21st Edition

®

P R I N C I P L E S   O F

I N T E R N A L
M E D I C I N E

HPIM 21e_FM_VOL1_pi-pxl.indd   1

21/01/22   7:01 PM

318 Nephrolithiasis ............................................................ 2368

Gary C. Curhan

342 Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease ................................ 2617

Bernd Schnabl

xiii

319 Urinary Tract Obstruction ........................................... 2373

Julian L. Seifter

320 Interventional Nephrology ........................................... 2377

Dirk M. Hentschel

343 Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Diseases and Nonalcoholic 

Steatohepatitis ............................................................. 2619
Manal F. Abdelmalek, Anna Mae Diehl

344 Cirrhosis and Its Complications ................................... 2624

Alex S. Befeler, Bruce R. Bacon

PART 10  Disorders of the Gastrointestinal  

345 Liver Transplantation ................................................... 2633

Raymond T. Chung, Jules L. Dienstag

System 

  SECTION 1   Disorders of the Alimentary Tract

321 Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal  

Disease ........................................................................ 2381
William L. Hasler, Chung Owyang

346 Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts ..................... 2641

Norton J. Greenberger, Gustav Paumgartner, Daniel S. Pratt

  SECTION 4   Disorders of the Pancreas 

347 Approach to the Patient with Pancreatic Disease ........... 2652

Somashekar G. Krishna, Darwin L. Conwell, Phil A. Hart 

322 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ......................................... 2387

Louis Michel Wong Kee Song, Mark Topazian

348 Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis .................................... 2657

Phil A. Hart, Darwin L. Conwell, Somashekar G. Krishna

323 Diseases of the Esophagus ............................................ 2423

Peter J. Kahrilas, Ikuo Hirano

324 Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders .................. 2434

John Del Valle

PART 11  Immune-Mediated, Inflammatory,  

and Rheumatologic Disorders 

325 Disorders of Absorption ............................................... 2458

Deborah C. Rubin

  SECTION 1   The Immune System in Health and Disease

326 Inflammatory Bowel Disease ........................................ 2469

Sonia Friedman, Richard S. Blumberg

349 Introduction to the Immune System ............................. 2671

Barton F. Haynes, Kelly A. Soderberg, Anthony S. Fauci

327 Irritable Bowel Syndrome ............................................. 2490

Chung Owyang

328 Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal  

Disorders ..................................................................... 2497
Susan L. Gearhart

350 Mechanisms of Regulation and Dysregulation of the  

Immune System ........................................................... 2701
Barton F. Haynes, Kelly A. Soderberg, Anthony S. Fauci

351 Primary Immune Deficiency Diseases .......................... 2709

Alain Fischer

329 Mesenteric Vascular Insufficiency ................................. 2506

Maryam Ali Khan, Jaideep Das Gupta, Mahmoud Malas

  SECTION 2   Disorders of Immune-Mediated Injury

330 Acute Intestinal Obstruction ........................................ 2508

Danny O. Jacobs

331 Acute Appendicitis and Peritonitis ............................... 2513

Danny O. Jacobs

  SECTION 2   Nutrition

352 Urticaria, Angioedema, and Allergic Rhinitis ................ 2719

Katherine L. Tuttle, Joshua A. Boyce

353 Anaphylaxis ................................................................. 2727

David Hong, Joshua A. Boyce

354 Mastocytosis ................................................................ 2729

Matthew P. Giannetti, Joshua A. Boyce

332 Nutrient Requirements and Dietary Assessment ........... 2517

Johanna T. Dwyer

355 Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Diseases ................... 2731

Betty Diamond, Peter E. Lipsky

333 Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and  

Excess .......................................................................... 2523
Paolo M. Suter

334 Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment .................... 2534

Gordon L. Jensen

335 Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition .................................. 2539

L. John Hoffer, Bruce R. Bistrian, David F. Driscoll

  SECTION 3   Liver and Biliary Tract Disease

356 Systemic Lupus Erythematosus .................................... 2736

Bevra Hannahs Hahn, Maureen McMahon

357 Antiphospholipid Syndrome ........................................ 2749

Haralampos M. Moutsopoulos, Clio P. Mavragani

358 Rheumatoid Arthritis ................................................... 2751

Ankoor Shah, E. William St. Clair

359 Acute Rheumatic Fever ................................................ 2766

Joseph Kado, Jonathan Carapetis

360 Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma) and  

336 Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease .................. 2546

Marc G. Ghany, Jay H. Hoofnagle 

Related Disorders ........................................................ 2771
John Varga

337 Evaluation of Liver Function ........................................ 2553

Emily D. Bethea, Daniel S. Pratt 

361 Sjögren’s Syndrome ...................................................... 2787

Haralampos M. Moutsopoulos, Clio P. Mavragani

338 The Hyperbilirubinemias ............................................. 2557

Allan W. Wolkoff

362 Spondyloarthritis ......................................................... 2790

Joel D. Taurog, Lianne S. Gensler, Nigil Haroon

339 Acute Viral Hepatitis ................................................... 2562

Jules L. Dienstag

363 The Vasculitis Syndromes ............................................ 2802

Carol A. Langford, Anthony S. Fauci 

340 Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis ............................... 2584

William M. Lee, Jules L. Dienstag

341 Chronic Hepatitis ........................................................ 2591

Jules L. Dienstag

364 Behçet Syndrome ......................................................... 2817

HPIM 21e_FM_VOL1_pi-pxl.indd   13

21/01/22   7:01 PM

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System

PART 10

Section 1  Disorders of the Alimentary 
Tract

321

Approach to the Patient 
with Gastrointestinal 
Disease
William L. Hasler, Chung Owyang

ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
The  gastrointestinal  (GI)  tract  extends  from  the  mouth  to  the  anus 
and  is  composed  of  organs  with  distinct  functions.  Sphincters  that 
assist in gut compartmentalization separate the organs. The gut wall is 
organized into distinct layers that contribute to regional activities. The 
mucosa is a barrier to luminal contents or a site for fluid and nutrient 
transfer. Smooth muscle in association with the enteric nervous system 
mediates propulsion between regions. Many GI organs possess a sero-
sal  layer  that  provides  a  supportive  foundation  and  permits  external 
input.

Interactions with other systems serve the needs of the gut and the 
body.  Pancreaticobiliary  conduits  deliver  bile  and  enzymes  into  the 
duodenum. The vascular supply is modulated by GI activity. Lymphatic 
channels assist in gut immune activities. Intrinsic nerves provide the 
controls  for  propulsion  and  fluid  regulation.  Extrinsic  neural  input 
provides volitional or involuntary control that is specific for each gut 
region.

FUNCTIONS OF THE GI TRACT
The  GI  tract  serves  two  main  functions—assimilating  nutrients  and 
eliminating waste. In the mouth, food is processed, mixed with salivary 
amylase,  and  delivered  to  the  gut  lumen.  The  esophagus  propels  the 
bolus into the stomach; the lower esophageal sphincter prevents oral 
reflux of gastric contents. The squamous esophageal mucosa protects 
against significant diffusion or absorption. Aboral esophageal contrac-
tions  coordinate  with  relaxation  of  the  upper  and  lower  esophageal 
sphincters on swallowing.

The  stomach  triturates  and  mixes  the  food  bolus  with  pepsin  and 
acid. Gastric acid also sterilizes the upper gut. The proximal stomach 
serves a storage function by relaxing to accommodate the meal. Phasic 
contractions in the distal stomach propel food residue against the pylo-
rus, where it is ground and thrust proximally for further mixing before 
it is emptied into the duodenum. The stomach secretes intrinsic factor 
for vitamin B12 absorption.

Most nutrient absorption occurs in the small intestine. The mucosal 
villus architecture provides maximal surface area for absorption and is 
endowed  with  specialized  enzymes  and  transporters.  Triturated  food 
from the stomach mixes with pancreatic juice and bile in the duode-
num.  Pancreatic  juice  contains  enzymes  for  nutrient  digestion  and 
bicarbonate  to  optimize  the  pH  for  enzyme  activation.  Bile  secreted 
by  the  liver  and  stored  in  the  gallbladder  is  essential  for  lipid  diges-
tion. The proximal intestine is optimized for rapid absorption of most 
nutrients and minerals, whereas the ileum is better suited for absorbing 
vitamin  B12  and  bile  acids.  Bile  contains  by-products  of  erythrocyte 
degradation, toxins, medications, and cholesterol for fecal evacuation. 
Intestinal  motor  function  delivers  indigestible  residue  into  the  colon 
for  processing.  The  ileocecal  junction  is  a  sphincter  that  prevents 
coloileal reflux, reducing microbial density.

The  colon  prepares  waste  for  evacuation.  The  mucosa  dehydrates 
the stool, reducing daily ileal volumes of 1000–1500 mL to 100–200 mL 

expelled from the rectum. The colon possesses a dense bacterial colo-
nization that ferments undigested carbohydrates and short-chain fatty 
acids.  The  gut  microbiome  also  modulates  immune  and  physiologic 
activity. Esophageal transit takes seconds, and times in the stomach and 
small intestine range from minutes to a few hours, but colon propaga-
tion  requires  >1  day  in  most  individuals.  Colon  contractions  exhibit 
a  to-and-fro  character  that  promotes  fecal  desiccation.  The  proximal 
colon mixes and absorbs fluid, while the distal colon exhibits peristaltic 
contractions and mass movements to expel the stool. The colon termi-
nates in the anus, which possesses volitional and involuntary controls 
to permit fecal retention until it can be released in a convenient setting.

EXTRINSIC MODULATION OF GUT 
FUNCTION
GI  function  is  modified  by  influences  outside  the  gut.  Unlike  other 
organs, the gut is in continuity with the outside environment. Protec-
tive  mechanisms  are  vigilant  against  injury  from  foods,  medications, 
toxins, and microbes. Mucosal immune mechanisms include epithelial 
and lamina propria lymphocytes and plasma cells supported by lymph 
node chains to prevent noxious agents from entering the circulation. 
Antimicrobial peptides secreted by Paneth cells defend against patho-
gens.  Drugs  and  toxins  absorbed  into  the  bloodstream  are  filtered 
and detoxified in the liver via the portal venous circulation. Although 
intrinsic nerves control most basic gut activities, extrinsic neural input 
modulates  many  functions.  Many  GI  reflexes  involve  extrinsic  vagus 
or  splanchnic  nerve  pathways.  The  brain-gut  axis  alters  function  in 
regions not under volitional regulation. Stress can disrupt gut motor, 
secretory, and sensory function.

OVERVIEW OF GI DISEASES
GI diseases develop as a result of abnormalities within or outside of the 
gut and range in severity from those that produce mild symptoms and 
no long-term morbidity to those with intractable symptoms or adverse 
outcomes.  Diseases  may  be  localized  to  one  organ  or  exhibit  diffuse 
involvement at many sites.
 ■ CLASSIFICATION OF GI DISEASES
GI diseases are manifestations of alterations in nutrient assimilation or 
waste evacuation or in the activities supporting these main functions.

Impaired Digestion and Absorption  Diseases  of  the  stomach, 
intestine, biliary tree, and pancreas can disrupt digestion and absorp-
tion.  The  most  common  maldigestion  syndrome,  lactase  deficiency, 
produces  gas  and  diarrhea  after  ingesting  dairy  products  and  has  no 
adverse outcomes. Other intestinal enzyme deficiencies produce sim-
ilar  symptoms  after  consuming  other  simple  sugars.  Celiac  disease, 
bacterial overgrowth, infectious enteritis, Crohn’s ileitis, and radiation 
damage,  which  affect  digestion  and/or  absorption  more  diffusely, 
produce  anemia,  dehydration,  electrolyte  disorders,  or  malnutrition. 
Gastric  hypersecretory  conditions  such  as  gastrinoma  damage  the 
intestinal  mucosa,  impair  pancreatic  enzyme  activation,  and  accel-
erate  transit  due  to  excess  gastric  acid.  Benign  or  neoplastic  biliary 
obstruction impairs fat digestion. Impaired pancreatic enzyme release 
in  chronic  pancreatitis  or  pancreatic  cancer  decreases  intraluminal 
digestion and can lead to malnutrition.

Altered  Secretion  Some  GI  diseases  result  from  dysregulation 
of  gut  secretion.  Gastric  acid  hypersecretion  occurs  in  gastrinoma, 
G-cell  hyperplasia,  retained  antrum  syndrome,  and  some  patients 
with duodenal ulcers. Gastric acid is reduced in atrophic gastritis and 
pernicious  anemia.  Inflammatory  and  infectious  small-intestinal  and 
colonic  diseases  produce  fluid  loss  through  impaired  absorption  or 
enhanced  secretion.  Common  hypersecretory  conditions  that  cause 
diarrhea include acute bacterial or viral infection, chronic Giardia or 
cryptosporidia  infections,  small-intestinal  bacterial  overgrowth,  bile 
salt diarrhea, microscopic colitis, and diabetic diarrhea. Less common 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2381

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
2382 causes include large colonic villus adenomas and endocrine neoplasias 
with tumor overproduction of secretagogue transmitters such as vaso-
active intestinal polypeptide.

Altered Gut Transit 
Impaired gut transit may result from mechan-
ical  obstruction.  Esophageal  occlusion  most  often  is  due  to  stricture 
(due to acid exposure or eosinophilic esophagitis) or neoplasm. Gas-
tric obstruction develops from ulcer disease or gastric cancer. Small- 
intestinal obstruction most commonly results from adhesions but also 
occurs with Crohn’s disease, radiation- or drug-induced strictures, and 
less likely malignancy. The most common cause of colonic obstruction 
is colon cancer, although inflammatory strictures develop with inflam-
matory bowel disease (IBD), after certain infections such as diverticu-
litis, or with some drugs.

Retardation of propulsion can develop from altered motor function. 
Achalasia is characterized by impaired esophageal body peristalsis and 
incomplete lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Gastroparesis is the 
delay  in  gastric  emptying  of  meals  due  to  impaired  gastric  motility. 
Intestinal pseudoobstruction is the disruption of small-bowel contrac-
tility due to enteric nerve or smooth-muscle injury. Slow-transit consti-
pation results from diffusely impaired colon propulsion. Constipation 
also is produced by outlet abnormalities such as rectal prolapse, intus-
susception, or dyssynergia—a failure of anal or puborectalis relaxation 
upon attempted defecation.

Disorders  of  rapid  propulsion  are  less  common  than  those  with 
delayed  transit.  Rapid  gastric  emptying  occurs  with  postvagotomy 
dumping  syndrome,  gastric  hypersecretion,  and  some  cases  of  func-
tional dyspepsia and cyclic vomiting syndrome. Exaggerated intestinal 
or colonic motor patterns may be responsible for diarrhea in irritable 
bowel  syndrome  (IBS).  Accelerated  transit  with  hyperdefecation  is 
noted in hyperthyroidism.

Immune  Dysregulation  Many  inflammatory  GI  conditions  are 
consequences of altered gut immune function. Mucosal inflammation 
in  celiac  disease  results  from  dietary  ingestion  of  gluten-containing 
grains.  Some  patients  with  food  allergy  also  exhibit  altered  immune 
populations.  Eosinophilic  esophagitis  and  eosinophilic  gastroenteri-
tis  are  inflammatory  disorders  with  prominent  mucosal  eosinophil 
infiltration.  Ulcerative  colitis  and  Crohn’s  disease  are  disorders  that 
produce  mucosal  injury  primarily  in  the  lower  gut.  The  microscopic 
colitides,  lymphocytic  and  collagenous  colitis,  exhibit  colonic  sub-
epithelial  infiltrates  without  visible  mucosal  damage.  Bacterial,  viral, 
and protozoal organisms produce ileitis or colitis in selected patients. 
Alterations in the gut microbiome (termed dysbiosis) are proposed to 
trigger IBD, celiac disease, and IBS flares and may be factors in onco-
genesis in some cases of pancreatic cancer.

Impaired  Gut  Blood  Flow  Different  GI  regions  are  at  variable 
risk for ischemic damage from impaired blood flow. Rare cases of gas-
troparesis result from blockage of the celiac and superior mesenteric 
arteries. More commonly encountered are intestinal and colonic ische-
mia  that  are  consequences  of  arterial  embolus,  arterial  thrombosis, 

venous thrombosis, or hypoperfusion from dehydration, sepsis, hem-
orrhage, or reduced cardiac output. These may produce mucosal injury, 
hemorrhage, or even perforation. Chronic ischemia may result in intes-
tinal  stricture.  Some  cases  of  radiation  enterocolitis  exhibit  reduced 
mucosal blood flow.

Neoplastic Degeneration  All GI regions are susceptible to malig-
nant degeneration. In the United States, colorectal cancer is most com-
mon and usually presents after age 45 years. Worldwide, gastric cancer 
is prevalent, especially in certain Asian populations. Esophageal cancer 
develops with chronic acid reflux or after extensive alcohol or tobacco 
use.  Small-intestinal  neoplasms  are  rare  but  occur  with  underlying 
inflammatory diseases. Anal cancers arise after prior anal infection or 
inflammation. Pancreatic and biliary cancers elicit severe pain, weight 
loss, and jaundice and have poor prognoses. Hepatocellular carcinoma 
usually  arises  in  the  setting  of  chronic  viral  hepatitis  or  cirrhosis 
secondary  to  other  causes.  Most  GI  cancers  exhibit  carcinomatous 
histology; however, lymphomas and other cell types also are observed.

Disorders  without  Obvious  Organic  Abnormalities  The 
most prevalent GI disorders show no abnormalities on biochemical or 
structural testing and include IBS, functional dyspepsia, and functional 
heartburn. These disorders exhibit altered gut motor function, but the 
pathogenic relevance of these abnormalities is uncertain. Exaggerated 
visceral sensory responses to noxious stimulation may cause discom-
fort in these disorders. Symptoms in other patients result from altered 
processing  of  visceral  pain  sensations  in  the  central  nervous  system. 
Functional bowel patients with severe symptoms may exhibit signifi-
cant emotional disturbances on psychometric testing. Subtle immuno-
logic defects may contribute to functional symptoms as well.

Genetic Influences  Although many GI diseases result from envi-
ronmental  factors,  others  exhibit  hereditary  components.  Family 
members  of  IBD  patients  show  a  genetic  predisposition  to  disease 
development  themselves.  Colonic,  esophageal,  and  pancreatic  malig-
nancies  arise  in  certain  inherited  disorders.  Rare  genetic  dysmotility 
syndromes are described. Familial clustering is observed in the func-
tional bowel disorders, although this may be secondary learned familial 
illness behavior rather than a true hereditary factor.

 ■ SYMPTOMS OF GI DISEASE
Symptoms  of  GI  disease  include  abdominal  pain,  heartburn,  nausea 
and  vomiting,  altered  bowel  habits,  GI  bleeding,  jaundice,  and  other 
manifestations (Table 321-1).

Abdominal  Pain  Abdominal  pain  results  from  GI  disease  and 
extraintestinal conditions involving the genitourinary tract, abdominal 
wall,  thorax,  or  spine.  Visceral  pain  generally  is  midline  in  location 
and vague in character, whereas parietal pain is localized and precisely 
described. Painful inflammatory diseases include peptic ulcer, appen-
dicitis,  diverticulitis,  IBD,  pancreatitis,  cholecystitis,  and  infectious 
enterocolitis.  Noninflammatory  visceral  sources  include  biliary  colic, 

TABLE 321-1  Common Causes of Common Gastrointestinal (GI) Symptoms
DIARRHEA
ABDOMINAL PAIN
Infection
Appendicitis
Poorly absorbed sugars
Gallstone disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Pancreatitis
Microscopic colitis
Diverticulitis
Functional bowel disorder
Ulcer disease
Celiac disease
Esophagitis
Pancreatic insufficiency
GI obstruction
Hyperthyroidism
Inflammatory bowel disease
Ischemia
Functional bowel disorder
Endocrine tumor
Vascular disease
Gynecologic causes
Renal stone

NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Medications
GI obstruction
Motor disorders
Functional bowel disorder
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome
Enteric infection
Pregnancy
Endocrine disease
Motion sickness
Central nervous system disease

GI BLEEDING
Ulcer disease
Esophagitis
Varices
Vascular lesions
Neoplasm
Diverticula
Hemorrhoids
Fissures
Inflammatory bowel disease
Infectious colitis

OBSTRUCTIVE JAUNDICE
Bile duct stones
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangitis
Sclerosing cholangitis
Ampullary stenosis
Ampullary carcinoma
Pancreatitis
Pancreatic tumor

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2382

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemmesenteric  ischemia,  and  neoplasia.  The  most  common  causes  of 
abdominal pain are IBS and functional dyspepsia.
Heartburn  Heartburn, a burning substernal sensation, is reported 
intermittently by 40% of the population. Classically, heartburn results 
from excess gastroesophageal acid reflux, but some cases exhibit nor-
mal  esophageal  acid  exposure  and  are  caused  by  reflux  of  nonacidic 
material or heightened sensitivity of esophageal nerves.
Nausea  and  Vomiting  Nausea  and  vomiting  are  caused  by  GI 
diseases,  medications,  toxins,  infection,  endocrine  disorders,  laby-
rinthine  conditions,  and  central  nervous  system  disease.  Mechanical 
obstructions  of  the  upper  gut  are  commonly  excluded  as  causes  of 
chronic  nausea  and  vomiting,  but  disorders  of  propulsion  including 
gastroparesis and intestinal pseudoobstruction elicit similar symptoms. 
Nausea and vomiting also are commonly reported by patients with IBS 
and  functional  disorders  of  the  upper  gut  (including  chronic  nausea 
vomiting  syndrome,  cyclic  vomiting  syndrome,  and  cannabinoid 
hyperemesis syndrome).
Altered  Bowel  Habits  Altered  bowel  habits  are  common  com-
plaints  in  GI  disease.  Constipation  may  be  reported  as  infrequent 
defecation, straining with defecation, passage of hard stools, or a sense 
of  incomplete  fecal  evacuation  and  is  caused  by  obstruction,  motor 
disorders,  medications,  and  endocrine  diseases  such  as  hypothyroid-
ism and hyperparathyroidism. Diarrhea may be reported as frequent 
defecation, passage of loose or watery stools, fecal urgency, or a similar 
sense of incomplete evacuation. The differential diagnosis of diarrhea 
includes  infections,  inflammatory  causes,  malabsorption,  and  medi-
cations.  IBS  produces  constipation,  diarrhea,  or  an  alternating  bowel 
pattern. Fecal mucus is common in IBS, whereas pus and blood char-
acterize IBD. Steatorrhea develops with malabsorption.
GI Bleeding  Hemorrhage may develop from any gut organ. Upper 
GI bleeding presents with melena or hematemesis, whereas lower GI 
bleeding  produces  passage  of  bright  red  or  maroon  stools.  However, 
briskly bleeding upper sites can elicit voluminous red rectal bleeding, 
whereas  slowly  bleeding  ascending  colon  sites  may  produce  melena. 
Chronic occult GI bleeding may present with iron deficiency anemia. 
Causes  of  upper  GI  bleeding  include  ulcer  disease,  gastroduodenitis, 
esophagitis, portal hypertensive etiologies, malignancy, tears across the 
gastroesophageal junction, and vascular lesions. Lower GI sources of 
hemorrhage include hemorrhoids, anal fissures, diverticula, ischemic 
colitis, neoplasm, IBD, infectious colitis, drug-induced colitis, arterio-
venous malformations, and other vascular lesions.
Jaundice 
Jaundice results from prehepatic, intrahepatic, or posthe-
patic  disease.  Posthepatic  causes  of  jaundice  include  biliary  diseases, 
such  as  choledocholithiasis,  acute  cholangitis,  primary  sclerosing 
cholangitis, other strictures, and neoplasm, and pancreatic disorders, 
such as acute and chronic pancreatitis, stricture, and malignancy.
Other Symptoms  Other  symptoms  are  manifestations  of  GI  dis-
ease.  Dysphagia,  odynophagia,  and  unexplained  chest  pain  suggest 
esophageal  disease.  A  globus  sensation  is  reported  with  esophago-
pharyngeal  conditions,  but  also  occurs  with  functional  GI  disorders. 
Weight loss, anorexia, and fatigue present with neoplastic, inflamma-
tory, motility, pancreatic, and psychiatric conditions. IBD is associated 
with  hepatobiliary  dysfunction,  skin  and  eye  lesions,  and  arthritis. 
Celiac disease may present with dermatitis herpetiformis. Jaundice can 
produce pruritus. Conversely, systemic diseases have GI consequences. 
Systemic lupus may cause gut ischemia, presenting with pain or bleed-
ing. Severe burns may lead to gastric ulcer formation.

EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT  
WITH GI DISEASE
Evaluation of the patient with suspected GI disease begins with a care-
ful  history  and  examination.  Subsequent  investigation  with  tools  to 
test gut structure or function and luminal constituents is indicated in 
selected cases. In patients with normal findings on diagnostic testing, 
validated  symptom  profiles  are  used  to  confidently  diagnose  a  func-
tional bowel disorder.

2383

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
1

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

 ■ HISTORY
The  history  in  suspected  GI  disease  has  several  components. 
Symptom  timing,  patterns,  and  duration  suggest  specific  etiologies. 
Short-duration  symptoms  commonly  result  from  acute  infection  or 
inflammation, toxin exposure, or ischemia. Long-standing symptoms 
point  to  chronic  inflammation,  neoplasia,  or  functional  bowel  dis-
orders.  Luminal  obstruction  can  present  with  dysphagia,  nausea  and 
vomiting,  bloating  and  distention,  or  constipation  depending  on  the 
site  of  blockage.  Symptoms  from  mechanical  obstruction,  ischemia, 
IBD,  and  functional  bowel  disorders  are  worsened  by  meals,  while 
ulcer  symptoms  may  be  relieved  by  eating  or  antacids.  Ulcer  pain 
occurs intermittently over weeks to months, whereas biliary colic has 
a sudden onset and lasts up to several hours. Acute pancreatitis pain is 
severe and persists for days to weeks. Meals elicit diarrhea while def-
ecation relieves discomfort in some cases of IBD and IBS. Functional 
bowel  disorders  are  exacerbated  by  stress.  Sudden  awakening  from 
sound  sleep  by  pain  suggests  organic  rather  than  functional  disease. 
Diarrhea from malabsorption usually improves with fasting, whereas 
secretory diarrhea persists without oral intake.

Symptom  relation  to  other  factors  narrows  the  list  of  diagnostic 
possibilities.  Obstructive  symptoms  with  prior  abdominal  surgery 
raise concern for adhesions. Loose stools after gastrectomy or chole-
cystectomy  suggest  dumping  syndrome  or  postcholecystectomy  diar-
rhea. Symptom onset after travel prompts consideration of infection. 
Medications produce pain, altered bowel habits, or GI bleeding. Celiac 
disease is prevalent in people of northern European descent, whereas 
IBD is more common in Jewish populations. A sexual history may raise 
concern for infection or immunodeficiency.

Working groups have devised symptom criteria to improve diagno-
sis of functional bowel disorders to minimize the numbers of unnec-
essary diagnostic tests performed. The best accepted symptom-based 
criteria  are  the  Rome  criteria,  which  exhibit  sensitivities  and  speci-
ficities of only 55–75% when tested against structural findings in IBS 
and functional dyspepsia, indicating a need for careful test selection in 
patients at high risk of organic disease.

 ■ PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The physical examination complements information from the history. 
Abnormal vital signs provide diagnostic clues and determine the need 
for  acute  intervention.  Fever  suggests  inflammation  or  neoplasm. 
Orthostasis is produced by significant blood loss, dehydration, sepsis, 
or  autonomic  neuropathy.  Skin,  eye,  or  joint  findings  may  point  to 
specific  diagnoses.  Neck  examination  with  swallowing  assessment 
evaluates  dysphagia.  Lung  and  cardiac  examinations  evaluate  for 
cardiopulmonary  disease  as  causes  of  abdominal  pain  or  nausea. 
Pelvic examination tests for a gynecologic source of abdominal pain. 
Rectal  examination  may  detect  blood,  indicating  mucosal  injury  or 
neoplasm  or  a  palpable  inflammatory  mass  in  appendicitis.  Meta-
bolic conditions and gut motor disorders have associated peripheral 
neuropathy.

Abdominal  inspection  may  reveal  distention  from  obstruction, 
tumor, or ascites or vascular abnormalities with liver disease. Ecchy-
moses develop with severe pancreatitis. Auscultation detects bruits or 
friction  rubs  from  vascular  disease  or  hepatic  tumors.  Loss  of  bowel 
sounds  signifies  ileus,  whereas  high-pitched,  hyperactive  sounds 
characterize  intestinal  obstruction.  Percussion  assesses  liver  size  and 
detects shifting dullness from ascites. Palpation assesses for hepatosple-
nomegaly and neoplastic or inflammatory masses. Intestinal ischemia 
elicits severe pain but little tenderness. Patients with visceral pain may 
exhibit  generalized  discomfort,  whereas  those  with  parietal  pain  or 
peritonitis have localized pain with involuntary guarding, rigidity, or 
rebound. Patients with musculoskeletal abdominal wall pain may note 
tenderness exacerbated by Valsalva or leg lift maneuvers.

 ■ TOOLS FOR PATIENT EVALUATION
Laboratory, radiographic, and functional tests assist in diagnosis of sus-
pected GI disease. The GI tract also is amenable to internal evaluation 
using endoscopy and to examination of luminal contents. Histopatho-
logic examinations of GI tissues complement these tests.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2383

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2384 Laboratory  Laboratory  tests  facilitate  diagnosis  of  GI  disease. 
Iron-deficiency anemia suggests mucosal blood loss, whereas vitamin B12 
deficiency results from intestinal, gastric, or pancreatic disease. Either 
can  result  from  inadequate  oral  intake.  Leukocytosis  and  increased 
sedimentation  rates  and  C-reactive  proteins  are  found  in  inflamma-
tion, whereas leukopenia is seen in viremic illness. Severe vomiting or 
diarrhea  elicits  electrolyte  disturbances,  acid-base  abnormalities,  and 
elevated  blood  urea  nitrogen.  Pancreaticobiliary  or  liver  disease  pro-
duces elevated pancreatic or liver chemistries. Thyroid chemistries and 
cortisol and calcium levels evaluate for endocrinologic causes of symp-
toms.  Pregnancy  testing  is  considered  for  women  with  unexplained 
nausea. Serologic tests screen for celiac disease, IBD, connective tissue 
diseases,  and  paraneoplastic  dysmotility  syndromes.  Hormone  levels 
are obtained for suspected endocrine neoplasia. Intraabdominal malig-
nancies produce tumor markers including the carcinoembryonic anti-
gen CA 19-9 and α-fetoprotein. Blood testing also monitors medication 
therapy, as with thiopurine metabolite levels in IBD. Pharmacogenetic 
methods are being adopted to determine optimal patient populations 
for  GI  medication  use.  In  conditions  including  IBD,  research  into 
novel  biomarkers  is  being  conducted  to  predict  longitudinal  course 
and treatment response. Other body fluids are sampled under certain 
circumstances.  Ascitic  fluid  is  analyzed  for  infection,  malignancy,  or 
findings  of  portal  hypertension.  Urine  samples  screen  for  carcinoid, 
porphyria, and heavy metal intoxication.

Luminal Contents  Luminal contents can provide diagnostic clues. 
Stool samples are cultured for bacterial pathogens, examined for leu-
kocytes and parasites, or tested for Giardia antigen. Duodenal aspirates 
can  be  examined  for  parasites  or  cultured  for  bacterial  overgrowth. 
Fecal  fat  is  quantified  in  possible  malabsorption.  Fecal  elastase  can 
be  decreased  with  exocrine  pancreatic  insufficiency.  Elevated  fecal 
calprotectin  or  lactoferrin  is  found  in  inflammatory  conditions  such 

as  IBD.  Stool  electrolytes  can  be  measured  in  diarrheal  conditions. 
Laxative  screens  are  performed  for  suspected  laxative  abuse.  Fecal 
immunochemical and DNA tests have assumed roles in colon cancer 
screening in low-risk populations. Gastric acid is quantified to exclude 
gastrinoma.  Esophageal  pH/impedance  testing  is  done  for  refractory 
symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux.

Endoscopy  The gut is accessible to endoscopy, which can diagnose 
causes  of  bleeding,  pain,  nausea  and  vomiting,  weight  loss,  altered 
bowel  function,  and  fever.  Table  321-2  lists  common  indications  for 
endoscopic  procedures.  Upper  endoscopy  evaluates  the  esophagus, 
stomach,  and  duodenum,  whereas  colonoscopy  assesses  the  colon 
and distal ileum. Upper endoscopy is advocated as the initial test for 
suspected  ulcer  disease,  esophagitis,  neoplasm,  malabsorption,  and 
Barrett’s metaplasia because of its abilities to visualize and biopsy any 
abnormality. Colonoscopy is the preferred procedure for colon cancer 
screening  and  surveillance  and  to  biopsy  colitis  or  ileitis  secondary 
to  IBD,  infection,  ischemia,  and  radiation.  Sigmoidoscopy  examines 
the  colon  to  the  splenic  flexure  and  excludes  distal  causes  of  bleed-
ing, inflammation, or obstruction in young patients not at significant 
risk  for  colon  cancer.  For  elusive  GI  bleeding  from  arteriovenous 
malformations  or  superficial  ulcers,  small-intestinal  examination  is 
performed  with  push  enteroscopy,  capsule  endoscopy,  or  double- 
balloon  enteroscopy.  Capsule  endoscopy  also  visualizes  small- 
intestinal  Crohn’s  disease  in  individuals  with  negative  radiography. 
Endoscopic  ultrasound  (EUS)  diagnoses  and  stages  GI  malignancy, 
excludes  choledocholithiasis,  evaluates  pancreatitis,  and  assesses  anal 
continuity. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
provides diagnoses of pancreatic and biliary disease.

The  development  of  novel  imaging  protocols  permits  opti-
cal  biopsies  to  define  mucosal  histology  and  detect  dysplasia  in 
selected  settings.  Methods  employed  include  narrow-band  imaging, 

TABLE 321-2  Common Indications for Endoscopy

CAPSULE 
ENDOSCOPY
Obscure 
bleeding
Suspected 
Crohn’s disease 
of the small 
intestine

DOUBLE-BALLOON 
ENDOSCOPY
Ablation of small-
intestinal bleeding 
sources
Biopsy of suspicious 
small-intestinal 
masses/ulcers

ENDOSCOPIC 
ULTRASOUND
Staging of malignancy
Characterize and biopsy 
submucosal mass
Bile duct stones
Chronic pancreatitis
Drain pseudocyst
Anal continuity
Direct stent placement

ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE 
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
Jaundice
Postbiliary surgery complaints
Cholangitis
Gallstone pancreatitis
Pancreatic/biliary/ampullary tumor
Unexplained pancreatitis
Pancreatitis with unrelenting pain
Fistulas
Biopsy radiologic abnormality
Pancreaticobiliary drainage
Sample bile
Sphincter of Oddi manometry

COLONOSCOPY
Cancer screening
Lower gastrointestinal 
(GI) bleeding
Anemia
Diarrhea
Polypectomy
Obstruction
Biopsy radiologic 
abnormality
Cancer surveillance: 
family history prior polyp/
cancer, colitis
Palliate neoplasm
Remove foreign body
Place stent across 
stenosis

UPPER ENDOSCOPY
Dyspepsia despite 
treatment
Dyspepsia with signs of 
organic disease
Refractory vomiting
Dysphagia
Upper GI bleeding
Anemia
Weight loss
Malabsorption
Biopsy radiologic 
abnormality
Polypectomy
Place gastrostomy
Barrett’s surveillance
Palliate neoplasm
Sample duodenal tissue/
fluid
Remove foreign body
Endoscopic mucosal 
resection or endoscopic 
submucosal dissection 
for dysplasia or early 
cancer
Place stent across 
stenosis
Endoscopic myotomy 
for achalasia or 
gastroparesis
Endoscopic bariatric 
procedures

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2384

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemchromoendoscopy, confocal laser endomicroscopy, and optical coher-
ence  tomography  in  colitis,  Barrett’s  esophagus,  and  gastric  cancer 
surveillance. Artificial intelligence using machine learning techniques 
shows promise in detecting dysplasia and early cancer in still images 
from biopsy tissues.

Radiography/Nuclear  Medicine  Radiographic  tests  evaluate 
gut  diseases  and  extraluminal  structures.  Contrast  radiography  with 
barium  provides  mucosal  definition  and  can  assess  gut  transit  and 
pelvic  floor  dysfunction.  An  esophagram  is  the  initial  procedure  to 
exclude  subtle  rings,  strictures,  or  achalasia  as  causes  of  dysphagia, 
whereas  small-bowel  contrast  radiology  detects  intestinal  tumors, 
strictures,  and  fistulae  and  can  estimate  intestinal  transit.  Contrast 
enemas are performed when colonoscopy is unsuccessful or contrain-
dicated. Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) evaluate regions 
not  accessible  by  endoscopy  or  contrast  studies,  including  the  liver, 
pancreas, gallbladder, kidneys, and retroperitoneum, and are useful for 
diagnosing mass lesions, fluid collections, organ enlargement, and, in 
the case of ultrasound, gallstones. CT and magnetic resonance (MR) 
colonography  have  been  considered  as  alternatives  to  colonoscopy 
for  colon  cancer  screening  but  have  not  commonly  been  adopted. 
MR  methods  image  the  pancreaticobiliary  ducts  to  exclude  neo-
plasm, stones, and sclerosing cholangitis and the liver to characterize 
benign  and  malignant  tumors.  Specialized  CT  or  MR  enterography 
quantifies  IBD  intensity.  Angiography  excludes  mesenteric  ischemia 
and  determines  spread  of  malignancy.  Angiographic  techniques  also 
access the biliary tree in obstructive jaundice. CT and MR techniques 
screen  for  mesenteric  occlusion,  thereby  limiting  exposure  to  angio-
graphic  dyes.  Positron  emission  tomography  (PET)  can  distinguish 
malignant from benign disease in several organ systems. Imaging with 
DOTA-octreotate  and  related  agents  has  improved  detection  of  neu-
roendocrine tumors by combined PET-CT techniques.

Scintigraphy evaluates structural abnormalities and quantifies lumi-
nal transit. Radionuclide scans localize bleeding sites in patients with 
brisk  hemorrhage  to  direct  therapy  with  endoscopy,  angiography, 
or  surgery.  Radiolabeled  leukocyte  scans  search  for  intraabdominal 
abscesses  not  visualized  on  CT.  Biliary  scintigraphy  complements 
ultrasound  in  assessing  for  cholecystitis.  Scintigraphy  to  quantify 
esophageal  and  gastric  emptying  is  well  established,  whereas  tech-
niques  to  measure  small-intestinal  or  colonic  transit  are  less  widely 
used.

Histopathology  Endoscopic mucosal biopsies evaluate for inflam-
matory,  infectious,  and  neoplastic  disease.  Deep  rectal  biopsies  facil-
itate  diagnosis  of  Hirschsprung’s  disease  or  amyloid.  Liver  biopsy  is 
performed for abnormal liver chemistries, unexplained jaundice, and 
some cases of viral hepatitis, and following liver transplant to exclude 
rejection.  Biopsies  obtained  during  CT  or  ultrasound  evaluate  for 
intraabdominal conditions not accessible by endoscopy.

Functional Testing  Tests of gut function provide important data 
when structural testing is nondiagnostic. Functional testing of motor 
activity is provided by newer high-resolution manometric techniques. 
Esophageal  manometry  is  useful  for  suspected  achalasia,  whereas 
small-intestinal  manometry  tests  for  pseudoobstruction  and  colon 
manometry  evaluates  for  colonic  inertia.  A  wireless  motility  capsule 
measures  transit  and  contractile  activity  in  the  stomach,  small  intes-
tine,  and  colon  in  a  single  test.  Anorectal  manometry  with  balloon 
expulsion testing is used for unexplained incontinence or constipation 
from outlet dysfunction. Biliary manometry tests for sphincter of Oddi 
dysfunction  with  unexplained  biliary  pain.  The  endoluminal  func-
tional lumen imaging probe can measure reduced distensibility in the 
lower esophageal sphincter in achalasia, the pylorus in gastroparesis, 
and the anus for defecation disorders. Measurement of breath hydro-
gen  while  fasting  and  after  oral  mono-  or  oligosaccharide  challenge 
can screen for carbohydrate intolerance and small-intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth.  Urea  breath  testing  assesses  for  persistent  Helicobacter 
pylori infection, while gastric emptying breath testing is an alternative 
to scintigraphy for gastroparesis diagnosis.

TREATMENT
Gastrointestinal Disease

2385

Management  options  for  GI  diseases  depend  on  the  cause  of 
symptoms.  Available  treatments  include  modifications  of  dietary 
intake, medications, treatment of gut dysbiosis, luminal intubation, 
interventional endoscopy or radiology techniques, surgery, psycho-
logical approaches, and physical therapy. Given the hereditary pre-
disposition of many GI diseases, genetic testing may be indicated 
in  some  patients.  Improved  smartphone  applications  are  being 
adopted for diverse purposes ranging from providing instructions 
for endoscopy preparation to educating and promoting adherence 
to diet restrictions in several disorders. 
NUTRITIONAL MANIPULATION
Dietary  modifications  for  GI  disease  include  those  that  only 
reduce symptoms, those that correct pathologic defects, or those 
that  replace  normal  food  intake  with  enteral  or  parenteral  for-
mulations.  Changes  that  improve  symptoms  but  do  not  reverse 
organic  abnormalities  include  lactose  restriction  for  lactase 
deficiency,  liquid  meals  in  gastroparesis,  carbohydrate  restric-
tions  with  dumping  syndrome,  and  low-FODMAP  (fermentable 
oligo-di-monosaccharides  and  polyols)  diets  in  IBS.  The  gluten-
free diet for celiac disease exemplifies a primary therapy to reduce 
mucosal  inflammation.  Likewise,  elimination  diets  may  improve 
histology  and  symptoms  in  some  cases  of  eosinophilic  esophagi-
tis.  Medium-chain  triglycerides  replace  normal  fats  in  short-gut 
syndrome or severe ileal disease. Perfusing liquid meals through 
a  gastrostomy  is  performed  in  those  who  cannot  swallow  safely. 
Enteral jejunostomy feedings are considered for gastric dysmotil-
ity syndromes that preclude feeding into the stomach. Intravenous 
hyperalimentation is used for generalized gut malfunction, which 
does not permit enteral nutrition. 
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Several medications can treat GI diseases. Considerable resources 
are  expended  on  over-the-counter  remedies.  Many  prescription 
drug classes are offered as short-term or continuous therapy of GI 
illness. Alternative treatments are popular in conditions for which 
traditional therapies provide incomplete relief. 
Over-the-Counter  Agents  Over-the-counter  agents  are  reserved 
for  mild  GI  symptoms.  Antacids,  histamine  H2  antagonists,  and 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) decrease symptoms in gastroesopha-
geal reflux disease (GERD) and dyspepsia. Fiber supplements, stool 
softeners, enemas, and laxatives are used for constipation. Laxatives 
are  categorized  as  stimulants,  osmotic  agents  (including  isotonic 
preparations containing polyethylene glycol), and poorly absorbed 
sugars. Nonprescription antidiarrheal agents include bismuth sub-
salicylate,  kaolin-pectin  combinations,  and  loperamide,  whereas 
lactase enzyme pills are used for lactose intolerance. Gaseous symp-
toms  may  be  reduced  by  bacterial  α-galactosidase,  antiflatulents, 
and adsorbents. In general, using a nonprescription preparation for 
more than a short time for chronic persistent symptoms should be 
supervised by a health care provider. 
Prescription  Drugs  Prescription  drugs  are  approved  for  a  broad 
range of GI diseases. Higher-dose prescription PPIs are advocated 
for  GERD  when  over-the-counter  preparations  are  inadequate. 
Cytoprotective agents are available for upper gut ulcers but are less 
frequently prescribed. Prokinetic drugs stimulate GI propulsion in 
gastroparesis,  pseudoobstruction,  and  slow-transit  constipation. 
Secretagogue  drugs  are  prescribed  for  constipation  refractory  to 
other agents, whereas peripheral opioid antagonists are offered for 
opioid-induced  constipation.  Prescription  antidiarrheals  include 
opioid  drugs,  anticholinergic  antispasmodics,  tricyclics,  bile  acid 
binders,  and  serotonin  antagonists.  Antispasmodics  and  anti-
depressants  also  are  useful  for  functional  GI  disorders,  whereas 
narcotics  are  used  for  pain  control  in  organic  conditions  such  as 
disseminated  malignancy  and  chronic  pancreatitis.  Antiemetics 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
1

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2385

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2386

reduce  nausea  and  vomiting.  Potent  pancreatic  enzymes  decrease 
malabsorption  and  pain  from  pancreatic  disease.  Antisecretory 
drugs  such  as  the  somatostatin  analogue  octreotide  treat  hyperse-
cretory states. Some functional GI disorders require use of neuro-
modulators, including tricyclic agents, for control of pain, diarrhea, 
or  nausea.  Antibiotics  treat  H.  pylori–induced  ulcers,  infectious 
diarrhea, diverticulitis, intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and Crohn’s 
disease. Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory drugs are used 
in IBD, microscopic colitis, refractory celiac disease, autoimmune 
pancreatitis, and gut vasculitis. Over the past decade, several newer 
biologic agents, including agents that inhibit tumor necrosis activ-
ity,  other  proinflammatory  cytokines,  and  Janus  kinase  signaling 
or  serve  as  antiadhesion  molecules,  have  had  dramatic  impact  in 
Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Biologics that deplete eosin-
ophils or inhibit mast cells show promise in eosinophilic disorders 
of the gut. Chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy is offered 
for GI malignancies. Most GI carcinomas respond poorly to such 
therapy, whereas lymphomas may be cured with such intervention. 
Complementary  and  Alternative  Medicine  Treatments  Alterna-
tive treatments are marketed to treat GI symptoms. Ginger, acupres-
sure, and acustimulation have been advocated for nausea, whereas 
pyridoxine has been investigated for nausea of first-trimester preg-
nancy.  Peppermint  oil  and  carraway  seed  oil  products  and  herbal 
preparations  such  as  STW  5  (a  mixture  of  nine  herbs)  are  useful 
in cases of functional dyspepsia and IBS. Low-potency pancreatic 
enzyme preparations are sold as general digestive aids but have little 
evidence to support their efficacy. 

THERAPIES TARGETING GUT DYSBIOSIS
Some  cases  of  diarrhea-predominant  IBS  respond  to  nonabsorb-
able antibiotics. Oral antibiotics also are the mainstay of managing 
intestinal  bacterial  overgrowth.  Probiotics  containing  active  bac-
terial  cultures  and  prebiotics  that  selectively  nourish  nonnoxious 
commensal bacteria are used as adjuncts in some cases of infectious 
diarrhea and IBS, with limited evidence of efficacy. Transplantation 
of donor feces into the colon by colonoscopy or enema is effective 
treatment for recurrent, refractory Clostridium difficile colitis, and 
numerous trials are being conducted to assess utility of this tech-
nique in IBS, IBD, and liver disease 

LUMINAL SUCTION AND LAVAGE

Nasogastric  tube  suction  decompresses  the  upper  gut  in  ileus  or 
mechanical obstruction. Nasogastric lavage of saline or water in the 
patient with upper GI hemorrhage determines the rate of bleeding 
and  helps  evacuate  blood  before  therapeutic  endoscopy.  Enteral 
feedings can be delivered through nasogastric or nasoenteric tubes. 
Enemas relieve fecal impaction or assist in gas evacuation in acute 
colonic pseudoobstruction. A rectal tube can be placed to vent the 
distal colon in colonic pseudoobstruction and other colonic disten-
tion disorders. 
INTERVENTIONAL ENDOSCOPY AND RADIOLOGY
In  addition  to  its  diagnostic  role,  endoscopy  has  numerous  ther-
apeutic capabilities. Cautery techniques and injection of vasocon-
strictor substances can stop hemorrhage from ulcers and vascular 
malformations.  Endoscopic  encirclement  of  varices  and  hemor-
rhoids with constricting bands stops hemorrhage from these sites, 
whereas  endoscopically  placed  clips  can  occlude  arterial  bleed-
ing  sites.  Endoscopically  delivered  hemostatic  powder  sprays  are 
approved to stop brisk GI bleeding. Endoscopy can remove polyps 
or debulk lumen-narrowing malignancies. Colonoscopy can with-
draw excess gas in some cases of acute colonic pseudoobstruction. 
Endoscopic  mucosal  resection,  submucosal  dissection,  and  radio-
frequency techniques can ablate some cases of Barrett’s esophagus 
with dysplasia or superficial cancer and early gastric malignancies. 
Obstructions  of  the  gut  lumen  and  pancreaticobiliary  tree  are 
relieved  by  endoscopic  dilation  or  placing  plastic  or  expandable 
metal  stents.  Endoscopic  sphincterotomy  of  the  ampulla  of  Vater 
relieves symptoms of choledocholithiasis. Cholangioscopy can help 

with  stone  lithotripsy  in  the  common  bile  duct,  ablation  of  small 
ductal  tumors,  and  placement  of  gallbladder  stents  to  facilitate 
drainage in nonoperative candidates. Methods employing interven-
tional  EUS  have  been  developed  for  pancreatic  cyst  gastrostomy 
using lumen-apposing metal stents, pancreatic necrosectomy, and 
placement of fiducial markers to direct pancreatic and rectal radio-
therapy. EUS also has been used to facilitate endoscopic access to 
the excluded distal stomach in patients who have undergone bariat-
ric  gastric  bypass  surgery  using  similar  stents  so  that  ERCP  can 
be done for pancreaticobiliary conditions. Likewise, EUS-directed 
stent placement can manage postsurgical stenoses after pancreatic 
resection.  Endoscopy  is  sometimes  used  to  insert  gastric  feeding 
tubes.  Peroral  endoscopic  myotomy  is  therapeutically  performed 
on the lower esophageal sphincter in achalasia and on the pylorus 
in  gastroparesis.  Endoscopic  treatments  for  acid  reflux  includ-
ing  radiofrequency  therapy,  transoral  fundoplication,  endoscopic 
stapling,  and  antireflux  mucosectomy  have  been  developed,  but 
many  offer  unproved  utility.  Endoscopic  bariatric  methodologies, 
including intragastric balloons, endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty, and 
duodenal resurfacing and diversion, have been introduced.

Radiologic measures also are useful in GI disease. Angiographic 
embolization or vasoconstriction decreases bleeding from gut sites 
not  amenable  to  endoscopic  intervention.  Dilatation  or  stenting 
with  fluoroscopic  guidance  relieves  luminal  strictures.  Contrast 
enemas can reduce volvulus and evacuate air in acute colonic pseu-
doobstruction. CT and ultrasound help drain abdominal fluid col-
lections, in many cases obviating the need for surgery. Percutaneous 
transhepatic  cholangiography  relieves  biliary  obstruction  when 
ERCP  is  contraindicated.  Transjugular  intrahepatic  portosystemic 
shunts are commonly performed by interventional radiologists for 
variceal  hemorrhage  not  amenable  to  endoscopic  therapy.  Litho-
tripsy  can  fragment  gallstones  in  patients  who  are  not  candidates 
for surgery. Radiologic approaches are often chosen over endoscopy  
for  gastroenterostomy  placement.  Finally,  central  venous  cath-
eters  for  parenteral  nutrition  may  be  placed  using  radiographic 
techniques. 

SURGERY
Surgery is performed to cure disease, control symptoms, maintain 
nutrition, or palliate unresectable neoplasm. Surgery can cure med-
ication-unresponsive  ulcerative  colitis,  diverticulitis,  cholecystitis, 
appendicitis,  and  intraabdominal  abscess,  but  can  only  reduce 
symptoms and treat disease complications in Crohn’s disease. Sur-
gery is mandated for ulcer complications such as bleeding, obstruc-
tion,  or  perforation  and  intestinal  obstructions  that  persist  after 
conservative  care.  Gastroesophageal  fundoplication  is  performed 
for  severe  ulcerative  esophagitis  and  drug-refractory  symptom-
atic acid reflux. Achalasia responds to operations to reduce lower 
esophageal sphincter tone. Operations for motor disorders include 
implanted  electrical  stimulators  for  gastroparesis  and  electrical 
devices and artificial sphincters for fecal incontinence. Surgery may 
be needed to place a jejunostomy for long-term enteral feedings. 

PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACHES AND PHYSICAL THERAPY
Psychological therapies, including psychotherapy, cognitive behav-
ioral  therapy,  and  hypnosis,  have  shown  efficacy  in  functional 
bowel disorders. Patients with significant psychological dysfunction 
and  those  with  little  response  to  treatments  targeting  the  gut  are 
likely  to  benefit  from  this  form  of  therapy.  Biofeedback  methods 
administered by physical therapies are accepted for treating refrac-
tory fecal incontinence or constipation secondary to dyssynergia.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Aslanian HR et al: AGA Clinical Practice Update on pancreas cancer 
screening in high-risk individuals: An expert review. Gastroenterol-
ogy 159:358, 2020.

Bajaj  JS  et  al:  Major  trends  in  gastroenterology  and  hepatology 
between  2010  and  2019:  An  overview  of  advances  from  the  past 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2386

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemdecade  selected  by  the  editorial  board  of  the  American  Journal  of 
Gastroenterology. Am J Gastroenterol 115:1007, 2020.

Gupta S et al: Recommendations for follow-up after colonoscopy and 
polypectomy:  A  consensus  update  by  the  US  Multi-Society  Task 
Force on Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology 158:1131, 2020.

Keefer L et al: Best practice update: Incorporating psychogastroenter-
ology  into  management  of  digestive  disorders.  Gastroenterology 
154:1249, 2018.

Lamb CA et al: British Society of Gastroenterology consensus guide-
lines  on  the  management  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease  in  adults. 
Gut 68:s1, 2019.

Osadchiy  V  et  al:  The  gut-brain  axis  and  the  microbiome:  Mecha-
nisms and clinical implications. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 17:322, 
2019.

322 Gastrointestinal  
Endoscopy
Louis Michel Wong Kee Song, Mark Topazian

Gastrointestinal  endoscopy  has  been  attempted  for  >200  years,  but 
the  introduction  of  semirigid  and  flexible  gastroscopes  in  the 
mid-twentieth  century  marked  the  dawn  of  the  modern  endoscopic 
era. Since then, rapid advances in endoscopic technology have led to 
dramatic  changes  in  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  many  digestive 
diseases. Innovative endoscopic devices and new endoscopic treatment 
modalities continue to expand the use of endoscopy in patient care.

Flexible  endoscopes  provide  an  electronic  video  image  generated 
by  a  charge-coupled  device  (CCD)  or  a  complementary  metal  oxide 
semiconductor  (CMOS)  chip  in  the  tip  of  the  endoscope.  Operator 
controls  permit  deflection  of  the  endoscope  tip;  fiberoptic  bundles 
or  light-emitting  diodes  provide  light  at  the  tip  of  the  endoscope; 
and  working  channels  allow  washing,  suctioning,  and  the  passage  of 
instruments  (Fig.  322-1).  Progressive  changes  in  the  diameter  and 
stiffness of endoscopes have improved the ease and patient tolerance of 
endoscopy. High-resolution and high-definition endoscopes equipped 
with  electronic  and  optical  magnification  capabilities  enable  acqui-
sition  of  images  with  a  high  level  of  detail.  Advanced  imaging  tech-
niques, including narrow-band imaging (Fig. 322-2) and real-time 

is  a  conventional 
FIGURE  322-1  Gastrointestinal  endoscope.  Shown  here 
colonoscope  with  control  knobs  for  tip  deflection,  push  buttons  for  suction  and 
air insufflation (single arrows), and a working channel for passage of accessories 
(double arrows).

2387

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-2  Flat colon polyp. A. White-light imaging. B. Corresponding narrow-
band imaging enhances mucosal features and lesion delineation.

image-processing enhancement algorithms, aid in tissue characteriza-
tion or differentiation.

ENDOSCOPIC PROCEDURES
 ■ UPPER ENDOSCOPY
Upper  endoscopy,  also  referred  to  as  esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
(EGD),  is  performed  by  passing  a  flexible  endoscope  through  the 
mouth into the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. The procedure is 
the  best  method  for  examining  the  upper  gastrointestinal  mucosa 
(Fig. 322-3). While the upper gastrointestinal radiographic series has 
similar accuracy for diagnosis of duodenal ulcer (Fig. 322-4), EGD is 
superior for detection of gastric ulcers (Fig. 322-5) and flat mucosal 
lesions,  such  as  Barrett’s  esophagus  (Fig.  322-6),  and  it  permits 
directed biopsy and endoscopic therapy. Intravenous sedation is given 
to most patients in the United States to ease the anxiety and discom-
fort  of  the  procedure,  although  in  many  countries,  EGD  is  routinely 
performed with topical pharyngeal anesthesia only. Patient tolerance of 
unsedated EGD is improved by the use of an ultrathin, 5-mm diameter 
endoscope that can be passed transorally or transnasally.
 ■ COLONOSCOPY
Colonoscopy is performed by passing a flexible colonoscope through 
the  anal  canal  into  the  rectum  and  colon.  The  cecum  is  reached  in 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2387

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2388

A

C

E

B

D

F

FIGURE 322-3  Normal upper endoscopic examination. A. Esophagus. B. Gastroesophageal junction. C. Gastric fundus. D. Gastric body. E. Gastric antrum. F. Pylorus. 
G. Duodenal bulb. H. Second portion of the duodenum.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2388

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2389

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

G

FIGURE 322-3  (Continued)

A

H

B

FIGURE 322-4  Duodenal ulcers. A. Ulcer with a small, flat, pigmented spot in its base. B. Ulcer with a visible vessel (arrow) in a patient with recent hemorrhage.

AA

B

FIGURE 322-5  Gastric ulcers. A. Benign gastric ulcer in the antrum. B. Malignant gastric ulcer involving greater curvature of stomach.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2389

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2390

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-6  Barrett’s esophagus. A. Salmon-colored Barrett’s mucosa extending proximally from the gastroesophageal junction. B. Barrett’s esophagus with a suspicious 
nodule (arrow) identified during endoscopic surveillance. C. Histologic finding of intramucosal adenocarcinoma in the endoscopically resected nodule. Tumor extends into 
the esophageal submucosa (arrow). D. Barrett’s esophagus with locally advanced adenocarcinoma.

>95% of cases, and the terminal ileum (Fig. 322-7) can often be exam-
ined. Colonoscopy is the gold standard for imaging the colonic mucosa 
(Fig. 322-8). Colonoscopy has greater sensitivity than barium enema 
for colitis (Fig. 322-9), polyps (Fig. 322-10), and cancer (Fig. 322-11). 
CT colonography rivals the accuracy of colonoscopy for detection of 
some polyps and cancer, although it is not as sensitive for the detection 
of flat lesions, such as serrated polyps (Fig. 322-12). Moderate seda-
tion is usually given before colonoscopy in the United States, although 
a  willing  patient  and  a  skilled  examiner  can  complete  the  procedure 
without sedation in many cases.
 ■ FLEXIBLE SIGMOIDOSCOPY
Flexible  sigmoidoscopy  is  akin  to  colonoscopy,  but  it  visualizes  only 
the rectum and a variable portion of the left colon, typically to 60 cm  

from the anal verge. This procedure causes abdominal cramping, but 
it  is  brief  and  usually  performed  without  sedation.  Flexible  sigmoi-
doscopy is primarily used for evaluation of diarrhea and rectal outlet 
bleeding.
 ■ SMALL-BOWEL ENDOSCOPY
Three endoscopic techniques are currently used to evaluate the small 
intestine,  most  often  in  patients  presenting  with  presumed  small-
bowel bleeding. For capsule endoscopy, the patient swallows a dispos-
able  capsule  that  contains  a  CMOS  chip  camera.  Color  still  images 
(Fig.  322-13)  are  transmitted  wirelessly  to  an  external  receiver  at 
several  frames  per  second  until  the  capsule’s  battery  is  exhausted 
or  it  is  passed  into  the  toilet.  Capsule  endoscopy  enables  visualiza-
tion of the small-bowel mucosa beyond the reach of a conventional 

A

B

FIGURE 322-7  Colonoscopic view of terminal ileum. A. Normal-appearing terminal ileum (TI). B. View of normal villi of TI enhanced by examination under water immersion.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2390

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2391

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-8  Normal colonoscopic examination. A. Cecum with view of appendiceal orifice. B. Ileocecal valve. C. Normal-appearing colon. D. Rectum (retroflexed view).

endoscope, and at present, it is solely a diagnostic procedure. Patients 
with a history of prior intestinal surgery or Crohn’s disease are at risk 
for  capsule  retention  at  the  site  of  a  clinically  unsuspected  small-
bowel  stricture,  and  ingestion  of  a  “patency  capsule”  composed  of 
radiologically opaque biodegradable material may be indicated prior 
to capsule endoscopy in such patients.

Push  enteroscopy  is  generally  performed  using  a  variable-stiffness 
pediatric or adult colonoscope or a dedicated enteroscope with or with-
out the assistance of a stiffening overtube that extends from the mouth 
to the small intestine. The proximal to mid-jejunum is usually reached, 
and  the  instrument  channel  of  the  endoscope  allows  for  biopsy  or 
endoscopic therapy.

Deeper  insertion  into  the  small  bowel  can  be  accomplished  by 
device-assisted  enteroscopy,  which  may  utilize  inflatable  balloons  at 
the  tip  of  the  enteroscope  and/or  an  overtube  (single-  or  double- 
balloon  enteroscopy)  or  a  rotating,  screw-like  overtube  (motorized 
spiral  enteroscopy)  to  pleat  the  small  intestine  onto  the  endoscope 
(Fig.  322-14,  Video  V5-1).  With  device-assisted  enteroscopy,  the 
entire small intestine can be visualized in some patients when both 
the  oral  and  anal  routes  of  insertion  are  used.  Biopsies  and  endo-
scopic  therapy  can  be  performed  throughout  the  visualized  small 
bowel (Fig. 322-15).

 ■ ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE 
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
During  endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP),  a 
side-viewing  endoscope  is  passed  through  the  mouth  to  the  duode-
num, the ampulla of Vater is identified and cannulated with a thin plas-
tic catheter, and radiographic contrast material is injected into the bile 
duct and pancreatic duct under fluoroscopic guidance (Fig. 322-16). 
When  indicated,  the  major  papilla  can  be  incised  using  the  tech-
nique  of  endoscopic  sphincterotomy  (Fig.  322-17).  Stones  can  be 
retrieved from the ducts, biopsies can be performed, strictures can be 
dilated  and/or  stented  (Fig. 322-18),  and  ductal  leaks  can  be  treated  
(Fig.  322-19).  ERCP  is  usually  performed  for  therapy  but  is  also 
important  diagnostically  as  it  facilitates  tissue  sampling  of  biliary  or 
pancreatic ductal strictures.
 ■ ENDOSCOPIC ULTRASOUND
Endoscopic  ultrasound  (EUS)  utilizes  ultrasound  transducers  incor-
porated  into  the  tip  of  a  flexible  endoscope.  Ultrasound  images  are 
obtained of the gut wall and adjacent organs, vessels, lymph nodes, and 
other  structures.  High-resolution  images  are  obtained  by  bringing  a 
high-frequency ultrasound transducer close to the area of interest via 
endoscopy. EUS provides the most accurate preoperative local staging 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2391

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2392

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-9  Causes of colitis. A. Chronic ulcerative colitis with diffuse ulcerations and exudates. B. Severe Crohn’s colitis with deep ulcers. C. Pseudomembranous colitis 
with yellow, adherent pseudomembranes. D. Ischemic colitis with patchy mucosal edema, subepithelial hemorrhage, superficial ulcerations, and cyanosis.

A

B

FIGURE 322-10  Colonic polyps. A. Pedunculated polyp on a stalk. B. Sessile polyp.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2392

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2393

FIGURE 322-13  Capsule endoscopy. Image of a jejunal vascular ectasia.

of  esophageal,  pancreatic,  and  rectal  malignancies  (Fig.  322-20),  but 
it does not detect most distant metastases. EUS is also useful for diag-
nosis of bile duct stones, gallbladder disease, subepithelial gastrointes-
tinal lesions, and chronic pancreatitis. Fine-needle aspirates and core 
biopsies of organs, masses, and lymph nodes in the posterior medias-
tinum, abdomen, retroperitoneum, and pelvis can be obtained under 
EUS guidance (Fig. 322-21). EUS-guided therapeutic procedures are 
increasingly performed, including drainage of abscesses, pseudocysts, 
and pancreatic necrosis into the gut lumen (Video V5-2); celiac plexus 
neurolysis for treatment of pancreatic pain; ethanol ablation of pancre-
atic neuroendocrine tumors; treatment of gastrointestinal hemorrhage; 
and drainage of obstructed biliary and pancreatic ducts.
 ■ NATURAL ORIFICE TRANSLUMINAL 
ENDOSCOPIC SURGERY
Natural  orifice  transluminal  endoscopic  surgery  (NOTES)  is  an 
evolving  collection  of  endoscopic  methods  that  entail  passage  of  an 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

FIGURE 322-11  Ulcerated colon adenocarcinoma narrowing the colonic lumen.

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-12  Flat serrated polyp in the cecum. A. Appearance of the lesion under 
conventional white-light imaging. B. Mucosal patterns and boundary of the lesion 
enhanced with narrow-band imaging. C. Submucosal lifting of the lesion with dye 
(methylene blue) injection prior to resection.

FIGURE  322-14  Double-balloon  enteroscopy.  Radiograph  of  the  orally  inserted 
instrument deep in the small intestine.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2393

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2394

A

B

C

A

B

FIGURE 322-16  Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for bile 
duct stones with cholangitis. A. Faceted bile duct stones are demonstrated in the 
common bile duct. B. After endoscopic sphincterotomy, the stones are extracted 
with a Dormia basket. A small abscess communicates with the left hepatic duct.

FIGURE  322-15  Nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drug  (NSAID)–induced  proximal 
ileal  stricture  managed  via  double-balloon  enteroscopy.  A.  High-grade  ileal 
stricture causing obstructive symptoms. B. Balloon dilation of the ileal stricture. 
C. Appearance of the stricture after dilation.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2394

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2395

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

FIGURE 322-17  Endoscopic sphincterotomy. A. A normal-appearing ampulla of Vater. B. Sphincterotomy is performed with electrosurgery. C. Bile duct stones are extracted 
with a balloon catheter. D. Final appearance of the sphincterotomy.

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 322-18  Endoscopic diagnosis, staging, and palliation of hilar cholangiocarcinoma. A. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in a patient with 
obstructive jaundice demonstrates a malignant-appearing stricture of the biliary confluence extending into the left and right intrahepatic ducts. B. Intraductal ultrasound 
of the biliary stricture demonstrates marked bile duct wall thickening due to tumor (T) with partial encasement of the hepatic artery (arrow). C. Intraductal biopsy obtained 
during ERCP demonstrates malignant cells infiltrating the submucosa of the bile duct wall (arrow). D. Endoscopic placement of bilateral self-expanding metal stents (arrow) 
relieves the biliary obstruction. GB, gallbladder. (Image courtesy of Dr. Thomas Smyrk.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2395

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2396

the  esophagus,  stomach,  and  colon.  Several  devices  are  available  for 
closure of EMR and ESD defects, as well as gastrointestinal fistulas and 
perforations.  Endoscopic  clips  deployed  through  the  working  chan-
nel of an endoscope have been used for many years to treat bleeding 
lesions, and the development of larger over-the-scope clips has facil-
itated  endoscopic  closure  of  gastrointestinal  fistulas  and  perforations 
not previously amenable to endoscopic therapy (Video V5-6). Endo-
scopic  suturing  can  be  used  to  close  some  perforations  and  large 
defects (Fig. 322-27), anastomotic leaks, and fistulas. Other potential 
indications  for  endoscopic  suturing  include  stent  fixation  to  prevent 
migration (Fig. 322-28, Video V5-7) and endoscopic bariatric proce-
dures. These technologies are playing an expanding role in patient care.

RISKS OF ENDOSCOPY
Medications  used  during  moderate  sedation  may  cause  respiratory 
depression or allergic reactions. All endoscopic procedures carry some 
risk of bleeding and gastrointestinal perforation. The risk is small with 
diagnostic upper endoscopy, flexible sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy 
(<1:1000 procedures), but it ranges from 0.5 to 5% when therapeutic 
procedures  such  as  polypectomy,  EMR,  ESD,  control  of  hemorrhage, 
or stricture dilation are performed. The risk of adverse events for diag-
nostic EUS (without needle aspiration) is similar to that for diagnostic 
upper endoscopy.

Infectious complications are uncommon with most endoscopic pro-
cedures. Some procedures carry a higher incidence of postprocedure 
bacteremia, and prophylactic antibiotics may be indicated (Table 322-1).  
Management of antithrombotic agents prior to endoscopic procedures 
should take into account the procedural risk of hemorrhage, the agent, 
and the patient condition, as summarized in Table 322-2.

ERCP carries additional risks. Pancreatitis occurs in ~5% of patients 
undergoing the procedure, and young, anicteric patients with normal 
ducts  are  at  increased  risk  (up  to  25%).  Post-ERCP  pancreatitis  is 
usually mild and self-limited, but it may result in prolonged hospital-
ization,  surgery,  diabetes,  or  death  when  severe.  Significant  bleeding 
occurs  after  endoscopic  sphincterotomy  in  ~1%  of  cases.  Ascending 
cholangitis,  pseudocyst  infection,  duodenal  perforation,  and  abscess 
formation may occur as a result of ERCP.

Percutaneous gastrostomy tube placement during EGD is associated 
with a 10–15% incidence of adverse events, most often wound infec-
tions.  Fasciitis,  pneumonia,  bleeding  (Fig.  322-29),  buried  bumper 
syndrome  (Fig.  322-30),  and  colonic  injury  may  result  from  gas-
trostomy tube placement.

URGENT ENDOSCOPY
 ■ ACUTE GASTROINTESTINAL HEMORRHAGE
Endoscopy  is  the  primary  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  technique  for 
patients  with  acute  gastrointestinal  hemorrhage.  Although  gastroin-
testinal bleeding stops spontaneously in most cases, some patients will 

FIGURE  322-19  Bile  leak  (arrow)  from  a  duct  of  Luschka  after  laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy.  Contrast  leaks  from  a  small  right  intrahepatic  duct  into  the 
gallbladder fossa, then flows into the pigtail of a percutaneous drainage catheter.

endoscope  or  its  accessories  into  or  through  the  wall  of  the  gastro-
intestinal  tract  to  perform  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  interventions. 
Some  NOTES  procedures,  such  as  percutaneous  endoscopic  gas-
trostomy  (PEG)  or  endoscopic  necrosectomy  of  pancreatic  necrosis, 
are well-established clinical procedures (Video V5-2); others such as 
peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for achalasia (Fig. 322-22) and 
gastroparesis, peroral endoscopic tumorectomy (POET) (Fig. 322-23), 
and  endoscopic  full-thickness  resection  (EFTR)  of  gastrointestinal 
mural lesions (Fig. 322-24, Video V5-3), are emerging as minimally 
invasive therapeutic options. NOTES is an area of continuing innova-
tion and endoscopic research.

 ■ ENDOSCOPIC RESECTION AND CLOSURE 
TECHNIQUES
Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) (Fig. 322-25, Video V5-4) and 
endoscopic  submucosal  dissection  (ESD)  (Fig.  322-26,  Video  V5-5) 
are  the  two  commonly  used  techniques  for  the  resection  of  benign 
and  early-stage  malignant  gastrointestinal  neoplasms.  In  addition  to 
providing larger specimens for more accurate histopathologic assess-
ment  and  diagnosis,  these  techniques  can  be  potentially  curative  for 
some  dysplastic  lesions  and  focal  intramucosal  carcinomas  involving 

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-20  Local staging of gastrointestinal cancers with endoscopic ultrasound. In each example, the white arrowhead marks the primary tumor and the black arrow 
indicates the muscularis propria (mp) of the intestinal wall. A. T1 gastric cancer. The tumor does not invade the mp. B. T2 esophageal cancer. The tumor invades the mp. 
C. T3 esophageal cancer. The tumor extends through the mp into the surrounding tissue and focally abuts the aorta (AO).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2396

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2397

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

FIGURE  322-21  Endoscopic  ultrasound  (EUS)–guided  fine-needle  aspiration  (FNA).  A.  Ultrasound  image  of  a  22-gauge  needle  passed  through  the  duodenal  wall  and 
positioned in a hypoechoic pancreatic head mass. B. Micrograph of aspirated malignant cells. (Image courtesy of Dr. Michael R. Henry.)

A

B

A

D

G

B

E

H

C

F

I

FIGURE 322-22  Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for achalasia. A. Dilated aperistaltic esophagus with retained secretions. B. Hypertonic lower esophageal sphincter 
(LES) region. C. Mucosal incision (mucosotomy) 10 cm proximal to the LES. D. Submucosal dissection using an electrosurgical knife following endoscope entry through the 
mucosotomy site into the submucosal space. E. Completion of submucosal tunnel to the cardia. F. Initiation of myotomy of the muscularis propria distal to the mucosotomy 
site. G. Completion of myotomy to the cardia. H. Closure of mucosotomy site with clips. I. Patulous gastroesophageal junction following myotomy.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2397

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2398

A

B

C

E

G

D

F

H

FIGURE  322-23  Peroral  endoscopic  tumorectomy  (POET).  A.  Mid-esophageal  subepithelial  lesion  (arrow).  B.  Mucosal  incision  (mucosotomy)  5  cm  proximal  to  the 
lesion. C. Submucosal dissection and tunneling to the site of the lesion. D. Dissection of the lesion from its attachment to the muscularis propria. E. Postresection defect 
through the muscularis propria. F. Mucosotomy site. G. Closure of mucosotomy site with clips. H. Resected specimen (leiomyoma).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2398

20/01/22   10:02 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemA

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-24  Endoscopic full-thickness resection (EFTR) of a gastrointestinal stromal tumor. A. Subepithelial lesion in the proximal stomach. B. Hypoechoic lesion arising 
from the fourth layer (muscularis propria) at endoscopic ultrasound. C. Full-thickness resection defect. D. Closure of defect using an over-the-scope clip.

have persistent or recurrent hemorrhage that may be life-threatening. 
Clinical  predictors  of  rebleeding  help  identify  patients  most  likely 
to  benefit  from  urgent  endoscopy  and  endoscopic,  angiographic,  or 
surgical hemostasis.

Initial  Evaluation  The  initial  evaluation  of  the  bleeding  patient 
focuses on the severity of hemorrhage as reflected by the presence of 
supine  hypotension  or  tachycardia,  postural  vital  sign  changes,  and 
the frequency of hematemesis or melena. Decreases in hematocrit and 
hemoglobin lag behind the clinical course and are not reliable gauges 

of  the  magnitude  of  acute  bleeding.  Nasogastric  tube  aspiration  and 
lavage can also be used to judge the severity of bleeding, but these are 
no  longer  routinely  performed  for  this  purpose.  The  bedside  initial 
evaluation,  completed  well  before  the  bleeding  source  is  confidently 
identified,  guides  immediate  supportive  care  of  the  patient,  triage  to 
the ward or intensive care unit, and timing of endoscopy. The severity 
of the initial hemorrhage is the most important indication for urgent 
endoscopy, since a large initial bleed increases the likelihood of ongo-
ing or recurrent bleeding. Patients with resting hypotension or orthos-
tatic change in vital signs, repeated hematemesis, or bloody nasogastric 

2399

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-25  Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). A. Large sessile polypoid fold in the transverse colon. B. Lifting of lesion following submucosal fluid injection. 
C. Piecemeal hot snare resection. D. Initial resection site. E. Resection defect following completion of piecemeal EMR.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2399

20/01/22   10:02 PM

 
 
 
2400

C

D

FIGURE 322-25  (Continued)

E

A

B

FIGURE  322-26  Endoscopic  submucosal  dissection  (ESD).  A.  Large,  flat,  distal  rectal  adenoma.  B.  Circumferential  incision  following  submucosal  fluid  injection  at  the 
periphery of the lesion. C. ESD using an electrosurgical knife. D. Rectal defect following ESD. E. Specimen resected en bloc.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2400

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2401

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

C

D

FIGURE 322-26  (Continued)

E

A

B

FIGURE 322-27  Closure of large defect using an endoscopic suturing device. A. Ulcerated inflammatory fibroid polyp in the antrum. B. Large defect following endoscopic 
submucosal dissection of the lesion. C. Closure of the defect using endoscopic sutures (arrows). D. Resected specimen.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2401

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2402

C

FIGURE 322-27  (Continued)

D

aspirate that does not clear with large-volume lavage or those requiring 
blood  transfusions  should  be  considered  for  urgent  endoscopy.  In 
addition, patients with cirrhosis, coagulopathy, or respiratory or renal 
failure  and  those  >70  years  old  are  more  likely  to  have  significant 
rebleeding and to benefit from prompt evaluation and treatment.

Bedside evaluation also suggests an upper or lower gastrointestinal 
source of bleeding in most patients. Over 90% of patients with melena 
are bleeding proximal to the ligament of Treitz, and ~85% of patients 
with hematochezia are bleeding from the colon. Melena can result from 
bleeding in the small bowel or right colon, especially in older patients 
with  slow  colonic  transit.  Conversely,  some  patients  with  massive 
hematochezia may be bleeding from an upper gastrointestinal source, 

with rapid intestinal transit. Early upper endoscopy should be consid-
ered in such patients.

Endoscopy  should  be  performed  after  the  patient  has  been  resus-
citated  with  intravenous  fluids  and  transfusions,  as  necessary.  Marked 
coagulopathy  or  thrombocytopenia  is  usually  treated  before  endos-
copy, since correction of these abnormalities may lead to resolution of 
bleeding, and techniques for endoscopic hemostasis are limited in such 
patients.  Metabolic  derangements  should  also  be  addressed.  Tracheal 
intubation  for  airway  protection  should  be  considered  before  upper 
endoscopy in patients with repeated recent hematemesis, particularly in 
those with suspected variceal hemorrhage. A single dose of erythromy-
cin (3–4 mg/kg or 250 mg) administered intravenously 30–90 min prior 

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-28  Prevention of stent migration using endoscopic sutures. A. Esophagogastric anastomotic stricture refractory to balloon dilation. B. Temporary placement of 
a covered esophageal stent. C. Endoscopic suturing device to anchor the stent to the esophageal wall. D. Stent fixation with endoscopic sutures (arrows).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2402

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 322-1  Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Endoscopic Procedures

2403

PATIENT CONDITION
All cardiac conditions
Bile duct obstruction in the absence of 
cholangitis
Bile duct obstruction in the absence of 
cholangitis

Sterile pancreatic fluid collection 
(e.g., pseudocyst, necrosis), which 
communicates with pancreatic duct
Sterile pancreatic fluid collection
Solid lesion along upper GI tract
Solid lesion along lower GI tract
Cystic lesions along GI tract (including 
mediastinum and pancreas)
All patients

Cirrhosis with acute GI bleeding

Continuous peritoneal dialysis
Synthetic vascular graft and other 
nonvalvular cardiovascular devices
Prosthetic joints

PROCEDURE CONTEMPLATED
Any endoscopic procedure
ERCP with complete drainage

GOAL OF PROPHYLAXIS
Prevention of infective endocarditis
Prevention of cholangitis

ERCP with anticipated incomplete 
drainage (e.g., sclerosing cholangitis, 
hilar strictures)
ERCP

Prevention of cholangitis

Prevention of cyst infection

PERIPROCEDURAL ANTIBIOTIC 
PROPHYLAXIS
Not indicated
Not recommended

Recommended; continue antibiotics 
after the procedure

Recommended; continue antibiotics 
after the procedure

Transmural drainage
EUS-FNA
EUS-FNA
EUS-FNA

Percutaneous endoscopic feeding tube 
placement
Required for all such patients, 
regardless of endoscopic procedures
Lower GI tract endoscopy
Any endoscopic procedure

Prevention of cyst infection
Prevention of local infection
Prevention of local infection
Prevention of cyst infection

Recommended
Not recommendeda
Not recommendeda
Recommended

Prevention of peristomal infection

Recommendedb

Prevention of infectious complications 
and reduction of mortality
Prevention of bacterial peritonitis
Prevention of graft and device infection Not recommendedd

Recommended

Recommended, upon admissionc

Any endoscopic procedure

Prevention of septic arthritis

Not recommendedd

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

aLow rates of bacteremia and local infection. bCefazolin or an antibiotic with equivalent coverage of oral and skin flora. cRisk for bacterial infection associated with cirrhosis 
and GI bleeding is well established; ceftriaxone or a quinolone antibiotic recommended. dVery low risk of infection.
Abbreviations: ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS-FNA, endoscopic ultrasound–fine-needle aspiration; GI, gastrointestinal.
Source: Reproduced with permission from MA Kashab et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for GI endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81:81, 2015.

to upper endoscopy increases gastric emptying and may clear blood and 
clots from the stomach to improve endoscopic visualization.

Most  patients  with  hematochezia  who  are  otherwise  stable  can 
undergo semielective colonoscopy. Controlled trials have not shown a 
benefit  to  urgent  colonoscopy  in  patients  hospitalized  with  hematoc-
hezia, although selected patients with massive or recurrent large-volume 
episodes of hematochezia should probably undergo urgent colonoscopy 
after  a  rapid  colonic  purge  with  an  oral  polyethylene  glycol  solution. 
Colonoscopy has a higher diagnostic yield than radionuclide bleeding 
scans  or  angiography  in  lower  gastrointestinal  bleeding,  and  endo-
scopic therapy can be applied in some cases. Urgent colonoscopy can 
be hindered by poor visualization due to persistent vigorous bleeding 
with recurrent hemodynamic instability, and other techniques (such as 
angiography or even emergent subtotal colectomy) must be employed. 
In  such  patients,  massive  bleeding  originating  from  an  upper  gastro-
intestinal source should also be considered and excluded promptly by 
upper  endoscopy.  The  anal  and  rectal  mucosa  should  also  be  visual-
ized  endoscopically  early  in  the  course  of  massive  rectal  bleeding,  as 
bleeding lesions in or close to the anal canal may be identified that are 
amenable to endoscopic or surgical transanal hemostatic techniques.

Peptic Ulcer  The endoscopic appearance of peptic ulcers provides 
useful  prognostic  information  and  guides  the  need  for  endoscopic 
therapy  in  patients  with  acute  hemorrhage  (Fig.  322-31).  A  clean-
based ulcer is associated with a low risk (3–5%) of rebleeding; patients 
with  melena  and  a  clean-based  ulcer  may  be  discharged  home  from 
the  emergency  room  or  endoscopy  suite  if  they  are  young,  reliable, 
otherwise healthy, and able to return as needed. Flat pigmented spots 
and  adherent  clots  covering  the  ulcer  base  have  a  10%  and  20%  risk 
of rebleeding, respectively. Flat pigmented spots do not require treat-
ment, but endoscopic therapy is generally applied to an ulcer with an 
adherent clot. When a fibrin plug is seen protruding from a vessel wall 
in the base of an ulcer (so-called sentinel clot or visible vessel), the risk 
of rebleeding from the ulcer approximates 40%. This finding typically 

leads  to  endoscopic  therapy  to  decrease  the  rebleeding  rate.  When 
active  spurting  from  an  ulcer  is  seen,  there  is  a  90%  risk  of  ongoing 
bleeding without endoscopic or surgical therapy.

Endoscopic therapy of ulcers with high-risk stigmata typically low-
ers  the  rebleeding  rate  to  5–10%.  Several  hemostatic  techniques  are 
available,  including  injection  of  epinephrine  or  a  sclerosant  into  and 
around the vessel (Fig. 322-32), “coaptive coagulation” of the vessel in 
the base of the ulcer using a thermal probe that is pressed against the 
site  of  bleeding  (Fig.  322-33),  placement  of  through-the-scope  clips 
(Fig. 322-34) or an over-the-scope clip (Fig. 322-35), or a combination 
of  these  modalities  (Video V5-8).  Epinephrine  injection  can  slow  or 
stop  active  bleeding,  but  it  is  not  enough  as  a  stand-alone  technique 
for  definitive  hemostasis.  In  conjunction  with  endoscopic  therapy, 
the  administration  of  a  proton  pump  inhibitor  decreases  the  risk  of 
rebleeding and improves patient outcome.

Varices  Two  complementary  strategies  guide  therapy  of  bleeding 
varices:  local  treatment  of  the  bleeding  varices  and  treatment  of  the 
underlying portal hypertension. Local therapies, including endoscopic 
variceal band ligation, endoscopic variceal sclerotherapy, stent place-
ment,  and  balloon  tamponade  with  a  Sengstaken-Blakemore  tube, 
effectively control acute hemorrhage in most patients, although ther-
apies that decrease portal pressure (pharmacologic treatment, surgical 
shunts, or radiologically placed intrahepatic portosystemic shunts) also 
play an important role.

Endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL) is indicated for the prevention 
of  a  first  bleed  (primary  prophylaxis)  from  large  esophageal  varices 
(Fig.  322-36),  particularly  in  patients  in  whom  nonselective  beta 
blockers are contraindicated or not tolerated. EVL is also the preferred 
endoscopic therapy for control of active esophageal variceal bleeding 
and for subsequent eradication of esophageal varices (secondary pro-
phylaxis). During EVL, a varix is suctioned into a cap fitted on the end 
of the endoscope, and a rubber band is released from the cap, ligating 
the varix (Fig. 322-37, Video V5-9). EVL controls acute hemorrhage 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2403

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2404 TABLE 322-2  Management of Antithrombotic Drugs Prior to Endoscopic Procedures

DRUG
Warfarin

BLEEDING RISK 
OF PROCEDURE
Lowa
Highb

MANAGEMENT
Continue
Discontinue

Dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
apixaban, edoxaban

Dabigatran

Lowa

Highb

Continue or hold 
morning dose on day of 
procedure
Discontinue

Rivaroxaban, apixaban, 
edoxaban

Higha

Discontinue

Heparin

Aspirin

Aspirin with dipyridamole

P2Y12 receptor antagonists 
(clopidogrel, prasugrel, 
ticlopidine, ticagrelor, 
cangrelor)

Lowa
Highb

Any

Lowa
Highb
Lowa

Highb

Continue
Discontinue

Continue

Continue
Discontinue
Continue

INTERVAL BETWEEN 
LAST DOSE AND 
PROCEDURE
N/A
3–7 days (usually 5), 
INR should be ≤1.5 for 
procedure

N/A

2–3 days if GFR is  
≥50 mL/min, 3–4 days if 
GFR is 30–49 mL/min

2 days if GFR is  
≥60 mL/min, 3 days if GFR 
is 30–59 mL/min, 4 days if 
GFR is <30 mL/min

N/A
4–6 h for unfractionated 
heparin
N/A

N/A
2–7 days
N/A

COMMENTS
Ensure that INR is not supratherapeutic
Consider bridging therapy with heparinc; usually safe to 
resume warfarin on the same or next day
For life-threatening GI hemorrhage, consider reversal with 
unactivated prothrombin complex concentrate

Bridging therapy not recommended; resume drug when 
bleeding risk is low
For life-threatening GI hemorrhage, consider use of a 
reversal agent
Bridging therapy not recommended; resume drug when 
bleeding risk is low
For life-threatening GI hemorrhage, consider use of a 
reversal agent

Skip one dose if using low-molecular-weight heparin

Low-dose aspirin does not substantially increase the risk of 
endoscopic procedures

Consider continuing aspirin monotherapy

Coronary stent in place: 
discuss with cardiologist

5 days (clopidogrel 
or ticagrelor), 7 days 
(prasugrel), 10–14 days 
(ticlopidine)

Risk of stent thrombosis for at least 12 months after 
insertion of drug-eluting coronary stent or 1 month after 
insertion of bare metal coronary stent

No coronary stent: 
discontinue, consider 
substituting aspirin

aLow-risk endoscopic procedures include esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) or colonoscopy with or without biopsy, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) without fine-needle 
aspiration (FNA), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with stent exchange. bHigh-risk endoscopic procedures include EGD or colonoscopy with 
dilation, polypectomy, or thermal ablation; percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG); EUS with FNA; and ERCP with sphincterotomy or pseudocyst drainage. cBridging 
therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin should be considered for patients discontinuing warfarin who are at high risk for thromboembolism, including those with (1) 
atrial fibrillation with a CHA2DS2-VASc score ≥3, mechanical valve(s), or history of stroke or transient ischemic attack; (2) mechanical mitral valve; (3) mechanical aortic 
valve with other thromboembolic risk factors or older-generation mechanical aortic valve; or (4) venous thromboembolism within the past 3 months.
Abbreviations: GFR, glomerular filtration rate; INR, international normalized ratio; N/A, not applicable.
Source: Adapted from RD Acosta et al: Gastrointest Endosc 83:3, 2016; and AM Veitch et al: Gut 65:374, 2016.

A

B

FIGURE 322-29  Bleeding from percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement. A. Patient with melena from a recently placed PEG tube. B. Loosening of the 
internal disk bumper of the PEG tube revealed active bleeding from within the PEG tract.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2404

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2405

A

B

FIGURE 322-30  Buried bumper syndrome. A. Migration of the internal disk bumper of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube through the gastric wall. 
B. Close-up view of the disk bumper (arrow) buried in the gastric wall.

in up to 90% of patients. Complications of EVL, such as postligation 
ulcer  bleeding  and  esophageal  stenosis,  are  uncommon.  Endoscopic 
variceal  sclerotherapy  (EVS)  involves  the  injection  of  a  sclerosing, 
thrombogenic  solution  into  or  next  to  esophageal  varices.  EVS  also 
controls acute hemorrhage in most patients, but it is generally used as 
salvage therapy when band ligation fails because of its higher compli-
cation rate. Bleeding from large gastric fundal varices (Fig. 322-38) is 
best  treated  with  endoscopic  cyanoacrylate  (“glue”)  injection  (Video 
V5-10),  since  EVL  or  EVS  of  these  varices  is  associated  with  a  high 
rebleeding  rate.  Complications  of  cyanoacrylate  injection  include 
infection  and  glue  embolization  to  other  organs,  such  as  the  lungs, 
brain, and spleen.

After  treatment  of  the  acute  hemorrhage,  an  elective  course  of 
endoscopic  therapy  can  be  undertaken  with  the  goal  of  eradicating 
esophageal  varices  and  preventing  rebleeding  months  to  years  later. 
However, this chronic therapy is less successful, preventing long-term 
rebleeding in ~50% of patients. Pharmacologic therapies that decrease 

portal pressure have similar efficacy. The preferred strategy, however, 
for  secondary  prophylaxis  of  variceal  bleeding  is  the  combination  of 
EVL with a nonselective beta blocker.

Dieulafoy’s  Lesion  This  lesion,  also  called  persistent  caliber 
artery,  is  a  large-caliber  arteriole  that  runs  immediately  beneath  the 
gastrointestinal  mucosa  and  bleeds  through  a  focal  mucosal  erosion 
(Fig. 322-39). Dieulafoy’s lesion commonly involves the lesser curva-
ture of the proximal stomach, causes impressive arterial hemorrhage, 
and may be difficult to diagnose when not actively bleeding; it is often 
recognized  only  after  repeated  endoscopy  for  recurrent  bleeding. 
Endoscopic  therapy,  such  as  thermal  coagulation,  band  ligation,  clip 
placement,  or  endoscopic  suturing,  is  typically  effective  for  control 
of  bleeding  and  sealing  of  the  underlying  vessel  once  the  lesion  has 
been identified (Video V5-11). Rescue therapies, such as angiographic 
embolization  or  surgical  oversewing,  are  considered  in  situations 
where endoscopic therapy has failed.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-31  Stigmata of hemorrhage in peptic ulcers. A. Gastric antral ulcer with a clean base. B. Duodenal ulcer with flat pigmented spots (arrows). C. Duodenal ulcer 
with a dense adherent clot. D. Duodenal ulcer with a pigmented protuberance/visible vessel. E. Duodenal ulcer with active spurting (arrow).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2405

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2406

C

D

FIGURE 322-31  (Continued)

E

Mallory-Weiss Tear  A Mallory-Weiss tear is a linear mucosal rent 
near  or  across  the  gastroesophageal  junction  that  is  often  associated 
with  retching  or  vomiting  (Fig.  322-40).  When  the  tear  disrupts  a 
submucosal arteriole, brisk hemorrhage may result. Endoscopy is the 
best method for diagnosis, and an actively bleeding tear can be treated 
endoscopically with coaptive coagulation, band ligation, or hemoclips, 
with  or  without  epinephrine  injection  (Video  V5-12).  Unlike  peptic 
ulcer, a Mallory-Weiss tear with a nonbleeding sentinel clot in its base 
rarely rebleeds and thus does not necessitate endoscopic therapy.

Vascular  Ectasias  Vascular  ectasias  are  flat  mucosal  vascular 
anomalies  that  are  best  diagnosed  by  endoscopy.  They  usually  cause 
slow intestinal blood loss and occur either in a sporadic fashion or in a 
well-defined pattern of distribution (e.g., gastric antral vascular ectasia 
[GAVE] or “watermelon stomach”) (Fig. 322-41). Cecal vascular ecta-
sias, GAVE, and radiation-induced rectal ectasias are often responsive 
to local endoscopic ablative therapy, such as argon plasma coagulation 
(Video  V5-13).  Patients  with  diffuse  small-bowel  vascular  ectasias 
(associated with chronic renal failure and with hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia) may continue to bleed despite endoscopic treatment of 
easily accessible lesions by conventional endoscopy. These patients may 
benefit from device-assisted enteroscopy with endoscopic hemostasis 
or pharmacologic therapy, such as octreotide or low-dose thalidomide, 
in those who continue to bleed despite endoscopic therapy.

FIGURE 322-32  Injection therapy for ulcer hemostasis. Epinephrine injection into a 
duodenal ulcer with visible vessel (arrow) and adherent clot.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2406

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2407

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-33  Contact coagulation for ulcer hemostasis. A. Duodenal ulcer with a visible vessel (arrow). B. Coagulation of the vessel with a contact thermal probe. 
C. Obliteration of the treated vessel (arrow).

C

A

B

FIGURE  322-34  Through-the-scope  clip  placement  for  ulcer  hemostasis.  A.  Superficial  duodenal  ulcer  with  visible  vessel  (arrow).  B.  Hemostasis  secured  following 
placement of multiple through-the-scope clips.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2407

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2408

A

B

FIGURE  322-35  Over-the-scope  clip  placement  for  ulcer  hemostasis.  A.  Pyloric 
channel  ulcer  with  visible  vessel  (arrow).  B.  Hemostasis  secured  following 
placement of an over-the-scope clip.

Colonic  Diverticula  Diverticula  form  where  nutrient  arteries 
penetrate the muscular wall of the colon en route to the colonic mucosa 
(Fig.  322-42).  The  artery  found  in  the  base  of  a  diverticulum  may 
bleed,  causing  painless  and  impressive  hematochezia.  Colonoscopy 
is indicated in patients with hematochezia and suspected diverticular 
hemorrhage, since other causes of bleeding (such as vascular ectasias, 
colitis,  and  colon  cancer)  must  be  excluded.  In  addition,  an  actively 
bleeding  diverticulum  may  be  seen  and  treated  during  colonoscopy 
(Fig. 322-43, Video V5-14).
 ■ GASTROINTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION AND 
PSEUDOOBSTRUCTION
Endoscopy  is  useful  for  evaluation  and  treatment  of  some  forms  of 
gastrointestinal  obstruction.  An  important  exception  is  small-bowel 
obstruction due to surgical adhesions, which is generally not diagnosed 

FIGURE 322-36  Esophageal varices.

A

B

FIGURE 322-37  Endoscopic variceal ligation. A. Esophageal varices with red wale 
marks. B. Band ligation of varices.

or  treated  endoscopically.  Esophageal,  gastroduodenal,  and  colonic 
obstruction or pseudoobstruction can all be diagnosed and often man-
aged endoscopically.

Acute  Esophageal  Obstruction  Esophageal  obstruction  by 
impacted food (Fig. 322-44) or an ingested foreign body (Fig. 322-45) 
is  a  potentially  life-threatening  event  and  represents  an  endoscopic 
emergency. Left untreated, the patient may develop esophageal ulcer-
ation,  ischemia,  and  perforation.  Patients  with  persistent  esophageal 
obstruction  often  have  hypersalivation  and  are  usually  unable  to 
swallow  water.  Sips  of  a  carbonated  beverage,  sublingual  nifedipine 
or  nitrates,  or  intravenous  glucagon  may  resolve  an  esophageal  food 
impaction, but in many patients, an underlying web, ring, or stricture is 
present, and endoscopic removal of the obstructing food bolus is nec-
essary. Endoscopy is generally the best initial test in such patients since 
endoscopic removal of the obstructing material is usually possible, and 
the presence of an underlying esophageal pathology can often be deter-
mined. Radiographs of the chest and neck should be considered before 
endoscopy in patients with fever, obstruction for ≥24 h, or ingestion of 
a sharp object, such as a fishbone. Radiographic contrast studies inter-
fere with subsequent endoscopy and are not advisable in most patients 
with a clinical picture of esophageal obstruction.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2408

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2409

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-38  Gastric varices. A. Large gastric fundal varices. B. Stigmata of recent bleeding from the same gastric varices (arrow).

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  322-39  Dieulafoy’s  lesion.  A.  Actively  spurting  gastric  Dieulafoy’s  lesion.  B.  Coagulation  of  the  lesion  using  a  contact  thermal  probe.  C.  Hemostasis  secured 
following contact coagulation (arrow). D. Histology of a gastric Dieulafoy’s lesion. A persistent caliber artery (arrows) is present in the gastric submucosa, immediately 
beneath the mucosa.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2409

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2410

bowel  preparation  for  an  elective  one-stage  operation  (Fig.  322-49, 
Video V5-17).
 ■ ACUTE BILIARY OBSTRUCTION
The steady, severe pain that occurs when a gallstone acutely obstructs the 
common bile duct often brings patients to a hospital. The diagnosis of a 
ductal stone is suspected when the patient is jaundiced or when serum 
liver tests or pancreatic enzyme levels are elevated; it is confirmed by 
EUS, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), or direct 
cholangiography (performed endoscopically, percutaneously, or during 
surgery).  ERCP  is  the  primary  means  of  treating  common  bile  duct 
stones (Figs. 322-16 and 322-17), although they can also be removed by 
bile duct exploration at the time of cholecystectomy. Radiologic percu-
taneous biliary drainage may be required in some cases.

Bile  Duct  Imaging  While  transabdominal  ultrasound  diagnoses 
only a minority of bile duct stones, MRCP and EUS are >90% accurate 
and have an important role in diagnosis. Examples of these modalities 
are shown in Fig. 322-50.

If the suspicion for a bile duct stone is high and urgent treatment is 
required (as in a patient with obstructive jaundice and biliary sepsis), 
ERCP  is  the  procedure  of  choice  since  it  remains  the  gold  standard 
for diagnosis and allows for immediate treatment (Video V5-18). If a 
persistent bile duct stone is relatively unlikely (as in a patient with gall-
stone pancreatitis), ERCP may be supplanted by less invasive imaging 
techniques,  such  as  EUS,  MRCP,  or  intraoperative  cholangiography 
performed during cholecystectomy, sparing some patients the risk and 
discomfort of ERCP.

Ascending  Cholangitis  Charcot’s  triad  of  jaundice,  abdominal 
pain, and fever is present in ~70% of patients with ascending cholan-
gitis and biliary sepsis. These patients are managed initially with fluid 
resuscitation  and  intravenous  antibiotics.  Abdominal  ultrasound  is 
often  performed  to  assess  for  gallbladder  stones  and  bile  duct  dila-
tion. However, the bile duct may not be dilated early in the course of 
acute  biliary  obstruction.  Medical  management  usually  improves  the 
patient’s  clinical  status,  providing  a  window  of  ~24  h  during  which 
biliary drainage should be established, typically by ERCP. Undue delay 
can result in recrudescence of overt sepsis and increased morbidity and 
mortality rates. In addition to Charcot’s triad, the additional presence 
of shock and confusion (Reynolds’s pentad) is associated with a high 
mortality rate and should prompt urgent intervention to restore biliary 
drainage.

Gallstone  Pancreatitis  Gallstones  may  cause  acute  pancreatitis 
as they pass through the ampulla of Vater. The occurrence of gallstone 
pancreatitis usually implies passage of a stone into the duodenum, and 
only ~20% of patients harbor a persistent stone in the ampulla or the 
common bile duct. Retained stones are more common in patients with 
jaundice, rising serum liver tests following hospitalization, severe pan-
creatitis, or superimposed ascending cholangitis.

Urgent  ERCP  decreases  the  morbidity  rate  of  gallstone  pancreati-
tis in a subset of patients with retained bile duct stones. It is unclear 
whether  the  benefit  of  ERCP  is  mainly  attributable  to  treatment  and 
prevention  of  ascending  cholangitis  or  to  relief  of  pancreatic  ductal 
obstruction. ERCP is warranted early in the course of gallstone pan-
creatitis if ascending cholangitis is suspected, especially in a jaundiced 
patient.  Urgent  ERCP  may  also  benefit  patients  predicted  to  have 
severe pancreatitis using a clinical index of severity, such as the Glas-
gow or Ranson score. Since the benefit of ERCP is limited to patients 
with a retained bile duct stone, a strategy of initial MRCP or EUS for 
diagnosis  decreases  the  utilization  of  ERCP  in  gallstone  pancreatitis 
and  improves  clinical  outcomes  by  limiting  the  occurrence  of  ERC-
P-related adverse events.

ELECTIVE ENDOSCOPY
 ■ DYSPEPSIA
Dyspepsia  is  a  chronic  or  recurrent  burning  discomfort  or  pain  in 
the upper abdomen that may be caused by diverse processes, such as 
gastroesophageal reflux, peptic ulcer disease, and “nonulcer dyspepsia,” 

FIGURE 322-40  Mallory-Weiss tear at the gastroesophageal junction.

Gastric Outlet Obstruction  Obstruction of the gastric outlet is 
commonly  caused  by  gastric,  duodenal,  or  pancreatic  malignancy  or 
chronic  peptic  ulceration  with  stenosis  of  the  pylorus  (Fig.  322-46). 
Patients  vomit  partially  digested  food  many  hours  after  eating.  Gas-
tric decompression with a nasogastric tube and subsequent lavage for 
removal of retained material is the first step in treatment. Endoscopy is 
useful for diagnosis and treatment. Patients with benign pyloric steno-
sis may be treated with endoscopic balloon dilation of the pylorus, and 
a course of endoscopic dilation results in long-term relief of symptoms 
in ~50% of patients. Removable, fully covered lumen-apposing metal 
stents (LAMS) may also be used to treat benign pyloric stenosis (Video 
V5-15).  Malignant  gastric  outlet  obstruction  can  be  relieved  with 
endoscopically  placed  expandable  stents  in  patients  with  inoperable 
malignancy (Video V5-16).

Colonic  Obstruction  and  Pseudoobstruction  These  con-
ditions  both  present  with  abdominal  distention  and  discomfort, 
tympany,  and  a  dilated  colon  on  plain  abdominal  radiography.  The 
radiographic appearance may be characteristic of a particular condi-
tion,  such  as  sigmoid  volvulus  (Fig.  322-47).  Both  obstruction  and 
pseudoobstruction may lead to colonic perforation if left untreated. 
Acute  colonic  pseudoobstruction  is  a  form  of  colonic  ileus  that  is 
usually attributable to electrolyte disorders, narcotic and anticholin-
ergic  medications,  immobility  (as  after  surgery),  or  retroperitoneal 
hemorrhage  or  mass.  Multiple  causative  factors  are  often  present. 
Colonoscopy,  water-soluble  contrast  enema,  or  CT  may  be  used  to 
assess  for  an  obstructing  lesion  and  differentiate  obstruction  from 
pseudoobstruction. One of these diagnostic studies should be strongly 
considered  if  the  patient  does  not  have  clear  risk  factors  for  pseu-
doobstruction, if radiographs do not show air in the rectum, or if the 
patient fails to improve when underlying causes of pseudoobstruction 
have been addressed. The risk of cecal perforation in pseudoobstruc-
tion rises when the cecal diameter exceeds 12 cm, and decompres-
sion of the colon may be achieved using intravenous neostigmine or 
via colonoscopic decompression (Fig. 322-48). Most patients should 
receive a trial of conservative therapy (with correction of electrolyte 
disorders,  removal  of  offending  medications,  and  increased  mobili-
zation)  before  undergoing  an  invasive  decompressive  procedure  for 
colonic pseudoobstruction.

Colonic  obstruction  is  an  indication  for  urgent  intervention.  In 
the  past,  emergent  diverting  colostomy  was  usually  performed  with 
a  subsequent  second  operation  after  bowel  preparation  to  treat  the 
underlying  cause  of  obstruction.  Colonoscopic  placement  of  an 
expandable  stent  is  an  alternative  treatment  option  that  can  relieve 
malignant colonic obstruction without emergency surgery and permit 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2410

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemA

B

2411

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

C

FIGURE 322-41  Gastrointestinal vascular ectasias. A. Gastric antral vascular ectasia (“watermelon stomach”) characterized by stripes of prominent flat or raised vascular 
ectasias. B. Cecal vascular ectasia. C. Radiation-induced vascular ectasias of the rectum in a patient previously treated for prostate cancer.

a  heterogeneous  category  that  includes  disorders  of  motility,  sensa-
tion,  and  somatization.  Gastric  and  esophageal  malignancies  are  less 
common  causes  of  dyspepsia.  Careful  history-taking  allows  accurate 
differential  diagnosis  of  dyspepsia  in  only  about  half  of  patients.  In 
the  remainder,  endoscopy  can  be  a  useful  diagnostic  tool,  especially 
in  patients  whose  symptoms  are  not  resolved  by  Helicobacter  pylori 
treatment  or  an  empirical  trial  of  acid-reducing  therapy.  Endoscopy 
should be performed at the outset in patients with dyspepsia and alarm 
features, such as weight loss, obstructive symptoms, or iron-deficiency 
anemia.
 ■ GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
When  classic  symptoms  of  gastroesophageal  reflux  are  present,  such 
as  water  brash  and  substernal  heartburn,  presumptive  diagnosis  and 
empirical treatment are often sufficient. Endoscopy is a sensitive test 
for  diagnosis  of  esophagitis  (Fig.  322-51),  but  it  will  miss  nonero-
sive  reflux  disease  (NERD)  since  some  patients  have  symptomatic 

reflux  without  esophagitis.  The  most  sensitive  test  for  diagnosis  of 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is 24-h ambulatory pH moni-
toring. Endoscopy is indicated in patients with reflux symptoms refrac-
tory to antisecretory therapy; in those with alarm symptoms, such as 
dysphagia, weight loss, or gastrointestinal bleeding; and in those with 
recurrent dyspepsia after treatment that is not clearly due to reflux on 
clinical  grounds  alone.  Endoscopy  should  be  considered  in  patients 
with long-standing (≥10 years) GERD, as they have a sixfold increased 
risk of harboring Barrett’s esophagus compared to patients with <1 year 
of reflux symptoms.

Barrett’s  Esophagus  and  Esophageal  Squamous  Dysplasia  
Barrett’s  esophagus  is  specialized  columnar  metaplasia  that  replaces 
the normal squamous mucosa of the distal esophagus in some persons 
with GERD. Barrett’s epithelium is a major risk factor for adenocarci-
noma of the esophagus and is readily detected endoscopically, due to 
proximal displacement of the squamocolumnar junction (Fig. 322-6). 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2411

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2412

FIGURE 322-42  Colonic diverticula.

A  screening  EGD  for  Barrett’s  esophagus  should  be  considered  in 
patients with a chronic (≥10 year) history of GERD symptoms. Endo-
scopic biopsy is the gold standard for confirmation of Barrett’s esopha-
gus and for dysplasia or cancer arising in Barrett’s mucosa.

Periodic  EGD  with  biopsies  is  recommended  for  surveillance  of 
patients with Barrett’s esophagus. Endoscopic resection (EMR or ESD) 
and/or  ablation  are  performed  when  high-grade  dysplasia  or  intra-
mucosal  cancer  are  found  in  the  Barrett’s  mucosa.  Both  endoscopic 
therapy  and  periodic  surveillance  are  acceptable  options  in  patients 
with  Barrett’s  esophagus  and  low-grade  dysplasia.  Radiofrequency 
ablation (RFA) is the most common ablative modality used for endo-
scopic treatment of Barrett’s esophagus, and other modalities, such as 
cryotherapy, are also available.

Esophageal squamous dysplasia is the precursor lesion of esopha-
geal squamous cell cancer (ESCC), the most common type of esoph-
ageal  malignancy  worldwide.  Endoscopic  detection  of  esophageal 
squamous  dysplasia  often  requires  specialized  imaging  methods, 
such as chromoendoscopy with Lugol’s iodine. Once detected, it can 
be  treated  endoscopically  with  EMR,  ESD,  or  RFA  (Fig.  322-52). 
Population-based screening for esophageal squamous dysplasia has 
been shown to decrease the occurrence of ESCC in high-incidence 
regions.

 ■ PEPTIC ULCER
Peptic  ulcer  classically  causes  epigastric  gnawing  or  burning,  often 
occurring  nocturnally  and  promptly  relieved  by  food  or  antacids. 
Although  endoscopy  is  the  most  sensitive  diagnostic  test  for  peptic 
ulcer, it is not a cost-effective strategy in young patients with ulcer-like 
dyspeptic symptoms unless endoscopy is available at low cost. Patients 
with suspected peptic ulcer should be evaluated for H. pylori infection. 
Serology (past or present infection), urea breath testing (current infec-
tion),  and  stool  tests  are  noninvasive  and  less  costly  than  endoscopy 
with  biopsy.  Patients  aged  >50  and  those  with  alarm  symptoms  or 
persistent symptoms despite treatment should undergo endoscopy to 
exclude malignancy.

 ■ NONULCER DYSPEPSIA
Nonulcer dyspepsia may be associated with bloating and, unlike peptic 
ulcer, tends not to remit and recur. Most patients describe persistent 
symptoms despite acid-reducing, prokinetic, or anti-Helicobacter ther-
apy and are referred for endoscopy to exclude a refractory ulcer and 
assess  for  other  causes.  Although  endoscopy  is  useful  for  excluding 
other diagnoses, its impact on the treatment of patients with nonulcer 
dyspepsia is limited.

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-43  Diverticular hemorrhage. A. Actively bleeding sigmoid diverticulum. 
B. Treatment of the bleeding vessel at the dome of the diverticulum with a contact 
thermal  probe.  C.  Hemostasis  secured  following  contact  coagulation  with  tattoo 
injection to aid future localization.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2412

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2413

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

FIGURE  322-44  Esophageal  food  impaction.  Meat  bolus  impacted  in  the  distal 
esophagus.

 ■ DYSPHAGIA
About  50%  of  patients  presenting  with  difficulty  swallowing  have  a 
mechanical  obstruction;  the  remainder  has  a  motility  disorder,  such 
as achalasia or diffuse esophageal spasm. Careful history-taking often 
points to a presumptive diagnosis and leads to the appropriate use of 
diagnostic  tests.  Esophageal  strictures  (Fig.  322-53)  typically  cause 
progressive  dysphagia,  first  for  solids,  then  for  liquids;  motility  dis-
orders often cause intermittent dysphagia for both solids and liquids. 
Some underlying disorders have characteristic historic features: Schatzki’s 
ring (Fig. 322-54) causes episodic dysphagia for solids, typically at the 
beginning of a meal; oropharyngeal motor disorders typically present 
with  difficulty  initiating  deglutition  (transfer  dysphagia)  and  nasal 
reflux or coughing with swallowing; and achalasia may cause nocturnal 
regurgitation of undigested food.

When  mechanical  obstruction  is  suspected,  endoscopy  is  a  useful 
initial diagnostic test, since it permits immediate biopsy and/or dila-
tion  of  strictures,  masses,  or  rings.  The  presence  of  linear  furrows 
and multiple corrugated rings throughout a narrowed esophagus should 
raise suspicion for eosinophilic esophagitis, an increasingly recognized 
cause of recurrent dysphagia and food impaction (Fig. 322-55). Blind 

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-46  Gastric outlet obstruction due to pyloric stenosis. A. Nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agent–induced ulcer disease with severe stenosis of the pylorus 
(arrow).  B.  Balloon  dilation  of  the  stenosis.  C.  Appearance  of  pyloric  ring  after 
dilation.

or forceful passage of an endoscope may lead to perforation in a patient 
with stenosis of the cervical esophagus or a Zenker’s diverticulum 
(Fig. 322-56), but gentle passage of an endoscope under direct visual 
guidance is reasonably safe. Endoscopy can miss a subtle stricture or 
ring in some patients.

When transfer dysphagia is evident or an esophageal motility disor-
der is suspected, esophageal radiography and/or a video-swallow study 
are  the  best  initial  diagnostic  tests.  The  oropharyngeal  swallowing 
mechanism, esophageal peristalsis, and the lower esophageal sphincter 
can all be assessed. In some disorders, subsequent esophageal manom-
etry is required for diagnosis.

Various  causes  of  dysphagia  are  amenable  to  endoscopic  ther-
apy.  Benign  strictures,  rings,  and  webs  can  be  dilated  using  a 

FIGURE  322-45  Esophageal  foreign  body.  Intentionally 
impacted in the esophageal lumen.

ingested  toothbrush 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2413

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2414

FIGURE 322-47  Sigmoid volvulus with the characteristic radiologic appearance of 
a “bent inner tube.”

through-the-scope balloon (Fig. 322-57) or a polyvinyl dilator passed 
over a guide wire. In some instances, fibrotic strictures may respond to 
needle-knife electroincision (Fig. 322-58) when they prove refractory 
to  dilation.  Self-expanding  esophageal  stents  can  be  used  to  palliate 
dysphagia  from  malignant  obstruction  (Fig.  322-59),  and  flexible 
endoscopic  myotomy  is  an  option  for  Zenker’s  diverticulum  (Video 
V5-19). Recent advances in submucosal endoscopy have enabled the 
development of procedures, such as POEM (Video V5-20) and POET 
(Video V5-21), for the management of achalasia and select subepithe-
lial esophageal tumors, respectively.
 ■ ENDOSCOPIC TREATMENT OF OBESITY
A  significant  proportion  of  Americans  are  overweight  or  obese, 
and  obesity-associated  diabetes  has  become  a  major  public  health 

A

B

FIGURE  322-48  Acute  colonic  pseudoobstruction.  A.  Acute  colonic  dilation 
occurring  in  a  patient  soon  after  knee  surgery.  B.  Colonoscopic  placement  of 
decompression tube with marked improvement in colonic dilation.

A

B

C

FIGURE  322-49  Obstructing  colonic  carcinoma.  A.  Colonic  adenocarcinoma 
causing  marked  luminal  narrowing  of  the  distal  transverse  colon.  B.  Endoscopic 
placement  of  a  self-expandable  metal  stent.  C.  Radiograph  of  expanded  stent 
across the obstructing tumor with a residual waist (arrow).

problem.  Bariatric  surgery  is  the  most  effective  weight-loss  inter-
vention,  decreasing  long-term  mortality  in  obese  persons,  but  many 
patients  do  not  undergo  surgery.  Endoscopic  treatments  for  obesity 
have been developed and include insertion of an intragastric balloon 
or  duodenojejunal  bypass  liner,  placement  of  a  percutaneous  gastric 
tube for aspiration of gastric contents after meals, or endoscopic sleeve 
gastroplasty, which utilizes endoscopic suturing to narrow the lumen 
of the gastric body (Video V5-22). Prospective trials show that these 
treatments induce total-body weight loss of 7–20% and provide vary-
ing degrees of glycemic control. Additional endoscopic modalities are 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2414

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2415

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-50  Methods of bile duct imaging. Arrows mark bile duct stones. A. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). B. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). 
C. Helical computed tomography (CT).

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  322-51  Causes  of  esophagitis.  A.  Severe  reflux  esophagitis  with  mucosal  ulceration  and  friability.  B.  Cytomegalovirus  esophagitis.  C.  Herpes  simplex  virus 
esophagitis with target-type shallow ulcerations. D. Candida esophagitis with white plaques adherent to the esophageal mucosa.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2415

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2416

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 322-52  Early squamous cell cancer. A. Nodularity in the distal esophagus due to T1 esophageal squamous cell cancer. B. Lesion is unstained under Lugol’s iodine 
chromoendoscopy without additional unstained areas. C. Circumferential mucosal incision around the lesion. D. Resection defect following en bloc removal of the lesion 
via endoscopic submucosal dissection.

undergoing clinical trials. The long-term efficacy of endoscopic bariat-
ric treatment in comparison to surgery is still unclear.
 ■ TREATMENT OF MALIGNANCIES
Endoscopy plays an important role in the treatment of gastrointestinal 
malignancies.  Early-stage  malignancies  limited  to  the  mucosal  and 
superficial  submucosal  layers  may  be  resected  using  the  techniques 
of EMR (Video V5-4) or ESD (Video V5-5). RFA and cryotherapy are 
effective modalities for ablative treatment of high-grade dysplasia and 
intramucosal cancer in Barrett’s esophagus (Video V5-23). Gastroin-
testinal stromal tumors can be removed en bloc by EFTR (Video V5-3). 
In general, endoscopic techniques offer the advantage of a minimally 
invasive approach to treatment but rely on other imaging techniques 
(such as CT, MRI, positron emission tomography [PET], and EUS) to 
exclude distant metastases or locally advanced disease better treated by 
surgery or other modalities. The decision to treat an early-stage gas-
trointestinal malignancy endoscopically is often made in collaboration 
with a surgeon and/or oncologist.

Endoscopic  palliation  of  gastrointestinal  malignancies  relieves 
symptoms and, in many cases, prolongs survival. Malignant obstruc-
tion can be relieved by endoscopic stent placement (Figs. 322-18, 322-49, 

322-59, and 322-60; Videos V5-16 and V5-17), and malignant gastro-
intestinal bleeding can often be palliated endoscopically as well. EUS-
guided celiac plexus neurolysis may relieve pancreatic cancer pain.

 ■ ANEMIA AND OCCULT BLOOD IN THE STOOL
Iron-deficiency  anemia  may  be  attributed  to  poor  iron  absorption 
(as in celiac sprue) or, more commonly, chronic blood loss. Intestinal 
bleeding  should  be  strongly  suspected  in  men  and  postmenopausal 
women with iron-deficiency anemia, and colonoscopy is indicated in 
such  patients,  even  in  the  absence  of  detectable  occult  blood  in  the 
stool. Approximately 30% will have large colonic polyps or colorectal 
cancer, and a few patients will have colonic vascular lesions. When a 
convincing source of blood loss is not found in the colon, upper gas-
trointestinal  endoscopy  should  be  considered;  if  no  lesion  is  found, 
duodenal biopsies should be obtained to exclude sprue (Fig. 322-61). 
Small-bowel evaluation with capsule endoscopy (Fig. 322-62), CT or 
magnetic resonance (MR) enterography, or device-assisted enteroscopy 
may be appropriate if both EGD and colonoscopy are unrevealing.

Tests for occult blood in the stool detect hemoglobin or the heme 
moiety and are most sensitive for colonic blood loss, although they will 
also detect larger amounts of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2416

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2417

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

FIGURE 322-53  Peptic esophageal stricture associated with esophagitis.

with occult blood in the stool should undergo colonoscopy to diagnose 
or exclude colorectal neoplasia, especially if they are >50 years old or 
have a family history of colonic neoplasia. Whether upper endoscopy 
is also indicated depends on the patient’s symptoms.

The small intestine may be the source of chronic intestinal bleeding, 
especially  if  colonoscopy  and  upper  endoscopy  are  not  diagnostic. 
The  utility  of  small-bowel  evaluation  varies  with  the  clinical  setting 
and  is  most  important  in  patients  in  whom  bleeding  causes  chronic 
or recurrent anemia. In contrast to the low diagnostic yield of small-
bowel radiography, positive findings on capsule endoscopy are seen in 
50–70% of patients with suspected small-intestinal bleeding. The most 
common finding is mucosal vascular ectasia. CT and MR enterography 
accurately detect small-bowel masses and Crohn’s disease and are also 
useful for initial small-bowel evaluation. Deep enteroscopy may follow 
capsule endoscopy for biopsy of lesions or to provide specific therapy, 
such as argon plasma coagulation of vascular ectasias (Fig. 322-63).
 ■ COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING
The majority of colon cancers develop from preexisting colonic ade-
nomas, and colorectal cancer can be largely prevented by the detection 
and  removal  of  adenomatous  polyps  (Video  V5-24).  The  choice  of 
screening  strategy  for  an  asymptomatic  person  depends  on  personal 

FIGURE 322-54  Schatzki’s ring at the gastroesophageal junction.

FIGURE 322-55  Eosinophilic esophagitis. Multiple circular rings of the esophagus 
creating  a  corrugated  appearance  and  an  impacted  grape  at  the  narrowed 
esophagogastric junction. The diagnosis requires biopsy with histologic finding of 
>15–20 eosinophils/high-power field.

and family history. Individuals with inflammatory bowel disease, a his-
tory of colorectal polyps or cancer, family members with adenomatous 
polyps  or  cancer,  or  certain  familial  cancer  syndromes  (Fig. 322-64) 
are at increased risk for colorectal cancer. An individual without these 
factors is generally considered at average risk.

Screening  strategies  are  summarized  in  Table  322-3.  While  fecal 
immunochemical tests (FIT) for heme or stool tests for occult blood 
have been shown to decrease the mortality rate from colorectal cancer, 
they do not detect some cancers and many polyps. FIT-DNA multitar-
geted stool DNA tests appear to be more sensitive, but direct visualiza-
tion of the colon is the gold standard method for detection of polyps 
and cancers and remains a preferred screening strategy. Sigmoidoscopy 
is also used for colorectal cancer screening. However, the distribution 
of  colon  cancers  has  changed  in  the  United  States  over  time,  with 
proportionally  fewer  rectal  and  left-sided  cancers  than  in  the  past. 
Large  American  studies  of  colonoscopy  for  screening  of  average-risk 
individuals show that cancers are roughly equally distributed between 
the  left  and  right  colon  and  half  of  patients  with  right-sided  lesions 
have no polyps in the left colon. Visualization of the entire colon thus 
appears to be the optimal strategy for colorectal cancer screening and 
prevention.

Computed  tomography  colonography  (CTC)  is  a  radiologic  tech-
nique  that  images  the  colon  with  CT  following  rectal  insufflation  of 
the  colonic  lumen.  Computer  rendering  of  CT  images  generates  an 
electronic display of a virtual “flight” along the colonic lumen, simu-
lating colonoscopy (Fig. 322-65). Findings detected during CTC often 
require  subsequent  conventional  colonoscopy  for  confirmation  and 
treatment.

 ■ DIARRHEA
Most cases of diarrhea are acute, self-limited, and due to infections or 
medication. Chronic diarrhea (lasting >6 weeks) is more often due to a 
primary inflammatory, malabsorptive, or motility disorder; is less likely 
to resolve spontaneously; and generally requires diagnostic evaluation. 
Patients  with  chronic  diarrhea  or  severe,  unexplained  acute  diarrhea 
often undergo endoscopy if stool tests for pathogens are unrevealing. 
The choice of endoscopic testing depends on the clinical setting.

Patients  with  colonic  symptoms  and  findings  such  as  bloody 
diarrhea,  tenesmus,  fever,  or  leukocytes  in  stool  generally  undergo 
sigmoidoscopy  or  colonoscopy  to  assess  for  colitis  (Fig.  322-9).  Sig-
moidoscopy is an appropriate initial test in most patients. Conversely, 
patients with symptoms and findings suggesting small-bowel disease, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2417

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2418

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 322-56  Zenker’s diverticulum. A. Contrast esophagography demonstrates a moderate-sized Zenker’s diverticulum. B. Endoscopic view of the Zenker’s diverticulum 
(left) relative to the true esophageal lumen (right) separated by the diverticular septum. C. Flexible endoscopic diverticulotomy using an electrosurgical knife. D. Appearance 
post diverticulotomy.

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-57  Endoscopic management of peptic stricture. A. Peptic stricture. B. Through-the-scope balloon dilation of stricture. C. Improvement in luminal diameter after dilation.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2418

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2419

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-58  Endoscopic management of an esophagogastric anastomotic stricture. A. Recurrent anastomotic stricture despite periodic balloon dilation. B. Needle-knife 
electroincision of stricture. C. Improvement in luminal opening after therapy.

such as large-volume watery stools, substantial weight loss, and malab-
sorption of iron, calcium, or fat, may undergo upper endoscopy with 
duodenal aspirates for assessment of bacterial overgrowth and biopsies 
for assessment of mucosal diseases, such as celiac sprue.

Many patients with chronic diarrhea do not fit either of these pat-
terns. In the setting of a long-standing history of alternating constipa-
tion and diarrhea dating to early adulthood, without findings such as 
blood in the stool or anemia, a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome 
may be made without direct visualization of the bowel. Steatorrhea and 
upper abdominal pain may prompt evaluation of the pancreas rather 
than the gut. Patients whose chronic diarrhea is not easily categorized 
often  undergo  initial  colonoscopy  to  examine  the  entire  colon  and 
terminal ileum for inflammatory or neoplastic disease (Fig. 322-66).
 ■ MINOR HEMATOCHEZIA
Bright red blood passed with or on formed brown stool usually has an 
anal, rectal, or sigmoid source (Fig. 322-67). Even trivial amounts of 
hematochezia should be investigated with colonoscopy and/or flexible 
sigmoidoscopy  together  with  anoscopy  to  exclude  polyps  or  cancers, 
especially in patients >40 years old and those with a personal or family 
history  of  colorectal  polyps  or  cancer.  Patients  reporting  red  blood 
on  the  toilet  tissue  only,  without  blood  in  the  toilet  or  on  the  stool, 
are generally bleeding from a lesion in the anal canal; careful external 
inspection,  digital  examination,  and  sigmoidoscopy  with  anoscopy 
may be sufficient for diagnosis in such cases.
 ■ PANCREATITIS
About  20%  of  patients  with  pancreatitis  have  no  identified  cause 
after  routine  clinical  investigation  (including  a  review  of  medication 
and  alcohol  use;  measurement  of  serum  triglyceride,  calcium,  and 

immunoglobulin G subclass 4 levels; abdominal ultrasonography; and 
CT or MRI). Endoscopic assessment leads to a specific diagnosis in the 
majority  of  such  patients,  often  altering  clinical  management.  Endo-
scopic  investigation  is  particularly  appropriate  if  the  patient  has  had 
more than one episode of pancreatitis.

Microlithiasis,  or  the  presence  of  microscopic  crystals  in  bile,  is 
a  leading  cause  of  previously  unexplained  acute  pancreatitis  and  is 
sometimes seen during abdominal ultrasonography as layering sludge 
or  flecks  of  floating,  echogenic  material  in  the  gallbladder.  EUS  may 
identify previously undetected microlithiasis.

Previously undetected chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic malignancy, 
or pancreas divisum may be diagnosed by either ERCP or EUS. Auto-
immune pancreatitis is often suspected based on CT, MRI, or serologic 
findings, but it may first become apparent during EUS and may require 
EUS-guided pancreatic biopsy for histologic diagnosis.

Severe  pancreatitis  often  results  in  pancreatic  fluid  collections. 
Symptomatic  pseudocysts  and  areas  of  walled-off  pancreatic  necro-
sis  can  be  drained  into  the  stomach  or  duodenum  endoscopically, 
using transpapillary and transmural endoscopic techniques. Pancreatic 
necrosis  can  be  debrided  by  direct  endoscopic  necrosectomy  (Video 
V5-2) via an endoscopically created transmural drainage site.

 ■ CANCER STAGING
Local  staging  of  esophageal,  gastric,  pancreatic,  bile  duct,  and  rectal 
cancers can be obtained with EUS (Fig. 322-20). EUS with fine-needle 
aspiration (Fig. 322-21) currently provides the most accurate preopera-
tive assessment of local tumor and nodal staging, but it does not detect 
many  distant  metastases.  Details  of  the  local  tumor  stage  can  guide 
treatment  decisions  including  resectability  and  need  for  neoadjuvant 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

FIGURE 322-59  Palliation of malignant dysphagia. A. Obstructing distal esophageal cancer. B. Palliative stent placement.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2419

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2420

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  322-60  Placement  of  biliary  and  duodenal  self-expanding  metal  stents  (SEMS)  for  obstruction  caused  by  pancreatic  cancer.  A.  Endoscopic  retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrates a distal bile duct stricture (arrow). B. A biliary SEMS is placed. C. Contrast injection demonstrates a duodenal stricture 
(arrow). D. Biliary and duodenal SEMS in place.

therapy. EUS with transesophageal needle biopsy may also be used to 
assess the presence of non-small-cell lung cancer in mediastinal nodes.

OPEN-ACCESS ENDOSCOPY
Direct  scheduling  of  endoscopic  procedures  by  primary  care  physi-
cians  without  preceding  gastroenterology  consultation,  or  open- 
access  endoscopy,  is  common.  When  the  indications  for  endoscopy 
are  clear-cut  and  appropriate,  the  procedural  risks  are  low,  and  the 
patient  understands  what  to  expect,  open-access  endoscopy  stream-
lines patient care and decreases costs.

FIGURE  322-61  Celiac  sprue.  Scalloped  duodenal  folds  in  a  patient  with  celiac 
sprue.

FIGURE  322-62  Capsule  endoscopy.  Images  of  a  mildly  scalloped  jejunal  fold 
(left) and an ileal tumor (right) in a patient with celiac sprue. (Images courtesy of  
Dr. Elizabeth Rajan; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2420

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2421

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
2

G
a
s
t
r
o
i
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

E
n
d
o
s
c
o
p
y

A

B

C

FIGURE 322-63  Small-bowel vascular ectasia. A. Actively bleeding mid-jejunal vascular ectasia identified by double-balloon enteroscopy. B. Ablation of vascular ectasia 
with argon plasma coagulation (APC). C. Hemostasis secured following APC.

Patients  referred  for  open-access  endoscopy  should  have  a  recent 
history,  physical  examination,  and  medication  list  that  are  available 
for  review  when  the  patient  comes  to  the  endoscopy  suite.  Patients 
with unstable or symptomatic cardiovascular or respiratory conditions 
should not be referred directly for open-access endoscopy. Those with 
particular conditions who are undergoing certain procedures should be 
prescribed  prophylactic  antibiotics  prior to  endoscopy  (Table  322-1). 
In  addition,  patients  taking  anticoagulants  and/or  antiplatelet  drugs 
may require adjustment of these agents before endoscopy based on the 
procedural risk for bleeding and their underlying risk for a thrombo-
embolic event (Table 322-2).

Common indications for open-access EGD include dyspepsia resis-
tant to a trial of appropriate therapy, dysphagia, gastrointestinal bleed-
ing, and persistent anorexia or early satiety. Open-access colonoscopy 
is  often  requested  in  men  or  postmenopausal  women  with  iron- 
deficiency  anemia,  in  patients  with  hematochezia  or  occult  blood 
in  the  stool,  in  patients  with  a  previous  history  of  colorectal  ade-
nomatous  polyps  or  cancer,  and  for  colorectal  cancer  screening. 
Flexible  sigmoidoscopy  is  commonly  performed  as  an  open-access 
procedure.

FIGURE  322-64  Familial  adenomatous  polyposis.  Numerous  colon  polyps  in  a 
patient with familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2421

20/01/22   10:03 PM

 
 
 
2422 TABLE 322-3  Colorectal Cancer Screening Strategies

CHOICES/RECOMMENDATIONS

COMMENTS

Average-Risk Patients

Asymptomatic individuals ≥45 years old

Personal History of Polyps or CRC

1–2 small (<1 cm) adenomas with low-grade 
dysplasia

3–10 adenomas, or any high-risk adenomab

>10 adenomas

Piecemeal removal of a sessile polyp
Small (<1 cm) hyperplastic polyps of sigmoid 
and rectum
Sessile serrated adenoma/polyp <10 mm, 
without dysplasia
Sessile serrated adenoma/polyp ≥10 mm or 
with dysplasia, or ≥2 serrated polyps
Incompletely removed serrated polyp ≥1 cm
Colon cancer

Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Long-standing (>8 years) ulcerative pancolitis 
or Crohn’s colitis, or left-sided ulcerative 
colitis of >15 years’ duration

Family History of Polyps or CRC

First-degree relatives with only small tubular 
adenomas
One first-degree relative with CRC or 
advanced adenoma at age ≥60 years
One first-degree relative with CRC or 
advanced adenoma at age <60 years, or two 
first-degree relatives with CRC or advanced 
adenomas at any age
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer 
(HNPCC; Lynch syndrome)

Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS)

Colonoscopy every 10 yearsa
Multitargeted stool DNA test every 3 years

Annual FIT or FOBT, multiple take-home specimen cards, with or 
without sigmoidoscopy every 5–10 years
CT colonography every 5 years
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years

Repeat colonoscopy in 5–10 yearsa

Repeat colonoscopy in 3 yearsa; subsequent colonoscopy based 
on findings
Repeat colonoscopy in <3 years based on clinical judgmenta

Exam in 2–6 months to verify complete removal
Repeat colonoscopy in 10 yearsa

Repeat colonoscopy in 5 yearsa

Repeat colonoscopy in 3 yearsa

Preferred cancer prevention strategy
Less sensitive than colonoscopy; colonoscopy if 
results are positive
Does not detect many polyps; colonoscopy if results 
are positive
Colonoscopy if results are positive
Does not detect proximal colon polyps and cancers; 
colonoscopy if an adenomatous polyp is found

Assuming complete polyp resection. Interval may 
vary based on prior personal history and family 
history
Assuming complete polyp resection

Consider evaluation for FAP or HNPCC; see 
recommendations below

Those with hyperplastic polyposis syndrome merit 
more frequent follow-up

Serrated polyposis syndrome merits more frequent 
follow-up

Exam in 2–6 months to verify complete removal
Evaluate entire colon around the time of resection, then repeat 
colonoscopy in 1 yeara

Subsequent colonoscopy in 3 years if the 1-year 
examination is normal

Colonoscopy with biopsies every 1–2 years

Consider chromoendoscopy or other advanced 
imaging techniques for detection of flat dysplasia 
during colonoscopy

Same as average risk

Colonoscopy every 10 years starting at age 40

Colonoscopy every 5 years beginning at age 40 years or 10 years 
younger than age at diagnosis of the youngest affected relative, 
whichever is earlier

Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy annually, beginning at age  
10–12 years
Colonoscopy every 2 years beginning at age 20–25 years (or 10 
years younger than the youngest first-degree relative was when 
diagnosed with CRC) until age 40, then annually thereafter

Colonoscopy at age 40 (or the same age at which the youngest 
first-degree relative was when diagnosed with SPS, or 10 years 
younger than the youngest first-degree relative was when 
diagnosed with CRC), then every 1–2 years thereafter

Consider genetic counseling and testing; consider 
screening family members
Consider histologic evaluation for microsatellite 
instability in tumor specimens of patients who 
meet modified Bethesda criteria; consider genetic 
counseling and testing, consider screening family 
members
Consider screening family members, even of patients 
with multiple serrated polyps who do not meet SPS 
criteria.

aAssumes good colonic preparation and complete examination to cecum. bHigh-risk adenoma: any adenoma ≥1 cm in size or containing high-grade dysplasia or villous 
features.
Abbreviations: CRC, colorectal cancer; FIT, fecal immunochemical test; FOBT, fecal occult blood test.
Sources: Adapted from U.S. Preventative Services Task Force Draft Guidelines released in 2020 (https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/draft-recommendation/
colorectal-cancer-screening) and American Cancer Society Guidelines (https://www.cancer.org/cancer/colon-rectal-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/acs-
recommendations.html), both accessed on December 12, 2020. See also G Mankaney et al: Serrated polyposis syndrome. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 18:777, 2020.

When  patients  are  referred  for  open-access  colonoscopy,  the 
primary  care  provider  may  need  to  choose  a  colonic  preparation. 
Commonly used oral preparations include polyethylene glycol lavage 
solution, with or without citric acid. A “split-dose” regimen improves 

the  quality  of  colonic  preparation.  Osmotic  purgative  preparations 
(such as sodium phosphate) are also effective but may cause fluid and 
electrolyte abnormalities and renal toxicity, especially in patients with 
renal failure or congestive heart failure and those >70 years of age.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2422

20/01/22   10:03 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System ■ FURTHER READING
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee et al: Antibiotic prophy-

2423

laxis for GI endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81:81, 2015.

ASGE Standards of Practice Committee et al: Open-access endos-

copy. Gastrointest Endosc 81:1326, 2015.

Barkun AN et al: Management of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding:  Guideline  recommendations  from  the  international  con-
sensus group. Ann Intern Med 171:805, 2019.

Garcia-Tsao G et al: Portal hypertensive bleeding in cirrhosis: Risk 
stratification, diagnosis, and management: 2016 practice guidance by 
the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 
65:310, 2017.

Rex  DK  et  al:  Colorectal  cancer  screening:  Recommendations  for 
physicians  and  patients  from  the  U.S.  Multi-Society  Task  Force  on 
Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology 153:307, 2017.

Shaheen NJ et al: ACG clinical guideline: Diagnosis and management 

of Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol 111:30, 2016.

Strate LL et al: ACG clinical guideline: Management of patients with 
acute  lower  gastrointestinal  bleeding.  Am  J  Gastroenterol  111:459, 
2016.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

323 Diseases of the  
Esophagus
Peter J. Kahrilas, Ikuo Hirano

ESOPHAGEAL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
The esophagus is a hollow, muscular tube coursing through the pos-
terior  mediastinum  joining  the  hypopharynx  to  the  stomach  with  a 
sphincter at each end. It functions to transport food and fluid between 
these ends, otherwise remaining empty. The physiology of swallowing, 
esophageal motility, and oral and pharyngeal dysphagia are described 
in Chap. 44. Esophageal diseases can be manifested by impaired func-
tion or pain. Key functional impairments are swallowing disorders and 
excessive  gastroesophageal  reflux.  Pain,  sometimes  indistinguishable 
from cardiac chest pain, can result from inflammation, infection, dys-
motility, or neoplasm.

SYMPTOMS OF ESOPHAGEAL DISEASE
The  clinical  history  remains  central  to  the  evaluation  of  esophageal 
symptoms.  A  thoughtfully  obtained  history  will  often  expedite  man-
agement. Important details include weight gain or loss, gastrointestinal 
bleeding,  dietary  habits  including  the  timing  of  meals,  smoking,  and 
alcohol  consumption.  The  major  esophageal  symptoms  are  heart-
burn,  regurgitation,  chest  pain,  dysphagia,  odynophagia,  and  globus 
sensation.

Heartburn  (pyrosis),  the  most  common  esophageal  symptom,  is 
characterized by a discomfort or burning sensation behind the sternum 
that  arises  from  the  epigastrium  and  may  radiate  toward  the  neck. 
Heartburn is an intermittent symptom, most commonly experienced 
after eating, during exercise, and while lying recumbent. The discom-
fort is relieved with drinking water or taking an antacid but can occur 
frequently,  interfering  with  normal  activities  including  sleep.  The 
association  between  heartburn  and  gastroesophageal  reflux  disease 
(GERD)  is  so  strong  that  empirical  therapy  for  GERD  has  become 
accepted management. However, the term heartburn is often misused 
and/or referred to using other terms such as indigestion or  repeating, 
making it important to clarify the intended meaning.

Regurgitation is the effortless return of food or fluid into the phar-
ynx without nausea or retching. Patients report a sour or burning fluid 
in  the  throat  or  mouth  that  may  also  contain  undigested  food  parti-
cles.  Bending,  belching,  or  maneuvers  that  increase  intraabdominal 

FIGURE  322-65  Virtual  colonoscopy  image  of  a  colon  polyp  (arrow).  (Image 
courtesy of Dr. Jeff Fidler; with permission.)

FIGURE 322-66  Crohn’s ileitis. Edema, erythema, ulcers, and exudates involving the 
terminal ileum.

FIGURE  322-67  Internal  hemorrhoids  with  bleeding  stigmata  (arrow)  as  seen  on 
retroflexed view of the rectum.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2423

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2424 pressure can provoke regurgitation. A clinician needs to discriminate 
among regurgitation, vomiting, and rumination. Vomiting is preceded 
by nausea and accompanied by retching. Rumination is a behavior in 
which  recently  swallowed  food  is  regurgitated  and  then  reswallowed 
repetitively for up to an hour. Although there is some linkage between 
rumination and cognitive deficiency, the behavior is also exhibited by 
unimpaired individuals.

Chest  pain  is  a  common  esophageal  symptom  with  characteristics 
similar  to  cardiac  pain,  sometimes  making  this  distinction  difficult. 
Esophageal pain is usually experienced as a pressure-type sensation in 
the mid chest, radiating to the mid back, arms, or jaws. The similarity 
to cardiac pain is likely because the two organs share a nerve plexus 
and the nerve endings in the esophageal wall have poor discriminative 
ability among stimuli. Esophageal distention or even chemostimulation 
(e.g., with acid) will often be perceived as chest pain. Gastroesophageal 
reflux is the most common cause of esophageal chest pain.

Esophageal dysphagia (Chap. 44) is often described as a feeling of 
food “sticking” or even lodging in the chest. Important distinctions are 
between uniquely solid food dysphagia as opposed to liquid and solid, 
episodic versus constant dysphagia, and progressive versus static dys-
phagia. If the dysphagia is for liquids as well as solid food, it suggests 
a motility disorder such as achalasia. Conversely, uniquely solid food 
dysphagia is suggestive of a stricture, ring, or tumor. Of note, a patient’s 
localization of food hang-up in the esophagus is notoriously imprecise. 
Approximately  30%  of  distal  esophageal  obstructions  are  perceived 
as  cervical  dysphagia.  In  such  instances,  the  absence  of  concomitant 
symptoms generally associated with oropharyngeal dysphagia such as 
aspiration, nasopharyngeal regurgitation, cough, drooling, or obvious 
neuromuscular compromise should suggest an esophageal etiology.

Odynophagia is pain either caused by or exacerbated by swallowing. 
Although  typically  considered  distinct  from  dysphagia,  odynophagia 
may  manifest  concurrently  with  dysphagia.  Odynophagia  is  more 
common with pill or infectious esophagitis than with reflux esophagitis 
and should prompt a search for these entities. When odynophagia does 
occur in GERD, it is likely related to an esophageal ulcer or extensive 
erosions.

Globus  sensation,  also  known  as  globus  pharyngeus,  is  the  per-
ception  of  a  lump  or  fullness  in  the  throat  that  is  felt  irrespective  of 
swallowing.  Although  such  patients  are  frequently  referred  for  an 
evaluation of dysphagia, globus sensation is often relieved by the act 
of swallowing. As implied by its alternative name, “globus hystericus,” 
globus  sensation  often  occurs  in  the  setting  of  anxiety  or  obsessive-
compulsive disorders. Clinical experience teaches that it is often attrib-
utable to GERD.

Water brash is excessive salivation resulting from a vagal reflex trig-
gered by acidification of the esophageal mucosa. This is not a common 
symptom. Afflicted individuals will describe the unpleasant sensation 
of the mouth rapidly filling with salty thin fluid, often in the setting of 
concomitant heartburn.

DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
 ■ ENDOSCOPY
Endoscopy,  also  known  as  esophagogastroduodenoscopy  (EGD),  is 
the  most  useful  test  for  the  evaluation  of  the  proximal  gastrointesti-
nal  tract.  Modern  instruments  produce  high-quality,  color  images  of 
the  esophageal,  gastric,  and  duodenal  lumen.  Endoscopes  also  have 
an  instrumentation  channel  through  which  biopsy  forceps,  injection 
catheters  for  local  delivery  of  therapeutic  agents,  balloon  dilators,  or 
devices for hemostasis or removal of mucosal lesions can be used. The 
key advantages of endoscopy over barium radiography are as follows: 
(1) increased sensitivity for the detection of mucosal lesions; (2) vastly 
increased  sensitivity  for  the  detection  of  abnormalities  mainly  iden-
tifiable  by  color,  such  as  Barrett’s  metaplasia  or  vascular  lesions;  (3) 
the  ability  to  obtain  biopsy  specimens  for  histologic  examination  of 
suspected abnormalities; and (4) the ability to dilate strictures during 
the examination. Submucosal endoscopy has emerged as a diagnostic 
modality for assessment of subepithelial lesions and therapy of esoph-
ageal motility disorders. The main disadvantages of endoscopy are low 

sensitivity for detection of diffuse, nonfocal esophageal strictures, cost, 
and the need for sedatives or anesthetics.
 ■ RADIOGRAPHY
Contrast  radiography  of  the  esophagus,  stomach,  and  duodenum 
can demonstrate reflux of the contrast media, hiatal hernia, mucosal 
granularity,  erosions,  ulcerations,  and  strictures.  The  sensitivity  of 
radiography compared with endoscopy for detecting reflux esophagitis 
reportedly  ranges  from  22  to  95%,  with  higher  grades  of  esophagitis 
(i.e.,  ulceration  or  stricture)  exhibiting  greater  detection  rates.  Con-
versely, the sensitivity of barium radiography for detecting esophageal 
strictures is greater than that of endoscopy, especially when the study 
is  done  in  conjunction  with  a  13-mm  barium  tablet.  Barium  studies 
also  provide  an  assessment  of  esophageal  function  and  morphology 
that  may  be  undetected  on  endoscopy.  Tracheoesophageal  fistula, 
altered  postsurgical  anatomy,  and  extrinsic  esophageal  compression 
are  conditions  where  radiographic  imaging  complements  endoscopic 
assessment.  Hypopharyngeal  pathology  and  disorders  of  the  cri-
copharyngeus  muscle  are  better  appreciated  on  radiographic  exami-
nation than with endoscopy, particularly with rapid sequence or video 
fluoroscopic recording. The major shortcoming of barium radiography 
is  that  it  rarely  obviates  the  need  for  endoscopy.  Either  a  positive  or 
a  negative  study  is  usually  followed  by  an  endoscopic  evaluation  to 
obtain  biopsies,  provide  therapy,  or  clarify  findings  in  the  case  of  a 
positive examination or to add a level of certainty in the case of a neg-
ative examination.
 ■ ENDOSCOPIC ULTRASOUND
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) instruments combine an endoscope with 
an ultrasound transducer to create a transmural image of the tissue sur-
rounding the endoscope tip. The key advantage of EUS over alternative 
radiologic imaging techniques is much greater resolution attributable 
to the proximity of the ultrasound transducer to the area being exam-
ined. Available devices can provide either radial imaging (360-degree, 
cross-sectional)  or  a  curved  linear  image  that  can  guide  fine-needle 
aspiration of imaged structures such as lymph nodes or tumors. Major 
esophageal applications of EUS are to stage esophageal cancer, to eval-
uate dysplasia in Barrett’s esophagus, and to assess submucosal lesions.
 ■ ESOPHAGEAL MANOMETRY
Esophageal  manometry,  or  motility  testing,  entails  positioning  a  
pressure-sensing catheter within the esophagus and then observing the 
contractility following test swallows. The upper esophageal sphincter 
and  lower  esophageal  sphincter  (LES)  appear  as  zones  of  high  pres-
sure that relax on swallowing, whereas the intersphincteric esophagus 
exhibits peristaltic contractions. Manometry is used to diagnose motil-
ity disorders (achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm [DES]) and to assess 
peristaltic integrity prior to the surgery for reflux disease. Technologic 
advances  have  enhanced  esophageal  manometry  as  high-resolution 
esophageal  pressure  topography  (Fig.  323-1).  Manometry  can  also 
be  combined  with  intraluminal  impedance  monitoring.  Impedance 
recordings use a series of paired electrodes added to the manometry 
catheter.  Esophageal  luminal  contents  in  contact  with  the  electrodes 
decrease  (liquid)  or  increase  (air)  the  impedance  signal,  allowing 
detection of anterograde or retrograde esophageal bolus transit.

 ■ REFLUX TESTING
GERD is often diagnosed in the absence of endoscopic signs of esoph-
agitis,  which  would  otherwise  define  the  disease.  This  occurs  in  the 
settings of partially treated disease, an abnormally sensitive esophageal 
mucosa,  or,  most  commonly,  in  nonerosive  reflux  disease.  In  such 
instances,  reflux  testing  can  demonstrate  excessive  esophageal  expo-
sure  to  refluxed  gastric  fluid,  the  physiologic  abnormality  of  GERD. 
This can be done by ambulatory 24- to 96-h esophageal pH recording 
using  either  a  wireless  pH-sensitive  transmitter  that  is  affixed  to  the 
esophageal  mucosa  or  a  transnasally  positioned  wire  electrode  with 
the  tip  stationed  in  the  distal  esophagus.  Either  way,  the  outcome  is 
expressed as the percentage of the day that the pH was <4 (indicative 
of recent acid reflux), with values exceeding 5% indicative of GERD. 
Reflux  testing  is  useful  in  the  evaluation  of  patients  presenting  with 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2424

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2425

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

FIGURE 323-1  High-resolution esophageal pressure topography (right) and conventional manometry (left) of a normal swallow. E, esophageal body; LES, lower esophageal 
sphincter; UES, upper esophageal sphincter.

atypical symptoms or an inexplicably poor response to therapy. Intralu-
minal impedance monitoring can be added to pH monitoring to detect 
reflux events irrespective of whether or not they are acidic, potentially 
increasing the sensitivity of the study.

STRUCTURAL DISORDERS
 ■ HIATAL HERNIA
Hiatal hernia is a herniation of viscera, most commonly the stomach, 
into the mediastinum through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm. 
Four types of hiatal hernia are distinguished, with type I, or sliding hia-
tal hernia, composing at least 95% of the overall total. A sliding hiatal 
hernia is one in which the gastroesophageal junction and gastric cardia 
translocate cephalad as a result of weakening of the phrenoesophageal 
ligament attaching the gastroesophageal junction to the diaphragm at 
the  hiatus  and  dilatation  of  the  diaphragmatic  hiatus.  The  incidence 
of sliding hernia increases with age. True to its name, sliding hernias 
enlarge with increased intraabdominal pressure, swallowing, and res-
piration. Conceptually, sliding hernias are the result of wear and tear: 
increased intraabdominal pressure from abdominal obesity, pregnancy, 
etc., along with hereditary factors predisposing to the condition. The 
main significance of sliding hernias is the propensity of affected indi-
viduals to have GERD.

Type II, III, and IV hiatal hernias are all subtypes of paraesophageal 
hernia in which the herniation into the mediastinum includes a visceral 
structure other than the gastric cardia. With type II and III paraesoph-
ageal  hernias,  the  gastric  fundus  also  herniates,  with  the  distinction 
being  that  in  type  II,  the  gastroesophageal  junction  remains  fixed  at 
the hiatus, whereas type III is a combined sliding and paraesophageal 
hernia.  With  type  IV  hiatal  hernias,  viscera  other  than  the  stomach 
herniate  into  the  mediastinum,  most  commonly  the  colon.  With  
type  II  and  III  paraesophageal  hernias,  the  stomach  may  twist  as  it 
herniates,  and  large  paraesophageal  hernias  can  lead  to  an  “upside 
down stomach,” gastric volvulus, and even strangulation of the stom-
ach.  Because  of  this  risk,  surgical  repair  is  often  advocated  for  large 
paraesophageal hernias, particularly when they are symptomatic.
 ■ RINGS AND WEBS
A lower esophageal mucosal ring, also called a B ring, is a thin membra-
nous narrowing at the squamocolumnar mucosal junction (Fig. 323-2). 
Its origin is unknown, but B rings are demonstrable in ~10–15% of the 
general  population  and  are  usually  asymptomatic.  When  the  lumen 
diameter is <13 mm, distal rings are usually associated with episodic 
solid  food  dysphagia  and  are  called  Schatzki  rings.  Patients  typically 
present  older  than  40  years,  consistent  with  an  acquired  rather  than 
congenital origin. Schatzki ring is one of the most common causes of 
intermittent  food  impaction,  also  known  as  “steakhouse  syndrome” 
because  meat  is  a  typical  instigator.  Symptomatic  rings  are  readily 
treated by dilation.

Web-like  constrictions  higher  in  the  esophagus  can  be  of  congen-
ital  or  inflammatory  origin.  Asymptomatic  cervical  esophageal  webs 
are  demonstrated  in  ~10%  of  people  and  typically  originate  along 
the  anterior  aspect  of  the  esophagus.  Depending  on  the  degree  of 
impingement, they can cause intermittent dysphagia to solids similar to 
Schatzki rings and are similarly treated with dilation. The combination 
of symptomatic proximal esophageal webs and iron-deficiency anemia 
in middle-aged women constitutes Plummer-Vinson or Paterson-Kelly 
syndrome.
 ■ DIVERTICULA
Esophageal diverticula are categorized by location, with the most com-
mon  being  epiphrenic,  hypopharyngeal  (Zenker’s),  and  midesopha-
geal. Epiphrenic and Zenker’s diverticula are false diverticula involving 
herniation of the mucosa and submucosa through the muscular layer 
of  the  esophagus.  These  lesions  result  from  increased  intraluminal 
pressure associated with distal obstruction. In the case of Zenker’s, the 
obstruction  is  a  stenotic  cricopharyngeus  muscle  (upper  esophageal 
sphincter), and the hypopharyngeal herniation most commonly occurs 
in an area of natural weakness proximal to the cricopharyngeus known 

v
e

E
s
o
p
stib
h
a
g
ule
e
al

Slidin
h
er
g hiatal
nia

Phrenic
ampulla

Tubular
esophagus

A ring

B ring
squamo-columnar
junction

Diaphragmatic
impression

Rugal folds
traversing hiatus

FIGURE 323-2  Radiographic anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2425

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2426

A

B

C

FIGURE 323-3  Examples of small (A) and large (B, C) Zenker’s diverticula arising from Killian’s triangle in the distal hypopharynx. Smaller diverticula are evident only 
during the swallow, whereas larger ones retain food and fluid.

as Killian’s triangle (Fig. 323-3). Small Zenker’s diverticula are usually 
asymptomatic,  but  when  they  enlarge  sufficiently  to  retain  food  and 
saliva, they can be associated with dysphagia, halitosis, and aspiration. 
Treatment is by surgical diverticulectomy and cricopharyngeal myot-
omy or transoral, endoscopic marsupialization.

Epiphrenic  diverticula  are  often  associated  with  achalasia,  esoph-
ageal  hypercontractile  disorders,  or  a  distal  esophageal  stricture. 
Midesophageal  diverticula  may  be  caused  by  traction  from  adjacent 
inflammation  (tuberculosis,  histoplasmosis),  in  which  case  they  are 
true  diverticula  involving  all  layers  of  the  esophageal  wall,  or  by 
pulsion  associated  with  esophageal  motor  disorders.  Midesophageal 
and epiphrenic diverticula are often asymptomatic until they enlarge 
sufficiently  to  retain  food  and  cause  dysphagia  and  regurgitation. 
Symptoms attributable to the diverticula tend to correlate more with 
the  underlying  esophageal  disorder  than  the  size  of  the  diverticula. 
Large  diverticula  can  be  removed  surgically,  usually  in  conjunction 
with a myotomy if the underlying motility disorder is identified. Dif-
fuse  intramural  esophageal  pseudodiverticulosis  is  a  rare  entity  that 
results from dilatation of the excretory ducts of submucosal esophageal 
glands (Fig. 323-4). Esophageal candidiasis and proximal esophageal 
strictures are commonly found in association with this disorder.

 ■ TUMORS
Esophageal cancer occurs in ~4.5/100,000 people in the United States, 
with  the  associated  mortality  being  3.9/100,000.  It  is  ~10  times  less 
common  than  colorectal  cancer  but  kills  about  one-quarter  as  many 
patients.  These  statistics  emphasize  both  the  rarity  and  lethality  of 
esophageal cancer. One notable trend is the shift of dominant esoph-
ageal  cancer  type  from  squamous  cell  to  adenocarcinoma,  strongly 
linked  to  reflux  disease  and  Barrett’s  metaplasia.  Other  distinctions 
between  cell  types  are  the  predilection  for  adenocarcinoma  to  affect 
the distal esophagus in white males and for squamous cell carcinoma to 
affect the more proximal esophagus in black males with the added risk 
factors  of  smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  caustic  injury,  and  human 
papillomavirus infection (Chap. 80).

The typical presentation of esophageal cancer is of progressive solid 
food  dysphagia  and  weight  loss.  Associated  symptoms  may  include 
odynophagia,  iron  deficiency,  cough  from  tracheoesophageal  fistula, 
and  hoarseness  from  left  recurrent  laryngeal  nerve  injury.  Generally, 
respiratory  symptoms  are  manifestations  of  locally  invasive  or  even 
metastatic  disease.  Even  when  detected  as  a  small  lesion,  esophageal 
cancer has poor survival because of the abundant esophageal lymphat-
ics leading to regional lymph node metastases.

Benign  esophageal  tumors  are  uncommon  and  usually  discovered 
incidentally. They include gastrointestinal stromal tumors, leiomyoma, 

fibrovascular polyps, squamous papilloma, granular cell tumors, lipo-
mas, mesenchymal neoplasms, and inflammatory fibroid polyps.

CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
The  most  common  congenital  esophageal  anomaly  is  esophageal 
atresia, occurring in ~1 in 5000 live births. Atresia can occur in several 
permutations, the common denominator being developmental failure 

FIGURE  323-4  Intramural  esophageal  pseudodiverticulosis  associated  with 
chronic obstruction. Invaginations of contrast into the esophageal wall outline deep 
esophageal glands.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2426

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemof fusion between the proximal and distal esophagus associated with 
a  tracheoesophageal  fistula,  most  commonly  with  the  distal  segment 
excluded.  Alternatively,  there  can  be  an  H-type  configuration  in 
which  esophageal  fusion  has  occurred,  but  with  a  tracheoesophageal 
fistula.  Esophageal  atresia  is  usually  recognized  and  corrected  surgi-
cally within the first few days of life. Later life complications include 
dysphagia from anastomotic strictures or absent peristalsis and reflux, 
which can be severe. Less common developmental anomalies include 
congenital esophageal stenosis, webs, and duplications.

Dysphagia can also result from congenital abnormalities that cause 
extrinsic  compression  of  the  esophagus.  In  dysphagia  lusoria,  the 
esophagus is compressed by an aberrant right subclavian artery arising 
from the descending aorta and passing behind the esophagus. Alterna-
tively, vascular rings may surround and constrict the esophagus.

Heterotopic gastric mucosa, also known as an esophageal inlet patch, 
is a focus of gastric-type epithelium in the proximal cervical esophagus; 
the estimated prevalence is 4–5%. The inlet patch is thought to result 
from incomplete replacement of embryonic columnar epithelium with 
squamous epithelium. The majority of inlet patches are asymptomatic, 
but  acid  production  can  occur  as  most  contain  fundic-type  gastric 
epithelium with parietal cells.

ESOPHAGEAL MOTILITY DISORDERS
Esophageal  motility  disorders  are  diseases  attributable  to  esophageal 
neuromuscular  dysfunction  commonly  associated  with  dysphagia, 
chest  pain,  or  heartburn.  The  major  entities  are  achalasia,  diffuse 
esophageal spasm (DES), jackhammer esophagus, and GERD. Motil-
ity  disorders  can  also  be  secondary  to  systemic  disease  processes,  as 
is  the  case  with  pseudoachalasia,  Chagas’  disease,  and  scleroderma. 
Not included in this discussion are diseases affecting the pharynx and 
proximal esophagus, the impairment of which is almost always part of 
a more global neuromuscular disease process.
 ■ ACHALASIA
Achalasia is a rare disease caused by loss of ganglion cells within the 
esophageal myenteric plexus, with a population incidence estimated to 
be 1–3 per 100,000 and presentation usually occurring between age 25 
and 60 years. With long-standing disease, aganglionosis is noted. The 
disease  involves  both  excitatory  (cholinergic)  and  inhibitory  (nitric 
oxide)  ganglionic  neurons.  Functionally,  inhibitory  neurons  mediate 
deglutitive LES relaxation and the sequential propagation of peristalsis. 
Their absence leads to impaired deglutitive LES relaxation and absent 
peristalsis. Increasing evidence suggests that the ultimate cause of gan-
glion cell degeneration in achalasia is an autoimmune process attribut-
able to a latent infection with human herpes simplex virus 1 combined 
with genetic susceptibility.

Long-standing  achalasia  is  characterized  by  progressive  dilatation 
and  sigmoid  deformity  of  the  esophagus  with  hypertrophy  of  the 
LES.  Clinical  manifestations  may  include  dysphagia,  regurgitation, 
chest pain, and weight loss. Most patients report solid and liquid food 
dysphagia.  Regurgitation  occurs  when  food,  fluid,  and  secretions  are 
retained in the dilated esophagus. Patients with advanced achalasia are 
at risk for bronchitis, pneumonia, or lung abscess from chronic regur-
gitation and aspiration. Chest pain may manifest early in the course of 
achalasia. Patients describe a squeezing, pressure-like retrosternal pain, 
sometimes  radiating  to  the  neck,  arms,  jaw,  and  back.  Paradoxically, 
some patients complain of heartburn that may be a chest pain equiv-
alent.  Treatment  of  achalasia  is  less  effective  at  alleviating  chest  pain 
than it is in relieving dysphagia or regurgitation.

The differential diagnosis of achalasia includes jackhammer esoph-
agus,  DES,  Chagas’  disease,  opioid-induced  esophageal  dysmotility, 
and  pseudoachalasia.  Chagas’  disease  is  endemic  in  areas  of  central 
Brazil,  Venezuela,  and  northern  Argentina  and  spread  by  the  bite  of 
the reduviid (kissing) bug that transmits the protozoan Trypanosoma 
cruzi. The chronic phase of the disease develops years after infection 
and results from destruction of autonomic ganglion cells throughout 
the body, including the heart, gut, urinary tract, and respiratory tract. 
Manometric  features  of  achalasia  have  been  described  in  patients  on 
chronic opioids and may be confused with primary achalasia. Tumor 

2427

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

FIGURE 323-5  Achalasia with esophageal dilatation, tapering at the gastroesophageal 
junction, and an air-fluid level within the esophagus. The example on the left shows 
sigmoid deformity with very advanced disease.

infiltration, most commonly seen with carcinoma in the gastric fundus 
or distal esophagus, can also mimic primary achalasia. The resultant 
“pseudoachalasia” accounts for up to 5% of suspected cases and is more 
likely  with  advanced  age,  abrupt  onset  of  symptoms  (<1  year),  and 
weight loss. Hence, endoscopy is a necessary part of the evaluation of 
achalasia. When the clinical suspicion for pseudoachalasia is high and 
endoscopy  nondiagnostic,  computed  tomography  (CT)  scanning  or 
EUS may be of value. Rarely, pseudoachalasia can result from a parane-
oplastic syndrome with circulating antineuronal antibodies.

Achalasia  is  diagnosed  by  barium  swallow  x-ray  and/or  esopha-
geal  manometry.  Endoscopy  excludes  tumors  or  benign  mechanical 
strictures of the esophagogastric junction. The barium swallow x-ray 
appearance  is  of  a  dilated  esophagus  with  poor  emptying,  an  air-
fluid  level,  and  tapering  at  the  LES  giving  it  a  beak-like  appearance  
(Fig. 323-5). Occasionally, an epiphrenic diverticulum is observed. In 
long-standing achalasia, the esophagus may assume a sigmoid config-
uration. The diagnostic criteria for achalasia with esophageal manome-
try are impaired LES relaxation and absent peristalsis. High-resolution 
manometry has somewhat advanced this diagnosis; three subtypes of 
achalasia are differentiated based on the pattern of pressurization in the 
nonperistaltic  esophagus  (Fig. 323-6).  Because  manometry  identifies 
early disease before esophageal dilatation and food retention, it is the 
most sensitive diagnostic test.

No method of preventing or “curing” achalasia is known. Therapy is 
thus directed at reducing LES pressure so that gravity and esophageal 
pressurization permit esophageal emptying. While peristalsis does not 
recover,  remnants  of  peristalsis  masked  by  esophageal  pressurization 
and dilatation prior to therapy may be demonstrable following effec-
tive treatment. LES pressure can be reduced by pharmacologic therapy, 
pneumatic balloon dilation, or LES myotomy by means of submucosal 
endoscopy or laparoscopic surgery. Pharmacologic therapies are rela-
tively ineffective but can be offered as temporizing therapies. Nitrates 
or calcium channel blockers are administered before eating but should 
be used with caution because of their effects on blood pressure. Botu-
linum toxin, injected into the LES under endoscopic guidance, inhibits 
acetylcholine  release  from  nerve  endings  and  improves  dysphagia  in 
about two-thirds of cases for at least 6 months. Sildenafil and alterna-
tive phosphodiesterase inhibitors effectively decrease LES pressure, but 
practicalities limit their clinical use in achalasia.

The only durable therapies for achalasia are pneumatic dilation and 
LES  myotomy.  Pneumatic  dilation,  with  a  reported  efficacy  ranging 
from  32  to  98%,  is  an  endoscopic  technique  using  a  noncompliant, 
cylindrical  balloon  dilator  positioned  across  the  LES  and  inflated  to 
a diameter of 3–4 cm. The major complication is perforation, with a 
reported incidence of 0.5–5%. The most common surgical procedure 
for  achalasia  is  laparoscopic  Heller  myotomy,  usually  performed  in 
conjunction  with  an  antireflux  procedure  (partial  fundoplication); 
good to excellent results are reported in 62–100% of cases. A European 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2427

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2428

A. Classic achalasia

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

–10

mmHg

75
70

60

50

40

30

20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10

mmHg

mmHg
100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20
15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3

45

6
Seconds

7

8

9

10

B. Achalasia with compression

0

5

10

15

20

25

Seconds

C. Spastic achalasia

0 Pharynx

5

10

15

20

25

30

cm

35 Stomach

0 Pharynx

5

10

15

20

25

30

cm

35 Stomach

0 Pharynx

5

10

15

20

25

30

cm

recovery. An international, multicenter, randomized trial of POEM and 
pneumatic dilation demonstrated greater symptom relief with POEM 
compared to dilation at 2 years. A European, multicenter, randomized 
trial of POEM and Heller myotomy reported similar efficacy for symp-
tom relief, with exceeded 80% with either modality.

In untreated or inadequately treated achalasia, esophageal dilatation 
predisposes  to  stasis  esophagitis.  Prolonged  stasis  esophagitis  is  the 
likely explanation for the association between achalasia and esophageal 
squamous cell cancer. Tumors develop after years of achalasia, usually 
in the setting of extreme esophageal dilatation, with the overall squa-
mous cell cancer risk increased 17-fold compared to controls.
 ■ DIFFUSE ESOPHAGEAL SPASM
DES is manifested by episodes of dysphagia and chest pain attributable 
to  abnormal  esophageal  contractions  with  normal  deglutitive  LES 
relaxation. The pathophysiology and natural history of DES are poorly 
defined.  Radiographically,  DES  has  been  characterized  by  tertiary 
contractions  or  a  “corkscrew  esophagus”  (Fig.  323-7),  but  in  many 
instances,  these  abnormalities  are  indicative  of  achalasia.  Manomet-
rically,  a  variety  of  defining  features  have  been  proposed  including 
uncoordinated (“spastic”) activity in the distal esophagus, spontaneous 
and repetitive contractions, or high-amplitude and prolonged contrac-
tions. High-resolution manometry has defined DES by the occurrence 
of  contractions  in  the  distal  esophagus  with  short  latency  relative  to 
the  time  of  the  pharyngeal  contraction,  a  dysfunction  indicative  of 
impairment  of  inhibitory  myenteric  plexus  neurons.  When  defined 
with  this  restrictive  criterion  (Fig.  323-8),  DES  is  substantially  less 
common than achalasia.

Esophageal chest pain closely mimics angina pectoris. Features sug-
gesting esophageal pain include pain that is nonexertional, prolonged, 
meal-related,  relieved  with  antacids,  and  accompanied  by  heartburn, 
dysphagia, or regurgitation and interrupts sleep. However, all of these 
features  exhibit  overlap  with  cardiac  pain,  which  still  must  be  the 
primary  consideration.  Furthermore,  even  within  the  spectrum  of 
esophageal diseases, both chest pain and dysphagia are also character-
istic of peptic or infectious esophagitis. Only after these more common 
entities  have  been  excluded  by  evaluation  and/or  treatment  should  a 
diagnosis of DES be pursued.

Although DES is diagnosed by manometry, endoscopy is useful to 
identify alternative structural and inflammatory lesions that may cause 
chest  pain.  Radiographically,  a  “corkscrew  esophagus,”  “rosary  bead 
esophagus,”  pseudodiverticula,  or  curling  can  be  indicative  of  DES, 
but these are also found with spastic achalasia. Given these vagaries of 
defining DES and the resultant heterogeneity of patients identified for 

–10

0

10

20

30
Seconds

40

50

35 Stomach

FIGURE  323-6  Three  subtypes  of  achalasia:  classic  (A),  with  esophageal 
compression (B), and spastic achalasia (C) imaged with pressure topography. All 
are  characterized  by  impaired  lower  esophageal  sphincter  (LES)  relaxation  and 
absent  peristalsis.  However,  classic  achalasia  has  minimal  pressurization  of  the 
esophageal body, whereas substantial fluid pressurization is observed in achalasia 
with esophageal compression, and spastic esophageal contractions are observed 
with spastic achalasia.

randomized controlled trial demonstrated an equivalent response rate 
of ~90% for both pneumatic dilation and laparoscopic Heller myotomy 
at  5-year  follow-up.  Occasionally,  patients  with  advanced  disease  fail 
to respond to pneumatic dilation or Heller myotomy or relapse years 
after response to primary therapy. In such refractory cases, esophageal 
resection with gastric pull-up or interposition of a segment of trans-
verse colon may be the only option other than gastrostomy feeding.

An endoscopic approach to LES myotomy is increasingly available, 
referred  to  as  peroral  esophageal  myotomy  (POEM).  This  technique 
involves the creation of a tunnel in the submucosa of the esophageal 
wall through which the circular muscle of the LES and distal esopha-
gus are transected with electrocautery. As expected, GERD is common 
after  POEM  but  managed  effectively  with  medications.  Potential 
advantages over the conventional laparoscopic approach include avoid-
ance of surgical disruption of the diaphragmatic hiatus and more rapid 

FIGURE  323-7  Diffuse  esophageal  spasm.  The  characteristic  “corkscrew” 
esophagus results from spastic contraction of the circular muscle in the esophageal 
wall; more precisely, this is actually a helical array of muscle. These findings are 
also seen with spastic achalasia.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2428

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemmmHg
150

100

50

0

Jackhammer esophagus

Diffuse esophageal spasm

Latency= 3.5 s

0

5

10

15

0

10

Time (s)
Normal latency with hypercontractility

Time (s)
Short latency, premature contraction

FIGURE  323-8  Esophageal  pressure  topography  of  the  two  major  variants  of  esophageal  spasm:  jackhammer 
esophagus (left) and diffuse esophageal spasm (right). Jackhammer esophagus is defined by the extraordinarily 
vigorous and repetitive contractions with normal peristaltic onset and normal latency of the contraction. Diffuse 
esophageal spasm is similar but primarily defined by a short latency (premature) contraction.

inclusion in therapeutic trials, it is not surprising that trial results have 
been  disappointing.  Only  small,  uncontrolled  trials  exist,  reporting 
response to nitrates, calcium channel blockers, hydralazine, botulinum 
toxin, and anxiolytics. POEM with distal esophageal myotomy or sur-
gical  myotomy  should  be  considered  only  with  severe  weight  loss  or 
intractable pain. These indications are extremely rare.

 ■ NONSPECIFIC MANOMETRIC FINDINGS
Manometric  studies  done  to  evaluate  chest  pain  and/or  dysphagia 
often  report  minor  abnormalities  (e.g.,  hypertensive  or  hypotensive 
peristalsis,  hypertensive  LES)  that  are  insufficient  to  diagnose  either 
achalasia  or  DES.  These  findings  are  of  unclear  significance.  Reflux 
and  psychiatric  diagnoses,  particularly  anxiety  and  depression,  are 
common among such individuals. A lower visceral pain threshold and 
symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome are noted in more than half of 
such patients. Consequently, therapy for these individuals should tar-
get either the most common esophageal disorder, GERD, or cognitive 
disorders that may be present.

GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
The  current  conception  of  GERD  is  that  it  encompasses  a  family  of 
conditions with the commonality that they are caused by gastroesoph-
ageal  reflux  resulting  in  either  troublesome  symptoms  or  an  array 
of  potential  esophageal  and  extraesophageal  manifestations.  It  is 
estimated  that  10–15%  of  adults  in  the  United  States  are  affected  by 
GERD,  although  such  estimates  are  based  on  population  studies  of 
self-reported  chronic  heartburn.  With  respect  to  the  esophagus,  the 
spectrum of injury includes esophagitis, stricture, Barrett’s esophagus, 
and adenocarcinoma (Fig. 323-9). Of particular concern is the rising 
incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma, an epidemiologic trend that 
parallels the increasing incidence of GERD. About 9200 incident cases 
of esophageal adenocarcinoma were noted in the United States in 2020 
(estimated  as  half  of  all  esophageal  cancers);  this  disease  burden  has 
increased two- to sixfold in the past 20 years.

 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The  best-defined  subset  of  GERD  patients,  albeit  a  minority  overall, 
have  esophagitis.  Esophagitis  occurs  when  refluxed  gastric  acid  and 
pepsin  induce  inflammation  of  the  esophageal  mucosa  that  leads  to 
microscopic injury and macroscopic erosions and ulcers. Experimen-
tal  evidence  supports  a  cytokine-mediated  inflammatory  pathway 
rather  than  direct  caustic  injury  to  the  esophageal  epithelium.  Note 
that some degree of gastroesophageal reflux is normal, physiologically 
intertwined with the mechanism of belching (transient LES relaxation), 
but  esophagitis  results  from  excessive  reflux,  often  accompanied  by 
impaired  clearance  of  the  refluxed  gastric  juice.  Restricting  reflux 

2429

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

to  that  which  is  physiologically  intended 
depends  on  the  anatomic  and  physiologic 
integrity  of  the  esophagogastric  junction, 
a  complex  sphincter  comprised  of  both 
the  LES  and  the  surrounding  crural  dia-
phragm.  Three  dominant  mechanisms  of 
esophagogastric junction incompetence are 
recognized: (1) transient LES relaxations (a 
vagovagal  reflex  in  which  LES  relaxation 
is  elicited  by  gastric  distention),  (2)  LES 
hypotension,  or  (3)  anatomic  distortion 
of  the  esophagogastric  junction  inclusive 
of  hiatal  hernia.  Of  note,  the  third  factor, 
esophagogastric junction anatomic disrup-
tion, is significant both unto itself and also 
because it interacts with the first two mech-
anisms.  Transient  LES  relaxations  account 
for  ~90%  of  reflux  in  normal  subjects  or 
GERD  patients  without  hiatal  hernia,  but 
patients  with  hiatal  hernia  have  a  more 
heterogeneous mechanistic profile. Factors 
tending  to  exacerbate  reflux  regardless  of 
mechanism  are  abdominal  obesity,  preg-
nancy, gastric hypersecretory states, delayed gastric emptying, disrup-
tion of esophageal peristalsis, and gluttony.

20

30

After acid reflux, peristalsis returns the refluxed fluid to the stom-
ach, and acid clearance is completed by titration of the residual acid by 
bicarbonate  contained  in  swallowed  saliva.  Consequently,  two  causes 
of prolonged acid clearance are impaired peristalsis and reduced sali-
vation. Impaired peristaltic emptying can be attributable to disrupted 
peristalsis  or  superimposed  reflux  associated  with  a  hiatal  hernia. 
With superimposed reflux, fluid retained within a sliding hiatal hernia 
refluxes  back  into  the  esophagus  during  swallow-related  LES  relax-
ation, a phenomenon that does not normally occur.

Inherent  in  the  pathophysiologic  model  of  GERD  is  that  gastric 
juice  is  harmful  to  the  esophageal  epithelium.  However,  gastric  acid 
hypersecretion  is  usually  not  a  dominant  factor  in  the  development 
of  esophagitis.  An  obvious  exception  is  with  Zollinger-Ellison  syn-
drome, which is associated with severe esophagitis in ~50% of patients. 
Another caveat is with chronic Helicobacter pylori gastritis, which may 
have  a  protective  effect  by  inducing  atrophic  gastritis  with  concomi-
tant  hypoacidity.  Pepsin,  bile,  and  pancreatic  enzymes  within  gastric 
secretions can also injure the esophageal epithelium, but their noxious 
properties are either lessened without an acidic environment or depen-
dent on acidity for activation. Bile warrants attention because it persists 
in refluxate despite acid-suppressing medications. Bile can transverse 
the cell membrane, imparting severe cellular injury in a weakly acidic 
environment, and has also been invoked as a cofactor in the pathogen-
esis of Barrett’s metaplasia and adenocarcinoma. Hence, the causticity 
of gastric refluxate extends beyond hydrochloric acid.

 ■ SYMPTOMS
Heartburn  and  regurgitation  are  the  typical  symptoms  of  GERD. 
Somewhat  less  common  are  dysphagia  and  chest  pain.  In  each  case, 
multiple  potential  mechanisms  for  symptom  genesis  operate  that 
extend beyond the basic concepts of mucosal erosion and activation of 
afferent sensory nerves. Specifically, visceral sensitivity is increasingly 
recognized as a cofactor. Nonetheless, the dominant clinical strategy is 
empirical treatment with acid inhibitors, reserving further evaluation 
for those who fail to respond. Important exceptions to this are patients 
with chest pain or persistent dysphagia, each of which may be indica-
tive of more morbid consequences of GERD or alternative diagnoses. 
With chest pain, cardiac disease must be carefully considered. In the 
case of dysphagia, chronic reflux can lead to the development of a pep-
tic stricture, eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), or adenocarcinoma, each 
of which benefits from early detection and/or specific therapy.

Extraesophageal  syndromes  with  an  established  association  to 
GERD  include  chronic  cough,  laryngitis,  asthma,  and  dental  ero-
sions. A multitude of other conditions including pharyngitis, chronic 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2429

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2430

A

Erosive esophagitis

B

Esophageal stricture with chronic
erosive esophagitis

 ■ COMPLICATIONS
The  complications  of  GERD  are  related  to  chronic 
esophagitis  (bleeding  and  stricture)  and  the  rela-
tionship between GERD and esophageal adenocarci-
noma. However, both erosive esophagitis and peptic 
strictures  have  become  increasingly  rare  in  the  era 
of  potent  antisecretory  medications.  Conversely,  the 
most severe histologic consequence of GERD is Bar-
rett’s metaplasia with the associated risk of esophageal 
adenocarcinoma,  and  the  incidence  of  these  lesions 
has  increased,  not  decreased,  in  the  era  of  potent 
acid  suppression.  Barrett’s  metaplasia,  recognized 
endoscopically  by  salmon-colored  mucosa  extend-
ing  proximally  from  the  gastroesophageal  junction 
(Fig.  323-9)  or  histopathologically  by  the  finding  of 
specialized columnar metaplasia, is associated with a 
significantly increased risk for development of esoph-
ageal adenocarcinoma.

Barrett’s  metaplasia  can  progress  to  adenocarci-
noma  through  the  intermediate  stages  of  low-  and 
high-grade  dysplasia  (Fig.  323-10).  Owing  to  this 
risk,  areas  of  Barrett’s  metaplasia  and  especially  any 
included  areas  of  mucosal  irregularity  should  be 
carefully inspected and extensively biopsied. The rate 
of  cancer  development  is  estimated  at  0.1–0.3%  per 
year,  but  vagaries  in  definitional  criteria  and  of  the 
extent  of  Barrett’s  metaplasia  requisite  to  establish 
the  diagnosis  have  contributed  to  variability  and 
inconsistency  in  this  risk  assessment.  The  group  at 
greatest risk is obese white males in their sixth decade 
of life. Despite common practice, however, the utility 
of  endoscopic  screening  and  surveillance  programs 
intended to control the adenocarcinoma risk remains 
an  open  question.  Also  of  note,  although  in  a  large, 
randomized,  controlled  chemoprevention  trial  in 
Barrett’s patients high-dose proton pump inhibitor therapy along with 
aspirin  did  significantly  better  at  achieving  the  primary  composite 
endpoint  of  delaying  all-cause  mortality,  development  of  esophageal 
adenocarcinoma, or progression to high-grade dysplasia, the effect was 
driven mainly by improved overall survival rather than reduced Bar-
rett’s progression or esophageal adenocarcinoma development.

Although  the  management  of  Barrett’s  esophagus  remains  contro-
versial,  the  finding  of  dysplasia  in  Barrett’s,  particularly  high-grade 
dysplasia, mandates further intervention. In addition to the high rate 
of  progression  to  adenocarcinoma,  there  is  also  a  high  prevalence  of 
unrecognized coexisting cancer with high-grade dysplasia. Treatment 
recommendations  for  Barrett’s  esophagus  with  high-grade  dysplasia 
have evolved over the past several years. Historically, esophagectomy 
was  the  gold  standard  treatment  for  high-grade  dysplasia.  However, 
esophagectomy  has  a  mortality  ranging  from  3  to  10%,  along  with 
substantial  morbidity.  Prospective  studies  have  demonstrated  the 
efficacy of endoscopic mucosal ablation therapy with substantially less 
morbidity and essentially no mortality. Consequently, current societal 
guidelines endorse endoscopic mucosal ablation therapies for the man-
agement of high-grade dysplasia.

TREATMENT
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

Lifestyle  modifications  are  routinely  advocated  as  GERD  therapy. 
Broadly speaking, these fall into three categories: (1) avoidance of 
foods that reduce LES pressure, making them “refluxogenic” (these 
commonly  include  fatty  foods,  alcohol,  spearmint,  peppermint, 
and possibly coffee and tea); (2) avoidance of acidic foods that are 
inherently  irritating  (citrus  fruits,  tomato-based  foods);  and  (3) 
adoption  of  behaviors  to  minimize  reflux  and/or  heartburn.  In 
general, minimal evidence supports the efficacy of these measures. 

C

Barrett’s esophagus

D

Esophageal adenocarcinoma
with Barrett’s esophagus

FIGURE  323-9  Endoscopic  appearance  of  (A)  peptic  esophagitis,  (B)  a  peptic  stricture,  (C)  Barrett’s 
metaplasia, and (D) adenocarcinoma developing within an area of Barrett’s esophagus.

bronchitis, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic sinusitis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
sleep  apnea,  and  recurrent  aspiration  pneumonia  have  proposed 
associations  with  GERD.  However,  in  both  cases,  it  is  important  to 
emphasize  the  word  association  as  opposed  to  causation.  In  many 
instances, the disorders likely coexist because of shared pathogenetic 
mechanisms  rather  than  strict  causality.  Potential  mechanisms  for 
extraesophageal  GERD  manifestations  are  either  regurgitation  with 
direct contact between the refluxate and supraesophageal structures or 
via a vagovagal reflex wherein reflux activation of esophageal afferent 
nerves triggers efferent vagal reflexes such as bronchospasm, cough, 
or arrhythmias.
 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Although generally quite characteristic, symptoms from GERD need to 
be distinguished from symptoms related to infectious or pill esophagi-
tis, EoE, peptic ulcer disease, dyspepsia, biliary colic, coronary artery 
disease,  and  esophageal  motility  disorders.  It  is  especially  important 
that coronary artery disease be given early consideration because of its 
potentially  lethal  implications.  The  remaining  elements  of  the  differ-
ential diagnosis can be addressed by endoscopy, upper gastrointestinal 
series,  or  esophageal  manometry  as  appropriate.  Erosive  esophagitis 
at  the  esophagogastric  junction  is  the  endoscopic  hallmark  of  GERD 
but  identified  in  only  about  one-third  of  patients  with  GERD.  The 
distinction  among  etiologies  of  esophagitis  is  readily  made  by  endo-
scopic  appearance,  but  mucosal  biopsies  may  be  helpful  to  evaluate 
for  infectious  or  eosinophilic  inflammation.  In  terms  of  endoscopic 
appearance, the ulcerations seen in peptic esophagitis are usually few 
and distal, whereas infectious ulcerations are numerous, punctate, and 
diffuse. EoE characteristically exhibits multiple esophageal rings, linear 
furrows,  white  punctate  exudate,  and  strictures.  Esophageal  ulcera-
tions  from  pill  esophagitis  are  usually  singular  and  deep  at  points  of 
luminal narrowing, especially near the carina, with sparing of the distal 
esophagus.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2430

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemBarrett’s metaplasia

High-grade dysplasia

2431

FIGURE 323-10  Histopathology of Barrett’s metaplasia and Barrett’s metaplasia with high-grade dysplasia. H&E, hematoxylin and eosin.

Alcian blue stain

H&E stain

However, clinical experience dictates that subsets of patients benefit 
from  specific  recommendations  based  on  their  individual  history 
and symptom profile. A patient with sleep disturbance from night-
time heartburn is more likely to benefit from elevation of the head 
of the bed and avoidance of eating before retiring. The most broadly 
applicable  recommendation  is  for  weight  reduction.  Even  though 
the benefit with respect to reflux cannot be assured, the strong epi-
demiologic relationship between body mass index and GERD and 
the secondary health gains of weight reduction is beyond dispute.

The dominant pharmacologic approach to GERD management 
is with inhibitors of gastric acid secretion, and abundant data sup-
port the effectiveness of this approach. Pharmacologically reducing 
the acidity of gastric juice does not prevent reflux, but it ameliorates 
reflux  symptoms  and  allows  esophagitis  to  heal.  The  hierarchy  of 
effectiveness  among  pharmaceuticals  parallels  their  antisecretory 
potency. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are more efficacious than 
histamine-2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs), and both are superior to 
placebo. No major differences exist among PPIs, and only modest 
gain is achieved by increased dosage.

Paradoxically, the perceived frequency and severity of heartburn 
correlate poorly with the presence or severity of esophagitis. When 
GERD treatments are assessed in terms of resolving heartburn, both 
efficacy  and  differences  among  pharmaceuticals  are  less  clear-cut 
than with the objective of healing esophagitis. Although the same 
overall hierarchy of effectiveness exists, observed efficacy rates are 
lower and vary widely, likely reflecting patient heterogeneity.

Reflux symptoms tend to be chronic, irrespective of esophagitis. 
Thus, a common management strategy is indefinite treatment with 
PPIs or H2RAs as necessary for symptom control. The side effects of 
PPI therapy are generally minimal. Rare cases of interstitial nephri-
tis  and  severe,  reversible  hypomagnesemia  have  been  reported. 
Vitamin B12 and iron absorption may be compromised and suscep-
tibility to enteric infections, particularly Clostridium difficile colitis, 
increased  with  treatment.  Observational  data  have  also  noted  an 
association  between  PPI  exposure  and  renal  disease,  dementia, 
and cardiovascular disease, but the hazard ratios reported in these 
studies  were  small,  and  the  potential  for  unrecognized  residual 
confounding bias was substantial. Population studies have also sug-
gested a slight increased risk of bone fracture with chronic PPI use 
suggesting  an  impairment  of  calcium  absorption,  but  prospective 
studies  have  failed  to  corroborate  this.  Nonetheless,  as  with  any 
medication, PPI dosage should be minimized to that necessary for 
the clinical indication.

Laparoscopic  Nissen  fundoplication,  wherein  the  proximal 
stomach  is  wrapped  around  the  distal  esophagus  to  create  an 
antireflux  barrier,  is  a  surgical  alternative  to  the  management  of 
chronic GERD. Just as with PPI therapy, evidence on the utility of 
fundoplication is strongest for treating esophagitis, and controlled 
trials suggest similar efficacy to PPI therapy. However, the benefits 
of  fundoplication  must  be  weighed  against  potential  deleterious 
effects,  including  surgical  morbidity  and  mortality,  postoperative 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

dysphagia, failure or breakdown requiring reoperation, an inability 
to  belch,  and  increased  bloating,  flatulence,  and  bowel  symptoms 
after surgery.

 ■ EOSINOPHILIC ESOPHAGITIS
EoE  is  increasingly  recognized  in  adults  and  children  around  the 
world.  Current  prevalence  estimates  in  the  United  States  identified 
4–8 cases per 10,000 with a predilection for white males between 30 
and 40 years of age. The increasing prevalence of EoE is attributable 
to  a  combination  of  an  increasing  incidence  and  a  growing  recogni-
tion  of  the  condition.  There  is  also  an  incompletely  understood,  but 
important, interaction between EoE and GERD that may confound the 
diagnosis of the disease. Genome-wide analysis studied demonstrated 
susceptibility  elements  at  5q22  (thymic  stromal  lymphopoietin)  and 
2p23 (CAPN14) in EoE.

EoE is diagnosed based on the combination of esophageal symptoms 
and esophageal mucosal biopsies demonstrating eosinophil-predomi-
nant  inflammation.  Alternative  etiologies  of  esophageal  eosinophilia 
include  GERD,  drug  hypersensitivity,  connective  tissue  disorders, 
hypereosinophilic  syndrome,  Crohn’s  disease,  eosinophilic  gastroen-
teritis,  and  infection.  EoE  is  an  immunologic  disorder  induced  by 
antigen sensitization in susceptible individuals. Food allergens are the 
dominant  triggers,  although  aeroallergens  may  also  contribute.  The 
natural  history  of  EoE  is  incompletely  understood,  but  an  increased 
risk  of  esophageal  stricture  development  paralleling  the  duration  of 
untreated disease has been noted.

EoE  should  be  strongly  considered  in  children  and  adults  with 
dysphagia  and  esophageal  food  impactions.  In  preadolescent  chil-
dren,  symptom  presentations  of  EoE  include  chest  or  abdominal 
pain, nausea, vomiting, and food aversion. Other symptoms in adults 
may  include  atypical  chest  pain  and  heartburn.  An  atopic  history  of 
IgE-mediated food allergy, asthma, eczema, and/or allergic rhinitis is 
present  in  the  majority  of  patients.  Peripheral  blood  eosinophilia  is 
demonstrable in 25–50% of patients, but the specificity of this finding 
is problematic in the setting of concomitant atopy. The characteristic 
endoscopically identified esophageal findings include loss of vascular 
markings (edema), multiple esophageal rings, longitudinally oriented 
furrows,  and  whitish  exudate  (Fig.  323-11).  Histologic  confirmation 
is  made  with  the  demonstration  of  esophageal  mucosal  eosinophilia 
(peak  density  ≥15  eosinophils  per  high-power  field)  (Fig.  323-12). 
Complications  of  EoE  include  food  impaction,  esophageal  stricture, 
narrow-caliber esophagus, and rarely esophageal perforation.

The goals of EoE management are symptom control and the preven-
tion of complications. Primary therapy often starts with PPI therapy, 
which is effective at improving eosinophilic inflammation in 30–50% 
of  patients.  Additional  first-line  therapies  include  elimination  diets 
or swallowed topical glucocorticoids. Elemental formula diets devoid 
of  allergenic  protein  are  a  highly  effective  therapy  but  are  limited  by 
palatability.  Notably,  allergy  testing  by  means  of  either  serum  IgE  or 
skin prick testing has demonstrated poor sensitivity and specificity in 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2431

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2432

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  323-11  Endoscopic  features  of  (A)  eosinophilic  esophagitis  (EoE),  
(B) Candida esophagitis, (C) giant ulcer associated with HIV, and (D) a Schatzki ring.

a day for 7–10 days) can be used for immunocompetent hosts, although 
the disease is typically self-limited after a 1- to 2-week period in such 
patients.  Immunocompromised  patients  are  treated  with  acyclovir  
(400 mg orally five times a day for 14–21 days), famciclovir (500 mg 
orally three times a day), or valacyclovir (1 g orally three times a day). 

(EoE)  showing 
FIGURE  323-12  Histopathology  of  eosinophilic  esophagitis 
infiltration  of  the  esophageal  squamous  epithelium  with  eosinophils.  Additional 
features  of  basal  cell  hyperplasia  and  lamina  propria  fibrosis  are  present. 
Eosinophilic inflammation can also be seen with gastroesophageal reflux disease.

the identification of foods responsible for EoE in an individual patient. 
Empiric elimination of common food allergies (milk, wheat, egg, soy, 
nuts, and seafood) followed by systematic reintroduction has been an 
effective diet therapy in both children and adults with EoE. The intent 
of the elimination diet approach is the identification of specific food 
trigger(s). Swallowed, topical glucocorticoids (e.g., fluticasone propio-
nate or budesonide) are effective in 50–80% of patients, but recurrence 
of  disease  is  common  following  the  cessation  of  short-term  therapy. 
Systemic glucocorticoids are not generally recommended due to side 
effects  and  lack  of  proven  benefit  beyond  that  achieved  with  topical 
glucocorticoids.  Biologic  therapies  targeting  allergic  cytokine  media-
tors  including  interleukin  (IL)  4,  IL-5,  and  IL-13  have  shown  prom-
ise  in  initial  clinical  trials.  Esophageal  dilation  is  highly  effective  at 
relieving dysphagia in patients with fibrostenosis but does not address 
the underlying inflammatory process. Dilation should be approached 
conservatively because of the risk of deep, esophageal mural laceration 
or perforation in the stiff-walled esophagus that is characteristic of the 
disease.

INFECTIOUS ESOPHAGITIS
As a result of the increased use of immunosuppression for organ trans-
plantation and chronic inflammatory diseases and use of chemotherapy 
agents, along with the AIDS epidemic, infections with Candida species, 
herpesvirus,  and  cytomegalovirus  (CMV)  have  become  relatively 
common. Although rare, infectious esophagitis also occurs among the 
non-immunocompromised, with herpes simplex and Candida albicans 
being the most common pathogens. Among AIDS patients, infectious 
esophagitis becomes more common as the CD4 count declines; cases 
are rare with a CD4 count >200 and common when <100. HIV itself 
may also be associated with a self-limited syndrome of acute esopha-
geal ulceration with oral ulcers and a maculopapular skin rash at the 
time  of  seroconversion.  Additionally,  some  patients  with  advanced 
disease have deep, persistent esophageal ulcers treated with oral gluco-
corticoids or thalidomide. However, with the widespread use of highly 
effective  antiviral  therapies,  a  reduction  in  these  HIV  complications 
has been noted.

Regardless  of  the  infectious  agent,  odynophagia  is  a  characteristic 
symptom  of  infectious  esophagitis;  dysphagia,  chest  pain,  and  hem-
orrhage  are  also  common.  Odynophagia  is  uncommon  with  reflux 
esophagitis, so its presence should always raise suspicion of an alter-
native etiology.
 ■ CANDIDA ESOPHAGITIS
Candida is normally found in the throat but can become pathogenic 
and  produce  esophagitis  in  a  compromised  host;  C.  albicans  is  most 
common.  Candida  esophagitis  also  occurs  with  esophageal  stasis 
secondary  to  esophageal  motor  disorders  and  diverticula.  Patients 
complain  of  odynophagia  and  dysphagia.  If  oral  thrush  is  present, 
empirical therapy is appropriate, but co-infection is common, and per-
sistent symptoms should lead to prompt endoscopy with biopsy, which 
is  the  most  useful  diagnostic  evaluation.  Candida  esophagitis  has  a 
characteristic  appearance  of  white  plaques  or  exudate  with  friability. 
Oral fluconazole (400 mg on the first day, followed by 200 mg daily) for  
14–21  days  is  the  preferred  treatment.  Patients  refractory  to  fluco-
nazole  may  respond  to  voriconazole  or  posaconazole.  Alternatively, 
poorly responsive patients or those who cannot swallow medications 
can be treated with an intravenous echinocandin.
 ■ HERPETIC ESOPHAGITIS
Herpes  simplex  virus  type  1  or  2  may  cause  esophagitis.  Vesicles  on 
the  nose  and  lips  may  coexist  and  are  suggestive  of  a  herpetic  eti-
ology.  Varicella-zoster  virus  can  also  cause  esophagitis  in  children 
with chickenpox or adults with zoster. The characteristic endoscopic 
findings are vesicles and small, superficial ulcerations. Because herpes 
simplex infections are limited to squamous epithelium, biopsies from 
the ulcer margins are most likely to reveal the characteristic ground-
glass nuclei, eosinophilic Cowdry’s type A inclusion bodies, and giant 
cells. Culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are helpful to 
identify acyclovir-resistant strains. Acyclovir (200 mg orally five times 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2432

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemIn  patients  with  severe  odynophagia,  intravenous  acyclovir,  5  mg/kg 
every 8 h for 7–14 days, reduces this morbidity.
 ■ CYTOMEGALOVIRUS
CMV esophagitis occurs primarily in immunocompromised patients, 
particularly those with HIV, patients with malignancy, and recipients 
of bone marrow or organ transplants. CMV is usually activated from a 
latent stage. Endoscopically, CMV lesions appear as large serpiginous 
ulcers in an otherwise normal mucosa, particularly in the distal esoph-
agus. Biopsies from the ulcer bases have the greatest diagnostic yield 
for finding the pathognomonic large nuclear or cytoplasmic inclusion 
bodies. Immunohistology with monoclonal antibodies to CMV and in 
situ hybridization tests are useful for early diagnosis. Data on therapy 
for  CMV  esophagitis  are  limited.  Treatment  studies  of  CMV  gastro-
intestinal disease have demonstrated effectiveness of both ganciclovir  
(5 mg/kg every 12 h IV) and valganciclovir (900 mg orally every 12 h). 
Therapy is continued until healing, which may take 3–6 weeks. Mainte-
nance therapy may be needed for patients with relapsing disease.

MECHANICAL TRAUMA AND  
IATROGENIC INJURY 

ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
Most  cases  of  esophageal  perforation  are  from  instrumentation  of 
the esophagus or trauma. Alternatively, forceful vomiting or retching 
can  lead  to  spontaneous  rupture  at  the  gastroesophageal  junction 
(Boerhaave’s  syndrome).  More  rarely,  corrosive  esophagitis  or  neo-
plasms lead to perforation. Instrument perforation from endoscopy or 
nasogastric tube placement typically occurs in the hypopharynx or at 
the gastroesophageal junction. Perforation may also occur at the site of 
a stricture in the setting of endoscopic food disimpaction or esopha-
geal dilation. Esophageal perforation causes pleuritic retrosternal pain 
that  can  be  associated  with  pneumomediastinum  and  subcutaneous 
emphysema. Mediastinitis is a major complication of esophageal per-
foration,  and  prompt  recognition  is  key  to  optimizing  outcome.  CT 
of the chest is most sensitive in detecting mediastinal air. Esophageal 
perforation  is  confirmed  by  a  contrast  swallow,  usually  Gastrografin 
followed by thin barium. Treatment includes nasogastric suction and 
parenteral  broad-spectrum  antibiotics  with  prompt  surgical  drainage 
and  repair  in  noncontained  leaks.  Conservative  therapy  with  NPO 
status and antibiotics without surgery may be appropriate in cases of 
contained perforation that are detected early. Endoscopic clipping or 
stent placement may be indicated in nonoperated iatrogenic perfora-
tions or nonoperable cases such as perforated tumors.
 ■ MALLORY-WEISS TEAR
Vomiting, retching, or vigorous coughing can cause a nontransmural 
tear at the gastroesophageal junction that is a common cause of upper 
gastrointestinal  bleeding.  Most  patients  present  with  hematemesis. 
Antecedent  vomiting  is  the  norm  but  not  always  evident.  Bleeding 
usually  abates  spontaneously,  but  protracted  bleeding  may  respond 
to local epinephrine or cauterization therapy, endoscopic clipping, or 
angiographic embolization. Surgery is rarely needed.
 ■ RADIATION ESOPHAGITIS
Radiation  esophagitis  can  complicate  treatment  for  thoracic  cancers, 
especially breast and lung cancers, with the risk proportional to radi-
ation dosage. Radiosensitizing drugs such as doxorubicin, bleomycin, 
cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin also increase the risk. Dysphagia and 
odynophagia may last weeks to months after therapy. The esophageal 
mucosa  becomes  erythematous,  edematous,  and  friable.  Submucosal 
fibrosis  and  degenerative  tissue  changes  and  stricturing  may  occur 
years  after  the  radiation  exposure.  Radiation  exposure  in  excess  of  
5000 cGy has been associated with increased risk of esophageal stric-
ture. Treatment for acute radiation esophagitis is supportive. Chronic 
strictures are managed with esophageal dilation.
 ■ CORROSIVE ESOPHAGITIS
Caustic esophageal injury from ingestion of alkali or, less commonly, 
acid  can  be  accidental  or  from  attempted  suicide.  Absence  of  oral 

2433

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
3

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
E
s
o
p
h
a
g
u
s

injury does not exclude possible esophageal involvement. Thus, early 
endoscopic evaluation is recommended to assess and grade the injury 
to the esophageal mucosa. Severe corrosive injury may lead to esoph-
ageal perforation, bleeding, stricture, and death. Glucocorticoids have 
not  been  shown  to  improve  the  clinical  outcome  of  acute  corrosive 
esophagitis and are not recommended. Healing of more severe grades 
of caustic injury is commonly associated with severe stricture forma-
tion and often requires repeated dilation.
 ■ PILL ESOPHAGITIS
Pill-induced esophagitis occurs when a swallowed pill fails to traverse 
the  entire  esophagus  and  lodges  within  the  lumen.  Generally,  this  is 
attributed to poor “pill-taking habits”: inadequate liquid with the pill or 
lying down immediately after taking a pill. The most common location 
for the pill to lodge is in the mid-esophagus near the crossing of the 
aorta or carina. Extrinsic compression from these structures halts the 
movement of the pill or capsule. Since initially reported in 1970, >1000 
cases of pill esophagitis have been reported, suggesting that this is not 
an unusual occurrence. A wide variety of medications are implicated, 
with  the  most  common  being  doxycycline,  tetracycline,  quinidine, 
phenytoin,  potassium  chloride,  ferrous  sulfate,  nonsteroidal  anti-in-
flammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and bisphosphonates.

Typical symptoms of pill esophagitis are the sudden onset of chest 
pain  and  odynophagia.  Characteristically,  the  pain  will  develop  over 
a period of hours or will awaken the individual from sleep. A classic 
history in the setting of ingestion of recognized pill offenders obviates 
the  need  for  diagnostic  testing  in  most  patients.  When  endoscopy  is 
performed, localized ulceration or inflammation is evident. Histologi-
cally, acute inflammation is typical. Chest CT imaging will sometimes 
reveal esophageal thickening consistent with transmural inflammation. 
Although the condition usually resolves within days to weeks, symp-
toms may persist for months and stricture can develop in severe cases. 
No specific therapy is known to hasten the healing process, but antise-
cretory medications are frequently prescribed to remove concomitant 
reflux as an aggravating factor. When healing results in stricture forma-
tion, dilation is indicated.
 ■ FOREIGN BODIES AND FOOD IMPACTION
Food or foreign bodies may lodge in the esophagus, causing complete 
obstruction, which in turn can cause an inability to handle secretions 
(foaming  at  the  mouth)  and  severe  chest  pain.  Food  impaction  may 
occur due to peptic stricture, carcinoma, Schatzki ring, EoE, or simply 
inattentive eating. If it does not spontaneously resolve, impacted food 
should  be  removed  endoscopically.  Use  of  meat  tenderizer  enzymes 
to facilitate passage of a meat bolus is discouraged because of poten-
tial esophageal injury. Glucagon (1 mg IV) is sometimes tried before 
endoscopic  dislodgement.  After  emergent  treatment,  patients  should 
be evaluated for potential causes of the impaction with treatment ren-
dered as indicated.
ESOPHAGEAL MANIFESTATIONS  
OF SYSTEMIC DISEASE
 ■ SCLERODERMA AND CONNECTIVE  
TISSUE DISORDERS
Scleroderma esophagus (hypotensive LES and absent esophageal con-
tractility) was initially described as a manifestation of scleroderma or 
other  collagen  vascular  diseases  and  thought  to  be  specific  for  these 
disorders.  However,  this  nomenclature  subsequently  has  been  dis-
carded  because  an  estimated  half  of  qualifying  patients  do  not  have 
an  identifiable  rheumatologic  disease,  and  reflux  disease  is  often  the 
only identifiable association. When scleroderma esophagus occurs as 
a  manifestation  of  a  connective  tissue  disorder,  the  histopathologic 
findings are of infiltration and destruction of the esophageal muscu-
laris  propria  with  collagen  deposition  and  fibrosis  and  reduction  in 
the  number  of  interstitial  cells  of  Cajal.  The  pathogenesis  of  absent 
peristalsis and LES hypotension in the absence of a connective tissue 
disorder  is  unknown.  Regardless  of  the  underlying  cause,  the  mano-
metric abnormalities predispose patients to severe GERD due to inad-
equate LES barrier function combined with poor esophageal clearance 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2433

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2434 of refluxed acid. Dysphagia may also be manifest but is generally mild 
and  alleviated  by  eating  in  an  upright  position  and  using  liquids  to 
facilitate solid emptying.
 ■ DERMATOLOGIC DISEASES
A host of dermatologic disorders (lichen planus, pemphigus vulgaris, 
bullous  pemphigoid,  cicatricial  pemphigoid,  Behçet’s  syndrome,  and 
epidermolysis  bullosa)  can  affect  the  oropharynx  and  esophagus, 
particularly  the  proximal  esophagus,  with  blisters,  bullae,  ulceration, 
webs,  and  strictures.  Topical  or  systemic  anti-inflammatory  therapy 
is effective for mucosal healing. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and graft-
versus-host disease can also involve the esophagus. Esophageal dilation 
may be necessary to treat strictures.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Furuta  GT,  Katzka  DA:  Eosinophilic  esophagitis.  N  Engl  J  Med 

373:1640, 2015.

Hirano  I  et  al:  American  Gastroenterological  Institute  and  the  joint 
task force on allergy-immunology practice parameters clinical guide-
lines for the management of eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterol-
ogy 158:1776, 2020.

Kahrilas  PJ,  Boeckxstaens  G:  The  spectrum  of  achalasia:  Lessons 
from  studies  of  pathophysiology  and  high-resolution  manometry. 
Gastroenterology 145:954, 2013.

Kahrilas PJ et al: American Gastroenterological Association Institute 
technical review on the management of gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease. Gastroenterology 135:1392, 2008.

Katzka  DA  et  al:  Phenotypes  of  gastroesophageal  reflux  disease: 
where Rome, Lyon, and Montreal meet. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
18:767, 2020.

Pandolfino  JE,  Gawron  AJ:  Achalasia:  A  systematic  review.  JAMA 

313:1841, 2015.

Shaheen NJ et al: Diagnosis and management of Barrett’s esophagus. 

Am J Gastroenterol 111:30, 2016.

Spechler SJ, Souza RF: Barrett’s esophagus. N Engl J Med 371:836, 

2014.

 ■ GASTRIC PHYSIOLOGY
Gastric  Anatomy  The  gastric  epithelial  lining  consists  of  rugae 
that  contain  microscopic  gastric  pits,  each  branching  into  four  or 
five gastric glands made up of highly specialized epithelial cells. The 
makeup of gastric glands varies with their anatomic location. Glands 
within the gastric cardia comprise <5% of the gastric gland area and 
contain  mucous  and  endocrine  cells.  The  75%  of  gastric  glands  are 
found within the oxyntic mucosa and contain mucous neck, parietal, 
chief, endocrine, enterochromaffin, and enterochromaffin-like (ECL) 
cells (Fig. 324-1). Highly specialized tuft cells are located in the neck 
region of the gastric gland. These specialized cells are thought to sam-
ple  luminal  contents,  which  in  turn  may  be  important  in  regulating 
gastric  acid  secretion.  Pyloric  glands  contain  mucous  and  endocrine 
cells (including gastrin cells) and are found in the antrum.

The parietal cell, also known as the oxyntic cell, is usually found in the 
neck  or  isthmus  or  in  the  oxyntic  gland.  The  resting,  or  unstimulated, 
parietal  cell  has  prominent  cytoplasmic  tubulovesicles  and  intracellular 
canaliculi containing short microvilli along its apical surface (Fig. 324-2). 
H+,K+-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) is expressed in the tubulovesicle 
membrane; upon cell stimulation, this membrane, along with apical mem-
branes, transforms into a dense network of apical intracellular canaliculi 
containing long microvilli. Acid secretion, a process requiring high energy, 
occurs at the apical canalicular surface. Numerous mitochondria (30–40% 
of total cell volume) generate the energy required for secretion.
Gastroduodenal  Mucosal  Defense  The  gastric  epithelium  is 
under  constant  assault  by  a  series  of  endogenous  noxious  factors, 
including hydrochloric acid (HCl), pepsinogen/pepsin, and bile salts. 
In addition, a steady flow of exogenous substances such as medications, 
alcohol, and bacteria encounter the gastric mucosa. A highly intricate 
biologic system is in place to provide defense from mucosal injury and 
to repair any injury that may occur.

The mucosal defense system can be envisioned as a three-level barrier, 
composed  of  preepithelial,  epithelial,  and  subepithelial  elements 

324 Peptic Ulcer Disease  
and Related Disorders
John Del Valle

PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
A peptic ulcer is defined as disruption of the mucosal integrity of the 
stomach and/or duodenum leading to a local defect or excavation due 
to active inflammation. Although burning epigastric pain exacerbated 
by fasting and improved with meals is a symptom complex associated 
with peptic ulcer disease (PUD), it is now clear that >90% patients with 
this  symptom  complex  (dyspepsia)  do  not  have  ulcers  and  that  the 
majority  of  patients  with  peptic  ulcers  may  be  asymptomatic.  Ulcers 
occur within the stomach and/or duodenum and are often chronic in 
nature.  Acid  peptic  disorders  are  very  common  in  the  United  States, 
with  4  million  individuals  (new  cases  and  recurrences)  affected  per 
year. Lifetime overall prevalence of PUD in the United States is ~8.4% 
with  a  slightly  higher  prevalence  in  men.  PUD  significantly  affects 
quality of life by impairing overall patient well-being and contributing 
substantially  to  work  absenteeism.  Moreover,  an  estimated  15,000 
deaths  per  year  occur  as  a  consequence  of  complicated  PUD.  The 
financial  impact  of  these  common  disorders  has  been  substantial, 
with  an  estimated  burden  on  direct  and  indirect  health  care  costs 
of ~$6 billion per year in the United States, with $3 billion spent on 
hospitalizations, $2 billion on physician office visits, and $1 billion in 
decreased productivity and days lost from work.

Gastric pit
  (foveolus)

Isthmus

Neck

Base
  (fundus)

d
n
a
G
c

l

i
t

n
y
x
O

Surface mucous cells

Mucous neck cells

Parietal cells

Endocrine cell

Chief cells

FIGURE  324-1  Diagrammatic  representation  of 
the  oxyntic  gastric  gland. 
(Reproduced with permission from S Ito, RJ Winchester: The Fine Structure of the 
Gastric Mucosa in the Bat. J Cell Biol 16:541, 1963.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2434

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
Resting

Stimulated

Canaliculus

H+,K+–ATPase

Tubulovesicles

Active
pump

H3O+

HCl

KCl

KCl

Active
pump

Gastrin

Ca

–

cAMP

ACh

Histamine

FIGURE 324-2  Gastric parietal cell undergoing transformation after secretagogue-
mediated stimulation. cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate. (Reproduced with 
permission from SJ Hersey, G Sachs: Gastric acid secretion. Am Physiol Soc 75:155, 1995.)

(Fig. 324-3). The first line of defense is a mucus-bicarbonate-phospholipid 
layer, which serves as a physicochemical barrier to multiple molecules, 
including hydrogen ions. Mucus is secreted in a regulated fashion by 
gastroduodenal  surface  epithelial  cells.  It  consists  primarily  of  water 
(95%) and a mixture of phospholipids and glycoproteins (mucin). The 
mucous gel functions as a nonstirred water layer impeding diffusion of 
ions and molecules such as pepsin. Bicarbonate, secreted in a regulated 
manner by surface epithelial cells of the gastroduodenal mucosa into 
the mucous gel, forms a pH gradient ranging from 1 to 2 at the gastric 
luminal surface and reaching 6–7 along the epithelial cell surface.

Surface  epithelial  cells  provide  the  next  line  of  defense  through 
several factors, including mucus production, epithelial cell ionic trans-
porters  that  maintain  intracellular  pH  and  bicarbonate  production, 
and intracellular tight junctions. Surface epithelial cells generate heat 
shock proteins that prevent protein denaturation and protect cells from 
certain factors such as increased temperature, cytotoxic agents, or oxi-
dative stress. Epithelial cells also generate trefoil factor family peptides 
and cathelicidins, which also play a role in surface cell protection and 
regeneration.  If  the  preepithelial  barrier  is  breached,  gastric  epithe-
lial  cells  bordering  a  site  of  injury  can  migrate  to  restore  a  damaged 
region  (restitution).  This  process  occurs  independent  of  cell  division 
and requires uninterrupted blood flow and an alkaline pH in the sur-
rounding  environment.  Several  growth  factors,  including  epidermal 
growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor (TGF) α, and basic 
fibroblast  growth  factor  (FGF),  modulate  the  process  of  restitution. 
Larger defects that are not effectively repaired by restitution require cell 
proliferation. Epithelial cell regeneration is regulated by prostaglandins 
and growth factors such as EGF and TGF-α. In tandem with epithelial 
cell renewal, formation of new vessels (angiogenesis) within the injured 
microvascular bed occurs. Both FGF and vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) are important in regulating angiogenesis in the gastric 
mucosa. In addition, the gastric peptide gastrin (see below) has been 
recently  found  to  stimulate  cell  proliferation,  migration,  invasion, 
angiogenesis, and autophagy. Finally, gastric parietal cells (see below) 
express  sonic  hedgehog,  a  family  of  proteins  important  in  regulating 
cell lineage in multiple organs. This latter finding suggests that parietal 
cells may also have the ability to regulate gastric stem cells.

An  elaborate  microvascular  system  within  the  gastric  submu-
cosal  layer  is  the  key  component  of  the  subepithelial  defense/repair 
−,  which  neutralizes  the  acid  generated  by 
system,  providing  HCO3
the  parietal  cell.  Moreover,  this  microcirculatory  bed  provides  an 
adequate  supply  of  micronutrients  and  oxygen  while  removing  toxic 
metabolic  by-products.  Several  locally  produced  factors  including 
nitric oxide (NO) (see below), hydrogen sulfide, and prostacyclin con-
tribute to the vascular protective pathway through vasodilation of the 
microcirculation.

Prostaglandins  play  a  central  role  in  gastric  epithelial  defense/
repair  (Fig.  324-4).  The  gastric  mucosa  contains  abundant  levels  of 
prostaglandins  that  regulate  the  release  of  mucosal  bicarbonate  and 
mucus, inhibit parietal cell secretion, and are important in maintaining 

2435

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

mucosal  blood  flow  and  epithelial  cell  restitution.  Prostaglandins  are 
derived from esterified arachidonic acid, which is formed from phos-
pholipids  (cell  membrane)  by  the  action  of  phospholipase  A2.  A  key 
enzyme that controls the rate-limiting step in prostaglandin synthesis 
is  cyclooxygenase  (COX),  which  is  present  in  two  isoforms  (COX-1, 
COX-2), each having distinct characteristics regarding structure, tissue 
distribution, and expression. COX-1 is expressed in a host of tissues, 
including  the  stomach,  platelets,  kidneys,  and  endothelial  cells.  This 
isoform is expressed in a constitutive manner and plays an important 
role in maintaining the integrity of renal function, platelet aggregation, 
and gastrointestinal (GI) mucosal integrity. In contrast, the expression 
of COX-2 is inducible by inflammatory stimuli, and it is expressed in 
macrophages, leukocytes, fibroblasts, and synovial cells. The beneficial 
effects  of  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs)  on  tissue 
inflammation  are  due  to  inhibition  of  COX-2;  the  toxicity  of  these 
drugs (e.g., GI mucosal ulceration and renal dysfunction) is related to 
inhibition of the COX-1 isoform. The highly COX-2–selective NSAIDs 
have the potential to provide the beneficial effect of decreasing tissue 
inflammation  while  minimizing  toxicity  in  the  GI  tract.  Selective 
COX-2 inhibitors have had adverse effects on the cardiovascular (CV) 
system, leading to increased risk of myocardial infarction. Therefore, 
the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  has  removed  two  of 
these agents (valdecoxib and rofecoxib) from the market (see below).

NO  is  important  in  the  maintenance  of  gastric  mucosal  integrity. 
The key enzyme NO synthase is constitutively expressed in the mucosa 
and  contributes  to  cytoprotection  by  stimulating  gastric  mucus, 
increasing mucosal blood flow, and maintaining epithelial cell barrier 
function. The central nervous system (CNS) and hormonal factors also 
play  a  role  in  regulating  mucosal  defense  through  multiple  pathways 
(Fig. 324-3).

Since the discovery of Helicobacter pylori and its impact on gastric 
pathology, it has become clear that the stomach has an elaborate and 
complex  inherent  immunologic  system  in  place.  Although  a  detailed 
description of the gastric immune system is beyond the scope of this 
chapter,  several  features  are  worth  highlighting.  The  gastric  immune 
response  to  certain  pathogens  such  as  H.  pylori  (see  below)  involves 
extensive  interplay  between  innate  (dendritic  cells,  epithelial  cells, 
neutrophils,  and  macrophages)  and  adaptive  (B  and  T  cells)  compo-
nents. Helper T cells (TH and TH regulatory cells) have been extensively 
studied and appear to play an important role in a broad array of gastric 
physiology extending from gastric secretion to epithelial cell turnover 
via production of a number of cytokines.

The  discovery  of  H.  pylori  has  also  led  to  the  understanding  that 
the  stomach,  once  thought  to  be  devoid  of  microorganisms  due  to 
its  highly  adverse  environment  (acid  and  pepsin),  can  serve  as  host 
for  bacterial  communities  consisting  of  hundreds  of  phylotypes, 
otherwise  known  as  its  microbiota.  The  conceptual  framework  of 
the microbiome has been receiving extensive attention in light of its 
importance in human health and disease. The overall relevance of the 
gastric microbiome and its impact on gastric pathology remain to be 
established,  but  it  is  likely  that  alteration  of  microorganism  homeo-
stasis  will  play  a  role  in  aspects  of  certain  disorders  such  as  PUD, 
gastritis, and gastric cancer.

Physiology  of  Gastric  Secretion  HCl  and  pepsinogen  are  the 
two principal gastric secretory products capable of inducing mucosal 
injury. Gastric acid and pepsinogen play a physiologic role in protein 
digestion;  absorption  of  iron,  calcium,  magnesium,  and  vitamin  B12; 
and killing ingested bacteria. Acid secretion should be viewed as occur-
ring  under  basal  and  stimulated  conditions.  Basal  acid  production 
occurs in a circadian pattern, with the highest levels occurring during 
the  night  and  lowest  levels  during  the  morning  hours.  Cholinergic 
input  via  the  vagus  nerve  and  histaminergic  input  from  local  gastric 
sources  are  the  principal  contributors  to  basal  acid  secretion.  Stimu-
lated gastric acid secretion occurs primarily in three phases based on 
the  site  where  the  signal  originates  (cephalic,  gastric,  and  intestinal). 
Sight, smell, and taste of food are the components of the cephalic phase, 
which  stimulates  gastric  secretion  via  the  vagus  nerve.  The  gastric 
phase  is  activated  once  food  enters  the  stomach.  This  component  of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2435

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2436

FIGURE 324-3  Components involved in providing gastroduodenal mucosal defense and repair. CCK, cholecystokinin; CRF, corticotropin-releasing factor; EGF, epidermal 
growth factor; HCl, hydrochloride; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; TGFα, transforming growth factor α; TRF, thyrotropin releasing factor. (Republished with permission of 
John Wiley and Son’s Inc, from Bioregulation and Its Disorders in the Gastrointestinal Tract, T Yoshikawa, T Arakawa [eds]: 1998; permission conveyed through Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc.)

secretion is driven by nutrients (amino acids and amines) that directly 
(via peptone and amino acid receptors) and indirectly (via stimulation 
of intramural gastrin-releasing peptide neurons) stimulate the G cell to 
release gastrin, which in turn activates the parietal cell via direct and 
indirect mechanisms. Distention of the stomach wall also leads to gas-
trin release and acid production. The last phase of gastric acid secretion 
is initiated as food enters the intestine and is mediated by luminal dis-
tention and nutrient assimilation. A series of pathways that inhibit gas-
tric acid production are also set into motion during these phases. The 
GI hormone somatostatin is released from endocrine cells found in the 
gastric mucosa (D cells) in response to HCl. Somatostatin can inhibit 
acid production by both direct (parietal cell) and indirect mechanisms 
(decreased histamine release from ECL cells, ghrelin release from Gr 
cells and gastrin release from G cells). Additional neural (central and 

peripheral)  and  humoral  (amylin,  atrial  natriuretic  peptide  [ANP], 
cholecystokinin,  ghrelin,  interleukin  11  [IL-11],  obestatin,  secretin, 
and serotonin) factors play a role in counterbalancing acid secretion. 
Under physiologic circumstances, these phases occur simultaneously. 
Ghrelin, the appetite-regulating hormone expressed in Gr cells in the 
stomach, and its related peptide motilin (released from the duodenum) 
may increase gastric acid secretion through stimulation of histamine 
release from ECL cells, but this remains to be confirmed.

The  acid-secreting  parietal  cell  is  located  in  the  oxyntic  gland, 
adjacent to other cellular elements (ECL cell, D cell) important in the 
gastric  secretory  process  (Fig.  324-5).  This  unique  cell  also  secretes 
intrinsic factor (IF) and IL-11. The parietal cell expresses receptors for 
several stimulants of acid secretion, including histamine (H2), gastrin 
(cholecystokinin  2/gastrin  receptor),  and  acetylcholine  (muscarinic, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2436

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2437

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Membrane phospholipids

Phospholipase A2

Arachidonic acid

Stomach
Kidney
Platelets
Endothelium

COX-1
housekeeping

COX-2
inflammation

Macrophages
Leukocytes
Fibroblasts
Endothelium

TXA2, PGI2, PGE2
  Gastrointestinal mucosal integrity
  Platelet aggregation
  Renal function

PGI2, PGE2
  Inflammation
  Mitogenesis
  Bone formation
  Other functions?

FIGURE  324-4  Schematic  representation  of  the  steps  involved  in  synthesis  of 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and prostacyclin (PGI2). Characteristics and distribution 
of the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes 1 and 2 are also shown. TXA2, thromboxane A2.

M3).  Binding  of  histamine  to  the  H2  receptor  leads  to  activation  of 
adenylate cyclase and the phosphoinositol pathways, in turn resulting 
in an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and intra-
cellular calcium, respectively. Activation of the gastrin and muscarinic 
receptors results in activation of the protein kinase C/phosphoinositide 
signaling pathway. Each of these signaling pathways in turn regulates 
a series of downstream kinase cascades that control the acid-secreting 
pump,  H+,K+-ATPase.  The  discovery  that  different  ligands  and  their 
corresponding receptors lead to activation of different signaling path-
ways explains the potentiation of acid secretion that occurs when hista-
mine and gastrin or acetylcholine are combined. More importantly, this 
observation  explains  why  blocking  one  receptor  type  (H2)  decreases 
acid  secretion  stimulated  by  agents  that  activate  a  different  pathway 
(gastrin, acetylcholine). Parietal cells also express receptors for ligands 
that inhibit acid production (glucagon-like peptide-1, prostaglandins, 
somatostatin, EGF, neurotensin, and urocortin). Histamine also stim-
ulates gastric acid secretion indirectly by activating the histamine H3 
receptor on D cells, which inhibits somatostatin release.

The  enzyme  H+,K+-ATPase  is  responsible  for  generating  the  large 
concentration of H+. It is a membrane-bound protein that consists of 
two subunits, α and β. The active catalytic site is found within the α 
subunit; the function of the β subunit is unclear. This enzyme uses the 
chemical energy of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to transfer H+ ions 

Vagus

from  parietal  cell  cytoplasm  to  the  secretory  canaliculi  in  exchange 
for K+. The H+,K+-ATPase is located within the secretory canaliculus 
and in nonsecretory cytoplasmic tubulovesicles. The tubulovesicles are 
impermeable to K+, which leads to an inactive pump in this location. 
The distribution of pumps between the nonsecretory vesicles and the 
secretory canaliculus varies according to parietal cell activity (Fig. 324-2). 
Proton  pumps  are  recycled  back  to  the  inactive  state  in  cytoplasmic 
vesicles once parietal cell activation ceases. Ezrin (an actin binding pro-
tein), actin, myosin, soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attach-
ment protein receptors (SNAREs), small G proteins of the Rab family, 
and  secretory  carrier  membrane  proteins  (SCAMPS)  are  postulated 
to  participate  in  parietal  cell  membrane  translocation.  In  addition, 
acid secretion requires a number of apical and basolateral parietal cell 
membrane chloride and potassium channels. Parietal cells also express 
members of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) family proteins, which play an 
important role in regulating cell types in multiple organs. This family 
of proteins may also regulate cell differentiation as well as restitution of 
mucosal defense in the gastric epithelium.

The chief cell, found primarily in the gastric fundus, synthesizes and 
secretes pepsinogen, the inactive precursor of the proteolytic enzyme 
pepsin. The acid environment within the stomach leads to cleavage of 
the inactive precursor to pepsin and provides the low pH (<2) required 
for pepsin activity. Pepsin activity is significantly diminished at a pH of 
4 and irreversibly inactivated and denatured at a pH of ≥7. Many of the 
secretagogues that stimulate acid secretion also stimulate pepsinogen 
release. The precise role of pepsin in the pathogenesis of PUD remains 
to be established.

 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC BASIS OF PUD
PUD  encompasses  both  gastric  ulcers  (GUs)  and  duodenal  ulcers 
(DUs). Ulcers are defined as breaks in the mucosal surface >5 mm in 
size, with depth to the submucosa. DUs and GUs share many common 
features in terms of pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment, but several 
factors distinguish them from one another. H. pylori and NSAIDs are 
the most common risk factors for PUD, with estimated odds ratios in 
the  United  States  of  3.7  and  3.3,  respectively.  Additional  risk  factors 
(odds  ratio)  include  chronic  obstructive  lung  disease  (2.34),  chronic 
renal insufficiency (2.29), current tobacco use (1.99), former tobacco 
use (1.55), older age (1.67), three or more doctor visits in a year (1.49), 
coronary  heart  disease  (1.46),  former  alcohol  use  (1.29),  African- 
American  race  (1.20),  obesity  (1.18),  and  diabetes  (1.13).  Selective 
serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  (SSRIs)  and  gastric  bypass  surgery  are 
also  associated  with  an  increased  incidence  of  PUD.  A  rise  in  idio-
pathic PUD has also been noted. The mechanisms by which some of 
these risk factors lead to ulcer disease are 
highlighted below.

CGRP

PACAP

ACh

VIP

ACh

ACh

GRP

+

+

G Cell
(Gastrin)

+

–

+

–

EC Cell
(ANP)

–

+

D Cell
(SST)

+

+

–

–

HP
(Chronic Antrum)

ACh

+

Parietal
Cell

H2

ACh

–

D Cell
(SST)

H3

–

–

+

+

–

ECL Cell
(Histamine)

+

+

Acid
HP (Acute)

Antrum

Fundus

FIGURE  324-5  Regulation  of  gastric  acid  secretion  at  the  cellular  level.  ACh,  acetylcholine;  ANP,  atrial  natriuretic 
peptide;  CGRP,  calcitonin  gene-related  peptide;  EC,  enterochromaffin;  ECL,  enterochromaffin-like;  GRP,  gastrin-
releasing peptide; PACAP, pituitary adenylate-cyclase activating peptide; SST, somatostatin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal 
peptide.

Epidemiology  •  DUODENAL  ULCERS  
DUs are estimated to occur in 6–15% of 
the  Western  population.  The  incidence 
of  DUs  declined  steadily  from  1960  to 
1980 and has remained stable since then. 
The  death  rates,  need  for  surgery,  and 
physician visits have decreased by >50% 
over  the  past  30  years.  The  reason  for 
the reduction in the frequency of DUs is 
likely related to the decreasing frequency 
of H. pylori in turn associated with over-
all  improved  sanitary  conditions  across 
the  world.  Before  the  discovery  of  H. 
pylori,  the  natural  history  of  DUs  was 
typified by frequent recurrences after ini-
tial therapy. Eradication of H. pylori has 
reduced these recurrence rates by >80%.

GASTRIC  ULCERS  GUs  tend  to  occur 
later  in  life  than  duodenal  lesions,  with 
a  peak  incidence  reported  in  the  sixth 
decade. More than one-half of GUs occur 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2437

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2438 in  males  and  are  less  common  than  DUs,  perhaps  due  to  the  higher 
likelihood of GUs being silent and presenting only after a complication 
develops. Autopsy studies suggest a similar incidence of DUs and GUs.
Pathology  •  DUODENAL  ULCERS  DUs  occur  most  often  in  the 
first portion of the duodenum (>95%), with ~90% located within 3 cm 
of the pylorus. They are usually ≤1 cm in diameter but can occasionally 
reach 3–6 cm (giant ulcer). Ulcers are sharply demarcated, with depth 
at times reaching the muscularis propria. The base of the ulcer often 
consists of a zone of eosinophilic necrosis with surrounding fibrosis. 
Malignant DUs are extremely rare.

GASTRIC ULCERS  In contrast to DUs, GUs can represent a malignancy 
and  should  be  biopsied  upon  discovery.  Benign  GUs  are  most  often 
found distal to the junction between the antrum and the acid secretory 
mucosa. Benign GUs are quite rare in the gastric fundus and are histo-
logically similar to DUs. Benign GUs associated with H. pylori are also 
associated with antral gastritis. In contrast, NSAID-related GUs are not 
accompanied by chronic active gastritis but may instead have evidence 
of a chemical gastropathy, typified by foveolar hyperplasia, edema of 
the  lamina  propria,  and  epithelial  regeneration  in  the  absence  of  H. 
pylori. Extension of smooth-muscle fibers into the upper portions of 
the mucosa, where they are not typically found, may also occur.

Pathophysiology  •  DUODENAL  ULCERS  H.  pylori  and  NSAID- 
induced injuries account for the majority of DUs. Many acid secretory 
abnormalities  have  been  described  in  DU  patients.  Of  these,  average 
basal  and  nocturnal  gastric  acid  secretion  appears  to  be  increased  in 
DU  patients  as  compared  to  controls;  however,  the  level  of  overlap 
between DU patients and control subjects is substantial. The reason for 
this altered secretory process is unclear, but H. pylori infection may con-
tribute. Bicarbonate secretion is significantly decreased in the duodenal 
bulb  of  patients  with  an  active  DU  as  compared  to  control  subjects.  
H. pylori infection may also play a role in this process (see below).

GASTRIC ULCERS  As in DUs, the majority of GUs can be attributed to 
either H. pylori or NSAID-induced mucosal damage. Prepyloric GUs or 
those in the body associated with a DU or a duodenal scar are similar 
in  pathogenesis  to  DUs.  Gastric  acid  output  (basal  and  stimulated) 
tends to be normal or decreased in GU patients. When GUs develop 
in the presence of minimal acid levels, impairment of mucosal defense 
factors may be present. GUs have been classified based on their loca-
tion: type I occur in the gastric body and tend to be associated with low 
gastric acid production; type II occur in the antrum, and gastric acid 
can vary from low to normal; type III occur within 3 cm of the pylorus 
and are commonly accompanied by DUs and normal or high gastric 
acid production; and type IV are found in the cardia and are associated 
with low gastric acid production.
H.  PYLORI  AND  ACID  PEPTIC  DISORDERS  Gastric  infection  with  the 
bacterium H. pylori accounts for the majority of PUD (Chap. 163). This 
organism also plays a role in the development of gastric mucosa-associ-
ated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and gastric adenocarcinoma. 
Although the entire genome of H. pylori has been sequenced, it is still 
not  clear  how  this  organism,  which  resides  in  the  stomach,  causes 
ulceration  in  the  duodenum.  H.  pylori  eradication  efforts  may  lead 
to  a  decrease  in  gastric  cancer  in  high-risk  populations,  particularly 
in individuals who have not developed chronic atrophic gastritis and 
gastric metaplasia.
The Bacterium  The bacterium, initially named Campylobacter pyloridis, 
is  a  gram-negative  microaerophilic  rod  found  most  commonly  in 
the deeper portions of the mucous gel coating the gastric mucosa or 
between the mucous layer and the gastric epithelium. It may attach to 
gastric  epithelium  but  under  normal  circumstances  does  not  appear 
to invade cells. It is strategically designed to live within the aggressive 
environment  of  the  stomach.  It  is  S-shaped  (~0.5–3  μm  in  size)  and 
contains  multiple  sheathed  flagella.  Initially,  H.  pylori  resides  in  the 
antrum but, over time, migrates toward the more proximal segments 
of the stomach. The organism is capable of transforming into a coccoid 
form, which represents a dormant state that may facilitate survival in 
adverse conditions. The genome of H. pylori (1.65 million base pairs) 

encodes  ~1500  proteins.  Among  this  multitude  of  proteins  there  are 
factors  that  are  essential  determinants  of  H.  pylori–mediated  patho-
genesis  and  colonization  such  as  the  outer  membrane  protein  (Hop 
proteins),  urease,  and  the  vacuolating  cytotoxin  (Vac  A).  Moreover, 
the  majority  of  H.  pylori  strains  contain  a  genomic  fragment  that 
encodes  the  cag  pathogenicity  island  (cag-PAI).  Several  of  the  genes 
that make up cag-PAI encode components of a type IV secretion island 
that  translocates  Cag  A  into  host  cells.  Once  in  the  cell,  Cag  A  acti-
vates a series of cellular events important in cell growth and cytokine 
production. H. pylori also has extensive genetic diversity that in turn 
enhances its ability to promote disease. The first step in infection by 
H. pylori is dependent on the bacteria’s motility and its ability to pro-
duce urease. Urease produces ammonia from urea, an essential step in 
alkalinizing the surrounding pH. Additional bacterial factors include 
catalase, lipase, adhesins, platelet-activating factor, and pic B (induces 
cytokines). Multiple strains of H. pylori exist and are characterized by 
their ability to express several of these factors (Cag A, Vac A, etc.). It is 
possible that the different diseases related to H. pylori infection can be 
attributed to different strains of the organism with distinct pathogenic 
features.
Epidemiology  The prevalence of H. pylori varies throughout the world 
and depends largely on the overall standard of living in the region. In 
developing parts of the world, 80% of the population may be infected 
by the age of 20, whereas the prevalence is 20–50% in industrialized 
countries.  In  contrast,  in  the  United  States,  this  organism  is  rare  in 
childhood. The overall prevalence of H. pylori in the United States is 
~30%, with individuals born before 1950 having a higher rate of infec-
tion than those born later. About 10% of Americans <30 years of age 
are colonized with the bacteria. The rate of infection with H. pylori in 
industrialized countries has decreased substantially in recent decades. 
The steady increase in the prevalence of H. pylori noted with increasing 
age is due primarily to a cohort effect, reflecting higher transmission 
during a period in which the earlier cohorts were children. It has been 
calculated  through  mathematical  models  that  improved  sanitation 
during the latter half of the nineteenth century dramatically decreased 
transmission of H. pylori. Moreover, with the present rate of interven-
tion, the organism will be ultimately eliminated from the United States. 
Two factors that predispose to higher colonization rates include poor 
socioeconomic  status  and  less  education.  These  factors,  not  race,  are 
responsible for the rate of H.  pylori infection in blacks and Hispanic 
Americans  being  double  the  rate  seen  in  whites  of  comparable  age. 
Other risk factors for H. pylori infection are (1) birth or residence in a 
developing country, (2) domestic crowding, (3) unsanitary living con-
ditions, (4) unclean food or water, and (5) exposure to gastric contents 
of an infected individual.

Transmission of H. pylori occurs from person to person, following 
an oral-oral or fecal-oral route. The risk of H. pylori infection is declin-
ing in developing countries. The rate of infection in the United States 
has fallen by >50% when compared to 30 years ago.

Pathophysiology  H. pylori infection is virtually always associated with 
a  chronic  active  gastritis,  but  only  10–15%  of  infected  individu-
als  develop  frank  peptic  ulceration.  The  basis  for  this  difference  is 
unknown but is likely due to a combination of host and bacterial fac-
tors, some of which are outlined below. Initial studies suggested that 
>90% of all DUs were associated with H. pylori, but H. pylori is present 
in only 30–60% of individuals with GUs and 50–70% of patients with 
DUs.  The  pathophysiology  of  ulcers  not  associated  with  H.  pylori  or 
NSAID  ingestion  (or  the  rare  Zollinger-Ellison  syndrome  [ZES])  is 
becoming more relevant as the incidence of H. pylori is dropping, par-
ticularly in the Western world (see below).

The  particular  end  result  of  H.  pylori  infection  (gastritis,  PUD, 
gastric MALT lymphoma, gastric cancer) is determined by a complex 
interplay between bacterial and host factors (Fig. 324-6).

Bacterial  factors:  H.  pylori  is  able  to  facilitate  gastric  residence, 
induce  mucosal  injury,  and  avoid  host  defense.  Different  strains  of 
H.  pylori  produce  different  virulence  factors  including  γ-glutamyl 
transpeptidase (GGT), cytotoxin-associated gene A (Cag A) product, 
and  virulence  components  vacuolating  toxin  (Vac  A),  in  addition  to 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2438

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemBacterial factors
    Structure
    Adhesins
    Porins
    Enzymes
      (urease, vac A, cag A, etc.)

Host factors
    Duration
    Location
    Inflammatory response
    Genetics??

Chronic gastritis
Peptic ulcer disease
Gastric MALT lymphoma
Gastric cancer

FIGURE  324-6  Outline  of  the  bacterial  and  host  factors  important  in  determining  
H. pylori–induced gastrointestinal disease. MALT, mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.

pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) such as flagella and 
lipopolysaccharide  (LPS).  A  specific  region  of  the  bacterial  genome, 
the pathogenicity island (cag-PAI), encodes the virulence factors Cag 
A and pic B. Vac A also contributes to pathogenicity, although it is not 
encoded  within  the  pathogenicity  island.  These  virulence  factors,  in 
conjunction with additional bacterial constituents, can cause mucosal 
damage, in part through their ability to target the host immune cells. 
For example, Vac A targets human CD4 T cells, inhibiting their pro-
liferation, and in addition can disrupt normal function of B cells, CD8 
T  cells,  macrophages,  and  mast  cells.  Multiple  studies  have  demon-
strated  that  H.  pylori  strains  that  are  cag-PAI  positive  are  associated 
with  a  higher  risk  of  PUD,  premalignant  gastric  lesions,  and  gastric 
cancer  than  are  strains  that  lack  the  cag-PAI.  In  addition,  H.  pylori 
may directly inhibit parietal cell H+,K+-ATPase activity through a Cag 
A–dependent mechanism, leading in part to the low acid production 
observed after acute infection with the organism. Urease, which allows 
the bacteria to reside in the acidic stomach, generates NH3, which can 
damage  epithelial  cells.  The  bacteria  produce  surface  factors  that  are 
chemotactic for neutrophils and monocytes, which in turn contribute 
to  epithelial  cell  injury  (see  below).  H.  pylori  makes  proteases  and 
phospholipases  that  break  down  the  glycoprotein  lipid  complex  of 
the mucous gel, thus reducing the efficacy of this first line of mucosal 
defense.  H.  pylori  expresses  adhesins  (outer  membrane  proteins  like 
BabA), which facilitate attachment of the bacteria to gastric epithelial 
cells. Although LPS of gram-negative bacteria often plays an important 
role in the infection, H. pylori LPS has low immunologic activity com-
pared to that of other organisms. It may promote a smoldering chronic 
inflammation.

Host  factors:  Studies  in  twins  suggest  that  there  may  be  genetic 
predisposition to acquire H. pylori. The inflammatory response to H. 
pylori  includes  recruitment  of  neutrophils,  lymphocytes  (T  and  B), 
macrophages, and plasma cells. The pathogen leads to local injury by 
binding to class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules 
expressed  on  gastric  epithelial  cells,  leading  to  cell  death  (apoptosis). 
Moreover,  bacterial  strains  that  encode  cag-PAI  can  introduce  Cag 
A  into  the  host  cells,  leading  to  further  cell  injury  and  activation  of 
cellular  pathways  involved  in  cytokine  production  and  repression  of 
tumor-suppressor genes. Elevated concentrations of multiple cytokines 
are  found  in  the  gastric  epithelium  of  H.  pylori–infected  individuals, 
including interleukin (IL) 1α/β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) α, and interferon (IFN) γ. H. pylori infection also leads to both 
a  mucosal  and  a  systemic  humoral  response,  which  does  not  lead  to 
eradication of the bacteria but further compounds epithelial cell injury. 
Additional  mechanisms  by  which  H.  pylori  may  cause  epithelial  cell 
injury  include  (1)  activated  neutrophil-mediated  production  of  reac-
tive oxygen or nitrogen species and enhanced epithelial cell turnover 
and (2) apoptosis related to interaction with T cells (T helper 1 [TH1] 
cells)  and  IFN-γ.  Finally,  the  human  stomach  is  colonized  by  a  host 

of  commensal  organisms  that  may  affect  the  likelihood  of  H.  pylori 
infection  and  subsequent  mucosal  injury.  Moreover,  colonization  of 
the stomach with H. pylori likely alters the composition of the gastric 
microbiota. The impact of the latter on gastric pathophysiology remains 
unknown. H. pylori also appears to regulate NO formation via different 
mechanisms  that  in  turn  may  contribute  to  the  organism’s  cytotoxic 
effects. Specifically, H. pylori–derived factors, such as urease, or the bac-
terium itself, stimulate NO synthase (NOS2) expression in macrophages 
and in gastric epithelial cells leading to NO release and subsequent cyto-
toxic effect on surrounding cells. H. pylori also leads to the formation of 
8-nitroguanine (8-NO2-Gua), which in conjunction with oncoprotein 
Cag A, may contribute to the development of gastric cancer.

The  reason  for  H.  pylori–mediated  duodenal  ulceration  remains 
unclear. Studies suggest that H. pylori associated with duodenal ulcer-
ation  may  be  more  virulent.  In  addition,  certain  specific  bacterial 
factors such as the DU-promoting gene A (dupA) may be associated 
with  the  development  of  DUs.  Another  potential  contributing  factor 
is that gastric metaplasia in the duodenum of DU patients, which may 
be due to high acid exposure (see below), permits H. pylori to bind to 
it  and  produce  local  injury  secondary  to  the  host  response.  Another 
hypothesis  is  that  H.  pylori  antral  infection  could  lead  to  increased 
acid  production,  increased  duodenal  acid,  and  mucosal  injury.  Basal 
and stimulated (meal, gastrin-releasing peptide [GRP]) gastrin release 
is  increased  in  H.  pylori–infected  individuals,  and  somatostatin- 
secreting  D  cells  may  be  decreased.  H.  pylori  infection  might  induce 
increased  acid  secretion  through  both  direct  and  indirect  actions  of 
H. pylori and proinflammatory cytokines (IL-8, TNF, and IL-1) on G, 
D, and parietal cells (Fig. 324-7). GUs, in contrast, are associated with 
H.  pylori–induced  pangastritis  and  normal  or  low  gastric  acid  secre-
tion.  The  H.  pylori–mediated  decrease  in  gastric  acid  secretion  after 
long-term  infection  may  be  due  to  the  bacterium’s  ability  to  inhibit 
H+,K+-ATPase expression. H. pylori infection has also been associated 
with decreased duodenal mucosal bicarbonate production. Data sup-
porting and contradicting each of these interesting theories have been 
demonstrated.  Thus,  the  mechanism  by  which  H.  pylori  infection  of 
the  stomach  leads  to  duodenal  ulceration  remains  to  be  established. 
The  development  of  in  vitro  organoids,  a  unique  tool  that  replicates 
in part the multicellular structure of the intact organ, provides a more 
physiologic model for experimentation in an invitro system. Moreover, 
the development of advanced microscopic optical imaging techniques 

Vagus

Acetylcholine

Parietal cell

FUNDUS

Canaliculus

2439

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Histamine
+

ECL cell

–
Somatostatin

D cell

ANTRUM

+

+
Histamine

H, K ATPase

Tubulovesicles

+

–

ECL cell

Somatostatin

+

Gastrin

Blood vessel

Gastrin

G cell

D cell

–
Somatostatin

FIGURE  324-7  Summary  of  potential  mechanisms  by  which  H.  pylori  may  lead  to 
gastric secretory abnormalities. D, somatostatin cell; ECL, enterochromaffin-like cell; 
G, G cell. (Reproduced with permission from J Calam et al: How does Helicobacter pylori 
cause mucosal damage? Its effect on acid and gastrin physiology. Gastroenterology 
113:543, 1997.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2439

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2440

High level of acid production

Duodenal ulcer

Antral-
predominant
gastritis

Nonatrophic
pangastritis

Corpus-
predominant
atrophic
gastritis

MALT
lymphoma

Asymptomatic
H. pylori
infection

Gastric ulcer

Intestinal metaplasia

Dysplasia

Gastric
cancer

Normal gastric
mucosa

Chronic
H. pylori
infection

Acute
H. pylori
infection

Low level of acid production

Childhood

Advanced age

FIGURE  324-8  Natural  history  of  H.  pylori  infection.  MALT,  mucosal-associated 
lymphoid tissue. (From S Suerbaum, P Michetti: Helicobacter pylori infection. N Engl J 
Med 347:1175, 2002. Copyright © 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with 
permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.)

will  lead  to  increased  understanding  of  parietal  cell  adaptation  to 
H. pylori infection.

In summary, the final effect of H. pylori on the GI tract is variable 
and  determined  by  microbial  and  host  factors.  The  type  and  distri-
bution  of  gastritis  correlate  with  the  ultimate  gastric  and  duodenal 
pathology  observed.  Specifically,  the  presence  of  antral-predominant 
gastritis is associated with DU formation; gastritis involving primarily 
the corpus predisposes to the development of GUs, gastric atrophy, and 
ultimately gastric carcinoma (Fig. 324-8).

NSAID-INDUCED DISEASE 
Epidemiology  NSAIDs represent a group of the most commonly used 
medications  in  the  world  and  the  United  States.  It  is  estimated  that  
7  billion  dollars  per  year  are  spent  on  NSAIDs  worldwide,  with  >30  bil-
lion  over-the-counter  tablets  sold.  More  than  30  million  individuals 
take  NSAIDs,  with  >100  million  prescriptions  sold  yearly  in  the 
United States alone. In fact, after the introduction of COX-2 inhibitors 
in the year 2000, the number of prescriptions written for NSAIDs was 
>111 million at a cost of $4.8 billion. Side effects and complications due 
to NSAIDs are considered the most common drug-related toxicities in 
the United States. The spectrum of NSAID-induced morbidity ranges 
from nausea and dyspepsia (prevalence reported as high as 50–60%) 
to  a  serious  GI  complication  such  as  endoscopy-documented  peptic 
ulceration  (15–30%  of  individuals  taking  NSAIDs  regularly),  which 
is complicated by bleeding or perforation in as many as 1.5% of users 
per  year.  It  is  estimated  that  NSAID-induced  GI  bleeding  accounts 
for  60,000–120,000  hospital  admissions  per  year,  and  deaths  related 
to NSAID-induced toxicity may be as high as 16,000 per year in the 
United  States.  Approximately  4–5%  of  patients  develop  symptomatic 
ulcers  within  1  year.  Unfortunately,  dyspeptic  symptoms  do  not  cor-
relate with NSAID-induced pathology. Over 80% of patients with seri-
ous NSAID-related complications did not have preceding dyspepsia. In 
view of the lack of warning signs, it is important to identify patients who 
are at increased risk for morbidity and mortality related to NSAID usage. 
Even 75 mg/d of aspirin may lead to serious GI ulceration; thus, no dose 
of  NSAID  is  completely  safe.  In  fact,  the  incidence  of  mucosal  injury 
(ulcers  and  erosions)  in  patients  taking  low-dose  aspirin  (75–325  mg) 
has been estimated to range from as low as 8 to as high as 60%. It appears 
that H. pylori infection increases the risk of PUD-associated GI bleeding 
in  chronic  users  of  low-dose  aspirin.  Established  risk  factors  include 
advanced age, history of ulcer, concomitant use of glucocorticoids, high-
dose NSAIDs, multiple NSAIDs, concomitant use of anticoagulants or 
clopidogrel,  and  serious  or  multisystem  disease.  Possible  risk  factors 
include  concomitant  infection  with  H.  pylori,  cigarette  smoking,  and 

Gastrointestinal mucosal injury

Mitochondrial uncoupling
Reactive prooxidants
MOS
ATP

M itochondrial fission
Mucosal PGHS-1
PGE 2
Mucosal defense
Intestinal mucosal barrier function
Mucosal inflammation
Apoptosis

FIGURE 324-9  Effect of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on different 
target  organs.  The  action  of  NSAIDs  on  major  organs  including  stomach,  small 
intestine, heart, liver, kidney, respiratory tract, and brain is mainly mediated through 
prostaglandin  endoperoxide  synthase  (PGHS)–dependent  prostanoid  modulation 
and  alteration  of  mitochondrial  functional  integrity  leading  to  mitochondrial 
oxidative stress (MOS) generation, depolarization of mitochondrial transmembrane 
potential  (ΔΨm),  and  consequent  cell  death.  However,  in  heart,  low-dose  aspirin 
actually  offers  cardioprotection  through  antithrombotic  effect.  Upward  arrows 
indicate  upregulation/elevation;  downward  arrows 
indicate  downregulation/
depletion. (From S Bindu et al: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
organ damage: A current perspective. Biochem Pharmacol 180:114147, 2020.)

alcohol consumption. SSRIs have a synergistic effect on the induction of 
GI bleeding believed to be due in part to this agent’s ability to decrease 
platelet aggregation by decreasing serotonin content in platelets.
Pathophysiology  Prostaglandins  play  a  critical  role  in  maintaining 
gastroduodenal mucosal integrity and repair. It therefore follows that 
interruption  of  prostaglandin  synthesis  can  impair  mucosal  defense 
and repair, thus facilitating mucosal injury via a systemic mechanism. 
Animal  studies  have  demonstrated  that  neutrophil  adherence  to  the 
gastric  microcirculation  plays  an  essential  role  in  the  initiation  of 
NSAID-induced mucosal injury. A summary of the pathogenetic path-
ways by which systemically administered NSAIDs may lead to mucosal 
injury is shown in Fig. 324-9. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
have  been  found  in  several  genes,  including  those  encoding  certain 
subtypes of cytochrome P450 (see below), IL-1β (IL-1β), angiotensino-
gen (AGT), and an organic ion transporting polypeptide (SLCO1B1), 
but these findings need confirmation in larger-scale studies.

Injury  to  the  mucosa  also  occurs  as  a  result  of  the  topical  use  of 
NSAIDs, leading to increased epithelial surface permeability. Aspirin 
and many NSAIDs are weak acids that remain in a nonionized lipoph-
ilic  form  when  found  within  the  acid  environment  of  the  stomach. 
Under  these  conditions,  NSAIDs  migrate  across  lipid  membranes  of 
epithelial cells, leading to cell injury once trapped intracellularly in an 
ionized form. Topical NSAIDs can also alter the surface mucous layer, 
permitting back diffusion of H+ and pepsin, leading to further epithe-
lial cell damage. Moreover, enteric-coated or buffered preparations are 
also associated with risk of peptic ulceration. NSAIDs can also lead to 
mucosal injury via production of additional proinflammatory media-
tors such as TNF and leukotrienes through simultaneous activation of 
the lipoxygenase pathway.

The  interplay  between  H.  pylori  and  NSAIDs  in  the  pathogenesis 
of  PUD  is  complex.  Meta-analysis  supports  the  conclusion  that  each 
of these aggressive factors is an independent and synergistic risk fac-
tor for PUD and its complications such as GI bleeding. For example, 
eradication of H. pylori reduces the likelihood of GI complications in 
high-risk individuals to levels observed in individuals with average risk 
of NSAID-induced complications.

In summary, NSAID-induced mucosal injury is a multifaceted pro-
cess involving the interaction of multiple, often synergistic pathophysi-
ologic processes at the epithelium and surrounding interfaces.
PATHOGENETIC  FACTORS  UNRELATED  TO  H.  PYLORI  AND  NSAIDS  IN 
ACID  PEPTIC  DISEASE  Cigarette  smoking  has  been  implicated  in 
the pathogenesis of PUD. Not only have smokers been found to have 
ulcers  more  frequently  than  do  nonsmokers,  but  smoking  appears 
to  decrease  healing  rates,  impair  response  to  therapy,  and  increase 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2440

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemulcer-related  complications  such  as  perforation.  The  mechanism 
responsible  for  increased  ulcer  diathesis  in  smokers  is  unknown. 
Theories  have  included  altered  gastric  emptying,  decreased  proxi-
mal  duodenal  bicarbonate  production,  increased  risk  for  H.  pylori 
infection,  and  cigarette-induced  generation  of  noxious  mucosal  free 
radicals. Genetic predisposition may play a role in ulcer development. 
First-degree relatives of DU patients are three times as likely to develop 
an ulcer; however, the potential role of H. pylori infection in contacts is 
a major consideration. Increased frequencies of blood group O and of 
the nonsecretor status have also been implicated as genetic risk factors 
for peptic diathesis. However, H. pylori preferentially binds to group O 
antigens. Additional genetic factors have been postulated to predispose 
certain individuals to developing PUD and/or upper GI bleeding. Spe-
cifically, genes encoding the NSAID-metabolizing enzymes cytochrome 
P450 2C9 and 2C8 (CYP2C9 and CYP2C8) are potential susceptibility 
genes for NSAID-induced PUD, but unfortunately, the studies have not 
been consistent in demonstrating this association. In a United Kingdom 
study, the CYP2C19*17 gain-of-function polymorphism was associated 
with PUD in a Caucasian cohort, irrespective of ulcer etiology. These 
findings need to be confirmed in broader studies. Psychological stress 
has been thought to contribute to PUD, but studies examining the role 
of  psychological  factors  in  its  pathogenesis  have  generated  conflicting 
results. Although PUD is associated with certain personality traits (neu-
roticism), these same traits are also present in individuals with nonulcer 
dyspepsia (NUD) and other functional and organic disorders.

Diet has also been thought to play a role in peptic diseases. Certain 
foods  and  beverages  can  cause  dyspepsia,  but  no  convincing  studies 
indicate  an  association  between  ulcer  formation  and  a  specific  diet. 
Specific  chronic  disorders  have  been  shown  to  have  a  strong  associ-
ation  with  PUD:  (1)  advanced  age,  (2)  chronic  pulmonary  disease, 
(3)  chronic  renal  failure,  (4)  cirrhosis,  (5)  nephrolithiasis,  (6)  α1-an-
titrypsin  deficiency,  and  (7)  systemic  mastocytosis.  Disorders  with  a 
possible association are (1) hyperparathyroidism, (2) coronary artery 
disease,  (3)  polycythemia  vera,  (4)  chronic  pancreatitis,  (5)  former 
alcohol  use,  (6)  obesity,  (7)  African-American  race,  and  (8)  three  or 
more doctor visits in a year.

Multiple  factors  play  a  role  in  the  pathogenesis  of  PUD.  The 
two predominant causes are H. pylori infection and NSAID ingestion. 
PUD not related to H. pylori or NSAIDs is increasing. Other less com-
mon causes of PUD are shown in Table 324-1. These etiologic agents 
should be considered as the incidence of H. pylori is decreasing. Inde-
pendent of the inciting or injurious agent, peptic ulcers develop as a 
result of an imbalance between mucosal protection/repair and aggres-
sive factors. Gastric acid plays an important role in mucosal injury.

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
History  Abdominal pain is common to many GI disorders, includ-
ing  DU  and  GU,  but  it  has  a  poor  predictive  value  for  the  presence 
of  either  DU  or  GU.  Approximately  two-thirds  of  patients  with 
PUD  do  not  have  abdominal  pain,  and  up  to  87%  of  patients  with 
NSAID-induced  mucosal  disease  can  present  with  a  complication 
(bleeding,  perforation,  and  obstruction)  without  antecedent  symp-
toms.  Despite  this  poor  correlation,  a  careful  history  and  physical 
examination  are  essential  components  of  the  approach  to  a  patient 
suspected of having peptic ulcers.

Epigastric pain described as a burning or gnawing discomfort can 
be present in both DU and GU. The discomfort is also described as an 
ill-defined, aching sensation or as hunger pain. The typical pain pattern 
in DU occurs 90 min to 3 h after a meal and is frequently relieved by 
antacids  or  food.  Pain  that  awakes  the  patient  from  sleep  (between 
midnight and 3 a.m.) is the most discriminating symptom, with two-
thirds  of  DU  patients  describing  this  complaint.  Unfortunately,  this 
symptom is also present in one-third of patients with NUD (see below). 
Elderly  patients  are  less  likely  to  have  abdominal  pain  as  a  manifes-
tation  of  PUD  and  may  instead  present  with  a  complication  such  as 
ulcer bleeding or perforation. The pain pattern in GU patients may be 
different from that in DU patients, where discomfort may actually be 
precipitated by food. Nausea and weight loss occur more commonly in 

TABLE 324-1  Causes of Ulcers Not Caused by Helicobacter pylori  
and NSAIDs
Pathogenesis of Non-Hp and Non-NSAID Ulcer Disease

2441

Infection
  Cytomegalovirus
  Herpes simplex virus
  Helicobacter heilmannii
Drug/Toxin
  Bisphosphonates
  Chemotherapy
  Clopidogrel
  Crack cocaine
  Glucocorticoids (when combined with NSAIDs)
  Mycophenolate mofetil
  Potassium chloride
Miscellaneous
  Basophilia in myeloproliferative disease
  Duodenal obstruction (e.g., annular pancreas)

Infiltrating disease
Ischemia

  Radiation therapy
  Eosinophilic infiltration
  Sarcoidosis
  Crohn’s disease

Idiopathic hypersecretory state

Abbreviations: Hp, H. pylori; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

GU patients. Endoscopy detects ulcers in <30% of patients who have 
dyspepsia.

The mechanism for development of abdominal pain in ulcer patients 
is unknown. Several possible explanations include acid-induced acti-
vation  of  chemical  receptors  in  the  duodenum,  enhanced  duodenal 
sensitivity  to  bile  acids  and  pepsin,  and  altered  gastroduodenal 
motility.

Variation  in  the  intensity  or  distribution  of  the  abdominal  pain, 
as  well  as  the  onset  of  associated  symptoms  such  as  nausea  and/or 
vomiting, may be indicative of an ulcer complication. Dyspepsia that 
becomes constant, is no longer relieved by food or antacids, or radi-
ates to the back may indicate a penetrating ulcer (pancreas). Sudden 
onset of severe, generalized abdominal pain may indicate perforation. 
Pain worsening with meals, nausea, and vomiting of undigested food 
suggest gastric outlet obstruction. Tarry stools or coffee-ground emesis 
indicate bleeding.

Physical Examination  Epigastric tenderness is the most frequent 
finding in patients with GU or DU. Pain may be found to the right of 
the midline in 20% of patients. Unfortunately, the predictive value of 
this finding is low. Physical examination is critically important for dis-
covering evidence of ulcer complication. Tachycardia and orthostasis 
suggest dehydration secondary to vomiting or active GI blood loss. A 
severely tender, board-like abdomen suggests a perforation. Presence 
of a succussion splash indicates retained fluid in the stomach, suggest-
ing gastric outlet obstruction.
PUD-Related Complications 
GASTROINTESTINAL  BLEEDING  GI  bleeding  is  the  most  common 
complication  observed  in  PUD.  Bleeding  is  estimated  to  occur  in 
19.4–57  per  100,000  individuals  in  a  general  population  or  in  ~15% 
of  patients.  Bleeding  and  complications  of  ulcer  disease  occur  more 
often in individuals >60 years of age. The 30-day mortality rate is as 
high as 2.5–10%. The higher incidence in the elderly is likely due to 
the increased use of NSAIDs in this group. In addition, up to 80% of 
the  mortality  in  PUD-related  bleeding  is  due  to  nonbleeding  causes 
such as multiorgan failure (24%), pulmonary complications (24%), and 
malignancy (34%).

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2441

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2442

Greater  than  50%  of  patients  with  ulcer-related  hemorrhage  bleed 

without any preceding warning signs or symptoms.
PERFORATION  The second most common ulcer-related complication 
is  perforation,  being  reported  in  as  many  as  6–7%  of  PUD  patients 
with  an  estimated  30-day  mortality  of  >20%.  Acute  abdominal  pain, 
tachycardia,  and  abdominal  rigidity  compose  the  classic  triad  asso-
ciated with this complication. It is essential to remember that elderly 
patients or individuals who are immunosuppressed may not have this 
classic presentation. As in the case of bleeding, the incidence of perfo-
ration in the elderly appears to be increasing secondary to increased 
use of NSAIDs. Perforation of DUs has become less common in light 
of  the  increased  rates  of  H.  pylori  eradication,  with  NSAID-induced 
GUs leading to perforation occurring more commonly. Penetration is 
a form of perforation in which the ulcer bed tunnels into an adjacent 
organ. DUs tend to penetrate posteriorly into the pancreas, leading to 
pancreatitis, whereas GUs tend to penetrate into the left hepatic lobe. 
Gastrocolic  fistulas  associated  with  GUs  have  also  been  described. 
Mortality for this complication can be >20% within 30 days.
GASTRIC  OUTLET  OBSTRUCTION  Gastric  outlet  obstruction  is  the 
least  common  ulcer-related  complication,  occurring  in  1–2%  of 
patients. A patient may have relative obstruction secondary to ulcer- 
related inflammation and edema in the peripyloric and duodenal region. 
This  process  often  resolves  with  ulcer  healing.  A  fixed,  mechanical 
obstruction secondary to scar formation in the peripyloric areas is also 
possible. The latter requires endoscopic (balloon dilation with or with-
out  placement  of  a  biodegradable  stent)  or  surgical  intervention  with 
a stricturoplasty or gastrojejunostomy. Signs and symptoms relative to 
mechanical  obstruction  may  develop  insidiously.  New  onset  of  early 
satiety, nausea, vomiting, increase of postprandial abdominal pain, and 
weight loss should make gastric outlet obstruction a possible diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis  The list of GI and non-GI disorders that 
can mimic ulceration of the stomach or duodenum is quite extensive. 
The  most  commonly  encountered  diagnosis  among  patients  seen  for 
upper abdominal discomfort is functional dyspepsia (FD) or essential 
dyspepsia, which refers to a group of heterogeneous disorders typified 
by upper abdominal pain without the presence of an ulcer. The symp-
toms can range from postprandial fullness and early satiety to epigas-
tric burning pain. The dichotomy of this symptom complex has led to 
the  identification  of  two  subcategories  of  FD  including  postprandial 
distress syndrome (PDS) and epigastric pain syndrome (EPS). Dyspep-
sia has been reported to occur in up to 30% of the U.S. population. Up 
to 80% of patients seeking medical care for dyspepsia have a negative 
diagnostic evaluation. The etiology of FD is not established, but recent 
studies  suggest  that  postinfectious  states,  certain  foods,  and  H.  pylori 
infection may contribute to the pathogenesis of this common disorder.

Several  additional  disease  processes  that  may  present  with  “ulcer-
like” symptoms include proximal GI tumors, gastroesophageal reflux, 
vascular disease, pancreaticobiliary disease (biliary colic, chronic pan-
creatitis), and gastroduodenal Crohn’s disease.

Diagnostic  Evaluation 
In  view  of  the  poor  predictive  value  of 
abdominal  pain  for  the  presence  of  a  gastroduodenal  ulcer  and  the 
multiple  disease  processes  that  can  mimic  this  disease,  the  clinician 
is often confronted with having to establish the presence of an ulcer. 
Documentation  of  an  ulcer  requires  either  a  radiographic  (barium 
study, rarely done in today’s environment) or an endoscopic procedure. 
However, a large percentage of patients with symptoms suggestive of an 
ulcer have NUD; testing for H. pylori and antibiotic therapy (see below) 
are appropriate for individuals who are otherwise healthy and <45 years 
of age, before embarking on a diagnostic evaluation (Chap. 45).

Barium studies of the proximal GI tract are rarely used as a first test 
for documenting an ulcer. The sensitivity of older single-contrast bar-
ium meals for detecting a DU is as high as 80%, with a double-contrast 
study providing detection rates as high as 90%. Sensitivity for detection 
is decreased in small ulcers (<0.5 cm), with presence of previous scar-
ring, or in postoperative patients. A DU appears as a well-demarcated 
crater, most often seen in the bulb (Fig. 324-10A). A GU may represent 
benign or malignant disease. Typically, a benign GU also appears as a 
discrete crater with radiating mucosal folds originating from the ulcer 
margin (Fig. 324-10B). Ulcers >3 cm in size or those associated with 
a mass are more often malignant. Unfortunately, up to 8% of GUs that 
appear  to  be  benign  by  radiographic  appearance  are  malignant  by 
endoscopy or surgery. Radiographic studies that show a GU must be 
followed by endoscopy and biopsy.

Endoscopy  provides  the  most  sensitive  and  specific  approach  for 
examining the upper GI tract (Fig. 324-11). In addition to permitting 
direct visualization of the mucosa, endoscopy facilitates photographic 
documentation  of  a  mucosal  defect  and  tissue  biopsy  to  rule  out 
malignancy  (GU)  or  H.  pylori.  Endoscopic  examination  is  particu-
larly helpful in identifying lesions too small to detect by radiographic 
examination, for evaluation of atypical radiographic abnormalities, or 
to determine if an ulcer is a source of blood loss.

Although  the  methods  for  diagnosing  H.  pylori  are  outlined  in 
Chap.  163,  a  brief  summary  will  be  included  here  (Table  324-2). 
Several biopsy urease tests have been developed (PyloriTek, CLOtest, 
Hpfast, Pronto Dry) that have a sensitivity and specificity of >90–95%. 
Several  noninvasive  methods  for  detecting  this  organism  have  been 
developed. Three types of studies routinely used include serologic test-
ing, the 13C- or 14C-urea breath test, and the fecal H. pylori (Hp) antigen 
test (monoclonal antibody test). A urinary Hp antigen test and a home 
breath test appear promising.

A

B

FIGURE 324-10  Barium study demonstrating (A) a benign duodenal ulcer and (B) a benign gastric ulcer.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2442

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2443

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

A

B

FIGURE 324-11  Endoscopy demonstrating (A) a benign duodenal ulcer and (B) a benign gastric ulcer.

Occasionally, specialized testing such as serum gastrin and gastric 
acid analysis may be needed in individuals with complicated or refrac-
tory  PUD  (see  “Zollinger-Ellison  Syndrome,”  below).  Screening  for 
aspirin or NSAIDs (blood or urine) may also be necessary in refractory 
H. pylori–negative PUD patients.

TREATMENT
Peptic Ulcer Disease

Before the discovery of H. pylori, the therapy of PUD was centered 
on the old dictum by Schwartz of “no acid, no ulcer.” Although acid 
secretion is still important in the pathogenesis of PUD, eradication 
of  H.  pylori  and  therapy/prevention  of  NSAID-induced  disease  is 
the mainstay of treatment. A summary of commonly used drugs for 
treatment of acid peptic disorders is shown in Table 324-3. 
ACID-NEUTRALIZING/INHIBITORY DRUGS
Antacids  Before we understood the important role of histamine 
in stimulating parietal cell activity, neutralization of secreted acid 
with antacids constituted the main form of therapy for peptic ulcers. 
They are now rarely, if ever, used as the primary therapeutic agent 
but  instead  are  often  used  by  patients  for  symptomatic  relief  of 
dyspepsia. The most commonly used agents are mixtures of alumi-
num  hydroxide  and  magnesium  hydroxide.  Aluminum  hydroxide 
can  produce  constipation  and  phosphate  depletion;  magnesium 
hydroxide  may  cause  loose  stools.  Many  of  the  commonly  used 

TABLE 324-2  Tests for Detection of Helicobacter pylori

TEST

SENSITIVITY/
SPECIFICITY, % COMMENTS

Invasive (Endoscopy/Biopsy Required)

Rapid urease

80–95/95–100

Histology

80–90/>95

Culture

—/—

Noninvasive

Serology

>80/>90

Urea breath test

>90/>90

Stool antigen

>90/>90

Simple, false negative with recent use of 
PPIs, antibiotics, or bismuth compounds
Requires pathology processing and 
staining; provides histologic information
Time-consuming, expensive, dependent 
on experience; allows determination of 
antibiotic susceptibility

Inexpensive, convenient; not useful for 
early follow-up
Simple, rapid; useful for early follow-up; 
false negatives with recent therapy (see 
rapid urease test); exposure to low-dose 
radiation with 14C test
Inexpensive, convenient

Abbreviation: PPIs, proton pump inhibitors.

antacids (e.g., Maalox, Mylanta) have a combination of both alumi-
num and magnesium hydroxide in order to avoid these side effects. 
The  magnesium-containing  preparation  should  not  be  used  in 
chronic renal failure patients because of possible hypermagnesemia, 
and aluminum may cause chronic neurotoxicity in these patients.

Calcium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate are potent antacids 
with  varying  levels  of  potential  problems.  The  long-term  use  of 
calcium  carbonate  (converts  to  calcium  chloride  in  the  stomach) 
can  lead  to  milk-alkali  syndrome  (hypercalcemia  and  hyperphos-
phatemia  with  possible  renal  calcinosis  and  progression  to  renal 
insufficiency). Sodium bicarbonate may induce systemic alkalosis. 
H2 Receptor Antagonists  Four of these agents are presently avail-
able (cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine), and their 
structures  share  homology  with  histamine.  Although  each  has 
different potency, all will significantly inhibit basal and stimulated 
acid secretion to comparable levels when used at therapeutic doses. 
Moreover, similar ulcer-healing rates are achieved with each drug 
when used at the correct dosage. Presently, this class of drug is often 
used for treatment of active ulcers (4–6 weeks) in combination with 
antibiotics directed at eradicating H. pylori (see below).

Cimetidine  was  the  first  H2  receptor  antagonist  used  for  the 
treatment  of  acid  peptic  disorders.  Cimetidine  may  have  weak 

TABLE 324-3  Drugs Used in the Treatment of Peptic Ulcer Disease
EXAMPLES
DRUG TYPE/MECHANISM

DOSE

Acid-Suppressing Drugs

  Antacids

  H2 receptor antagonists

  Proton pump inhibitors

Mylanta, Maalox, 
Tums, Gaviscon
Cimetidine
Ranitidine
Famotidine
Nizatidine
Omeprazole
Lansoprazole
Rabeprazole
Pantoprazole
Esomeprazole
Dexlansoprazole

Mucosal Protective Agents

  Sucralfate
  Prostaglandin analogue Misoprostol

Sucralfate

 Bismuth-containing 
compounds

Bismuth subsalicylate 
(BSS)

Abbreviation: hs, at bedtime (hora somni).

100–140 meq/L 1 and 3 h 
after meals and hs
400 mg bid
300 mg hs
40 mg hs
300 mg hs
20 mg/d
30 mg/d
20 mg/d
40 mg/d
20 mg/d
30 mg/d

1 g qid
200 μg qid
See anti–H. pylori 
regimens (Table 324-4)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2443

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2444

antiandrogenic side effects resulting in reversible gynecomastia and 
impotence, primarily in patients receiving high doses for prolonged 
periods  of  time  (months  to  years).  In  view  of  cimetidine’s  ability 
to  inhibit  cytochrome  P450,  careful  monitoring  of  drugs  such  as 
warfarin, phenytoin, and theophylline is indicated with long-term 
usage.  Other  rare  reversible  adverse  effects  reported  with  cimeti-
dine include confusion and elevated levels of serum aminotransfer-
ases, creatinine, and serum prolactin. Ranitidine, famotidine, and 
nizatidine are more potent H2 receptor antagonists than cimetidine. 
Each can be used once a day at bedtime for ulcer prevention, which 
was commonly done before the discovery of H. pylori and the devel-
opment  of  proton  pump  inhibitors  (PPIs).  Patients  may  develop 
tolerance to H2 blockers, a rare event with PPIs (see below). Compa-
rable nighttime dosing regimens are cimetidine 800 mg, ranitidine 
300 mg, famotidine 40 mg, and nizatidine 300 mg.

Additional  rare,  reversible  systemic  toxicities  reported  with  H2 
receptor antagonists include pancytopenia, neutropenia, anemia, and 
thrombocytopenia, with a prevalence rate varying from 0.01 to 0.2%. 
Cimetidine  and  ranitidine  (to  a  lesser  extent)  can  bind  to  hepatic 
cytochrome P450; famotidine and nizatidine do not. Ranitidine and 
nizatidine were taken off of the market due to contamination of the 
drug with N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a known carcinogen. 

Proton  Pump  (H+,K+-ATPase)  Inhibitors  Omeprazole,  esomepra-
zole,  lansoprazole,  rabeprazole,  and  pantoprazole  are  substituted 
benzimidazole  derivatives  that  covalently  bind  and  irreversibly 
inhibit  H+,K+-ATPase.  Esomeprazole  is  the  S-enantiomer  of  ome-
prazole,  which  is  a  racemic  mixture  of  both  S-  and  R-optical  iso-
mers.  The  R-isomer  of  lansoprazole,  dexlansoprazole,  is  the  most 
recent  PPI  approved  for  clinical  use.  Its  reported  advantage  is  a 
dual delayed-release system aimed at improving treatment of gas-
troesophageal  reflux  disease  (GERD).  These  are  the  most  potent 
acid  inhibitory  agents  available.  Omeprazole  and  lansoprazole 
are  the  PPIs  that  have  been  used  for  the  longest  time.  Both  are 
acid-labile  and  are  administered  as  enteric-coated  granules  in  a 
sustained-release capsule that dissolves within the small intestine at 
a pH of 6. Lansoprazole is available in an orally disintegrating tablet 
that can be taken with or without water, an advantage for individu-
als who have significant dysphagia. Absorption kinetics are similar 
to  the  capsule.  In  addition,  a  lansoprazole-naproxen  combination 
preparation that has been made available is targeted at decreasing 
NSAID-related  GI  injury  (see  below).  Omeprazole  is  available  as 
non–enteric-coated  granules  mixed  with  sodium  bicarbonate  in  a 
powder form that can be administered orally or via gastric tube. The 
sodium  bicarbonate  has  two  purposes:  to  protect  the  omeprazole 
from acid degradation and to promote rapid gastric alkalinization 
and  subsequent  proton  pump  activation,  which  facilitates  rapid 
action  of  the  PPI.  Pantoprazole  and  rabeprazole  are  available  as 
enteric-coated  tablets.  Pantoprazole  is  also  available  as  a  parent-
eral  formulation  for  intravenous  use.  These  agents  are  lipophilic 
compounds;  upon  entering  the  parietal  cell,  they  are  protonated 
and  trapped  within  the  acid  environment  of  the  tubulovesicular 
and canalicular system. These agents potently inhibit all phases of 
gastric  acid  secretion.  Onset  of  action  is  rapid,  with  a  maximum 
acid  inhibitory  effect  between  2  and  6  h  after  administration  and 
duration  of  inhibition  lasting  up  to  72–96  h.  With  repeated  daily 
dosing, progressive acid inhibitory effects are observed, with basal 
and  secretagogue-stimulated  acid  production  being  inhibited  by 
>95% after 1 week of therapy. The half-life of PPIs is ~18 h; thus, 
it can take between 2 and 5 days for gastric acid secretion to return 
to normal levels once these drugs have been discontinued. Because 
the pumps need to be activated for these agents to be effective, their 
efficacy is maximized if they are administered before a meal (except 
for the immediate-release formulation of omeprazole) (e.g., in the 
morning before breakfast). Mild to moderate hypergastrinemia has 
been  observed  in  patients  taking  these  drugs.  Carcinoid  tumors 
developed in some animals given the drugs preclinically; however, 
extensive  experience  has  failed  to  demonstrate  gastric  carcinoid 
tumor  development  in  humans.  Serum  gastrin  levels  return  to 

normal levels within 1–2 weeks after drug cessation. Rebound gas-
tric  acid  hypersecretion  has  been  described  in  H.  pylori–negative 
individuals after discontinuation of PPIs. It occurs even after rela-
tively short-term usage (2 months) and may last for up to 2 months 
after  the  PPI  has  been  discontinued.  The  mechanism  involves 
gastrin-induced hyperplasia and hypertrophy of histamine-secreting 
ECL cells. The clinical relevance of this observation is that individ-
uals  may  have  worsening  symptoms  of  GERD  or  dyspepsia  upon 
stopping the PPI. Gradual tapering of the PPI and switching to an 
H2 receptor antagonist may prevent this from occurring. H. pylori–
induced inflammation and concomitant decrease in acid production 
may explain why this does not occur in H. pylori–positive patients. 
IF production is also inhibited, but vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is 
uncommon, probably because of the large stores of the vitamin. As 
with any agent that leads to significant hypochlorhydria, PPIs may 
interfere with absorption of drugs such as ketoconazole, ampicillin, 
iron, and digoxin. Hepatic cytochrome P450 can be inhibited by the 
earlier PPIs (omeprazole, lansoprazole). Rabeprazole, pantoprazole, 
and esomeprazole do not appear to interact significantly with drugs 
metabolized  by  the  cytochrome  P450  system.  The  overall  clinical 
significance of this observation is not definitely established. Caution 
should be taken when using theophylline, warfarin, diazepam, ata-
zanavir, and phenytoin concomitantly with PPIs.

The  list  of  potential  side  effects  with  long-term  PPI  use  has 
steadily  grown  over  the  years.  These  agents  are  commonly  used 
since  several  formulations  have  become  available  as  over-the-
counter medications. Moreover, up to 70% of current prescriptions 
for long-term PPIs may be unwarranted and between 35 and 60% of 
in-hospital use of PPIs may be inappropriate. Interpretation of the 
multiple studies should take into consideration that the vast major-
ity were retrospective observational studies in which confounding 
factors could not be accounted for entirely.

Long-term acid suppression, especially with PPIs, has been asso-
ciated with a higher incidence of community-acquired pneumonia 
as well as community- and hospital-acquired Clostridium difficile–
associated disease. A meta-analysis showed a 74% increased risk of 
C. difficile infection and a 2.5-fold higher risk of reinfection as com-
pared to nonusers. In light of these concerns, the FDA published a 
safety alert regarding the association between C. difficile infection 
and PPI use. Although the risk of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
in  cirrhotics  was  thought  to  be  increased,  the  data  here  are  less 
supportive. The impact of PPI-induced changes in the host micro-
biome is postulated to play a role in the increased risk of infection, 
but this theory needs to be confirmed. These observations require 
confirmation but should alert the practitioner to take caution when 
recommending these agents for long-term use, especially in elderly 
patients at risk for developing pneumonia or C. difficile infection.

Diarrhea is also associated with PPI use, which in some cases has 
been associated with the development of collagenous colitis (haz-
ard  ratio  of  4.5),  particularly  with  lansoprazole.  The  mechanism 
for PPI-induced collagenous colitis is unclear, but in vitro studies 
demonstrate  that  PPIs  may  induce  collagen  gene  expression.  The 
colitis usually resolves with cessation of the PPI.

A population-based study revealed that long-term use of PPIs was 
associated with the development of hip fractures in older women. 
The absolute risk of fracture remained low and may be zero despite 
an observed increase associated with the dose and duration of acid 
suppression. The mechanism for this observation is not clear, and 
this finding must be confirmed before making broad recommenda-
tions regarding the discontinuation of these agents in patients who 
benefit from them. Long-term use of PPIs has also been implicated 
in the development of iron, vitamin B12, and magnesium deficiency. 
A meta-analysis of nine observational studies found a 40% increase 
in  hypomagnesemia  in  PPI  users  as  compared  to  nonusers.  One 
approach to consider in patients needing to take PPIs long term is to 
check a complete blood count looking for evidence of anemia due to 
iron or vitamin B12 deficiency, vitamin B12 level, and a magnesium 
level after 1–2 years of PPI use, but these recommendations are not 
evidence based or recommended by expert opinion. PPIs may exert 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2444

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systema negative effect on the antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel. Although 
the evidence is mixed and inconclusive, a small increase in mortal-
ity  and  readmission  rate  for  coronary  events  was  seen  in  patients 
receiving a PPI while on clopidogrel in earlier studies. Subsequently, 
three meta-analyses reported an inverse correlation between clopi-
dogrel and PPI use; therefore, the influence of this drug interaction 
on mortality is not clearly established. The mechanism involves the 
competition of the PPI and clopidogrel with the same cytochrome 
P450 (CYP2C19). Whether this is a class effect of PPIs is unclear; 
there appears to be at least a theoretical advantage of pantoprazole 
over  the  other  PPIs,  but  this  has  not  been  confirmed.  This  drug 
interaction  is  particularly  relevant  in  light  of  the  common  use  of 
aspirin and clopidogrel for prevention of coronary events and the 
efficacy  of  PPIs  in  preventing  GI  bleeding  in  these  patients.  The 
FDA  has  made  several  recommendations  while  awaiting  further 
evidence  to  clarify  the  impact  of  PPI  therapy  on  clopidogrel  use. 
Health care providers should continue to prescribe clopidogrel to 
patients who require it and should reevaluate the need for starting 
or  continuing  treatment  with  a  PPI.  From  a  practical  standpoint, 
additional  recommendations  to  consider  include  the  following: 
Patients  taking  clopidogrel  with  aspirin,  especially  with  other  GI 
risk  factors  for  bleeding,  should  receive  GI  protective  therapy. 
Although high-dose H2 blockers have been considered an option, 
these do not appear to be as effective as PPIs. If PPIs are to be given, 
some have recommended that there be a 12-h separation between 
administration of the PPI and clopidogrel to minimize competition 
of the two agents with the involved cytochrome P450. One option 
is  to  give  the  PPI  30  min  before  breakfast  and  the  clopidogrel  at 
bedtime.  Insufficient  data  are  available  to  firmly  recommend  one 
PPI over another. Additional concerning side effects with long-term 
PPI use include increased cardiac risks independent of clopidogrel 
use, dementia, and acute and chronic kidney injury. Again, the data 
are often retrospective and confounding variables were not consis-
tently  eliminated,  thus  making  it  difficult  to  establish  a  definitive 
association  between  PPIs  and  the  toxicities  outlined.  A  summary 
of  the  side  effects  with  the  corresponding  relative  risks  is  shown 
in Fig. 324–12. Ultimately, heightened awareness of inappropriate 
long-term use of PPIs is paramount. Patients aged ≥65 years of age 
have  a  higher  risk  for  some  of  the  long-term  side  effects  of  PPIs 
highlighted above, in part due to the higher prevalence of concom-
itant  chronic  diseases.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  carefully  select 
individuals, especially among the elderly, who need long-term PPI 
therapy and discontinue it in those individuals who do not need it. 
Abrupt withdrawal of a PPI in a long-term user may result in a com-
ponent of rebound hyperacidity; thus, this agent should be tapered 
gradually over the course of 1–2 weeks with possible transition to 
an H2 blocker for a short period of time.

Development  of  novel  acid  inhibitory  agents  continues  in  an 
attempt  to  primarily  address  the  need  for  better  agents  to  treat 

Bone fracture

C. difficile infection

Community-acquired
pneumonia
(2 studies)

Hypermagnesemia

Acute interstitial
nephritis

t
c
e
f
f
e

e
d
S

i

Acute kidney disease

Chronic
kidney disease

0
5
.
3

0
5
.
1

0
0
.
2

0
5
.
0

0
5
.
2

0
0
.
3

0
0
.
1

0
0
0
5
.
.
0
6
Adjusted odds ratio (95% confidence interval)
FIGURE  324-12.  Evidence  supporting  the  potential  adverse  effects  of 
proton pump inhibitor drugs. (Adapted from AJ Schoenfeld, D Grady: 
Adverse effects associated with proton pump inhibitors. JAMA Intern 
Med 176:172, 2016.)

0
0
.
5

0
5
.
5

0
0
.
6

0
5
.
4

0
0
.
4

2445

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

GERD.  For  example,  modified  H2  blockers  with  greater  potency 
and duration as well as novel PPIs with longer half-life and potency 
are under study. For example, tenatoprazole is a PPI containing an 
imidazopyridine ring instead of a benzimidazole ring, which pro-
motes irreversible proton pump inhibition. This agent has a longer 
half-life  than  the  other  PPIs  and  may  be  beneficial  for  inhibiting 
nocturnal acid secretion, which has significant relevance in GERD. 
Additional  PPIs  with  longer  half-life  and  combined  with  other 
agents are being studied, but the details are beyond the scope of this 
chapter. A second new class of agents is the potassium-competitive 
acid pump antagonists (P-CAPs). These compounds inhibit gastric 
acid secretion via potassium competitive binding of the H+,K+-AT-
Pase. Revaprazan, vonoprazan and tegoprazan are agents approved 
for  use  in  Korea  and  Japan.  Vonoprazan  may  be  superior  to  PPIs 
when combined with antibiotics for the treatment of H. pylori, and 
this novel agent has been awarded Fast Track status by the FDA for 
the treatment of H. pylori in combination with both amoxicillin and 
clarithromycin and with amoxicillin alone. 

CYTOPROTECTIVE AGENTS
Sucralfate  Sucralfate  is  a  complex  sucrose  salt  in  which  the 
hydroxyl groups have been substituted by aluminum hydroxide and 
sulfate. This compound is insoluble in water and becomes a viscous 
paste within the stomach and duodenum, binding primarily to sites 
of  active  ulceration.  Sucralfate  may  act  by  several  mechanisms: 
serving  as  a  physicochemical  barrier,  promoting  a  trophic  action 
by  binding  growth  factors  such  as  EGF,  enhancing  prostaglan-
din  synthesis,  stimulating  mucus  and  bicarbonate  secretion,  and 
enhancing  mucosal  defense  and  repair.  Toxicity  from  this  drug 
is  rare,  with  constipation  being  most  common  (2–3%).  It  should 
be avoided in patients with chronic renal insufficiency to prevent 
aluminum-induced  neurotoxicity.  Hypophosphatemia  and  gastric 
bezoar formation have also been reported rarely. Standard dosing 
of sucralfate is 1 g qid. 
Bismuth-Containing  Preparations  Sir  William  Osler  considered 
bismuth-containing  compounds  the  drug  of  choice  for  treating 
PUD. The resurgence in the use of these agents is due to their effect 
against H. pylori. Colloidal bismuth subcitrate (CBS) and bismuth 
subsalicylate (BSS; Pepto-Bismol) are the most widely used prepa-
rations. The mechanism by which these agents induce ulcer healing 
is unclear. Adverse effects with short-term use include black stools, 
constipation, and darkening of the tongue. Long-term use with high 
doses, especially with the avidly absorbed CBS, may lead to neuro-
toxicity. These compounds are commonly used as one of the agents 
in an anti–H. pylori regimen (see below). 
Prostaglandin  Analogues 
In  view  of  their  central  role  in  main-
taining mucosal integrity and repair, stable prostaglandin analogues 
were developed for the treatment of PUD. The mechanism by which 
this rapidly absorbed drug provides its therapeutic effect is through 
enhancement  of  mucosal  defense  and  repair.  The  most  common 
toxicity  noted  with  this  drug  is  diarrhea  (10–30%  incidence). 
Other  major  toxicities  include  uterine  bleeding  and  contractions; 
misoprostol  is  contraindicated  in  women  who  may  be  pregnant, 
and women of childbearing age must be made clearly aware of this 
potential drug toxicity. The standard therapeutic dose is 200 μg qid. 
Miscellaneous Drugs  A number of drugs including anticholiner-
gic agents and tricyclic antidepressants were used for treating acid 
peptic disorders, but in light of their toxicity and the development 
of potent antisecretory agents, these are rarely, if ever, used today. 
Newer  agents  such  as  teprenone,  an  acyclic  polyisoprenoid  com-
pound used as a gastric mucosal protector that is employed to treat 
gastritis  and  GUs  outside  of  the  United  States;  plant-based  thera-
pies;  and  CCK2  receptor  antagonists  are  intriguing  therapies  but 
require further evaluation. 

THERAPY OF H. PYLORI
The physician’s goal in treating PUD is to provide relief of symp-
toms  (pain  or  dyspepsia),  promote  ulcer  healing,  and  ultimately 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2445

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2446

prevent ulcer recurrence and complications. The greatest influence 
of understanding the role of H. pylori in peptic disease has been the 
ability to prevent recurrence. Documented eradication of H. pylori 
in patients with PUD is associated with a dramatic decrease in ulcer 
recurrence  to  <10–20%  as  compared  to  59%  in  GU  patients  and 
67% in DU patients when the organism is not eliminated. Eradica-
tion of the organism may lead to diminished recurrent ulcer bleed-
ing. The effect of its eradication on ulcer perforation is unclear.

Extensive effort has been made in determining who of the many 
individuals with H. pylori infection should be treated. The common 
conclusion  arrived  at  by  multiple  consensus  conferences  around 
the  world  is  that  H.  pylori  should  be  eradicated  in  patients  with 
documented  PUD.  This  holds  true  independent  of  time  of  pre-
sentation (first episode or not), severity of symptoms, presence of 
confounding factors such as ingestion of NSAIDs, or whether the 
ulcer is in remission. Some have advocated treating patients with a 
history of documented PUD who are found to be H. pylori positive 
by stool antigen or breath testing. Between 60 and 90% of patients 
with  gastric  MALT  lymphoma  experience  complete  remission  of 
the tumor in response to H. pylori eradication. The Maastricht IV/ 
Florence Consensus Report recommends a test-and-treat approach 
for  patients  with  uninvestigated  dyspepsia  if  the  local  incidence 
of  H.  pylori  is  >20%.  The  American  College  of  Gastroenterology 
(ACG)  clinical  guidelines  (developed  for  North  America)  recom-
mend that individuals aged <60 years with uninvestigated dyspepsia 
should be tested and treated for H. pylori. In addition, recommen-
dations from this consensus report and the ACG clinical guidelines 
include testing and offering eradication of H. pylori in patients who 
will be using NSAIDs (including low-dose aspirin) on a long-term 
basis, especially if there is a prior history of PUD. These individuals 
will  require  continued  PPI  treatment  as  well  as  eradication  treat-
ment, because eradication of the organism alone does not eliminate 
the  risk  of  gastroduodenal  ulcers  in  patients  already  receiving 
long-term NSAIDs. Treating patients with NUD to prevent gastric 
cancer or patients with GERD requiring long-term acid suppression 
remains  controversial.  Guidelines  from  the  ACG  suggest  eradica-
tion of H. pylori in patients who have undergone resection of early 
gastric cancer. The Maastricht IV/Florence Consensus Report also 
evaluated H. pylori treatment in gastric cancer prevention and rec-
ommends  that  eradication  should  be  considered  in  the  following 
situations: first-degree relatives of family members with gastric can-
cer; patients with previous gastric neoplasm treated by endoscopic 
or subtotal resection; individuals with a risk of gastritis (severe pan-
gastritis or body-predominant gastritis) or severe atrophy; patients 
with  gastric  acid  inhibition  for  >1  year;  individuals  with  strong 
environmental risk factors for gastric cancer (heavy smoking; high 
exposure to dust, coal, quartz, or cement; and/or work in quarries); 
and H. pylori–positive patients with a fear of gastric cancer. Finally, 
the  ACG  clinical  guidelines  recommend  testing  and  offering  H. 
pylori eradication to patients with unexplained iron deficiency ane-
mia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Despite this, con-
cerns have been raised about the widespread use of antibiotics for 
the therapy of all cases of H. pylori positivity, including the potential 
for  increased  bacterial  resistance  rates,  reported  weight  gain,  and 
alteration of the microbiome.

Multiple drugs have been evaluated in the therapy of H. pylori. 
No  single  agent  is  effective  in  eradicating  the  organism.  Combi-
nation therapy for 14 days provides the greatest efficacy, although 
regimens  based  on  sequential  administration  of  antibiotics  also 
appear  promising  (see  below).  A  shorter  administration  course 
(7–10  days),  although  attractive,  has  not  proved  as  successful  as 
the 14-day regimens. The agents used with the greatest frequency 
include  amoxicillin,  metronidazole,  tetracycline,  clarithromycin, 
and bismuth compounds.

Suggested  treatment  regimens  for  H.  pylori  are  outlined  in 
Table 324-4. Choice of a particular regimen will be influenced by 
several  factors,  including  efficacy,  patient  tolerance,  existing  anti-
biotic  resistance,  prior  antibiotic  use,  and  cost  of  the  drugs.  The 
aim  for  initial  eradication  rates  should  be  85–90%.  Dual  therapy 

(PPI plus amoxicillin, PPI plus clarithromycin, ranitidine bismuth 
citrate [Tritec] plus clarithromycin) is not recommended in view of 
studies demonstrating eradication rates of <80–85%. The combina-
tion of bismuth, metronidazole, and tetracycline was the first triple 
regimen found effective against H. pylori. The combination of two 
antibiotics plus either a PPI, H2 blocker, or bismuth compound has 
comparable  success  rates.  Addition  of  acid  suppression  assists  in 
providing early symptom relief and enhances bacterial eradication.
Triple therapy, although effective, has several drawbacks, includ-
ing the potential for poor patient compliance and drug-induced side 
effects. Compliance is being addressed by simplifying the regimens 
so that patients can take the medications twice a day. Simpler (dual 
therapy) and shorter regimens (7 and 10 days) are not as effective as 
triple therapy for 14 days. Two anti–H. pylori regimens are available 
in prepackaged formulation: Prevpac (lansoprazole, clarithromycin, 
and  amoxicillin)  and  Helidac  (BSS,  tetracycline,  and  metroni-
dazole). The contents of the Prevpac are to be taken twice per day 
for 14 days, whereas Helidac constituents are taken four times per 
day with an antisecretory agent (PPI or H2 blocker), also for at least 
14 days. Clarithromycin-based triple therapy should be avoided in 
settings where H. pylori resistance to this agent exceeds 15%.

Side effects have been reported in up to 20–30% of patients on 
triple  therapy.  Bismuth  may  cause  black  stools,  constipation,  or 
darkening of the tongue. The most feared complication with amox-
icillin  is  pseudomembranous  colitis,  but  this  occurs  in  <1–2%  of 
patients. Amoxicillin can also lead to antibiotic-associated diarrhea, 
nausea, vomiting, skin rash, and allergic reaction. Concomitant use 
of probiotics may ameliorate some of the antibiotic side effects (see 
below).  Tetracycline  has  been  reported  to  cause  rashes  and,  very 
rarely, hepatotoxicity and anaphylaxis.

One  important  concern  with  treating  patients  who  may  not 
need  therapy  is  the  potential  for  development  of  antibiotic- 
resistant  strains.  The  incidence  and  type  of  antibiotic-resistant   
H. pylori strains vary worldwide. Strains resistant to metronidazole, 
clarithromycin, amoxicillin, and tetracycline have been described, 
with  the  latter  two  being  uncommon.  Antibiotic-resistant  strains 
are  the  most  common  cause  for  treatment  failure  in  compliant 
patients. Unfortunately, in vitro resistance does not predict outcome 
in  patients.  Culture  and  sensitivity  testing  of  H.  pylori  is  not  per-
formed  routinely.  Although  resistance  to  metronidazole  has  been 
found  in  as  many  as  30%  of  isolates  in  North  America  and  80% 
in  developing  countries,  triple  therapy  is  effective  in  eradicating 
the  organism  in  >50%  of  patients  infected  with  a  resistant  strain. 
Clarithromycin resistance is seen in 13–16% of individuals in the 
United States, with resistance to amoxicillin being <1% and resis-
tance  to  both  metronidazole  and  clarithromycin  in  the  5%  range. 
Resistance to tetracycline and rifabutin (see below) is reported to 
be  <2%  in  the  United  States.  In  light  of  the  paucity  of  H.  pylori 
antibiotic real-time resistance data, asking the patient about prior 
antibiotic exposure should be included in the decision-making and 
used  as  a  surrogate  for  potential  antibiotic  resistance,  especially 
when it comes to prior macrolide use. Clarithromycin use should 
be excluded in patients with prior macrolide usage. An approach to 
antibiotic selection for H. pylori therapy has been recommended in 
the ACG clinical guidelines (Fig. 324-13).

Failure of H. pylori eradication with triple therapy in a compliant 
patient is usually due to infection with a resistant organism. A series 
of salvage therapies for H. pylori are shown in Table 324-5. Quadru-
ple  therapy  (Table  324-4),  where  clarithromycin  is  substituted  for 
metronidazole (or vice versa), should be the next step. The combi-
nation of PPI, amoxicillin, and rifabutin for 10 days has also been 
used successfully (86% cure rate) in patients infected with resistant 
strains.  Additional  regimens  considered  for  second-line  therapy 
include levofloxacin-based triple therapy (levofloxacin, amoxicillin, 
PPI)  for  10  days  and  furazolidone-based  triple  therapy  (furazoli-
done, amoxicillin, PPI) for 14 days. Unfortunately, there is no uni-
versally accepted treatment regimen recommended for patients in 
whom two courses of antibiotics have failed. If eradication is still not 
achieved in a compliant patient, then culture and sensitivity of the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2446

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 324-4  Recommended First-Line Therapies for H. pylori Infection
REGIMEN
Clarithromycin triple

DOSING FREQUENCY
bid

DURATION (DAYS)
14

FDA APPROVAL
Yesa

2447

Bismuth quadruple

Concomitant

Sequential

Hybrid

Levofloxacin triple

Levofloxacin sequential

LOAD

DRUGS (DOSES)
PPI (standard or double dose)
Clarithromycin (500 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g) or metronidazole (500 mg tid)
PPI (standard dose)
Bismuth subcitrate (120–300 mg) or subsalicylate (300 mg)
Tetracycline (500 mg)
Metronidazole (250–500 mg)

PPI (standard dose)
Clarithromycin (500 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g)
Nitroimidazole (500 mg)c
PPI (standard dose)
PPI, clarithromycin (500 mg) + nitroimidazole (500 mg)c
PPI (standard dose) + amoxicillin (1 g)
PPI, amoxicillin, clarithromycin (500 mg), nitroimidazole (500 mg)c
PPI (standard or double dose) + amoxicillin (1 g)
Levofloxacin (500 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g)
PPI (standard or double dose) + amoxicillin (1 g)
PPI, amoxicillin, levofloxacin (500 mg qd), nitroimidazole (500 mg)c
Levofloxacin (250 mg)
PPI (double dose)
Nitazoxanide (500 mg)
Doxycycline (100 mg)

10–14

Nob

10–14

5–7
5–7
7
7
5–7

5–7
5–7
7–10

No

No

No

No

No

No

bid
qid
qid
qid (250 mg)
tid to qid (500 mg)
bid

bid
bid
bid
bid
bid
qd
bid
bid
bid
qd
qd
bid
qd

aSeveral PPI, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin combinations have achieved FDA approval. The regimen of a PPI, clarithromycin, and metronidazole is not an FDA-approved 
treatment regimen. bThe regimen of a PPI, bismuth, tetracycline, and metronidazole combined with a PPI for 10 days is an FDA-approved treatment regimen. cMetronidazole 
or tinidazole.
Abbreviations: bid, twice daily; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; tid, three times daily; qd, once daily; qid, four times daily.
Source: Reproduced with permission from WD Chey et al: ACG clinical guideline: Treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol 112:212, 2017.

organism should be considered. One challenge with this approach 
is that culture and sensitivity testing is cumbersome and not widely  
available; thus, H. pylori resistance data within specific communi-
ties  are  often  not  available.  Non-culture-based  approaches  using 
molecular markers to determine potential resistance through stool 
testing are being developed but are not widely available. Additional 
factors that may lower eradication rates include the patient’s coun-
try of origin (higher in Northeast Asia than other parts of Asia or 
Europe) and cigarette smoking. In addition, meta-analysis suggests 
that even the most effective regimens (quadruple therapy including 
PPI,  bismuth,  tetracycline,  and  metronidazole  and  triple  therapy 
including PPI, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin) may have subopti-
mal eradication rates (<80%), thus demonstrating the need for the 
development of more efficacious treatments.

In view of the observation that 15–25% of patients treated with 
first-line  therapy  may  still  remain  infected  with  the  organism, 
new approaches to treatment have been explored. One promising 
approach  is  sequential  therapy.  Regimens  examined  consist  of   
5 days of amoxicillin and a PPI, followed by an additional 5 days 
of  PPI  plus  tinidazole  and  clarithromycin  or  levofloxacin.  One 
promising regimen that has the benefit of being shorter in duration, 
easier to take, and less expensive is 5 days of concomitant therapy 
(PPI  twice  daily,  amoxicillin  1  g  twice  daily,  levofloxacin  500  mg 
twice  daily,  and  tinidazole  500  mg  twice  daily).  Initial  studies 
have  demonstrated  eradication  rates  of  >90%  with  good  patient 
tolerance. Confirmation of these findings and applicability of this 
approach  in  the  United  States  are  needed,  although  some  experts 
are recommending abandoning clarithromycin-based triple therapy 
in the United States for the concomitant therapy or the alternative 
sequential therapies highlighted above.

Innovative  non-antibiotic-mediated  approaches  have  been 
explored  in  an  effort  to  improve  eradication  rates  of  H.  pylori. 
Pretreatment of patients with N-acetylcysteine as a mucolytic agent 
to  destroy  the  H.  pylori  biofilm  and  therefore  impair  antibiotic 
resistance has been examined, but more studies are needed to con-
firm the applicability of this approach. In vitro studies suggest that 
certain  probiotics  like  Lactobacillus  or  its  metabolites  can  inhibit 
H. pylori. Administration of probiotics has been attempted in sev-
eral  clinical  studies  in  an  effort  to  maximize  antibiotic-mediated 
eradication with varying results. Overall, it appears that the use of 
certain  probiotics,  such  as  Lactobacillus  spp.,  Saccharomyces  spp., 
Bifidobacterium spp., and Bacillus clausii, did not alter eradication 
rates  but  importantly  decreased  antibiotic-associated  side  effects 
including nausea, dysgeusia, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort/
pain,  resulting  in  enhanced  tolerability  of  H.  pylori  therapies. 
Additional  studies  are  needed  to  confirm  the  potential  benefits 
of  probiotics  in  this  setting.  Statins,  specifically  atorvastatin,  have 
been used with some success as an adjunct to quadruple therapy in 
patients with NUD.

Reinfection after successful eradication of H. pylori is rare in the 
United States (<1% per year). If recurrent infection occurs within 
the first 6 months after completing therapy, the most likely explana-
tion is recrudescence as opposed to reinfection. 

THERAPY OF NSAID-RELATED GASTRIC  
OR DUODENAL INJURY
Medical  intervention  for  NSAID-related  mucosal  injury  includes 
treatment  of  an  active  ulcer  and  primary  prevention  of  future 
injury.  Recommendations  for  the  treatment  and  primary  preven-
tion  of  NSAID-related  mucosal  injury  are  listed  in  Table  324-6. 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2447

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2448

Key Questions:

1. Is there a penicillin (PCN)
allergy?

2. Previous macrolide (MCL)
exposure for any reason?

PCN allergy: No

PCN allergy: No

PCN allergy: Yes

PCN allergy: Yes

MCL exposure: No

MCL exposure: Yes*

MCL exposure: No

MCL exposure: Yes*

Recommended
treatments:

Bismuth quadruple

Recommended
treatments:

Clarithromycin
triple with
metronidazole

Bismuth quadruple

Recommended
treatments:

Recommended
treatments:

Bismuth quadruple

Bismuth quadruple

CONCOMITANT

Levofloxacin triple

Clarithromycin triple
With amoxicillin

Levofloxacin
sequential

Other options:

Other options:

Sequential

HYBRID

Concomitant therapy?

Sequential therapy?

Levofloxacin triple

Hybrid therapy?

Levofloxacin
sequential

LOAD?

LOAD?

*In regions where clarithromycin resistance is known
to be >15%, utilize recommendations for patients
with a history of macrolide exposure.

FIGURE 324-13  Approach to selecting antibiotics for patients with H. pylori infection. LOAD, levofloxacin, omeprazole, nitazoxanide, and doxycycline. (Reproduced with 
permission from WD Chey et al: ACG clinical guideline: Treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol 112:212, 2017.)

TABLE 324-5  Salvage Therapies for H. pylori Infection
REGIMEN
Bismuth quadruple

DRUGS (DOSES)
PPI (standard dose)
Bismuth subcitrate (120–300 mg) or 
subsalicylate (300 mg)
Tetracycline (500 mg)
Metronidazole (500 mg)
PPI (standard dose)
Levofloxacin (500 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g)
PPI (standard dose)
Clarithromycin (500 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g)
Nitroimidazole (500 mg)
PPI (standard dose)
Rifabutin (300 mg)
Amoxicillin (1 g)
PPI (standard to double dose)
Amoxicillin (1 g tid or 750 mg qid)

DOSING FREQUENCY
bid
qid

DURATION (DAYS)
14

FDA APPROVAL
Noa

qid
tid or qid
bid
qd
bid
bid
bid
bid
bid or tid
bid
qd
bid
tid or qid
tid or qid

14

10–14

10

14

No

No

No

No

Levofloxacin triple

Concomitant

Rifabutin triple

High-dose dual

aPPI, bismuth, tetracycline, and metronidazole prescribed separately is not an FDA-approved treatment regimen. However, Pylera, a combination 
product containing bismuth subcitrate, tetracycline, and metronidazole, combined with a PPI for 10 days is an FDA-approved treatment regimen.
Abbreviations: bid, twice daily; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; tid, three times daily; qd, once daily; qid, four times daily.
Source: Reproduced with permission from WD Chey et al: ACG clinical guideline: Treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol 
112:212, 2017.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2448

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 324-6  Recommendations for Treatment of NSAID-Related 
Mucosal Injury
CLINICAL SETTING
Active ulcer
  NSAID discontinued
  NSAID continued
Prophylactic therapy

RECOMMENDATION

H2 receptor antagonist or PPI
PPI
Misoprostol
PPI
Selective COX-2 inhibitor
Eradication if active ulcer present or there is a 
past history of peptic ulcer disease

H. pylori infection

Abbreviations: COX-2, isoenzyme of cyclooxygenase; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.

Ideally, the injurious agent should be stopped as the first step in the 
therapy of an active NSAID-induced ulcer. If that is possible, then 
treatment with one of the acid inhibitory agents (H2 blockers, PPIs) 
is indicated. Cessation of NSAIDs is not always possible because of 
the patient’s severe underlying disease. Only PPIs can heal GUs or 
DUs, independent of whether NSAIDs are discontinued.

The widespread use of NSAIDs has created some concern due to 
the increasing likelihood of GI and CV side effects associated with 
these  agents.  The  approach  to  primary  prevention  has  included 
avoiding the agent, using the lowest possible dose of the agent for 
the shortest period of time possible, using NSAIDs that are theoret-
ically less injurious, using newer topical NSAID preparations, and/
or using concomitant medical therapy to prevent NSAID-induced 
injury. Several nonselective NSAIDs that are associated with a lower 
likelihood of GI and CV toxicity include naproxen and ibuprofen, 
although the beneficial effect may be eliminated if higher dosages 
of  the  agents  are  used.  Primary  prevention  of  NSAID-induced 
ulceration  can  be  accomplished  by  a  PPI  and,  if  not  tolerated, 
misoprostol (200 μg qid). High-dose H2 blockers (famotidine 40 mg 
bid)  have  also  shown  some  promise  in  preventing  endoscopically 
documented  ulcers,  although  PPIs  are  superior.  The  highly  selec-
tive COX-2 inhibitors, celecoxib and rofecoxib, are 100 times more 
selective  inhibitors  of  COX-2  than  standard  NSAIDs,  leading  to 
gastric or duodenal mucosal injury that is comparable to placebo; 
their  utilization  led  to  an  increase  in  CV  events  and  withdrawal 
from  the  market.  Additional  caution  was  engendered  when  the 
CLASS  study  demonstrated  that  the  advantage  of  celecoxib  in 
preventing  GI  complications  was  offset  when  low-dose  aspirin 
was  used  simultaneously.  Therefore,  gastric  protection  therapy  is 
required  in  individuals  taking  COX-2  inhibitors  and  aspirin  pro-
phylaxis.  Finally,  much  of  the  work  demonstrating  the  benefit  of 
COX-2  inhibitors  and  PPIs  on  GI  injury  has  been  performed  in 
individuals of average risk; it is unclear if the same level of benefit 
will be achieved in high-risk patients. For example, concomitant use 
of warfarin and a COX-2 inhibitor was associated with rates of GI 
bleeding similar to those observed in patients taking nonselective 
NSAIDs.  A  combination  of  factors,  including  withdrawal  of  the 
majority  of  COX-2  inhibitors  from  the  market,  the  observation 
that  low-dose  aspirin  appears  to  diminish  the  beneficial  effect  of 
COX-2–selective inhibitors, and the growing use of aspirin for pro-
phylaxis of CV events, has significantly altered the approach to gas-
tric protective therapy during the use of NSAIDs. A set of guidelines 
for the approach to the use of NSAIDs was published by the ACG 
and is shown in Table 324-7. Individuals who are not at risk for CV 
events, do not use aspirin, and are without risk for GI complications 
can  receive  nonselective  NSAIDs  without  gastric  protection.  In 
those without CV risk factors but with a high potential risk (prior 
GI  bleeding  or  multiple  GI  risk  factors)  for  NSAID-induced  GI 
toxicity, cautious use of a selective COX-2 inhibitor and co-therapy 
with high-dose PPI or misoprostol are recommended. Individuals 
at moderate GI risk without cardiac risk factors can be treated with 
a COX-2 inhibitor alone or with a nonselective NSAID with PPI or 
misoprostol. Individuals with CV risk factors, who require low-dose 

TABLE 324-7  Guide to NSAID Therapy

2449

No CV risk (no 
aspirin)

CV risk (consider 
aspirin)

NO/LOW NSAID  
GI RISK
Traditional NSAID

Traditional NSAID + 
PPI or misoprostol 
if GI risk warrants 
gastroprotection
Consider non-NSAID 
therapy

NSAID GI RISK
Coxib or
Traditional NSAID + PPI or 
misoprostol
Consider non-NSAID therapy
A gastroprotective agent must 
be added if a traditional NSAID is 
prescribed
Consider non-NSAID therapy

Abbreviations: CV, cardiovascular; GI, gastrointestinal; NSAID, nonsteroidal  
anti-inflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
Source: Republished with permission of MJH Life Sciences, LLC, from COX-2 
inhibitor use after Vioxx: careful balance orend of the rope?, Fendrick AM,  
10(11 Pt 1): 2004; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

aspirin and have low potential for NSAID-induced toxicity, should 
be considered for a non-NSAID agent or use of a traditional NSAID 
such  as  naproxen  (lower  CV  side  effects)  in  combination  with 
gastric  protection,  if  warranted.  Finally,  individuals  with  CV  and 
GI  risks  who  require  aspirin  must  be  considered  for  non-NSAID 
therapy,  but  if  that  is  not  an  option,  then  gastric  protection  with 
any  type  of  NSAID  must  be  considered.  Any  patient,  regardless 
of  risk  status,  who  is  being  considered  for  long-term  traditional 
NSAID  therapy  should  also  be  considered  for  H.  pylori  testing 
and treatment if positive. Assuring the use of GI protective agents 
with NSAIDs is difficult, even in high-risk patients. This is in part 
due to underprescribing of the appropriate protective agent; other 
times, the difficulty is related to patient compliance. The latter may 
be due to patients forgetting to take multiple pills or preferring not 
to take the extra pill, especially if they have no GI symptoms. Sev-
eral NSAID gastroprotective-containing combination pills are now 
commercially available, including double-dose famotidine with ibu-
profen, diclofenac with misoprostol, and naproxen with esomepra-
zole. Although initial studies suggested improved compliance and a 
cost advantage when taking these combination drugs, their clinical 
benefit over the use of separate pills has not been established. One 
additional  concern  with  NSAID-induced  GI  complications  is  the 
relatively low rate of primary care provider compliance with estab-
lished guidelines outlining preventative measures. An intervention 
including  professional  education,  informatics  to  facilitate  review, 
and  financial  incentives  for  practices  to  review  patients’  charts  to 
assess appropriateness showed a reduced rate of high-risk prescrib-
ing of antiplatelet medications and NSAIDs with a tendency toward 
improved  clinical  outcomes.  Efforts  continue  toward  developing 
safer NSAIDs, including topical NSAIDs, NSAID formulations that 
are  rapidly  absorbed  (diclofenac  potassium  powder  mixed  with  a 
buffering agent, Prosorb and SoluMatrix technology), NO-releasing 
NSAIDs,  hydrogen  sulfide–releasing  NSAIDs,  dual  COX/5-LOX 
inhibitors, NSAID prodrugs, and agents that can effectively seques-
ter unbound NSAIDs without interfering with their efficacy. 
APPROACH AND THERAPY: SUMMARY
Controversy continues regarding the best approach to the patient who 
presents with dyspepsia (Chap. 45). The discovery of H. pylori and its 
role in pathogenesis of ulcers has added a new variable to the equation. 
Previously, if a patient <50 years of age presented with dyspepsia and 
without alarming signs or symptoms suggestive of an ulcer complica-
tion or malignancy, an empirical therapeutic trial with acid suppression 
was commonly recommended. Although this approach is practiced by 
some today, an approach presently gaining approval for the treatment 
of patients with dyspepsia is outlined in  Fig. 324-14. The referral to a 
gastroenterologist is for the potential need of endoscopy and subsequent 
evaluation and treatment if the endoscopy is negative.

Once  an  ulcer  (GU  or  DU)  is  documented,  the  main  issue  at 
stake is whether H. pylori or an NSAID is involved. With H. pylori 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2449

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2450

New-Onset Dyspepsia

>40 years old
Alarm symptoms

Exclude by history GERD, biliary
 pain, IBS, aerophagia,
 medication-related

–

Noninvasive Hp testing

+

Anti-Hp
therapy

–

+

Empiric trial
H2 blocker

or

Refer to
gastroenterologist

4 weeks
after therapy

Confirm eradication UBT

Symptoms remain or recur

FIGURE 324-14  Overview of new-onset dyspepsia. GERD, gastroesophageal reflux 
disease; Hp, Helicobacter pylori; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; UBT, urea breath 
test.  (Reproduced  with  permission  from  BS  Anand,  DY  Graham:  State-of-the-Art: 
Ulcer and Gastritis, Endoscopy 31:215, 1999. © Georg Thieme Verlag KG.)

present,  independent  of  the  NSAID  status,  triple  therapy  is  rec-
ommended  for  14  days,  followed  by  continued  acid-suppressing 
drugs (H2 receptor antagonist or PPIs) for a total of 4–6 weeks. H. 
pylori eradication should be documented 4 weeks after completing 
antibiotics.  The  test  of  choice  for  documenting  eradication  is  the 
laboratory-based validated monoclonal stool antigen test or a urea 
breath test (UBT). The patient must be off antisecretory agents for 
at least 7 days when being tested for eradication of H. pylori with 
UBT or stool antigen. Serologic testing is not useful for the purpose 
of documenting eradication because antibody titers fall slowly and 
often do not become undetectable. Some recommend that patients 
with  complicated  ulcer  disease  or  who  are  frail  should  be  treated 
with  long-term  acid  suppression,  thus  making  documentation  of 
H. pylori eradication a moot point. In view of this discrepancy in 
practice, it would be best to discuss with the patient the different 
options available.

Several  issues  differentiate  the  approach  to  a  GU  versus  a  DU. 
GUs, especially of the body and fundus, have the potential of being 
malignant. Multiple biopsies of a GU should be taken initially; even 
if these are negative for neoplasm, repeat endoscopy to document 
healing at 8–12 weeks should be performed, with biopsy if the ulcer 
is still present. About 70% of GUs eventually found to be malignant 
undergo  significant  (usually  incomplete)  healing.  Repeat  endos-
copy is warranted in patients with DU if symptoms persist despite 
medical therapy or a complication is suspected.

The majority (>90%) of GUs and DUs heal with the conventional 
therapy outlined above. A GU that fails to heal after 12 weeks and a 
DU that does not heal after 8 weeks of therapy should be considered 
refractory. Once poor compliance and persistent H. pylori infection 
have  been  excluded,  NSAID  use,  either  inadvertent  or  surrepti-
tious,  must  be  excluded.  In  addition,  cigarette  smoking  must  be 
eliminated. For a GU, malignancy must be meticulously excluded. 
Next, consideration should be given to a gastric acid hypersecretory 
state such as ZES (see “Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome,” below) or the 
idiopathic form, which can be excluded with gastric acid analysis. 
Although  a  subset  of  patients  has  gastric  acid  hypersecretion  of 
unclear etiology as a contributing factor to refractory ulcers, ZES 
should  be  excluded  with  a  fasting  gastrin  or  secretin  stimulation 
test  (see  below).  More  than  90%  of  refractory  ulcers  (either  DUs 

or GUs) heal after 8 weeks of treatment with higher doses of PPI 
(omeprazole 40 mg/d; lansoprazole 30–60 mg/d). This higher dose 
is  also  effective  in  maintaining  remission.  Surgical  intervention 
may be a consideration at this point; however, other rare causes of 
refractory ulcers must be excluded before recommending surgery. 
Rare etiologies of refractory ulcers that may be diagnosed by gastric 
or duodenal biopsies include ischemia, Crohn’s disease, amyloido-
sis,  sarcoidosis,  lymphoma,  eosinophilic  gastroenteritis,  smoking 
crack cocaine, or infection (cytomegalovirus [CMV], tuberculosis, 
or syphilis). 

SURGICAL THERAPY
Surgical  intervention  in  PUD  can  be  viewed  as  being  either  elec-
tive,  for  treatment  of  medically  refractory  disease,  or  as  urgent/
emergent, for the treatment of an ulcer-related complication. The 
development  of  pharmacologic  and  endoscopic  approaches  for 
the  treatment  of  peptic  disease  and  its  complications  has  led  to  a 
substantial  decrease  in  the  number  of  operations  needed  for  this 
disorder with a drop of >90% for elective ulcer surgery over the past 
four decades. Refractory ulcers are an exceedingly rare occurrence. 
Surgery  is  more  often  required  for  treatment  of  an  ulcer-related 
complication.

Hemorrhage  is  the  most  common  ulcer-related  complication, 
occurring  in  ~15–25%  of  patients.  Bleeding  may  occur  in  any  age 
group  but  is  most  often  seen  in  older  patients  (sixth  decade  or 
beyond). The majority of patients stop bleeding spontaneously, but 
endoscopic  therapy  (Chap.  322)  is  necessary  in  some.  Parenterally 
and orally administered PPIs also decrease ulcer rebleeding in patients 
who  have  undergone  endoscopic  therapy.  Patients  unresponsive  or 
refractory to endoscopic intervention will require angiographic inter-
vention or surgery (~5% of transfusion-requiring patients).

Free  peritoneal  perforation  occurs  in  ~2–3%  of  DU  patients, 
with NSAID-induced GU perforations occurring more commonly. 
Sudden onset of severe abdominal pain with peritoneal signs and 
evidence of pneumoperitoneum on abdominal imaging is the clas-
sic presentation of a perforated viscous, but this presentation occurs 
in only two-thirds of patients. The latter is especially true in elderly 
patients  (>70  years  old),  obese  individuals,  and  immunocompro-
mised patients. It is important to keep in mind that, as in the case 
of  bleeding,  up  to  10%  of  these  patients  will  not  have  antecedent 
ulcer symptoms. Delay in diagnosis clearly leads to higher mortal-
ity; thus, early suspicion and intervention with nasogastric suction, 
intravenous PPI, antibiotics and surgical consultation are essential. 
Concomitant  bleeding  may  occur  in  up  to  10%  of  patients  with 
perforation,  with  mortality  being  increased  substantially.  Peptic 
ulcer  can  also  penetrate  into  adjacent  organs,  especially  with  a 
posterior DU, which can penetrate into the pancreas, colon, liver, 
or biliary tree.

Pyloric channel ulcers or DUs can lead to gastric outlet obstruc-
tion  in  ~2–3%  of  patients.  This  can  result  from  chronic  scarring 
or  from  impaired  motility  due  to  inflammation  and/or  edema 
with pylorospasm. Patients may present with early satiety, nausea, 
vomiting of undigested food, and weight loss. Conservative man-
agement with nasogastric suction, intravenous hydration/nutrition, 
and antisecretory agents is indicated for 7–10 days with the hope 
that a functional obstruction will reverse. If a mechanical obstruc-
tion persists, endoscopic intervention with balloon dilation may be 
effective. Surgery should be considered if all else fails. 

Specific Operations for Duodenal Ulcers  Surgical treatment was 
originally  designed  to  decrease  gastric  acid  secretion.  Operations 
most  commonly  performed  include  (1)  vagotomy  and  drainage 
(by  pyloroplasty,  gastroduodenostomy,  or  gastrojejunostomy),  (2) 
highly selective vagotomy (which does not require a drainage pro-
cedure), and (3) vagotomy with antrectomy. The specific procedure 
performed  is  dictated  by  the  underlying  circumstances:  elective 
versus  emergency,  the  degree  and  extent  of  duodenal  ulceration, 
the etiology of the ulcer (H. pylori, NSAIDs, malignancy), and the 
expertise  of  the  surgeon.  Moreover,  the  trend  has  been  toward  a 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2450

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemdramatic decrease in the need for surgery for treatment of refrac-
tory  PUD,  and  when  needed,  minimally  invasive  and  anatomy- 
preserving operations are preferred.

Vagotomy  is  a  component  of  each  of  these  procedures  and  is 
aimed  at  decreasing  acid  secretion  through  ablating  cholinergic 
input  to  the  stomach.  Unfortunately,  both  truncal  and  selective 
vagotomy  (preserves  the  celiac  and  hepatic  branches)  result  in 
gastric  atony  despite  successful  reduction  of  both  basal  acid  out-
put  (BAO;  decreased  by  85%)  and  maximal  acid  output  (MAO; 
decreased by 50%). Drainage through pyloroplasty or gastroduode-
nostomy is required in an effort to compensate for the vagotomy- 
induced gastric motility disorder. This procedure has an interme-
diate complication rate and a 10% ulcer recurrence rate. To mini-
mize gastric dysmotility, highly selective vagotomy (also known as 
parietal cell, super-selective, or proximal vagotomy) was developed. 
Only the vagal fibers innervating the portion of the stomach that 
contains parietal cells are transected, thus leaving fibers important 
for  regulating  gastric  motility  intact.  Although  this  procedure 
leads to an immediate decrease in both BAO and stimulated acid 
output,  acid  secretion  recovers  over  time.  By  the  end  of  the  first 
postoperative  year,  basal  and  stimulated  acid  output  are  ~30  and 
50%, respectively, of preoperative levels. Ulcer recurrence rates are 
higher with highly selective vagotomy (≥10%), although the overall 
complication rates are the lowest of the three procedures.

The procedure that provides the lowest rates of ulcer recurrence 
(1%) but has the highest complication rate is vagotomy (truncal or 
selective)  in  combination  with  antrectomy.  Antrectomy  is  aimed 
at  eliminating  an  additional  stimulant  of  gastric  acid  secretion, 
gastrin.  Two  principal  types  of  reanastomoses  are  used  after  ant-
rectomy:  gastroduodenostomy  (Billroth  I)  or  gastrojejunostomy 
(Billroth  II)  (Fig.  324-15).  Although  Billroth  I  is  often  preferred 
over II, severe duodenal inflammation or scarring may preclude its 
performance. Prospective, randomized studies confirm that partial 
gastrectomy followed by Roux-en-Y reconstruction leads to a sig-
nificantly better clinical, endoscopic, and histologic outcome than 
Billroth II reconstruction.

Antrum

Duodenum

Fundus

Billroth I

Billroth II

FIGURE 324-15  Schematic representation of Billroth I and II procedures.

2451

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Of these procedures, highly selective vagotomy may be the pro-
cedure of choice in the elective setting, except in situations where 
ulcer recurrence rates are high (prepyloric ulcers and those refrac-
tory  to  medical  therapy).  Selection  of  vagotomy  and  antrectomy 
may be more appropriate in these circumstances.

These procedures have been traditionally performed by standard 
laparotomy.  The  advent  of  laparoscopic  surgery  has  led  several 
surgical  teams  to  successfully  perform  highly  selective  vagotomy, 
truncal  vagotomy/pyloroplasty,  and  truncal  vagotomy/antrectomy 
through this approach. An increase in the number of laparoscopic 
procedures for treatment of PUD has occurred. Laparoscopic repair 
of perforated peptic ulcers is safe, feasible for the experienced sur-
geon, and associated with decreased postoperative pain, although it 
does take longer than an open approach. Moreover, no difference 
between  the  two  approaches  is  noted  in  postoperative  complica-
tions or length of hospital stay. 
Specific  Operations  for  GUs  The  location  and  presence  of  a 
concomitant  DU  dictate  the  operative  procedure  performed  for 
a  GU.  Antrectomy  (including  the  ulcer)  with  a  Billroth  I  anasto-
mosis  is  the  treatment  of  choice  for  an  antral  ulcer.  Vagotomy  is 
performed  only  if  a  DU  is  present.  Although  ulcer  excision  with 
vagotomy  and  drainage  procedure  has  been  proposed,  the  higher 
incidence of ulcer recurrence makes this a less desirable approach. 
Ulcers  located  near  the  esophagogastric  junction  may  require  a 
more  radical  approach,  a  subtotal  gastrectomy  with  a  Roux-en-Y 
esophagogastrojejunostomy  (Csendes’  procedure).  A  less  aggres-
sive  approach,  including  antrectomy,  intraoperative  ulcer  biopsy, 
and vagotomy (Kelling-Madlener procedure), may be indicated in 
fragile patients with a high GU. Ulcer recurrence approaches 30% 
with this procedure. 
Surgery-Related  Complications  Complications  seen  after  sur-
gery  for  PUD  are  related  primarily  to  the  extent  of  the  anatomic 
modification performed. Minimal alteration (highly selective vago-
tomy)  is  associated  with  higher  rates  of  ulcer  recurrence  and  less 
GI disturbance. More aggressive surgical procedures have a lower 
rate of ulcer recurrence but a greater incidence of GI dysfunction. 
Overall,  morbidity  and  mortality  related  to  these  procedures  are 
quite low. Morbidity associated with vagotomy and antrectomy or 
pyloroplasty is ≤5%, with mortality ~1%. Highly selective vagotomy 
has lower morbidity and mortality rates of 1 and 0.3%, respectively.
In addition to the potential early consequences of any intraab-
dominal  procedure  (bleeding,  infection,  thromboembolism),  gas-
troparesis, duodenal stump leak, and efferent loop obstruction can 
be observed. 
Recurrent  Ulceration  The  risk  of  ulcer  recurrence  is  directly 
related to the procedure performed. Ulcers that recur after partial 
gastric  resection  tend  to  develop  at  the  anastomosis  (stomal  or 
marginal  ulcer).  Epigastric  abdominal  pain  is  the  most  frequent 
presenting complaint (>90%). Severity and duration of pain tend to 
be more progressive than observed with DUs before surgery.

Ulcers may recur for several reasons, including incomplete vago-
tomy, inadequate drainage, retained antrum, and, less likely, persis-
tent or recurrent H. pylori infection. ZES should have been excluded 
preoperatively. Surreptitious use of NSAIDs is an important reason 
for recurrent ulcers after surgery, especially if the initial procedure 
was done for an NSAID-induced ulcer. Once H. pylori and NSAIDs 
have been excluded as etiologic factors, the question of incomplete 
vagotomy  or  retained  gastric  antrum  should  be  explored.  For  the 
latter,  fasting  plasma  gastrin  levels  should  be  determined.  If  ele-
vated,  retained  antrum  or  ZES  (see  below)  should  be  considered. 
Incomplete vagotomy can be ruled out by gastric acid analysis cou-
pled with sham feeding. In this test, gastric acid output is measured 
while the patient sees, smells, and chews a meal (without swallow-
ing). The cephalic phase of gastric secretion, which is mediated by 
the vagus, is being assessed with this study. An increase in gastric 
acid output in response to sham feeding is evidence that the vagus 
nerve is intact. A rise in serum pancreatic polypeptide >50% within 
30 min of sham feeding is also suggestive of an intact vagus nerve.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2451

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2452

Medical therapy with H2 blockers will heal postoperative ulcera-
tion in 70–90% of patients. The efficacy of PPIs has not been fully 
assessed in this group, but one may anticipate greater rates of ulcer 
healing compared to those obtained with H2 blockers. Repeat oper-
ation (complete vagotomy, partial gastrectomy) may be required in 
a small subgroup of patients who have not responded to aggressive 
medical management. 
Afferent Loop Syndromes  Although rarely seen today as a result 
of the decrease in the performance of Billroth II anastomosis, two 
types  of  afferent  loop  syndrome  can  occur  in  patients  who  have 
undergone this type of partial gastric resection. The more common 
of  the  two  is  bacterial  overgrowth  in  the  afferent  limb  secondary 
to  stasis.  Patients  may  experience  postprandial  abdominal  pain, 
bloating, and diarrhea with concomitant malabsorption of fats and 
vitamin  B12.  Cases  refractory  to  antibiotics  may  require  surgical 
revision  of  the  loop.  The  less  common  afferent  loop  syndrome 
can present with severe abdominal pain and bloating that occur 
20–60  min  after  meals.  Pain  is  often  followed  by  nausea  and 
vomiting  of  bile-containing  material.  The  pain  and  bloating  may 
improve after emesis. The cause of this clinical picture is theorized 
to be incomplete drainage of bile and pancreatic secretions from an 
afferent loop that is partially obstructed. Cases refractory to dietary 
measures may need surgical revision or conversion of the Billroth 
II anastomosis to a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy. 
Dumping Syndrome  Dumping syndrome consists of a series of vaso-
motor and GI signs and symptoms and occurs in patients who have 
undergone  vagotomy  and  drainage  (especially  Billroth  procedures). 
Two  phases  of  dumping,  early  and  late,  can  occur.  Early  dumping 
takes  place  15–30  min  after  meals  and  consists  of  crampy  abdomi-
nal  discomfort,  nausea,  diarrhea,  belching,  tachycardia,  palpitations, 
diaphoresis,  light-headedness,  and,  rarely,  syncope.  These  signs  and 
symptoms  arise  from  the  rapid  emptying  of  hyperosmolar  gastric 
contents into the small intestine, resulting in a fluid shift into the gut 
lumen with plasma volume contraction and acute intestinal distention. 
Release of vasoactive GI hormones (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, 
neurotensin, motilin) is also theorized to play a role in early dumping.
The late phase of dumping typically occurs 90 min to 3 h after 
meals. Vasomotor symptoms (light-headedness, diaphoresis, palpi-
tations, tachycardia, and syncope) predominate during this phase. 
This component of dumping is thought to be secondary to hypogly-
cemia from excessive insulin release.

Dumping syndrome is most noticeable after meals rich in simple 
carbohydrates  (especially  sucrose)  and  high  osmolarity.  Ingestion 
of large amounts of fluids may also contribute. After vagotomy and 
drainage, up to 50% of patients will experience dumping syndrome 
to some degree early on. Signs and symptoms often improve with 
time,  but  a  severe  protracted  picture  can  occur  in  up  to  1%  of 
patients.

Dietary  modification  is  the  cornerstone  of  therapy  for  patients 
with  dumping  syndrome.  Small,  multiple  (six)  meals  devoid  of 
simple  carbohydrates  coupled  with  elimination  of  liquids  during 
meals  is  important.  Antidiarrheals  and  anticholinergic  agents  are 
complementary to diet. Guar and pectin, which increase the viscos-
ity of intraluminal contents, may be beneficial in more symptomatic 
individuals. Acarbose, an α-glucosidase inhibitor that delays diges-
tion of ingested carbohydrates, has also been shown to be beneficial 
in the treatment of the late phases of dumping. The somatostatin 
analogue  octreotide  has  been  successful  in  diet-refractory  cases. 
This  drug  is  administered  subcutaneously  (50  μg  tid),  titrated 
according to clinical response. A long-acting depot formulation of 
octreotide  can  be  administered  once  every  28  days  and  provides 
symptom relief comparable to the short-acting agent. In addition, 
patient weight gain and quality of life appear to be superior with the 
long-acting form. 
Postvagotomy Diarrhea  Up to 10% of patients may seek medical 
attention for the treatment of postvagotomy diarrhea. This compli-
cation is most commonly observed after truncal vagotomy, which 
is  rarely  performed  today.  Patients  may  complain  of  intermittent 

diarrhea that occurs typically 1–2 h after meals. Occasionally, the 
symptoms  may  be  severe  and  relentless.  This  is  due  to  a  motility 
disorder from interruption of the vagal fibers supplying the luminal 
gut. Other contributing factors may include decreased absorption 
of  nutrients  (see  below),  increased  excretion  of  bile  acids,  and 
release of luminal factors that promote secretion. Diphenoxylate or 
loperamide is often useful in symptom control. The bile salt–binding 
agent cholestyramine may be helpful in severe cases. Surgical rever-
sal of a 10-cm segment of jejunum may yield a substantial improve-
ment in bowel frequency in a subset of patients. 
Bile  Reflux  Gastropathy  A  subset  of  post–partial  gastrectomy 
patients  who  present  with  abdominal  pain,  early  satiety,  nausea, 
and  vomiting  will  have  mucosal  erythema  of  the  gastric  remnant 
as the only finding. Histologic examination of the gastric mucosa 
reveals  minimal  inflammation  but  the  presence  of  epithelial  cell 
injury. This clinical picture is categorized as bile or alkaline reflux 
gastropathy/gastritis.  Although  reflux  of  bile  is  implicated  as  the 
reason  for  this  disorder,  the  mechanism  is  unknown.  Prokinetic 
agents,  cholestyramine,  and  sucralfate  have  been  somewhat  effec-
tive  treatments.  Severe  refractory  symptoms  may  require  using 
either  nuclear  scanning  with  99mTc-HIDA  to  document  reflux. 
Surgical  diversion  of  pancreaticobiliary  secretions  away  from  the 
gastric remnant with a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy consisting of 
a long (50–60 cm) Roux limb has been used in severe cases. Bilious 
vomiting improves, but early satiety and bloating may persist in up 
to 50% of patients. 
Maldigestion  and  Malabsorption  Weight  loss  can  be  observed 
in  up  to  60%  of  patients  after  partial  gastric  resection.  Patients 
can  experience  a  10%  loss  of  body  weight,  which  stabilizes   
3 months postoperatively. A significant component of this weight 
reduction  is  due  to  decreased  oral  intake.  However,  mild  steator-
rhea  can  also  develop.  Reasons  for  maldigestion/malabsorption 
include decreased gastric acid production, rapid gastric emptying, 
decreased  food  dispersion  in  the  stomach,  reduced  luminal  bile 
concentration,  reduced  pancreatic  secretory  response  to  feeding, 
and rapid intestinal transit.

Decreased serum vitamin B12 levels can be observed after partial 
gastrectomy.  This  is  usually  not  due  to  deficiency  of  IF,  since  a 
minimal amount of parietal cells (source of IF) is removed during 
antrectomy.  Reduced  vitamin  B12  may  be  due  to  competition  for 
the vitamin by bacterial overgrowth or inability to split the vitamin 
from its protein-bound source due to hypochlorhydria.

Iron-deficiency  anemia  may  be  a  consequence  of  impaired 
absorption  of  dietary  iron  in  patients  with  a  Billroth  II  gastroje-
junostomy. Absorption of iron salts is normal in these individuals; 
thus,  a  favorable  response  to  oral  iron  supplementation  can  be 
anticipated.  Folate  deficiency  with  concomitant  anemia  can  also 
develop  in  these  patients.  This  deficiency  may  be  secondary  to 
decreased absorption or diminished oral intake.

Malabsorption  of  vitamin  D  and  calcium  resulting  in  osteopo-
rosis  and  osteomalacia  is  common  after  partial  gastrectomy  and 
gastrojejunostomy  (Billroth  II).  Osteomalacia  can  occur  as  a  late 
complication  in  up  to  25%  of  post–partial  gastrectomy  patients. 
Bone  fractures  occur  twice  as  commonly  in  men  after  gastric 
surgery as in a control population. It may take years before x-ray 
findings  demonstrate  diminished  bone  density.  Elevated  alkaline 
phosphatase,  reduced  serum  calcium,  bone  pain,  and  pathologic 
fractures may be seen in patients with osteomalacia. The high inci-
dence  of  these  abnormalities  in  this  subgroup  of  patients  justifies 
treating them with vitamin D and calcium supplementation indef-
initely.  Therapy  is  especially  important  in  females.  Copper  defi-
ciency has also been reported in patients undergoing surgeries that 
bypass the duodenum, where copper is primarily absorbed. Patients 
may present with a rare syndrome that includes ataxia, myelopathy, 
and peripheral neuropathy. 
Gastric  Adenocarcinoma  The  incidence  of  adenocarcinoma  in 
the gastric stump is increased 15 years after resection. Some have 
reported a four- to fivefold increase in gastric cancer 20–25 years 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2452

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemafter resection. The pathogenesis is unclear but may involve alka-
line  reflux,  bacterial  proliferation,  or  hypochlorhydria.  The  role 
of  endoscopic  screening  is  not  clear,  and  most  guidelines  do  not 
support its use. 
Additional  Complications  Reflux  esophagitis  and  a  higher  inci-
dence of gallstones and cholecystitis have been reported in patients 
undergoing subtotal gastrectomy. The latter is thought to be due to 
decreased  gallbladder  contractility  associated  with  vagotomy  and 
bypass of the duodenum, leading to decreased postprandial release 
of cholecystokinin.

RELATED CONDITIONS
 ■ ZOLLINGER-ELLISON SYNDROME
Severe  peptic  ulcer  diathesis  secondary  to  gastric  acid  hypersecre-
tion  due  to  unregulated  gastrin  release  from  a  non–β-cell,  often 
well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (NET; gastrinoma) defines 
the components of ZES. Initially, ZES was typified by aggressive and 
refractory ulceration in which total gastrectomy provided the only chance 
for enhancing survival. Today, it can be cured by surgical resection in up 
to 40% of patients with the sporadic form of the disease (see below).

Epidemiology  The  true  incidence  of  ZES  is  unknown,  but  esti-
mates  suggest  that  it  varies  from  0.1  to  1%  of  individuals  presenting 
with PUD, with 0.1–3 individuals per year having this rare diagnosis. 
Others  have  estimated  an  incidence  of  0.5–3  per  million  population. 
Females  are  slightly  more  commonly  affected  than  males,  and  the 
majority of patients are diagnosed between ages 30 and 50. Gastrino-
mas  are  classified  into  sporadic  tumors  (80%)  and  those  associated 
with  multiple  endocrine  neoplasia  (MEN)  type  1  (see  below).  The 
widespread availability and use of PPIs have led to a decreased patient 
referral for gastrinoma evaluation, delay in diagnosis, and an increase 
in false-positive diagnoses of ZES. In fact, diagnosis may be delayed for 
≥6 years after symptoms consistent with ZES are displayed.

Pathophysiology  Hypergastrinemia  originating  from  an  autono-
mous neoplasm is the driving force responsible for the clinical man-
ifestations  in  ZES.  Gastrin  stimulates  acid  secretion  through  gastrin 
receptors on parietal cells and by inducing histamine release from ECL 
cells. Gastrin also has a trophic action on gastric epithelial cells. Long-
standing  hypergastrinemia  leads  to  markedly  increased  gastric  acid 
secretion through both parietal cell stimulation and increased parietal 
cell mass. The increased gastric acid output leads to peptic ulcer diath-
esis, erosive esophagitis, and diarrhea.

Tumor  Distribution  Although  early  studies  suggested  that  the 
vast majority of gastrinomas occurred within the pancreas, a signifi-
cant number of these lesions are extrapancreatic. Between 60 and 90% 
of these tumors are found within the hypothetical gastrinoma triangle 
(confluence of the cystic and common bile ducts superiorly, junction 
of  the  second  and  third  portions  of  the  duodenum  inferiorly,  and 
junction  of  the  neck  and  body  of  the  pancreas  medially).  Duodenal 
tumors constitute the most common nonpancreatic lesion; between 60 
and 100% of gastrinomas are found here. Duodenal tumors are smaller, 
slower growing, and less likely to metastasize than pancreatic lesions. 
Less  common  extrapancreatic  sites  include  stomach,  bones,  ovaries, 
heart, liver, and lymph nodes. More than 60% of tumors are considered 
malignant,  with  up  to  30–50%  of  patients  having  multiple  lesions  or 
metastatic  disease  at  presentation.  Histologically,  gastrin-producing 
cells appear well-differentiated (grade 1 or 2 histologically), expressing 
markers typically found in endocrine neoplasms (chromogranin, neu-
ron-specific enolase). Although not clearly established in gastrinomas, 
histologic grade in pancreatic NETs generally is an important predictor 
of survival in these rare neoplasms (Chap. 84).

Clinical  Manifestations  Gastric  acid  hypersecretion  is  respon-
sible for the signs and symptoms observed in patients with ZES. The 
most common clinical presentation for gastrinoma patients is abdom-
inal  pain  in  the  presence  of  acid  peptic  disorders.  Peptic  ulcer  is  the 

2453

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

most common clinical manifestation, occurring in >90% of gastrinoma 
patients. Initial presentation and ulcer location (duodenal bulb) may be 
indistinguishable from common PUD. Clinical situations that should 
create suspicion of gastrinoma are ulcers in unusual locations (second 
part  of  the  duodenum  and  beyond),  ulcers  refractory  to  standard 
medical  therapy,  ulcer  recurrence  after  acid-reducing  surgery,  ulcers 
presenting  with  frank  complications  (bleeding,  obstruction,  and  per-
foration),  or  ulcers  in  the  absence  of  H.  pylori  or  NSAID  ingestion. 
Symptoms  of  esophageal  origin  are  present  in  up  to  two-thirds  of 
patients with ZES, with a spectrum ranging from mild esophagitis to 
frank ulceration with stricture and Barrett’s mucosa.

Diarrhea, the next most common clinical manifestation, is found in 
up to 70% of patients. Although diarrhea often occurs concomitantly 
with acid peptic disease, it may also occur independent of an ulcer and 
classically will abate with PPI therapy. Etiology of the diarrhea is mul-
tifactorial, resulting from marked volume overload to the small bowel, 
pancreatic enzyme inactivation by acid, and damage of the intestinal 
epithelial  surface  by  acid.  The  epithelial  damage  can  lead  to  a  mild 
degree of maldigestion and malabsorption of nutrients. The diarrhea 
may  also  have  a  secretory  component  due  to  the  direct  stimulatory 
effect of gastrin on enterocytes or the co-secretion of additional hor-
mones from the tumor such as vasoactive intestinal peptide.

Gastrinomas  can  develop  in  the  presence  of  MEN  1  syndrome 
(Chaps.  84 and  388)  in  ~25%  of  patients.  This  autosomal  dominant 
disorder  involves  primarily  three  organ  sites:  the  parathyroid  glands 
(80–90%),  pancreas  (40–80%),  and  pituitary  gland  (30–60%).  The 
syndrome  is  caused  by  inactivating  mutations  of  the  MEN1  tumor-
suppressor  gene  found  on  the  long  arm  of  chromosome  11q13.  The 
gene encodes for menin, which has an important role in DNA replica-
tion and transcriptional regulation. A genetic diagnosis is obtained by 
sequencing of the MEN1 gene, which can reveal mutations in 70–90% 
of  typical  MEN  1  cases.  A  family  may  have  an  unknown  mutation, 
making a genetic diagnosis impossible, and therefore, certain individ-
uals will require a clinical diagnosis, which is determined by whether a 
patient has tumors in two of the three endocrine organs (parathyroid, 
pancreas/duodenum,  or  pituitary)  or  has  a  family  history  of  MEN  1 
and  one  of  the  endocrine  organ  tumors.  In  view  of  the  stimulatory 
effect  of  calcium  on  gastric  secretion,  the  hyperparathyroidism  and 
hypercalcemia seen in MEN 1 patients may have a direct effect on ulcer 
disease.  Resolution  of  hypercalcemia  by  parathyroidectomy  reduces 
gastrin and gastric acid output in gastrinoma patients. An additional 
distinguishing feature in ZES patients with MEN 1 is the higher inci-
dence of gastric carcinoid tumor development (as compared to patients 
with sporadic gastrinomas). ZES presents and is diagnosed earlier in 
MEN  1  patients,  and  they  have  a  more  indolent  course  as  compared 
to patients with sporadic gastrinoma. Gastrinomas tend to be smaller, 
multiple, and located in the duodenal wall more often than is seen in 
patients  with  sporadic  ZES.  Establishing  the  diagnosis  of  MEN  1  is 
critical in order to provide genetic counseling to the patient and his or 
her family and also to determine the recommended surgical approach. 
Therefore, gastrinoma patients should be screened for MEN 1 by per-
forming a detailed family history and obtaining several serum markers 
including calcium, parathyroid, prolactin, and pancreatic polypeptide 
levels.

Diagnosis  Establishing an early diagnosis is important in order to 
minimize  the  long-term  sequelae  of  gastric  acid  hypersecretion,  pre-
vent metastatic disease, and counsel family members if a diagnosis of 
MEN 1 is established. Biochemical measurements of gastrin and acid 
secretion in patients suspected of having ZES play an important role 
is establishing this rare diagnosis. Often, patients suspected of having 
ZES will be treated with a PPI in an effort to ameliorate symptoms and 
decrease  the  likelihood  of  possible  acid-related  complications.  The 
presence  of  the  PPI,  which  will  lower  acid  secretion  and  potentially 
elevate  fasting  gastrin  levels  in  normal  individuals,  will  make  the 
diagnostic  approach  in  these  individuals  somewhat  difficult.  Signifi-
cant  morbidity  related  to  peptic  diathesis  has  been  described  when 
stopping PPIs in gastrinoma patients; therefore, a systematic approach 
in stopping these agents is warranted (see below). The first step in the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2453

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2454

TABLE 324-8  When to Obtain a Fasting Serum Gastrin Level
Multiple ulcers
Ulcers in unusual locations; associated with severe esophagitis; resistant 
to therapy with frequent recurrences; in the absence of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug ingestion or H. pylori infection
Ulcer patients awaiting surgery
Extensive family history for peptic ulcer disease
Postoperative ulcer recurrence
Basal hyperchlorhydria
Unexplained diarrhea or steatorrhea
Hypercalcemia
Family history of pancreatic islet, pituitary, or parathyroid tumor
Prominent gastric or duodenal folds

evaluation of a patient suspected of having ZES is to obtain a fasting 
gastrin  level.  A  list  of  clinical  scenarios  that  should  arouse  suspicion 
regarding this diagnosis is shown in Table 324-8. Fasting gastrin levels 
obtained using a dependable assay are usually <150 pg/mL. A normal 
fasting  gastrin,  on  two  separate  occasions,  especially  if  the  patient  is 
on  a  PPI,  virtually  excludes  this  diagnosis.  Virtually  all  gastrinoma 
patients  will  have  a  gastrin  level  >150–200  pg/mL.  Measurement  of 
fasting  gastrin  should  be  repeated  to  confirm  the  clinical  suspicion. 
Some of the commercial biochemical assays used for measuring serum 
gastrin may be inaccurate. Variable specificity of the antibodies used 
have led to both false-positive and false-negative fasting gastrin levels, 
placing in jeopardy the ability to make an accurate diagnosis of ZES.

Multiple processes can lead to an elevated fasting gastrin level, the 
most frequent of which are gastric hypochlorhydria and achlorhydria, 
with  or  without  pernicious  anemia.  Gastric  acid  induces  feedback 
inhibition of gastrin release. A decrease in acid production will subse-
quently lead to failure of the feedback inhibitory pathway, resulting in 
net hypergastrinemia. Gastrin levels will thus be high in patients using 
antisecretory  agents  for  the  treatment  of  acid  peptic  disorders  and 
dyspepsia. H. pylori infection can also cause hypergastrinemia. Addi-
tional causes of elevated gastrin include retained gastric antrum; G-cell 
hyperplasia;  gastric  outlet  obstruction;  renal  insufficiency;  massive 
small-bowel obstruction; and conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
vitiligo, diabetes mellitus, and pheochromocytoma. Although a fasting 
gastrin  >10  times  normal  is  highly  suggestive  of  ZES,  two-thirds  of 
patients will have fasting gastrin levels that overlap with levels found 
in  the  more  common  disorders  outlined  above,  especially  if  a  PPI  is 
being taken by the patient. The effect of the PPI on gastrin levels and 
acid secretion will linger several days after stopping the PPI; therefore, 
it should be stopped for a minimum of 7 days before testing. During 
this period, the patient should be placed on a histamine H2 antagonist, 
such as famotidine, twice to three times per day. Although this type of 
agent has a short-term effect on gastrin and acid secretion, it needs to 
be stopped 24 h before repeating fasting gastrin levels or performing 
some of the tests highlighted below. The patient may take antacids for 
the final day, stopping them ~12 h before testing is performed. Height-
ened awareness of complications related to gastric acid hypersecretion 
during the period of PPI cessation is critical.

The  next  step  at  times  needed  for  establishing  a  biochemical 
diagnosis  of  gastrinoma  is  to  assess  acid  secretion.  Nothing  further 
needs  to  be  done  if  decreased  acid  output  in  the  absence  of  a  PPI  is 
observed. A pH can be measured on gastric fluid obtained either dur-
ing endoscopy or through nasogastric aspiration; a pH <3 is suggestive 
of a gastrinoma, but a pH >3 is not helpful in excluding the diagnosis. 
In  those  situations  where  the  pH  is  >3,  formal  gastric  acid  analysis 
should be performed if available. Normal BAO in nongastric surgery 
patients is typically <5 meq/h. A BAO >15 meq/h in the presence of 
hypergastrinemia is considered pathognomonic of ZES, but up to 12% 
of  patients  with  common  PUD  may  have  elevated  BAO  to  a  lesser 
degree that can overlap with levels seen in ZES patients. In an effort 
to improve the sensitivity and specificity of gastric secretory studies, a 
BAO/MAO ratio was established using pentagastrin infusion as a way 
to maximally stimulate acid production, with a BAO/MAO ratio >0.6 

being highly suggestive of ZES. Pentagastrin is no longer available in 
the United States, making measurement of MAO virtually impossible. 
An  endoscopic  method  for  measuring  gastric  acid  output  has  been 
developed but requires further validation.

Gastrin  provocative  tests  have  been  developed  in  an  effort  to  dif-
ferentiate  between  the  causes  of  hypergastrinemia  and  are  especially 
helpful in patients with indeterminate acid secretory studies. The tests 
are  the  secretin  stimulation  test  and  the  calcium  infusion  study;  the 
latter is rarely, if ever, utilized in our current environment due to the 
cumbersome nature of the test and its lower sensitivity and specificity 
than secretin stimulation. The most sensitive and specific gastrin pro-
vocative test for the diagnosis of gastrinoma is the secretin study. An 
increase in gastrin of ≥120 pg within 15 min of secretin injection has a 
sensitivity and specificity of >90% for ZES. PPI-induced hypochlorhy-
dria or achlorhydria may lead to a false-positive secretin test; thus, this 
agent must be stopped for 1 week before testing.

In light of the limited availability of the biochemical studies outlined 
above, more studies make a diagnosis of gastrinoma based on the pres-
ence of elevated gastrin and low gastric pH in the right clinical setting 
coupled  with  tumor  localization  tests  outlined  below  and  positive 
histology by biopsy (difficult to obtain). Revised guidelines for the best 
approach to establishing a diagnosis of gastrinoma taking into consid-
eration the above outlined limitations are being considered, but none 
have replaced the established guidelines outlined earlier in this section.

Tumor  Localization  Once  the  biochemical  diagnosis  of  gastri-
noma  has  been  confirmed  (if  possible),  the  tumor  must  be  located. 
Multiple  imaging  studies  have  been  used  in  an  effort  to  enhance 
tumor  localization  (Table  324-9).  The  broad  range  of  sensitivity  is 
due to the variable success rates achieved by the different investiga-
tive  groups.  Endoscopic  ultrasound  (EUS)  permits  imaging  of  the 
pancreas with a high degree of resolution (<5 mm). This modality is 
particularly helpful in excluding small neoplasms within the pancreas 
and in assessing the presence of surrounding lymph nodes and vascu-
lar involvement, but it is not very sensitive (43%) for finding duodenal 
lesions.  This  latter  observation  has  led  some  to  not  include  EUS  in 
the routine preoperative evaluation of a patient suspected of having 
a  gastrinoma.  Several  types  of  endocrine  tumors  express  cell-sur-
face receptors for somatostatin, in particular the subtype 2 (SSTR2). 
This permits the localization, staging, and prediction of therapeutic 
response  to  somatostatin  analogues  (see  below)  by  gastrinomas. 
The original functional scinitigraphic tool developed measuring the 
uptake of the stable somatostatin analogue 111In-pentetreotide (Oct-
reoScan) has demonstrated sensitivity and specificity rates of >80%. 
More  recently,  positron  emission  tomography  (PET)–computed 
tomography (CT) with  68Ga-DOTATATE has been developed and is 
superior  than  OctreoScan  for  assessing  tumor  presence  in  patients 
with  well-differentiated  NETs  such  as  gastrinomas,  with  sensitivity 
and  specificity  of  >90%,  making  it  the  functional  imaging  study  of 
choice when available. 18F-Fluordeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET imaging 

TABLE 324-9  Sensitivity of Imaging Studies in Zollinger-Ellison 
Syndrome

SENSITIVITY, %

STUDY
Ultrasound
CT scan
Selective angiography
Portal venous sampling
SASI
MRI
OctreoScan
EUS

PRIMARY 
GASTRINOMA
21–28
55–70
35–68
70–90
55–78
55–70
67–86
80–100

METASTATIC 
GASTRINOMA
14
>85
33–86
N/A
41
>85
80–100
N/A

Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasonography; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; N/A, not applicable; OctreoScan, imaging with 
111In-pentetreotide; SASI, selective arterial secretin injection.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2454

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemhas been found to be useful in pancreatic NETs, including gastrinomas, 
particularly as a prognostic marker.

Up to 50% of patients have metastatic disease at diagnosis. Success 
in controlling gastric acid hypersecretion has shifted the emphasis of 
therapy toward providing a surgical cure. Detecting the primary tumor 
and excluding metastatic disease are critical in view of this paradigm 
shift.  Once  a  biochemical  diagnosis  has  been  confirmed,  the  patient 
should first undergo an abdominal CT scan, magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI), or OctreoScan/PET-CT with 68Ga-DOTATATE (depending 
on availability) to exclude metastatic disease. Once metastatic disease 
has  been  excluded,  an  experienced  endocrine  surgeon  may  opt  for 
exploratory laparotomy with intraoperative ultrasound or transillumi-
nation. In other centers, careful examination of the peripancreatic area 
with EUS, accompanied by endoscopic exploration of the duodenum 
for primary tumors, will be performed before surgery. Selective arterial 
secretin injection may be a useful adjuvant for localizing tumors in a 
subset of patients. The extent of the diagnostic and surgical approach 
must be carefully balanced with the patient’s overall physiologic condi-
tion and the natural history of a slow-growing gastrinoma.

TREATMENT
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome

Treatment of functional endocrine tumors is directed at ameliorat-
ing  the  signs  and  symptoms  related  to  hormone  overproduction, 
curative resection of the neoplasm, and attempts to control tumor 
growth in metastatic disease.

PPIs  are  the  treatment  of  choice  and  have  decreased  the  need 
for total gastrectomy. Initial PPI doses tend to be higher than those 
used for treatment of GERD or PUD. The initial dose of omepra-
zole,  lansoprazole,  rabeprazole,  or  esomeprazole  should  be  in  the 
range of 60 mg in divided doses in a 24-h period. When gastric acid 
analysis was more widely available, dosing was adjusted to achieve 
a  BAO  <10  meq/h  (at  the  drug  trough)  in  surgery-naive  patients 
and to <5 meq/h in individuals who have previously undergone an 
acid-reducing  operation.  Close  monitoring  of  clinical  symptoms 
when  starting  PPIs  and  increasing  the  dose  accordingly  are  para-
mount. Although the somatostatin analogue has inhibitory effects 
on gastrin release from receptor-bearing tumors and inhibits gastric 
acid secretion to some extent, PPIs have the advantage of reducing 
parietal cell activity to a greater degree. Despite this, octreotide or 
lanreotide  may  be  considered  as  adjunctive  therapy  to  the  PPI  in 
patients with tumors that express somatostatin receptors and have 
peptic symptoms that are difficult to control with high-dose PPI.

The  ultimate  goal  of  surgery  would  be  to  provide  a  definitive 
cure.  Improved  understanding  of  tumor  distribution  has  led  to 
immediate cure rates as high as 33% with 10-year disease-free inter-
vals  as  high  as  95%  in  sporadic  gastrinoma  patients  undergoing 
surgery. A positive outcome is highly dependent on the experience 
of the surgical team treating these rare tumors. Surgical therapy of 
gastrinoma patients with MEN 1 remains controversial because of 
the difficulty in rendering these patients disease-free with surgery. 
In  contrast  to  the  encouraging  postoperative  results  observed  in 
patients with sporadic disease, <5% of MEN 1 patients are disease-
free  5  years  after  an  operation.  Moreover,  in  contrast  to  patients 
with sporadic ZES, the clinical course of MEN 1 patients tends to be 
benign and rarely leads to disease-related mortality, recommending 
that early surgery be deferred. Some groups suggest surgery only if 
a clearly identifiable, nonmetastatic lesion is documented by struc-
tural  studies.  Others  advocate  a  more  aggressive  approach,  where 
all patients free of hepatic metastasis are explored and all detected 
tumors in the duodenum are resected; this is followed by enucle-
ation of lesions in the pancreatic head, with a distal pancreatectomy 
to follow. The outcome of the two approaches has not been clearly 
defined. Laparoscopic surgical interventions may provide attractive 
approaches in the future but currently seem to be of some limited 
benefit in patients with gastrinoma because a significant percentage 
of the tumors may be extrapancreatic and difficult to localize with a 

laparoscopic approach. Finally, patients selected for surgery should 
be  individuals  whose  health  status  would  lead  them  to  tolerate  a 
more aggressive operation and obtain the long-term benefits from 
such aggressive surgery, which are often witnessed after 10 years.

Therapy of metastatic endocrine tumors in general remains sub-
optimal; gastrinomas are no exception. In light of the observation 
that  in  many  instances  tumor  growth  is  indolent  and  that  many 
individuals  with  metastatic  disease  remain  relatively  stable  for 
significant periods of time, many advocate not instituting systemic 
tumor-targeted  therapy  until  evidence  of  tumor  progression  or 
refractory  symptoms  not  controlled  with  PPIs  are  noted.  Medical 
approaches, including biologic therapy (IFN-α, long-acting soma-
tostatin  analogues,  and  peptide  receptor  radionuclides),  systemic 
chemotherapy  (streptozotocin,  5-fluorouracil,  and  doxorubicin), 
and  hepatic  artery  embolization,  may  lead  to  significant  toxicity 
without  a  substantial  improvement  in  overall  survival.  Use  of 
temozolomide  with  capecitabine  has  demonstrated  radiographic 
regression  and  progression-free  survival  in  patients  with  well- 
differentiated  NETs  in  the  range  of  70%  and  18  months,  respec-
tively.  Systemic  therapy  with  radiolabeled  somatostatin  analogues 
(peptide  receptor  radiotherapy  [PRRT])  has  been  used  in  the 
therapy  of  metastatic  NETs  and  appears  to  be  very  promising  in 
terms of radiographic regression, symptoms, and progression-free 
survival,  but  additional  studies  are  warranted.  Several  promising 
therapies are being explored, including radiofrequency ablation or 
cryoablation of liver lesions and use of agents that block the VEGF 
receptor pathway (sunitinib), the mammalian target of rapamycin, 
and immune checkpoint inhibitors (Chap. 87).

Surgical  approaches,  including  debulking  surgery  and  liver 
transplantation for hepatic metastasis, have also produced limited 
benefit.

The overall 5- and 10-year survival rates for gastrinoma patients 
are  62–75%  and  47–53%,  respectively.  Individuals  with  the  entire 
tumor  resected  or  those  with  a  negative  laparotomy  have  5-  and 
10-year  survival  rates  >90%.  Patients  with  incompletely  resected 
tumors have 5- and 10-year survival rates of 43 and 25%, respec-
tively.  Patients  with  hepatic  metastasis  have  <20%  survival  at   
5 years. Favorable prognostic indicators include primary duodenal 
wall tumors, isolated lymph node tumor, the presence of MEN 1, 
and undetectable tumor upon surgical exploration. Poor outcome is 
seen in patients with shorter disease duration; female sex; older age 
at diagnosis; higher gastrin levels (>10,000 pg/mL); poor histologic 
differentiation;  high  proliferative  index;  large  pancreatic  primary 
tumors (>3 cm); metastatic disease to lymph nodes, liver, and bone; 
and Cushing’s syndrome. Rapid growth of hepatic metastases is also 
predictive of poor outcome.

2455

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

 ■ STRESS-RELATED MUCOSAL INJURY
Patients suffering from shock, sepsis, massive burns, severe trauma, or 
head injury can develop acute erosive gastric mucosal changes or frank 
ulceration with bleeding. Classified as stress-induced gastritis or ulcers, 
injury is most commonly observed in the acid-producing (fundus and 
body) portions of the stomach. The most common presentation is GI 
bleeding, which is usually minimal but can occasionally be life-threat-
ening. Respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and under-
lying coagulopathy are risk factors for bleeding, which tends to occur 
48–72 h after the acute injury or insult.

Histologically,  stress  injury  does  not  contain  inflammation  or  H. 
pylori;  thus,  “gastritis”  is  a  misnomer.  Although  elevated  gastric  acid 
secretion  may  be  noted  in  patients  with  stress  ulceration  after  head 
trauma (Cushing’s ulcer) and severe burns (Curling’s ulcer), mucosal 
ischemia, breakdown of the normal protective barriers of the stomach, 
systemic  release  of  cytokines,  poor  GI  motility,  and  oxidative  stress 
also play an important role in the pathogenesis. Acid must contribute 
to injury in view of the significant drop in bleeding noted when acid 
inhibitors are used as prophylaxis for stress gastritis.

Improvement  in  the  general  management  of  intensive  care  unit 
patients has led to a significant decrease in the incidence of GI bleeding 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2455

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2456 due  to  stress  ulceration.  The  estimated  decrease  in  bleeding  is  from 
20–30% to <5%. This improvement has led to some debate regarding 
the need for prophylactic therapy. The high mortality associated with 
stress-induced clinically important GI bleeding (>40%) and the limited 
benefit of medical (endoscopic, angiographic) and surgical therapy in a 
patient with hemodynamically compromising bleeding associated with 
stress ulcer/gastritis support the use of preventive measures in high-risk 
patients (mechanically ventilated, coagulopathy, multiorgan failure, or 
severe burns). Meta-analysis comparing H2 blockers with PPIs for the 
prevention of stress-associated clinically important and overt GI bleed-
ing  demonstrates  superiority  of  the  latter  without  increasing  the  risk 
of nosocomial infections, increasing mortality, or prolonging intensive 
care unit length of stay. Therefore, PPIs are the treatment of choice for 
stress prophylaxis. Oral PPI is the best option if the patient can tolerate 
enteral administration. Pantoprazole is available as an intravenous for-
mulation for individuals in whom enteral administration is not possi-
ble. If bleeding occurs despite these measures, endoscopy, intraarterial 
vasopressin, and embolization are options. If all else fails, then surgery 
should  be  considered.  Although  vagotomy  and  antrectomy  may  be 
used, the better approach would be a total gastrectomy, which has an 
exceedingly high mortality rate in this setting. Concerns with the effect 
of PPIs on the immune system coupled with the high cost of this agent 
have led to several comparative studies of PPIs and H2 receptor antago-
nists for stress prophylaxis in patients requiring mechanical ventilation. 
Although the PEPTIC trial demonstrated comparative efficacy between 
the two agents regarding mortality, technical aspects of the study led to 
some limitation in the final interpretation of the results.
 ■ GASTRITIS
The  term  gastritis  should  be  reserved  for  histologically  documented 
inflammation  of  the  gastric  mucosa.  Gastritis  is  not  the  mucosal 
erythema  seen  during  endoscopy  and  is  not  interchangeable  with 
“dyspepsia.” The etiologic factors leading to gastritis are broad and het-
erogeneous. Gastritis has been classified based on time course (acute 
vs chronic), histologic features, and anatomic distribution or proposed 
pathogenic mechanism (Table 324-10).

The correlation between the histologic findings of gastritis, the clin-
ical picture of abdominal pain or dyspepsia, and endoscopic findings 
noted  on  gross  inspection  of  the  gastric  mucosa  is  poor.  Therefore, 
there is no typical clinical manifestation of gastritis.

Acute  Gastritis  The  most  common  causes  of  acute  gastritis  are 
infectious. Acute infection with H. pylori induces gastritis. However, 

TABLE 324-10  Classification of Gastritis
I.  Acute gastritis

A.  Acute Helicobacter pylori infection
B.  Other acute infectious gastritides
1.  Bacterial (other than H. pylori)
2.  Helicobacter heilmannii
3.  Phlegmonous
4.  Mycobacterial
5.  Syphilitic
6.  Viral
7.  Parasitic
8.  Fungal

II.  Chronic atrophic gastritis

A.  Type A: Autoimmune, body-predominant
B.  Type B: H. pylori–related, antral-predominant
C.  Indeterminate

III.  Uncommon forms of gastritis

A.  Lymphocytic
B.  Eosinophilic
C.  Crohn’s disease
D.  Sarcoidosis
E.  Isolated granulomatous gastritis
F.  Russell body gastritis

H. pylori acute gastritis has not been extensively studied. It is reported as 
presenting with sudden onset of epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting, 
and limited mucosal histologic studies demonstrate a marked infiltrate 
of neutrophils with edema and hyperemia. If not treated, this picture 
will evolve into one of chronic gastritis. Hypochlorhydria lasting for up 
to 1 year may follow acute H. pylori infection.

Bacterial  infection  of  the  stomach  or  phlegmonous  gastritis  is  a 
rare, potentially life-threatening disorder characterized by marked and 
diffuse acute inflammatory infiltrates of the entire gastric wall, at times 
accompanied  by  necrosis.  Elderly  individuals,  alcoholics,  and  AIDS 
patients may be affected. Potential iatrogenic causes include polypec-
tomy and mucosal injection with India ink. Organisms associated with 
this entity include streptococci, staphylococci, Escherichia coli, Proteus, 
and Haemophilus species. Failure of supportive measures and antibiot-
ics may result in gastrectomy.

Other  types  of  infectious  gastritis  may  occur  in  immunocompro-
mised  individuals  such  as  AIDS  patients.  Examples  include  herpetic 
(herpes simplex) or CMV gastritis. The histologic finding of intranu-
clear inclusions would be observed in the latter.

Chronic Gastritis  Chronic gastritis is identified histologically by 
an  inflammatory  cell  infiltrate  consisting  primarily  of  lymphocytes 
and plasma cells, with very scant neutrophil involvement. Distribution 
of the inflammation may be patchy, initially involving superficial and 
glandular  portions  of  the  gastric  mucosa.  This  picture  may  progress 
to  more  severe  glandular  destruction,  with  atrophy  and  metaplasia. 
Chronic gastritis has been classified according to histologic character-
istics. These include superficial atrophic changes and gastric atrophy. 
The  association  of  atrophic  gastritis  with  the  development  of  gastric 
cancer has led to the development of endoscopic and serologic markers 
of  severity.  Some  of  these  include  gross  inspection  and  classification 
of  mucosal  abnormalities  during  standard  endoscopy,  magnification 
endoscopy, endoscopy with narrow band imaging and/or autofluores-
cence imaging, and measurement of several serum biomarkers includ-
ing pepsinogen I and II levels, gastrin-17, and anti–H. pylori serologies. 
The clinical utility of these tools is currently being explored.

The  early  phase  of  chronic  gastritis  is  superficial  gastritis.  The 
inflammatory changes are limited to the lamina propria of the surface 
mucosa,  with  edema  and  cellular  infiltrates  separating  intact  gastric 
glands.  The  next  stage  is  atrophic  gastritis.  The  inflammatory  infil-
trate extends deeper into the mucosa, with progressive distortion and 
destruction of the glands. The final stage of chronic gastritis is gastric 
atrophy. Glandular structures are lost, and there is a paucity of inflam-
matory  infiltrates.  Endoscopically,  the  mucosa  may  be  substantially 
thin, permitting clear visualization of the underlying blood vessels.

Gastric glands may undergo morphologic transformation in chronic 
gastritis. Intestinal metaplasia denotes the conversion of gastric glands 
to a small intestinal phenotype with small-bowel mucosal glands con-
taining goblet cells. The metaplastic changes may vary in distribution 
from patchy to fairly extensive gastric involvement. Intestinal metapla-
sia is an important predisposing factor for gastric cancer (Chap. 80).

Chronic gastritis is also classified according to the predominant site 
of involvement. Type A refers to the body-predominant form (autoim-
mune), and type B is the antral-predominant form (H. pylori–related). 
This classification is artificial in view of the difficulty in distinguishing 
between these two entities. The term AB gastritis has been used to refer 
to a mixed antral/body picture.
TYPE A GASTRITIS  The less common of the two forms involves primar-
ily the fundus and body, with antral sparing. Traditionally, this form of 
gastritis has been associated with pernicious anemia (Chap. 95) in the 
presence of circulating antibodies against parietal cells and IF; thus, it is 
also called autoimmune gastritis. H. pylori infection can lead to a similar 
distribution of gastritis. The characteristics of an autoimmune picture 
are not always present.

Antibodies to parietal cells have been detected in >90% of patients 
with  pernicious  anemia  and  in  up  to  50%  of  patients  with  type  A 
gastritis. The parietal cell antibody is directed against H+,K+-ATPase.  
T cells are also implicated in the injury pattern of this form of gastritis. 
A subset of patients infected with H. pylori develop antibodies against 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2456

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemH+,K+-ATPase,  potentially  leading  to  the  atrophic  gastritis  pattern 
seen  in  some  patients  infected  with  this  organism.  The  mechanism 
is  thought  to  involve  molecular  mimicry  between  H.  pylori  LPS  and 
H+,K+-ATPase.

Parietal cell antibodies and atrophic gastritis are observed in family 
members  of  patients  with  pernicious  anemia.  These  antibodies  are 
observed in up to 20% of individuals aged >60 and in ~20% of patients 
with  vitiligo  and  Addison’s  disease.  About  one-half  of  patients  with 
pernicious  anemia  have  antibodies  to  thyroid  antigens,  and  ~30% 
of  patients  with  thyroid  disease  have  circulating  anti–parietal  cell 
antibodies.  Anti-IF  antibodies  are  more  specific  than  parietal  cell 
antibodies for type A gastritis, being present in ~40% of patients with 
pernicious  anemia.  Another  parameter  consistent  with  this  form  of 
gastritis being autoimmune in origin is the higher incidence of specific 
familial histocompatibility haplotypes such as HLA-B8 and HLA-DR3. 
Low pepsinogen levels have also been observed; thus, this marker has 
been used as an additional diagnostic tool in autoimmune gastritis.

The parietal cell–containing gastric gland is preferentially targeted 
in this form of gastritis, and achlorhydria results. Parietal cells are the 
source of IF, the lack of which will lead to vitamin B12 deficiency and its 
sequelae (megaloblastic anemia, neurologic dysfunction).

Gastric acid plays an important role in feedback inhibition of gastrin 
release  from  G  cells.  Achlorhydria,  coupled  with  relative  sparing  of 
the antral mucosa (site of G cells), leads to hypergastrinemia. Gastrin 
levels can be markedly elevated (>500 pg/mL) in patients with perni-
cious anemia. ECL cell hyperplasia with frank development of gastric 
carcinoid  tumors  may  result  from  gastrin  trophic  effects.  Hypergas-
trinemia and achlorhydria may also be seen in nonpernicious anemia–
associated type A gastritis.
TYPE  B  GASTRITIS  Type  B,  or  antral-predominant,  gastritis  is  the 
more common form of chronic gastritis. H. pylori infection is the cause 
of this entity. Although described as “antral-predominant,” this is likely 
a  misnomer  in  view  of  studies  documenting  the  progression  of  the 
inflammatory process toward the body and fundus of infected individ-
uals. The conversion to a pangastritis is time dependent and estimated 
to require 15–20 years. This form of gastritis increases with age, being 
present in up to 100% of persons aged >70. Histology improves after 
H.  pylori  eradication.  The  number  of  H.  pylori  organisms  decreases 
dramatically  with  progression  to  gastric  atrophy,  and  the  degree  of 
inflammation  correlates  with  the  level  of  these  organisms.  Early  on, 
with antral-predominant findings, the quantity of H. pylori is highest 
and  a  dense  chronic  inflammatory  infiltrate  of  the  lamina  propria  is 
noted, accompanied by epithelial cell infiltration with polymorphonu-
clear leukocytes (Fig. 324-16).

Multifocal  atrophic  gastritis,  gastric  atrophy  with  subsequent 
metaplasia, has been observed in chronic H. pylori–induced gastritis. 
This may ultimately lead to development of gastric adenocarcinoma 

FIGURE  324-16  Chronic  gastritis  and  H.  pylori  organisms.  Steiner  silver  stain  of 
superficial  gastric  mucosa  showing  abundant  darkly  stained  microorganisms 
layered over the apical portion of the surface epithelium. Note that there is no tissue 
invasion.

2457

(Fig.  324-8;  Chap.  80).  H.  pylori  infection  is  now  considered  an 
independent risk factor for gastric cancer. Worldwide epidemiologic 
studies have documented a higher incidence of H. pylori infection in 
patients with adenocarcinoma of the stomach as compared to control 
subjects.  Seropositivity  for  H.  pylori  is  associated  with  a  three-  to 
sixfold  increased  risk  of  gastric  cancer.  This  risk  may  be  as  high  as 
ninefold  after  adjusting  for  the  inaccuracy  of  serologic  testing  in  the 
elderly.  The  mechanism  by  which  H.  pylori  infection  leads  to  cancer 
is unknown, but it appears to be related to the chronic inflammation 
induced  by  the  organism.  Eradication  of  H.  pylori  as  a  general  pre-
ventative measure for gastric cancer is being evaluated but is not yet 
recommended.

Infection with H. pylori is also associated with development of a low-
grade  B-cell  lymphoma,  gastric  MALT  lymphoma  (Chap.  108).  The 
chronic T-cell stimulation caused by the infection leads to production 
of cytokines that promote the B-cell tumor. The tumor should be ini-
tially staged with a CT scan of the abdomen and EUS. Tumor growth 
remains  dependent  on  the  presence  of  H.  pylori,  and  its  eradication 
is often associated with complete regression of the tumor. The tumor 
may take more than a year to regress after treating the infection. Such 
patients should be followed by EUS every 2–3 months. If the tumor is 
stable or decreasing in size, no other therapy is necessary. If the tumor 
grows, it may have become a high-grade B-cell lymphoma. When the 
tumor  becomes  a  high-grade  aggressive  lymphoma  histologically,  it 
loses responsiveness to H. pylori eradication.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
4

P
e
p
t
i
c
U
l
c
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TREATMENT
Chronic Gastritis
Treatment in chronic gastritis is aimed at the sequelae and not the 
underlying  inflammation.  Patients  with  pernicious  anemia  will 
require  parenteral  vitamin  B12  supplementation  on  a  long-term 
basis. Eradication of H. pylori is often recommended even if PUD 
or  a  low-grade  MALT  lymphoma  is  not  present.  Expert  opinion 
suggests that patients with atrophic gastritis complicated by intes-
tinal  metaplasia  without  dysplasia  should  undergo  surveillance 
endoscopy every 3 years.

Miscellaneous Forms of Gastritis  Lymphocytic gastritis is char-
acterized histologically by intense infiltration of the surface epithelium 
with lymphocytes. The infiltrative process is primarily in the body of 
the stomach and consists of mature T cells and plasmacytes. The etiol-
ogy of this form of chronic gastritis is unknown. It has been described 
in  patients  with  celiac  sprue,  but  whether  there  is  a  common  factor 
associating these two entities is unknown. No specific symptoms sug-
gest lymphocytic gastritis. A subgroup of patients has thickened folds 
noted  on  endoscopy.  These  folds  are  often  capped  by  small  nodules 
that contain a central depression or erosion; this form of the disease 
is  called  varioliform  gastritis.  H.  pylori  probably  plays  no  significant 
role in lymphocytic gastritis. Therapy with glucocorticoids or sodium 
cromoglycate has obtained unclear results.

Marked  eosinophilic  infiltration  involving  any  layer  of  the  stom-
ach  (mucosa,  muscularis  propria,  and  serosa)  is  characteristic  of 
eosinophilic  gastritis.  Affected  individuals  will  often  have  circulating 
eosinophilia  with  clinical  manifestation  of  systemic  allergy.  Involve-
ment  may  range  from  isolated  gastric  disease  to  diffuse  eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis.  Antral  involvement  predominates,  with  prominent 
edematous folds being observed on endoscopy. These prominent antral 
folds can lead to outlet obstruction. Patients can present with epigastric 
discomfort, nausea, and vomiting. Treatment with glucocorticoids has 
been successful.

Several  systemic  disorders  may  be  associated  with  granulomatous 
gastritis.  Gastric  involvement  has  been  observed  in  Crohn’s  disease. 
Involvement may range from granulomatous infiltrates noted only on 
gastric  biopsies  to  frank  ulceration  and  stricture  formation.  Gastric 
Crohn’s disease usually occurs in the presence of small-intestinal dis-
ease. Several rare infectious processes can lead to granulomatous gas-
tritis, including histoplasmosis, candidiasis, syphilis, and tuberculosis. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2457

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2458 Other unusual causes of this form of gastritis include sarcoidosis, idio-
pathic granulomatous gastritis, and eosinophilic granulomas involving 
the  stomach.  Establishing  the  specific  etiologic  agent  in  this  form  of 
gastritis  can  be  difficult,  at  times  requiring  repeat  endoscopy  with 
biopsy and cytology. Occasionally, a surgically obtained full-thickness 
biopsy of the stomach may be required to exclude malignancy.

Russell body gastritis (RBG) is a mucosal lesion of unknown etiol-
ogy that has a pseudotumoral endoscopic appearance. Histologically, it 
is defined by the presence of numerous plasma cells containing Russell 
bodies (RBs) that express kappa and lambda light chains. Only 10 cases 
have been reported, and 7 of these have been associated with H. pylori 
infection. The lesion can be confused with a neoplastic process, but it 
is benign in nature, and the natural history of the lesion is not known. 
There have been cases of resolution of the lesion when H. pylori was 
eradicated.

Immune  checkpoint  inhibitor–induced  enterocolitis  and  gastritis 
are  recognized  sequelae  of  these  oncologic  therapies.  The  gastritis 
typically occurs later in the course of therapy. The diagnosis is made 
by the histologic findings on gastric mucosal biopsies obtained endo-
scopically. This is an important diagnosis to make since therapy with 
glucocorticoids and potentially IL-6 receptor blockers will be required. 
Moreover, this side effect will have an effect on the oncologic therapy 
prescribed.

 ■ MÉNÉTRIER’S DISEASE
Ménétrier’s  disease  (MD)  is  a  very  rare  gastropathy  characterized  by 
large,  tortuous  mucosal  folds.  MD  has  an  average  age  of  onset  of 
40–60  years  with  a  male  predominance.  The  differential  diagnosis 
of  large  gastric  folds  includes  ZES,  malignancy  (lymphoma,  infiltrat-
ing  carcinoma),  infectious  etiologies  (CMV,  histoplasmosis,  syphilis, 
tuberculosis),  gastritis  polyposa  profunda,  and  infiltrative  disorders 
such  as  sarcoidosis.  MD  is  most  commonly  confused  with  large  or 
multiple gastric polyps (prolonged PPI use) or familial polyposis syn-
dromes.  The  mucosal  folds  in  MD  are  often  most  prominent  in  the 
body and fundus, sparing the antrum. Histologically, massive foveolar 
hyperplasia (hyperplasia of surface and glandular mucous cells) and a 
marked reduction in oxyntic glands and parietal cells and chief cells are 
noted.  This  hyperplasia  produces  the  prominent  folds  observed.  The 
pits of the gastric glands elongate and may become extremely dilated 
and tortuous. Although the lamina propria may contain a mild chronic 
inflammatory infiltrate including eosinophils and plasma cells, MD is 
not considered a form of gastritis. The etiology of this unusual clinical 
picture in children is often CMV, but the etiology in adults is unknown. 
Overexpression of the growth factor TGF-α has been demonstrated in 
patients with MD. The overexpression of TGF-α in turn results in over-
stimulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway 
and  increased  proliferation  of  mucus  cells,  resulting  in  the  observed 
foveolar hyperplasia.

The clinical presentation in adults is usually insidious and progres-
sive.  Epigastric  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,  anorexia,  peripheral  edema, 
and weight loss are signs and symptoms in patients with MD. Occult GI 
bleeding may occur, but overt bleeding is unusual and, when present, 
is due to superficial mucosal erosions. In fact, bleeding is more often 
seen in one of the common mimics of MD, gastric polyposis. Twenty 
to  100%  of  patients  (depending  on  time  of  presentation)  develop  a 
protein-losing  gastropathy  due  to  hypersecretion  of  gastric  mucus 
accompanied by hypoalbuminemia and edema. Gastric acid secretion 
is  usually  reduced  or  absent  because  of  the  decreased  parietal  cells. 
Large gastric folds are readily detectable by either radiographic (bar-
ium  meal)  or  endoscopic  methods.  Endoscopy  with  deep  mucosal 
biopsy,  preferably  full  thickness  with  a  snare  technique,  is  required 
to establish the diagnosis and exclude other entities that may present 
similarly.  A  nondiagnostic  biopsy  may  lead  to  a  surgically  obtained 
full-thickness biopsy to exclude malignancy. Although MD is consid-
ered  premalignant  by  some,  the  risk  of  neoplastic  progression  is  not 
defined. Complete blood count, serum gastrin, serum albumin, CMV 
and H. pylori serology, and pH testing of gastric aspirate during endos-
copy should be included as part of the initial evaluation of patients with 
large gastric folds.

TREATMENT
Ménétrier’s Disease
Medical therapy with anticholinergic agents, prostaglandins, PPIs, 
prednisone,  somatostatin  analogues  (octreotide),  and  H2  receptor 
antagonists  yields  varying  results.  Ulcers  should  be  treated  with 
a  standard  approach.  The  discovery  that  MD  is  associated  with 
overstimulation  of  the  EGFR  pathway  has  led  to  the  successful 
use  of  the  EGF  inhibitory  antibody,  cetuximab,  in  these  patients. 
Specifically, four of seven patients who completed a 1-month trial 
with  this  agent  demonstrated  near  complete  histologic  remission 
and improvement in symptoms. Cetuximab is now considered the 
first-line treatment for MD, leaving partial or total gastrectomy for 
severe  disease  with  persistent  and  substantial  protein  loss  despite 
therapy with this agent.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Bindu  S  et  al:  Non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs) 
and  organ  damage:  A  current  perspective.  Biochem  Pharmacol 
180:114147, 2020.

Bjarnason  I  et  al:  Mechanisms  of  damage  to  the  gastrointestinal 
tract  from  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs.  Gastroenterology 
154:500, 2018.

Brandi ML et al: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: Latest insights. 

Endocr Rev 42:133, 2021.

Chey  WD  et  al:  ACG  clinical  guideline:  Treatment  of  Helicobacter 

pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol 112:212, 2017.

Engevik AC et al: The physiology of the gastric parietal cell. Physiol 

Rev 100:573, 2019.

Jensen RT, Ito T: Gastrinoma; Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, 

MA, 2020. https://europepmc.org/article/NBK/nbk279075.

Kavitt RT et al: Diagnosis and treatment of peptic ulcer disease. Am 

J Med 132:447, 2019.

Pennelli G et al: Gastritis: Update on etiological features and histolog-

ical practice approach. Pathologica 112:153, 2020.

Savarino V et al: Proton pump inhibitors: Use and misuse in the clin-

ical setting. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 11:1123, 2018.

Yao  X,  Smolka  AJ:  Gastric  parietal  cell  physiology  and  Helicobacter 

pylori-induced disease. Gastroenterology 156:2158, 2019.

325 Disorders of Absorption

Deborah C. Rubin

A wide range of diseases affect gastrointestinal (GI) absorptive func-
tion  and  may  result  in  malabsorption  syndromes.  These  disorders 
affect one or more of the three phases of enteral nutrient processing. 
Luminal  digestion  is  initiated  by  lingual  and  gastric  lipase  and  gas-
tric  pepsin,  and  continues  in  the  small  bowel  by  the  actions  of  pan-
creatic  enzymes  and  bile  salts.  Small  intestinal  mucosal  digestion 
and  absorption  are  mediated  by  enterocyte  brush  border  enzymes 
including disaccharidases, enterokinases, and peptidases, which digest 
nutrients  upon  contact,  and  by  mixed  micelles  containing  lipids  and 
bile salts. Protein and carbohydrate digestive products are transported 
into  the  enterocyte  by  carriers  and  transporters,  and  lipids  enter  by 
diffusion mediated by micelles. Once in the enterocyte, nutrients may 
be reprocessed for post mucosal absorption and entry into lymphatics 
(long-chain  triglycerides  as  part  of  chylomicrons)  or  are  transported 
into  the  bloodstream.  Malabsorptive  diseases  or  syndromes  can  be 
classified  by  their  effects  on  one  or  more  of  these  three  phases  of 
absorption (Table 325-1).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2458

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 325-1  Classification of Malabsorption Syndromes
Inadequate digestion
  Postgastrectomya
  Deficiency or inactivation of pancreatic lipase

  Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

  Chronic pancreatitis
  Pancreatic carcinoma
  Cystic fibrosis
  Pancreatic insufficiency—congenital or acquired

  Gastrinoma—acid inactivation of lipase
  Drugs—orlistat
Reduced intraduodenal bile-acid concentration/impaired micelle formation
  Liver disease

  Parenchymal liver disease
  Cholestatic liver disease

  Bacterial overgrowth in small intestine:

  Anatomic stasis
  Afferent loop
  Stasis/blind
  Loop/strictures/fistulae

Functional stasis
  Diabetesa
  Sclerodermaa

Intestinal pseudo-obstruction

Interrupted enterohepatic circulation of bile salts

Ileal resection
  Crohn’s disease

  Drugs (binding or precipitating bile salts)—neomycin, cholestyramine, calcium 
carbonate
Impaired mucosal absorption/mucosal loss or defect

Intestinal resection or bypassa
Inflammation, infiltration, or infection:
  Crohn’s diseasea
  Amyloidosis
  Sclerodermaa
  Lymphomaa
  Eosinophilic enteritis
  Mastocytosis
  Tropical sprue

Celiac disease
Collagenous sprue
Whipple’s diseasea
Radiation enteritisa
Folate and vitamin B12 deficiency
Infections—giardiasis
Graft vs host disease

  Genetic disorders

  Disaccharidase deficiency
  Agammaglobulinemia
  Abetalipoproteinemia
  Hartnup disease
  Cystinuria

Impaired nutrient delivery to and/or from intestine:
  Lymphatic obstruction

Circulatory disorders
  Congestive heart failure
  Constrictive pericarditis
  Mesenteric artery atherosclerosis
  Vasculitis

  Lymphomaa
  Lymphangiectasia

Endocrine and metabolic disorders
  Diabetesa
  Hypoparathyroidism
  Adrenal insufficiency
  Hyperthyroidism
  Carcinoid syndrome

aMalabsorption caused by more than one mechanism.

Disorders of absorption also have diverse clinical presentations. For 
example,  the  deficiency  of  a  single  brush  border  membrane  protein 
such as lactase causes symptoms of diarrhea by affecting the absorption 
of one nutrient, lactose. Celiac sprue may be localized to the duodenum 

and present with isolated iron deficiency, or may cause diffuse intesti-
nal mucosal disease, affecting the absorption of multiple nutrients and 
causing a constellation of symptoms and clinical presentations.

2459

Definition of Diarrhea  Diarrhea is the most common symptom 
associated with disorders of absorption. For most patients, diarrhea as 
a symptom is defined as an increase in stool number or frequency, or a 
change in consistency. Because normal bowel patterns may vary from 
as many as two to four bowel movements per day to one stool per week, 
it is critical to use an objective measure of diarrhea to help direct eval-
uation. In health, stool volume or weight is <200 mL or <200 g respec-
tively in 24 h. Collection of stool for weight/volume determination is 
one of the most useful tools for an evaluation of diarrhea. In particular, 
a 72-h collection for weight/volume and fecal fat determination is the 
gold  standard  for  documenting  the  presence  of  steatorrhea,  or  fatty 
stool.  Steatorrhea,  defined  as  increased  stool  fat  excretion  to  >7%  of 
dietary fat, is a common manifestation of malabsorption. Steatorrhea 
often  results  in  large,  bulky,  and  malodorous  stools.  Malabsorption 
of  single  nutrients  like  lactose  may  result  in  an  osmotic  diarrhea,  in 
which  the  osmotically  active  unabsorbed  nutrient  causes  fluid  to  be 
drawn  into  the  GI  tract  lumen.  Malabsorptive  diarrhea  frequently  is 
precipitated by eating and resolves or significantly decreases at night, 
with fasting, and thus can frequently be distinguished from secretory 
diarrheas, for example from infectious causes such as bacterial entero-
toxigenic  Escherichia  coli.  In  this  circumstance,  intestinal  fluid  and 
electrolyte  secretion  is  stimulated  by  enterotoxin  and  will  continue 
even during fasting.

OVERVIEW: NUTRIENT DIGESTION  
AND ABSORPTION
Luminal digestive processes begin in the mouth and proceed through-
out  the  GI  tract,  mediated  by  salivary  amylase,  lingual  and  gastric 
lipases, gastric acid, pancreatic enzymes, and bile salts. As nutrients are 
digested in the lumen of the proximal GI tract, they are further pro-
cessed by enterocyte brush border enzymes including disaccharidases 
such  as  lactase  and  sucrase-isomaltase,  which  produce  monosaccha-
rides,  and  peptidases,  which  hydrolyze  polypeptides  into  tripeptides 
and  dipeptides  and  amino  acids.  Lipids  in  mixed  micelles  are  then 
absorbed into enterocytes.

The  surface  area  of  the  small  bowel,  which  is  normally  6–12  ft 
long, is further enhanced by circular folds, villi, and microvilli. Fol-
lowing uptake into enterocytes, nutrients are further processed and 
transported into the lymphatics or into the portal circulation for use 
by  other  cells  throughout  the  body.  The  intestine  is  also  presented 
with  7–9  L  of  fluid  daily,  a  volume  comprising  dietary  fluid  intake 
(1–2  L/day)  and  salivary,  gastric,  pancreatic,  biliary,  and  intestinal 
fluid (6–7 L/day). In health, almost all of this fluid is reabsorbed by the 
small bowel and colon, resulting in a normal stool volume of <200 mL 
or stool weight of <200 g.

 ■ SPECIFIC NUTRIENTS
Lipids  Lipid absorption is a complex process that requires hydroly-
sis by pancreatic enzymes and bile salts for physiochemical dispersion 
of  fats,  followed  by  absorption  of  processed  lipid  nutrients  dispersed 
in bile salt–mixed micelles across the intestinal epithelium. Bile acids 
are  synthesized  in  the  liver,  secreted  into  the  intestinal  lumen,  and 
constantly recirculated by absorption in the ileum. The ileum expresses 
fibroblast  growth  factor  19  (FGF19),  which  is  a  physiologic  bile  acid 
sensor.  FGF19  is  secreted  from  the  ileum  into  the  bloodstream  in 
response  to  bile  acid  flux  and  negatively  regulates  hepatic  bile  acid 
synthesis by affecting the transcription of hepatic CYP7A1.

Thus  assimilation  of  dietary  lipid  requires  three  integrated  pro-
cesses:  an  intraluminal  or  digestive  phase,  a  mucosal  or  absorptive 
phase, and a delivery or postabsorptive phase (Table 325-2).

Gastric  lipases  begin  the  lipolytic  process.  Following  entry  into 
the  small  bowel,  long-chain  triglycerides,  with  carbon  lengths  >12 
and that are the major component of dietary lipid, are hydrolyzed by 
pancreatic lipases into fatty acids and monoglyceride during a process 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
5

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

A
b
s
o
r
p
t
i
o
n

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2459

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2460

TABLE 325-2  Defects in Lipid Digestion and Absorption in Steatorrhea

PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC 
DEFECT

DISEASE EXAMPLE

Chronic pancreatitis

Decreased lipase 
secretion
Decreased intraduodenal 
bile acids

Mucosal dysfunction

Celiac disease

PHASE, PROCESS

Digestive

Lipolysis formation

Micelle formation

Absorptive

Mucosal uptake and 
re-esterification

Postabsorptive

Chylomicron formation
Delivery from intestine

Absent β-lipoproteins
Abnormal lymphatics

Abetalipoproteinemia
Intestinal 
lymphangiectasia

called lipolysis (Fig. 325-1). Long-chain free fatty acids are dispersed 
by bile salts into mixed micelles, which contact the brush border and 
permit  fatty  acid  absorption  into  enterocytes  across  this  specialized 
apical membrane. The other two types of fatty acids that compose fats, 
medium-chain and short-chain fatty acids, are soluble in the unstirred 
water layer. Medium-chain triglycerides with carbon chain lengths of 
8–12 are found in coconut oil. Long-chain fatty acids are re-esterified 
to triglycerides in enterocytes, packaged into chylomicrons that con-
tain  apolipoproteins  on  the  surface,  which  are  subsequently  secreted 
into  the  extracellular  space,  and  because  of  their  size,  are  excluded 
from capillaries and enter the lymphatics. Medium-chain triglycerides 
do  not  require  micelle  formation  or  pancreatic  lipolysis  as  they  are 
directly  absorbed  intact  from  the  small  bowel  into  the  bloodstream, 
and  short-chain  fatty  acids  (carbon  length  <8)  are  produced  by  and 
absorbed in the colon.

Carbohydrates  Dietary  carbohydrate  consists  of  starch,  sucrose, 
lactose,  maltose,  and  monosaccharides  such  as  glucose  and  fructose. 
Starch  is  digested  by  salivary  α-amylase  in  the  mouth,  followed  by 
pancreatic  amylase.  The  main  products  include  maltotriose,  maltose, 
and α-dextrins. These are further digested on the brush border mem-
brane by disaccharidases such as glucoamylase and sucrase-isomaltase. 
Dietary lactose is digested by brush border lactase, sucrose by sucrase, 
and  trehalose  by  trehalase.  The  final  digested  products  are  glucose, 
fructose, and galactose, which are transported into the enterocyte by 
transporters such as SLCA5 (formerly SGLT-1), which transports glu-
cose or galactose in a sodium-dependent manner, and GLUT-5, which 
transports  fructose  by  facilitated  diffusion.  Glucose,  galactose,  and 
fructose exit the cell via GLUT-2.

Pancreas

Liver

Jejunal Mucosa

Proteins  Dietary protein digestion begins in the stomach by pepsin. 
Pancreatic  proteases  including  endopeptidases,  exopeptidases,  and 
trypsin  are  activated  in  the  small-bowel  lumen.  Trypsinogen  is  acti-
vated by brush border enterokinase to generate active trypsin. Trypsin 
in  turn  activates  chymotrypsinogen  to  chymotrypsin,  proelastase  to 
elastase,  and  procarboxypeptidases  to  carboxypeptidases  A  and  B. 
These enzymes digest protein into di peptides, tripeptides, larger poly-
peptides,  or  free  amino  acids.  At  the  brush  border,  peptidases  digest 
larger  peptides  into  dipeptides  and  tripeptides  or  free  amino  acids, 
which  enter  the  enterocyte  via  specialized  carriers.  Most  dipeptides 
and tripeptides are further metabolized intracellularly by cytoplasmic 
peptidase into amino acids, which directly enter the bloodstream via 
carriers in the basolateral membrane. Small amounts of dipeptides and 
tripeptides may also enter the bloodstream.

 ■ LUMINAL PHASE OF DIGESTION
The  luminal  phase  of  digestion  begins  in  the  mouth,  starting  with 
mastication  and  lipase  secretion  by  the  tongue  and  salivary  glands. 
The stomach continues the luminal digestive process, via gastric acid, 
gastric  lipase,  and  pepsin  secretion  as  well  as  mechanical  trituration 
of contents. In the small-bowel lumen, pancreatic enzymes (amylase, 
lipases, carboxypeptidase, trypsin, and other endopeptidases) contrib-
ute to carbohydrate, lipid, and protein digestion, respectively. Bile salts 
produced by the liver are secreted into the intestinal lumen (and reab-
sorbed in the ileum via the enterohepatic circulation) and are required 
for efficient lipid absorption.

Disorders That Affect the Luminal Phase of Digestion  The 
luminal phase may be disrupted by disorders of gastric and intestinal 
motility  including  the  sequelae  of  gastric  surgery,  systemic  diseases 
such  as  scleroderma,  or  endocrine  disorders  such  as  diabetes  mel-
litus,  pancreatic  diseases  leading  to  pancreatic  insufficiency  with 
reduced pancreatic enzyme secretion, or luminal bile salt deficiency 
caused by hepatobiliary disease, ileal disease, or small-bowel bacterial 
overgrowth.

Gastric Resection  Surgical procedures that remove or bypass part 
of the stomach and duodenal bulb such as Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for 
weight loss, or resection of the gastric antrum and duodenal bulb with 
creation of a Billroth II anastomosis for treatment of peptic ulcer dis-
ease, result in rapid gastric emptying into the jejunum, which leads to 
diarrhea and weight loss due to inadequate mixing of luminal nutrients 
with bile and pancreatic secretions.

Disordered  Intestinal  Motility  Hyperthyroidism  may  cause 
diarrhea  and  malabsorption  due  to  increased  intestinal  motility  with 
rapid  transit,  also  resulting  in  inadequate  nutrient  mixing  with  pan-
creaticobiliary secretions. Long-standing diabetes mellitus may result 
in damage to the enteric nervous system resulting 
in  increased  motility  and  diarrhea,  or  reduced 
motility  and  constipation.  Disorders  that  affect 
the intestinal smooth muscle such as connective 
tissue disorders including scleroderma may have 
profound effects on GI motility.

Lymphatics

Delivery

Lipolysis

Fatty acids

β-Monoglyceride

s
e
d
i
r
e
c
y
g
i
r
T

l

Micellar
Solubilization
with Bile Acid

Absorption

(1) Esterification

Fatty acids

β-Monoglyceride

s
e
d
i
r
e
c
y
g
i
r
T

l

To tissues
for utilization
of fat

Cholesterol
Phospholipid
β–Lipoprotein

(2) Chylomicron
      formation 

FIGURE  325-1  Schematic  representation  of  lipid  digestion  and  absorption.  Dietary  lipid  is  in  the  form  of 
long-chain triglycerides. The overall process can be divided into (1) a digestive phase that includes both 
lipolysis and micelle formation requiring pancreatic lipase and conjugated bile acids, respectively, in the 
duodenum; (2) an absorptive phase for mucosal uptake and re-esterification; and (3) a postabsorptive phase 
that includes chylomicron formation and exit from the intestinal epithelial cell via lymphatics. (Courtesy of 
John M. Dietschy, MD; with permission.)

Pancreatic  Disorders  Chronic  pancreatitis 
(see  Chap.  348)  may  result  in  a  marked  reduc-
tion in pancreatic enzyme secretion and pancre-
atic  insufficiency,  with  subsequent  fat,  protein, 
and  carbohydrate  malabsorption.  Patients  with 
chronic pancreatitis present with steatorrhea, or 
fatty  stools,  which  are  often  voluminous,  bulky, 
and  malodorous.  Patients  with  steatorrhea  also 
develop deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins includ-
ing vitamins A, E, and most commonly, vitamins 
D and K, which depend on the same lipid absorp-
tion  mechanisms,  and  thus  are  malabsorbed 
along  with  dietary  fat.  Weight  loss  is  common. 
For a discussion of causes of acute and chronic 
pancreatitis, please see Chap. 348.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2460

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemNORMAL

TABLE 325-4  Comparison of Bile Acid and Fatty Acid Diarrhea

2461

Extent of ileal disease
Ileal bile-acid absorption
Fecal bile-acid excretion
Fecal bile-acid loss 
compensated by hepatic 
synthesis
Bile-acid pool size
Intraduodenal (bile acid)
Steatorrhea
Response to cholestyramine
Response to low-fat diet

[Bile acids]
  >4 mM

Jejunum

Ileum

BILE ACID DIARRHEA FATTY ACID DIARRHEA
Limited
Reduced
Increased
Yes

Extensive
Reduced
Increased
No

Normal
Normal
None or mild
Yes
No

Reduced
Reduced
>20 g
No
Yes

Cholesterol

Bile acids
  0.5 g synthesized
  per day

Bile acid
  pool size
  4.0 g

Na

COLON

0.5 g
Bile acids
  excreted per day

FIGURE  325-2  Schematic  representation  of  the  enterohepatic  circulation  of  bile 
acids.  Bile-acid  synthesis  is  cholesterol  catabolism  and  occurs  in  the  liver.  Bile 
acids  are  secreted  in  bile  and  are  stored  in  the  gallbladder  between  meals  and 
at  night.  Food  in  the  duodenum  induces  the  release  of  cholecystokinin,  a  potent 
stimulus for gallbladder contraction resulting in bile-acid entry into the duodenum. 
Bile  acids  are  primarily  absorbed  via  an  Na-dependent  transport  process  that  is 
located only in the ileum. A relatively small quantity of bile acids (~500 mg) is not 
absorbed in a 24-h period and is lost in stool. Fecal bile-acid losses are matched by 
bile-acid synthesis. The bile-acid pool (the total amount of bile acids in the body) is 
~4 g and is circulated twice during each meal or six to eight times in a 24-h period.

Disorders That Result in Luminal Bile Salt Deficiency  Bile 
acid  synthesis  and  the  enterohepatic  circulation  (Fig.  325-2):  Bile 
acids are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver. The two primary 
bile acids are cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid. These are con-
jugated  in  the  liver  to  taurine  and  glycine  and  are  secreted  into  bile 
ducts,  stored  in  the  gallbladder,  and  then  delivered  to  the  intestinal 
lumen. Conjugation prevents bile acids from passive diffusion in the 
small-bowel  lumen,  retaining  bile  acid  concentrations  required  for 
lipid  absorption.  Bile  acids  emulsify  fats  and  fat-soluble  vitamins  to 
facilitate their absorption. Bile acids are efficiently reabsorbed in the 
ileum  into  the  portal  circulation  and  are  extracted  by  the  liver  in  a 
process  called  enterohepatic  circulation  (Fig.  325-2).  Small  amounts 
are deconjugated in the ileum by bacteria, or pass into the colon and 
are deconjugated and metabolized by colonic bacteria to become sec-
ondary bile acids. The two major secondary bile acids are lithocholic 
acid and deoxycholic acid.

Processes that affect any of the above pathways may result in luminal 
bile  salt  deficiency  and  malabsorption.  Thus,  hepatobiliary  diseases, 
intestinal ileal resection, extensive disease such as Crohn’s disease, and 
small-bowel bacterial overgrowth may result in luminal bile salt defi-
ciency and malabsorption (Table 325-3).

Hepatobiliary Disease  Hepatic disorders that result in decreased 
bile acid synthesis due to hepatocyte dysfunction or reduced secretion 
of bile into the gut lumen caused by diseases of the bile ducts such as 
primary sclerosing cholangitis or primary biliary cirrhosis may result 
in  luminal  bile  salt  deficiency  and  fat  malabsorption.  These  are  dis-
cussed in Chap. 346.

TABLE 325-3  Defects in Enterohepatic Circulation of Bile Acids

PROCESS
Synthesis

Biliary secretion

Maintenance of 
conjugated bile acids
Reabsorption

PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC 
DEFECT
Decreased hepatic 
function
Altered canalicular 
function
Bacterial overgrowth

DISEASE EXAMPLE
Cirrhosis

Primary biliary cirrhosis

Jejunal diverticulosis

Abnormal ileal function

Crohn’s disease

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
5

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

A
b
s
o
r
p
t
i
o
n

Ileal  Resection  or  Ileal  Disease  Diseases  that  involve  the  ileal 
mucosa or that result in ileal resection may lead to reduced recycling of 
bile acids by the enterohepatic circulation and increased entry into and 
concentration  of  bile  acids  in  the  colon,  which  produces  a  secretory 
diarrhea, or malabsorption due to inadequate bile acid concentrations 
in  the  small-bowel  lumen.  In  general,  resection  or  disease  involving 
<100  cm  of  ileum  results  in  bile  acid  spillage  into  the  colon;  resec-
tions of >100 cm result in loss of bile acids that exceed liver synthetic 
capacity, and malabsorption becomes the dominant pathophysiologic 
mechanism for diarrhea, due to bile acid deficiency (Table 325-4). The 
most common disorder of the GI tract that targets the ileum is Crohn’s 
disease  (Chap.  326),  which  is  a  chronic  inflammatory  disorder  that 
may  involve  the  entire  GI  tract,  but  most  commonly  the  ileum  and 
colon. If severe or refractory to treatment, Crohn’s disease may lead to 
chronic inflammation, marked epithelial dysfunction, and structuring 
and  fibrosis,  and  surgical  resection  may  be  required  to  treat  small-
bowel obstruction or refractory disease.

Primary Bile Acid Diarrhea  A subset of patients with functional 
diarrhea or irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea have been recently 
shown to have bile acid malabsorption. Although the mechanisms are 
still being elucidated, reduced FGF19 secretion by ileal enterocytes has 
been  observed.  FGF19  regulates  serum  7alpha-hydroxy-4-cholesten-
3-one  (C4)  levels;  reductions  in  circulating  FGF19  lead  to  increased 
hepatic bile acid synthesis via increased C4 expression. Chronic diar-
rhea  results  from  increased  bile  acid  spillage  into  the  colon,  which 
induces a secretory diarrhea.

Treatment  Bile acid sequestrants are effective in reducing diarrhea 
by binding bile acids to prevent spillage into the colon. Hepatic synthe-
sis  of  bile  acids  is  sufficient  to  maintain  intraluminal  concentrations 
that are adequate for fat absorption.

Small-Bowel  Bacterial  Overgrowth  The  intestine  contains  a 
rich microbiome. Bacterial titers increase along the horizontal axis of 
the gut from duodenum to ileum. However, intestinal disorders affect-
ing motility or causing stasis of bowel contents may lead to small-bowel 
bacterial overgrowth. These include scleroderma bowel, chronic intes-
tinal pseudo-obstruction, the creation of blind surgical loops such as 
Billroth II anastomosis, small-bowel strictures, or fibrosis from inflam-
matory  disorders  such  as  Crohn’s  disease,  and  diffuse  diverticulosis 
(Fig.  325-3).  Surgical  resection  of  the  ileocecal  valve  increases  ileal 
bacterial counts from the colon. Bacterial overgrowth causes deconju-
gation of bile acids, which facilitates their absorption in the proximal 
bowel and results in luminal bile acid deficiency, which in turn causes 
malabsorptive  diarrhea  with  steatorrhea.  Bacterial  overgrowth  may 
also damage the brush border and result in carbohydrate maldigestion  
and short-chain fatty acid production in the colon, with diarrhea and 
gas. These patients are also at risk for B12 deficiency due to bacterial 
metabolism of B12 resulting in macrocytic anemia and peripheral neu-
ropathy. In contrast, elevated serum folate levels may also be observed, 
derived from bacterial synthesis of folate.

Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth has also been observed in patients 
with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. The underlying 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2461

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
2462

FIGURE 325-3  Barium contrast small-intestinal radiologic examinations. A. Normal individual. B. Celiac disease. C. Jejunal diverticulosis. D. Crohn’s disease. (Courtesy of 
Morton Burrell, MD, Yale University; with permission.)

mechanisms  are  unclear,  but  treatment  of  bacterial  overgrowth  leads 
to  resolution  of  symptoms  in  a  subset  of  irritable  bowel  syndrome 
patients.

Diagnosis  Duodenal aspirate for bacterial titers is the gold standard 
but  is  not  generally  available  to  most  practitioners.  Breath  hydrogen 
testing  with  administration  of  lactulose,  a  nondigestible  disaccha-
ride,  is  widely  available  but  must  be  interpreted  carefully  to  avoid 
false-positive results. Many clinicians choose to treat empirically with 
antibiotics (see Treatment) and observe for resolution of symptoms.

Treatment  When  possible,  surgical  correction  of  blind  loops, 
endoscopic  or  surgical  treatment  of  strictures,  and  removal  of  large 
diverticula can be pursued for definitive therapy, in addition to treat-
ment of underlying disorders such as Crohn’s disease to avoid recurrent 
stricture formation or fibrosis. Other disorders such as scleroderma or 
other diffuse motility disorders may not be easily treated. In these cir-
cumstances, treatment with the nonabsorbable antibiotic, rifaximin, or 
with other antibiotics such as metronidazole, doxycycline, amoxicillin-
clavulinic acid, or cephalosporins for several weeks is often pursued. 
Patients may require retreatment or even chronic therapy with rotating 
antibiotics depending on the severity of symptoms.
 ■ MUCOSAL PHASE OF DIGESTION  
AND ABSORPTION
The intestinal epithelium (also known as the mucosa) plays a critical 
role in continued digestion of nutrients and absorption from the intes-
tinal lumen into the bloodstream and lymphatics.

The  small-bowel  epithelial  or  mucosal  digestive  and  absorptive 
phase  is  mediated  by  enterocytic  brush  border  enzymes,  including 
peptidases and hydrolases. Brush border enterokinase is required for 
the  conversion  of  pancreatic  trypsinogen  to  trypsin,  which  further 

activates trypsinogen and other pancreatic protease proenzymes. The 
brush  border  membrane  of  the  small-bowel  epithelium  expresses 
a  wide  variety  of  disaccharidases,  peptidases,  and  other  hydrolases 
that  continue  the  digestive  process  for  carbohydrates  and  proteins, 
with  enzymatic  digestion  of  disaccharides  to  monosaccharides  and 
dipeptidases  to  amino  acids,  which  are  then  absorbed  by  specific 
transporters. Long-chain fatty acids are re-esterified to triglycerides in 
enterocytes, packaged into chylomicrons with apolipoproteins on the 
surface,  which  are  subsequently  secreted  into  the  extracellular  space, 
and because of their size, are excluded from capillaries and enter the 
lymphatics.

INTESTINAL MUCOSAL DISORDERS
 ■ DISORDERS OF ENTEROCYTE CARBOHYDRATE 
TRANSPORTERS AND ENZYME DEFICIENCIES
Lactose  Intolerance  Due  to  Lactase  Deficiency  This  is  the 
most common brush border disaccharidase deficiency and is a frequent 
cause of diarrhea, abdominal pain, gassiness, and bloating. Lactose is 
present in many dairy products but is also a “hidden” component of a 
vast number of processed foods.

Lactose malabsorption can result from lactase deficiency, which is 
regulated  by  primary  genetic  mechanisms  (adult-type  hypolactasia) 
or secondary due to damage to the epithelial (mucosal) lining of the 
gut,  from  infections  (viral,  bacterial,  or  parasitic)  or  from  intestinal 
mucosal diseases. Congenital lactase deficiency is very rare and is an 
autosomal recessive disorder. Hypolactasia in adulthood is very com-
mon throughout the world and is considered to be the genetic wild-
type;  lactase  persistence  results  from  a  C  to  T  mutation  (LACTASE 
LCT-13910CT and LCT-13910TT) and adults with hypolactasia have 
absence  of  this  “persistence”  allele.  Lactose  is  metabolized  by  lactase 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2462

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systeminto glucose and galactose, which are both absorbed by transporters at 
the enterocyte surface. Patients who are lactase deficient have elevated 
luminal  lactose  levels  upon  ingestion  of  lactose.  The  mechanism  for 
diarrhea in lactase deficiency is complex. Undigested lactose acts as an 
osmotic substance to draw fluid into the small-bowel lumen. In addi-
tion, when unabsorbed lactose enters the colon, luminal bacteria fer-
ment lactose producing intestinal gas (hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and 
methane), bloating, and abdominal pain. Luminal lactose is metabo-
lized by bacteria into short-chain fatty acids that can be absorbed by 
the  colon,  but  watery  diarrhea  may  occur  when  a  large  lactose  load 
exceeds the colon’s absorptive capacity.
Diagnosis  When lactose intolerance is suspected, a common initial 
approach is to institute a lactose-exclusion diet and assess for resolution 
of symptoms. This is a rapid and generally effective diagnostic and ther-
apeutic method. Patients are provided with a list of lactose-containing 
foods  and  lactose-free  alternatives.  Patients  are  also  counseled  on 
alternative  calcium  sources,  because  dairy-containing  foods  are  a 
major  source  of  dietary  calcium,  which  is  important  for  osteoporosis 
prevention.

Should  the  results  of  dietary  exclusion  be  ambiguous,  a  lactose- 
tolerance  test  or  breath  hydrogen  test  may  prove  useful.  For  the  lac-
tose-tolerance  test,  patients  ingest  a  standardized  liquid  lactose  solu-
tion (usually 50 g of lactose) followed by timed measurements of serum 
glucose for 90 min. If lactose digestion is normal, glucose levels should 
rise by >20 mg/L. Serum glucose rise <20 mg/L plus the presence of 
symptoms  of  lactose  intolerance  (abdominal  discomfort,  gassiness, 
and diarrhea) is considered a positive test. A breath hydrogen test is 
performed by measuring breath hydrogen levels following ingestion of 
a standardized lactose load. Breath hydrogen levels should not exceed 
>20 ppm above the fasting baseline. Generally the peak occurs between 
2–4  h.  Both  methods  may  be  inaccurate  if  the  patient  has  abnormal 
gastric emptying or abnormal intestinal transit. Breath hydrogen mea-
surements  may  be  abnormal  in  the  setting  of  bacterial  overgrowth, 
which may cause very similar symptoms.
Treatment  Patients may elect to completely eliminate lactose from 
their  diets.  It  is  very  important  to  consider  calcium  and  vitamin  D 
supplementation because elimination of milk and soft cheeses removes 
important dietary sources. They also may need to consult a dietitian 
for guidance about hidden lactose in prepared or other foods. An alter-
native is to consider using lactase supplementation, which is available 
over the counter, but which may need to be titrated to avoid symptoms.
Glucose  Galactose  Malabsorption  This  rare  congenital  dis-
order  is  an  autosomal  recessive  disease  in  which  mutations  occur  in 
the SLC5A1 gene (also known as SGLT1). SLC5A1 is a brush border 
protein  and  member  of  the  sodium-dependent  glucose  transporter 
family; mutations in this gene result in malabsorption of glucose and 
galactose.  Gene  sequencing  has  shown  that  most  patients  have  loss 
of  function  single-nucleotide  variations.  SLC5A1  actively  transports 
glucose or galactose coupled to sodium cotransport; patients who are 
homozygous for these loss-of-function variants have severe congenital 
diarrhea and death if unrecognized. Treatment focuses on eliminating 
glucose-  and  galactose-containing  foods  and  substituting  fructose-
containing foods. Fructose is absorbed by the brush border transporter 
GLUT5 by facilitated diffusion and is not dependent on SLC5A1.
Abetalipoproteinemia  Abetalipoproteinemia  is  a  rare  disorder  of 
lipid metabolism associated with abnormal erythrocytes (acanthocytes), 
neurologic  symptoms,  and  steatorrhea  (see  Chap.  407).  Lipolysis, 
micelle  formation,  and  lipid  uptake  are  all  normal  in  patients  with 
abetalipoproteinemia, but the re-esterified triglyceride cannot exit the 
epithelial  cell  because  of  the  failure  to  produce  chylomicrons.  This 
disorder  results  from  mutation  of  microsomal  triglyceride  transfer 
protein, which catalyzes the transfer of triglyceride onto nascent apo-
lipoprotein  B  containing  particles.  Mutations  in  MTP  decrease  this 
transfer  and  decrease  formation  of  chylomicrons.  Small-intestinal 
biopsy samples obtained from these rare patients in the postprandial 
state  reveal  lipid-laden  small-intestinal  epithelial  cells  that  become 
normal in appearance after a 72- to 96-h fast.

2463

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
5

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

A
b
s
o
r
p
t
i
o
n

 ■ INTESTINAL MUCOSAL DISORDERS THAT RESULT 
IN MALABSORPTION OF MULTIPLE NUTRIENTS
Celiac  Disease  Celiac  disease,  also  known  as  celiac  sprue  or 
gluten-sensitive  enteropathy,  is  a  small  intestinal  enteropathy  that 
results from an immune response to gluten ingestion and is character-
ized by autoantibodies to tissue transglutaminase. Gluten is found in 
foods produced from wheat, rye, barley, and some varieties of oats, and 
it is a common additive to prepared foods and pharmaceuticals. Tissue 
transglutaminase is involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder, as it 
deamidates glutamine residues of gluten-derived peptides, facilitating 
their presentation by antigen-presenting cells.
Epidemiology  and  Genetics  The  incidence  and  prevalence  of 
celiac  disease  have  been  increasing  worldwide.  Increased  awareness 
among  clinicians  and  patients  has  led  to  increases  in  detection,  but 
there  is  evidence  that  the  true  incidence  appears  to  be  increasing  as 
well.  Global  prevalence  has  been  measured  at  1.4%.  In  the  United 
States, data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination sur-
vey showed seroprevalence of 0.2% in non-Hispanic black populations, 
0.3% in Hispanic individuals, and 1.0% in white populations.

The prevalence of celiac disease is 10–15% in first-degree relatives. 
Host genetic factors include histocompatibility locus antigens HLADQ2 
and DQ8; the presence of one of the two haplotypes is necessary but 
not  sufficient  for  developing  celiac  disease.  HLADQ2  and  DQ8  are 
found  in  25–35%  of  the  general  population;  because  most  carriers 
never develop celiac disease, detection of these alleles is not useful for 
diagnosis. However, a negative test is very useful for ruling out celiac 
disease, with a negative predictive value of >99%. This is particularly 
helpful  in  patients  who  self-discontinued  gluten  ingestion  prior  to 
serologic or endoscopic testing.
Presentation  Patients  with  celiac  disease  have  a  wide  variety  of 
disease  manifestations,  ranging  from  being  asymptomatic,  to  having 
isolated  iron-deficiency  anemia  due  to  duodenal  disease,  to  severe 
diarrhea,  weight  loss,  and  malabsorption  of  multiple  nutrients  with 
more  diffuse  disease.  Celiac  disease  primarily  affects  the  proximal 
small intestine; it may involve the duodenum only or may cause wide-
spread jejunal disease resulting in severe symptoms.

Diarrhea, weight loss, and growth failure in children are common 
presenting complaints, but additional signs and symptoms have become 
increasingly recognized to be associated with celiac disease, including 
bloating and irregular bowel habits, migraine headaches, and ataxia. In 
addition, patients may be identified after presenting with osteoporosis, 
iron-deficiency anemia, or detection of abnormal liver enzymes.
Mechanism  of  Diarrhea  Patients  with  celiac  disease  have  villus 
atrophy  in  the  proximal  small  intestine  and  thus  develop  steatorrhea 
from mucosal malabsorption and may have lactase deficiency. However, 
they also develop a secretory component due to crypt hyperplasia and 
fluid hypersecretion from the crypt epithelium.
Associated  Diseases  Patients  with  celiac  disease  have  a  higher 
incidence  of  other  autoimmune  disorders  such  as  type  1  diabetes 
mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease. Dermatitis herpetiformis is 
a skin disorder that is highly associated with celiac disease, character-
ized by a vesicular rash mediated by IgA deposits in the skin. Down 
syndrome  and  Turner  syndrome  patients  also  have  an  increased  risk 
of celiac disease.
Diagnosis  Patients  are  screened  for  celiac  disease  first  by  testing 
for  serum  antibodies,  including  tissue  transglutaminase  IgA,  anti- 
endomysial,  and  deamidated  anti-gliadin  antibodies.  Serum  IgA  lev-
els  are  measured  to  detect  false-negative  results  from  IgA  deficiency. 
Deamidated  anti-gliadin  IgG  antibodies  or  tissue  transglutaminase 
IgG antibodies are detectable and diagnostic in IgA-deficient patients. 
The diagnosis in adults with positive antibody levels is confirmed by 
endoscopy with small-intestinal biopsy. Biopsies typically show charac-
teristic villus blunting, crypt hyperplasia, and inflammation, including 
increased  intraepithelial  lymphocytes.  The  Marsh  classification  cate-
gorizes different types of celiac disease–related lesions and is currently 
used to quantify severity of disease involvement.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2463

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
2464

Family members of patients with celiac disease are screened if symp-
tomatic;  recommendations  regarding  screening  asymptomatic  family 
members are still controversial.

Complications  Complications of celiac disease include refractory 
celiac disease, enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma, hyposplenism, 
and small-bowel adenocarcinoma.

Refractory  Celiac  Disease  This  complication  is  most  common 
in patients with ongoing active celiac disease, found in about 10% of 
patients with persistent active disease. Patients have ongoing diarrhea 
and weight loss with persistent villus atrophy on biopsy after 1 year of 
following  a  strict  gluten-free  diet.  These  patients  also  have  negative 
celiac  serology,  confirming  their  adherence  to  the  gluten-free  diet. 
Type 1 refractory celiac disease has a normal intraepithelial lympho-
cyte population whereas type 2 disease has clonal expansion of CD3+ 
intraepithelial lymphocytes that also contain a monoclonal rearrange-
ment  of  the  gamma  chain  of  the  T-cell  receptor.  Type  2  refractory 
celiac disease has a worse prognosis due to its association with T-cell 
lymphoma, which occurs in 33–50% of cases after 5 years. The therapy 
for celiac disease–related lymphoma is intense and includes high-dose 
chemotherapy and sometimes stem cell transplantation.

Small-bowel  adenocarcinoma  is  a  very  rare  cancer  in  the  general 

population but is increased in celiac disease patients.

Therapy and Follow-up  The mainstay of celiac disease treatment 
is institution of a strict gluten-free diet. This is challenging for patients 
because of the widespread presence of gluten in both raw and prepared 
foods, inaccurate food labeling, and cross-contamination during food 
preparation. Patients must receive rigorous dietary instruction from a 
dietitian and adhere lifelong to a gluten-free diet.

For  those  patients  whose  symptoms  resolve,  serologic  follow-up 
is  generally  recommended  to  confirm  compliance  with  a  gluten-free 
diet. A follow-up biopsy to document complete healing of villus atro-
phy  is  also  generally  recommended.  However,  subsequent  biopsies 
are  not  recommended  unless  symptoms  recur.  For  patients  without 
symptom  resolution,  a  biopsy  is  required  to  determine  the  degree  of 
disease activity and to rule out other causes of persistent diarrhea and 
complications  such  as  refractory  celiac  disease  or  T-cell  lymphoma. 
The most common cause of residual disease activity is dietary nonad-
herence or inadvertent gluten exposure. These patients pursue repeat 
consultation with a dietitian and efforts to reduce restaurant or other 
out-of-the-home exposure or cross-contamination at home. If biopsies 
are  negative  but  symptoms  persist,  other  causes  of  abdominal  pain 
and  diarrhea  that  are  associated  with  celiac  disease  are  considered, 
including  irritable  bowel  syndrome,  microscopic  colitis,  small-bowel 
bacterial overgrowth, and lactose or fructose intolerance.

Nonceliac  Gluten  Sensitivity  Recently  a  subset  of  patients  has 
been described with symptoms consistent with celiac disease but with 
negative serology and negative biopsies. Upon discontinuation of glu-
ten, they have relief of abdominal pain, diarrhea, headaches/migraines, 
and other celiac disease–type symptoms. The etiology of this disorder 
is unknown.

 ■ WHIPPLE’S DISEASE
Whipple’s  disease  is  a  chronic,  multiorgan  disease  caused  by  Troph-
eryma  whipplei,  a  gram-positive  non-acid-fast,  periodic  acid–Schiff 
(PAS) positive rod, which is ubiquitous in the environment. Whipple’s 
disease most commonly occurs in middle-aged men. Classic Whipple’s 
disease is defined by the presence of arthralgias, weight loss, diarrhea, 
and abdominal pain. Other manifestations including central nervous 
system (CNS) and cardiac involvement are common and occur later in 
the disease. T. whipplei can be detected by polymerase chain reaction 
on  involved  tissue  and  is  difficult  to  detect  in  the  bloodstream.  The 
intestinal lesion is also characterized by PAS-positive macrophages.

Clinical Presentation  Arthralgias and arthritis are present for an 
average of 6 years before the GI symptoms begin, consistent with a per-
sistent and substantial lag in diagnosis, which is still a problem today. 
Joint disease is present in >80% of patients. GI manifestations include 

diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss from malabsorption. CNS 
involvement  is  common  and  may  include  symptoms  such  as  psychi-
atric manifestations or memory problems. Dementia and encephalitis 
may occur in later stages. Cardiac involvement may include endocar-
ditis, pericarditis, and myocarditis.

Diagnosis  For  patients  with  GI  manifestations,  endoscopy  with 
biopsies is performed and tissue is tested for T. whipplei by polymerase 
chain reaction. Tissue is also stained for PAS-positive macrophages and 
immunohistochemistry may also be performed to detect T. whipplei.

Treatment  Prolonged  antibiotics  are  recommended  although  the 
optimal  regimen  is  still  uncertain.  Relapses  are  common,  and  often 
associated with the first manifestations of CNS involvement.

 ■ TROPICAL SPRUE
Tropical sprue is a poorly understood syndrome that is manifested by 
chronic diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, and nutritional deficiencies, 
including both folate and vitamin B12. Malabsorption of two unrelated 
substances is required for diagnosis. This disease occurs in 8–20% of 
people  who  have  had  an  attack  of  infectious  gastroenteritis  in  India, 
and  is  considered  by  some  to  be  a  postinfectious  complication.  It  is 
prevalent in some but not all tropical areas, including southern India, 
Pakistan,  the  Philippines,  Puerto  Rico,  Haiti,  and  Cuba.  It  occurs  in 
residents of as well as visitors to these areas.

Chronic  diarrhea  in  a  tropical  environment  is  most  often  caused 
by infectious agents, including Giardia lamblia, Yersinia enterocolitica, 
Entamoeba  histolytica,  C.  difficile,  Cryptosporidium  parvum,  Isospora 
belli,  Strongyloides  stercoralis,  and  Cyclospora  cayetanensis.  Tropical 
sprue should not be entertained as a possible diagnosis until the pres-
ence of cysts and trophozoites has been excluded in three stool sam-
ples. Chronic infections of the GI tract and diarrhea are discussed in 
Chaps. 46, 133, 134, 163–168, and 223.

In the past few years, the term environmental enteropathy has been 
introduced  as  the  diagnosis  of  many  patients  (especially  infants  and 
children) who had previously been diagnosed as tropical sprue. How-
ever, exact delineation of this newly designated entity is lacking.

Etiology  Because  tropical  sprue  responds  to  antibiotics,  the  con-
sensus is that it may be caused by one or more infectious agents. None-
theless, the etiology and pathogenesis of tropical sprue are uncertain. 
First, its occurrence is not evenly distributed in all tropical areas; it is 
rarely observed in Africa, Jamaica, or Southeast Asia. Second, an occa-
sional  individual  does  not  develop  symptoms  of  tropical  sprue  until 
long after having left an endemic area. For this reason, celiac disease 
(often referred to as celiac sprue) was originally called nontropical sprue 
to distinguish it from tropical sprue. Third, multiple microorganisms 
have  been  identified  in  jejunal  aspirates,  with  relatively  little  consis-
tency among studies. Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, and 
E.  coli  have  been  implicated  in  some  studies  of  tropical  sprue,  while 
other studies have favored a role for a toxin produced by one or more 
of  these  bacteria.  Fourth,  the  incidence  of  tropical  sprue  appears  to 
have  decreased  substantially  during  the  past  two  or  three  decades, 
perhaps in relation to improved sanitation in many tropical countries 
during this time. Some have speculated that the reduced occurrence is 
attributable to the wider use of antibiotics in acute diarrhea, especially 
in travelers to tropical areas from temperate countries. Fifth, the role 
of folic acid deficiency in the pathogenesis of tropical sprue requires 
clarification. Folic acid is absorbed exclusively in the duodenum and 
proximal jejunum, and most patients with tropical sprue have evidence 
of folate malabsorption and depletion. Although folate deficiency can 
cause changes in small-intestinal mucosa that are corrected by folate 
replacement, several earlier studies reporting that tropical sprue could 
be cured by folic acid did not provide an explanation for the “insult” 
that was initially responsible for folate malabsorption.

The  clinical  pattern  of  tropical  sprue  varies  in  different  areas  of 
the world (e.g., India vs Puerto Rico). Not infrequently, individuals in 
southern India initially report the occurrence of acute enteritis before 
the  development  of  steatorrhea  and  malabsorption.  In  contrast,  in 
Puerto Rico, a more insidious onset of symptoms and a more dramatic 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2464

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2465

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
5

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

A
b
s
o
r
p
t
i
o
n

FIGURE 325-4  Small-intestinal mucosal biopsies. A. Normal individual. B. Untreated celiac disease. C. Treated celiac disease. D. Intestinal lymphangiectasia. E. Whipple’s 
disease. F. Lymphoma. G. Giardiasis. (Courtesy of Marie Robert, MD, Yale University; with permission.)

response to antibiotics are seen compared with some other locations. 
Tropical sprue in different areas of the world may not be the same dis-
ease, and similar clinical entities may have different etiologies.

gain,  and  some  morphologic  changes  in  small-intestinal  biopsy. 
Because of marked folate deficiency, folic acid is most often given 
together with antibiotics.

Diagnosis  The diagnosis of tropical sprue is based on an abnormal 
small-intestinal mucosal biopsy in an individual with chronic diarrhea 
and evidence of malabsorption who is either residing or has recently 
lived in a tropical country. The small-intestinal biopsy in tropical sprue 
does not reveal pathognomonic features but resembles, and can often 
be indistinguishable from, that seen in celiac disease (Fig. 325-4). The 
biopsy sample in tropical sprue has less villous architectural alteration 
and more mononuclear cell infiltrate in the lamina propria. In contrast 
to those of celiac disease, the histologic features of tropical sprue man-
ifest with a similar degree of severity throughout the small intestine, 
and  a  gluten-free  diet  does  not  result  in  either  clinical  or  histologic 
improvement in tropical sprue.

TREATMENT
Tropical Sprue
Broad-spectrum antibiotics and folic acid are most often curative, 
especially if the patient leaves the tropical area and does not return. 
Tetracycline should be used for up to 6 months and may be associ-
ated with improvement within 1–2 weeks. Folic acid alone induces 
hematologic remission as well as improvement in appetite, weight 

SHORT-BOWEL SYNDROME
 ■ OVERVIEW
Short-bowel syndrome results from intestinal resection to treat a mul-
titude  of  disorders  including  Crohn’s  disease,  vascular  diseases  such 
as  mesenteric  arterial  or  venous  thrombosis  resulting  in  intestinal 
ischemia,  volvulus,  trauma,  internal  herniation,  radiation  enteritis, 
and diffuse carcinoma, among others. In children, the most common 
causes of short-bowel syndrome are necrotizing enterocolitis, intestinal 
atresias,  volvulus,  and  malrotation.  Short-bowel  syndrome  is  defined 
as extensive removal of small intestine resulting in <200 cm remain-
ing small bowel. Intestinal failure is functionally defined as persistent 
parenteral nutrition dependence, generally found in patients who have 
<100 cm of remaining small bowel and no residual colon in continuity.

Clinical Features  Loss of small-bowel surface area in short-bowel 
syndrome  results  in  severe  diarrhea,  weight  loss,  and  malabsorption 
of  multiple  nutrients,  including  fat,  protein,  and  carbohydrate.  The 
severity of symptoms and ultimate dependence on parenteral nutrition 
are  generally  related  to  the  extent  of  resection,  presence  or  absence 
of  residual  colon  in  continuity,  retention  of  the  ileocecal  valve,  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2465

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
2466 severity  of  the  underlying  disease.  The  intestine  has  a  remarkable 
capacity to adapt to loss of small-bowel surface area, but this adaptive 
process  is  variable  from  patient  to  patient.  Following  resection,  the 
adapting residual intestine exhibits an increase in crypt cell prolifera-
tion resulting in epithelial hyperplasia. The adaptive process generally 
continues for up to 2 years post resection, but improvements in nutri-
ent, fluid, and electrolyte absorptive capacity have been reported even 
as late as 3–5 years after surgery. Massive diarrhea generally occurs in 
the first three postoperative months, associated with increased gastric 
acid secretion and malabsorption. Gradually, patients show enhanced 
functional  capacity  and  reduced  diarrhea.  Specific  nutrient  deficien-
cies are dependent upon which segment of gut has been removed. For 
example, resection of the ileum results in loss of B12 absorptive and bile 
salt reabsorptive capacity. Malabsorbed bile salts reach the colon and 
cause a secretory diarrhea. In addition, resection of >100 cm of ileum 
results  in  such  severe  bile  salt  malabsorption  that  the  liver  cannot 
compensate  by  increased  synthesis,  thus  precipitating  fat  malabsorp-
tion  due  to  bile  salt  insufficiency/deficiency.  Substantial  resection  of 
the colon also results in fluid and electrolyte loss and imbalance. The 
colon  also  plays  a  role  in  nutrient  absorption  because  it  metabolizes 
malabsorbed  carbohydrate  into  short-chain  fatty  acids  that  can  be 
absorbed by the colon and can contribute several hundred additional 
calories per day.

Long-Term Complications  Because massive resection often leads 
to severe fat malabsorption, fat-soluble vitamin deficiency is common, 
and vitamin D deficiency can be very difficult to treat even with high-
dose oral vitamin D supplementation, resulting in an increased risk of 
osteoporosis.  Patients  with  a  history  of  multiple  surgeries  often  have 
extensive adhesive disease, and the residual intestine may have mark-
edly abnormal motility or areas of structuring and narrowing, resulting 
in  recurrent  bacterial  overgrowth.  The  frequency  of  renal  calcium 
oxalate stones increases in patients with a shortened small bowel with 
an  intact  colon  in  continuity;  calcium  is  saponified  in  the  intestinal 
luminal contents that contain fatty acids, freeing oxalate to be absorbed 
in the colon resulting in hyperoxaluria.

Treatment  The major focus of treatment for short-bowel syndrome 
is  to  control  diarrhea  and  normalize  nutrient,  fluid,  and  electrolyte 
absorption  so  that  patients  can  maintain  their  weight  and  have  a 
healthy nutritional status without the support of parenteral nutrition. 
Medications  include  opiates  and  derivatives  including  loperamide 
and  diphenoxylate-atropine,  which  slow  intestinal  motility  to  allow 
for more contact time between luminal nutrients and the small-bowel 
mucosal  surface.  In  the  first  year  following  resection,  acid-blocking 
medications are used to treat gastric hypersecretion, including proton 
pump  inhibitors  or  histamine  2  antagonists.  Small-bowel  bacterial 
overgrowth is common and is treated with antibiotics if suspected. The 
only medication that is specific for short-bowel syndrome but limited 
for use in parenteral nutrition or intravenous fluid–dependent patients 
is teduglutide, a glucagon-like 2 peptide analog that enhances crypt cell 
proliferation  and  villus  hyperplasia,  and  increases  nutrient  and  fluid 
and  electrolyte  absorption.  Patients  treated  with  teduglutide  have  an 
average  reduction  of  20%  of  their  parenteral  nutrition  requirements. 
Greater efficacy has been noted for patients without a residual colon, 
likely due to lower circulating endogenous GLP-2 levels compared to 
those with a colon in continuity.

Dietary Therapy  Patients  with  short-bowel  syndrome  must  con-
sume three to four times their normal caloric intake to maintain their 
weight. The presence of luminal nutrients is required for the adaptive 
process to occur, so early feeding is recommended, even if parenteral 
nutrition  is  also  required.  These  effects  are  most  likely  mediated  by 
direct contact with the mucosa as well as stimulation of secretion of gut 
hormones such as glucagon-like 2.

If the patient has all or part of their colon remaining in continuity, 
a low-fat diet is instituted to reduce the concentration of malabsorbed 
fatty  acids  that  induce  a  secretory  diarrhea.  High  complex  carbohy-
drates are encouraged because when malabsorbed and present in the 
colon, they are converted to short-chain fatty acids and are absorbed, 

contributing  several  hundred  additional  kilocalories  per  day.  All 
patients are asked to take a high-potency multivitamin on a daily basis. 
Patients in whom oral nutrition fails are fed with parenteral nutrition.

Monitoring  SBS  patients  are  at  high  risk  for  osteoporosis  due  to 
dietary calcium and vitamin D malabsorption, so they are periodically 
monitored for vitamin D deficiency and calcium levels and with DEXA 
studies to assess bone density. Malabsorption of vitamins and miner-
als is common; therefore, fat-soluble vitamins, vitamin B12, folic acid, 
iron, magnesium, and zinc are monitored periodically. More unusual 
deficiencies  include  copper,  selenium  and  chromium,  but  these  are 
usually  in  PN-dependent  patients  and  can  be  corrected  by  adjusting 
daily intravenous dosages. Signs and symptoms of vitamin and mineral 
deficiency are also carefully monitored (hair loss, skin and nail changes, 
neurologic symptoms such as peripheral neuropathy, etc.).

 ■ DISORDERS OF POST-MUCOSAL ABSORPTION
Following uptake into enterocytes, nutrients are further processed and 
transported into the lymphatics or into the portal circulation for use 
by  other  cells  throughout  the  body.  Primary  or  secondary  disorders 
of  the  lymphatics  may  result  in  significant  diarrhea  and  malabsorp-
tion. Primary disorders of the intestinal lymphatics include intestinal 
lymphangiectasia,  which  may  be  congenital  or  acquired.  Secondary 
causes of intestinal lymphatic damage or blockage include retroperito-
neal fibrosis, fibrosing mesenteritis, and lymphoma. Circulatory causes 
of  impaired  delivery  of  nutrients  from  the  intestine  include  Fontan 
physiology, congestive heart failure, and constrictive pericarditis. The 
end result of damage to lymphatic channels is malabsorption and diar-
rhea with concomitant protein-losing enteropathy.

PROTEIN-LOSING ENTEROPATHY
Protein-losing  enteropathy  refers  to  a  large  group  of  GI  and  non-GI 
disorders characterized by hypoproteinemia and edema in the absence 
of liver disease with reduced protein synthesis, or kidney disease with 
proteinuria. These diseases are characterized by excess protein loss in 
the GI tract. Diseases that may result in increased protein loss into the 
GI  tract  can  be  classified  into  three  groups:  (1)  mucosal  ulceration, 
such that the protein loss primarily represents exudation across dam-
aged mucosa (e.g., ulcerative colitis, GI carcinomas); (2) nonulcerated 
mucosa,  but  with  evidence  of  mucosal  damage  so  that  the  protein 
loss  represents  loss  across  epithelia  with  altered  permeability  (e.g., 
celiac  disease  and  Ménétrier’s  disease  [hypertrophic  gastropathy]  in 
the small intestine and stomach, respectively); and (3) lymphatic dys-
function, representing either primary lymphatic disease or lymphatic 
disease  secondary  to  partial  lymphatic  obstruction  that  may  occur 
as a result of enlarged lymph nodes or cardiac disease. These result in 
increased lymphatic pressure causing exudation of protein into the GI 
tract lumen.
Diagnosis  The diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy is suggested 
by diarrhea, peripheral edema, and low serum albumin and globulin 
levels in the absence of renal and hepatic disease. An individual with 
protein-losing enteropathy rarely has selective loss of only albumin or 
only  globulins.  Therefore,  marked  reduction  of  serum  albumin  with 
normal serum globulins should suggest renal and/or hepatic disease. 
Likewise,  reduced  serum  globulins  with  normal  serum  albumin  lev-
els  are  more  likely  a  result  of  reduced  globulin  synthesis  rather  than 
enhanced globulin loss into the intestine. Alpha-1 antitrypsin, a pro-
tein that accounts for ~4% of total serum proteins and is resistant to 
proteolysis, can be used to detect enhanced rates of serum protein loss 
into the intestinal tract but cannot be used to assess gastric protein loss 
because of its degradation in an acid milieu. Alpha-1 antitrypsin can 
be measured in a spot or 24-h stool collection and if elevated, is diag-
nostic. A more accurate determination is alpha-1 antitrypsin clearance, 
measured by determining stool volume as well as both stool and plasma 
alpha-1  antitrypsin  concentrations.  In  addition  to  the  loss  of  protein 
via abnormal and distended lymphatics, peripheral lymphocytes may 
be  lost  via  lymphatics,  with  consequent  relative  lymphopenia  and 
specifically loss of CD3+ T cells. Thus, lymphopenia in a patient with 
hypoproteinemia indicates increased loss of protein into the GI tract.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2466

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2467

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
5

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

A
b
s
o
r
p
t
i
o
n

Patients with increased protein loss into the GI tract from lymphatic 
obstruction often have steatorrhea and diarrhea. The steatorrhea is a 
result of altered lymphatic flow as lipid-containing chylomicrons exit 
from  intestinal  epithelial  cells  via  intestinal  lymphatics  (Table  325-2;  
Fig.  325-4).  In  the  absence  of  mechanical  or  anatomic  lymphatic 
obstruction, intrinsic intestinal lymphatic dysfunction—with or with-
out lymphatic dysfunction in the peripheral extremities—has been des-
ignated intestinal lymphangiectasia. Similarly, ~50% of individuals with 
intrinsic peripheral lymphatic disease (Milroy’s disease) also have intes-
tinal  lymphangiectasia  and  hypoproteinemia.  Other  than  steatorrhea 
and enhanced protein loss into the GI tract, all other aspects of intes-
tinal absorptive function are normal in intestinal lymphangiectasia.
Endoscopy  and  Imaging  Endoscopy  with  biopsy  and  video 
capsule  endoscopy  may  be  performed  to  rule  out  mucosal  disease. 
Magnetic  resonance  enterography  may  be  helpful  in  children  with 
lymphangiectasia.
Other Causes  Patients who have idiopathic protein-losing enterop-
athy  without  evidence  of  GI  disease  should  be  examined  for  car-
diac  disease.  As  more  patients  with  congenital  heart  disease  reach 
adulthood,  Fontan  physiology  has  become  a  more  common  cause  of 
protein-losing  enteropathy.  Other  cardiac  causes  include  right-sided 
valvular  disease  and  chronic  pericarditis  (Chaps.  268  and  270). 
Ménétrier’s disease (also called hypertrophic gastropathy) is an uncom-
mon  entity  that  involves  the  body  and  fundus  of  the  stomach  and  is 
characterized by large gastric folds, reduced gastric acid secretion, and, 
at times, enhanced protein loss into the stomach.

TREATMENT
Protein-Losing Enteropathy

As excess protein loss into the GI tract is most often secondary to 
a  specific  disease,  treatment  should  be  directed  primarily  to  the 
underlying disease process and not to the hypoproteinemia. When 
enhanced protein loss is secondary to lymphatic obstruction, it is 
critical to establish the nature of this obstruction. Identification of 
mesenteric nodes or lymphoma may be possible by imaging studies. 
Similarly,  it  is  important  to  exclude  cardiac  disease  as  a  cause  of 
protein-losing  enteropathy.  Patients  with  congenital  heart  disease 
may be examined by intranodal lymphangiography or noncontrast 
magnetic resonance lymphangiography, and may undergo surgical 
lymphatic interventions to decompress the lymphatic system or to 
target exclusion of abnormal lymphatic channels.

The  increased  protein  loss  that  occurs  in  intestinal  lymphang-
iectasia  is  a  result  of  distended  lymphatics  associated  with  lipid 
malabsorption.  The  hypoproteinemia  is  treated  with  a  low-fat, 
high-protein  diet  and  the  administration  of  medium-chain  trig-
lycerides, which do not exit from the intestinal epithelial cells via 
lymphatics but are delivered to the body via the portal vein. Other 
medical  therapies  including  octreotide,  a  somatostatin  analog, 
intravenous  heparin,  and  budesonide  have  been  studied  but  have 
generally been ineffective.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Evaluation of the Patient with Suspected 
Malabsorption

The evaluation of patients with malabsorption is often challenging 
due to the large number of underlying disorders and the wide array 
of  available  tests.  Thus  an  extensive  history  and  careful  physical 
examination  are  essential  to  develop  a  more  limited  differential 
diagnosis, and thereby avoid extensive and unnecessary testing. 
HISTORY
A  careful  history  should  include  questions  about  symptoms 
including  abdominal  pain,  diarrhea,  weight  loss,  bloating, 

symptoms  or  signs  of  selective  nutrient  deficiency  including 
iron deficiency anemia, bone fracture, or osteoporosis suggest-
ing vitamin D and/or calcium deficiency, peripheral neuropathy 
resulting  from  vitamin  B12  deficiency,  hair  loss  that  may  result 
from generalized protein deficiency, predisposing disorders such 
as chronic pancreatitis or liver disease particularly involving the 
bile ducts such as primary biliary cholangitis or primary scleros-
ing cholangitis, history of small-bowel resection (due to Crohn’s 
disease, trauma, ischemic bowel disease, etc.), and travel history. A 
multitude of nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue and weakness 
may also be reported. The protean manifestations of malabsorption 
and the underlying pathophysiology of clinical manifestations are 
summarized in Table 325-5. 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A  careful  physical  examination  may  provide  clues  to  underlying 
nutrient deficiencies and help assess severity of the malabsorptive 
process.  For  example,  evidence  of  significant  weight  loss  may  be 
detected  by  bitemporal  wasting  and  reduced  arm  circumference, 
iron deficiency may cause nail spooning, and vitamin B12 deficiency 
may result in significant peripheral neuropathy resulting in sensory 
reduction with tingling or numbness. 
LABORATORY EXAMINATION (TABLE 325-6)
Diseases  that  exclusively  affect  the  proximal  small  intestine 
(e.g.,  celiac  disease  limited  to  the  duodenum)  may  result  in 
iron-deficiency anemia. Resection or disease of the terminal ileum 
frequently  results  in  B12  deficiency  since  B12  absorption  occurs 
exclusively  in  the  ileum,  causing  a  macrocytic  anemia.  Disorders 
that  cause  steatorrhea  are  almost  invariably  associated  with  fat- 
soluble  vitamin  deficiency,  specifically  vitamin  D  (very  common), 
vitamin  E,  vitamin  A,  and  vitamin  K.  The  functional  result  of 
vitamin K deficiency is an elevated prothrombin time/international 
normalized  ratio  (INR)  so  this  blood  test  is  frequently  measured 
instead of vitamin K levels. Serum carotene levels can suggest fat 
malabsorption  but  may  decrease  simply  due  to  poor  dietary  con-
sumption of leafy vegetables.

To diagnose steatorrhea, a spot stool can be submitted for Sudan 
III staining, which is specific for fecal fat. This is a useful qualitative 
but not quantitative test. Stool for elastase is helpful for diagnosing 
pancreatic insufficiency. A 24-h assessment of stool volume/weight 
may useful to establish the presence of clinically significant absorp-
tive  or  secretory  diarrhea  vs  diarrhea  from  other  causes  such  as 
proctitis, which causes frequent, small, low-volume stools. The gold 
standard  for  documenting  steatorrhea  is  the  72-h  fecal  fat  collec-
tion, which is performed in concert with the patient’s consumption 
of a 100-g fat diet. This test is highly accurate but difficult to obtain 
due to patient reluctance to collect stool. Also patients with fat mal-
absorption may poorly tolerate a 100-g fat diet. A diet with strictly 
quantified  albeit  reduced  fat  calories  may  be  substituted.  Finally, 
the calculation of the stool osmotic gap is a very useful and easy 
way to diagnose an osmotic diarrhea. A spot stool sample is sent 
to the lab for quantitation of fecal sodium and potassium concen-
tration. Although stool osmolality can also be measured in the lab, 
measurements are often inaccurate due to bacterial degradation of 
nonabsorbed carbohydrate as the stool sits prior to examination. 
Because normal stool osmolality reflects serum osmolality at 290 
mOsm/kg H2O, the osmotic gap may be calculated as follows:

290 – 2 (stool [Na+] + stool [K+]).

If >50–100, a stool osmotic gap is present indicating the pres-
ence  of  unmeasured  osmoles  (e.g.,  malabsorbed  lactose),  and 
osmotic  diarrhea  can  be  diagnosed.  If  <50,  one  can  presume  a 
secretory  component.  Of  note,  malabsorbed  fatty  acids  may  also 
cause  a  secretory  diarrhea  by  inducing  secretion  in  the  colon,  so 
a malabsorptive diarrhea may have both an osmotic and secretory 
component. Extensive celiac disease may cause both osmotic diar-
rhea due to malabsorbed carbohydrate and also secretory diarrhea 
due to crypt hyperplasia. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2467

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
2468 TABLE 325-5  Pathophysiology of Clinical Manifestations of 

Malabsorption Disorders
SYMPTOM OR SIGN
Weight loss/malnutrition
Diarrhea

Flatus

Glossitis, cheilosis, stomatitis

Abdominal pain
Bone pain

Tetany, paresthesia
Weakness
Azotemia, hypotension
Amenorrhea, decreased libido

Anemia
Bleeding
Night blindness/xerophthalmia
Peripheral neuropathy
Dermatitis

MECHANISM
Anorexia, malabsorption of nutrients
Impaired absorption or secretion of water and 
electrolytes; colonic fluid secretion secondary 
to unabsorbed dihydroxy bile acids and fatty 
acids
Bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed 
carbohydrate
Deficiency of iron, vitamin B12, folate, and 
vitamin A
Bowel distention or inflammation, pancreatitis
Calcium, vitamin D malabsorption, protein 
deficiency, osteoporosis
Calcium and magnesium malabsorption
Anemia, electrolyte depletion (particularly K+)
Fluid and electrolyte depletion
Protein depletion, decreased calories, 
secondary hypopituitarism
Impaired absorption of iron, folate, vitamin B12
Vitamin K malabsorption, hypoprothrombinemia
Vitamin A malabsorption
Vitamin B12 and thiamine deficiency
Deficiency of vitamin A, zinc, and essential 
fatty acid

Urinary D-xylose Test  The urinary D-xylose test for carbohydrate 
absorption provides a measure of proximal small-bowel absorptive 
function. d-Xylose, a pentose, is absorbed almost exclusively in the 
proximal small intestine and is excreted in the urine. The d-xylose 
test  is  usually  performed  by  administering  25  g  of  d-xylose  and 
collecting  urine  for  5  h.  An  abnormal  test  (excretion  of  <4.5  g) 
primarily reflects duodenal/jejunal mucosal disease. The d-xylose 
test can also be abnormal in patients with delayed gastric empty-
ing,  impaired  renal  function,  and  sequestration  in  patients  with 
large collections of fluid in a third space (i.e., ascites, pleural fluid). 
The  ease  of  obtaining  a  mucosal  biopsy  of  the  small  intestine  by 
endoscopy and the false-negative rate of the d-xylose test have led 
to  its  diminished  use.  When  small-intestinal  mucosal  disease  is 
suspected, a small-intestinal mucosal biopsy should be performed. 
Radiologic  Examination  A  small-bowel  follow-through  barium 
examination  may  be  very  useful  for  detecting  evidence  of  small-
bowel  diseases  such  as  celiac  disease,  jejunal  diverticulosis  that 
predisposes to small-bowel bacterial overgrowth, or Crohn’s disease 
(Fig.  325-3).  Magnetic  resonance  enterography  and  CT  enterogra-
phy are commonly used for diagnosis and management of inflam-
matory, stricturing disorders such as Crohn’s disease and as an initial 
assessment  of  malabsorption,  providing  a  means  to  visualize  the 
entire luminal GI tract as well as the hepatobiliary tree and pancreas. 
Endoscopic  Evaluation  and  Small-Bowel  Biopsies  Endoscopy 
with  small-bowel  biopsy  is  essential  in  the  evaluation  of  patients 

with  documented  steatorrhea  or  chronic  diarrhea,  as  well  as  to 
evaluate  abnormalities  detected  by  radiologic  imaging  or  by  cap-
sule  endoscopy.  In  patients  with  documented  steatorrhea  and  no 
evidence of pancreatic or hepatobiliary disease, an upper endoscopy 
and possible small-bowel enteroscopy are required to examine the 
small-bowel  mucosa  and  to  take  biopsies  for  analysis.  An  upper 
endoscopy  will  visualize  the  stomach  and  duodenum;  the  maxi-
mum  reach  of  the  typical  upper  endoscopy  scope  is  the  ligament 
of Treitz. Small-bowel enteroscopy using a longer scope such as a 
pediatric colonoscope can be used to visualize the jejunum. Single- 
and  double-balloon  enteroscopy  provide  a  means  for  examining 
much more of the jejunum and, if successful, will reach the ileum. 
Capsule  endoscopy  provides  another  means  for  visualizing  the 
entire small bowel. Colonoscopy can be used for a retrograde view 
and biopsy of the terminal ileum. 
Biopsy Analysis  Small-bowel pathology may be divided into the 
three groups (Table 325-7) described below.

1.  Diffuse histopathologic findings involving the entire or major-
ity  of  the  mucosa  which  are  specific  for  a  particular  disease 
entity;  these  include  Whipple’s  disease,  agammaglobulinemia 
(for  example,  combined  variable  immunodeficiency),  and  abe-
talipoproteinemia. Whipple’s disease exhibits PAS-positive mac-
rophages  and  immunohistochemical  analysis  can  detect  the 
pathogenic organism. Immune globulin deficiency is associated 
with  a  variety  of  histopathologic  findings  on  small-intestinal 
mucosal  biopsy.  The  characteristic  feature  is  the  absence  of  or 
substantial reduction in the number of plasma cells in the lamina 
propria; the mucosal architecture may be either perfectly normal 
or flat (i.e., villous atrophy). Abetalipoproteinemia is character-
ized by a normal mucosal appearance except for the presence of 
mucosal  absorptive  cells  that  contain  lipid  postprandially  and 
disappear  after  a  prolonged  period  of  either  fat-free  intake  or 
fasting.

2.  Patchy lesions that are specific for a disease entity include, for 
example,  intestinal  lymphoma  or  intestinal  lymphangiectasia. 
Several  diseases  feature  an  abnormal  small-intestinal  mucosa 
with a patchy distribution. As a result, biopsy samples obtained 
randomly or in the absence of endoscopically visualized abnor-
malities may not reveal diagnostic features. Intestinal lymphoma 
can at times be diagnosed on mucosal biopsy by the identifica-
tion  of  malignant  lymphoma  cells  in  the  lamina  propria  and 
submucosa (Chap. 108). Dilated lymphatics in the submucosa 
and sometimes in the lamina propria indicate lymphangiectasia 
associated with hypoproteinemia secondary to protein loss into 
the intestine. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis comprises a heteroge-
neous group of disorders with a spectrum of presentations and 
symptoms, with an eosinophilic infiltrate of the lamina propria, 
and with or without peripheral eosinophilia. The patchy nature 
of the infiltrate and its presence in the submucosa often lead to 
an absence of histopathologic findings on mucosal biopsy. As the 
involvement of the duodenum in Crohn’s disease is also submu-
cosal  and  not  necessarily  continuous,  mucosal  biopsies  are  not 
the most direct approach to the diagnosis of duodenal Crohn’s 
disease  (Chap.  326).  Amyloid  deposition  can  be  identified  by 

TABLE 325-6  Comparison of Different Types of Fatty Acids

Carbon chain length
Present in diet
Origin

Primary site of absorption
Requires pancreatic lipolysis
Requires micelle formation
Present in stool

LONG-CHAIN
>12
In large amounts
In diet as triglycerides

Small intestine
Yes
Yes
Minimal

MEDIUM-CHAIN
8–12
In small amounts
Only in small amounts in diet as 
triglycerides
Small intestine
No
No
No

SHORT-CHAIN
<8
No
Bacterial degradation in colon of 
nonabsorbed carbohydrate to fatty acids
Colon
No
No
Substantial

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2468

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 325-7  Diseases That Can Be Diagnosed by Small-Intestinal 
Mucosal Biopsies
LESIONS

PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS

Diffuse, Specific

Whipple’s disease

Agammaglobulinemia

Abetalipoproteinemia

Patchy, Specific

Intestinal lymphoma

Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis

Amyloidosis
Crohn’s disease
Infection by one or more 
microorganisms (see text)
Mastocytosis

Diffuse, Nonspecific

Celiac disease

Tropical sprue
Bacterial overgrowth
Folate deficiency

Vitamin B12 deficiency
Radiation enteritis
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Protein-calorie malnutrition
Drug-induced enteritis

Lamina propria includes macrophages 
containing material positive on periodic  
acid–Schiff staining
No plasma cells; either normal or absent villi 
(“flat mucosa”)
Normal villi; epithelial cells vacuolated with fat 
postprandially

Malignant cells in lamina propria and 
submucosa
Dilated lymphatics; clubbed villi
Eosinophil infiltration of lamina propria and 
mucosa
Amyloid deposits
Noncaseating granulomas
Specific organisms

Mast cell infiltration of lamina propria

Short or absent villi; mononuclear infiltrate; 
epithelial cell damage; hypertrophy of crypts
Similar to celiac disease
Patchy damage to villi; lymphocyte infiltration
Short villi; decreased mitosis in crypts; 
megalocytosis
Similar to folate deficiency
Similar to folate deficiency
Mucosal ulceration and erosion from acid
Villous atrophy; secondary bacterial overgrowth
Variable histology

Congo Red staining in some patients with amyloidosis involving 
the duodenum (Chap. 112).

3.  Diffuse  nonspecific  lesions  may  be  found  in  more  than  one 
disorder.  For  example,  villus  atrophy/absence  may  be  found  in 
celiac  disease,  tropical  sprue,  or  bacterial  overgrowth,  among 
other  disorders.  Several  microorganisms  can  be  identified  in 
small-intestinal  biopsy  samples,  establishing  a  correct  diagno-
sis.  At  times,  the  biopsy  is  performed  specifically  to  diagnose 
infection  (e.g.,  Whipple’s  disease  or  giardiasis).  In  most  other 
instances,  the  infection  is  detected  incidentally  during  the 
workup  for  diarrhea  or  other  abdominal  symptoms.  Many  of 
these  infections  occur  in  immunocompromised  patients  with 
diarrhea; the etiologic agents include Cryptosporidium, Isospora 
belli,  microsporidia,  Cyclospora,  Toxoplasma,  cytomegalovirus, 
adenovirus, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and G. lamblia. 
In  immunocompromised  patients,  when  Candida,  Aspergillus, 
Cryptococcus,  or  Histoplasma  organisms  are  seen  on  duodenal 
biopsy, their presence generally reflects systemic infection. Apart 
from  Whipple’s  disease  and  infections  in  the  immunocompro-
mised  host,  small-bowel  biopsy  is  seldom  used  as  the  primary 
mode  of  diagnosis  of  infection.  Even  giardiasis  is  more  easily 
diagnosed  by  stool  antigen  studies  and/or  duodenal  aspiration 
than by duodenal biopsy.

SUMMARY
The evaluation and management of patients with disorders of absorp-
tion  is  challenging  due  to  the  complexity  of  the  underlying  patho-
physiology and the large number of associated diseases. A diagnostic 
approach based on the information summarized in Tables 325-1 and 

325-5  should  prove  useful  for  guiding  the  care  of  these  challenging 
patients.

2469

Acknowledgments
Henry Binder wrote this chapter in prior editions and some material from 
his chapter has been retained.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Boutte  HJ,  Rubin  DC:  Short  bowel  syndrome,  in  Gastrointestinal 
Motility Disorders: A Point-of-Care Clinical Guide. E Bardan, R Shaker 
(eds). Cham, Switzerland, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
Bushyhead  D,  Quigley  EM:  Small  intestinal  bacterial  overgrowth. 

Gastroenterol Clin North Am 50:463, 2021.

Caio  G  et  al:  Celiac  disease:  A  comprehensive  current  review.  BMC 

Med 17:142, 2019.

Camilleri M, Vijayvargiya P: The role of bile acids in chronic diar-

rhea. Am J Gastroenterol 115:1596, 2020.

Elli  L  et  al:  Protein-losing  enteropathy.  Curr  Opin  Gastroenterol 

36:238, 2020.

Johnson LR: Digestion and absorption of nutrients, in Gastrointesti-
nal Physiology, 9th ed. LR Johnson. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2019, pp 
102-120.

Lagier  JC,  Raoult  D:  Whipple’s  disease  and  Tropheryma  whipplei 
infections:  When  to  suspect  them  and  how  to  diagnose  and  treat 
them. Curr Opin Infect Dis 31:463, 2018.

Lebwohl B, Rubio-Tapa A: Epidemiology, presentation and diagnosis 

of celiac disease. Gastroenterology 160:63, 2021.

Levitt DG, Levitt MD: Protein losing enteropathy: comprehensive 
review  of  the  mechanistic  association  with  clinical  and  subclinical 
disease states. Clin Exper Gastro 10:247, 2017.

Misselwitz B et al: Update on lactose malabsorption and intolerance: 
pathogenesis, diagnosis and clinical management. Gut 68: 2080, 2019.

326 Inflammatory Bowel  

Disease
Sonia Friedman, Richard S. Blumberg

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic idiopathic inflamma-
tory  disease  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  Ulcerative  colitis  (UC)  and 
Crohn’s disease (CD) are the two major types of IBD.
 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS: EPIDEMIOLOGY
UC and CD have emerged as global diseases in the twenty-first cen-
tury. They affect >2 million individuals in North America, 3.2 million 
in  Europe,  and  millions  more  worldwide.  Since  the  late  1990s,  the 
majority of studies on CD and UC show stable or falling incidence in 
the Western world. The disease burden remains high, with a prevalence 
of >0.3% in North America, Oceania, and most countries in Europe. 
In newly industrialized countries in Africa, Asia, and South America 
where  there  is  increased  urbanization  and  Westernization,  the  inci-
dence of IBD has been rising and mirrors the prior increase of IBD in 
the Western world in the twentieth century. For example, in Brazil, the 
annual percent change is +11.1% (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.8–
17.8%) for CD and +14.9% (95% CI, 10.4–19.6%) for UC, whereas in 
Taiwan, the annual percent change is +4.0% (95% CI, 1.0–7.1%) for CD 
and +4.8% (95% CI, 1.8–8.0%) for UC. In a study of newly diagnosed 
IBD cases between 2011 and 2013 from 13 countries or regions in the 
Asia Pacific, the mean annual IBD incidence per 100,000 was 1.50 (95% 
CI, 1.43–1.57). India (9.31; 95% CI, 8.38–10.31) and China (3.64; 95% 
CI,  2.97–4.42)  had  the  highest  IBD  incidences  in  Asia.  The  highest 
reported  prevalence  values  were  in  Europe  (UC,  505  per  100,000  in 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2469

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2470 TABLE 326-1  Epidemiology of IBD

Age of onset

Ethnicity
Female-to-male ratio
Smoking

Oral contraceptives
Appendectomy

Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Infections in the first year 
of life

CROHN’S DISEASE
Second to fourth 
decades and seventh to 
ninth decades

ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Second to fourth 
decades and seventh to 
ninth decades
Jewish > non-Jewish white > black > Latinx > Asian
0.51–1.58
May prevent disease 
(odds ratio 0.58)
No increased risk
Protective (risk reduction 
13–26%)
6–18% concordance
0–2% concordance
1.6 and 3 times the risk of developing IBD by age 10 
and 20 years

0.34–1.65
May cause disease (odds 
ratio 1.76)
Hazard ratio 2.82
Not protective

38–58% concordance
4% concordance

Abbreviation: IBD, inflammatory bowel disease.

Norway; CD, 322 per 100,000 in Germany) and North America (UC, 
286 per 100,000 in the United States; CD, 319 per 100,000 in Canada). 
The most likely factors that explain the geographic variability of IBD 
rates, especially the rising incidence in developing countries and urban 
areas,  are  environmental  variables  including  changes  in  diet  (with 
downstream effects on the intestinal microbiota), exposure to sunlight 
or  temperature  differences,  and  socioeconomic  status  and  hygiene 
(Table 326-1).

Increasing immigration to Western societies also has an impact on 
the  incidence  and  prevalence  of  IBD.  The  prevalence  of  UC  among 
southern  Asians  who  immigrated  to  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  was 
higher  in  comparison  to  the  European  UK  population  (17  cases  per 
100,000  persons  vs  7  per  100,000).  Spanish  patients  who  emigrated 
within Europe, but not those who immigrated to Latin America, devel-
oped IBD more frequently than controls. Individuals who have immi-
grated to Westernized countries and then returned to their country of 
birth also continue to demonstrate an increased risk of developing IBD.
Peak incidence of UC and CD is in the second to fourth decades, 
with 78% of CD studies and 51% of UC studies reporting the highest 
incidence  among  those  aged  20–29  years  old.  A  second  modest  rise 
in  incidence  occurs  between  the  seventh  and  ninth  decades  of  life. 
The female-to-male ratio ranges from 0.51 to 1.58 for UC studies and 
0.34 to 1.65 for CD studies, suggesting that the diagnosis of IBD is not  
gender-specific.  Pediatric  IBD  (patients  <17  years  old)  composes  
~20–25% of all IBD patients, and ~5% of all IBD patients are <10 years 
old. Children with IBD are also grouped as those with early-onset (EO) 
IBD  (patients  <10  years  old),  very-early-onset  (VEO)  IBD  (patients 
<6 years old), and infantile IBD (patients <2 years old). VEOIBD and 
infantile IBD mainly affect the colon and are resistant to standard med-
ications, and patients often have a strong family history of IBD, with 
at least one first-degree relative affected. In infantile IBD or VEOIBD, 
a number of rare, single genetic mutations have been identified as the 
basis for this susceptibility in up to 10% of patients, suggesting a simple 
Mendelian origin of the disease in these cases.

The greatest incidence of IBD is among white and Jewish people, but 
the incidence of IBD in Latinx and Asian people is increasing, as noted 
above. Urban areas have a higher prevalence of IBD than rural areas, 
and high socioeconomic classes have a higher prevalence than lower 
socioeconomic classes.

Epidemiologic  studies  have  identified  a  number  of  potential  envi-
ronmental  factors  that  are  associated  with  disease  risk  (Fig.  326-1). 
In Caucasian populations, smoking is an important risk factor in IBD 
with opposite effects on UC (odds ratio [OR] 0.58) and CD (OR 1.76), 
whereas  in  other  ethnic  groups  with  different  genetic  susceptibility, 
smoking  may  play  a  lesser  role.  Previous  appendectomy  with  con-
firmed appendicitis (risk reduction of 13–26%), particularly at a young 
age, has a protective effect on the development of UC across different 
geographical  regions  and  populations.  Appendectomy  is  modestly 
associated  with  the  development  of  CD,  but  this  may  be  due  to 

diagnostic bias. Oral contraceptive use is associated with an increased 
risk of CD, with a reported hazard ratio as high as 2.82 among current 
users  and  1.39  among  past  users.  The  association  between  oral  con-
traceptive use and UC is limited to women with a history of smoking. 
Infections  in  the  first  year  of  life  are  associated  with  development  of 
IBD, especially before the ages of 10 and 20 years. Breast-feeding may 
also protect against the development of IBD. Infectious gastroenteritis 
with pathogens (e.g., Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter spp., Clostrid-
ium  difficile)  increases  IBD  risk  by  two-  to  threefold.  Diets  high  in 
animal protein, sugars, sweets, oils, fish and shellfish, and dietary fat, 
especially ω-6 fatty acids, and low in ω-3 fatty acids have been impli-
cated in increasing the risk of IBD. A protective effect of vitamin D on 
the risk of CD has been reported.

IBD is a familial disease in 5–10% of patients (Fig. 326-2), and the 
strongest risk factor for the development of IBD is a first-degree rela-
tive with the disease. The children of mothers and fathers with UC have 
an  approximately  fourfold  increased  risk  of  UC,  and  the  children  of 
mothers and fathers with CD have an almost eightfold increased risk of 
CD. Some of these patients may exhibit early-onset disease during the 
first decade of life and, in CD, a concordance of anatomic site and clin-
ical type within families. In twin studies, 38–58% of monozygotic twins 
are concordant for CD, and 6–18% are concordant for UC, whereas 4% 
of dizygotic twins are concordant for CD, and 0–2% are concordant for 
UC in Swedish and Danish cohorts. In the remainder of patients, IBD 
is observed in the absence of a family history (i.e., sporadic disease).

GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS: IBD 
PHENOTYPES
IBD  location  and  behavior  show  racial  differences  that  may  reflect 
underlying  genetic  variations  and  have  important  implications  for 
diagnosis  and  management  of  disease.  Blacks  and  Latinxs  tend  to 
have  an  ileocolonic  CD  distribution.  Data  from  East  Asia  show  that 
ileocolonic  CD  is  the  most  common  CD  phenotype  (50.5–71%)  and 
perianal disease is more common in East Asian patients (30.3–58.8%) 
than  whites  (25.1–29.6%).  Pancolonic  disease  is  more  common  than 
left-sided colitis or proctitis among black, Latinx, and Asian patients 
with UC. Older Asian patients with UC (age >60) tend to have a more 
aggressive  disease  course.  Among  blacks,  joint  involvement  is  the 
predominant extraintestinal manifestation (EIM) reported and ranges 
from  15.7  to  29.6%.  Ocular  involvement  is  also  common  in  African 
Americans and ranges from 7.1 to 13%. Dermatologic manifestations 
are the most common EIMs reported in Latinxs (10–13%). Few data 
shed light on all aspects of disease in Hispanics, on the incidence and 
prevalence of IBD in blacks, and in Asians with IBD outside of Asia. 
These  ethnic  variations  indicate  the  importance  of  different  genetic 
and/or environmental factors in the pathogenesis of this disorder.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Under  physiologic  conditions,  homeostasis  normally  exists  between 
the commensal microbiota, epithelial cells that line the interior of the 
intestines (intestinal epithelial cells [IECs]), and immune cells within 
the tissues (Fig. 326-1). A consensus hypothesis is that each of these 
three major host compartments that function together as an integrated 
“supraorganism” (microbiota, IECs, and immune cells) are affected by 
specific  environmental  (e.g.,  smoking,  antibiotics,  enteropathogens) 
and genetic factors that, in a susceptible host, cumulatively and inter-
actively disrupt homeostasis during the course of one’s life and, in so 
doing, culminate in a chronic state of dysregulated inflammation; i.e., 
IBD. Although chronic activation of the mucosal immune system may 
represent an appropriate response to an infectious agent, a search for 
such an agent has thus far been unrewarding in IBD. As such, IBD is 
currently considered an inappropriate immune response to the endoge-
nous  (autochthonous)  commensal  microbiota  within  the  intestines, 
with  or  without  some  component  of  autoimmunity.  Importantly,  the 
normal, uninflamed intestines contain a large number of immune cells 
that are in a unique state of activation, in which the gut is restrained 
from  full  immunologic  responses  to  the  commensal  microbiota  and 
dietary  antigens  by  very  powerful  regulatory  pathways  that  function 
within  the  immune  system  (e.g.,  T  regulatory  cells  that  express  the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2470

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
Genetic susceptibility

2471

XBP1
NOD2
ATG16L1

TLR4
XBP1
DLG5
ECM1
ITLN1
SLC22A5
DMBT1
PTGER4

IL23R, IL12B, JAK2, STAT3, CCR6,
NOD2, TLR4, CARD9, IRF5,
ATG16L1, IRGM,  LRRK2
TNFSF15, TNFRSF6B
TNFAIP3, PTPN2/22
NLRP3, IL18RAP
ICOSL, ARPC2, STAT3, IL10

Microbial flora

IEC

Immune dysregulation

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Enteropathogens

Antibiotics

Diet, hygiene

NSAIDs, smoking

Stress

Diet, hygiene

Environmental factors

FIGURE 326-1  Pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). In IBD, the tridirectional relationship between the commensal flora (microbiota), intestinal epithelial 
cells (IECs), and mucosal immune system is dysregulated, leading to chronic inflammation. Each of these three factors is affected by genetic and environmental factors 
that determine risk for the disease. NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. (Republished with permission Annual Review of Immunology from Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease, A Kaser et al: 28:573, 2010. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)

FoxP3 transcription factor and suppress inflammation). Maintenance 
of  homeostasis  also  involves  oversight  from  local  parenchymal  cells 
including nerve, endothelial, and stromal cells, as well as the commen-
sal  microbiota  that  provide  essential  remedial  factors  necessary  for 
health and serve as a target of the immune response. During the course 
of  infections  or  other  environmental  stimuli  in  the  normal  host,  full 
activation of the lymphoid tissues in the intestines occurs but is rapidly 
superseded by dampening of the immune response and tissue repair. In 
IBD, such processes may not be regulated normally.

Monogenic

Oligogenic

Polygenic

t
e
s
n
o
y
l
r
a
E

Environment

i

n
f
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
?

U
n
d
i
a
g
n
o
s
e
d

Genetics

Familial
(10%)

Sporadic

FIGURE  326-2  A  model  for  the  syndromic  nature  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease 
(IBD). Genetic and environmental factors variably influence the development and 
phenotypic manifestations of IBD. At the one extreme, IBD is exemplified as a simple 
Mendelian disorder as observed in early-onset IBD due to single-gene defects such 
as IL10, IL10RA, and IL10RB; and at the other extreme, it may be exemplified by as yet 
to be described emerging infectious diseases. (Reproduced with permission from A 
Kaser et al: Genes and environment: how will our concepts on the pathophysiology 
of IBD develop in the future?, Dig Dis 28:395, 2010.)

GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

The genetic underpinning of IBD is known from its concordance 
in identical twins, its occurrence in the context of several genetic 
syndromes, and the development of severe, refractory IBD in early 
life in association with single-gene defects that affect the immune sys-
tem (Table 326-2). More than 60 different gene defects have been iden-
tified in patients with VEOIBD by whole exome sequencing (WES), in 
whom  the  majority  of  monogenic  mutations  have  been  discovered. 
These  include  mutations  in  genes  encoding,  for  example,  interleukin 
(IL) 10, the IL-10 receptor (IL-10R), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated 
protein-4  (CTLA4),  neutrophil  cytosolic  factor  2  protein  (NCF2), 
X-linked  inhibitor  of  apoptosis  protein  (XIAP),  lipopolysaccharide 
responsive and beige-like anchor protein (LRBA), and tetratricopeptide 
repeat domain 7A protein (TTC7), among many other genes that are 
involved in host-commensal interactions. A monogenic etiology may 
also be possible in a small subset of adult patients with IBD. In addi-
tion, IBD has a familial origin in at least 10% of afflicted individuals, 
consistent with an inherited basis for this disease (Fig. 326-2). How-
ever, the majority of cases of pediatric (non-VEOIBD) and adult IBD 
are multigenic (or polygenic) in origin, suggesting a syndromic nature 
of this disease that gives rise to multiple clinical subgroups beyond the 
simple classification as UC and CD. The polygenic nature of the disease 
has been elucidated through a variety of genetic approaches, including 
candidate gene studies, linkage analysis, and genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) that focus on the identification of disease-associated 
single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  within  the  human  genome 
and WES and whole genome sequencing to elucidate the specific muta-
tions  potentially  involved.  GWAS  have  identified  ~240  genetic  loci; 
two-thirds of these loci are associated with both disease phenotypes, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2471

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2472

TABLE 326-2  Primary Genetic Disorders Associated with IBD
NAME
Turner’s syndrome

GENETIC ASSOCIATION
Loss of part or all of X 
chromosome
Autosomal recessive 
chromosome 10q23

Hermansky-Pudlak 
syndrome

PHENOTYPE
Associated with UC and 
colonic CD
Granulomatous colitis, 
oculocutaneous albinism, 
platelet dysfunction, 
pulmonary fibrosis
Colitis, 
immunodeficiency, 
severely dysfunctional 
platelets, and 
thrombocytopenia
Granulomatous colitis, 
presents in infancy with 
hypoglycemia, growth 
failure, hepatomegaly, 
and neutropenia
UC-like autoimmune 
enteropathy, with 
endocrinopathy (neonatal 
type 1 diabetes or 
thyroiditis), dermatitis
Severe, refractory IBD in 
early life

the specific causal variants for each identified gene or locus are mostly 
unknown as most risk loci are contained within regulatory (noncod-
ing) regions of the associated genes, it is not clear whether the similar-
ities in the genetic risk factors associated with CD and UC are shared 
at a structural or functional level. The risk conferred by each identified 
gene or locus is unequal and generally small, such that only ~20% of 
the  disease  risk  is  considered  to  be  explained  by  the  current  genetic 
information.  Further,  many  of  the  genetic  risk  factors  identified  are 
also  observed  to  be  associated  with  risk  for  other  immune-mediated 
diseases, suggesting that related immunogenetic pathways are involved 
in the pathogenesis of multiple different disorders, accounting for the 
common  responsiveness  to  similar  types  of  biologic  therapies  (e.g., 
anti–tumor necrosis factor [TNF] therapies) and possibly the simulta-
neous occurrence of these disorders. The diseases and the genetic risk 
factors  that  are  shared  with  IBD  include,  for  example,  rheumatoid 
arthritis  (TNFAIP3),  psoriasis  (IL23R,  IL12B),  ankylosing  spondylitis 
(IL23R), type 1 diabetes mellitus (IL10, PTPN2), asthma (ORMDL3), 
and systemic lupus erythematosus (TNFAIP3, IL10), among others.

The  genetic  factors  that  are  recognized  to  mediate  risk  for  IBD 
have highlighted the importance of shared mechanisms of disease that 
variably  affect  CD  and/or  UC  (Table  326-3).  These  include  the  fol-
lowing: those genes that are associated with fundamental cell biologic 
processes  such  as  the  unfolded  protein  response  due  to  endoplasmic 
reticulum  stress,  autophagy,  and  metabolism  that  regulate  the  ability 
of cells to manage the physiologic needs of the intestinal environment; 
those  associated  with  innate  immunity  associated  with  nonlymphoid 
cells  that  function  in  responses  to  and  control  of  microbes;  those 
associated  with  the  regulation  of  adaptive  immunity  that  control  the 
balance  between  inflammatory  and  anti-inflammatory  cellular  path-
ways associated with lymphocytes; and, finally, those that are involved 
in  the  development  and  resolution  of  inflammation  associated  with 

Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome (WAS)

X-linked recessive 
disorder, loss of WAS 
protein function

Glycogen storage 
disease type B1

Immune dysregulation 
polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy X-linked 
(IPEX)

Early-onset IBD

Autosomal recessive 
disorder of SLC37A4 
resulting in deficiency of 
the glucose-6-phosphate 
translocase
Loss of FoxP3 
transcription factor and T 
regulatory cell function

Deficient IL-10 and IL-10 
receptor function

Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IL, interleukin; 
UC, ulcerative colitis.

with the remainder being specific for either CD or UC (Table 326-3). 
These genetic similarities account for the overlapping immunopatho-
genesis and consequently epidemiologic observations of both diseases 
in the same families and similarities in response to therapies. Because 

TABLE 326-3  Some Genetic Loci Associated with Crohn’s Disease and/or Ulcerative Colitis
CHROMOSOME

PUTATIVE GENE

GENE NAME

PROTEIN FUNCTION

Unfolded Protein Response, Autophagy and Metabolism

2q37
5q31
5q33
7p21
12q12
13q14
17q21
22q12

Innate Immunity

1q23
16q12

Adaptive Immunity

1p31
1q32
5q33
18p11

ATG16L1
SLC22A5
IRGM
AGR2
LRRK2
C13orf1
ORMDL3
XBP1

ITLN1
NOD2

IL23R
IL10
IL12B
PTPN2

Inflammation and Healing

ATG16 autophagy related 16-like 1
Solute carrier family 22, member 5
Immunity-related GTPase family, M
Anterior gradient 2
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
FAMIN/LACC1
Orosomucoid related member 1-like 3
X-box binding protein 1

Autophagy
β-Carnitine transporter
Autophagy
Unfolded protein response
Autophagy
Immunometabolic regulator
Unfolded protein response and lipid synthesis
Unfolded protein response

Intelectin 1
Nucleotide-binding oligomerization 
domain containing 2

Bacterial binding
Bacterial sensing and autophagy activation

Interleukin 23 receptor
Interleukin 10
Interleukin 12B
Protein tyrosine phosphatase, 
nonreceptor type 2

TH17 cell stimulation
Treg-associated cytokine
IL-12 p40 chain of IL-12/IL-23
T-cell regulation

3p21
5p13
6q23

6q27
9p24
17q21

MST1
PTGER4
TNFAIP3

CCR6
JAK2
STAT3

Macrophage stimulating 1
Prostaglandin E receptor 4
Tumor necrosis factor, alpha-induced 
protein 3 (A20)
Chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 6
Janus kinase 2
Signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3

Macrophage activation
PGE2 receptor
Toll-like receptor regulation

Dendritic cell migration
IL-6R and IL-23R signaling
IL-6R, IL-23R, and IL-10R signaling

CD

UC

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+

+

+
+

+
+
+

+
+
+

+

+
+

+
+
+

+
+

+
+

Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; GTPase, guanosine triphosphatase; IL, interleukin; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; Treg, T regulatory cell; UC, ulcerative colitis.
Source: Adapted from A Kaser et al: Ann Rev Immunol 28:573, 2010; Graham DB and Xavier RJ: Nature 578:527, 2020.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2472

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healing  that  control  leukocyte  recruitment  and  inflammatory  medi-
ator  production.  Each  of  these  genetic  susceptibilities  contributes  in 
an  incremental  manner  to  IBD  risk,  variably  affects  the  activities  of 
virtually  all  subtypes  of  immune  and  nonimmune  cells  within  the 
intestines,  and  encodes  mutations  (polymorphisms)  that  promote  or 
protect from IBD. Some of these loci are associated with specific sub-
types of disease such as the association between NOD2 polymorphisms 
and fibrostenosing CD or ATG16L1 and fistulizing disease, especially 
within  the  ileum.  However,  the  clinical  utility  of  these  genetic  risk 
factors for the diagnosis or determination of prognosis and therapeutic 
responses remains to be defined.

 ■ COMMENSAL MICROBIOTA AND IBD
The endogenous commensal microbiota within the intestines plays a 
central role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Humans are born with sterile 
guts and acquire their commensal microbiota initially from the mother 
during egress through the birth canal and subsequently from environ-
mental sources. A stable configuration of up to 1000 species of bacteria 
that achieves a biomass of ~1012 colony-forming units per gram of feces 
is achieved by 3 years of age, which likely persists into adult life, with 
each  individual  human  possessing  a  unique  combination  of  species. 
In addition, the intestines contain other microbial life forms including 
fungi, archaea, viruses, and protists. The microbiota is thus considered 
as  a  critical  and  sustaining  component  of  the  human  organism.  The 
establishment  and  maintenance  of  the  intestinal  microbiota  compo-
sition  and  function  are  under  the  control  of  host  (e.g.,  immune  and 
epithelial  responses),  environmental  (e.g.,  diet  and  antibiotics),  and 
likely genetic (e.g., NOD2) factors (Fig. 326-1). In turn, the microbiota, 
through  its  structural  components  and  metabolic  activity,  has  major 
influences on the epithelial and immune function of the host, which, 
through  epigenetic  effects,  may  have  durable  consequences.  During 
early life when the commensal microbiota is being established, these 
microbial effects on the host may be particularly important in deter-
mining later life risk for IBD. Specific components of the microbiota 
can  promote  or  protect  from  disease.  The  commensal  microbiota  in 
patients with both UC and CD is demonstrably different from that of 
nonafflicted  individuals,  a  state  of  dysbiosis  suggesting  the  presence 
of  microorganisms  that  drive  disease  (e.g.,  Proteobacteria  such  as 
enteroinvasive and adherent Escherichia coli) and to which the immune 
response  is  directed  and/or  the  loss  of  microorganisms  that  hinder 
inflammation  (e.g.,  Firmicutes  such  as  Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii). 
Many of the changes in the commensal microbiota occur as a conse-
quence of the inflammation and are thus potential secondary drivers 
of disease. In addition, agents that alter the intestinal microbiota such 
as metronidazole, ciprofloxacin, and elemental diets, may improve CD. 
CD may also respond to fecal diversion, demonstrating the ability of 
luminal contents to exacerbate disease.

 ■ DEFECTIVE IMMUNE REGULATION IN IBD
The mucosal immune system does not normally elicit an inflammatory 
immune response to luminal contents due to oral (mucosal) tolerance. 
Administration of soluble antigens orally, rather than subcutaneously or 
intramuscularly, leads to antigen-specific control of the response and the 
host’s ability to tolerate the antigen. Multiple mechanisms are involved 
in the induction of oral tolerance and include deletion or anergy (non-
responsiveness) of antigen-reactive T cells or induction of CD4+ T cells 
that  suppress  gut  inflammation  (e.g.,  T  regulatory  cells  expressing  the 
FoxP3  transcription  factor)  and  that  secrete  anti-inflammatory  cytok-
ines such as IL-10, IL-35, and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). 
Oral tolerance may be responsible for the lack of immune responsive-
ness to dietary antigens and the commensal microbiota in the intestinal 
lumen. In IBD, this suppression of inflammation is altered, leading to 
uncontrolled inflammation. The mechanisms of this regulated immune 
suppression are incompletely known.

Gene  knockout  (–/–)  or  transgenic  (Tg)  mouse  models  of  IBD, 
including those that are directed at genes associated with risk for the 
human  disease,  have  revealed  that  deleting  specific  cytokines  (e.g., 
IL-2,  IL-10,  TGF-β)  or  their  receptors,  deleting  molecules  associated 

2473

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

with  T-cell  antigen  recognition  (e.g.,  T-cell  antigen  receptors),  or 
interfering with IEC barrier function and the regulation of responses 
to  commensal  bacteria  (e.g.,  XBP1,  mucus  glycoproteins,  or  nuclear 
factor-κB  [NF-κB])  leads  to  spontaneous  colitis  or  enteritis.  In  the 
majority  of  circumstances,  intestinal  inflammation  in  these  animal 
models requires the presence of the commensal microbiota. However, 
in some cases, activation of certain elements of the intestinal immune 
system  may  be  exacerbated  by  the  absence  of  bacteria,  resulting  in 
severe  colitis  and  emphasizing  the  presence  of  protective  properties 
of the commensal microbiota. Thus, a variety of specific alterations in 
either  the  microbiota  or  host  can  lead  to  uncontrolled  immune  acti-
vation and inflammation directed at the intestines in mice. How these 
relate  to  human  IBD  remains  to  be  defined,  but  they  are  consistent 
with inappropriate responses of the genetically susceptible host to the 
commensal microbiota.

 ■ THE INFLAMMATORY CASCADE IN IBD
In  both  UC  and  CD,  inflammation  likely  emerges  from  the  genetic 
predisposition  of  the  host  in  the  context  of  yet-to-be-defined  envi-
ronmental factors. Once initiated in IBD by abnormal innate immune 
sensing of bacteria by parenchymal cells (e.g., IECs) and hematopoi-
etic  cells  (e.g.,  dendritic  cells),  the  immune  inflammatory  response 
is perpetuated by T-cell activation when coupled together with inad-
equate  regulatory  pathways.  A  sequential  cascade  of  inflammatory 
mediators  extends  the  response,  making  each  step  a  potential  target 
for therapy. Inflammatory cytokines from innate immune cells such as 
IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IL-23, and TNF have diverse effects on tissues. They 
promote fibrogenesis, collagen production, activation of tissue metal-
loproteinases,  and  the  production  of  other  inflammatory  mediators; 
they also activate the coagulation cascade in local blood vessels (e.g., 
increased  production  of  von  Willebrand  factor).  These  cytokines  are 
normally produced in response to infection but are usually turned off 
or inhibited by cytokines such as IL-10 and TGF-β at the appropriate 
time  to  limit  tissue  damage.  In  IBD  their  activity  is  not  regulated, 
resulting  in  an  imbalance  between  the  proinflammatory  and  anti- 
inflammatory mediators. Some cytokines activate other inflammatory 
cells  (macrophages  and  B  cells),  and  others  act  indirectly  to  recruit 
other  lymphocytes,  inflammatory  leukocytes,  and  mononuclear  cells 
from  the  bloodstream  into  the  gut  through  interactions  between 
homing  receptors  on  leukocytes  (e.g.,  α4β7  integrin)  and  addressins 
on vascular endothelium (e.g., MadCAM1). CD4+ T helper (TH) cells 
that promote inflammation are of three major types, all of which may 
be associated with colitis in animal models and perhaps humans: TH1 
cells (secrete interferon [IFN] γ), TH2 cells (secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-13), 
and TH17 cells (secrete IL-17, IL-21, IL-22). TH17 cells may also provide 
protective functions. Innate immune-like cells (ILCs) that lack T-cell 
receptors are also present in intestines, polarize to the same functional 
fates, and may similarly participate in IBD. TH1 cells induce transmural 
granulomatous inflammation that resembles CD; TH2 cells and related 
natural  killer  T  cells  that  secrete  IL-4,  IL-5,  and  IL-13  induce  super-
ficial  mucosal  inflammation  resembling  UC  in  animal  models;  and 
TH17 cells may be responsible for neutrophilic recruitment. However, 
neutralization of the cytokines produced by these cells, such as IFN-γ 
or IL-17, has yet to show efficacy in therapeutic trials. Each of these 
T-cell subsets cross-regulates each other. The TH1 cytokine pathway is 
initiated by IL-12, a key cytokine in the pathogenesis of experimental 
models of mucosal inflammation. IL-4 and IL-23, together with IL-6 
and TGF-β, induce TH2 and TH17 cells, respectively, and IL-23 inhibits 
the suppressive function of regulatory T cells. Activated macrophages 
secrete TNF and IL-6.

These  characteristics  of  the  immune  response  in  IBD  explain  the 
beneficial  therapeutic  effects  of  antibodies  to  block  proinflammatory 
cytokines or the signaling by their receptors (e.g., anti-TNF, anti-IL-12, 
anti-IL-23,  anti-IL-6,  or  Janus  kinase  [JAK]  inhibitors)  or  molecules 
associated  with  leukocyte  recruitment  (e.g.,  anti-α4β7).  They  also 
highlight  the  potential  usefulness  of  cytokines  that  inhibit  inflam-
mation  and  promote  regulatory  T  cells  or  promote  intestinal  barrier 
function  (e.g.,  IL-10)  in  the  treatment  of  IBD.  Therapies  such  as  the 
5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) compounds and glucocorticoids are also 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2473

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2474 potent inhibitors of these inflammatory mediators through inhibition 

of transcription factors such as NF-κB that regulate their expression.

PATHOLOGY
 ■ ULCERATIVE COLITIS: MACROSCOPIC FEATURES
UC is a mucosal disease that usually involves the rectum and extends 
proximally to involve all or part of the colon. About 40–50% of patients 
have disease limited to the rectum and rectosigmoid, 30–40% have dis-
ease extending beyond the sigmoid but not involving the whole colon, 
and 20% have a pancolitis. Proximal spread occurs in continuity with-
out  areas  of  uninvolved  mucosa.  When  the  whole  colon  is  involved, 
the inflammation extends 2–3 cm into the terminal ileum in 10–20% 
of patients. The endoscopic changes of backwash ileitis are superficial 
and mild and are of little clinical significance. Although variations in 
macroscopic  activity  may  suggest  skip  areas,  biopsies  from  normal- 
appearing mucosa are usually abnormal. Thus, it is important to obtain 
multiple biopsies from apparently uninvolved mucosa, whether prox-
imal or distal, during endoscopy. One caveat is that effective medical 
therapy can change the appearance of the mucosa such that either skip 
areas or the entire colon can be microscopically normal.

With  mild  inflammation,  the  mucosa  is  erythematous  and  has  a 
fine granular surface that resembles sandpaper. In more severe disease, 
the mucosa is hemorrhagic, edematous, and ulcerated (Fig. 326-3). In 
long-standing  disease,  inflammatory  polyps  (pseudopolyps)  may  be 
present as a result of epithelial regeneration. The mucosa may appear 
normal  in  remission,  but  in  patients  with  many  years  of  disease,  it 
appears  atrophic  and  featureless,  and  the  entire  colon  becomes  nar-
rowed  and  shortened.  Patients  with  fulminant  disease  can  develop  a 
toxic colitis or megacolon where the bowel wall becomes thin and the 
mucosa is severely ulcerated; this may lead to perforation.
 ■ ULCERATIVE COLITIS: MICROSCOPIC FEATURES
Histologic findings correlate well with the endoscopic appearance and 
clinical course of UC. The process is limited to the mucosa and super-
ficial  submucosa,  with  deeper  layers  unaffected  except  in  fulminant 
disease.  In  UC,  two  major  histologic  features  suggest  chronicity  and 
help  distinguish  it  from  infectious  or  acute  self-limited  colitis.  First, 
the crypt architecture of the colon is distorted; crypts may be bifid and 
reduced in number, often with a gap between the crypt bases and the 
muscularis  mucosae.  Second,  some  patients  have  basal  plasma  cells 
and multiple basal lymphoid aggregates. Mucosal vascular congestion, 
with edema and focal hemorrhage, and an inflammatory cell infiltrate 
of  neutrophils,  lymphocytes,  plasma  cells,  and  macrophages  may  be 
present. The neutrophils invade the epithelium, usually in the crypts, 

FIGURE  326-4  Medium-power  view  of  colonic  mucosa  in  ulcerative  colitis 
showing diffuse mixed inflammation, basal lymphoplasmacytosis, crypt atrophy and 
irregularity,  and  superficial  erosion.  These  features  are  typical  of  chronic  active 
ulcerative  colitis.  (Courtesy  of  Dr.  R.  Odze,  Division  of  Gastrointestinal  Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)

giving rise to cryptitis and, ultimately, to crypt abscesses (Fig. 326-4). 
Ileal changes in patients with backwash ileitis include villous atrophy 
and  crypt  regeneration  with  increased  inflammation,  increased  neu-
trophil  and  mononuclear  inflammation  in  the  lamina  propria,  and 
patchy cryptitis and crypt abscesses.
 ■ CROHN’S DISEASE: MACROSCOPIC FEATURES
CD can affect any part of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract from the mouth 
to the anus. Some 30–40% of patients have small-bowel disease alone, 
40–55% have disease involving both the small and large intestines, and 
15–25% have colitis alone. In the 75% of patients with small-intestinal 
disease,  the  terminal  ileum  is  involved  in  90%.  Unlike  UC,  which 
almost always involves the rectum, the rectum is often spared in CD. 
CD is often segmental with skip areas throughout the diseased intes-
tine  (Fig.  326-5).  Perianal  disease,  manifesting  as  perirectal  fistulas, 
fissures, abscesses, and anal stenosis, is present in one-third of patients 
with CD, particularly those with colonic involvement. Rarely, CD may 
also involve the liver and the pancreas.

Unlike UC, CD is a transmural process. Endoscopically, aphthous or 
small superficial ulcerations characterize mild disease; in more active 
disease,  stellate  ulcerations  fuse  longitudinally  and  transversely  to 

FIGURE  326-3  Ulcerative  colitis.  Diffuse 
(nonsegmental)  mucosal  disease, 
with  broad  areas  of  ulceration.  The  bowel  wall  is  not  thickened,  and  there  is  no 
cobblestoning.  (Courtesy  of  Dr.  R.  Odze,  Division  of  Gastrointestinal  Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)

FIGURE  326-5  Crohn’s  disease  of  the  colon  showing  thickening  of  the  wall,  with 
stenosis, linear serpiginous ulcers, and cobblestoning of the mucosa. (Courtesy of 
Dr. R Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, Department of Pathology, Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2474

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2475

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

TABLE 326-4  Montreal Classification of Extent and Severity of 
Ulcerative Colitis (UC)
EXTENT
E1: Ulcerative proctitis
E2: Left-sided UC (distal UC)

ANATOMY
Involvement limited to the rectum
Involvement limited to the colorectum distal to 
the splenic flexure
Involvement extends proximal to the splenic 
flexure

E3: Extensive UC (pancolitis)

SEVERITY
S0: Clinical remission
S1: Mild disease activity

S2: Moderate disease 
activity
S3: Severe disease activity

DEFINITION
Absence of symptoms
≤4 stools/d (with or without blood), absence of 
systemic illness, normal inflammatory  
markers (ESR)
≥4 stools/d but minimal signs of systemic toxicity

≥6 bloody stools/d, pulse ≥90 beats/min, 
temperature ≥37.5°C, hemoglobin <10.5 g/100 mL, 
and ESR ≥30 mm/h

Abbreviation: ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Source: C Gasche et al: A simple classification of Crohn’s disease: Report of 
the Working Party for the World Congresses of Gastroenterology, Vienna 1998. 
Inflamm Bowel Dis 6:8, 2000; and J Satsangi et al: The Montreal classification of 
inflammatory bowel disease: Controversies, consensus, and implications.  
Gut 55:749, 2006.

cramping and abdominal pain can occur with severe attacks of the dis-
ease. Other symptoms in moderate to severe disease include anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting, fever, and weight loss.

Physical  signs  of  proctitis  include  a  tender  anal  canal  and  blood 
on  rectal  examination.  With  more  extensive  disease,  patients  have 
tenderness  to  palpation  directly  over  the  colon.  Patients  with  a  toxic 
colitis have severe pain and bleeding, and those with megacolon have 
hepatic tympany. Both may have signs of peritonitis if a perforation has 
occurred. The classification of disease activity is shown in Table 326-4.

Laboratory,  Endoscopic,  and  Radiographic  Features  Active 
disease can be associated with a rise in acute-phase reactants (C-reactive 
protein  [CRP]),  platelet  count,  and  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate 
(ESR) and a decrease in hemoglobin. Fecal lactoferrin, a glycoprotein 
present  in  activated  neutrophils,  is  a  highly  sensitive  and  specific 
marker  for  detecting  intestinal  inflammation.  Fecal  calprotectin  is 
present  in  neutrophils  and  monocytes,  and  levels  correlate  well  with 
histologic  inflammation,  predict  relapses,  and  detect  pouchitis.  Both 
fecal lactoferrin and calprotectin are becoming an integral part of IBD 
management and are used frequently to rule out active inflammation 
versus symptoms of irritable bowel or bacterial overgrowth. In severely 
ill patients, the serum albumin level will fall rather quickly. Leukocy-
tosis may be present but is not a specific indicator of disease activity. 
Proctitis  or  proctosigmoiditis  rarely  causes  a  rise  in  CRP.  Diagnosis 
relies on the patient’s history, clinical symptoms, negative stool and/or 
tissue examination for bacteria, C. difficile toxin, ova and parasites, and 
viruses  depending  on  epidemiologic  considerations  and  clinical  pre-
sentation; sigmoidoscopic appearance (see Fig. 322-4A); and histology 
of rectal or colonic biopsy specimens.

Sigmoidoscopy is used to assess disease activity and is usually per-
formed  before  treatment.  If  the  patient  is  not  having  an  acute  flare, 
colonoscopy is used to assess disease extent and activity (Fig. 326-7). 
Endoscopically  mild  disease  is  characterized  by  erythema,  decreased 
vascular pattern, and mild friability. Moderate disease is characterized 
by marked erythema, absent vascular pattern, friability, and erosions, 
and severe disease is characterized by spontaneous bleeding and ulcer-
ations. Histologic features change more slowly than clinical features but 
can also be used to grade disease activity.

Complications  Only  15%  of  patients  with  UC  present  initially 
with severe disease. Massive hemorrhage occurs in 1% of patients, and 
treatment for the disease usually stops the bleeding. Toxic megacolon is 
defined as a transverse or right colon with a diameter of >6 cm, with 
loss of haustration in patients with severe attacks of UC. It occurs rarely 

FIGURE  326-6  Medium-power  view  of  Crohn’s  colitis  showing  mixed  acute  and 
chronic  inflammation,  crypt  atrophy,  and  multiple  small  epithelioid  granulomas 
in  the  mucosa.  (Courtesy  of  Dr.  R  Odze,  Division  of  Gastrointestinal  Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)

demarcate islands of mucosa that frequently are histologically normal. 
This “cobblestone” appearance is characteristic of CD, both endoscop-
ically and by barium radiography. As in UC, pseudopolyps can form 
in CD.

Active  CD  is  characterized  by  focal  inflammation  and  formation 
of fistula tracts, which resolve by fibrosis and stricturing of the bowel. 
The bowel wall thickens and becomes narrowed and fibrotic, leading 
to  chronic,  recurrent  bowel  obstructions.  Projections  of  thickened 
mesentery known as “creeping fat” encase the bowel, and serosal and 
mesenteric inflammation promotes adhesions and fistula formation.
 ■ CROHN’S DISEASE: MICROSCOPIC FEATURES
The earliest lesions are aphthoid ulcerations and focal crypt abscesses 
with  loose  aggregations  of  macrophages,  which  form  noncaseating 
granulomas in all layers of the bowel wall (Fig. 326-6). Granulomas are 
a characteristic feature of CD and are less commonly found on mucosal 
biopsies  than  on  surgical  resection  specimens.  Other  histologic  fea-
tures  of  CD  include  submucosal  or  subserosal  lymphoid  aggregates, 
particularly away from areas of ulceration, gross and microscopic skip 
areas,  and  transmural  inflammation  that  is  accompanied  by  fissures 
that penetrate deeply into the bowel wall and sometimes form fistulous 
tracts or local abscesses.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
 ■ ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Signs and Symptoms  The  major  symptoms  of  UC  are  diarrhea, 
rectal  bleeding,  tenesmus,  passage  of  mucus,  and  crampy  abdominal 
pain.  The  severity  of  symptoms  correlates  with  the  extent  of  disease. 
Although UC can present acutely, symptoms usually have been present 
for weeks to months.

Patients  with  proctitis  usually  pass  fresh  blood  or  blood-stained 
mucus, either mixed with stool or streaked onto the surface of a normal 
or  hard  stool.  They  also  have  tenesmus,  or  urgency  with  a  feeling  of 
incomplete evacuation, but rarely have abdominal pain. With proctitis 
or  proctosigmoiditis,  proximal  transit  slows,  which  may  account  for 
the constipation commonly seen in patients with distal disease.

When  the  disease  extends  beyond  the  rectum,  blood  is  usually 
mixed  with  stool  or  grossly  bloody  diarrhea  may  be  noted.  Colonic 
motility  is  altered  by  inflammation  with  rapid  transit  through  the 
inflamed  intestine.  When  the  disease  is  severe,  patients  pass  a  liquid 
stool  containing  blood,  pus,  and  fecal  matter.  Diarrhea  is  often  noc-
turnal and/or postprandial. Although severe pain is not a prominent 
symptom,  some  patients  with  active  disease  may  experience  lower 
abdominal  discomfort  or  mild  central  abdominal  cramping.  Severe 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2475

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2476

ILEOCOLITIS  Because the most common site of inflammation is the 
terminal  ileum,  the  usual  presentation  of  ileocolitis  is  a  chronic  his-
tory of recurrent episodes of right lower quadrant pain and diarrhea. 
Sometimes  the  initial  presentation  mimics  acute  appendicitis  with 
pronounced  right  lower  quadrant  pain,  a  palpable  mass,  fever,  and 
leukocytosis. Pain is usually colicky; it precedes and is relieved by defe-
cation. A low-grade fever is usually noted. High-spiking fever suggests 
intraabdominal abscess formation. Weight loss is common—typically 
10–20% of body weight—and develops as a consequence of diarrhea, 
anorexia, and fear of eating.

An inflammatory mass may be palpated in the right lower quadrant 
of the abdomen. The mass is composed of inflamed bowel, induration 
of  the  mesentery,  and  enlarged  abdominal  lymph  nodes.  The  “string 
sign”  on  radiographic  studies  results  from  a  severely  narrowed  loop 
of bowel, which makes the lumen resemble a frayed cotton string. It is 
caused by incomplete filling of the lumen as the result of edema, irri-
tability, and spasms associated with inflammation and ulcerations. The 
sign may be seen in both nonstenotic and stenotic phases of the disease.
Bowel  obstruction  may  take  several  forms.  In  the  early  stages  of 
disease,  bowel  wall  edema  and  spasm  produce  intermittent  obstruc-
tive  manifestations  and  increasing  symptoms  of  postprandial  pain. 
Over  several  years,  persistent  inflammation  gradually  progresses  to 
fibrostenotic  narrowing  and  stricture.  Diarrhea  will  decrease  and  be 
replaced by chronic bowel obstruction. Acute episodes of obstruction 
occur as well, precipitated by bowel inflammation and spasm or some-
times by impaction of undigested food or medication. These episodes 
usually resolve with intravenous fluids and gastric decompression.

Severe  inflammation  of  the  ileocecal  region  may  lead  to  localized 
wall  thinning,  with  microperforation  and  fistula  formation  to  the 
adjacent bowel, the skin, or the urinary bladder, or to an abscess cavity 
in  the  mesentery.  Enterovesical  fistulas  typically  present  as  dysuria 
or recurrent bladder infections or, less commonly, as pneumaturia or 
fecaluria.  Enterocutaneous  fistulas  follow  tissue  planes  of  least  resis-
tance, usually draining through abdominal surgical scars. Enterovagi-
nal  fistulas  are  rare  and  present  as  dyspareunia  or  as  a  feculent  or 
foul-smelling,  often  painful  vaginal  discharge.  They  are  unlikely  to 
develop without a prior hysterectomy.

JEJUNOILEITIS  Extensive  inflammatory  disease  is  associated  with  a 
loss of digestive and absorptive surface, resulting in malabsorption and 
steatorrhea.  Nutritional  deficiencies  can  also  result  from  poor  intake 
and  enteric  losses  of  protein  and  other  nutrients.  Intestinal  malab-
sorption  can  cause  anemia,  hypoalbuminemia,  hypocalcemia,  hypo-
magnesemia, coagulopathy, and hyperoxaluria with nephrolithiasis in 
patients with an intact colon. Many patients need to take intravenous 
iron  since  oral  iron  is  poorly  tolerated  and  often  ineffective.  Verte-
bral  fractures  are  caused  by  a  combination  of  vitamin  D  deficiency, 
hypocalcemia, and prolonged glucocorticoid use. Pellagra from niacin 
deficiency can occur in extensive small-bowel disease, and malabsorp-
tion  of  vitamin  B12  can  lead  to  megaloblastic  anemia  and  neurologic 
symptoms. Other important nutrients to measure and replete if low are 
folate and vitamins A, E, and K. Levels of minerals such as zinc, sele-
nium, copper, and magnesium are often low in patients with extensive 
small-bowel inflammation or resections, and these should be repleted 
as  well.  Most  patients  should  take  daily  multivitamin,  calcium,  and 
vitamin D supplements.

Diarrhea is characteristic of active disease; its causes include (1) bac-
terial overgrowth in obstructive stasis or fistulization, (2) bile acid mal-
absorption due to a diseased or resected terminal ileum, (3) intestinal 
inflammation with decreased water absorption and increased secretion 
of electrolytes and (4) enteroenteric fistula(e).

COLITIS  AND  PERIANAL  DISEASE  Patients  with  colitis  present  with 
low-grade  fevers,  malaise,  diarrhea,  crampy  abdominal  pain,  and 
sometimes hematochezia. Gross bleeding is not as common as in UC 
and appears in about one-half of patients with exclusively colonic dis-
ease. Only 1–2% exhibit massive bleeding. Pain is caused by passage of 
fecal  material  through  narrowed  and  inflamed  segments  of  the  large 
bowel.  Decreased  rectal  compliance  is  another  cause  for  diarrhea  in 
Crohn’s colitis patients.

FIGURE  326-7  Colonoscopy  with  acute  ulcerative  colitis:  severe  colon 
inflammation with erythema, friability, and exudates. (Courtesy of Dr. M. Hamilton, 
Gastroenterology  Division,  Department  of  Medicine,  Brigham  and  Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)

and can be triggered by electrolyte abnormalities and narcotics. About 
50%  of  acute  dilations  will  resolve  with  conservative  management 
alone, but urgent colectomy is required for those who do not improve. 
Perforation is the most dangerous of the local complications, and the 
physical signs of peritonitis may not be obvious, especially if the patient 
is receiving glucocorticoids. Although perforation is rare, the mortality 
rate for perforation complicating a toxic megacolon is ~15%. In addi-
tion,  patients  can  develop  a  toxic  colitis  and  such  severe  ulcerations 
that the bowel may perforate without first dilating.

Strictures occur in 5–10% of patients and are always a concern in 
UC because of the possibility of underlying neoplasia. Although benign 
strictures can form from the inflammation and fibrosis of UC, stric-
tures  that  are  impassable  with  the  colonoscope  should  be  presumed 
malignant until proven otherwise. A stricture that prevents passage of 
the colonoscope is an indication for surgery. UC patients occasionally 
develop  anal  fissures,  perianal  abscesses,  or  hemorrhoids,  but  the 
occurrence of extensive perianal lesions should suggest CD.
 ■ CROHN’S DISEASE
Signs and Symptoms  Although  CD  usually  presents  as  acute  or 
chronic bowel inflammation, the inflammatory process evolves toward 
one  of  two  patterns  of  disease:  a  fibrostenotic  obstructing  pattern  or 
a  penetrating  fistulous  pattern,  each  with  different  treatments  and 
prognoses.  The  site  of  disease  influences  the  clinical  manifestations 
(Table 326-5).

TABLE 326-5  Vienna and Montreal Classifications of Crohn’s Disease

Age at diagnosis

Location

Behavior

VIENNA
A1: <40 years
A2: >40 years

L1: Ileal
L2: Colonic
L3: Ileocolonic
L4: Upper
B1: Nonstricturing, 
nonpenetrating
B2: Stricturing
B3: Penetrating

MONTREAL
A1: <16 years
A2: Between 17 and 40 years
A3: >40 years
L1: Ileal
L2: Colonic
L3: Ileocolonic
L4: Isolated upper diseasea
B1: Nonstricturing, 
nonpenetrating
B2: Stricturing
B3: Penetrating
p: Perianal disease modifierb

aL4 is a modifier and can be added to L1–L3 when there is concomitant foregut 
disease.
bp is added to B1–B3 when there is concomitant perianal disease.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2476

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
Stricturing can occur in the colon in 4–16% of patients and produce 
symptoms of bowel obstruction. If the endoscopist is unable to traverse 
a stricture in Crohn’s colitis, surgical resection should be considered, 
especially if the patient has symptoms of chronic obstruction. Colonic 
disease may fistulize into the stomach or duodenum, causing feculent 
vomiting,  or  to  the  proximal  or  mid-small  bowel,  causing  malab-
sorption  by  “short  circuiting”  the  absorptive  surface  and  bacterial 
overgrowth. Ten percent of women with Crohn’s colitis will develop a 
rectovaginal fistula.

Perianal  disease  affects  about  one-third  of  patients  with  Crohn’s 
colitis  and  is  manifested  by  incontinence,  large  hemorrhoidal  tags, 
anal  strictures,  anorectal  fistulas,  and  perirectal  abscesses.  Not  all 
patients with perianal fistula will have endoscopic evidence of colonic 
inflammation.
GASTRODUODENAL DISEASE  Symptoms and signs of upper GI tract 
disease include nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain. Patients usually 
have a Helicobacter pylori–negative gastritis. The second portion of the 
duodenum is more commonly involved than the bulb. Fistulas involv-
ing the stomach or duodenum arise from the small or large bowel and 
do not necessarily signify the presence of upper GI tract involvement. 
Patients with advanced gastroduodenal CD may develop a chronic gas-
tric outlet obstruction. About 30% of children diagnosed with CD have 
esophagogastroduodenal  involvement.  The  classification  of  disease 
activity is shown in Table 326-5.

Laboratory, Endoscopic, and Radiographic Features  Laboratory 
abnormalities include elevated ESR and CRP. In more severe disease, 
findings  include  hypoalbuminemia,  anemia,  and  leukocytosis.  Fecal 
calprotectin and lactoferrin levels have been used to distinguish IBD 
from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), to assess whether CD is active, 
and  to  detect  postoperative  recurrence  of  CD.  Fecal  calprotectin  is  a 
more  sensitive  marker  of  ileocolonic  or  colonic  inflammation  rather 
than isolated ileal inflammation.

Endoscopic features of CD include rectal sparing, aphthous ulcera-
tions, fistulas, and skip lesions. Colonoscopy allows examination and 
biopsy of mass lesions or strictures and biopsy of the terminal ileum. 
Upper endoscopy is useful in diagnosing gastroduodenal involvement 
in patients with upper tract symptoms. Ileal or colonic strictures may 
be  dilated  with  balloons  introduced  through  the  colonoscope.  Stric-
tures  ≤4  cm  in  length  and  those  at  anastomotic  sites  respond  better 
to  endoscopic  dilation.  The  perforation  rate  is  as  high  as  10%.  Most 
endoscopists  dilate  only  fibrotic  strictures  and  not  those  associated 
with  active  inflammation.  Wireless  capsule  endoscopy  (WCE)  allows 
direct visualization of the entire small-bowel mucosa (Fig. 326-8). The 
diagnostic yield of detecting lesions suggestive of active CD is higher 
with WCE than CT or magnetic resonance (MR) enterography. WCE 
should be used in the setting of a small-bowel stricture. Capsule reten-
tion occurs in <1% of patients with suspected CD, but retention rates 
of 4–6% are seen in patients with established CD. It is helpful to give 
the patient with CD a patency capsule, which is made of barium and 
starts to dissolve 30 h after ingestion. An abdominal x-ray can be taken 
at around 30 h after ingestion to see if the capsule is still present in the 
small bowel, which would indicate a stricture.

In  CD,  early  radiographic  findings  in  the  small  bowel  include 
thickened folds and aphthous ulcerations. “Cobblestoning” from lon-
gitudinal and transverse ulcerations most frequently involves the small 
bowel.  In  more  advanced  disease,  strictures,  fistulas,  inflammatory 
masses, and abscesses may be detected. The earliest macroscopic find-
ings  of  colonic  CD  are  aphthous  ulcers.  These  small  ulcers  are  often 
multiple and separated by normal intervening mucosa. As the disease 
progresses, aphthous ulcers become enlarged, deeper, and occasionally 
connected  to  one  another,  forming  longitudinal  stellate,  serpiginous, 
and linear ulcers (see Fig. 322-4B).

The  transmural  inflammation  of  CD  leads  to  decreased  luminal 
diameter and limited distensibility. As ulcers progress deeper, they can 
lead to fistula formation. The segmental nature of CD results in wide 
gaps of normal or dilated bowel between involved segments.

CT  enterography  and  MR  enterography  have  been  shown  to 
be  equally  accurate  in  the  identification  of  active  small-bowel 

2477

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

FIGURE 326-8  Wireless capsule endoscopy image in a patient with Crohn’s disease 
of  the  ileum  shows  ulcerations  and  narrowing  of  the  intestinal  lumen.  (Courtesy 
of Dr. S. Reddy, Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)

inflammation.  MRI  is  thought  to  offer  superior  soft  tissue  contrast 
and has the added advantage of avoiding radiation exposure changes 
(Figs. 326-9 and 326-10). The lack of ionizing radiation is particularly 
appealing in younger patients and when monitoring response to ther-
apy where serial images will be obtained. Pelvic MRI is superior to pel-
vic CT for demonstrating pelvic lesions such as ischiorectal abscesses 
and  perianal  fistulas  (Fig.  326-11).  An  underutilized  resource  for 
assessing  small-bowel  CD  is  small-bowel  ultrasound  (SBUS).  SBUS 
is  at  least  as  sensitive  as  MR  enterography  and  CT  enterography  for 
detecting small-bowel CD, with a sensitivity of 94%, specificity of 97%, 
positive predictive value of 97%, and negative predictive value of 94%. 
Use of oral contrast medium can increase the sensitivity and specificity 
to  detect  small-bowel  lesions  to  100%.  SBUS  is  best  suited  for  distal 
small-bowel  assessment,  as  the  sensitivity  of  detecting  lesions  within 
the duodenum and proximal jejunum may be lower due to anatomic 
position.  The  limitations  of  SBUS  include  availability  and  operator 
dependence.

Complications  Because CD is a transmural process, serosal adhe-
sions  develop  that  provide  direct  pathways  for  fistula  formation  and 
reduce  the  incidence  of  free  perforation.  Perforation  occurs  in  1–2% 
of  patients,  usually  in  the  ileum  but  occasionally  in  the  jejunum  or 
as  a  complication  of  toxic  megacolon.  The  peritonitis  of  free  perfo-
ration,  especially  colonic,  may  be  fatal.  Intraabdominal  and  pelvic 
abscesses  occur  in  10–30%  of  patients  with  CD  at  some  time  in  the 
course of their illness. CT-guided percutaneous drainage of the abscess 
is  standard  therapy.  Despite  adequate  drainage,  most  patients  need 
resection of the offending bowel segment. Percutaneous drainage has 
an  especially  high  failure  rate  in  abdominal  wall  abscesses.  Systemic 
glucocorticoid therapy increases the risk of intraabdominal and pelvic 
abscesses in CD patients who have never had an operation. Other com-
plications include intestinal obstruction in 40%, massive hemorrhage, 
malabsorption, and severe perianal disease.

Serologic  Markers  Patients  with  UC  and  CD  show  a  wide  vari-
ation  in  the  way  they  present  and  progress  over  time.  Some  patients 
present with mild disease activity and do well with generally safe and 
mild  medications,  but  many  others  exhibit  more  severe  disease  and 
can  develop  serious  complications  that  will  require  surgery.  Current 
and developing biologic therapies can help halt progression of disease 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2477

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2478

FIGURE  326-9  A  coronal  magnetic  resonance  image  was  obtained  using  a  half 
Fourier  single-shot  T2-weighted  acquisition  with  fat  saturation  in  a  27-year-old 
pregnant (23 weeks’ gestation) woman. The patient had Crohn’s disease and was 
maintained  on  mercaptopurine  and  prednisone.  She  presented  with  abdominal 
pain,  distension,  vomiting,  and  small-bowel  obstruction.  The  image  reveals  a  7- 
to  10-cm  long  stricture  at  the  terminal  ileum  (white  arrows)  causing  obstruction 
and  significant  dilatation  of  the  proximal  small  bowel  (white  asterisk).  A  fetus 
is  seen  in  the  uterus  (dashed  white  arrows).  (Courtesy  of  Drs.  J.  F.  B.  Chick  and  
P. B. Shyn, Abdominal Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, Brigham 
and  Women’s  Hospital,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Massachusetts;  with 
permission.)

and give patients with moderate to severe UC and CD a better quality 
of life. There are potential risks of biologic therapies such as infection 
and malignancy, and it would be optimal to determine by genetic or 
serologic markers at the time of diagnosis which patients will require 
more aggressive medical therapy.

For  success  in  diagnosing  IBD  and  in  differentiating  between  CD 
and UC, the efficacy of these serologic tests depends on the prevalence 
of IBD in a specific population. Increased titers of anti–Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae  antibody  (ASCA)  have  been  associated  with  CD,  whereas 
increased  levels  of  perinuclear  antineutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibody 
(pANCA)  are  more  commonly  seen  in  patients  with  UC.  However, 
when  evaluated  in  a  meta-analysis  of  60  studies,  the  sensitivity  and 
specificity of an ASCA-positive/pANCA-negative pattern for identifi-
cation of CD were 55 and 93%, respectively. In addition to ASCA, mul-
tiple other antibodies to bacterial proteins (Omp-C and I2), flagellin 
(CBir1), and bacterial carbohydrates have been studied and associated 
with  CD.  These  serologic  markers  tend  to  have  low  sensitivity  and 
specificity  and  may  be  elevated  due  to  other  autoimmune  diseases, 
infections, and inflammation including those outside of the GI tract. 
The  Prometheus  IBD  SGI  Diagnostic  blood  test  measures  a  panel  of 
serologic  (S),  genetic  (G),  and  inflammatory  (I)  biomarkers,  but  the 
test  is  costly,  and  reliable  results  are  based  on  the  pretest  probability 
of  the  patient  having  IBD.  PROSPECT  is  a  validated  web-based  tool 
to  display  individual  CD  outcomes  and  considers  multiple  variables 
including disease location (large or small bowel, perianal), serologies 
(ASCA, CBir1, ANCA), and genetics (NOD2 frameshift mutation).

Clinical  factors  described  at  diagnosis  are  more  helpful  than 
serologies  at  predicting  the  natural  history  of  IBD.  Except  in  special 
circumstances  (such  as  before  consideration  of  an  ileal  pouch-anal 
anastomosis [IPAA] in a patient with indeterminate colitis), serologic 
markers have only minimal clinical utility.

FIGURE  326-10  A  coronal  balanced,  steady-state,  free  precession,  T2-weighted 
image with fat saturation was obtained in a 32-year-old man with Crohn’s disease 
and  prior  episodes  of  bowel  obstruction,  fistulas,  and  abscesses.  He  was  being 
treated with mercaptopurine and presented with abdominal distention and diarrhea. 
The image demonstrates a new gastrocolic fistula (solid white arrows). Multifocal 
involvement of the small bowel and terminal ileum is also present (dashed white 
arrows).  (Courtesy  of  Drs.  J.  F.  B.  Chick  and  P.  B.  Shyn,  Abdominal  Imaging  and 
Intervention,  Department  of  Radiology,  Brigham  and  Women’s  Hospital,  Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)

FIGURE  326-11  Axial  T2-weighted  fat-saturated  image  obtained  in  a  39-year-old 
male with Crohn’s disease shows a defect in the internal sphincter at the 6 o’clock 
position  of  the  mid  anal  canal  (open  white  arrow)  communicating  with  a  1.1-cm 
intersphincteric collection (black arrow). Wide defect in the external sphincter at the 
7 o’clock position (solid white arrow) leads to a moderate-sized perianal abscess in 
the ischioanal fossa (asterisk). (Courtesy of Drs. J.S. Quon and P.B. Shyn, Abdominal 
Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2478

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemDIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF UC AND CD
Once a diagnosis of IBD is made, distinguishing between UC and CD 
is impossible initially in up to 15% of cases. These are termed indeter-
minate colitis. Fortunately, in most cases, the true nature of the under-
lying colitis becomes evident later in the course of the patient’s disease. 
Approximately  5%  (range  1–20%)  of  colon  resection  specimens  are 
difficult to classify as either UC or CD because they exhibit overlapping 
histologic features.

 ■ INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Infections of the small intestines and colon can mimic CD or UC. They 
may  be  bacterial,  fungal,  viral,  or  protozoal  in  origin  (Table  326-6). 
Campylobacter colitis can mimic the endoscopic appearance of severe 
UC  and  can  cause  a  relapse  of  established  UC.  Salmonella  can  cause 
watery  or  bloody  diarrhea,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Shigellosis  causes 
watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever followed by rectal tenesmus 
and by the passage of blood and mucus per rectum. All three are usu-
ally  self-limited,  but  1%  of  patients  infected  with Salmonella  become 
asymptomatic carriers. Yersinia enterocolitica infection occurs mainly 
in the terminal ileum and causes mucosal ulceration, neutrophil inva-
sion,  and  thickening  of  the  ileal  wall.  Other  bacterial  infections  that 
may mimic IBD include C. difficile, which presents with watery diar-
rhea, tenesmus, nausea, and vomiting; and E. coli, three categories of 
which can cause colitis. These are enterohemorrhagic, enteroinvasive, 
and enteroadherent E. coli, all of which can cause bloody diarrhea and 
abdominal  tenderness.  Gonorrhea,  Chlamydia,  and  syphilis  can  also 
cause proctitis.

GI  involvement  with  mycobacterial  infection  occurs  primarily 
in  the  immunosuppressed  patient  but  may  occur  in  patients  with 
normal  immunity.  Distal  ileal  and  cecal  involvement  predominates, 
and  patients  present  with  symptoms  of  small-bowel  obstruction  and 

TABLE 326-6  Diseases That Mimic IBD
Infectious Etiologies

Bacterial
  Salmonella
  Shigella
  Toxigenic
  Escherichia coli
  Campylobacter
  Yersinia
  Clostridium difficile
  Gonorrhea
  Chlamydia trachomatis

Viral
Mycobacterial
  Tuberculosis
  Cytomegalovirus
  Mycobacterium avium   Herpes simplex
Parasitic
  Amebiasis
Isospora

HIV
Fungal
  Histoplasmosis
  Candida
Aspergillus

  Trichuris trichiura
  Hookworm
  Strongyloides

Noninfectious Etiologies

Neoplastic
  Lymphoma
  Metastatic
  Carcinoma
  Carcinoma of the ileum
  Carcinoid
  Familial polyposis

Drugs and Chemicals
  NSAIDs
  Phosphosoda
  Cathartic colon
  Gold
  Oral contraceptives
  Cocaine

 Immune checkpoint 
inhibitor colitis

  Mycophenolate mofetil

Inflammatory
  Appendicitis
  Diverticulitis
  Diversion colitis
 Collagenous/
lymphocytic colitis
Ischemic colitis
 Radiation colitis/
enteritis
 Solitary rectal ulcer 
syndrome
 Eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis
  Neutropenic colitis
  Behçet’s syndrome
 Graft-versus-host 
disease

Abbreviations: IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.

2479

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

a  tender  abdominal  mass.  The  diagnosis  is  made  most  directly  by 
colonoscopy  with  biopsy  and  culture.  Although  most  of  the  patients 
with viral colitis are immunosuppressed, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and 
herpes simplex proctitis may occur in immunocompetent individuals. 
CMV  occurs  most  commonly  in  the  esophagus,  colon,  and  rectum 
but  may  also  involve  the  small  intestine.  Symptoms  include  abdomi-
nal pain, bloody diarrhea, fever, and weight loss. With severe disease, 
necrosis and perforation can occur. Diagnosis is made by identification 
of  characteristic  intranuclear  inclusions  in  mucosal  cells  on  biopsy. 
Herpes simplex infection of the GI tract is limited to the oropharynx, 
anorectum,  and  perianal  areas.  Symptoms  include  anorectal  pain, 
tenesmus,  constipation,  inguinal  adenopathy,  difficulty  with  urinary 
voiding,  and  sacral  paresthesias.  Diagnosis  is  made  by  rectal  biopsy 
with  identification  of  characteristic  cellular  inclusions  and  viral  cul-
ture.  HIV  itself  can  cause  diarrhea,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  anorexia. 
Small-intestinal  biopsies  show  partial  villous  atrophy;  small-bowel 
bacterial overgrowth and fat malabsorption may also be noted.

Protozoan  parasites  include  Isospora  belli,  which  can  cause  a 
self-limited  infection  in  healthy  hosts  but  causes  a  chronic  profuse, 
watery diarrhea and weight loss in AIDS patients. Entamoeba histolyt-
ica or related species infect ~10% of the world’s population; symptoms 
include  abdominal  pain,  tenesmus,  frequent  loose  stools  containing 
blood  and  mucus,  and  abdominal  tenderness.  Colonoscopy  reveals 
focal  punctate  ulcers  with  normal  intervening  mucosa;  diagnosis  is 
made by biopsy or serum amebic antibodies. Fulminant amebic colitis 
is rare but has a mortality rate of >50%.

Other parasitic infections that may mimic IBD include hookworm 
(Necator  americanus),  whipworm  (Trichuris  trichiura),  and  Strongy-
loides  stercoralis.  In  severely  immunocompromised  patients,  Candida 
or Aspergillus can be identified in the submucosa. Disseminated histo-
plasmosis can involve the ileocecal area.

 ■ NONINFECTIOUS DISEASES
Diverticulitis can be confused with CD clinically and radiographically. 
Both  diseases  cause  fever,  abdominal  pain,  tender  abdominal  mass, 
leukocytosis,  elevated  ESR,  partial  obstruction,  and  fistulas.  Perianal 
disease or ileitis on small-bowel series favors the diagnosis of CD. Sig-
nificant endoscopic mucosal abnormalities are more likely in CD than 
in diverticulitis. Endoscopic or clinical recurrence following segmental 
resection  favors  CD.  Diverticular-associated  colitis  is  similar  to  CD, 
but mucosal abnormalities are limited to the sigmoid and descending 
colon.

Ischemic  colitis  is  commonly  confused  with  IBD.  The  ischemic 
process can be chronic and diffuse, as in UC, or segmental, as in CD. 
Colonic inflammation due to ischemia may resolve quickly or may per-
sist and result in transmural scarring and stricture formation. Ischemic 
bowel disease should be considered in the elderly following abdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair or when a patient has a hypercoagulable state 
or  a  severe  cardiac  or  peripheral  vascular  disorder.  Patients  usually 
present  with  sudden  onset  of  left  lower  quadrant  pain,  urgency  to 
defecate, and the passage of bright red blood per rectum. Endoscopic 
examination  often  demonstrates  a  normal-appearing  rectum  and  a 
sharp  transition  to  an  area  of  inflammation  in  the  descending  colon 
and splenic flexure.

The effects of radiotherapy on the GI tract can be difficult to distin-
guish from IBD. Acute symptoms can occur within 1–2 weeks of start-
ing radiotherapy. When the rectum and sigmoid are irradiated, patients 
develop bloody, mucoid diarrhea and tenesmus, as in distal UC. With 
small-bowel involvement, diarrhea is common. Late symptoms include 
malabsorption and weight loss. Stricturing with obstruction and bac-
terial overgrowth may occur. Fistulas can penetrate the bladder, vagina, 
or abdominal wall. Flexible sigmoidoscopy reveals mucosal granularity, 
friability,  numerous  telangiectasias,  and  occasionally  discrete  ulcera-
tions. Biopsy can be diagnostic.

Solitary  rectal  ulcer  syndrome  is  uncommon  and  can  be  con-
fused  with  IBD.  It  occurs  in  persons  of  all  ages  and  may  be  caused 
by  impaired  evacuation  and  failure  of  relaxation  of  the  puborectalis 
muscle.  Single  or  multiple  ulcerations  may  arise  from  anal  sphincter 
overactivity, higher intrarectal pressures during defecation, and digital 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2479

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2480 removal  of  stool.  Patients  complain  of  constipation  with  straining 
and  pass  blood  and  mucus  per  rectum.  Other  symptoms  include 
abdominal  pain,  diarrhea,  tenesmus,  and  perineal  pain.  Ulceration, 
which may be as large as 5 cm in diameter, is usually observed ante-
riorly or anterolaterally 3–15 cm from the anal verge. Biopsies can be 
diagnostic.
Several 

types  of  colitis  are  associated  with  nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including de novo colitis, reactiva-
tion of IBD, and proctitis caused by use of suppositories. Most patients 
with NSAID-related colitis present with diarrhea and abdominal pain, 
and complications include stricture, bleeding, obstruction, perforation, 
and fistulization. Withdrawal of these agents is crucial, and in cases of 
reactivated IBD, standard therapies are indicated.

Colitis secondary to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), termed 
ICI-related  colitis,  has  emerged  as  these  agents  have  found  use  in  a 
wide variety of cancers. Immune checkpoint proteins such as cytotoxic 
T-lymphocyte-associated  protein  4  (CTLA-4)  and  programmed  cell 
death protein 1 (PD-1) are receptors expressed on the surface of effec-
tor T cells that interact with their ligands CD80/CD86 (CTLA-4) and 
programmed  death-ligand  1  (PD-1)  on  antigen-presenting  cells  and 
normally function as inhibitors of immune responses. ICIs block these 
inhibitory pathways and promote the activation and proliferation of the 
native adaptive T-cell response against malignant cells as their mecha-
nism of antitumor activity. While very effective at enhancing antitumor 
T-cell  activity,  ICIs  also  activate  global  T-cell  responses  that  induce 
several autoimmune-related adverse events. Although immune-related 
adverse events of ICIs occur in multiple organ systems, the GI tract is 
affected in 21–44% of patients. The most common clinical presentation 
is  self-limited  diarrhea  that  can  be  associated  with  frank  colitis  and 
can lead to significant morbidity and mortality if not managed appro-
priately. Treatment is generally based on symptom severity. Moderate 
to severe symptoms usually require glucocorticoids, whereas biologics 
such  as  anti-TNF  agents  and  integrin  inhibitors  are  used  in  steroid- 
refractory cases.

 ■ THE ATYPICAL COLITIDES
Two atypical colitides—collagenous colitis and lymphocytic colitis—
have completely normal endoscopic appearances. Collagenous colitis 
has  two  main  histologic  components:  increased  subepithelial  col-
lagen  deposition  and  colitis  with  increased  intraepithelial  lympho-
cytes. The female-to-male ratio is 9:1, and most patients present in 
the  sixth  or  seventh  decade  of  life.  The  main  symptom  is  chronic 
watery diarrhea. Risk factors include smoking; use of NSAIDs, pro-
ton pump inhibitors, or beta blockers; and a history of autoimmune 
disease.

Lymphocytic  colitis  has  features  similar  to  collagenous  colitis, 
including age at onset and clinical presentation, but it has almost equal 
incidence  in  men  and  women  and  no  subepithelial  collagen  deposi-
tion  on  pathologic  section.  However,  intraepithelial  lymphocytes  are 
increased.  Use  of  sertraline  (but  not  beta  blockers)  is  an  additional 
risk factor. The frequency of celiac disease is increased in lymphocytic 
colitis  and  ranges  from  9  to  27%.  Celiac  disease  should  be  excluded 
in  all  patients  with  lymphocytic  colitis,  particularly  if  diarrhea  does 
not respond to conventional therapy. Treatments for both microscopic 
colitides  vary  depending  on  symptom  severity  and  include,  antidiar-
rheals (e.g., loperamide and diphenoxylate), bismuth, aminosalicylates, 
budesonide,  systemic  glucocorticoids,  and  biologics  for  refractory 
disease.

Diversion colitis is an inflammatory process that arises in segments 
of the large intestine that are not continuous with the fecal stream. It 
usually occurs in patients with ileostomy or colostomy when a mucus 
fistula  or  a  Hartmann’s  pouch  has  been  created.  Clinically,  patients 
have mucus or bloody discharge from the rectum. Erythema, granu-
larity,  friability,  and,  in  more  severe  cases,  ulceration  can  be  seen  on 
endoscopy.  Histopathology  shows  areas  of  active  inflammation  with 
foci  of  cryptitis  and  crypt  abscesses.  Crypt  architecture  is  normal, 
which  differentiates  it  from  UC  but  not  necessarily  CD.  Short-chain 
fatty acid enemas may help in diversion colitis, but the definitive ther-
apy is surgical reanastomosis.

EXTRAINTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS
Up to one-third of IBD patients have at least one extraintestinal disease 
manifestation. Please see Table 326-7 for a summary of IBD EIMs.
 ■ DERMATOLOGIC
Erythema  nodosum  (EN)  occurs  in  up  to  15%  of  CD  patients  and 
10%  of  UC  patients.  Attacks  usually  correlate  with  bowel  activity; 
skin lesions develop after the onset of bowel symptoms, and patients 
frequently have concomitant active peripheral arthritis. The lesions of 
EN are hot, red, tender nodules measuring 1–5 cm in diameter and are 
found on the anterior surface of the lower legs, ankles, calves, thighs, 
and arms. Therapy is directed toward the underlying bowel disease.

Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is seen in 1–12% of UC patients and 
less  commonly  in  Crohn’s  colitis.  Although  it  usually  presents  after 
the  diagnosis  of  IBD,  PG  may  occur  years  before  the  onset  of  bowel 
symptoms,  run  a  course  independent  of  the  bowel  disease,  respond 
poorly to colectomy, and even develop years after proctocolectomy. It 
is usually associated with severe disease. Lesions are commonly found 
on the dorsal surface of the feet and legs but may occur on the arms, 
chest,  stoma,  and  even  the  face.  PG  usually  begins  as  a  pustule  and 
then spreads concentrically to rapidly undermine healthy skin. Lesions 
then ulcerate, with violaceous edges surrounded by a margin of eryth-
ema. Centrally, they contain necrotic tissue with blood and exudates. 
Lesions may be single or multiple and grow as large as 30 cm. They are 
sometimes  very  difficult  to  treat  and  often  require  IV  antibiotics,  IV 
glucocorticoids,  dapsone,  azathioprine,  thalidomide,  IV  cyclosporine 
(CSA), infliximab, or adalimumab.

Other  dermatologic  manifestations  include  pyoderma  vegetans, 
which  occurs  in  intertriginous  areas;  pyostomatitis  vegetans,  which 
involves  the  mucous  membranes;  Sweet  syndrome,  a  neutrophilic 
dermatosis; and metastatic CD, a rare disorder defined by cutaneous 
granuloma  formation.  Psoriasis  affects  5–10%  of  patients  with  IBD 
and is unrelated to bowel activity, consistent with the potential shared 
immunogenetic basis of these diseases. Perianal skin tags are found in 
75–80% of patients with CD, especially those with colon involvement. 
Oral mucosal lesions, seen often in CD and rarely in UC, include aph-
thous stomatitis and “cobblestone” lesions of the buccal mucosa.

 ■ RHEUMATOLOGIC
Peripheral  arthritis  develops  in  15–20%  of  IBD  patients,  is  more 
common in CD, and worsens with exacerbations of bowel activity. It 
is  asymmetric,  polyarticular,  and  migratory  and  most  often  affects 
large joints of the upper and lower extremities. Treatment is directed 
at reducing bowel inflammation. In severe UC, colectomy frequently 
cures the arthritis.

Ankylosing  spondylitis  (AS)  occurs  in  ~10%  of  IBD  patients  and 
is  more  common  in  CD  than  UC.  About  two-thirds  of  IBD  patients 
with AS express the HLA-B27 antigen. The AS activity is not related to 
bowel activity and does not remit with glucocorticoids or colectomy. 
It most often affects the spine and pelvis, producing symptoms of dif-
fuse  low-back  pain,  buttock  pain,  and  morning  stiffness.  The  course 
is continuous and progressive, leading to permanent skeletal damage 
and  deformity.  Anti-TNF  therapy  reduces  spinal  inflammation  and 
improves functional status and quality of life.

Sacroiliitis  is  symmetric,  occurs  equally  in  UC  and  CD,  is  often 
asymptomatic,  does  not  correlate  with  bowel  activity,  and  does  not 
always progress to AS. Other rheumatic manifestations include hyper-
trophic  osteoarthropathy,  pelvic/femoral  osteomyelitis,  and  relapsing 
polychondritis.

 ■ OCULAR
The incidence of ocular complications in IBD patients is 1–10%. The 
most common are conjunctivitis, anterior uveitis/iritis, and episcleritis. 
Uveitis is associated with both UC and Crohn’s colitis, may be found 
during  periods  of  remission,  and  may  develop  in  patients  following 
bowel resection. Symptoms include ocular pain, photophobia, blurred 
vision, and headache. Prompt intervention, sometimes with systemic 
glucocorticoids, is required to prevent scarring and visual impairment. 
Episcleritis is a benign disorder that presents with symptoms of mild 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2480

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2481

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

TABLE 326-7  Extraintestinal Manifestations
CATEGORY

CLINICAL COURSE

Rheumatologic disorders (5–20%)

Peripheral arthritis

Sacroiliitis

Ankylosing spondylitis

Asymmetric, migratory
Parallels bowel activity
Symmetric: spine and hip joints
Independent of bowel activity
Gradual fusion of spine
Independent of bowel activity
Two-thirds have HLA-B27 antigen

Metabolic bone disorders (up to 40% of patients)

TREATMENT

Reduce bowel inflammation

Steroids, injections, methotrexate, anti-TNF

Physical therapy, steroids, injections, methotrexate, 
anti-TNF, IL-17 inhibitors, tofacitinib

Osteoporosis

Osteonecrosis

Risk increased by glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, methotrexate, total parenteral 
nutrition, malabsorption, and inflammation
Fracture rates highest in the elderly (age >60)
Death of osteocytes and adipocytes and eventual bone collapse; affects hips 
more than knees or shoulders; risk factor is steroid use

Screening with DEXA scan, check vitamin D levels, 
treat if osteoporosis or osteopenia on long-term 
corticosteroids

Pain control, injections, joint replacement

Dermatologic disorders (10–20%)

Erythema nodosum

Hot, red, tender, nodules/extremities
Parallels bowel activity

Pyoderma gangrenosum Ulcerating, necrotic lesions on extremities, trunk, face, stoma

Independent of bowel activity

Psoriasis

Unrelated to bowel activity

Pyoderma vegetans

Pyostomatitis vegetans

Metastatic Crohn’s 
disease (CD)

Sweet syndrome

Aphthous stomatitis

Intertriginous areas
Parallels bowel activity
Mucous membranes
Parallels bowel activity
CD of the skin
Parallels bowel activity
Neutrophilic dermatosis
Parallels bowel activity
Oral ulcerations
Parallels bowel activity

Ocular disorders (1–11%)

Uveitis

Episcleritis

Ocular pain, photophobia, blurred vision, headache
Independent of bowel activity
Mild ocular burning
Parallels bowel activity

Hepatobiliary disorders (10–35%)

Reduce bowel inflammation

Antibiotics, steroids, cyclosporine, infliximab, dapsone, 
azathioprine, intralesional steroids; not debridement or 
colectomy
Topical steroids, light therapy, methotrexate, infliximab, 
adalimumab, ustekinumab
Evanescent; resolves without progression

Evanescent; resolves without progression

Reduce bowel inflammation

Reduce bowel inflammation

Reduce bowel inflammation/topical therapy

Topical or systemic steroids

Topical corticosteroids

Fatty liver
Cholelithiasis

Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC)

Urologic

Nephrolithiasis (10–20%)

Secondary to chronic illness, malnutrition, steroid therapy
Patients with ileitis or ileal resection
Malabsorption of bile acids, depletion of bile salt pool, secretion of lithogenic bile
Intrahepatic and extrahepatic
Inflammation and fibrosis leading to biliary cirrhosis and hepatic failure
7–10% cholangiocarcinoma
Small-duct PSC involves small-caliber bile ducts and has a better prognosis

Improve nutrition, reduce steroids
Reduce bowel inflammation; cholecystectomy in 
symptomatic patients

ERCP/high-dose ursodiol lowers risk of colonic 
neoplasia; cholecystectomy in patients with gallbladder 
polyps due to the high incidence of malignancy

CD patients following small-bowel resection; calcium oxalate stones most 
common

Low-oxalate diet; control of bowel inflammation; 
surgical intervention

Less common extraintestinal manifestations

Thromboembolic 
disorders

Cardiopulmonary

Systemic amyloidosis
Pancreatitis

Increased risk of venous and arterial thrombosis; factors responsible include 
abnormalities of the platelet-endothelial interaction, hyperhomocysteinemia, 
alterations in the coagulation cascade, impaired fibrinolysis, involvement of 
tissue factor–bearing microvesicles, disruption of the normal coagulation system 
by autoantibodies, and a genetic predisposition
Endocarditis, myocarditis, pleuropericarditis, interstitial lung disease

Secondary (reactive) in long-standing IBD, especially CD
Duodenal fistulas, ampullary CD, gallstones, PSC, drugs (MP, azathioprine, 
5-ASAs), autoimmune, primary CD of the pancreas

Anticoagulation; control of inflammation

Treatment is varied; stop 5-ASA agents as they can 
rarely cause interstitial lung disease
Colchicine
Treatment is varied; stop offending medication; diagnose 
and treat with ERCP and/or cholecystectomy

Abbreviations: 5-ASA, 5-aminosalicylic acid; DEXA, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; IBD, inflammatory bowel 
disease; IL, interleukin; MP, mercaptopurine; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2481

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2482 ocular burning. It occurs in 3–4% of IBD patients, more commonly in 

Crohn’s colitis, and is treated with topical glucocorticoids.
 ■ HEPATOBILIARY
Hepatic steatosis is detectable in about one-half of the abnormal liver 
biopsies  from  patients  with  CD  and  UC;  patients  usually  present 
with  hepatomegaly.  Fatty  liver  usually  results  from  a  combination  of 
chronic  debilitating  illness,  malnutrition,  and  glucocorticoid  therapy. 
Cholelithiasis  occurs  in  10–35%  of  CD  patients  with  ileitis  or  ileal 
resection.  Gallstone  formation  is  caused  by  malabsorption  of  bile 
acids, resulting in depletion of the bile salt pool and the secretion of 
lithogenic bile.

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a disorder characterized by 
both intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct inflammation and fibro-
sis, frequently leading to biliary cirrhosis and hepatic failure; ~5% of 
patients with UC have PSC, but 50–75% of patients with PSC have IBD. 
PSC occurs less often in patients with CD. Although it can be recog-
nized after the diagnosis of IBD, PSC can be detected earlier or even 
years after proctocolectomy. Consistent with this, the immunogenetic 
basis for PSC appears to be overlapping but distinct from UC based on 
GWAS, although both IBD and PSC are commonly pANCA positive. 
Most patients have no symptoms at the time of diagnosis; when symp-
toms  are  present,  they  consist  of  fatigue,  jaundice,  abdominal  pain, 
fever, anorexia, and malaise. The traditional gold standard diagnostic 
test  is  endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP),  but 
magnetic  resonance  cholangiopancreatography  (MRCP)  is  sensitive, 
specific, and safer. MRCP is reasonable as an initial diagnostic test in 
children  and  adults  and  can  visualize  irregularities,  multifocal  stric-
tures,  and  dilatations  of  all  levels  of  the  biliary  tree.  In  patients  with 
PSC, both ERCP and MRCP demonstrate multiple bile duct strictures 
alternating with relatively normal segments.

Gallbladder  polyps  in  patients  with  PSC  have  a  high  incidence  of 
malignancy,  and  cholecystectomy  is  recommended,  even  if  a  mass 
lesion is <1 cm in diameter. Gallbladder surveillance with ultrasound 
should be performed annually. Endoscopic stenting may be palliative 
for cholestasis secondary to bile duct obstruction. Patients with symp-
tomatic disease develop cirrhosis and liver failure over 5–10 years and 
eventually  require  liver  transplantation.  PSC  patients  have  a  10–15% 
lifetime  risk  of  developing  cholangiocarcinoma  and  then  cannot  be 
transplanted. Patients with IBD and PSC are at increased risk of colon 
cancer and should be surveyed yearly by colonoscopy and biopsy.

In  addition,  cholangiography  is  normal  in  a  small  percentage  of 
patients who have a variant of PSC known as small duct primary scle-
rosing cholangitis. This variant (sometimes referred to as “pericholan-
gitis”) is probably a form of PSC involving small-caliber bile ducts. It 
has similar biochemical and histologic features to classic PSC. It has a 
significantly better prognosis than classic PSC, although it may evolve 
into classic PSC. Granulomatous hepatitis and hepatic amyloidosis are 
much rarer EIMs of IBD.

 ■ UROLOGIC
The  most  frequent  genitourinary  complications  are  calculi,  ureteral 
obstruction, and ileal bladder fistulas. The highest frequency of neph-
rolithiasis (10–20%) occurs in patients with CD following small-bowel 
resection. Calcium oxalate stones develop secondary to hyperoxaluria, 
which results from increased absorption of dietary oxalate. Normally, 
dietary calcium combines with luminal oxalate to form insoluble cal-
cium  oxalate,  which  is  eliminated  in  the  stool.  In  patients  with  ileal 
dysfunction, however, nonabsorbed fatty acids bind calcium and leave 
oxalate unbound. The unbound oxalate is then delivered to the colon, 
where it is readily absorbed, especially in the presence of inflammation.

 ■ METABOLIC BONE DISORDERS
Low bone mass occurs in 14–42% of IBD patients. The risk is increased 
by  glucocorticoids,  CSA,  methotrexate  (MTX),  and  total  parenteral 
nutrition (TPN). Malabsorption and inflammation mediated by IL-1, 
IL-6,  TNF,  and  other  inflammatory  mediators  also  contribute  to  low 
bone density. An increased incidence of hip, spine, wrist, and rib frac-
tures has been noted: 36% in CD and 45% in UC. The absolute risk of 

an osteoporotic fracture is ~1% per person per year. Fracture rates, par-
ticularly in the spine and hip, are highest among the elderly (age >60). 
One study noted an OR of 1.72 for vertebral fracture and an OR of 1.59 
for hip fracture. The disease severity predicted the risk of a fracture. 
Only 13% of IBD patients who had a fracture were on any kind of anti-
fracture treatment. Up to 20% of bone mass can be lost per year with 
chronic glucocorticoid use. The effect is dose-dependent. Budesonide 
may also suppress the pituitary-adrenal axis and thus carries a risk of 
causing osteoporosis.

Osteonecrosis is characterized by death of osteocytes and adipocytes 
and  eventual  bone  collapse.  The  pain  is  aggravated  by  motion  and 
swelling  of  the  joints.  It  affects  the  hips  more  often  than  knees  and 
shoulders, and in one series, 4.3% of patients developed osteonecrosis 
within 6 months of starting glucocorticoids. Diagnosis is made by bone 
scan or MRI, and treatment consists of pain control, cord decompres-
sion, osteotomy, and joint replacement.
 ■ THROMBOEMBOLIC DISORDERS
Patients  with  IBD  have  an  increased  risk  of  both  venous  and  arte-
rial  thrombosis  even  if  the  disease  is  not  active.  Factors  responsible 
for  the  hypercoagulable  state  have  included  abnormalities  of  the  
platelet-endothelial interaction, hyperhomocysteinemia, alterations in 
the  coagulation  cascade,  impaired  fibrinolysis,  involvement  of  tissue 
factor–bearing  microvesicles,  disruption  of  the  normal  coagulation 
system by autoantibodies, and a genetic predisposition. A spectrum of 
vasculitides involving small, medium, and large vessels has also been 
observed.
 ■ OTHER DISORDERS
More common cardiopulmonary manifestations include endocarditis, 
myocarditis, pleuropericarditis, and interstitial lung disease. A second-
ary  or  reactive  amyloidosis  can  occur  in  patients  with  long-standing 
IBD, especially in patients with CD. Amyloid material is deposited sys-
temically and can cause diarrhea, constipation, and renal failure. The 
renal disease can be successfully treated with colchicine. Pancreatitis is 
a rare EIM of IBD and results from duodenal fistulas; ampullary CD; 
gallstones; PSC; drugs such as mercaptopurine, azathioprine, or, very 
rarely, 5-ASA agents; autoimmune pancreatitis; and primary CD of the 
pancreas.

TREATMENT
Inflammatory Bowel Disease 

5-ASA AGENTS
These  agents  are  effective  at  inducing  and  maintaining  remission 
in UC. Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ (PPAR-γ) may 
mediate  5-ASA  therapeutic  action  by  decreasing  nuclear  local-
ization  of  NF-κB.  Sulfa-free  aminosalicylate  formulations  include 
alternative azo-bonded carriers, 5-ASA dimers, and delayed-release 
and controlled-release preparations. Each has the same efficacy as 
sulfasalazine when equimolar concentrations are used.

Sulfasalazine is effective treatment for mild to moderate UC, but 
its high rate of side effects limits its use. Although sulfasalazine is 
more effective at higher doses, at 6 or 8 g/d, up to 30% of patients 
experience allergic reactions or intolerable side effects such as head-
ache,  anorexia,  nausea,  and  vomiting  that  are  attributable  to  the 
sulfapyridine  moiety.  Hypersensitivity  reactions,  independent  of 
sulfapyridine  levels,  include  rash,  fever,  hepatitis,  agranulocytosis, 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pancreatitis, worsening of colitis, and 
reversible sperm abnormalities. Sulfasalazine can also impair folate 
absorption, and patients should be given folic acid supplements.

Balsalazide contains an azo bond binding mesalamine to the car-
rier molecule 4-aminobenzoyl-β-alanine; it is effective in the colon.
Delzicol  and  Asacol  HD  (high  dose)  are  enteric-coated  forms 
of mesalamine with the 5-ASA being released at pH >7. They dis-
integrate  with  complete  breakup  of  the  tablet  occurring  in  many 
different  parts  of  the  gut  ranging  from  the  small  intestine  to  the 
splenic  flexure;  they  have  increased  gastric  residence  when  taken 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2482

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemwith  a  meal.  Lialda  is  a  once-a-day  formulation  of  mesalamine 
(Multi-Matrix  System  [MMX])  designed  to  release  mesalamine 
in the colon. The MMX technology incorporates mesalamine into 
a  lipophilic  matrix  within  a  hydrophilic  matrix  encapsulated  in  a 
polymer resistant to degradation at a low pH (<7) to delay release 
throughout the colon. The safety profile appears to be comparable 
to other 5-ASA formulations.

Apriso  is  a  formulation  containing  encapsulated  mesalamine 
granules that delivers mesalamine to the terminal ileum and colon 
via  a  proprietary  extended-release  mechanism  (Intellicor).  The 
outer coating of this agent (Eudragit L) dissolves at a pH >6. In addi-
tion,  there  is  a  polymer  matrix  core  that  aids  in  sustained  release 
throughout  the  colon.  Because  Lialda  and  Apriso  are  given  once 
daily, an anticipated benefit is improved compliance compared with 
two to four daily doses required for other mesalamine preparations.
Pentasa is another mesalamine formulation that uses an ethylcel-
lulose coating to allow water absorption into small beads containing 
the mesalamine. Water dissolves the 5-ASA, which then diffuses out 
of the bead into the lumen. Disintegration of the capsule occurs in 
the stomach. The microspheres then disperse throughout the entire 
GI tract from the small intestine through the distal colon in both 
fasted and fed conditions.

Salofalk  Granu-Stix,  an  unencapsulated  version  of  mesalamine, 
has been in use in Europe for induction and maintenance of remis-
sion for several years.

Appropriate  doses  of  the  5-ASA  compounds  are  shown  in   
Table 326-8. Some 50–75% of patients with mild to moderate UC 
improve  when  treated  with  5-ASA  doses  equivalent  to  2  g/d  of 
mesalamine; the dose response continues up to at least 4.8 g/d.

More  common  side  effects  of  the  5-ASA  medications  include 
headaches, nausea, hair loss, and abdominal pain. Rare side effects 
of  the  5-ASA  medications  include  renal  impairment,  hematuria, 
pancreatitis,  and  paradoxical  worsening  of  colitis.  Renal  function 
tests and urinalysis should be checked yearly.

Topical  Rowasa  enemas  are  composed  of  mesalamine  and  are 
effective in mild-to-moderate distal UC. Combination therapy with 
mesalamine  in  both  oral  and  enema  form  is  more  effective  than 
either treatment alone for both distal and extensive UC.

Canasa  suppositories  composed  of  mesalamine  are  effective  in 

treating proctitis. 

GLUCOCORTICOIDS
The majority of patients with moderate to severe UC benefit from 
oral or parenteral glucocorticoids. Prednisone is usually started at 
doses of 40–60 mg/d for active UC that is unresponsive to 5-ASA 
therapy. Parenteral glucocorticoids may be administered as hydro-
cortisone, 300 mg/d, or methylprednisolone, 40–60 mg/d. A newer 
glucocorticoid for UC, budesonide (Uceris), is released entirely in 

TABLE 326-8  Oral 5-Aminosalicylic Acid (5-ASA) Preparations
PREPARATION

FORMULATION

Azo-Bond

Sulfasalazine (500 mg) (Azulfidine)

Sulfapyridine-5-ASA

Balsalazide (750 mg) (Colazal)

Aminobenzoyl-alanine–5-ASA

Delayed-Release

the  colon  and  has  minimal  to  no  glucocorticoid  side  effects.  The 
dose  is  9  mg/d  for  8  weeks,  and  no  taper  is  required.  Topically 
applied  glucocorticoids  (hydrocortisone  enemas  or  budesonide 
foam)  are  also  beneficial  for  distal  colitis  and  may  serve  as  an 
adjunct in those who have rectal involvement plus more proximal 
disease.  Hydrocortisone  enemas  are  significantly  absorbed  from 
the  rectum  and  can  lead  to  adrenal  suppression  with  prolonged 
administration. Topical 5-ASA therapy is more effective than topi-
cal steroid therapy in the treatment of distal UC.

Glucocorticoids  are  also  effective  for  treatment  of  moderate  to 
severe CD and induce a 60–70% remission rate compared to a 30% 
placebo  response.  The  systemic  effects  of  standard  glucocorticoid 
formulations  have  led  to  the  development  of  formulations  that 
are  less  well  absorbed  and  have  increased  first-pass  metabolism. 
Controlled-ileal-release budesonide has been nearly equal to pred-
nisone  for  ileocolonic  CD  with  fewer  glucocorticoid  side  effects. 
Budesonide is used for 2–3 months at a dose of 9 mg/d and then 
tapered.  Glucocorticoids  play  no  role  in  maintenance  therapy  in 
either UC or CD. Once clinical remission has been induced, they 
should  be  tapered  according  to  the  clinical  activity,  normally  at  a 
rate  of  no  more  than  5–10  mg/week.  The  side  effects  are  numer-
ous, including fluid retention, abdominal striae, fat redistribution, 
hyperglycemia,  subcapsular  cataracts,  osteonecrosis,  osteoporosis, 
myopathy,  emotional  disturbances,  and  withdrawal  symptoms. 
Most of these side effects, aside from osteonecrosis, are related to 
the dose and duration of therapy. 
ANTIBIOTICS
Antibiotics have no role in the treatment of active or quiescent UC. 
However, pouchitis, which occurs in ~30–50% of UC patients after 
colectomy and IPAA, usually responds to treatment with a variety 
of  antibiotics  including  metronidazole  and  ciprofloxacin.  Some 
patients  require  long-term  treatment  with  antibiotics  for  chronic 
pouchitis. 
AZATHIOPRINE AND MERCAPTOPURINE
Azathioprine and mercaptopurine (MP) are purine analogues used 
concomitantly with biologic therapy or, much less often, as the sole 
immunosuppressants.  Azathioprine  is  rapidly  absorbed  and  con-
verted to MP, which is then metabolized to the active end product, 
thioinosinic  acid,  an  inhibitor  of  purine  ribonucleotide  synthesis 
and cell proliferation. Efficacy can be seen as early as 3–4 weeks but 
can take up to 4–6 months. Adherence can be monitored by mea-
suring  the  levels  of  6-thioguanine  and  6-methylmercaptopurine, 
end products of MP metabolism. The doses used range from 2 to  
3 mg/kg per day for azathioprine and 1 to 1.5 mg/kg per day for MP.
Although  azathioprine  and  MP  are  usually  safe,  pancreatitis 
occurs  in  3–4%  of  patients,  typically  presents  within  the  first  few 
weeks  of  therapy,  and  is  completely  reversible  when  the  drug  is 

2483

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

DELIVERY

DOSING PER DAY

Mesalamine (400, 800 mg) (Delzicol, Asacol HD)

Eudragit S (pH 7)

Distal ileum-colon

Mesalamine (1.2 g) (Lialda)

Controlled-Release

MMX mesalamine (SPD476)

Ileum-colon

Mesalamine (250, 500, 1000 mg) (Pentasa)

Ethylcellulose microgranules

Stomach-colon

Colon

Colon

3–6 g (acute)
2–4 g (maintenance)
6.75–9 g

2.4–4.8 g (acute)
1.6–4.8 g (maintenance)
2.4–4.8 g

2–4 g (acute)
1.5–4 g (maintenance)

Delayed- and Extended-Release

Mesalamine (0.375 g) (Apriso)

Intellicor extended-release mechanism Ileum-colon

1.5 g (maintenance)

Abbreviation: MMX, Multi-Matrix System.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2483

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2484

stopped. Other side effects include nausea, fever, rash, and hepatitis. 
Bone marrow suppression (particularly leukopenia) is dose-related 
and  often  delayed,  necessitating  regular  monitoring  of  the  com-
plete  blood  cell  count  (CBC).  Additionally,  1  in  300  individuals 
lacks thiopurine methyltransferase, the enzyme responsible for drug 
metabolism to inactive end products (6-methylmercaptopurine); an 
additional  11%  of  the  population  are  heterozygotes  with  interme-
diate enzyme activity. Both are at increased risk of toxicity because 
of  increased  accumulation  of  active  6-thioguanine  metabolites. 
Although  6-thioguanine  and  6-methylmercaptopurine  levels  can 
be  followed  to  determine  correct  drug  dosing  and  reduce  toxicity, 
weight-based  dosing  is  an  acceptable  alternative.  CBCs  and  liver 
function tests should be monitored frequently regardless of dosing 
strategy.

One  meta-analysis  demonstrated  a  fourfold  risk  of  lymphoma 
in IBD patients on azathioprine and MP. The highest risk for thi-
opurine-associated lymphoma is in patients >65 years old actively 
using  thiopurines  (yearly  incidence  rate  per  1000  patient-years   
of 5.41), with a moderate risk in those between the ages of 50 and 
65 (incidence rate of 2.58 compared to an incidence rate of 0.37 in 
patients <50 years old). Patients using thiopurines also have a two- 
to threefold increased risk of nonmelanoma skin cancers. 
METHOTREXATE
MTX inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, resulting in impaired DNA 
synthesis. Additional anti-inflammatory properties may be related 
to decreases in the production of IL-1. It is used most often con-
comitantly  with  biologic  therapy  to  decrease  antibody  formation 
and  improve  disease  response.  Intramuscular  (IM)  or  subcuta-
neous  (SC)  doses  range  from  15  to  25  mg/week.  Potential  toxici-
ties include leukopenia and hepatic fibrosis, necessitating periodic 
evaluation of CBCs and liver enzymes. The role of liver biopsy in 
patients on long-term MTX is uncertain but is probably limited to 
those with increased liver enzymes. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is 
a rare but serious complication of therapy. 
CYCLOSPORINE
CSA is a lipophilic peptide with inhibitory effects on both the cel-
lular and humoral immune systems. CSA blocks the production of 
IL-2 by T helper lymphocytes. CSA binds to cyclophilin, and this 
complex  inhibits  calcineurin,  a  cytoplasmic  phosphatase  enzyme 
involved  in  the  activation  of  T  cells.  CSA  also  indirectly  inhibits 
B-cell  function  by  blocking  helper  T  cells.  CSA  has  a  more  rapid 
onset of action than MP and azathioprine.

CSA  is  most  effective  when  given  at  2–4  mg/kg  per  day  IV  in 
severe  UC  that  is  refractory  to  IV  glucocorticoids,  with  82%  of 
patients responding. CSA can be an alternative to colectomy. The 
long-term  success  of  oral  CSA  is  not  as  dramatic,  but  if  patients 
are started on MP or azathioprine at the time of hospital discharge, 
remission  can  be  maintained.  Levels  as  measured  by  monoclonal 
radioimmunoassay or by the high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy assay should be maintained between 150 and 350 ng/mL.

CSA  may  cause  significant  toxicity;  renal  function  should  be 
monitored  frequently.  Hypertension,  gingival  hyperplasia,  hyper-
trichosis,  paresthesias,  tremors,  headaches,  and  electrolyte  abnor-
malities are common side effects. Creatinine elevation calls for dose 
reduction or discontinuation. Seizures may also complicate therapy, 
especially if the patient is hypomagnesemic or if serum cholesterol 
levels  are  <3.1  mmol/L  (<120  mg/dL).  Opportunistic  infections, 
most  notably  Pneumocystis  jirovecii  pneumonia,  may  occur  with 
combination immunosuppressive treatment; antibiotic prophylaxis 
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole should be given.

To  compare  IV  CSA  versus  infliximab,  a  large  trial  was  con-
ducted  in  Europe  by  the  GETAID  (Group  d’Etudes  Thérapeu-
tiques des Affections Inflammatoires Digestives) group. The results 
indicated  identical  7-day  response  rates  for  CSA  2  mg/kg  (with 
doses adjusted for levels of 150–250 ng/mL) and infliximab 5 mg/kg,  
with  both  groups  achieving  response  rates  of  85%.  Serious  infec-
tions  occurred  in  5  of  55  CSA  patients  and  4  of  56  infliximab 
patients. Response rates were similar in the two groups at day 98 

among  patients  treated  with  oral  CSA  versus  infliximab  at  the 
usual induction dose and maintenance dose regimen (40 and 46%, 
respectively).  In  light  of  data  showing  equal  efficacy  of  CSA  and 
infliximab in severe UC, more physicians are relying on infliximab 
rather than CSA in these patients. 

TACROLIMUS
Tacrolimus is a macrolide antibiotic with immunomodulatory prop-
erties similar to CSA but 100 times as potent and not dependent on 
bile or mucosal integrity for absorption. Thus, tacrolimus has good 
oral absorption despite proximal small-bowel Crohn’s involvement. 
Tacrolimus is effective in children with refractory IBD and in adults 
with extensive involvement of the small bowel. It is also effective in 
adults with glucocorticoid-dependent or refractory UC and CD as 
well as refractory fistulizing CD. 

BIOLOGIC THERAPIES
Biologic  therapy  is  now  commonly  given  as  an  initial  therapy  for 
patients  with  moderate  to  severe  CD  and  UC  to  prevent  future 
complications  of  IBD.  High-risk  patients  with  UC  who  are  more 
likely  to  require  biologics  include  those  with  moderate  to  severe 
disease, steroid-dependent or steroid-refractory disease, and refrac-
tory pouchitis. High-risk patients with CD who are more likely to 
require biologics include those who are <30 years old, with exten-
sive  disease,  perianal  or  severe  rectal  disease  and/or  deep  ulcera-
tions in the colon, and stricturing or penetrating disease behavior. 
The  current  goal  of  IBD  treatment  is  to  treat  early  in  the  disease 
course,  treat  aggressively  with  biologics,  check  drug  and  drug 
metabolite levels, administer dual therapy with immunomodulators 
and biologics in appropriate patients, and aim for deep remission 
(endoscopic  and  histologic  remission).  Patients  who  respond  to 
biologic  therapies  enjoy  an  improvement  in  clinical  symptoms;  a 
better  quality  of  life;  less  disability,  fatigue,  and  depression;  and 
fewer surgeries and hospitalizations. 

Anti-TNF  Therapies  TNF  is  a  proinflammatory  cytokine  that 
regulates immune cells to coordinate a systemic immune response. 
Dysregulation  of  TNF  production  has  been  associated  with 
immune-mediated  disorders  including  IBD,  and  inhibition  of 
TNF signaling is used in the treatment of IBD. Four TNF inhibi-
tors  are  currently  approved  for  the  treatment  of  IBD:  infliximab, 
adalimumab,  certolizumab  pegol,  and  golimumab.  Infliximab,  a 
chimeric IgG1 antibody against TNF-α, was the first biologic ther-
apy  approved  for  moderately  to  severely  active  inflammatory  and 
fistulizing CD and UC.

The  SONIC  (Study  of  Biologic  and  Immunomodulator-Naive 
Patients with Crohn’s Disease) trial compared infliximab plus aza-
thioprine,  infliximab  alone,  and  azathioprine  alone  in  immuno-
modulator- and biologic therapy–naive patients with moderate to 
severe CD. At 1 year, the infliximab plus azathioprine group had a 
glucocorticoid-free remission rate of 46% compared with 35% for 
infliximab alone and 24% for azathioprine alone. Complete mucosal 
healing was noted in more patients at week 26 with the combined 
approach  compared  with  either  infliximab  or  azathioprine  alone 
(44 vs 30 vs 17%). The adverse events were equal between groups.

A similar study in patients with moderate to severe UC showed 
that after 16 weeks of therapy, UC patients receiving azathioprine 
plus  infliximab  exhibited  a  glucocorticoid-free  remission  rate  of 
40%,  compared  to  rates  of  24  and  22%  in  those  on  azathioprine 
and infliximab alone, respectively. Together, these studies support 
a  more  aggressive  therapy  for  moderate  to  severe  CD  and  UC. 
Trough infliximab levels can be checked, and if low, the dose can be 
increased or the interval decreased.

Hospitalized  patients  with  acute 

severe  glucocorticoid- 
refractory UC have a high inflammatory burden and may develop a 
protein-losing enteropathy, leading to an accelerated consumption, 
excessive  fecal  wasting,  and  low  serum  concentrations  of  inflixi-
mab. Given a clear exposure–response relationship for infliximab in 
patients with IBD, intensive infliximab dosing regimens have been 
used in these patients.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2484

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAdalimumab (ADA) is a recombinant human monoclonal IgG1 
antibody containing only human peptide sequences and is injected 
subcutaneously.  ADA  binds  TNF  and  neutralizes  its  function  by 
blocking the interaction between TNF and its cell-surface receptor. 
Therefore, it seems to have a similar mechanism of action to inflix-
imab but with less immunogenicity. ADA is approved for treatment 
of moderate to severe CD and UC. CHARM (Crohn’s Trial of the 
Fully Human Adalimumab for Remission Maintenance) is an ADA 
maintenance  study  in  patients  who  responded  to  ADA  induction 
therapy.  About  50%  of  the  patients  in  this  trial  were  previously 
treated with infliximab. Remission rates ranged from 42 to 48% in 
infliximab-naïve patients at 1 year compared with remission rates 
of 31–34% in patients who had previously received infliximab. UC 
results are similar, with a sustained remission rate at 1 year of 22% 
(12.4%  placebo)  among  anti–TNF-naïve  patients  and  a  sustained 
remission rate at 1 year of 10.2% (3% placebo) among patients who 
had  previously  received  anti-TNF  agents.  In  clinical  practice,  the 
remission rate in both CD and UC patients taking ADA increases 
with a dose increase to 40 mg weekly instead of every other week.

Certolizumab  pegol  is  a  pegylated  form  of  an  anti-TNF  Fab 
portion  of  an  antibody  administered  SC  once  monthly.  SC  cer-
tolizumab pegol was effective for induction of clinical response in 
patients with active inflammatory CD.

Golimumab is another fully human IgG1 antibody against TNF-α 
and  is  currently  approved  for  the  treatment  of  moderately  to 
severely  active  UC.  Like  ADA  and  certolizumab,  golimumab  is 
injected SC. 

Side Effects of Anti-TNF Therapies 
Development  of  Antibodies  and  Drug  Levels  The  develop-
ment  of  antibodies  to  infliximab  is  associated  with  an  increased 
risk  of  infusion  reactions  and  a  decreased  response  to  treatment. 
Current  practice  does  not  include  giving  on-demand  or  episodic 
infusions  in  contrast  to  scheduled  periodic  infusions  because 
patients  are  most  likely  to  develop  antibodies.  Anti-infliximab 
antibodies are generally present when the quality of response or the 
response  duration  to  infliximab  infusion  decreases.  Commercial 
assays can detect both infliximab and ADA antibodies and measure 
trough  levels  to  determine  optimal  dosing.  If  a  patient  has  high 
anti-infliximab  antibodies  and  a  low  trough  level  of  infliximab, 
it  is  best  to  switch  to  another  anti-TNF  therapy.  If  a  patient  has 
a  therapeutic  anti-TNF  level  and  active  inflammatory  symptoms, 
the drug should be switched to a different class of biologic. Most 
acute infusion reactions and serum sickness can be managed with 
glucocorticoids and antihistamines. Some reactions can be serious 
and would necessitate a change in therapy, especially if a patient has 
anti-infliximab  antibodies.  It  is  now  common  practice  to  add  an 
immunomodulator such as azathioprine, MP, or MTX to anti-TNF 
therapy to help prevent antibody formation. 
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL)  The baseline risk of NHL in 
CD patients is 2 in 10,000, slightly higher than in the general pop-
ulation.  Azathioprine  and/or  MP  therapy  increases  the  risk  to  ~4 
in 10,000. It is difficult to assess whether anti-TNF medications are 
associated with lymphoma because most patients are also receiving 
thiopurines. After adjustment for co-treatments, no excess risk of 
lymphoma was found in a Danish study of a cohort of IBD patients 
exposed to anti-TNF medications. 
Hepatosplenic T-Cell Lymphoma (HSTCL)  HSTCL is a nearly 
universally  fatal  lymphoma  in  patients  with  or  without  CD.  In 
patients  with  CD,  a  total  of  37  unique  cases  have  been  reported. 
Eighty-six  percent  of  the  patients  were  male,  and  the  median  age 
was  26  years.  Patients  had  CD  for  a  mean  of  10  years  before  the 
diagnosis  of  HSTCL.  Thirty-six  patients  had  used  either  MP  or 
azathioprine, and 28 patients had used infliximab. 
Skin  Lesions  New-onset  psoriasiform  skin  lesions  develop  in 
nearly  5%  of  IBD  patients  treated  with  anti-TNF  therapy.  Most 
often,  these  can  be  treated  topically,  and  occasionally,  anti-TNF 
therapy must be decreased, switched, or stopped. Patients with IBD 

2485

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

may have a slight, unexplained, intrinsic higher risk of developing 
melanoma. The risk of melanoma is increased almost twofold with 
anti-TNF and not thiopurine use. The risk of nonmelanoma skin 
cancer is increased with thiopurines and biologics, especially with 
≥1 year of follow-up. Patients on these medications should have a 
skin check at least once a year. 
Infections  All  of  the  anti-TNF  drugs  are  associated  with  an 
increased risk of infections, particularly reactivation of latent tuber-
culosis and opportunistic fungal infections including disseminated 
histoplasmosis  and  coccidioidomycosis.  Patients  should  have  a 
purified protein derivative (PPD) or a QuantiFERON-TB Gold test 
before initiation of anti-TNF therapy. Patients >65 years old have 
a  higher  rate  of  infections  and  death  on  infliximab  or  ADA  than 
those <65 years old. 
Other  Acute liver injury due to reactivation of hepatitis B virus 
and  to  autoimmune  effects  and  cholestasis  has  been  reported. 
Rarely,  infliximab  and  the  other  anti-TNF  drugs  have  been  asso-
ciated  with  optic  neuritis,  seizures,  new  onset  or  exacerbation  of 
clinical  symptoms,  and  radiographic  evidence  of  central  nervous 
system demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis. They 
may exacerbate symptoms in patients with New York Heart Associ-
ation functional class III/IV heart failure. 

ANTI-INTEGRINS
Integrins are expressed on the cell surface of leukocytes and serve 
as  mediators  of  leukocyte  adhesion  to  vascular  endothelium. 
α4-Integrin along with its β1 or β7 subunit interact with endothe-
lial ligands termed adhesion molecules. Interaction between α4β7 
and  mucosal  addressin  cellular  adhesion  molecule  (MAdCAM-1) 
is important in lymphocyte trafficking to gut mucosa.

Natalizumab is a recombinant humanized IgG4 antibody against 
α4-integrin  and  is  effective  in  induction  and  maintenance  of 
patients with CD. The rates of response and remission at 3 months 
are  ~60  and  40%,  respectively,  with  a  sustained  remission  rate  of 
~40% at 36 weeks. Natalizumab is no longer widely used for CD due 
to the risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).

Vedolizumab  (VDZ),  another  leukocyte  trafficking  inhibitor,  is 
a monoclonal antibody directed against α4β7-integrin specifically 
and  has  the  ability  to  convey  gut-selective  immunosuppression. 
Unlike natalizumab, it inhibits adhesion of a discrete gut-homing 
subset of T lymphocytes to MAdCAM-1, but not to vascular adhe-
sion molecule-1. VDZ decreases GI inflammation without inhibit-
ing systemic immune responses or affecting T-cell trafficking to the 
central nervous system. It may be prescribed as a first-line biologic 
or  after  failure  of  a  TNF  antagonist  in  patients  with  CD  or  UC. 
The  VARSITY  trial,  a  phase  3B,  randomized,  double-blind,  dou-
ble-dummy, active-controlled superiority trial, evaluated outcomes 
among patients with UC who received either VDZ or ADA. Results 
showed that, at week 52, patients who were treated with VDZ were 
significantly more likely to be in clinical remission (31.3% VDZ vs 
22.5%  ADA)  and  show  endoscopic  improvement  (39.7%  VDZ  vs 
27.7% ADA). Glucocorticoid-free clinical remission was observed 
in  12.6%  of  the  VDZ  group  and  21.8%  of  patients  who  received 
ADA, but the difference was not statistically significant. This trial 
suggests that among patients with UC, VDZ should be considered 
as first-line therapy and before treatment with ADA.

Ustekinumab, a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody, blocks 
the biologic activity of IL-12 and IL-23 through their common p40 
subunit by inhibiting the interaction of these cytokines with their 
receptors  on  T  cells,  natural  killer  cells,  and  antigen-presenting 
cells. In the UNITI trial, the remission rate for the highest 6 mg/kg 
IV induction dose followed by a dose of 90 mg every 8 weeks was 
41.7%,  compared  with  27.4%  for  placebo,  at  22  weeks  in  patients 
with CD no longer responding to anti-TNF therapy.

Similarly,  the  UNIFI  trial  evaluated  ustekinumab  as  8-week 
induction and 44-week maintenance therapy in moderate to severe 
UC.  Induction  rates  at  8  weeks  were  15.6%  in  the  ustekinumab 
group compared to 5.3% in the placebo group, and 44-week main-
tenance  rates  were  43.8%  in  the  ustekinumab  group  compared  to 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2485

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2486

24% in the placebo group. The rates of serious adverse events were 
similar for ustekinumab and placebo in the UNITI and UNIFI tri-
als. Therefore, ustekinumab is another option for the treatment of 
moderate to severe CD and UC and is particularly appealing for use 
in patients with concomitant psoriatic arthritis. 
SMALL MOLECULES
Small  molecules  (drugs  with  molecular  weight  <1  kDa)  are  a  new 
class of orally administered medications developed for IBD that lack 
the  immunogenicity  associated  with  monoclonal  antibodies.  The 
advantage of small molecules is their ability to diffuse through cell 
membranes into the intracellular space and alter cytokine signaling 
pathways. This mechanism of action may be more efficacious com-
pared to monoclonal antibodies that inhibit specific targets because 
several  cytokine  pathways  are  involved  in  IBD  pathogenesis  and 
inhibiting numerous cytokines may be synergistic. A key regulatory 
pathway  is  the  JAK/STAT  pathway  that  activates  transcription  and 
translation  of  proteins  that  mediate  the  immune  response.  Janus 
kinase (JAK) is a family of intracellular, nonreceptor tyrosine kinases 
that regulate cytokine signaling via the JAK/STAT pathway, ultimately 
suppressing the immune response and inflammation. The JAK family 
members include JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2).
Tofacitinib is a reversible and competitive JAK inhibitor used for 
the treatment of moderate to severe UC refractory to conventional 
therapy. It competes with ATP to bind to the ATP-docking site of the 
kinase domain of JAK. By competing with ATP, tofacitinib inhibits 
phosphorylation  and  activation  of  JAK,  leading  to  downstream 
reduction  of  cytokine  production  and  alteration  of  the  immune 
response. Although tofacitinib is a pan-JAK inhibitor, it has higher 
specificity for JAK1 and JAK3 than for JAK2 and TYK2. The pan-
JAK inhibition is concerning for adverse events and overall safety.

The efficacy of tofacitinib as induction and maintenance therapy, 
as well as its safety profile, was evaluated in three phase 3, random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in adults with moderate 
to  severe  UC  refractory  to  conventional  therapy  including  anti-T-
NFs. Patients who responded to induction therapy were eligible for 
OCTAVE  Sustain,  a  maintenance  trial  of  tofacitinib  5  mg  versus 
10  mg  versus  placebo  that  continued  through  52  weeks,  with  the 
primary end point of clinical remission at 52 weeks. Remission rates 
at 8 weeks in the OCTAVE Induction 1 and 2 trials were 18.5 and 
16.6% in the tofacitinib groups, compared to 8.2 and 3.6% in the pla-
cebo groups, respectively. In the OCTAVE Sustain trial, remission 
rates at 52 weeks were 34.3% with 5 mg and 40.6% with 10 mg of 
tofacitinib, compared to 11.1% with placebo. A recent U.S. Food and 
Drug  Administration  review  concluded  that  there  is  an  increased 
risk of serious adverse events including heart attack, stroke, cancer, 
blood clots, and death in patients with ulcerative colitis and rheuma-
toid arthritis who are prescribed tofacitinib. Patients who are at risk 
for  cardiovascular  disease,  are  current  or  past  smokers  and/or  are 
over the age of 50 should consider alternative therapies.
OZANIMOD
Ozanimod  is  a  potent  sphingosine-1-phosphate  (S1P1)  receptor 
modulator that binds selectively with high affinity to the S1P recep-
tor subtypes S1P1 and S1P5, both of which are involved in immune 
regulation.  By  preventing  trafficking  of  disease-exacerbating  lym-
phocytes  to  the  gut,  ozanimod  may  provide  immunomodulatory 
effects and moderate disease processes. 

Ozanimod  has  very  recently  been  approved  for  the  treatment  of 
moderate to severe ulcerative colitis. It is administered as a daily capsule.
The biologic and small-molecule therapies used in daily practice 

are detailed in Table 326-9. 
NUTRITIONAL THERAPIES
Diet has long been thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of IBD 
and may also be an avenue for managing disease activity. Diet plays 
a significant role in shaping the gut microbiome, and dietary com-
ponents may interact with the microbiome and stimulate a mucosal 
immune response. In fact, active CD responds to exclusive enteral 
nutrition (EEN) or bowel rest with TPN, interventions as effective 

as  glucocorticoids  in  inducing  remission  but  not  as  effective  for 
maintenance therapy. In contrast to CD, active UC is not effectively 
treated by elemental diets or TPN.

Dietary  approaches  to  maintenance  therapy  in  CD  have  largely 
been  adapted  from  epidemiologic  studies;  however,  significant  het-
erogeneity is noted among research study outcomes. In general, low 
fiber, refined carbohydrates (especially sweetened beverages), animal 
fats, red meat, and processed meat have been associated with onset 
of IBD. Therefore, the overall dietary approach is to maximize fiber 
intake, particularly from fruits and vegetables, and to limit consump-
tion of higher-risk foods. Several defined diets adhere to these prin-
ciples with some variation, including the Mediterranean diet pattern, 
specific carbohydrate diet, semi-vegetarian diet, and IBD anti-inflam-
matory  diet  (IBD-AID).  However,  it  remains  unclear  whether  diet 
studies will eventually lead to evidence-based nutrition guidelines.

Standard  medical  management  of  UC  and  CD  is  shown  in   

Fig. 326-12. 

SURGICAL THERAPY 
Ulcerative  Colitis  Nearly  one-half  of  patients  with  extensive 
chronic UC undergo surgery within the first 10 years of their illness. 
The indications for surgery are listed in Table 326-10. Morbidity is 
~20% for elective, 30% for urgent, and 40% for emergency procto-
colectomy. The risks are primarily hemorrhage, contamination and 
sepsis, and neural injury. The operation of choice is an IPAA.

Because  UC  is  a  mucosal  disease,  the  rectal  mucosa  can  be 
dissected  and  removed  down  to  the  dentate  line  of  the  anus  or 
~2  cm  proximal  to  this  landmark.  The  ileum  is  fashioned  into  a 
pouch that serves as a neorectum. This ileal pouch is then sutured 
circumferentially  to  the  anus  in  an  end-to-end  fashion.  If  per-
formed  carefully,  this  operation  preserves  the  anal  sphincter  and 
maintains continence. The overall operative morbidity is 10%, with 
the  major  complication  being  bowel  obstruction.  Pouch  failure 
necessitating conversion to permanent ileostomy occurs in 5–10% 
of patients. Some inflamed rectal mucosa is usually left behind, and 
thus, endoscopic surveillance is necessary. Primary dysplasia of the 
ileal mucosa of the pouch has occurred rarely.

Patients with IPAA usually have ~6–10 bowel movements a day. 
On validated quality-of-life indices, they report better performance 
in  sports  and  sexual  activities  than  ileostomy  patients.  The  most 
frequent complication of IPAA is pouchitis in ~30–50% of patients 
with  UC.  This  syndrome  consists  of  increased  stool  frequency, 
watery stools, cramping, urgency, nocturnal leakage of stool, arth-
ralgias, malaise, and fever. Pouch biopsies may distinguish true pou-
chitis from underlying CD. Although pouchitis usually responds to 
antibiotics, 3–5% of patients remain refractory and may require glu-
cocorticoids, immunomodulators, biologics, or even pouch removal. 
Crohn’s  Disease  The  majority  of  patients  with  CD  will  require 
at  least  one  operation  in  their  lifetime.  The  need  for  surgery  is 
related to duration of disease and the site of involvement. Patients 
with small-bowel disease have an 80% chance of requiring surgery. 
Those  with  colitis  alone  have  a  50%  chance.  Surgery  is  an  option 
only when medical treatment has failed or complications dictate its 
necessity. The indications for surgery are shown in Table 326-10. 
Small-Intestinal  Disease  Because  CD  is  chronic  and  recur-
rent,  with  no  clear  surgical  cure,  as  little  intestine  as  possible  is 
resected. Current surgical alternatives for treatment of obstructing 
CD  include  resection  of  the  diseased  segment  and  strictureplasty. 
Surgical  resection  of  the  diseased  segment  is  the  most  frequently 
performed operation, and in most cases, primary anastomosis can 
be  done  to  restore  continuity.  An  end-to-end  anastomosis  may 
provide  the  best  opportunity  for  an  optimal  functional  outcome, 
compared  to  an  antiperistaltic  side-to-side  anastomosis,  which 
creates a functional block to motility leading to distention and pain 
at  the  anastomotic  site  in  a  subgroup  of  patients.  If  much  of  the 
small bowel has already been resected and the strictures are short, 
with intervening areas of normal mucosa, strictureplasties should 
be  done  to  avoid  a  functionally  insufficient  length  of  bowel.  The 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2486

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 326-9  Biologic Agents in the Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease

2487

INDICATION
Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
Fistulizing Crohn’s disease

MEDICATION
Infliximab

DOSAGE
5 mg/kg at 0, 2, and 6 
weeks, then every 8 
weeks; may increase 
dose to 10 mg/kg every 
4 weeks depending on 
trough levels
Intensive dosing 
for hospitalized 
corticosteroid-refractory 
patients

SERIOUS TOXICITIES
Increased risk of 
infections (bacterial and 
fungal), tuberculosis 
(TB) reactivation, 
hepatitis B reactivation, 
lymphoma (controversial), 
psoriasis, melanoma 
and nonmelanoma skin 
cancers, drug-induced 
lupus
Contraindicated in 
multiple sclerosis, class 
III/IV congestive heart 
failure
As above

OTHER COMMON SIDE 
EFFECTS
Infusion reactions

TESTING
Prior to infusion:
TB testing
Hepatitis B testing (HBsAb, HBsAb, 
HBcAb)
Maintenance:
Skin check yearly
Influenza, Pneumovax 23, and 
Prevnar 13 vaccinations
Hepatitis B vaccine if not immune

Injection site reactions 
(better with citrate-free 
preparation)

As above

Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis.
Fistulizing Crohn’s disease

Adalimumab

Certolizumab

Golimumab

Vedolizumab

160 mg day 0, 80 mg day 
14 and then 40 mg every 
14 days; may increase 
to 40 mg every 7 days 
depending on trough 
levels
400 mg on days 0 and 14, 
then 400 mg every 28 days
200 mg on day 0, 100 mg 
on day 14, then 100 mg 
every 28 days
300 mg at 0, 2, and 6 
weeks, then every 8 
weeks; may increase 
dose to 300 mg every 4 
weeks

Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease
Moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis

As above

As above

As above

As above

As above

As above

Moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis 
(more effective than 
adalimumab as first-line 
therapy in one study)

No increased risk of 
serious systemic or 
opportunistic infections
No increased risk of 
malignancy

Nasopharyngitis, 
headache, arthralgias, 
nausea

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Prior to infusion:
TB testing
hepatitis B testing (HBsAb, HBsAg, 
HBcAb)
Maintenance:
Influenza, Pneumovax 23, and 
Prevnar 13 vaccinations
Hepatitis B vaccine if not immune
Prior to infusion:
Anti-JCV antibody, TB testing
Hepatitis B testing (HBsAb, HBsAg, 
HBcAb)
Maintenance:
Influenza, Pneumovax 23, and 
Prevnar 13 vaccinations
Hepatitis B vaccine if not immune
Prior to infusion:
TB testing
Hepatitis B testing (HBsAb, HBsAg, 
HBcAb)
Maintenance:
Influenza, Pneumovax 23, and 
Prevnar 13 vaccinations
Hepatitis B vaccine if not immune
Prior to infusion:
First dose of Shingrix recommended, 
TB testing
Hepatitis B testing (HBsAb, HBsAg, 
HBcAb)
Maintenance:
Influenza, Pneumovax 23, and 
Prevnar 13 vaccinations
Hepatitis B vaccine if not immune

Natalizumab

300 mg IV every 4 weeks Moderate to severe 

Crohn’s disease (not to be 
used in combination with 
other immunosuppressive 
medications)

Progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy 
(monitor anti-JCV 
antibodies every 6 months 
and stop if positive)

Headache, fatigue, 
infusions reactions, 
urinary tract infections, 
arthralgia, pain in 
extremity, rash, 
gastroenteritis, vaginitis

Ustekinumab

6 mg/kg IV, then 90 mg 
every 8 weeks; may 
increase dose to 90 mg 
every 4 weeks

Moderate to severe 
Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis

Tofacitinib

10 mg bid; can decrease 
to 5 mg bid when patient 
in remission

Moderate to severe 
ulcerative colitis

Nasopharyngitis, upper 
respiratory tract infection, 
fatigue, headache

Elevated lipids, 
neutropenia, anemia, 
elevated liver enzymes

Reversible posterior 
leukoencephalopathy 
syndrome (presents 
with headaches, 
seizures, confusion, and 
visual disturbances), 
anaphylaxis, and 
angioedema

Increased risk of heart 
attack, stroke, cancer, 
blood clots, and death in 
patients with ulcerative 
colitis and rheumatoid 
arthritis Patients who are 
at risk for cardiovascular 
disease, are current or 
past smokers and/or are 
over the age of 50 should 
consider alternative 
therapies.
Increased risk of viral 
infections, including 
herpes zoster, and 
bacterial and invasive 
fungal infections

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2487

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2488

Tofacitinib

Biologic +/–
MP/AZA/MTX

Prednisone oral (induction
of remission only)

Hydrocortisone rectal

Budesonide rectal and/or oral

5-ASA oral and/or rectal

Mild to Moderate Ulcerative Colitis

Total
parenteral
nutrition
and bowel rest

Cyclosporine IV

Tofacitinib

Biologic +/– MP/AZA/MTX

Hydrocortisone or Solumedrol IV
(induction of remission only)

Biologic +/–
MP/AZA/MTX

Prednisone oral (induction of remission only)

Prednisone oral (induction of
remission only)

Sulfasalazine (colon)

Budesonide (ileal and right colon)

Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis

Total
parenteral
nutrition and
bowel rest

Biologic +/– MP/AZA/MTX

Mild to Moderate Crohn’s Disease

Biologic +/– MP/AZA/MTX

Hydrocortisone or Solumedrol IV
(induction of remission only)

Prednisone oral (induction of remission only)

Abscess drainage and antibiotics

Moderate to Severe Crohn’s Disease

Fistulizing Crohn’s Disease

FIGURE 326-12  Medical management of inflammatory bowel disease. 5-ASA, 5-aminosalicylic acid; CD, Crohn’s disease; UC, ulcerative colitis.

strictured area of intestine is incised longitudinally and the incision 
sutured transversely, thus widening the narrowed area. Complica-
tions of strictureplasty include prolonged ileus, hemorrhage, fistula, 
abscess, leak, and restricture.

Risk  factors  for  early  recurrence  of  disease  include  cigarette 
smoking, penetrating disease (internal fistulas, abscesses, or other 
evidence of penetration through the wall of the bowel), early recur-
rence since a previous surgery, multiple surgeries, and a young age 
at the time of the first surgery. Aggressive postoperative treatment 
with biologics should be considered for this group of patients. It is 
also recommended to evaluate for endoscopic recurrence of CD via 
a colonoscopy, if possible, 3–6 months after surgery. 
Colorectal  Disease  A  greater  percentage  of  patients  with 
Crohn’s colitis require surgery for intractability, fulminant disease, 
and  anorectal  disease.  Several  alternatives  are  available,  ranging 

TABLE 326-10  Indications for Surgery
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Intractable disease
Fulminant disease
Toxic megacolon
Colonic perforation
Massive colonic hemorrhage
Extracolonic disease
Colonic obstruction
Colon cancer prophylaxis
Colon dysplasia or cancer

CROHN’S DISEASE
Small Intestine
  Stricture and obstruction
  unresponsive to medical therapy
  Massive hemorrhage
  Refractory fistula
  Abscess
Colon and rectum

Intractable disease
  Fulminant disease

 Perianal disease unresponsive to medical 
therapy

  Refractory fistula
  Colonic obstruction
  Cancer prophylaxis
  Colon dysplasia or cancer

from the use of a temporary loop ileostomy to resection of segments 
of diseased colon or even the entire colon and rectum. For patients 
with  segmental  involvement,  segmental  colon  resection  with  pri-
mary  anastomosis  can  be  performed.  In  20–25%  of  patients  with 
extensive colitis, the rectum is spared sufficiently to consider rectal 
preservation. Most surgeons believe that an IPAA is contraindicated 
in CD due to the high incidence of pouch failure. A diverting colos-
tomy may help heal severe perianal disease or rectovaginal fistulas, 
but disease almost always recurs with reanastomosis. These patients 
often require a total proctocolectomy and ileostomy.

 ■ IBD AND PREGNANCY
Patients  with  quiescent  UC  and  CD  have  normal  fertility  rates;  the 
fallopian  tubes  can  be  scarred  by  the  inflammatory  process  of  CD, 
especially  on  the  right  side  because  of  the  proximity  of  the  terminal 
ileum. In addition, perirectal, perineal, and rectovaginal abscesses and 
fistulas  as  well  as  pelvic  surgery  can  result  in  dyspareunia.  Infertility 
in men can be caused by sulfasalazine but reverses when treatment is 
stopped. Women with an IPAA have decreased fertility due to scarring 
or occlusion of the fallopian tubes secondary to pelvic inflammation 
and adhesions, although studies have shown that fertility is improved 
with laparoscopic versus open IPAA.

Mild or quiescent UC or CD has no effect on birth outcomes. The 
courses of CD and UC during pregnancy mostly correlate with disease 
activity at the time of conception. Patients should be in remission for  
6 months before conceiving. Most CD patients can deliver vaginally, but 
cesarean delivery may be the preferred route of delivery for patients with 
anorectal and perirectal abscesses and fistulas to reduce the likelihood 
of fistulas developing or extending into the episiotomy scar. Unless they 
desire  multiple  children,  UC  patients  with  an  IPAA  may  consider  a 
cesarean delivery due to an increased risk of future fecal incontinence.

Sulfasalazine  and  all  mesalamines  are  safe  for  use  in  pregnancy 
and  nursing  with  the  caveat  that  additional  folate  supplementation 
must be given with sulfasalazine. Topical 5-ASA agents are safe during 
pregnancy and nursing. Glucocorticoids are generally safe for use dur-
ing pregnancy and are indicated for patients with moderate to severe 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2488

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disease activity. The amount of glucocorticoids received by the nursing 
infant is minimal. The safest antibiotics to use for CD in pregnancy for 
short periods of time (weeks, not months) are ampicillin and cephalo-
sporins. Metronidazole can be used in the second or third trimester. 
Ciprofloxacin causes cartilage lesions in immature animals and should 
be avoided because of the absence of data on its effects on growth and 
development in humans.

MP  and  azathioprine  pose  minimal  or  no  risk  during  pregnancy. 
Breast  milk  has  been  shown  to  contain  negligible  levels  of  MP/
azathioprine when measured in a limited number of patients.

MTX  is  teratogenic  and  should  be  discontinued  at  least  3  months 

before conception.

In a large prospective and multiple retrospective studies, no increased 
risk of stillbirths, miscarriages, or spontaneous abortions was seen with 
infliximab,  ADA,  or  certolizumab.  Infliximab  and  ADA  are  IgG1 
antibodies and are actively transported across the placenta in the late 
second and third trimesters. Infants can have serum levels of infliximab 
and ADA up to 12 months of age, and live vaccines should be avoided 
during  this  time.  Certolizumab  crosses  the  placenta  by  passive  diffu-
sion,  and  infant  serum  and  cord  blood  levels  are  minimal.  The  anti-
TNF drugs are relatively safe in nursing. Miniscule levels of infliximab, 
ADA, and certolizumab have been reported in breast milk. These levels 
are of no clinical significance. It is recommended that drugs should not 
be switched during pregnancy unless necessitated by the medical con-
dition of the IBD. VDZ and ustekinumab appear safe during pregnancy, 
although  the  data  are  limited.  Tofacitinib  should  not  be  used  during 
pregnancy.  Animal  studies  show  teratogenic  effects  with  tofacitinib, 
and data in humans are limited. A washout period of at least 1 week is 
recommended before conception. Surgery in UC should be performed 
only  for  emergency  indications,  including  severe  hemorrhage,  perfo-
ration, and megacolon refractory to medical therapy. Total colectomy 
and ileostomy carry a 50% risk of postoperative spontaneous abortion. 
The best time to perform surgery is in the second trimester if necessary. 
Patients with IPAAs have increased nighttime stool frequency during 
pregnancy that resolves postpartum. Transient small-bowel obstruction 
or ileus has been noted in up to 8% of patients with ileostomies.

CANCER IN IBD
 ■ ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Patients  with  long-standing  UC  are  at  increased  risk  for  developing 
colonic epithelial dysplasia and carcinoma (Fig. 326-13).

The  risk  of  neoplasia  in  chronic  UC  increases  with  duration  and 
extent  of  disease.  In  contrast  to  the  relatively  high  risk  in  one  large 
meta-analysis  (2%  after  10  years,  8%  after  20  years,  and  18%  after  
30 years of disease), a decrease in the risk of colorectal cancer has been 
noted over time potentially due to better control of inflammation and 
better  colonoscopic  surveillance.  The  rates  of  colon  cancer  are  still 

FIGURE  326-13  Medium-power  view  of  low-grade  dysplasia  in  a  patient  with 
chronic  ulcerative  colitis.  Low-grade  dysplastic  crypts  are  interspersed  among 
regenerating crypts. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)

2489

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
6

I
n
f
l
a
m
m
a
t
o
r
y
B
o
w
e
l

D
i
s
e
a
s
e

about 1.5 to 2 times higher than in the general population, and colono-
scopic surveillance is the standard of care.

Annual  or  biennial  colonoscopy  with  multiple  biopsies  is  recom-
mended for patients with >8–10 years of extensive colitis (greater than 
one-third  of  the  colon  involved)  or  12–15  years  of  proctosigmoiditis 
(less than one-third but more than just the rectum) and has been widely 
used  to  screen  and  survey  for  subsequent  dysplasia  and  carcinoma. 
International  guideline  societies  have  recommended  chromoendos-
copy  for  dysplasia  surveillance  in  IBD.  Chromoendoscopy  enhances 
the visualization of the surface and pit pattern of the mucosa, as well as 
borders of lesions, in order to better define areas of dysplasia compared 
to  standard-definition  white  light  endoscopy.  The  evidence  behind 
chromoendoscopy is controversial. A systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials found that chromoendoscopy had a higher likelihood 
of  detecting  dysplasia  compared  to  standard-definition  white  light 
endoscopy with a relative risk of 2.12. In contrast, a retrospective study 
found  no  significant  difference  in  dysplasia  detection  rates  between 
chromoendoscopy  and  standard-definition  white  light  endoscopy.  In 
real-life settings, the practice has been to use standard-definition white 
light  endoscopy  with  surveillance  biopsies  in  patients  with  chronic 
colitis  at  average  risk  and  chromoendoscopy  in  higher-risk  patients 
including those with a history of dysplasia, PSC, or family history of 
colorectal cancer.

Risk factors for cancer in UC include long-duration disease, exten-
sive disease, family history of colon cancer, PSC, a colon stricture, and 
the presence of postinflammatory pseudopolyps on colonoscopy.
 ■ CROHN’S DISEASE
Risk factors for developing cancer in Crohn’s colitis are long-duration 
and extensive disease, bypassed colon segments, colon strictures, PSC, 
and family history of colon cancer. The cancer risks in CD and UC are 
probably equivalent for similar extent and duration of disease. In the 
CESAME  study,  a  prospective  observational  cohort  of  IBD  patients 
in France, the standardized incidence ratios of colorectal cancer were 
2.2 for all IBD patients (95% CI, 1.5–3.0; p < .001) and 7.0 for patients 
with long-standing extensive colitis (both Crohn’s and UC) (95% CI, 
4.4–10.5;  p  <  .001).  Thus,  the  same  endoscopic  surveillance  strategy 
used for UC is recommended for patients with chronic Crohn’s colitis. 
A pediatric colonoscope can be used to pass narrow strictures in CD 
patients,  but  surgery  should  be  considered  in  symptomatic  patients 
with impassable strictures.
 ■ MANAGEMENT OF DYSPLASIA AND CANCER
Dysplasia can be flat or polypoid. If flat high-grade dysplasia is encoun-
tered  on  colonoscopic  surveillance,  the  usual  treatment  is  colectomy 
for UC and either colectomy or segmental resection for CD. If flat low-
grade dysplasia is found (Fig. 326-13), most investigators recommend 
immediate  colectomy.  Adenomas  may  occur  coincidently  in  UC  and 
CD  patients  with  chronic  colitis  and  can  be  removed  endoscopically 
provided that biopsies of the surrounding mucosa are free of dysplasia.
IBD patients are also at greater risk for other malignancies. Patients 
with CD may have an increased risk of NHL, leukemia, and myelodys-
plastic syndromes. Severe, chronic, complicated perianal disease in CD 
patients may be associated with an increased risk of cancer in the lower 
rectum and anal canal (squamous cell cancers). Although the absolute 
risk of small-bowel adenocarcinoma in CD is low (2.2% at 25 years in 
one study), patients with long-standing, extensive, small-bowel disease 
should be considered for screening.

COVID-19 AND IBD
COVID-19,  caused  by  SARS-CoV-2,  was  first  reported  in  December 
2019 and has rapidly spread throughout the world, leading to an inter-
national pandemic. Glucocorticoids, immunomodulators (thiopurines, 
MTX), biologics, and JAK inhibitors, commonly used to treat IBD, are 
associated with higher rates of serious viral and bacterial infections, and 
patients with IBD using these medications are potentially at increased 
risk  of  a  serious  COVID-19  infection.  Yet,  it  is  also  possible  that 
some forms of immune suppression may blunt the excessive immune 
response/cytokine storm characteristic of severe COVID-19 infection 
and consequently reduce mortality. Using data from the Surveillance 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2489

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2490 Epidemiology  of  Coronavirus  Under  Research  Exclusion  for  Inflam-
matory Bowel Disease, it was found that increasing age (adjusted OR 
1.04; 95% CI, 1.01–1.02), two or more comorbidities (adjusted OR 2.9; 
95% CI, 1.1–7.8), and systemic glucocorticoids (adjusted OR 6.9; 95% 
CI,  2.3–20.5)  are  associated  with  severe  COVID-19  in  IBD  patients. 
Anti-TNF  treatment  was  not  associated  with  severe  COVID-19 
(adjusted OR 0.9; 95% CI, 0.4–2.2).
 ■ FURTHER READING
Alexandersson B et al: High-definition chromoendoscopy superior 
to  high-definition  white-light  endoscopy  in  surveillance  of  inflam-
matory  bowel  diseases  in  a  randomized  trial.  Clin  Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 18:2101, 2020.

Ananthakrishnan A et al: Changing global epidemiology of inflam-
matory  bowel  disease:  Sustaining  health  care  delivery  into  the  21st 
century.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2020;18(6):1252-1260.Bella-
guarda E, Hanauer ST: Checkpoint-inhibitor-induced colitis. Am J 
Gastroenterol 115:202, 2020.

Bernstein  CM  et  al:  Events  within  the  first  year  of  life,  but  not  the 
neonatal  period,  affect  risk  for  later  development  of  inflammatory 
bowel diseases. Gastroenterology 156:2190, 2019.

Brenner  E  et  al:  Corticosteroids,  but  not  TNF  antagonists,  are 
associated  with  adverse  COVID-19  outcomes  in  patients  with 
inflammatory bowel diseases: Results from an international registry. 
Gastroenterology 159:481, 2020.

Graham DB, Xavier RJ: Pathway paradigms revealed from the genet-

ics of inflammatory bowel disease. Nature 578:527, 2020.

Levine A et al: Crohn’s disease exclusion diet plus partial enteral nutri-
tion  induces  sustained  remission  in  a  randomized  controlled  trial. 
Gastroenterology 157:440, 2019.

Mahadevan  U  et  al:  Pregnancy  and  neonatal  outcomes  after  fetal 
exposure to biologics and thiopurines among women with inflamma-
tory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 160:1131, 2021.

Moller  FT  et  al:  Familial  risk  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease:  A 
population-based  cohort  study  1977-2011.  Am  J  Gastroenterol 
110:564, 2015.

Ng  SC  et  al:  Worldwide  incidence  and  prevalence  of  inflamma-
tory  bowel  disease  in  the  21st  century:  A  systematic  review  of 
population-based studies. Lancet 390:2769, 2018.

Sands  BE  et  al:  UNIFI  Study  Group.  Ustekinumab  as  induction  and 
maintenance  therapy  for  ulcerative  colitis.  N  Engl  J  Med  381:1201, 
2019.

Sands  BE  et  al:  VARSITY  Study  Group.  Vedolizumab  versus  adali-
mumab  for  moderate-to-severe  ulcerative  colitis.  N  Engl  J  Med 
381:1215, 2019.

Singh S et al: AGA technical review on the management of moderate 

to severe ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 158:1465, 2020.

327 Irritable Bowel  
Syndrome
Chung Owyang

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional bowel disorder charac-
terized by abdominal pain or discomfort and altered bowel habits in 
the absence of detectable structural abnormalities. No clear diagnostic 
markers exist for IBS; thus, the diagnosis of the disorder is based on 
clinical presentation. In 2016, the Rome III criteria for the diagnosis of 
IBS were updated to Rome IV (Table 327-1). Throughout the world, 
~10–20% of adults and adolescents have symptoms consistent with IBS. 
IBS symptoms tend to come and go over time and often overlap with 
other  functional  disorders  such  as  fibromyalgia,  headache,  backache, 

TABLE 327-1  Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria for Irritable  
Bowel Syndromea
Recurrent abdominal pain, on average, at least 1 day per week in the  
last 3 months, associated with ≥2 of the following criteria:
1.  Related to defecation
2.  Associated with a change in frequency of stool
3.  Associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool

aCriteria fulfilled for the last 3 months with symptom onset at least 6 months prior to 
diagnosis.

and  genitourinary  symptoms.  Severity  of  symptoms  varies  and  can 
significantly impair quality of life, resulting in high health care costs. 
Altered gastrointestinal (GI) motility, visceral hyperalgesia, disturbance 
of brain–gut interaction, abnormal central processing, autonomic and 
hormonal events, genetic and environmental factors, and psychosocial 
disturbances are variably involved, depending on the individual. This 
progress may result in improved methods of treatment.
 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
IBS is a disorder that affects all ages, although most patients have their 
first symptoms before age 45. Women are diagnosed with IBS two to 
three times as often as men and make up 80% of the population with 
severe IBS. As indicated in Table 327-1, pain is a key symptom for the 
diagnosis of IBS. This symptom should be associated with defecation 
and/or have its onset associated with a change in frequency or form of 
stool. In comparison to Rome III, the Rome IV criteria are more strin-
gent, requiring abdominal pain to occur at a minimum of once a week 
and eliminating “discomfort” as one of the criteria. Painless diarrhea 
or constipation does not fulfill the diagnostic criteria to be classified as 
IBS. Supportive symptoms that are not part of the diagnostic criteria 
include defecation straining, urgency or a feeling of incomplete bowel 
movement, passing mucus, and bloating.

Abdominal Pain  According to the current IBS diagnostic criteria, 
abdominal  pain  is  a  prerequisite  clinical  feature  of  IBS.  Abdominal 
pain in IBS is highly variable in intensity and location. It is frequently 
episodic  and  crampy,  but  it  may  be  superimposed  on  a  background 
of  constant  ache.  Pain  may  be  mild  enough  to  be  ignored,  or  it  may 
interfere with daily activities. Despite this, malnutrition due to inade-
quate caloric intake is exceedingly rare with IBS. Sleep deprivation is 
also unusual because abdominal pain is almost uniformly present only 
during waking hours. Pain is often exacerbated by eating or emotional 
stress and improved by passage of flatus or stools. In addition, female 
patients  with  IBS  commonly  report  worsening  symptoms  during  the 
premenstrual and menstrual phases.

Altered  Bowel  Habits  Alteration  in  bowel  habits  is  the  most 
consistent clinical feature in IBS. The most common pattern is consti-
pation alternating with diarrhea, usually with one of these symptoms 
predominating. At first, constipation may be episodic, but eventually, it 
becomes continuous and increasingly intractable to treatment with lax-
atives. Stools are usually hard with narrowed caliber, possibly reflect-
ing excessive dehydration caused by prolonged colonic retention and 
spasm. Most patients also experience a sense of incomplete evacuation, 
thus  leading  to  repeated  attempts  at  defecation  in  a  short  time  span. 
Patients whose predominant symptom is constipation may have weeks 
or months of constipation interrupted with brief periods of diarrhea. In 
other patients, diarrhea may be the predominant symptom. Diarrhea 
resulting  from  IBS  usually  consists  of  small  volumes  of  loose  stools. 
Most  patients  have  stool  volumes  of  <200  mL.  Nocturnal  diarrhea 
does not occur in IBS. Diarrhea may be aggravated by emotional stress 
or eating. Stool may be accompanied by passage of large amounts of 
mucus. Bleeding is not a feature of IBS unless hemorrhoids are present, 
and malabsorption or weight loss does not occur.

Bowel pattern subtypes are highly unstable. In a patient population 
with  ~33%  prevalence  rates  of  IBS-diarrhea  predominant  (IBS-D), 
IBS-constipation predominant (IBS-C), and IBS-mixed (IBS-M) forms, 
75% of patients change subtypes, and 29% switch between IBS-C and 
IBS-D over 1 year.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2490

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemGas  and  Flatulence  Patients  with  IBS  frequently  complain  of 
abdominal  distention  and  increased  belching  or  flatulence,  all  of 
which  they  attribute  to  increased  gas.  Although  some  patients  with 
these symptoms actually may have a larger amount of gas, quantitative 
measurements  reveal  that  most  patients  who  complain  of  increased 
gas  generate  no  more  than  a  normal  amount  of  intestinal  gas.  Most 
IBS patients have impaired transit and tolerance of intestinal gas loads. 
In  addition,  patients  with  IBS  tend  to  reflux  gas  from  the  distal  to 
the  more  proximal  intestine,  which  may  explain  the  belching.  Some 
patients  with  bloating  may  also  experience  visible  distention  with 
increase in abdominal girth.

Upper  GI  Symptoms  Between  25  and  50%  of  patients  with  IBS 
complain of dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, and vomiting. This suggests 
that other areas of the gut apart from the colon may be involved. Pro-
longed  ambulant  recordings  of  small-bowel  motility  in  patients  with 
IBS show a high incidence of abnormalities in the small bowel during 
the diurnal (waking) period; nocturnal motor patterns are not different 
from those of healthy controls. The overlap between dyspepsia and IBS 
is great. The prevalence of IBS is higher among patients with dyspepsia 
(31.7%)  than  among  those  who  reported  no  symptoms  of  dyspepsia 
(7.9%). Conversely, among patients with IBS, 55.6% reported symptoms 
of  dyspepsia.  In  addition,  the  functional  abdominal  symptoms  can 
change over time. Those with predominant dyspepsia or IBS can flux 
between the two. Thus, it is conceivable that functional dyspepsia and 
IBS are two manifestations of a single, more extensive digestive system 
disorder. Furthermore, IBS symptoms are prevalent in noncardiac chest 
pain patients, suggesting overlap with other functional gut disorders.

 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The  pathogenesis  of  IBS  is  poorly  understood,  although  roles  of 
abnormal gut motor and sensory activity, central neural dysfunction, 
psychological disturbances, mucosal inflammation, stress, and luminal 
factors  such  as  bile  acid  malabsorption  and  gut  dysbiosis  have  been 
proposed (Fig. 327-1).

GI  Motor  Abnormalities  Studies  of  colonic  myoelectrical  and 
motor activity under unstimulated conditions have not shown consis-
tent abnormalities in IBS. In contrast, colonic motor abnormalities are 
more prominent under stimulated conditions in IBS. IBS patients may 
exhibit increased rectosigmoid motor activity for up to 3 h after eating. 
Similarly, inflation of rectal balloons both in IBS-D and IBS-C patients 
leads  to  marked  and  prolonged  distention-evoked  contractile  activ-
ity.  Recordings  from  the  transverse,  descending,  and  sigmoid  colon 
showed that the motility index and peak amplitude of high-amplitude 
propagating  contractions  (HAPCs)  in  diarrhea-prone  IBS  patients 
were greatly increased compared to those in healthy subjects and were 

Motility
abnormalities

“Leaky” gut
dysbiosis

Brain–gut 
interactions
• HPA axis
• Autonomic
  dysfunction

IBS

Bile acid
malabsorption

Genetic factors

• Twin studies
• SERT polymorphisms

Visceral
hypersensitivity

Psychological

• Anxiety/panic
• Depression
• Somatization

associated with rapid colonic transit and accompanied by abdominal 
pain.

2491

Visceral  Hypersensitivity 
IBS  patients  frequently  exhibit  exag-
gerated  sensory  responses  to  visceral  stimulation.  The  frequency  of 
perceptions of food intolerance is at least twofold more common than 
in  the  general  population.  Postprandial  pain  has  been  temporally 
related to entry of the food bolus into the cecum in 74% of patients. 
On the other hand, prolonged fasting in IBS patients is often associated 
with  significant  improvement  in  symptoms.  Rectal  balloon  inflation 
produces  nonpainful  and  painful  sensations  at  lower  volumes  in  IBS 
patients than in healthy controls without altering rectal tension, sugges-
tive of visceral afferent dysfunction in IBS. Similar studies show gastric 
and  esophageal  hypersensitivity  in  patients  with  nonulcer  dyspepsia 
and noncardiac chest pain, raising the possibility that these conditions 
have a similar pathophysiologic basis. Lipids lower the thresholds for 
the first sensation of gas, discomfort, and pain in IBS patients. Hence, 
postprandial symptoms in IBS patients may be explained in part by a 
nutrient-dependent  exaggerated  sensory  component  of  the  gastroco-
lonic  response.  In  contrast  to  enhanced  gut  sensitivity,  IBS  patients 
do not exhibit heightened sensitivity elsewhere in the body. Thus, the 
afferent  pathway  disturbances  in  IBS  appear  to  be  selective  for  vis-
ceral innervation with sparing of somatic pathways. The mechanisms 
responsible for visceral hypersensitivity are still under investigation.

Central Neural Dysregulation  The role of central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) factors in the pathogenesis of IBS is strongly suggested by 
the clinical association of emotional disorders and stress with symptom 
exacerbation and the therapeutic response to therapies that act on cere-
bral cortical sites. Functional brain imaging studies such as magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) have shown that in response to distal colonic 
stimulation, the mid-cingulate cortex—a brain region concerned with 
attention  processes  and  response  selection—shows  greater  activation 
in IBS patients. Modulation of this region is associated with changes 
in the subjective unpleasantness of pain. In addition, IBS patients also 
show  preferential  activation  of  the  prefrontal  lobe,  which  contains  a 
vigilance network within the brain that increases alertness. These may 
represent a form of cerebral dysfunction, leading to the increased per-
ception of visceral pain.

Abnormal  Psychological  Features  Abnormal  psychiatric  fea-
tures are recorded in up to 80% of IBS patients, especially in referral 
centers; however, no single psychiatric diagnosis predominates. Most 
of these patients demonstrated exaggerated symptoms in response to 
visceral distention, and this abnormality persists even after exclusion 
of psychological factors.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
7

I
r
r
i
t
a
b
l
e
B
o
w
e
l
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e

Psychological  factors  influence  pain  thresholds  in  IBS  patients,  as 
stress  alters  sensory  thresholds.  An  association  between 
prior  sexual  or  physical  abuse  and  development  of  IBS 
has  been  reported.  Clinical  studies  suggest  that  IBS  has 
a strong developmental component that involves interac-
tions of genetic and epigenetic factors early in life. These 
may modulate brain networks related to emotional arousal 
and/or  central  autonomic  control,  salience,  and  soma-
tosensory  integration.  Abuse  is  associated  with  greater 
pain  reporting,  psychological  distress,  and  poor  health 
outcome. Brain functional MRI studies show greater acti-
vation of the posterior and middle dorsal cingulate cortex, 
which  is  implicated  in  affect  processing  in  IBS  patients 
with a past history of sexual abuse.

FIGURE 327-1  Pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The cause of IBS is likely to be 
multifactorial. Patients often show evidence of visceral hypersensitivity and motility abnormalities. 
Many  IBS  patients  have  increased  anxiety  and/or  depression,  and  their  symptoms  are  often 
exacerbated  by  mental  or  physical  stress,  suggesting  abnormal  brain–gut  interaction.  Genetic 
studies  suggest  a  few  IBS  patients  may  have  genetic  abnormalities  affecting  the  serotonin 
transport system in the enteric nerves. Up to 30% of IBS patients may have bile acid malabsorption. 
Gut dysbiosis and impaired mucosa permeability also have been reported in many IBS patients. 
This may lead to subclinical mucosa inflammation.

Postinfectious  IBS  A  GI  infection  may  predispose 
a  patient  to  IBS.  In  an  investigation  of  544  patients  with 
confirmed  bacterial  gastroenteritis,  one-quarter  devel-
oped  IBS  subsequently.  Conversely,  about  a  third  of  IBS 
patients experienced an acute “gastroenteritis-like” illness 
at  the  onset  of  their  chronic  IBS  symptomatology.  This 
group  of  “postinfective”  IBS  occurs  more  commonly  in 
females  and  affects  younger  rather  than  older  patients. 
Risk factors for developing postinfectious IBS include, in 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2491

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2492 order  of  importance,  prolonged  duration  of  initial  illness,  toxicity  of 
infecting bacterial strain, smoking, mucosal markers of inflammation, 
female sex, depression, hypochondriasis, and adverse life events in the 
preceding  3  months.  Age  older  than  60  years  might  protect  against 
postinfectious IBS, whereas treatment with antibiotics has been associ-
ated with increased risk. The microbes involved in the initial infection 
are Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella. Increased rectal mucosal 
enteroendocrine cells, T lymphocytes, and gut permeability are acute 
changes following Campylobacter enteritis that could persist for more 
than a year and may contribute to postinfective IBS.

Immune  Activation  and  Mucosal  Inflammation  Some 
patients with IBS display persistent signs of low-grade mucosal inflam-
mation with activated lymphocytes, mast cells, and enhanced expres-
sion  of  proinflammatory  cytokines.  Other  studies  also  indicate  that 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from IBS patients show 
abnormal  release  of  proinflammatory  cytokines  such  as  interleukin 
(IL)  6,  IL-1β,  and  tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF).  These  abnormalities 
may  contribute  to  abnormal  epithelial  secretion  and  visceral  hyper-
sensitivity. Located at the host-environment interface, mast cells are in 
close proximity to sensory nerves. Electromicroscopic evidence of mast 
cell  activation  is  commonly  observed  in  the  colonic  mucosa  of  IBS 
patients. Recent studies show that the proximity of activated mast cells 
to submucosal nerve fibers correlates with the frequency and severity 
of abdominal pain in patients with IBS. Other studies report that the 
colonic  mucosa  of  IBS  patients  releases  increased  amounts  of  mast 
cell  mediators,  including  histamine,  proteases,  and  prostaglandin  E2. 
These findings, together with the observation that marked excitation of 
visceral sensory nerves innervating the colon occurs after exposure to 
IBS mucosal supernatant, support a prominent role for mast cells in the 
pathogenesis of visceral hypersensitivity. Increasing evidence suggests 
that some members of the superfamily of transient receptor potential 
(TRP) cation channels such as TRPV1 (vanilloid) channels are central 
to  the  initiation  and  persistence  of  visceral  hypersensitivity.  Mucosal 
inflammation can lead to increased expression of TRPV1 in the enteric 
nervous system. Enhanced expression of TRPV1 channels in the sen-
sory neurons of the gut has been observed in IBS, and such expression 
appears to correlate with visceral hypersensitivity and abdominal pain. 
Interestingly, clinical studies have also shown increased intestinal per-
meability in patients with IBS-D. Psychological stress and anxiety can 
increase the release of proinflammatory cytokine, and this in turn may 
alter intestinal permeability. A clinical study showed that 39% of IBS-D 
patients  had  increased  intestinal  permeability  as  measured  by  the  
lactulose/mannitol  ratio.  These  IBS  patients  also  demonstrated  a 
higher  Functional  Bowel  Disorder  Severity  Index  (FBDSI)  score  and 
increased  hypersensitivity  to  visceral  nociceptive  pain  stimuli.  This 
provides a functional link among psychological stress, immune activa-
tion, and symptom generation in patients with IBS.
Altered Gut Flora  A high prevalence of small-intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth in IBS patients has been noted based on positive lactulose 
hydrogen breath test. This finding, however, has been challenged by a 
number of other studies that found no increased incidence of bacterial 
overgrowth  based  on  jejunal  aspirate  culture.  Abnormal  H2  breath 
test  can  occur  because  of  small-bowel  rapid  transit  and  may  lead  to 
erroneous interpretation. Hence, the role of testing for small-intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth in IBS patients remains unclear.

Studies  using  culture-independent  approaches  such  as  16S  rRNA 
gene-based analysis found significant differences between the molec-
ular profile of the fecal microbiota of IBS patients and that of healthy 
subjects.  A  review  of  24  studies  involving  827  IBS  patients  showed 
extensive variability in bacterial flora among IBS patients and healthy 
subjects.  However,  a  few  general  observations  were  made:  (1)  an 
increase  in  the  ratio  of  fecal  Firmicutes  to  fecal  Bacteroidetes  was 
noted  in  IBS;  (2)  the  diversity  of  the  microbiota  was  decreased;  and 
(3) these changes were accompanied by an increase in instability of the 
bacteria flora in IBS. Despite a lack of consensus on the exact microbial 
difference  between  IBS  patients  and  controls,  IBS  patients  generally 
had decreased proportions of the genera Bifidobacterium and Faecal-
ibacterium  and  increased  abundance  of  family  Enterobacteriaceae 

Healthy controls

IBS

IBS vs Controls

Lactobacillaceae
Bacteroides
Enterobacteriaceae

Bifidobacterium
Faecalibacterium

FIGURE  327-2  Changes  in  gut  microbiota  among  patients  with  irritable  bowel 
syndrome. (Adapted from R Pittayanon et al: Gastroenterology 157:97, 2019.)

(phylum  Proteobacteria),  family  Lactobacillaceae,  and  genus  Bacte-
roides  (phylum  Bacteroidetes)  (Fig.  327-2).  Many  members  of  the 
genus Faecalibacterium are butyrate-producing and anti-inflammatory 
organisms  and  may  reduce  IBS  symptoms  via  mediation  of  IL-17 
expression.  Similarly,  members  of  the  genus  Bifidobacterium  are  also 
anti-inflammatory organisms and may reduce mucosal inflammation 
in IBS patients in clinical trials. On the other hand, the three groups 
of  bacteria  that  were  increased  were  potentially  harmful  commensal 
microbiota.  The  gram-negative  Enterobacteriaceae  family  is  capable 
of  injuring  epithelium  lining  and  inducing  mucosal  inflammation 
via  a  lipopolysaccharide-dependent  pathway.  Members  of  the  genus 
Bacteroides such as Bacteroides fragilis produces toxin to dissolve gly-
coproteins and induce mucosal inflammation. Lastly, in the family of 
Lactobacillaceae, Lactobacillus can produce gas and organic acids from 
glucose and fructose fermentation, resulting in bloating and abdominal 
pain. It is conceivable that gut dysbiosis acting in concert with genetic 
susceptibility and environmental insults may alter mucosal permeabil-
ity and increase antigen presentation to the immune cells in the lamina 
propria. This may result in mast cell activation and altered enteric neu-
ronal and smooth-muscle function causing IBS symptoms. In addition, 
release of cytokines and chemokines from mucosal inflammation may 
generate extra-GI symptoms such as chronic fatigue, muscle pain, and 
anxiety (Fig. 327-3).
Abnormal  Serotonin  Pathways  The  serotonin-containing 
enterochromaffin cells in the colon are increased in a subset of IBS-D 
patients  compared  to  healthy  individuals  or  patients  with  ulcerative 
colitis. Furthermore, postprandial plasma serotonin levels were signifi-
cantly higher in this group of patients compared to healthy controls. 
Tryptophan  hydroxylase  1  (TPH1)  is  the  rate-limiting  enzyme  in 
enterochromaffin  cell  serotonin  biosynthesis,  and  functional  TPH1 
polymorphism  has  been  shown  to  be  associated  with  IBS  habit  sub-
types. In addition, gut microbes promote colonic serotonin production 
through an effect of short-chain fatty acids on enterochromaffin cells. 
In  IBS  patients,  the  expression  of  mucosal  serotonin  reuptake  trans-
porter  (SERT)  is  downregulated  due  to  gram  negative  gut  dysbiosis. 
Thus, gut and reuptake dysbiosis in IBS may contribute to abnormal 
serotonin synthesis in this disorder. Because serotonin plays an impor-
tant role in the regulation of GI motility and visceral perception, the 
increased  release  of  serotonin  may  contribute  to  the  postprandial 
symptoms of these patients and provides a rationale for the use of sero-
tonin antagonists in the treatment of this disorder.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Because  IBS  is  a  disorder  for  which  no  pathognomonic  abnor-
malities have been identified, its diagnosis relies on recognition of 
positive clinical features and elimination of other organic diseases. 
Symptom-based  criteria  have  been  developed  for  the  purpose  of 
differentiating patients with IBS from those with organic diseases. 
These include the Manning, Rome I, Rome II, Rome III, and Rome 
IV criteria. Rome IV criteria for the diagnosis of IBS were published 
in 2016 (Table 327-1) and defined IBS on the basis of abdominal 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2492

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2493

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
7

I
r
r
i
t
a
b
l
e
B
o
w
e
l
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e

-Dysbiosis
-Genetic
  susceptibility
-Environmental
  insults

Altered
permeability

Increased
antigen
presentation

Mast cell
activation

Extra-GI
symptoms

Systemic
cytokines
& chemokines

IBS

Altered
enteric
neuronal &
smooth
muscle
function

FIGURE 327-3  Gut dysbiosis and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Gut dysbiosis acting in concert with genetic and environmental factors may alter intestinal permeability 
and increase antigen presentation, resulting in mast cell activation. Products of mast cell degranulation may alter neuronal and smooth-muscle function causing IBS 
symptoms. The cytokines and chemokines generated from mucosal inflammation may cause symptoms such as fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, and mood changes. GI, 
gastrointestinal. (Adapted from NJ Talley, AA Fodor: Gastroenterology 141:1555, 2011.)

pain and altered bowel habits that occur with sufficient frequency 
in  affected  patients.  A  careful  history  and  physical  examination 
are  frequently  helpful  in  establishing  the  diagnosis.  Clinical  fea-
tures  suggestive  of  IBS  include  recurrence  of  lower  abdominal 
pain  with  altered  bowel  habits  over  a  period  of  time  without 
progressive  deterioration,  onset  of  symptoms  during  periods  of 
stress  or  emotional  upset,  absence  of  other  systemic  symptoms 
such as fever and weight loss, and small-volume stool without any 
evidence of blood.

On the other hand, the appearance of the disorder for the first 
time  in  old  age,  progressive  course  from  time  of  onset,  persistent 
diarrhea  after  a  48-h  fast,  and  presence  of  nocturnal  diarrhea  or 
steatorrheal stools argue against the diagnosis of IBS.

Because the major symptoms of IBS—abdominal pain, abdominal 
bloating, and alteration in bowel habits—are common complaints 
of many GI organic disorders, the list of differential diagnoses is a 
long one. The quality, location, and timing of pain may be helpful 
to  suggest  specific  disorders.  Pain  due  to  IBS  that  occurs  in  the 
epigastric  or  periumbilical  area  must  be  differentiated  from  bil-
iary  tract  disease,  peptic  ulcer  disorders,  intestinal  ischemia,  and 
carcinoma of the stomach and pancreas. If pain occurs mainly in 
the  lower  abdomen,  the  possibility  of  diverticular  disease  of  the 
colon, inflammatory bowel disease (including ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn’s disease), and carcinoma of the colon must be considered. 
Postprandial pain accompanied by bloating, nausea, and vomiting 
suggests gastroparesis or partial intestinal obstruction. Patients with 
small  intestinal  bacteria  overgrowth  can  present  with  abdominal 
pain,  nausea,  and  bloating,  and  this  possibility  should  be  ruled 
out  before  making  a  diagnosis  of  IBS.  Intestinal  infestation  with 
Giardia  lamblia  or  other  parasites  may  cause  similar  symptoms. 
When  diarrhea  is  the  major  complaint,  the  possibility  of  lactase 
deficiency,  laxative  abuse,  malabsorption,  celiac  sprue,  hyperthy-
roidism, inflammatory bowel disease, and infectious diarrhea must 
be ruled out. On the other hand, constipation may be a side effect 
of many different drugs, such as anticholinergic, antihypertensive, 
and  antidepressant  medications.  Endocrinopathies  such  as  hypo-
thyroidism and hypoparathyroidism must also be considered in the 
differential  diagnosis  of  constipation.  In  addition,  acute  intermit-
tent porphyria and lead poisoning may present in a fashion similar 
to  IBS,  with  painful  constipation  as  the  major  complaint.  These 
possibilities are suspected on the basis of their clinical presentations 
and are confirmed by appropriate serum and urine tests.

Few tests are required for patients who have typical IBS symp-
toms  and  no  alarm  features.  Unnecessary  investigations  may  be 
costly and even harmful. The American Gastroenterological Asso-
ciation has delineated factors to be considered when determining 

the aggressiveness of the diagnostic evaluation. These include the 
duration  of  symptoms,  the  change  in  symptoms  over  time,  the 
age  and  sex  of  the  patient,  the  referral  status  of  the  patient,  prior 
diagnostic  studies,  a  family  history  of  colorectal  malignancy,  and 
the degree of psychosocial dysfunction. Thus, a younger individual 
with  mild  symptoms  requires  a  minimal  diagnostic  evaluation, 
while  an  older  person  or  an  individual  with  rapidly  progressive 
symptoms  should  undergo  a  more  thorough  exclusion  of  organic 
disease.  Most  patients  should  have  a  complete  blood  count  and 
sigmoidoscopic  examination;  in  addition,  stool  specimens  should 
be examined for ova and parasites in those who have diarrhea. In 
patients  with  persistent  diarrhea  not  responding  to  simple  anti-
diarrheal  agents,  a  sigmoid  colon  biopsy  should  be  performed  to 
rule out microscopic colitis. In those age >40 years, an air-contrast 
barium  enema  or  colonoscopy  should  also  be  performed.  If  the 
main  symptoms  are  diarrhea  and  increased  gas,  the  possibility  of 
lactase deficiency should be ruled out with a hydrogen breath test 
or  with  evaluation  after  a  3-week  lactose-free  diet.  Excessive  gas 
with  bloating  also  raises  the  possibility  of  small-bowel  bacteria 
overgrowth and should be ruled out with a glucose hydrogen breath 
test. Some patients with IBS-D may have undiagnosed celiac sprue. 
Because the symptoms of celiac sprue respond to a gluten-free diet, 
testing for celiac sprue in IBS may prevent years of morbidity and 
attendant  expense.  Decision-analysis  studies  show  that  serology 
testing  for  celiac  sprue  in  patients  with  IBS-D  has  an  acceptable 
cost when the prevalence of celiac sprue is >1% and is the dominant 
strategy  when  the  prevalence  is  >8%.  In  patients  with  concurrent 
symptoms of dyspepsia, upper GI radiographs or esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy may be advisable. In patients with postprandial right 
upper quadrant  pain, an  ultrasonogram  of  the  gallbladder  should 
be  obtained.  Laboratory  features  that  argue  against  IBS  include 
evidence  of  anemia,  elevated  sedimentation  rate,  presence  of  leu-
kocytes or blood in stool, and stool volume >200–300 mL/d. These 
findings would necessitate other diagnostic considerations.

TREATMENT
Irritable Bowel Syndrome 

PATIENT COUNSELING AND DIETARY ALTERATIONS
Reassurance  and  careful  explanation  of  the  functional  nature  of 
the  disorder  and  of  how  to  avoid  obvious  food  precipitants  are 
important  first  steps  in  patient  counseling  and  dietary  change. 
Occasionally,  a  meticulous  dietary  history  may  reveal  substances 
(such as coffee, disaccharides, legumes, and cabbage) that aggravate 
symptoms.  Excessive  fructose  and  artificial  sweeteners,  such  as 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2493

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2494

TABLE 327-2  Some Common Food Sources of FODMAPs

FOOD TYPE
Fruits

Vegetables

Grains and cereals
Nuts and seeds
Milk and milk products

Legumes

Other

Food additives

FREE FRUCTOSE
Apple, cherry, mango, 
pear, watermelon

LACTOSE

FRUCTANS
Peach, persimmon, 
watermelon

GALACTO-
OLIGOSACCHARIDES

Asparagus, artichokes, 
sugar snap peas

Artichokes, beetroot, Brussels 
sprout, chicory, fennel, garlic, 
leek, onion, peas
Wheat, rye, barley
Pistachios

Milk, yogurt, ice 
cream, custard, soft 
cheeses

Legumes, lentils, chickpeas

Legumes, chickpeas, 
lentils

Honey, high-fructose corn 
syrup

Chicory drinks

Inulin, FOS

POLYOLS
Apple, apricot, pear, 
avocado, blackberries, 
cherry, nectarine, plum, 
prune
Cauliflower, mushroom, 
snow peas

Sorbitol, mannitol, 
maltitol, xylitol, isomalt

Abbreviations: FODMAPs, fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols; FOS, fructo-oligosaccharides.
Source: Reproduced with permission from PR Gibson et al: Food choice as a key management strategy for functional gastrointestinal symptoms. Am J Gastroenterol 107:657, 2012.

sorbitol  or  mannitol,  may  cause  diarrhea,  bloating,  cramping,  or 
flatulence. As a therapeutic trial, patients should be encouraged to 
eliminate  any  foodstuffs  that  appear  to  produce  symptoms.  How-
ever, patients should avoid nutritionally depleted diets. A diet low in 
fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and 
polyols (FODMAPs) (Table 327-2) has been shown to be helpful in 
IBS patients (see “Low FODMAP Diet”). 
STOOL-BULKING AGENTS
High-fiber  diets  and  bulking  agents,  such  as  bran  or  hydrophilic 
colloid,  are  frequently  used  in  treating  IBS.  The  water-holding 
action of fibers may contribute to increased stool bulk because of 
the  ability  of  fiber  to  increase  fecal  output  of  bacteria.  Fiber  also 
speeds up colonic transit in most people. In diarrhea-prone patients, 
whole-colonic transit is faster than average; however, dietary fiber 
can  also  delay  transit.  Furthermore,  because  of  their  hydrophilic 
properties, stool-bulking agents bind water and thus prevent both 
excessive hydration and dehydration of stool. The latter observation 
may  explain  the  clinical  experience  that  a  high-fiber  diet  relieves 
diarrhea in some IBS patients. Fiber supplementation with psyllium 
has been shown to reduce perception of rectal distention, indicating 
that fiber may have a positive effect on visceral afferent function.

Controlled trials of dietary fiber in IBS patients have produced 
variable results. This is not surprising since IBS is a heterogeneous 
disorder,  with  some  patients  being  constipated  and  other  having 
predominant diarrhea. Most investigations report increases in stool 
weight,  decreases  in  colonic  transit  times,  and  improvement  in 
constipation.  Others  have  noted  benefits  in  patients  with  alter-
nating  diarrhea  and  constipation,  pain,  and  bloating.  However, 
most  studies  observe  no  response  in  patients  with  diarrhea-  or 
pain-predominant  IBS.  Compared  to  insoluble  dietary  fiber  such 
as  wheat  bran,  soluble  fibers  such  as  psyllium  preparations  tend 
to produce less bloating and distention. Fiber should be started at 
a nominal dose and slowly titrated up as tolerated over the course 
of several weeks to a targeted dose of 20–30 g of total dietary and 
supplementary fiber per day. Even when used judiciously, fiber can 
exacerbate bloating, flatulence, constipation, and diarrhea. Patients 
with drug-induced or slow colonic transit constipation usually do 
not respond to fiber supplementation. 
ANTISPASMODICS
Clinicians  have  observed  that  anticholinergic  drugs  may  provide 
temporary  relief  for  symptoms  such  as  painful  cramps  related  to 
intestinal spasm. Although controlled clinical trials have produced 
mixed  results,  evidence  generally  supports  the  beneficial  effects 

of anticholinergic drugs for pain. Physiologic studies demonstrate 
that  anticholinergic  drugs  inhibit  the  gastrocolic  reflex;  hence, 
postprandial  pain  is  best  managed  by  giving  antispasmodics   
30  min  before  meals  so  that  effective  blood  levels  are  achieved 
shortly before the anticipated onset of pain. Most anticholinergics 
contain natural belladonna alkaloids, which may cause xerostomia, 
urinary  hesitancy  and  retention,  blurred  vision,  and  drowsiness. 
They should be used in the elderly with caution. Some physicians 
prefer  to  use  synthetic  anticholinergics  such  as  dicyclomine  that 
have less effect on mucous membrane secretion and produce fewer 
undesirable side effects. Peppermint oil appears to reduce abdom-
inal cramps by some undefined mechanism. In a meta-analysis of 
nine double-blind randomized controlled trials evaluating 726 IBS 
patients, peppermint oil was found to be significantly superior to 
placebo for global improvement of IBS symptoms and reduction in 
abdominal pain. The most commonly reported adverse event was 
heartburn, which was mild and transient. 
ANTIDIARRHEAL AGENTS
Peripherally  acting  opiate-based  agents  are  the  initial  therapy  of 
choice  for  IBS-D.  Physiologic  studies  demonstrate  increases  in 
segmenting  colonic  contractions,  delays  in  fecal  transit,  increases 
in  anal  pressures,  and  reductions  in  rectal  perception  with  these 
drugs. When diarrhea is severe, especially in the painless diarrhea 
variant of IBS, small doses of loperamide, 2–4 mg every 4–6 h up 
to a maximum of 12 mg/d, can be prescribed. These agents are less 
addictive than paregoric, codeine, or tincture of opium. In general, 
the intestines do not become tolerant of the antidiarrheal effect of 
opiates, and increasing doses are not required to maintain antidiar-
rheal potency. These agents are most useful if taken before antici-
pated stressful events that are known to cause diarrhea. However, 
not  infrequently,  a  high  dose  of  loperamide  may  cause  cramping 
because of increases in segmenting colonic contractions. Another 
antidiarrheal agent that may be used in IBS patients is the bile acid 
binder cholestyramine resin because up to 30% of IBS-D patients 
may have bile acid malabsorption. 
ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS
In  addition  to  their  mood-elevating  effects,  antidepressant  med-
ications  have  several  physiologic  effects  that  suggest  they  may  be 
beneficial in IBS. In IBS-D patients, the tricyclic antidepressant imi-
pramine slows jejunal migrating motor complex transit propagation 
and  delays  orocecal  and  whole-gut  transit,  indicative  of  a  motor 
inhibitory effect. Some studies also suggest that tricyclic agents may 
alter visceral afferent neural function.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2494

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A number of studies indicate that tricyclic antidepressants may 
be effective in some IBS patients. When stratified according to the 
predominant  symptoms,  improvements  were  observed  in  IBS-D 
patients, with no improvement being noted in IBS-C patients. The 
beneficial effects of the tricyclic compounds in the treatment of IBS 
appear to be independent of their effects on depression. The thera-
peutic benefits for the bowel symptoms occur faster and at a lower 
dosage. The efficacy of antidepressant agents from other chemical 
classes in the management of IBS is less well evaluated. In contrast 
to tricyclic agents, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) 
paroxetine  accelerates  orocecal  transit,  raising  the  possibility  that 
this drug class may be useful in IBS-C patients. The SSRI citalopram 
blunts perception of rectal distention and reduces the magnitude of 
the gastrocolonic response in healthy volunteers. A small placebo-
controlled study of citalopram in IBS patients reported reductions 
in pain. However, these findings could not be confirmed in another 
randomized  controlled  trial.  Hence,  the  efficacy  of  SSRIs  in  the 
treatment of IBS needs further confirmation. 
ANTIFLATULENCE THERAPY
The  management  of  excessive  gas  is  seldom  satisfactory,  except 
when  there  is  obvious  aerophagia  or  disaccharidase  deficiency. 
Patients should be advised to eat slowly and not chew gum or drink 
carbonated  beverages.  Bloating  may  decrease  if  an  associated  gut 
syndrome  such  as  IBS  or  constipation  is  improved.  If  bloating  is 
accompanied by diarrhea and worsens after ingesting dairy prod-
ucts,  fresh  fruits,  vegetables,  or  juices,  further  investigation  or  a 
dietary  exclusion  trial  may  be  worthwhile.  Avoiding  flatogenic 
foods, exercising, losing excess weight, and taking activated char-
coal are safe but unproven remedies. A low FODMAP diet has been 
shown  to  be  quite  effective  to  reduce  gas  and  bloating  (see  “Low 
FODMAP Diet”). Data regarding the use of surfactants such as sim-
ethicone are conflicting. Antibiotics may help in a subgroup of IBS 
patients with predominant symptoms of bloating. Beano, an over-
the-counter oral β-glycosidase solution, may reduce rectal passage 
of  gas  without  decreasing  bloating  and  pain.  Pancreatic  enzymes 
reduce  bloating,  gas,  and  fullness  during  and  after  high-calorie, 
high-fat meal ingestion. 
SEROTONIN RECEPTOR MODULATORS
Serotonin 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors are found throughout the GI 
tract.  Prucalopride,  a  dihydrobenzo-furancarboxamide  derivative, 
is  a  new  selective  agonist  of  5-HT4.  In  six  of  seven  multicenter, 
double-blind,  randomized  trials  of  prucalopride  in  patients  with 
chronic constipation, the drug was more effective that placebo. The 
most  frequently  encountered  side  effects  were  headache,  nausea, 
and  diarrhea,  which  were  mostly  transient.  Unlike  with  the  older 
5-HT4  agonist  tegaserod,  there  were  no  significant  cardiovascular 
side effects. Prucalopride was approved by the European Medicines 
Agency  and  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for 
treatment of chronic constipation.

Another  5-HT4  receptor  agonist,  tegaserod,  also  exhibits  prok-
inetic activity by stimulating peristalsis. Clinical studies involving 
>4000 IBS-C patients reported reduction in abdominal discomfort 
and improvements in constipation and bloating compared to pla-
cebo. Diarrhea is the only major side effect. In 2007, the drug was 
voluntarily withdrawn from the market after a greater number of 
cardiovascular complications were observed in a database of 18,000 
patients receiving tegaserod (0.11 vs 0.01% in placebo). In 2019, the 
FDA  reviewed  additional  data  and  approved  the  use  of  tegaserod 
in women younger than 65 years old who do not have a history of 
ischemic  cardiovascular  disease  and  who  have  no  more  than  one 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease. 
SECRETAGOGUES
Lubiprostone,  linaclotide,  and  plecanatide  are  secretagogues  that 
stimulate net efflux of ions and water into the intestinal lumen and 
thus enhance transit and facilitate ease of defecation. By activating 
channels  on  the  apical  (luminal)  enterocyte  surface,  these  secret-
agogues increase intestinal chloride secretion. Other ion channels 

2495

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
7

I
r
r
i
t
a
b
l
e
B
o
w
e
l
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e

and transporters secrete sodium into the intestine to maintain elec-
troneutrality, followed by the secretion of water. Lubiprostone is a 
bicyclic fatty acid derived from prostaglandin E1 that activates type 
3 chloride channels in the apical membrane of intestinal epithelial 
cells.  Oral  lubiprostone  was  effective  in  the  treatment  of  patients 
with  IBS-C  in  large  phase  3,  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-
controlled  multicenter  trials.  The  recommended  daily  dose  is   
24 mg twice daily. In general, the drug is quite well tolerated. The 
major  side  effects  are  nausea  and  diarrhea.  Linaclotide  and  ple-
canatide are minimally absorbed 14-amino-acid peptide guanylate 
cyclase-C (GC-C) agonists that bind to and activate GC-C on the 
luminal surface of intestinal epithelium. The subsequent increase in 
cyclic guanosine monophosphate activates the cyclic fibrosis trans-
membrane regulator and induces fluid secretion into the GI tract. 
These  drugs  are  similar  to  endogenous  peptides  secreted  by  the 
small intestine (uroguanylin) or colon (guanylin). In two 12-week, 
double-blind, randomized, controlled trials, linaclotide (290 or 145 μg, 
once  daily)  reduced  constipation  and  pain.  A  lower  dose  (72  μg 
once  daily)  was  also  more  effective  than  placebo.  Linaclotide  has 
been approved by the FDA for treatment of constipation in IBS-C 
patients. Plecanatide (3- and 6-mg doses) also has been shown to 
be  more  effective  than  placebo  in  two  phase  3  trials.  The  3-mg 
once-daily dose has been approved by the FDA. The only significant 
side effect was diarrhea, which occurred in <5% of patients. Lina-
clotide  and  plecanatide  are  of  similar  efficacy  and  tolerability  for 
the treatment of chronic constipation. Tenapanor, a small-molecule 
inhibitor  of  GI  sodium-hydrogen  exchange-3,  has  been  shown  to 
be more effective than placebo when given at 50 mg twice daily in 
patients with IBS-C. 

OSMOTIC LAXATIVES
Osmotic agents such as magnesium citrate–based products, sodium 
phosphate–based  products,  and  nonabsorbable  carbohydrates  are 
hypertonic  products  that,  through  osmosis,  extract  fluid  into  the 
intestinal  lumen  to  soften  stool  and  enhance  colonic  transit.  In 
contrast, polyethylene glycol (PEG)–based solution is iso-osmotic 
and induces bowel movement by high-volume lavage. The osmotic 
laxatives  were  better  than  placebo  in  improving  symptoms  of 
chronic  constipation  in  clinical  trials.  However,  chronic  use  of 
magnesium  hydroxide  may  result  in  severe  hypermagnesemia  in 
patients with renal impairment. Frequent sodium phosphate–based 
bowel cleansing should be avoided as this is associated with hyper-
phosphatasemia,  hypocalcemia,  and  hypokalemia.  In  19  trials, 
PEG  consistently  induced  more  bowel  movements  than  placebo. 
A Cochrane review of 10 randomized trials showed that PEG was 
superior  to  lactulose  for  improving  stool  frequency  and  abdomi-
nal  pain.  Among  the  nonabsorbable  carbohydrates,  lactulose  and 
sorbitol had similar laxative effects. However, bacterial metabolism 
of  unabsorbed  carbohydrates  often  leads  to  gas  production  and 
abdominal pain, which can limit long-term use. 
MODULATION OF GUT FLORA
Because altered colonic flora (gut dysbiosis) may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of IBS, this has led to great interest in using antibiot-
ics, prebiotics, probiotics, and dietary measures to treat IBS. 
Antibiotics  Antibiotic treatment benefits a subset of IBS patients. 
In a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study, neomycin 
dosed  at  500  mg  twice  daily  for  10  days  was  more  effective  than 
placebo  at  improving  symptom  scores  among  IBS  patients.  The 
nonabsorbed oral antibiotic rifaximin is the most thoroughly stud-
ied antibiotic for the treatment of IBS. In a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study, patients receiving rifaximin at a dose of 550 mg 
two times daily for 2 weeks experienced substantial improvement 
of global IBS symptoms over placebo. Rifaximin is the only antibi-
otic with demonstrated sustained benefit beyond therapy cessation 
in  IBS  patients.  The  drug  has  a  favorable  safety  and  tolerability 
profile compared with systemic antibiotics. A systemic review and 
meta-analysis  of  five  studies  of  IBS  patients  found  that  rifaximin 
is  more  effective  than  placebo  for  global  symptoms  and  bloating 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2495

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2496

(odds  ratio  1.57),  with  a  number  needed  to  treat  (NNT)  of  10.2. 
The  modest  therapeutic  gain  was  similar  to  that  yielded  by  other 
currently available therapies for IBS. However, currently, there are 
still insufficient data to recommend routine use of this antibiotic in 
the treatment of IBS. 
Prebiotics  These  are  nondigestible  food  ingredients  that  stimu-
late growth and/or activity of bacteria in the GI tract. There have 
been  four  randomized  trials  to  examine  the  effects  of  prebiotics. 
Three of the four studies reported that prebiotics worsened or did 
not improve IBS symptoms. This is not surprising given the adverse 
effects of a high-carbohydrate diet on IBS symptoms. 
Probiotics  These  are  defined  as  live  microorganisms  that  when 
administered  in  adequate  amounts  confer  a  health  benefit  on  the 
host. A meta-analysis of 10 probiotic studies in IBS patients found 
significant  relief  of  pain  and  bloating  with  the  use  of  Bifidobacte-
rium breve, Bifidobacterium longum, and  Lactobacillus acidophilus 
species compared to placebo. However, there was no change in stool 
frequency  or  consistency.  Large-scale  studies  of  well-phenotyped 
IBS patients are needed to establish the efficacy of these probiotics. 
Low FODMAP Diet  A diet rich in FODMAP (fermentable oligo-
saccharides,  disaccharides,  monosaccharides,  and  polyols)  often 
triggers symptoms in IBS patients. FODMAPs are poorly absorbed 
by  the  small  intestine  and  fermented  by  bacteria  in  the  colon  to 
produce  gas  and  osmotically  active  carbohydrates  (Fig.  327-4). 
At  the  same  time,  on  entering  the  colon,  FODMAPs  may  serve 
as  nutrients  for  the  colonic  bacteria  and  promote  the  growth  of 
gram-negative  commensal  bacteria,  which  may  induce  epithe-
lial  damage  and  subclinical  mucosa  inflammation.  Fructose  and 
fructans  induce  IBS  symptoms  in  a  dose-dependent  manner.  In 
contrast, a low FODMAP diet reduces IBS symptoms. A systemic 
review  and  meta-analysis  of  seven  studies  of  IBS  patients  found 
that a low FODMAP diet was associated with reduced global symp-
toms  compared  with  control  interventions.  These  studies  showed 
symptomatic benefit of restricting FODMAPs in 50–80% of patients 
with  IBS.  There  is  increasing  support  for  recommending  a  low 
FODMAP  diet  as  first-line  treatment  for  IBS  patients.  Given  that 
between 20 and 50% of patients do not respond to a low FODMAP 

Small poorly absorbed carbohydrates

Laxative effect

Food source for
bacteria

Water in intestines

Gas production

Abdominal
distention

Bloating, abdominal discomfort, flatulence, diarrhea

FIGURE 327-4  Pathogenesis of FODMAP-related symptoms. FODMAPs are poorly 
absorbed by the small intestine and fermented by gut bacteria to produce gas and 
osmotically active carbohydrates. These events act in concert to cause bloating, 
flatulence, and diarrhea. FODMAPs may also serve as nutrients for colonic bacteria, 
which may induce mucosa inflammation. FODMAP, fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides,  monosaccharides,  and  polyols.  (Figure  created  using  data  from 
http://www.nutritiontoyou.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/IBS-symptoms.png.)

TABLE 327-3  Spectrum of Severity in IBS

Clinical Features

Prevalence
Correlations with gut physiology
Symptoms constant
Psychosocial difficulties
Health care issues
Practice type

MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE

70%
+++
0
0
+
Primary

25%
++
+
+
++
Specialty

5%
+
+++
+++
+++
Referral

diet, the identification of patients who are more likely to respond 
to a low FODMAP diet at baseline would be highly beneficial. In a 
small clinical study comparing responders to a low FODMAP diet 
to  nonresponders,  fecal  volatile  organic  acid  profiling  at  baseline 
accurately predicted response in 97% of cases. This finding needs 
to be confirmed by large prospective cohort studies. 
SUMMARY
The  treatment  strategy  of  IBS  depends  on  the  severity  of  the 
disorder  (Table  327-3).  Most  IBS  patients  have  mild  symptoms. 
They  are  usually  cared  for  in  primary  care  practices,  have  little 
or no psychosocial difficulties, and do not seek health care often. 
Treatment  usually  involves  education,  reassurance,  and  dietary/
lifestyle changes. A smaller portion have moderate symptoms that 
are usually intermittent and correlate with altered gut physiology, 
e.g.,  worsened  with  eating  or  stress  and  relieved  by  defecation. 
For  IBS-D  patients,  treatments  include  gut-acting  pharmacologic 
agents  such  as  antispasmodics,  antidiarrheals,  bile  acid  binders, 
and  the  newer  gut  serotonin  modulators  (Table  327-4).  In  IBS-C 
patients,  increased  fiber  intake  and  the  use  of  osmotic  agents 
such  as  polyethylene  glycol  may  achieve  satisfactory  results.  For 
patients with more severe constipation, a chloride channel opener 
(lubiprostone) or GC-C agonist (linaclotide or plecanatide) may be 
considered. For IBS patients with predominant gas and bloating, a 
low-FODMAP  diet  may  provide  significant  relief.  Some  patients 

TABLE 327-4  Possible Drugs for a Dominant Symptom in IBS
SYMPTOM
Diarrhea

DRUG
Loperamide

Cholestyramine resin
Alosetrona

DOSE
2–4 mg when necessary/
maximum 12 g/d
4 g with meals
0.5–1 mg bid (for severe IBS, 
women)
3–4 g bid with meals, then adjust
2 g bid with meals, then adjust
1 g qd to qid
10–20 g bid
15 mL bid
17 g in 250 mL water qd
24 mg bid
30–60 mL qd
290 μg qd/3 mg qd
2 mg qd
qd to qid ac

Psyllium husk
Methylcellulose
Calcium polycarbophil
Lactulose syrup
70% sorbitol
Polyethylene glycol 3350
Lubiprostone (Amitiza)
Magnesium hydroxide
Linaclotide (Plecanatide)
Prucalopride
Smooth-muscle relaxant
Tricyclic antidepressants Start 25–50 mg hs, then adjust
Begin small dose, increase as 
Selective serotonin 
needed
reuptake inhibitors
Low FODMAP diet
Probiotics
Rifaximin

qd
550 mg bid

Constipation

Abdominal pain

Gas and bloating

aAvailable only in the United States.
Abbreviation: FODMAP, fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, 
monosaccharides, and polyols; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome.
Source: Reproduced with permission from GF Longstreth et al: Functional bowel 
disorders. Gastroenterology 130:1480, 2006.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2496

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2497

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
8

D
i
v
e
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
C
o
m
m
o
n
A
n
o
r
e
c
t
a
l

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

may  benefit  from  probiotics  and  rifaximin  treatment.  A  small 
proportion  of  IBS  patients  have  severe  and  refractory  symptoms, 
are  usually  seen  in  referral  centers,  and  frequently  have  constant 
pain  and  psychosocial  difficulties.  This  group  of  patients  is  best 
managed with antidepressants and other psychological treatments  
(Table 327-4). Clinical trials demonstrating success of a low FOD-
MAP diet in improving IBS symptoms and quality of life provide 
strong evidence supporting the use of this dietary approach in the 
treatment of IBS. These observations, if confirmed, may lead to the 
use of the low FODMAP diet as the first line of treatment of IBS 
patients with moderate to severe symptoms.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Bharucha AE, Lacy BE: Mechanisms, evaluation, and management 

of chronic constipation. Gastroenterology 158:1232, 2020.

Dionne J et al: A systematic review and meta-anaylsis evaluating the 
efficacy  of  a  gluten-free  diet  and  a  low  FODMAP  diet  in  treating 
symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol 113:1290, 
2018.

Drossman  DA:  Functional  gastrointestinal  disorders:  History, 
pathophysiology,  clinical  features,  and  Rome  IV.  Gastroenterology 
150:1262, 2016.

Mayer  EA  et  al:  Brain-gut  microbiome  interactions  and  functional 

bowel disorders. Gastroenterology 146:1500; 2014.

Pittayanon  R  et  al:  Gut  microbiota  in  patients  with  irritable  bowel 

syndrome: A systematic review. Gastroenterology 157:97, 2019.

Zhou  SY  et  al:  FODMAP  diet  modulates  visceral  nociception  by 
lipopolysaccharide-mediated  intestinal  barrier  dysfunction  and 
intestinal inflammation. J Clin Invest 128:267, 2018.

328 Diverticular Disease  
and Common Anorectal  
Disorders
Susan L. Gearhart

 ■ DIVERTICULAR DISEASE
Incidence  and  Epidemiology 
In  the  United  States,  diverticu-
losis affects one-third of the population aged >60 years, and in most 
instances,  there  are  no  associated  symptoms.  However,  10–25%  of 
individuals with diverticulosis will develop acute diverticular disease. 
In addition, 10–25% of individuals with diverticular disease will expe-
rience recurrent symptoms, and up to 10% will develop complications 
leading to surgery. Diverticular disease has become the fifth most costly 
gastrointestinal disorder in the United States and is the leading indica-
tion for elective colon resection. The incidence of diverticular disease is 
on the rise, especially among individuals <40 years of age. The major-
ity  of  patients  with  diverticular  disease  report  a  lower  health-related 
quality of life and more depression as compared to matched controls, 
thus  adding  to  health  care  costs.  Formerly,  diverticular  disease  was 
confined to developed countries; however, with the adoption of west-
ernized diets in underdeveloped countries, diverticulosis is on the rise 
across the globe. Immigrants to the United States develop diverticular 
disease at the same rate as U.S. natives. Although the prevalence among 
females and males is similar, males tend to present at a younger age.

Anatomy and Pathophysiology  Two  types  of  diverticula  occur 
in the intestine: true and false (or pseudodiverticula). A true diverticu-
lum is a saclike herniation of the entire bowel wall, whereas a pseudo-
diverticulum involves only a protrusion of the mucosa and submucosa 
through the muscularis propria of the colon (Fig. 328-1). The type of 

FIGURE 328-1  Gross and microscopic view of sigmoid diverticular disease. Arrows 
mark an inflamed diverticulum with the diverticular wall made up only of mucosa.

diverticulum most commonly affecting the colon is the pseudodiver-
ticulum. The diverticula occur at the point where the nutrient artery, 
or vasa recta, penetrates through the muscularis propria, resulting in a 
break in the integrity of the colonic wall. This anatomic restriction may 
be a result of the relative high-pressure zone within the muscular sig-
moid colon. Thus, higher-amplitude contractions combined with con-
stipated, high-fat-content stool within the sigmoid lumen in an area of 
weakness in the colonic wall result in the creation of these diverticula. 
Consequently, the vasa recta is either compressed or eroded, leading to 
either perforation or bleeding.

Diverticula commonly affect the left and sigmoid colon; the rectum 
is always spared. However, in Asian populations, 70% of diverticula are 
seen in the right colon and cecum as well. Yamanda et al. found right-
sided  colonic  diverticulosis  in  22%  of  Japanese  patients  undergoing 
colonoscopy. Diverticulitis is inflammation of a diverticulum. Previous 
understanding  of  the  pathogenesis  of  diverticulosis  attributed  a  low-
fiber  diet  as  the  sole  culprit,  and  onset  of  diverticulitis  would  occur 
acutely when these diverticula become obstructed. However, evidence 
now suggests that the pathogenesis is more complex and multifactorial. 
Better  understanding  of  the  gut  microbiota  suggests  that  dysbiosis  is 
an  important  aspect  of  disease.  Chronic  low-grade  inflammation  is 
thought  to  play  a  key  role  in  neuronal  degeneration,  leading  to  dys-
motility and high intraluminal pressure. As a consequence, pockets or 
outpouchings develop in the colonic wall where it is weakest.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2497

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2498 Presentation,  Evaluation,  and  Management  of  Diverticular 
Bleeding  Hemorrhage  from  a  colonic  diverticulum  is  the  most 
common cause of hematochezia in patients >60 years, yet only 20% of 
patients with diverticulosis will have gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients 
at  increased  risk  for  bleeding  tend  to  be  hypertensive,  have  athero-
sclerosis,  and  regularly  use  antithrombotic  therapy  and  nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents. Additional risk factors include obesity and 
a  history  of  diabetes  mellitus.  Most  bleeds  are  self-limited  and  stop 
spontaneously with bowel rest. The lifetime risk of rebleeding is 25%.

Abscess

Initial localization of diverticular bleeding may include colonoscopy, 
multiplanar computed tomography (CT) angiogram, or nuclear med-
icine tagged red cell scan. If the patient is stable, ongoing bleeding is 
best managed by angiography. If mesenteric angiography can localize 
the bleeding site, the vessel can be occluded successfully with a coil in 
80% of cases. The patient can then be followed closely with repetitive 
colonoscopy,  if  necessary,  looking  for  evidence  of  colonic  ischemia. 
However,  with  highly  selective  coil  embolization,  the  rate  of  colonic 
ischemia is <10%, and the risk of acute rebleeding is <25%. Long-term 
results (40 months) indicate that >50% of patients with acute diverticu-
lar bleeds treated with highly selective angiography have had definitive 
treatment. Alternatively, colonoscopic ligation with banding or place-
ment of a detachable snare has been shown in a recent meta-analysis 
to  be  an  effective  way  to  obtain  hemostasis  if  the  bleeding  site  can 
be  localized.  Ligation  has  been  shown  to  prevent  rebleeding  or  the 
requirement  of  emergent  surgery.  In  the  event  that  these  measures 
fail to achieve hemostasis, a segmental resection of the colon may be 
undertaken. This may be advantageous in patients on chronic antico-
agulation and immunosuppression as delayed bleeding and perforation 
have been reported in this subpopulation.

If  the  patient  is  unstable  or  has  had  a  6-unit  bleed  within  24  h, 
current recommendations are that surgery should be performed. If the 
bleeding has been localized, a segmental resection can be performed. If 
the site of bleeding has not been definitively identified, a subtotal colec-
tomy may be required. In patients without severe comorbidities, surgi-
cal resection can be performed with a primary anastomosis. A higher 
anastomotic  leak  rate  has  been  reported  in  patients  who  received  
>10 units of blood.

Presentation,  Evaluation,  and  Staging  of  Diverticulitis  
Acute  uncomplicated  diverticulitis  (also  known  as  symptomatic 
uncomplicated diverticular disease [SUDD]) characteristically presents 
with fever, anorexia, left lower quadrant abdominal pain, and obstipa-
tion (Table 328-1). In <25% of cases, patients may present with gener-
alized peritonitis indicating the presence of a diverticular perforation. 
If a pericolonic abscess has formed, the patient may have abdominal 
distention and signs of localized peritonitis. Laboratory investigations 
will  demonstrate  a  leukocytosis.  Rarely,  a  patient  may  present  with 
an air-fluid level in the left lower quadrant on plain abdominal film. 
This is a giant diverticulum of the sigmoid colon and is managed with 
resection to avoid impending perforation.

The diagnosis of diverticulitis is best made on a contrast-enhanced 
abdominal and pelvic CT scan demonstrating the following findings: 
sigmoid  diverticula,  thickened  colonic  wall  >4  mm,  and  inflamma-
tion within the pericolic fat with or without the collection of contrast 

TABLE 328-1  Presentation of Diverticular Disease
Uncomplicated Diverticular Disease—75%

Abdominal pain
Fever
Leukocytosis
Anorexia/obstipation

Complicated Diverticular Disease—25%

Abscess 16%
Perforation 10%
Stricture 5%
Fistula 2%

I

II

Feces

III

IV

FIGURE  328-2  Hinchey  classification  of  diverticulitis.  Stage  I:  Perforated 
diverticulitis with a confined paracolic abscess. Stage II: Perforated diverticulitis 
that  has  closed  spontaneously  with  distant  abscess  formation.  Stage  III: 
Noncommunicating  perforated  diverticulitis  with  fecal  peritonitis  (the  diverticular 
neck  is  closed  off,  and  therefore,  contrast  will  not  freely  expel  on  radiographic 
images).  Stage  IV:  Perforation  and  free  communication  with  the  peritoneum, 
resulting in fecal peritonitis.

material or fluid. In up to 20% of patients, an abdominal abscess may 
be  present.  Symptoms  of  irritable  bowel  syndrome  (Chap.  327)  may 
mimic  those  of  diverticulitis.  Therefore,  suspected  diverticulitis  that 
does  not  meet  CT  criteria  or  is  not  associated  with  a  leukocytosis 
or  fever  is  not  diverticular  disease.  Other  conditions  that  can  mimic 
diverticular  disease  include  an  ovarian  cyst,  endometriosis,  acute 
appendicitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease.

Although  the  benefit  of  colonoscopy  in  the  evaluation  of  patients 
with diverticular disease has been called into question, its use is still 
considered important in the exclusion of colorectal cancer. The parallel 
epidemiology  of  colorectal  cancer  and  diverticular  disease  provides 
enough  concern  for  an  endoscopic  evaluation  before  operative  man-
agement. Therefore, a colonoscopy should be performed ~6 weeks after 
an attack of diverticular disease.

Complicated  diverticular  disease  is  defined  as  diverticular  disease 
associated  with  an  abscess  or  perforation  and  less  commonly  with  a 
fistula (Table 328-1). Perforated diverticular disease is staged using the 
Hinchey  classification  system  (Fig.  328-2).  This  staging  system  was 
developed to predict outcomes following the surgical management of 
complicated diverticular disease. In recent years, the Hinchey staging 
system has been modified to include the development of a phlegmon 
or early abscess (Hinchey stage Ia). A pericolic abscess is then consid-
ered Hinchey stage Ib. In complicated diverticular disease with fistula 
formation,  common  locations  include  cutaneous,  vaginal,  or  vesicle 
fistulas. These conditions present with either passage of stool through 
the skin or vagina or the presence of air in the urinary stream (pneu-
maturia). Colovaginal fistulas are more common in women who have 
undergone a hysterectomy.

TREATMENT
Diverticular Disease 

MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
Asymptomatic  diverticular  disease  discovered  on  imaging  studies 
or at the time of colonoscopy is best managed by lifestyle changes. 
Although the data regarding dietary risks and symptomatic diver-
ticular disease are limited (Table 328-2), patients may benefit from 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2498

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2499

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
8

D
i
v
e
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
C
o
m
m
o
n
A
n
o
r
e
c
t
a
l

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TABLE 328-2  The Use of Fiber in the Management of Diverticular Disease (DD)
JOURNAL, STUDY YEAR
Lancet, 1977
BMJ, 1981
J Gastroenterol, 1977
BMJ, 2011
Gastroenterology, 2012
JAMA, 2008

PATIENTS (N)
18
58
30
47,033
2104
47,288

INTERVENTION
Wheat or bran crisp bread
Bran, ispaghula, placebo
Methylcellulose
Vegetarian vs nonvegetarian
Fiber consumption
Nut, corn, popcorn 
consumption
Fiber consumption

Ann R Coll Surg Engl, 1985

56

STUDY LENGTH
3 months
16 weeks
3 months
11.6 years
12 years
18 years

66 months

FINDINGS
Significant reduction of symptoms score
No difference
Significant reduction in symptoms
Vegetarians had a 31% lower risk of DD
Fiber associated with great risk of DD
Higher nut, corn, and popcorn had lower risk of 
recurrence
Higher fiber associated with 19% reduction in symptom 
recurrence

Source: Modified from A Turis et al: Review article: The pathophysiology and medical management of diverticulosis and diverticular disease of the colon. Aliment Parmacol 
Ther 42:664, 2015.

a fiber-enriched diet that includes 30 g of fiber each day. Supple-
mentary  fiber  products  such  as  Metamucil,  Fibercon,  or  Citrucel 
are  useful.  The  use  of  fiber  decreases  colonic  transit  time  and, 
therefore,  prevents  increased  intraluminal  pressure  leading  to  the 
development of diverticulosis. The incidence of complicated diver-
ticular disease appears to also be increased in patients who smoke 
and are obese. Therefore, patients should be encouraged to refrain 
from  smoking  and  to  join  a  weight  loss  program.  The  historical 
recommendation  to  avoid  eating  nuts  is  based  on  no  more  than 
anecdotal data.

SUDD with confirmation of inflammation and infection within 
the colon should be treated initially with bowel rest. The routine use 
of antibiotics in uncomplicated diverticular disease does not reduce 
time to symptom resolution or risk of complications or recurrence. 
There  is  ample  evidence  establishing  the  safety  of  treating  SUDD 
without antibiotics. The AVOD trial randomly assigned 623 inpa-
tients with CT-confirmed uncomplicated left-sided diverticulitis to 
receive intravenous fluids alone or intravenous fluids and antibiot-
ics and found no differences between the treatment groups in terms 
of  time  to  recovery,  the  development  of  complicated  diverticular 
disease, and recurrence. The DIABOLO trial from the Dutch Diver-
ticular  Disease  Collaborative  Study  Group  compared  the  efficacy 
of treating patients with their first episode of sigmoid diverticulitis 
with  antibiotics  or  outpatient  observation.  A  total  of  528  patients 
with  CT-proven  uncomplicated  diverticulitis  were  randomized  to 
either a 10-day course of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid or observation 
in  an  outpatient  setting.  This  study  demonstrated  that  antibiotics 
made no difference in symptom duration or management, and the 
results  favored  observation  over  antibiotic  therapy  for  uncompli-
cated  diverticulitis  (SUDD).  Currently,  the  practice  guidelines  of 
the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgery state that “selected 
patients  with  uncomplicated  diverticulitis  can  be  treated  without 
antibiotics.” Hospitalization for acute diverticulitis is recommended if 
the patient is unable to take oral therapy, is affected by several comor-
bidities, fails to improve with outpatient therapy, or has complicated 
diverticulitis. Nearly 75% of patients hospitalized for acute divertic-
ulitis will respond to nonoperative treatment with a suitable antimi-
crobial regimen. The current recommended antimicrobial coverage is 
a third-generation cephalosporin or ciprofloxacin and metronidazole 
targeting aerobic gram-negative rods and anaerobic bacteria. Unfor-
tunately, these agents do not cover enterococci, and the addition of 
ampicillin to this regimen for nonresponders is recommended. Alter-
natively, single-agent therapy with a third-generation penicillin such 
as IV piperacillin or oral penicillin/clavulanic acid may be effective. 
The usual course of antibiotics is 7–10 days, although this length of 
time is being investigated. Patients should remain on a limited diet 
until their pain resolves.

Once the acute attack has resolved, the mainstay medical man-
agement of diverticular disease to prevent symptoms has evolved. 
The risk of recurrent hospitalization following an episode of acute 
diverticular  disease  is  11%.  Established  risk  factors  for  symptom-
atic  recurrence  include  younger  age,  the  formation  of  a  divertic-
ular abscess, more frequent attacks (>2 per year), multimorbidity, 
obesity,  and  smoking.  Prevention  strategies  may  include  smoking 

cessation and weight loss. Diverticular disease is now considered a 
functional bowel disorder associated with low-grade inflammation. 
The  use  of  anti-inflammatory  medications  (mesalazine)  in  ran-
domized clinical trials has shown them to be beneficial at reducing 
symptoms and disease recurrence in patients with SUDD. However, 
when  objective  signs  of  inflammation  such  as  C-reactive  protein 
and computerized imaging are taken into consideration, no benefit 
for the use of mesalazine has been shown.

Treatment  strategies  targeting  dysbiosis  in  diverticular  disease 
have also been evaluated using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on 
stool specimens. Stool samples from consumers of a high-fiber diet 
have different bacterial content than stool samples from consumers 
of  a  low-fiber,  high-fat  diet.  Probiotics  are  increasingly  used  by 
gastroenterologists  for  multiple  bowel  disorders  and  may  prevent 
recurrence of diverticulitis. Specifically, probiotics containing Lac-
tobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium strains may be beneficial; 
however, a recent systematic review was unable to show any benefit 
to the use of probiotics alone. The addition of fiber or mesalazine 
with probiotics has been shown to maintain remission. Rifaximin 
(a  poorly  absorbed  broad-spectrum  antibiotic),  when  compared 
to  fiber  alone  for  the  treatment  of  SUDD,  is  associated  with  30% 
less frequent recurrent symptoms from uncomplicated diverticular 
disease. 

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
Preoperative risk factors influencing postoperative mortality rates 
include higher American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) phys-
ical  status  class  (Table  328-3)  and  preexisting  organ  failure.  In 
patients who are low risk (ASA P1 and P2), surgical therapy can be 
offered  to  those  who  do  not  rapidly  improve  on  medical  therapy. 
For  uncomplicated  diverticular  disease,  medical  therapy  can  be 
continued beyond two attacks without an increased risk of perfora-
tion requiring a colostomy. However, patients on immunosuppres-
sive  therapy,  in  chronic  renal  failure,  or  with  a  collagen-vascular 
disease have a fivefold greater risk of perforation during recurrent 
attacks. A multicentered randomized clinical trial (DIRECT trial) 
comparing  surgery  with  conservative  management  for  recurrent 
SUDD demonstrated that elective surgical resection was associated 
with  an  improved  quality  of  life  and  was  more  cost-effective  at   
5  years  following  resection  as  compared  to  conservative  manage-
ment. Surgical therapy is indicated in all low-surgical-risk patients 
with complicated diverticular disease.

The goals of surgical management of diverticular disease include 
controlling  sepsis,  eliminating  complications  such  as  fistula  or 
obstruction, removing the diseased colonic segment, and restoring 
intestinal continuity. These goals must be obtained while minimiz-
ing morbidity rate, length of hospitalization, and cost in addition to 
maximizing survival and quality of life. Table 328-4 lists the opera-
tions most commonly indicated based on the Hinchey classification 
and  the  predicted  postoperative  outcomes.  The  current  options 
for  uncomplicated  diverticular  disease  include  an  open  or  a  lap-
aroscopic resection of the diseased area with reanastomosis to the 
rectosigmoid.  Preservation  of  portions  of  the  sigmoid  colon  may 
lead to early recurrence of the disease. The benefits of laparoscopic 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2499

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2500 TABLE 328-3  American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status 

Classification System
P1
P2
P3
P4

A normal healthy patient
A patient with mild systemic disease
A patient with severe systemic disease
A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant  
threat to life
A moribund patient who is not expected to survive without the 
operation
A declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for 
donor purposes

P5

P6

resection over open surgical techniques include early discharge (by 
at least 1 day), less narcotic use, less postoperative complications, 
and an earlier return to work.

The options for the surgical management of complicated diver-
ticular  disease  (Fig. 328-3)  include  the  following  open  or  laparo-
scopic procedures: (1) proximal diversion of the fecal stream with 
an ileostomy or colostomy and sutured omental patch with drain-
age, (2) resection with colostomy and mucous fistula or closure of 
distal  bowel  with  formation  of  a  Hartmann’s  pouch  (Hartmann’s 
procedure),  (3)  resection  with  anastomosis  (coloproctostomy),  or 
(4)  resection  with  anastomosis  and  diversion  (coloproctostomy 
with loop ileostomy or colostomy). (5) Laparoscopic technique of 
washout  and  drainage  without  diversion  has  been  described  for 
Hinchey III patients; however, a threefold increased risk of recur-
rent peritonitis requiring reoperation with washout alone has been 
reported.

Patients with Hinchey stage Ia are managed with antibiotic ther-
apy only followed by resection with anastomosis at 6 weeks. Patients 
with  Hinchey  stages  Ib  and  II  disease  are  managed  with  percu-
taneous  drainage  followed  by  resection  with  anastomosis  about   
6 weeks later. Current guidelines put forth by the American Society 
of  Colon  and  Rectal  Surgeons  suggest,  in  addition  to  antibiotic 
therapy, CT-guided percutaneous drainage of diverticular abscesses 
that  are  >3  cm  and  have  a  well-defined  wall.  Abscesses  that  are   
<5 cm may resolve with antibiotic therapy alone. Contraindications 
to percutaneous drainage are no percutaneous access route, pneu-
moperitoneum,  and  fecal  peritonitis.  Drainage  of  a  diverticular 
abscess  is  associated  with  a  20–25%  failure  rate.  Urgent  opera-
tive intervention is undertaken if percutaneous drainage fails and 
patients develop generalized peritonitis, and most will need to be 
managed  with  a  Hartmann’s  procedure  (resection  of  the  sigmoid 
colon with end colostomy and rectal stump). In selected cases, non-
operative therapy may be considered. In one nonrandomized study, 
nonoperative management of isolated paracolic abscesses (Hinchey 
stage I) was associated with only a 20% recurrence rate at 2 years. 

FIGURE  328-3  Methods  of  surgical  management  of  complicated  diverticular 
disease. 1. Drainage, omental pedicle graft, and proximal diversion. 2. Hartmann’s 
procedure.  3.  Sigmoid  resection  with  coloproctostomy.  4.  Sigmoid  resection  with 
coloproctostomy and proximal diversion.

More than 80% of patients with distant abscesses (Hinchey stage II) 
required surgical resection for recurrent symptoms.

The  management  of  Hinchey  stage  III  disease  is  under  debate. 
In this population of patients, no fecal peritonitis is present, and it 
is presumed that the perforation has sealed. Historically, Hinchey 
stage III has been managed with a Hartmann’s procedure or with 
primary anastomosis and proximal diversion. Several studies have 
examined  short-  and  long-term  outcomes  for  laparoscopic  peri-
toneal  lavage  to  remove  the  peritoneal  contamination  and  place 
drainage catheters should a communication to the bowel still exist. 
However, this procedure has been associated with an increased risk 
of  requiring  reoperation  for  ongoing  peritonitis.  Overall,  ostomy 
rates are lower with the use of laparoscopic peritoneal lavage. No 
anastomosis of any type should be attempted in Hinchey stage IV 
disease or in the presence of fecal peritonitis. A limited approach to 
these patients is associated with a decreased mortality rate.

TABLE 328-4  Outcome Following Surgical Therapy for Complicated Diverticular Disease Based on Modified Hinchey Staging
HINCHEY STAGE
Ia (pericolic phlegmon)
Ib (pericolic abscess)

ANASTOMOTIC LEAK RATE, %
43
3

OVERALL MORBIDITY RATE, %
15
15

II

III

IV

OPERATIVE PROCEDURE
Laparoscopic or open colon resection
Percutaneous drainage followed by laparoscopic or 
open colon resection
Percutaneous drainage followed by laparoscopic  
or open colon resection +/− proximal diversion with  
an ostomy
Laparoscopic washout and drainage

or
Laparoscopic or open resection with proximal diversion 
(ostomy)

Hartmann’s procedure
Hartmann’s procedure

or

or

Washout with proximal diversion

3

3

—

15

30% risk of peritonitis requiring reoperation if 
no resection is performed.
Overall morbidity 50%
Overall mortality 15%

Overall morbidity 50%
Overall mortality 15%

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2500

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemRecurrent Symptoms  Recurrent abdominal symptoms following 
surgical  resection  for  diverticular  disease  occur  in  10%  of  patients. 
Recurrent  diverticular  disease  develops  in  patients  following  inade-
quate surgical resection. A retained segment of diseased rectosigmoid 
colon is associated with twice the incidence of recurrence. The pres-
ence of irritable bowel syndrome may also cause recurrence of initial 
symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical resection for presumed diver-
ticulitis and symptoms of chronic abdominal cramping and irregular 
loose bowel movements consistent with irritable bowel syndrome have 
poorer functional outcomes.

COMMON DISEASES OF THE ANORECTUM
 ■ RECTAL PROLAPSE (PROCIDENTIA)
Incidence and Epidemiology  Rectal prolapse is six times more 
common  in  women  than  in  men.  The  incidence  of  rectal  prolapse 
peaks in women >60 years. Women with rectal prolapse have a higher 
incidence of associated pelvic floor disorders including urinary incon-
tinence,  rectocele,  cystocele,  and  enterocele.  About  20%  of  children 
with  rectal  prolapse  will  have  cystic  fibrosis.  All  children  presenting 
with  prolapse  should  undergo  a  sweat  chloride  test.  Less  common 
associations include Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, solitary rectal ulcer syn-
drome, congenital hypothyroidism, Hirschsprung’s disease, dementia,  
cognitively impaired, and schizophrenia.

Anatomy and Pathophysiology  Rectal prolapse (procidentia) is 
a circumferential, full-thickness protrusion of the rectal wall through 
the anal orifice. It is often associated with a redundant sigmoid colon, 
pelvic  laxity,  and  a  deep  rectovaginal  septum  (pouch  of  Douglas). 
Initially, rectal prolapse was felt to be the result of early internal rectal 
intussusception,  which  occurs  in  the  upper  to  mid  rectum.  This  was 
considered to be the first step in an inevitable progression to full-thick-
ness  external  prolapse.  However,  only  1  of  38  patients  with  internal 
prolapse followed for >5 years developed full-thickness prolapse. Oth-
ers have suggested that full-thickness prolapse is the result of damage 
to the nerve supply to the pelvic floor muscles or pudendal nerves from 
repeated stretching with straining to defecate. Damage to the pudendal 
nerves would weaken the pelvic floor muscles, including the external 
anal sphincter muscles. Bilateral pudendal nerve injury is more signifi-
cantly associated with prolapse and incontinence than unilateral injury.

Presentation and Evaluation 
In external prolapse, the majority 
of patient complaints include anal mass, bleeding per rectum, and poor 
perianal hygiene. Prolapse of the rectum usually occurs following def-
ecation and will spontaneously reduce or require the patient to manu-
ally reduce the prolapse. Constipation occurs in ~30–67% of patients 
with rectal prolapse. Differing degrees of fecal incontinence occur in 
50–70% of patients. Patients with internal rectal prolapse will present 
with  symptoms  of  both  constipation  and  incontinence.  Other  asso-
ciated  findings  include  outlet  obstruction  (anismus)  in  30%,  colonic 
inertia in 10%, and solitary rectal ulcer syndrome in 12%.

Office evaluation is best performed after the patient has been given 
an  enema,  which  enables  the  prolapse  to  protrude.  An  important 
distinction  should  be  made  between  full-thickness  rectal  prolapse 
and  isolated  mucosal  prolapse  associated  with  hemorrhoidal  disease  
(Fig. 328-4). Mucosal prolapse is known for radial grooves rather than 
circumferential  folds  around  the  anus  and  is  due  to  increased  laxity 
of the connective tissue between the submucosa and underlying mus-
cle  of  the  anal  canal.  The  evaluation  of  prolapse  should  also  include 
cystoproctography  and  colonoscopy.  These  examinations  evaluate 
for  associated  pelvic  floor  disorders  and  rule  out  a  malignancy  or  a 
polyp  as  the  lead  point  for  prolapse.  If  rectal  prolapse  is  associated 
with  chronic  constipation,  the  patient  should  undergo  a  defecating 
proctogram and a sitzmark study. This will evaluate for the presence 
of  anismus  or  colonic  inertia.  Anismus  is  the  result  of  attempting  to 
defecate against a closed pelvic floor and is also known as nonrelaxing 
puborectalis. This can be seen when straightening of the rectum fails 
to occur on fluoroscopy while the patient is attempting to defecate. In 
colonic inertia, a sitzmark study will demonstrate retention of >20% of 

2501

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
8

D
i
v
e
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
C
o
m
m
o
n
A
n
o
r
e
c
t
a
l

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

A

B

C

D

FIGURE  328-4  Degrees  of  rectal  prolapse.  Mucosal  prolapse  only  (A,  B,  sagittal 
view). Full-thickness prolapse associated with redundant rectosigmoid and deep 
pouch of Douglas (C, D, sagittal view).

markers on abdominal x-ray 5 days after swallowing. For patients with 
fecal  incontinence,  endoanal  ultrasound  and  manometric  evaluation, 
including pudendal nerve testing of their anal sphincter muscles, may 
be  performed  before  surgery  for  prolapse  (see  “Fecal  Incontinence,” 
below).

TREATMENT
Rectal Prolapse

The  medical  approach  to  the  management  of  rectal  prolapse  is 
limited and includes stool-bulking agents or fiber supplementation 
to  ease  the  process  of  evacuation.  Surgical  correction  of  rectal 
prolapse is the mainstay of therapy. Two approaches are commonly 
considered:  transabdominal  and  transperineal.  Transabdominal 
approaches  have  been  associated  with  lower  recurrence  rates,  but 
some patients with significant comorbidities are better served by a 
transperineal approach.

Common transperineal approaches include a transanal proctec-
tomy (Altmeier procedure), mucosal proctectomy (Delorme proce-
dure), or placement of a Tirsch wire encircling the anus. The goal 
of the transperineal approach is to remove the redundant rectosig-
moid  colon.  Common  transabdominal  approaches  include  presa-
cral suture or mesh rectopexy (Ripstein) with (Frykman-Goldberg) 
or  without  resection  of  the  redundant  sigmoid.  Colon  resection, 
in  general,  is  reserved  for  patients  with  constipation  and  outlet 
obstruction.  Ventral  rectopexy  is  an  effective  method  of  abdomi-
nal repair of full-thickness prolapse that does not require sigmoid 
resection (see description below). This repair may have improved 
functional  results  over  other  abdominal  repairs.  Transabdominal 
procedures  can  be  performed  effectively  with  laparoscopic  and, 
more  recently,  robotic  techniques  without  increased  incidence  of 
recurrence. The goal of the transabdominal approach is to restore 
normal anatomy by removing redundant bowel and reattaching the 
supportive  tissue  of  the  rectum  to  the  presacral  fascia.  The  final 
alternative  is  abdominal  proctectomy  with  end-sigmoid  colos-
tomy. If total colonic inertia is present, as defined by a history of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2501

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2502

FIGURE 328-5  Stapled transanal rectal resection. Schematic of placement of the 
circular stapling device.

constipation  and  a  positive  sitzmark  study,  a  subtotal  colectomy 
with an ileosigmoid or rectal anastomosis may be required at the 
time of rectopexy.

Previously,  the  presence  of  internal  rectal  prolapse  identified 
on  imaging  studies  has  been  considered  a  nonsurgical  disorder, 
and  biofeedback  was  recommended.  However,  only  one-third  of 
patients will have successful resolution of symptoms from biofeed-
back. Two surgical procedures more effective than biofeedback are 
the stapled transanal rectal resection (STARR) and the laparoscopic 
ventral  rectopexy  (LVR).  The  STARR  procedure  (Fig.  328-5)  is 
performed through the anus in patients with internal prolapse. A 
circular  stapling  device  is  inserted  through  the  anus;  the  internal 
prolapse  is  identified  and  ligated  with  the  stapling  device.  LVR   
(Fig.  328-6)  is  performed  through  an  abdominal  approach.  An 
opening in the peritoneum is created on the left side of the recto-
sigmoid junction, and this opening continues down anterior on the 
rectum  into  the  pouch  of  Douglas.  No  rectal  mobilization  is  per-
formed, thus avoiding any autonomic nerve injury. Mesh is secured 
to the anterior and lateral portion of the rectum, the vaginal fornix, 
and the sacral promontory, allowing for closure of the rectovaginal 
septum and correction of the internal prolapse. In both procedures, 
recurrence at 1 year was low (<10%), and symptoms improved in 
more than three-fourths of patients.

 ■ FECAL INCONTINENCE
Incidence  and  Epidemiology  Fecal  incontinence  is  the  invol-
untary passage of fecal material for at least 1 month in an individual 
with  a  developmental  age  of  at  least  4  years.  The  prevalence  of  fecal 
incontinence in the United States is 0.5–11%. The majority of patients 
are women and aged >65. A higher incidence of incontinence is seen 
among  parous  women.  One-half  of  patients  with  fecal  incontinence 
also  suffer  from  urinary  incontinence.  The  majority  of  incontinence 
is a result of obstetric injury to the pelvic floor, either while carrying a 
fetus or during the delivery. An anatomic sphincter defect may occur in 
up to 32% of women following childbirth regardless of visible damage 
to the perineum. Risk factors at the time of delivery include prolonged 
labor, the use of forceps, and the need for an episiotomy. Symptoms of 
incontinence  can  present  two  or  more  decades  after  obstetric  injury. 
Medical  conditions  known  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  fecal 
incontinence are listed in Table 328-5.
Anatomy  and  Pathophysiology  The  anal  sphincter  complex 
is  made  up  of  the  internal  and  external  anal  sphincter.  The  internal 
sphincter is smooth muscle and a continuation of the circular fibers of 
the rectal wall. It is innervated by the intestinal myenteric plexus and 

FIGURE 328-6  Laparoscopic ventral rectopexy (LVR). To reduce the internal prolapse 
and close any rectovaginal septal defect, the pouch of Douglas is opened and mesh 
is  secured  to  the  anterolateral  rectum,  vaginal  fornix,  and  sacrum.  (Reproduced 
with permission from A D’Hoore et al: Long-term outcome of laparoscopic ventral 
rectopexy for total rectal prolapse. B J S 91:1500, 2004.)

is therefore not under voluntary control. The external anal sphincter 
is  formed  in  continuation  with  the  levator  ani  muscles  and  is  under 
voluntary control. The pudendal nerve supplies motor innervation to 
the  external  anal  sphincter.  Obstetric  injury  may  result  in  tearing  of 
the muscle fibers anteriorly at the time of the delivery. This results in 
an obvious anterior defect on endoanal ultrasound. Injury may also be 
the  result  of  stretching  of  the  pudendal  nerves  during  pregnancy  or 
delivery of the fetus through the birth canal.
Presentation  and  Evaluation  Patients  may  suffer  with  varying 
degrees of fecal incontinence. Minor incontinence includes incontinence 
to flatus and occasional seepage of liquid stool. Major incontinence is 
frequent inability to control solid waste. As a result of fecal incontinence, 
patients  suffer  from  poor  perianal  hygiene.  Beyond  the  immediate 

TABLE 328-5  Medical Conditions That Contribute to Symptoms of 
Fecal Incontinence
Neurologic Disorders

•	 Dementia
•	 Brain tumor
•	 Stroke
•	 Multiple sclerosis
•	 Tabes dorsalis
•	 Cauda equina lesions

Skeletal Muscle Disorders

•	 Myasthenia gravis
•	 Myopathies, muscular dystrophy

Miscellaneous

•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Irritable bowel syndrome
•	 Diabetes
•	 Severe diarrhea
•	 Scleroderma

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2502

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemproblems  associated  with  fecal  incontinence,  these  patients  are  often 
withdrawn  and  suffer  from  depression.  For  this  reason,  quality-of-life 
measures  are  an  important  component  in  the  evaluation  of  patients 
with fecal incontinence.

The  evaluation  of  fecal  incontinence  should  include  a  thorough 
history and physical examination including digital rectal examination 
(DRE). Weak sphincter tone on DRE and loss of the “anal wink” reflex 
(S1-level  control)  may  indicate  a  neurogenic  dysfunction.  Perianal 
scars may represent surgical injury. Other studies helpful in the diag-
nosis  of  fecal  incontinence  include  anal  manometry,  pudendal  nerve 
terminal motor latency (PNTML), and endoanal ultrasound. Centers 
that  care  for  patients  with  fecal  incontinence  will  have  an  anorectal 
physiology  laboratory  that  uses  standardized  methods  of  evaluating 
anorectal physiology. Anorectal manometry (ARM) measures resting 
and  squeeze  pressures  within  the  anal  canal  using  an  intraluminal 
water-perfused  catheter.  Current  methods  of  ARM  include  use  of  a 
three-dimensional,  high-resolution  system  with  a  12-catheter  perfu-
sion system, which allows physiologic delineation of anatomic abnor-
malities.  Pudendal  nerve  studies  evaluate  the  function  of  the  nerves 
innervating the anal canal using a finger electrode placed in the anal 
canal. Stretch injuries to these nerves will result in a delayed response 
of the sphincter muscle to a stimulus, indicating a prolonged latency. 
Finally,  endoanal  ultrasound  will  evaluate  the  extent  of  the  injury  to 
the sphincter muscles before surgical repair. Unfortunately, all of these 
investigations  are  user-dependent,  and  very  few  studies  demonstrate 
that these studies predict outcome following an intervention. Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) has been used, but its routine use for imag-
ing in fecal incontinence is not well established.

Rarely  does  a  pelvic  floor  disorder  exist  alone.  The  majority  of 
patients  with  fecal  incontinence  will  have  some  degree  of  urinary 
incontinence.  Similarly,  fecal  incontinence  is  a  part  of  the  spectrum 
of  pelvic  organ  prolapse.  For  this  reason,  patients  may  present  with 
symptoms of obstructed defecation as well as fecal incontinence. Care-
ful  evaluation  including  dynamic  MRI  or  cinedefecography  should 
be  performed  to  search  for  other  associated  defects.  Surgical  repair 
of  incontinence  without  attention  to  other  associated  defects  may 
decrease the success of the repair.

TREATMENT
Fecal Incontinence

Medical  management  of  fecal  incontinence  includes  strategies  to 
bulk up the stool, which help in increasing fecal sensation. These 
include fiber supplementation, loperamide, diphenoxylate, and bile 
acid  binders.  These  agents  harden  the  stool  and  delay  frequency 
of  bowel  movements  and  are  helpful  in  patients  with  minimal  to 
mild  symptoms.  Furthermore,  patients  can  be  offered  a  form  of 
physical therapy called biofeedback. This therapy helps strengthen 
the  external  sphincter  muscle  while  training  the  patient  to  relax 
with defecation to avoid unnecessary straining and further injury 
to the sphincter muscles. Biofeedback has had variable success and 
is dependent on the motivation of the patient. At a minimum, bio-
feedback  is  risk-free.  Most  patients  will  have  some  improvement. 
For  this  reason,  it  should  be  incorporated  into  the  initial  recom-
mendation to all patients with fecal incontinence.

Historically, the “gold standard” for the treatment of fecal incon-
tinence  with  an  isolated  sphincter  defect  has  been  the  overlap-
ping  sphincteroplasty.  The  external  anal  sphincter  muscle  and 
scar  tissue,  as  well  as  any  identifiable  internal  sphincter  muscle, 
are  dissected  free  from  the  surrounding  adipose  and  connective 
tissue, and then an overlapping repair is performed in an attempt to 
rebuild the muscular ring and restore its function. However, long-
term results following overlapping sphincteroplasty have been poor, 
with a 50% failure rate over 5 years.

Alternative  therapies  such  as  sacral  nerve  stimulation  (SNS), 
collagen-enhancing injectables, and magnetic “Fenix” ring are other 
options.  SNS  is  an  adaptation  of  a  procedure  developed  for  the 
management  of  urinary  incontinence.  SNS  is  ideally  suited  for 

2503

patients  with  intact  but  weak  anal  sphincters.  A  temporary  nerve 
stimulator is placed on the third sacral nerve. If there is at least a 
50%  improvement  in  symptoms,  a  permanent  nerve  stimulator  is 
placed under the skin. Long-term results for sacral stimulation have 
been  promising,  with  nearly  80%  of  patients  having  a  reduction 
in incontinence episodes by at least 50%. This reduction has been 
sustainable in studies out to 5 years. Collagen-enhancing injectables 
have  been  around  for  several  years.  More  than  50%  of  inconti-
nent  patients  treated  with  nonanimal  stabilized  hyaluronic  acid 
(NASHA/DX) achieved a 50% reduction in incontinence episodes, 
and  these  results  were  sustainable  up  to  2  years.  Currently,  this 
injectable is not universally available. The Fenix is a magnetic ring 
that is implanted around the anal sphincter muscles. Its long-term 
outcomes are still being studied, and it is currently only available 
for compassionate use.

Finally, the use of stem cells to increase the bulk of the sphincter 
muscles is currently being tested. Stem cells can be harvested from 
the  patient’s  own  muscle,  grown,  and  then  implanted  into  their 
sphincter complex. Concern for cost and the need for an additional 
procedure dampen enthusiasm. Trial results are awaited.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
8

D
i
v
e
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
C
o
m
m
o
n
A
n
o
r
e
c
t
a
l

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

 ■ HEMORRHOIDAL DISEASE
Incidence  and  Epidemiology  Symptomatic  hemorrhoids  affect 
>1 million individuals in the Western world per year. The prevalence 
of hemorrhoidal disease is not selective for age or sex. However, age is 
known to be a risk factor. The prevalence of hemorrhoidal disease is 
less in underdeveloped countries. The typical low-fiber, high-fat West-
ern diet is associated with constipation and straining and the develop-
ment of symptomatic hemorrhoids.

Anatomy  and  Pathophysiology  Hemorrhoidal  cushions  are  a 
normal part of the anal canal. The vascular structures contained within 
this  tissue  aid  in  continence  by  preventing  damage  to  the  sphincter 
muscle. Three main hemorrhoidal complexes traverse the anal canal—
the left lateral, the right anterior, and the right posterior. Engorgement 
and straining lead to prolapse of this tissue into the anal canal. Over 
time, the anatomic support system of the hemorrhoidal complex weak-
ens, exposing this tissue to the outside of the anal canal where it is sus-
ceptible to injury. Hemorrhoids are commonly classified as external or 
internal. External hemorrhoids originate below the dentate line and are 
covered with squamous epithelium and are associated with an internal 
component.  External  hemorrhoids  are  painful  when  thrombosed. 
Internal  hemorrhoids  originate  above  the  dentate  line  and  are  cov-
ered with mucosa and transitional zone epithelium and represent the 
majority of hemorrhoids. The standard classification of hemorrhoidal 
disease is based on the progression of the disease from their normal 
internal location to the prolapsing external position (Table 328-6).

TABLE 328-6  The Staging and Treatment of Hemorrhoids

STAGE
I

DESCRIPTION OF 
CLASSIFICATION
Enlargement with 
bleeding

II

III

IV

Protrusion with 
spontaneous reduction

Protrusion requiring 
manual reduction

Irreducible protrusion

TREATMENT
Fiber supplementation
Short course of cortisone suppository
Sclerotherapy
Infrared coagulation
Fiber supplementation
Short course of cortisone suppository
Sclerotherapy
Infrared coagulation
Fiber supplementation
Short course of cortisone suppository
Rubber band ligation
Operative hemorrhoidectomy
Fiber supplementation
Cortisone suppository
Operative hemorrhoidectomy

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2503

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2504 Presentation  and  Evaluation  Patients  commonly  present  to  a 
physician for two reasons: bleeding and protrusion. Pain is less com-
mon than with fissures and, if present, is described as a dull ache from 
engorgement  of  the  hemorrhoidal  tissue.  Severe  pain  may  indicate 
a  thrombosed  hemorrhoid.  Hemorrhoidal  bleeding  is  described  as 
painless bright red blood seen either in the toilet or upon wiping. Occa-
sional patients can present with significant bleeding, which may be a 
cause of anemia; however, the presence of a colonic neoplasm must be 
ruled out in anemic patients. Patients who present with a protruding 
mass  complain  about  inability  to  maintain  perianal  hygiene  and  are 
often concerned about the presence of a malignancy.

Acute  complications  associated  with  the  treatment  of  hemor-
rhoids  include  pain,  infection,  recurrent  bleeding,  and  urinary 
retention. Care should be taken to place bands properly and to avoid 
overhydration in patients undergoing operative hemorrhoidectomy. 
Late complications include fecal incontinence as a result of injury to 
the sphincter during the dissection. Anal stenosis may develop from 
overzealous excision, with loss of mucosal skin bridges for reepithe-
lialization. Finally, an ectropion (prolapse of rectal mucosa from the 
anal canal) may develop. Patients with an ectropion complain of a 
“wet” anus as a result of inability to prevent soiling once the rectal 
mucosa is exposed below the dentate line.

The diagnosis of hemorrhoidal disease is made on physical exami-
nation.  Inspection  of  the  perianal  region  for  evidence  of  thrombosis 
or excoriation is performed, followed by a careful digital examination. 
Anoscopy  is  performed  paying  particular  attention  to  the  known 
position  of  hemorrhoidal  disease.  The  patient  is  asked  to  strain.  If 
this is difficult for the patient, the maneuver can be performed while 
sitting on a toilet. The physician is notified when the tissue prolapses. 
It  is  important  to  differentiate  the  circumferential  appearance  of  a 
full-thickness rectal prolapse from the radial nature of prolapsing hem-
orrhoids (see “Rectal Prolapse,” above). The stage and location of the 
hemorrhoidal complexes are defined.

TREATMENT
Hemorrhoidal Disease

The  treatment  for  bleeding  hemorrhoids  is  based  on  the  stage  of 
the disease (Table 328-6). In all patients with bleeding, the possibil-
ity of other causes must be considered. In young patients without 
a  family  history  of  colorectal  cancer,  the  hemorrhoidal  disease 
may  be  treated  first  and  a  colonoscopic  examination  performed 
if  the  bleeding  continues.  Older  patients  who  have  not  had  col-
orectal  cancer  screening  should  undergo  colonoscopy  or  flexible 
sigmoidoscopy.

With rare exceptions, the acutely thrombosed hemorrhoid can be 
excised within the first 72 h by performing an elliptical excision. 
Sitz  baths,  fiber,  and  stool  softeners  are  prescribed.  Additional 
therapy for bleeding hemorrhoids includes the office procedures 
of  rubber  band  ligation,  infrared  coagulation,  and  sclerotherapy. 
Sensation  begins  at  the  dentate  line;  therefore,  all  procedures 
can be performed without discomfort either endoscopically or in 
the  office.  Bands  are  placed  around  the  engorged  tissue,  causing 
ischemia  and  fibrosis.  This  aids  in  fixing  the  tissue  proximally 
in  the  anal  canal.  Patients  may  complain  of  a  dull  ache  for  24  h 
following  band  application.  During  sclerotherapy,  1–2  mL  of  a 
sclerosant  (usually  sodium  tetradecyl  sulfate)  is  injected  using  a 
25-gauge needle into the submucosa of the hemorrhoidal complex. 
Care must be taken not to inject the anal canal circumferentially, 
or stenosis may occur.

For  surgical  management  of  hemorrhoidal  disease,  excisional 
hemorrhoidectomy  with  sharp  dissection  or  using  a  ligator,  tran-
shemorrhoidal dearterialization (THD), or stapled hemorrhoidec-
tomy  (“the  procedure  for  prolapse  or  hemorrhoids”  [PPH])  is 
the  procedure  of  choice.  All  surgical  methods  of  management 
are  equally  effective  in  the  treatment  of  symptomatic  third-  and 
fourth-degree  hemorrhoids.  However,  because  the  sutured  hem-
orrhoidectomy  involves  the  removal  of  redundant  tissue  down 
to  the  anal  verge,  unpleasant  anal  skin  tags  are  removed  as  well. 
The stapled hemorrhoidectomy is associated with less discomfort; 
however,  this  procedure  does  not  remove  anal  skin  tags,  and  an 
increased number of complications are associated with use of the 
stapling device. THD uses ultrasound guidance to ligate the blood 
supply  to  the  anal  tissue,  hence  reducing  hemorrhoidal  engorge-
ment. No procedures on hemorrhoids should be done in patients 
who  are  immunocompromised  or  who  have  active  proctitis.  Fur-
thermore, emergent hemorrhoidectomy for bleeding hemorrhoids 
is associated with a higher complication rate.

 ■ ANORECTAL ABSCESS
Incidence  and  Epidemiology  The  development  of  a  perianal 
abscess  is  more  common  in  men  than  women  by  a  ratio  of  3:1.  The 
peak  incidence  is  in  the  third  to  fifth  decade  of  life.  Perianal  pain 
associated with the presence of an abscess accounts for 15% of office 
visits to a colorectal surgeon. The disease is more prevalent in immu-
nocompromised  patients  such  as  those  with  diabetes,  hematologic 
disorders, or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and persons who are 
HIV  positive.  These  disorders  should  be  considered  in  patients  with 
recurrent perianal infections.

Anatomy  and  Pathophysiology  An  anorectal  abscess  is  an 
abnormal  fluid-containing  cavity  in  the  anorectal  region.  Anorectal 
abscess results from an infection involving the glands surrounding the 
anal canal. Normally, these glands release mucus into the anal canal, 
which  aids  in  defecation.  When  stool  accidentally  enters  the  anal 
glands, the glands become infected, and an abscess develops. Anorectal 
abscesses are perianal in 40–50% of patients, ischiorectal in 20–25%, 
intersphincteric in 2–5%, and supralevator in 2.5% (Fig. 328-7).

Presentation  and  Evaluation  Perianal  pain  and  fever  are  the 
hallmarks of an abscess. Patients may have difficulty voiding and have 
blood in the stool. A prostatic abscess may present with similar com-
plaints, including dysuria. Patients with a prostatic abscess will often 
have a history of recurrent sexually transmitted diseases. On physical 
examination,  a  large  fluctuant  area  is  usually  readily  visible.  Routine 
laboratory evaluation shows an elevated white blood cell count. Diag-
nostic  procedures  are  rarely  necessary  unless  evaluating  a  recurrent 
abscess.  A  CT  scan  or  MRI  has  an  accuracy  of  80%  in  determining 
incomplete drainage. If there is a concern about the presence of IBD, 
a  rigid  or  flexible  sigmoidoscopic  examination  may  be  done  at  the 
time of drainage to evaluate for inflammation within the rectosigmoid 
region. A more complete evaluation for Crohn’s disease would include 
a full colonoscopy and small-bowel series.

Abscesses

Supralevator

Intersphincteric

Ischiorectal

Perianal

Fistula
tracts
4

3

2

1

1
Intersphincteric

Trans-sphincteric

4

Extrasphincteric

2

3
Suprasphincteric

FIGURE 328-7  Common locations of anorectal abscess (left) and fistula in ano (right).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2504

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTREATMENT
Anorectal Abscess

As with all abscesses, the “gold standard” is drainage. Office drain-
age  of  an  uncomplicated  anorectal  abscess  may  suffice.  A  small 
incision close to the anal verge is made, and a Mallenkot drain is 
advanced into the abscess cavity. For patients who have a compli-
cated abscess or who are diabetic or immunocompromised, drain-
age should be performed in an operating room under anesthesia. 
These patients are at greater risk for developing necrotizing fasciitis. 
The role of antibiotics in the management of anorectal abscesses is 
limited. Antibiotics are only warranted in patients who are immu-
nocompromised  or  have  prosthetic  heart  valves,  artificial  joints, 
diabetes, or IBD.

2505

Early complications from these procedures include urinary reten-
tion and bleeding. Later complications are rare (<10%) and include 
temporary and permanent incontinence. Recurrence is 0–18% fol-
lowing  fistulotomy  and  20–30%  following  anorectal  advancement 
flap and the LIFT procedure.

Fistulizing disease of the anus is common in Crohn’s disease, and 
recent  evidence  has  suggested  that  the  use  of  mesenchymal  stem 
cell  therapy  may  improve  healing  rates  of  fistula  associated  with 
Crohn’s disease. The ADMIRE study examined the use of allogeneic 
expanded adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells in the treatment 
of complex fistula in ano in Crohn’s disease. The study included 212 
patients randomized to stem cell therapy or placebo. Fistula remis-
sion rates at 52 weeks were significantly higher with the use of stem 
cell therapy over placebo (59 vs 42%, respectively). Currently, there 
is an international multicenter trial underway.

 ■ FISTULA IN ANO
Incidence  and  Epidemiology  The  incidence  and  prevalence  of 
fistulating perianal disease parallel the incidence of anorectal abscess, 
estimated  to  be  1  in  10,000  individuals.  Some  30–40%  of  abscesses 
will give rise to fistula in ano. Although the majority of the fistulas are 
cryptoglandular in origin, 10% are associated with IBD, tuberculosis, 
malignancy, and radiation.
Anatomy and Pathophysiology  A fistula in ano is defined as a 
communication of an abscess cavity with an identifiable internal open-
ing within the anal canal. This identifiable opening is most commonly 
located at the dentate line where the anal glands enter the anal canal. 
Patients experiencing continuous drainage following the treatment of a 
perianal abscess likely have a fistula in ano. These fistulas are classified 
by  their  relationship  to  the  anal  sphincter  muscles,  with  70%  being 
intersphincteric,  23%  transsphincteric,  5%  suprasphincteric,  and  2% 
extrasphincteric (Fig. 328-7).
Presentation and Evaluation  A patient with a fistula in ano will 
complain  of  constant  drainage  from  the  perianal  region  associated 
with a firm mass. The drainage may increase with defecation. Perianal 
hygiene  is  difficult  to  maintain.  Examination  under  anesthesia  is  the 
best way to evaluate a fistula. At the time of the examination, anoscopy 
is performed to look for an internal opening. Diluted hydrogen perox-
ide will aid in identifying such an opening. In lieu of anesthesia, MRI 
with an endoanal coil will also identify tracts in 80% of the cases. After 
drainage of an abscess with insertion of a Mallenkot catheter, a fistula-
gram through the catheter can be obtained in search of an occult fistula 
tract. Goodsall’s rule states that a posterior external fistula will enter the 
anal canal in the posterior midline, whereas an anterior fistula will enter 
at the nearest crypt. A fistula exiting >3 cm from the anal verge may 
have a complicated upward extension and may not obey Goodsall’s rule.

 ■ ANAL FISSURE
Incidence and Epidemiology  Anal fissures occur at all ages but 
are more common in the third through the fifth decades. A fissure is 
the most common cause of rectal bleeding in infancy. The prevalence is 
equal in males and females. It is associated with constipation, diarrhea, 
infectious etiologies, perianal trauma, and Crohn’s disease.

Anatomy and Pathophysiology  Trauma to the anal canal occurs 
following defecation. This injury occurs in the anterior or, more com-
monly, posterior anal canal. Irritation caused by the trauma to the anal 
canal results in an increased resting pressure of the internal sphincter. 
The  blood  supply  to  the  sphincter  and  anal  mucosa  enters  laterally. 
Therefore, increased anal sphincter tone results in a relative ischemia 
in the region of the fissure and leads to poor healing of the anal injury. 
A fissure that is not in the posterior or anterior position should raise 
suspicion  for  other  causes,  including  tuberculosis,  syphilis,  Crohn’s 
disease, and malignancy.

Presentation and Evaluation  A  fissure  can  be  easily  diagnosed 
on  history  alone.  The  classic  complaint  is  pain,  which  is  strongly 
associated  with  defecation  and  is  relentless.  The  bright  red  bleeding 
that can be associated with a fissure is less extensive than that associ-
ated with hemorrhoids. On examination, most fissures are located in 
either the posterior or anterior position. A lateral fissure is worrisome 
because it may have a less benign nature, and systemic disorders should 
be ruled out. A chronic fissure is indicated by the presence of a hyper-
trophied anal papilla at the proximal end of the fissure and a sentinel 
pile or skin tag at the distal end. Often the circular fibers of the hyper-
trophied internal sphincter are visible within the base of the fissure. If 
anal manometry is performed, elevation in anal resting pressure and 
a  sawtooth  deformity  with  paradoxical  contractions  of  the  sphincter 
muscles are pathognomonic.

TREATMENT
Fistula in Ano

TREATMENT
Anal Fissure

A newly diagnosed draining fistula is best managed with placement 
of a seton, a vessel loop or silk tie placed through the fistula tract, 
which maintains the tract open and quiets down the surrounding 
inflammation that occurs from repeated blockage of the tract. Once 
the inflammation is less, the exact relationship of the fistula tract 
to the anal sphincters can be ascertained. A simple fistulotomy can 
be performed for intersphincteric and low (less than one-third of 
the muscle) transsphincteric fistulas without compromising conti-
nence. For a higher transsphincteric fistula, an anorectal advance-
ment  flap  in  combination  with  a  drainage  catheter  or  fibrin  glue 
may be used. Very long (>2 cm) and narrow tracts respond better to 
fibrin glue than shorter tracts. Simple ligation of the internal fistula 
tract  (LIFT  procedure)  has  also  been  used  in  the  management  of 
simple fistula with good success.

Patients should be maintained on stool-bulking agents, nonnar-
cotic pain medication, and sitz baths following surgery for a fistula. 

The management of the acute fissure is conservative. Stool softeners 
for  those  with  constipation,  increased  dietary  fiber,  topical  anes-
thetics, glucocorticoids, and sitz baths are prescribed and will heal 
60–90% of fissures. Chronic fissures are those present for >6 weeks. 
These can be treated with modalities aimed at decreasing the anal 
canal resting pressure including nifedipine ointment applied three 
times a day and botulinum toxin type A, up to 20 units, injected into 
the internal sphincter on each side of the fissure. Both treatments 
are associated with a fissure healing rate of >80%. Surgical manage-
ment  includes  anal  dilatation  and  lateral  internal  sphincterotomy. 
Usually, one-third of the internal sphincter muscle is divided; it is 
easily identified because it is hypertrophied. Recurrence rates from 
medical  therapy  are  higher,  but  this  is  offset  by  a  risk  of  inconti-
nence  following  sphincterotomy.  Lateral  internal  sphincterotomy 
may lead to incontinence more commonly in women.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
8

D
i
v
e
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
a
n
d
C
o
m
m
o
n
A
n
o
r
e
c
t
a
l

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2505

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2506 Acknowledgment

The author thanks Cory Sandore for providing some illustrations for this 
chapter. Gregory Bulkley, MD, contributed to this chapter in an earlier 
edition, and some of that material has been retained here.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Bharucha AE et al: Surgical interventions and the use of device-aided 
therapy for the treatment of fecal incontinence and defecatory disor-
ders. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 15:1844, 2017.

Daniels L et al: Randomized clinical trial of observation versus antibi-
otic treatment for a first episode of CT-proven uncomplicated acute 
diverticulitis (DIABOLO trial). BJS 104:52, 2017.

Guttenplan  M:  The  evaluation  and  office  management  of  hemor-
rhoids for the gastroenterologist. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 19:30, 2017.
Panes  J  et  al:  Long-term  efficacy  and  safety  of  stem  cell  therapy 
(Cx601) for complex perianal fistulas in patients with Crohn’s disease. 
Gastroenterology 154:1334, 2018.

Prichard  D,  Bharucha  AE:  Management  of  pelvic  floor  disorders: 
Biofeedback  and  more.  Curr  Treat  Options  Gastroenterol  12:456, 
2014.

Salfity HV et al: Minimally invasive incision and drainage technique 
in the treatment of simple subcutaneous abscess in adults. Am Surg 
83:699, 2017.

Sugrue  J  et  al:  Sphincter-sparing  anal  fistula  repair:  Are  we  getting 

better? Dis Colon Rectum 60:1071, 2017.

Tursi  A:  Dietary  pattern  and  colonic  diverticulosis.  Curr  Opin  Clin 

Nutr Metab Care 20:409, 2017.

329 Mesenteric Vascular 
Insufficiency
Maryam Ali Khan, Jaideep Das Gupta, 
Mahmoud Malas

INTESTINAL ISCHEMIA
 ■ INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Intestinal ischemia occurs when splanchnic perfusion fails to meet the 
metabolic demands of the intestines, resulting in ischemic tissue injury. 
Mesenteric ischemia affects 2–3 people per 100,000, with an increasing 
incidence  in  the  aging  population.  Mortality  with  acute  presentation 
remains high, between 50 and 80%, and early diagnosis with prompt 
intervention  is  crucial  in  improving  clinical  outcomes.  Intestinal 
ischemia is further classified as chronic mesenteric ischemia (CMI) or 
acute mesenteric ischemic (AMI). CMI is secondary to multiple major 
visceral  arterio-occlusive  disease,  with  involvement  of  the  superior 
mesenteric  artery  (SMA)  most  worrisome.  AMI  is  most  commonly 
associated with (1) arterio-occlusive mesenteric ischemia, (2) nonoc-
clusive mesenteric ischemia, and (3) mesenteric venous thrombosis.

CMI is the failure to achieve normal postprandial hyperemic intes-
tinal blood flow. This occurs due to an imbalance between the supply 
and  demand  of  oxygen  metabolites  to  the  intestinal  tract  similar  to 
cardiac angina. CMI occurs due to significant atherosclerotic disease 
leading to the narrowing of the SMA and/or celiac artery origins.

AMI is the occurrence of an abrupt cessation of mesenteric blood 
flow, usually embolic or thrombotic in nature. Approximately 50% of 
AMI  is  due  to  embolus  to  the  mid  to  distal  SMA.  Embolus  etiology 
includes  atrial  fibrillation,  recent  myocardial  infarction,  soft  athero-
sclerotic  plaque,  infective  endocarditis,  valvular  heart  disease,  and 
recent  cardiac  or  vascular  catheterization.  Approximately  25–30%  of 
cases are characterized by an acute-on-chronic thrombosis in patients 
with  preexisting  mesenteric  atherosclerosis.  Thrombotic  occlusion 

most commonly occurs in areas of severe atherosclerotic narrowing at 
the SMA and celiac artery.

Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia represents 20% of the cases and 
is secondary to intestinal ischemia when subjected to acute hemody-
namic instability. Hypovolemia, shock, and the use of vasoconstrictive 
agents (digoxin, α-adrenergic agonists, cocaine) can precipitate ische-
mia in these patients. It is the most prevalent gastrointestinal disease 
complicating cardiovascular surgery. The incidence of ischemic colitis 
following  elective  aortic  repair  is  5–9%,  and  the  incidence  triples  in 
patients following emergent repair.

Mesenteric  venous  thrombosis  accounts  for  <10%  of  cases  and  is 
generally precipitated by a hypercoagulable state due to an underlying 
inherited  disorder  such  as  factor  V  Leiden,  prothrombin  mutation, 
protein S deficiency, protein C deficiency, antithrombin deficiency, and 
antiphospholipid syndrome. It may also occur as a result of acquired 
thrombophilia in malignancies, hematologic disorders, or use of oral 
contraceptives.

 ■ ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The blood supply to the intestines is supplied by the celiac artery, SMA, 
and  inferior  mesenteric  artery  (IMA)  (Fig.  329-1).  Extensive  collat-
eralization  occurs  between  major  mesenteric  trunks  and  branches  of 
the  mesenteric  arcades.  Collateral  vessels  within  the  small  bowel  are 
numerous and meet within the duodenum and the bed of the pancreas. 
Collateral  vessels  within  the  colon  meet  at  the  splenic  flexure  and 
descending/sigmoid colon. These areas, which are inherently at risk for 
decreased blood flow, are known as Griffiths’ point and Sudeck’s point, 
respectively, and are the most common locations for colonic ischemia 
(Fig. 329-1, shaded areas). The splanchnic circulation can receive up 
to 30% of the cardiac output. Protective responses to prevent intestinal 
ischemia  include  abundant  collateralization,  autoregulation  of  blood 
flow, and the ability to increase oxygen extraction from the blood.

Left phrenic a.

Aorta

Right phrenic a.

Celiac trunk

Pancreatico-
duodenal a.

SMA

IMA

IIA

Hemorrhoidal aa.
Superior
Middle
Inferior

Splenic a.

Griffiths’
point

Arc of
Riolan

Marginal a.

Sudeck’s
point

FIGURE  329-1  Blood  supply  to  the  intestines  includes  the  celiac  artery,  superior 
mesenteric  artery  (SMA),  inferior  mesenteric  artery  (IMA),  and  branches  of  the 
internal iliac artery (IIA). Griffiths’ and Sudeck’s points, indicated by shaded areas, 
are  watershed  areas  within  the  colonic  blood  supply  and  common  locations  for 
ischemia.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2506

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2507

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
2
9

M
e
s
e
n
t
e
r
i
c
V
a
s
c
u
l
a
r

I
n
s
u
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y

Occlusive  ischemia  is  a  result  of  disruption  of  blood  flow  by  an 
embolus  or  progressive  thrombosis  in  a  major  artery  supplying  the 
intestine. In >75% of cases, emboli originate from the heart and pref-
erentially lodge in the SMA just distal to the origin of the middle colic 
artery.  Progressive  thrombosis  of  typically  two  of  the  major  vessels 
supplying  the  intestine  is  required  for  the  development  of  chronic 
intestinal  angina.  The  involvement  of  the  SMA  is  most  worrisome. 
Nonocclusive  ischemia  is  disproportionate  mesenteric  vasoconstric-
tion  (arteriolar  vasospasm)  in  response  to  severe  physiologic  stress 
such  as  shock.  If  left  untreated,  early  mucosal  stress  ulceration  will 
progress to full-thickness injury.

 ■ PRESENTATION, EVALUATION,  
AND MANAGEMENT
Patients with CMI typically present with insidious onset of symptoms 
and  classically  with  recurrent  episodes  of  acute,  dull,  crampy,  post-
prandial epigastric pain, which has also been referred to as “intestinal 
angina.”  Weight  loss  and  chronic  diarrhea  may  also  be  noted.  Dura-
tion  of  symptoms  is  typically  6–12  months.  Physical  examination 
often  reveals  a  malnourished  patient  with  other  manifestations  of 
atherosclerosis.

Duplex  ultrasound  has  gained  popularity  as  a  screening  tool  for 
the  evaluation  of  the  mesenteric  vessels  due  to  high  sensitivity  and 
specificity. Mesenteric duplex scan demonstrating a high peak veloc-
ity of flow in the SMA is associated with an ~80% positive predictive 
value  of  mesenteric  ischemia.  More  significantly,  a  negative  duplex 
scan  virtually  precludes  the  diagnosis  of  mesenteric  ischemia.  It  is 
important to perform the test while the patient is fasting because the 
presence of increased bowel gas prevents adequate visualization of flow 
disturbances within the vessels or the lack of a vasodilation response to 
feeding during the test.

The management of CMI includes medical management of the ath-
erosclerotic disease by exercise, cessation of smoking, and antiplatelet 
and lipid-lowering medications. A full cardiac and vascular evaluation 
should be performed before intervention on CMI. Before intervention, 
a CT angiogram is recommended to assess the degree of atherosclerotic 
disease of the aortic and visceral vessels.

Treatment  involves  either  endovascular  or  open  surgical  revascu-
larization and should be individualized based on the patient’s comor-
bidities and anatomy. Endovascular revascularization involves targeted 
vessel treatment with visceral stents, with the SMA anatomy being the 

TABLE 329-1  Overview of the Management of Acute Intestinal Ischemia

key  determinant.  Open  revascularization  involves  antegrade  bypass 
from the supraceliac aortic or retrograde bypass, typically the common 
iliac arteries, with a synthetic graft to the targeted vessels, usually the 
SMA and/or celiac artery. In patients requiring revascularization, the 
endovascular approach is recommended as first-line therapy. It is espe-
cially favorable for short segment stenosis with minimal to moderate 
calcification  or  thrombus.  Angioplasty  with  endovascular  stenting  in 
the  treatment  of  CMI  is  associated  with  an  80%  long-term  success 
rate.  Open  revascularization  should  be  considered  in  patients  with 
lesions not amenable to endovascular treatment such as severe calci-
fication,  longer  lesions,  small  vessel  diameter,  or  failed  endovascular 
interventions.

Acute  intestinal  ischemia  remains  one  of  the  most  challenging 
diagnoses.  The  mortality  rate  of  AMI  is  >50%.  The  most  significant 
indicator of survival is the timeliness of diagnosis and treatment. An 
overview  of  diagnosis  and  management  of  each  form  of  intestinal 
ischemia is given in Table 329-1.

AMI resulting from an arterial embolus or thrombosis presentation 
is  nonspecific  and  requires  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  diagnosis. 
Severe,  acute,  unremitting  abdominal  pain  strikingly  out  of  propor-
tion  to  the  physical  findings  is  the  most  common  complaint  (95%). 
This may be associated with nausea (44%), vomiting (35%), diarrhea 
(35%),  and  blood  per  rectum  (16%).  Later  findings  will  demonstrate 
peritonitis  and  cardiovascular  collapse.  Specific  clinical  features  can 
help differentiate the underlying etiology, whether embolic or throm-
botic. Patients with embolic ischemia are typically older adults with an 
underlying condition that predisposes to embolism such as atrial fibril-
lation,  prior  embolic  event,  or  recent  infective  endocarditis.  Throm-
botic ischemia typically presents as an acute occlusion in patients with 
the underlying atherosclerotic disease who may have been previously 
diagnosed with CMI.

AMI is a surgical emergency, and emergent admission to a moni-
tored bed or intensive care unit is recommended for resuscitation with 
fluids  and  administration  of  broad-spectrum  antibiotics  in  addition 
to  further  evaluation.  If  the  diagnosis  of  intestinal  ischemia  is  being 
considered,  consultation  with  a  surgical  service  is  necessary.  Often 
the  decision  to  operate  is  made  on  a  high  index  of  suspicion  from 
the history and physical exam despite normal laboratory findings. In 
patients with suspected AMI, CT angiography with a 1-mm or thinner 
cut should be used to detect mesenteric arterial occlusive disease most 
likely due to embolic or thrombotic etiology and is the gold standard. 

CONDITION
Arterio-occlusive 
mesenteric ischemia
1. Arterial embolus

KEY TO EARLY DIAGNOSIS
Computed tomography (CT) 
angiography
Early laparotomy

2. Arterial thrombosis

Duplex ultrasound
CT angiography

TREATMENT OF UNDERLYING 
CAUSE
Anticoagulation
Cardioversion
Thrombectomy
Broad-spectrum antibiotics

Anticoagulation
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Resuscitation

Mesenteric venous 
thrombosis
Venous thrombosis

CT with venous phase

Anticoagulation
Resuscitation

TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC LESION
Laparotomy
Embolectomy
Assess viability and resect 
nonviable bowel

Endovascular approach: 
thrombolysis, angioplasty, and 
stenting
Endarterectomy/thrombectomy or 
vascular bypass
Assess viability and resect 
nonviable bowel
Anticoagulation
Hypercoagulable workup

Nonocclusive mesenteric 
ischemia

Vasospasm: CT
Hypoperfusion: CT

Resuscitation
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Broad-spectrum antibiotics

Vasospasm: intraarterial 
vasodilators
Hypoperfusion: assess viability 
and resect dead bowel

Source: Modified from GB Bulkley, in JL Cameron (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 2nd ed. Toronto, BC Decker, 1986.

TREATMENT OF SYSTEMIC 
CONSEQUENCE
Anticoagulation
Resuscitation
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Emergent surgical intervention
Assessment of bowel
Anticoagulation
Resuscitation
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Emergent surgical intervention
Assessment of bowel

Anticoagulation
Resuscitation
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Resuscitation
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2507

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
2508 Additional  diagnostic  modalities  that  can  be  useful  in  diagnosis  but 
that  should  not  delay  surgical  therapy  include  an  electrocardiogram 
(ECG),  echocardiogram,  and  abdominal  radiographs.  Patients  with 
AMI should be given a heparin bolus and started on a therapeutic hep-
arin drip. Correction of electrolyte abnormalities and empiric broad- 
spectrum antibiotic therapy should also be initiated immediately.

If  the  CTA  verifies  the  acute  embolic  occlusion  of  SMA,  surgical 
exploration should not be delayed. The goal of operative exploration is 
to resect the compromised bowel and restore blood supply. The entire 
length of the small and large bowel beginning at the ligament of Treitz 
should be evaluated. The SMA artery should be localized, typically at 
the mesocolon of the transverse colon. A transverse arteriotomy of the 
SMA should be made with the removal of the embolus with a Fogarty 
catheter passed in a retrograde and antegrade manner to restore blood 
flow. In the case of SMA occlusion where the embolus usually lies just 
proximal to the origin of the middle colic artery, the proximal jejunum 
is often spared, while the remainder of the small bowel up to the trans-
verse colon may become ischemic. Nonviable bowel should be resected. 
Questionable bowel should undergo a second-look laparotomy in a 24- 
to 48-h period. After revascularization, peristalsis and return of pink 
color of the bowel wall should be observed. Palpation of major arterial 
mesenteric  vessels  can  be  performed,  as  well  as  applying  a  Doppler 
flowmeter to the antimesenteric border of the bowel wall, but neither 
is a definitive indicator of viability.

In the assessment of acute-on-chronic mesenteric ischemia, typically 
involvement  of  the  orifice  of  the  SMA  is  seen.  Therefore,  the  entire 
small  bowel  is  compromised.  Revascularization  using  an  endovascu-
lar, open, and/or hybrid approach should be individualized based on 
the patient’s critical status, comorbidities, and anatomy. Endovascular 
stenting, suction thrombectomy, and/or thrombolysis catheter should 
be considered for intervention. The bowel should be evaluated for via-
bility, typically via an exploratory laparotomy.

Nonocclusive  or  vasospastic  mesenteric  ischemia  presents  with 
generalized  abdominal  pain,  anorexia,  bloody  stools,  and  abdominal 
distention.  Often  these  patients  are  obtunded,  and  physical  findings 
may not assist in the diagnosis or may be obscured by the underlying 
etiology.  The  presence  of  leukocytosis,  metabolic  acidosis,  and/or 
lactic acidosis is useful in support of the diagnosis of advanced intes-
tinal ischemia; however, these markers may not be indicative of either 
reversible ischemia or frank necrosis.

Emergent admission to a monitored bed or intensive care unit is rec-
ommended for resuscitation, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and further 
evaluation. Anticoagulation is not recommended as the goal of resus-
citation  is  to  maintain  hemodynamics.  For  select  patients,  intrame-
senteric  infusion  of  vasodilators  such  as  papaverine,  prostaglandins, 
and nitroglycerin for reversal of mesenteric ischemia can be used, but 
resuscitation and the treatment of the underlying pathology should be 
the priority.

If ischemic colitis is a concern, colonoscopy should be considered 
to  assess  the  integrity  of  the  colon  mucosa.  Ischemia  of  the  colonic 
mucosa  is  graded  as  mild  with  minimal  mucosal  erythema  or  as 
moderate with pale mucosal ulcerations and evidence of extension to 
the muscular layer of the bowel wall. Severe ischemic colitis presents 
with severe ulcerations resulting in black or green discoloration of the 
mucosa,  consistent  with  full-thickness  bowel-wall  necrosis.  Laparos-
copy can also be employed for assessment. Ischemic colitis is optimally 
treated  with  resection  of  the  ischemic  bowel  and  the  formation  of  a 
proximal stoma.

Onset  of  mesenteric  venous  thrombosis  can  be  acute  or  subacute 
based  on  the  location  of  thrombosis  in  the  splanchnic  circulation. 
Patients often present with vague abdominal pain associated with nau-
sea  and  vomiting.  Physical  examination  findings  include  abdominal 
distention with mild to moderate tenderness and signs of dehydration. 
Findings  on  CT  venous  phase  include  diffuse  bowel-wall  thickening 
and thrombus within the splanchnic system. IV therapeutic anticoagu-
lation, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and correction of electrolyte abnor-
malities should be performed. Surgical intervention is not performed 
unless there is evidence of peritonitis and/or bowel perforation. If there 
is evidence of bowel compromise, an exploratory laparotomy should be 

performed with resection of compromised bowel. Second-look lapar-
otomy after 24–48 h should be attempted as anticoagulation can help 
prevent  resection  of  viable  bowel.  Hypercoagulability  testing  should 
be  performed,  and  if  underlying  inherited  disorders  are  diagnosed, 
lifelong anticoagulation is recommended.

Acknowledgments
We  thank  Cory  Sandore  for  providing  the  illustration  for  this  chapter. 
Susan Gearhart contributed to this chapter in the 18th edition, Rizwan 
Ahmed  contributed  to  the  19th  edition  and  Satinderjit  Locham  to  the 
20th edition.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Deng QW et al: Risk factors for postoperative acute mesenteric ische-
mia among adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Crit Care 42:294, 2017.

Salsano  G  et  al:  What  is  the  best  revascularization  strategy  for 
acute occlusive arterial mesenteric ischemia: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 41:27, 2018.

Sise MJ: Acute mesenteric ischemia. Surg Clin North Am 94:165, 2014.

330 Acute Intestinal  
Obstruction
Danny O. Jacobs

 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
Morbidity and mortality from acute intestinal obstruction have been 
decreasing  over  the  past  several  decades.  Nevertheless,  the  diagnosis 
can still be challenging, and the type of complications that patients suf-
fer has not changed significantly. The extent of mechanical obstruction 
is  typically  described  as  partial,  high  grade,  or  complete—generally 
correlating with the risk of complications and the urgency with which 
the underlying disease process must be addressed. Obstruction is also 
commonly described as being either “simple” or, alternatively, “stran-
gulated” if vascular insufficiency and intestinal ischemia are evident.

Acute intestinal obstruction occurs either mechanically from block-
age  or  from  intestinal  dysmotility  when  there  is  no  blockage.  In  the 
latter  instance,  the  abnormality  is  described  as  being  functional. 
Mechanical  bowel  obstruction  may  be  caused  by  extrinsic  processes, 
intrinsic abnormalities of the bowel wall, or intraluminal abnormalities 
(Table 330-1). Within each of these broad categories are many diseases 
that can impede intestinal propulsion. Intrinsic diseases that can cause 
intestinal obstruction are usually congenital, inflammatory, neoplastic, 
or traumatic in origin, although intussusception and radiation injury 
can also be etiologic.

Acute intestinal obstruction accounts for ~1–3% of all hospitaliza-
tions and a quarter of all urgent or emergent general surgery admis-
sions. Approximately 80% of cases involve the small bowel, and about 
one-third of these patients show evidence of significant ischemia. The 
mortality  rate  for  patients  with  strangulation  who  are  operated  on 
within  24–30  h  of  the  onset  of  symptoms  is  ~8%  but  triples  shortly 
thereafter.

Extrinsic diseases most commonly cause mechanical obstruction of 
the small intestine. In the United States and Europe, almost all cases 
are  caused  by  postoperative  adhesions,  carcinomatosis,  or  herniation 
of the anterior abdominal wall. Carcinomatosis most often originates 
from the ovary, pancreas, stomach, or colon, although rarely, metastasis 
from distant organs like the breast and skin can occur. Adhesions are 
responsible for the majority of cases of early postoperative obstruction 
that  require  intervention.  It  is  important  to  note  many  patients  who 
are successfully treated for adhesive small-bowel instruction will expe-
rience  recurrence.  Approximately  20%  of  patients  who  were  treated 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2508

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 330-1  Most Common Causes of Acute Intestinal Obstruction
Extrinsic Disease

Adhesions (especially due to previous abdominal surgery), internal or external 
hernias, neoplasms (including carcinomatosis and extraintestinal malignancies, 
mostly commonly ovarian), endometriosis or intraperitoneal abscesses, and 
idiopathic sclerosis

Intrinsic Disease

Congenital (e.g., malrotation, atresia, stenosis, intestinal duplication, cyst 
formation, and congenital bands—the latter rarely in adults)
Inflammation (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, especially Crohn’s disease, 
but also diverticulitis, radiation, tuberculosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and 
schistosomiasis)
Neoplasia (note: primary small-bowel cancer is rare; obstructive colon cancer 
may mimic small-bowel obstruction if the ileocecal valve is incompetent)
Traumatic (e.g., hematoma formation, anastomotic strictures)
Other, including intussusception (where the lead point is typically a polyp or 
tumor in adults), volvulus, obstruction of duodenum by superior mesenteric 
artery, radiation or ischemic injury, and aganglionosis, which is Hirschsprung’s 
disease

Intraluminal Abnormalities

Bezoars, feces, foreign bodies including inspissated barium, gallstones (entering 
the lumen via a cholecystoenteric fistula), enteroliths

conservatively and between 5 and 30% of patients who were managed 
operatively will require readmission within 10 years.

Open  operations  of  the  lower  abdomen,  including  appendectomy 
and colorectal and gynecologic procedures, are especially likely to cre-
ate adhesions that can cause bowel obstruction (Table 330-2). The risk 
of  internal  herniation  is  increased  by  abdominal  procedures  such  as 
laparoscopic or open Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Although laparoscopic 
procedures  may  generate  fewer  postoperative  adhesions  compared 
with  open  surgery,  the  risk  of  obstructive  adhesion  formation  is  not 
eliminated.

Volvulus,  which  occurs  when  bowel  twists  on  its  mesenteric  axis, 
can  cause  partial  or  complete  obstruction  and  vascular  insufficiency. 
The sigmoid colon is most commonly affected, accounting for approx-
imately two-thirds of all cases of volvulus and 4% of all cases of large-
bowel obstruction. The cecum and terminal ileum can also volvulize, 
or  the  cecum  alone  may  be  involved  as  a  cecal  bascule.  Risk  factors 
include  institutionalization,  the  presence  of  neuropsychiatric  condi-
tions  requiring  psychotropic  medication,  chronic  constipation,  and 
aging; patients typically present in their seventies or eighties.

Colonic volvulus is more common in Eastern Europe, Russia, and 
Africa than it is in the United States. It is rare for adhesions or hernias 
to  obstruct  the  colon.  Cancer  of  the  descending  colon  and  rectum 
is  responsible  for  approximately  two-thirds  of  all  cases,  followed  by 
diverticulitis and volvulus.

Functional obstruction, also known as ileus and pseudo-obstruction, 
is  present  when  dysmotility  prevents  intestinal  contents  from  being 
propelled distally and no mechanical blockage exists. Ileus that occurs 
after  intraabdominal  surgery  is  the  most  commonly  identified  form 
of  functional  bowel  obstruction,  but  there  are  many  other  causes 
(Table 330-3). Although postoperative ileus is most often transient, it 

TABLE 330-2  Acute Small-Intestinal and Colonic  
Obstruction Incidences
CAUSE
Postoperative adhesions
Neoplasms
Hernias (especially ventral or internal types, where the 
risk of strangulation is increased)
Inflammatory bowel disease, other inflammation 
(obstruction may resolve if acute inflammation and 
edema subside)
Intussusception, volvulus, other miscellaneous 
diseases

INCIDENCE
>50%
~20%
~10%

~5%

<15%

2509

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
0

A
c
u
t
e
I
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

O
b
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n

TABLE 330-3  Most Common Causes of Ileus (Functional or  
Pseudo-Obstruction of the Intestine)
Intraabdominal procedures, lumbar spinal injuries, or surgical procedures on the 
lumbar spine and pelvis
Metabolic or electrolyte abnormalities, especially hypokalemia and 
hypomagnesemia, but also hyponatremia, uremia, and severe hyperglycemia
Drugs such as opiates, antihistamines, and some psychotropic (e.g., haloperidol, 
tricyclic antidepressants) and anticholinergic agents
Intestinal ischemia
Intraabdominal or retroperitoneal inflammation or hemorrhage
Lower lobe pneumonias
Intraoperative radiation (likely due to muscle damage)
Systemic sepsis
Hyperparathyroidism
Pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie’s syndrome)
Ileus secondary to hereditary or acquired visceral myopathies and neuropathies 
that disrupt myocellular neural coordination
Some collagen vascular diseases such as lupus erythematosus or scleroderma

is  often  the  most  common  reason  why  hospital  discharge  is  delayed. 
Pseudo-obstruction of the colon, also known as Ogilvie’s syndrome, is 
a  relatively  rare  disease.  Some  patients  with  Ogilvie’s  syndrome  have 
colonic  dysmotility  due  to  abnormalities  of  their  autonomic  nervous 
system that may be inherited.

 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The  manifestations  of  acute  intestinal  obstruction  depend  on  the 
nature of the underlying disease process, its location, and changes in 
blood flow (Fig. 330-1). Increased intestinal contractility, which occurs 
proximally  and  distal  to  the  obstruction,  is  a  characteristic  response. 
Subsequently,  intestinal  peristalsis  slows  as  the  intestine  or  stomach 
proximal  to  the  point  of  obstruction  dilates  and  fills  with  gastroin-
testinal  secretions  and  swallowed  air.  Although  swallowed  air  is  the 
primary contributor to intestinal distension, intraluminal air may also 
accumulate from fermentation, local carbon dioxide production, and 
altered gaseous diffusion.

Intraluminal  dilation  also  increases  intraluminal  pressure.  When 
luminal  pressure  exceeds  venous  pressure,  venous  and  lymphatic 
drainage  is  impeded.  Edema  ensues,  and  the  bowel  wall  proximal  to 
the site of blockage may become hypoxemic. Epithelial necrosis can be 
identified within 12 h of obstruction. Ultimately, arterial blood supply 
may  become  so  compromised  that  full-thickness  ischemia,  necrosis, 
and perforation result. Stasis increases the bacteria counts within the 
jejunum  and  ileum.  Bacteria,  such  as  Escherichia  coli,  Streptococcus 
faecalis,  and  Klebsiella,  and  other  pathogens  may  be  recovered  from 
intestinal  cultures,  mesenteric  lymph  nodes,  the  bloodstream,  and 
other sites.

Other  manifestations  depend  on  the  degree  of  hypovolemia,  the 
patient’s metabolic response, and the presence or absence of associated 
intestinal  ischemia.  Inflammatory  edema  eventually  increases  the 
production  of  reactive  oxygen  species  and  activates  neutrophils  and 
macrophages, which accumulate within the bowel wall. Their accumu-
lation, along with changes in innate immunity, disrupts secretory and 
neuromotor  processes.  Dehydration  is  caused  by  loss  of  the  normal 
intestinal absorptive capacity as well as fluid accumulation in the gas-
tric or intestinal wall and intraperitoneally.

Anorexia  and  emesis  tend  to  exacerbate  intravascular  volume 
depletion. In the worst-case scenario that is most commonly identi-
fied after high-grade distal obstruction, emesis leads to losses of gas-
tric potassium, hydrogen, and chloride, while dehydration stimulates 
proximal renal tubule bicarbonate reabsorption. Intraperitoneal fluid 
accumulation, especially in patients with severe distal bowel obstruc-
tion, may increase intraabdominal pressure enough to elevate the dia-
phragm, inhibit respiration, and impede systemic venous return and 
promote vascular instability. Severe hemodynamic compromise may 
elicit a systemic inflammatory response and generalized microvascu-
lar leakage.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2509

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2510

Abnormal
bacteria
colonization

Inflammatory
mediators
released

Fluid and air
accumulate; bacteria
overgrowth may occur

Air

Fluid

Epithelial
necrosis

Inflammatory
wall edema 

Proximal
bowel
dilatation

Point of obstruction
from extrinsic, intrinsic,
or intraluminal disease

Collapsed
bowel distal
to obstruction 

Patients with distal
obstruction may still
discharge intraluminal
contents

FIGURE 330-1  Pathophysiologic changes of small-bowel obstruction.

Note: intraluminal obstruction is displayed

Closed-loop  obstruction  results  when  the  proximal  and  distal 
openings  of  a  given  bowel  segment  are  both  occluded,  for  example, 
due to volvulus or a hernia. It is the most common precursor for stran-
gulation, but not every closed loop strangulates. The risk of vascular 
insufficiency,  systemic  inflammation,  hemodynamic  compromise, 
and  irreversible  intestinal  ischemia  is  much  greater  in  patients  with 
closed-loop obstruction. Pathologic changes may occur more rapidly, 
and emergency intervention is indicated. Irreversible bowel ischemia 
may  progress  to  transmural  necrosis  even  if  obstruction  is  relieved. 
It is also important to remember that patients with high-grade distal 
colonic obstruction who have competent ileocecal valves may present 
with  closed-loop  obstruction.  In  the  latter  instance,  the  cecum  may 
progressively dilate such that ischemic necrosis results in perforation 
especially when the cecal diameter exceeds 10–12 cm, as informed by 
Laplace’s law. Patients with distal colonic obstruction whose ileocecal 
valves are incompetent tend to present later in the course of disease and 
mimic patients with distal small-bowel obstruction.

 ■ HISTORY AND PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Even  though  the  presenting  signs  and  symptoms  can  be  misleading, 
many patients with acute obstruction can be accurately diagnosed after 
a thorough history and physical examination is performed. However, 
small-bowel obstruction with strangulation can be especially difficult 
to diagnosis promptly. Early recognition allows earlier treatment that 
decreases the risk of progression or other excess morbidity.

The  cardinal  signs  are  colicky  abdominal  pain,  abdominal  disten-
tion, emesis, and obstipation. More intraluminal fluid accumulates in 
patients  with  distal  obstruction,  which  typically  leads  to  greater  dis-
tention, more discomfort, and delayed emesis. This emesis is feculent 

when  there  is  bacterial  overgrowth.  Patients  with  more  proximal 
obstruction  commonly  present  with  less  abdominal  distention  but 
more  pronounced  vomiting.  Elements  of  the  history  that  might  be 
helpful include any prior history of surgery, including herniorrhaphy, 
as well as any history of cancer or inflammatory bowel disease.

Most patients, even those with simple obstruction, appear to be crit-
ically ill. Many may be oliguric, hypotensive, and tachycardic because 
of severe intravascular volume depletion. Fever is worrisome for stran-
gulation or systemic inflammation. Bowel sounds and bowel functional 
activity are notoriously difficult to interpret. Classically, many patients 
with  early  small-bowel  obstruction  will  have  high-pitched,  “musical” 
tinkling bowel sounds and peristaltic “rushes” known as borborygmi. 
Later  in  the  course  of  disease,  the  bowel  sounds  may  be  absent  or 
hypoactive  as  peristaltic  activity  decreases.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the 
common findings in patients with ileus or pseudo-obstruction where 
bowel  sounds  are  typically  absent  or  hypoactive  from  the  beginning. 
Lastly, patients with partial blockage may continue to pass flatus and 
stool, and those with complete blockage may evacuate bowel contents 
present downstream beyond their obstruction.

All  surgical  incisions  should  be  examined,  and  the  presence  of  a 
tender abdominal or groin mass strongly suggests that an incarcerated 
hernia  may  be  the  cause  of  obstruction.  The  presence  of  tenderness 
should increase the concern about the presence of complications such 
as  ischemia,  necrosis,  or  peritonitis.  Severe  pain  with  localization  or 
signs  of  peritoneal  irritation  is  suspicious  for  strangulated  or  closed-
loop obstruction. It is important to remember that the discomfort may 
be out of proportion to physical findings mimicking the complaints of 
patients with acute mesenteric ischemia. Patients with colonic volvulus 
present  with  the  classic  manifestations  of  closed-loop  obstruction: 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2510

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemsevere  abdominal  pain,  vomiting,  and  obstipation.  Asymmetrical 
abdominal distension and a tympanic mass may be evident.

Patients  with  ileus  or  pseudo-obstruction  may  have  signs  and 
symptoms similar to those of bowel obstruction. Although abdominal 
distention  is  present,  colicky  abdominal  pain  is  typically  absent,  and 
patients may not have nausea or emesis. Ongoing, regular discharge of 
stool or flatus can sometimes help distinguish patients with ileus from 
those with complete mechanical bowel obstruction.

 ■ LABORATORY AND IMAGING STUDIES
Laboratory testing should include a complete blood count and serum 
electrolyte and creatinine measurements. Serial assessments are often 
useful. Mild hemoconcentration and slight elevation of the white blood 
cell count commonly occur after simple bowel obstruction. Emesis and 
dehydration  may  cause  hypokalemia,  hypochloremia,  elevated  blood 
urea  nitrogen–to–creatinine  ratios,  and  metabolic  alkalosis.  Patients 
may  be  hyponatremic  on  admission  because  many  have  attempted 
to  rehydrate  themselves  with  hypotonic  fluids.  The  presence  of 
guaiac-positive stools and iron-deficiency anemia are strongly sugges-
tive of malignancy.

Higher white blood cell counts with the presence of immature forms 
or the presence of metabolic acidosis are worrisome for severe volume 
depletion or ischemic necrosis and sepsis. Presently, there are no lab-
oratory tests that are especially useful for identifying the presence of 
simple or strangulated obstruction, although increases in serum d-lac-
tate,  creatine  kinase  BB  isoenzymes,  or  intestinal  fatty  acid  binding 
protein levels may be suggestive of the latter.

Recommendations  for  diagnostic  imaging  continue  to  evolve.  In 
all cases, the key is not to delay operative intervention unnecessarily 
when the patient’s signs or symptoms strongly suggest that high-grade 
or complete obstruction or bowel compromise is present. Abdominal 
radiography, which must include upright or cross-table lateral views, 
can  be  completed  quickly  and  may  indicate  the  need  for  emergency 
surgical intervention in patients who are not in the immediate post-
operative period. A “staircasing” pattern of dilated air and fluid-filled 
small-bowel loops >2.5 cm in diameter with little or no air seen in the 
colon are classical findings in patients with small-bowel obstruction, 
although findings may be equivocal in some patients with documented 
disease.  Little  bowel  gas  appears  in  patients  with  proximal  bowel 
obstruction  or  in  patients  whose  intestinal  lumens  are  filled  with 
fluid. Upright plain films of the abdomen of patients with large-bowel 
obstruction typically show colon dilatation. Small-bowel air-fluid lev-
els may not be obvious if the ileocecal valve is incompetent. Although 
it can be difficult to distinguish from ileus, small-bowel obstruction is 
more likely when air-fluid levels are seen without significant colonic 
distension. Free air suggests that perforation has occurred in patients 
who  have  not  recently  undergone  surgical  procedures.  A  gas-filled, 
“coffee  bean”–shaped  dilated  shadow  may  be  seen  in  patients  with 
volvulus.

More sophisticated imaging, which may be unnecessarily time con-
suming and expensive, can nevertheless be beneficial when the diagno-
sis is unclear. Computed tomography (CT) is the most commonly used 
imaging modality. Its sensitivity for detecting bowel obstruction is ~95% 
(78–100%) in patients with high-grade obstruction, with a specificity of 
96% and an accuracy of ≥95%. Its accuracy in diagnosing closed-loop 
obstruction is much lower (60%). CT may also provide useful informa-
tion  regarding  location  or  to  identify  particular  circumstances  where 
surgical  intervention  is  needed  urgently.  Patients  who  have  evidence 
of contrast appearing within the cecum within 4–24 h of oral adminis-
tration of water-soluble contrast can be expected to improve with high 
sensitivity  and  specificity  (~95%  each).  For  example,  contrast  studies 
may demonstrate a “bird’s beak,” a “c-loop,” or “whorl” deformity on CT 
imaging at the site where twisting obstructs the lumen when a colonic 
volvulus is present. Although abdominal radiography is usually the ini-
tial examination, unlike CT imaging, it may not accurately distinguish 
obstruction from other causes of colonic dysmotility. Examples of some 
CT images are reproduced in Fig. 330-2.

Ultrasonographic evaluations are especially difficult to interpret but 
may be sensitive and appropriate studies to evaluate patients who are 

2511

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
0

A
c
u
t
e
I
n
t
e
s
t
i
n
a
l

O
b
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n

FIGURE  330-2  Computed  tomography  with  oral  and  intravenous  contrast 
demonstrating (A) evidence of small-bowel dilatation with air-fluid levels consistent 
with  a  small-bowel  obstruction;  (B)  a  partial  small-bowel  obstruction  from  an 
incarcerated  ventral  hernia  (arrow);  and  (C)  decompressed  bowel  seen  distal  to 
the  hernia  (arrow).  (Reproduced  with  permission  from  D  Longo  et  al:  Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)

pregnant or for whom x-ray exposure is otherwise contraindicated or 
inappropriate.

CT imaging with enteral and IV contrast can also identify ischemia. 
Altered bowel wall enhancement is the most specific early finding, but 
its sensitivity is low. Mesenteric venous gas, pneumoperitoneum, and 
pneumatosis  intestinalis  are  late  findings  indicating  the  presence  of 
bowel necrosis. CT scanning after a water-soluble contrast enema may 
help  distinguish  ileus  or  pseudo-obstruction  from  distal  large-bowel 
obstruction  in  patients  who  present  with  evidence  of  small-bowel 
and colonic distention. CT enteroclysis, though rarely performed, can 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2511

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2512 accurately identify neoplasia as a cause of bowel obstruction. Contrast 
enemas or colonoscopies are almost always needed to identify causes 
of acute colonic obstruction.

Barium  studies  are  generally  contraindicated  in  patients  with  firm 
evidence of complete or high-grade bowel obstruction, especially when 
they present acutely. Barium should never be given orally to a patient 
with  possible  obstruction  until  that  diagnosis  has  been  excluded.  In 
every  other  case,  such  investigations  should  only  be  performed  in 
exceptional circumstances and with great caution because patients with 
significant obstruction may develop barium concretions as an additional 
source of blockage and some who would have otherwise recovered will 
require operative intervention. Barium opacification also renders cross-
sectional imaging studies or angiography uninterpretable.

TREATMENT
Acute Intestinal Obstruction

An  improved  understanding  of  the  pathophysiology  of  bowel 
obstruction  and  the  importance  of  fluid  resuscitation,  electrolyte 
repletion, intestinal decompression, and the selected use of antibi-
otics has likely contributed to a reduction in mortality from acute 
bowel  obstruction.  Every  patient  should  be  stabilized  as  quickly 
as  possible.  Nasogastric  tube  suction  decompresses  the  stomach, 
minimizes further distention from swallowed air, improves patient 
comfort,  and  reduces  the  risk  of  aspiration.  Urine  output  should 
be  assessed  using  a  Foley  catheter.  In  some  cases,  for  example,  in 
patients  with  cardiac  disease,  central  venous  pressures  should  be 
monitored. The use of antibiotics is controversial, although prophy-
lactic administration may be warranted if operation is anticipated. 
Complete bowel obstruction is an indication for intervention. Stent-
ing  may  be  possible  and  warranted  for  some  patients  with  high-
grade obstruction due to unresectable stage IV malignancy. Stenting 
may  also  allow  elective  mechanical  bowel  preparation  before  sur-
gery  is  undertaken.  Because  treatment  options  are  so  variable,  it 
is helpful to make as precise a diagnosis as possible preoperatively. 
ILEUS
Patients with ileus are treated supportively with intravenous fluids 
and nasogastric decompression while any underlying pathology is 
treated. Pharmacologic therapy is not yet proven to be efficacious 
or  cost-effective.  However,  peripherally  active  μ-opioid  receptor 
antagonists (e.g., alvimopan and methylnaltrexone) may accelerate 
gastrointestinal  recovery  in  some  patients  who  have  undergone 
abdominal surgery. 
COLONIC PSEUDO-OBSTRUCTION (OGILVIE’S DISEASE)
Neostigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that increases cho-
linergic  (parasympathetic)  activity,  which  can  stimulate  colonic 
motility.  Some  studies  have  shown  it  to  be  moderately  effective 
in  alleviating  acute  colonic  pseudo-obstruction.  It  is  the  most 
common  therapeutic  approach  and  can  be  used  once  it  is  certain 
that  there  is  no  mechanical  obstruction.  Cardiac  monitoring  is 
required,  and  atropine  should  be  immediately  available.  Intrave-
nous administration induces defecation and flatus within 10 min in 
the majority of patients who will respond. Sympathetic blockade by 
epidural anesthesia can successfully ameliorate pseudo-obstruction 
in some patients. 
VOLVULUS
Patients with sigmoid volvulus can often be decompressed using a 
flexible tube inserted through a rigid proctoscope or using a flexible 
sigmoidoscope. Successful decompression results in sudden release 
of gas and fluid with evidence of decreased abdominal distension 
and  allows  definitive  correction  to  be  scheduled  electively.  Cecal 
volvulus most often requires laparotomy or laparoscopic correction. 
INTRAOPERATIVE STRATEGIES
Approximately 60–80% of selected patients with mechanical bowel 
obstruction can be successfully treated conservatively. Indeed, most 
cases  of  radiation-induced  obstruction  should  also  be  managed 

nonoperatively  if  possible.  In  most  circumstances,  early  consul-
tation  with  a  surgeon  is  prudent  when  there  is  concern  about 
strangulation  obstruction  or  other  abnormality  that  needs  to  be 
addressed urgently. Deterioration signifies a need for intervention. 
At this time, the decision as to whether the patient can continue to 
be treated nonoperatively can only be based on clinical judgment, 
although,  as  described  earlier,  imaging  studies  can  sometimes  be 
helpful.  The  frequency  of  major  complications  after  operation 
ranges from 12 to 47%, with greater risk being attributed to resec-
tion therapies and the patient’s overall health. Risk is increased for 
patients with American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical 
status of class III or higher.

At operation, dilation proximal to the site of blockage with distal 
collapse  is  a  defining  feature  of  bowel  obstruction.  Intraoperative 
strategies depend on the underlying problem and range from lysis 
of  adhesions  to  resection  with  or  without  diverting  ostomy  to 
primary resection with anastomosis. Resection is warranted when 
there is concern about the bowel’s viability after the obstructive pro-
cess is relieved. Laparoscopic approaches can be useful for patients 
with early obstruction when extensive adhesions are not expected 
to be present. Some patients with high-grade obstruction secondary 
to malignant disease that is not amendable to resection will benefit 
from bypass procedures. 
ADULT INTUSSUSCEPTION AND GALLSTONE ILEUS
Primary  resection  is  prudent.  Careful  manual  reduction  of  any 
involved bowel may limit the amount of intestine that needs to be 
removed. A proximal ostomy may be required if unprepped colon 
is  involved.  The  most  common  site  of  intestinal  obstruction  in 
patients with gallstone “ileus” is the ileum (60% of patients). The 
gallstone  enters  the  intestinal  tract  most  often  via  a  cholecysto-
duodenal  fistula.  It  can  usually  be  removed  by  operative  entero-
lithotomy.  Addressing  the  gallbladder  disease  during  urgent  or 
emergent surgery is not recommended. 
POSTOPERATIVE BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
Early  postoperative  mechanical  bowel  obstruction  is  that  which 
occurs within the first 6 weeks of operation. Most are partial and 
can  be  expected  to  resolve  spontaneously.  It  tends  to  respond 
and behave differently from classic mechanical bowel obstruction 
and  may  be  very  difficult  to  distinguish  from  postoperative  ileus.   
A  higher  index  of  suspicion  for  a  definitive  site  of  obstruction  is 
warranted  for  patients  who  undergo  laparoscopic  surgical  proce-
dures. Patients who first had ileus and then subsequently develop 
obstructive symptoms after an initial return of normal bowel func-
tion are more likely to have true postoperative small-bowel obstruc-
tion.  The  longer  it  takes  for  a  patient’s  obstructive  symptoms  to 
resolve after hospitalization, the more likely the patient is to require 
surgical intervention.

Acknowledgment
The  wisdom  and  expertise  of  Dr.  William  Silen  are  gratefully 
acknowledged.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Catena  F  et  al:  Adhesive  small  bowel  adhesions  obstruction:  Evolu-
tions in diagnosis, management and prevention. World J Gastrointest 
Surg 27:222, 2016.

Ferrada P et al: Surgery or stenting for colonic obstruction: A practice 
management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery 
of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 80:659, 2016.

Jaffe  T,  Thompson  WM:  Large-bowel  obstruction  in  the  adults:  
Classic radiographic and CT findings, etiology and mimics. Radiol-
ogy 275:651, 2015.

Paulson  EK,  Thompson  WM:  Review  of  small-bowel  obstruction: 

The diagnosis and when to worry. Radiology 275:332, 2015.

Perry H et al: Relative accuracy of emergency CT in adults with non- 

traumatic abdominal pain. Brit Inst Rad 89:20150416, 2016.

Taylor MR, Lalani N: Adult small bowel obstruction. Acad Emerg 

Med 20:528, 2013.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2512

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System331

Acute Appendicitis  
and Peritonitis
Danny O. Jacobs

ACUTE APPENDICITIS
 ■ INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Appendicitis  occurs  more  frequently  in  westernized  societies,  but 
its  incidence  is  decreasing  for  uncertain  reasons.  Nevertheless,  acute 
appendicitis  remains  the  most  common  emergency  general  surgi-
cal  disease  affecting  the  abdomen,  with  a  rate  of  ~100  per  100,000  
person-years  in  Europe  and  the  Americas  or  ~11  cases  per  10,000 
people  annually.  Approximately  9%  of  men  and  7%  of  women  will 
experience an episode during their lifetime. Appendicitis occurs most 
commonly  in  10-  to  19-year-olds;  however,  the  average  age  at  diag-
nosis appears to be gradually increasing. Overall, 70% of patients are  
<30 years old, and most are men.

One  of  the  more  common  complications  and  most  important 
causes of excess morbidity and mortality is perforation, whether it is 
contained  and  localized  or  unconstrained  within  the  peritoneal  cav-
ity.  The  incidence  of  perforated  appendicitis  (~20  cases  per  100,000 
person-years)  may  be  increasing.  The  explanation  for  this  trend  is 
unknown. Approximately 20% of all patients will present with evidence 
of perforation, but the percentage risk is much higher in patients <5 or 
>65 years of age.

 ■ PATHOGENESIS OF APPENDICITIS AND 
APPENDICEAL PERFORATION
Appendicitis was first described in 1886 by Reginald Fitz. Its etiology is 
still not completely understood. Fecaliths, incompletely digested food 
residue, lymphoid hyperplasia, intraluminal scarring, tumors, bacteria, 
viruses, and inflammatory bowel disease have all been associated with 
inflammation of the appendix and appendicitis with potentially differ-
ent outcomes depending on pathogenesis.

Although  not  proven,  obstruction  of  the  appendiceal  lumen  is 
believed to be an important step in the development of appendicitis—
at least in some cases. Here, obstruction leads to bacterial overgrowth 
and luminal distension, with an increase in intraluminal pressure that 
can  inhibit  the  flow  of  lymph  and  blood.  Then,  vascular  thrombosis 
and  ischemic  necrosis  with  perforation  of  the  distal  appendix  may 
occur. Therefore, perforation that occurs near the base of the appendix 
should  raise  concerns  about  another  disease  process.  Most  patients 
who will perforate do so before they are evaluated by surgeons.

Appendiceal  fecaliths  (or  appendicoliths)  are  found  in  ~50%  of 
patients  with  gangrenous  appendicitis  who  perforate  but  are  rarely 
identified  in  those  who  have  simple  disease.  As  mentioned  earlier, 
the  incidence  of  perforated,  but  not  simple,  appendicitis  appears  to 
be  increasing.  The  rate  of  perforated  and  nonperforated  appendicitis 
is  correlated  in  men  but  not  in  women.  Together  these  observations 
suggest  that  the  underlying  pathophysiologic  processes  are  different 
and that simple appendicitis does not always progress to perforation. 
It  appears  that  at  least  some  cases  of  simple  acute  appendicitis  may 
resolve  spontaneously  or  with  antibiotic  therapy  with  limited  risk  of 
recurrent disease. The use of antibiotics to treat uncomplicated appen-
dicitis  continues  to  be  studied  intensively.  Some  data  indicate  that 
some patients who present with uncomplicated appendicitis based on 
computed tomography (CT) and who are treated with antibiotics alone 
will not experience a recurrence within a year. These findings highlight 
the importance of clinical decision-making and risk assessment when 
deciding and discussing treatment options with patients who presum-
ably have simple disease, for example, deciding who is an appropriate 
candidate  for  nonoperative  management  and  who  is  not.  The  latter 
is especially pertinent given the difficulty in assessing which patients 
might progress to perforation and which will not.

2513

TABLE 331-1  Some Conditions That Mimic Appendicitis
Meckel’s diverticulitis
Crohn’s disease
Mittelschmerz
Cholecystitis or other gallbladder 
disease
Mesenteric adenitis
Diverticulitis
Omental torsion
Ectopic pregnancy
Pancreatitis
Endometriosis
Lower lobe pneumonia
Gastroenteritis or colitis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Gastric or duodenal ulceration
Ruptured ovarian cyst or other cystic 
disease of the ovaries
Hepatitis
Small-bowel obstruction
Kidney disease, including 
nephrolithiasis
Urinary tract infection
Liver abscess

Increasingly it appears that there are two broad categories of patients 
with  appendicitis—those  with  complicated  disease  like  gangrene  or 
perforation and those without. When perforation occurs, the resultant 
leak may be contained by the omentum or other surrounding tissues 
to form an abscess. Free perforation normally causes severe peritonitis. 
These  patients  may  also  develop  infective  suppurative  thrombosis  
of the portal vein and its tributaries along with intrahepatic abscesses. 
The prognosis of the very unfortunate patients who develop this rare 
but dreaded complication is very poor.
 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Improved  diagnosis,  supportive  care,  and  surgical  interventions  are 
likely responsible for the remarkable decrease in the risk of mortality 
from  simple  appendicitis  to  currently  <1%.  Nevertheless,  it  is  still 
important  to  identify  patients  who  might  have  appendicitis  as  early 
as  possible.  Patients  who  have  persistent  symptoms  that  have  not 
improved over 48 h may be more likely to perforate or develop other 
complications.

Appendicitis  should  be  included  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of 
abdominal pain for every patient in any age group unless it is certain 
that the organ has been previously removed (Table 331-1).

The appendix’s anatomic location, which varies, may directly influ-
ence  how  the  patient  presents.  Where  the  appendix  can  be  “found” 
ranges  from  local  differences  in  how  the  appendiceal  body  and  tip 
lie relative to its attachment to the cecum (Figs. 331-1 and 331-2), to 
where  the  appendix  is  actually  situated  in  the  peritoneal  cavity—for 
example, from its typical location in the right lower quadrant, to the 
pelvis, right flank, right upper quadrant (as may be observed during 
pregnancy), or even the left side of the abdomen for patients with mal-
rotation or who have severely redundant colons.

Because  the  differential  diagnosis  of  appendicitis  is  so  extensive, 
deciding  if  a  patient  has  appendicitis  can  be  difficult  (Table  331-2). 
Many patients may not present with the classically described history or 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
1

A
c
u
t
e
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
c
i
t
i
s
a
n
d
P
e
r
i
t
o
n
i
t
i
s

64%

0.5%

1%

32%

FIGURE 331-1  Regional anatomic variations of the appendix.

2%

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2513

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2514

TABLE 331-3  Relative Frequency of Some Presenting Signs
SIGNS
Abdominal tenderness
Right lower quadrant tenderness
Rebound tenderness
Rectal tenderness
Cervical motion tenderness
Rigidity
Psoas sign
Obturator sign
Rovsing’s sign
Palpable mass

FREQUENCY 
>95%
>90%
30–70%
30–40%
30%
~10%
3–5%
5–10%
5%
<5%

to  answer  expeditiously  is  whether  the  patient  has  appendicitis  or 
some other condition that requires immediate operative intervention.  
A major concern is that the likelihood of a delay in diagnosis is greater 
if the appendix is unusually positioned. All patients should undergo a 
rectal examination. An inflamed appendix located behind the cecum 
or below the pelvic brim may prompt very little tenderness of the ante-
rior abdominal wall.

Patients  with  pelvic  appendicitis  are  more  likely  to  present  with 
dysuria,  urinary  frequency,  diarrhea,  or  tenesmus.  They  may  only 
experience  pain  in  the  suprapubic  region  on  palpation  or  on  rectal 
or pelvic examination. A pelvic examination in women is mandatory 
to rule out conditions affecting urogynecologic organs that can cause 
abdominal pain and mimic appendicitis such as pelvic inflammatory 
disease, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian torsion. Interest in the ability 
of various clinical scoring systems to predict appendicitis or the need 
for imaging studies continues. However, none of the currently available 
decision tools yet appear to be able to circumvent or obviate the need 
for expert clinical opinion. The relative frequencies of some presenting 
signs are displayed in Table 331-3.

Patients  with  simple  appendicitis  normally  only  appear  mildly  ill 
with a pulse and temperature that are usually only slightly above nor-
mal. The provider should be concerned about other disease processes 
beside appendicitis or the presence of complications such as perfora-
tion,  phlegmon,  or  abscess  formation  if  the  temperature  is  >38.3°C 
(~101°F) and if there are rigors.

Patients  with  appendicitis  will  be  found  to  lie  quite  still  to  avoid 
peritoneal  irritation  caused  by  movement,  and  some  will  report  dis-
comfort caused by a bumpy car ride on the way to the hospital or clinic, 
coughing, sneezing, or other actions that replicate a Valsalva maneuver. 
The entire abdomen should be examined systematically starting in an 
area  where  the  patient  does  not  report  discomfort  if  possible.  Clas-
sically,  maximal  tenderness  is  identified  where  the  appendix  is  most 
often located—in the right lower quadrant at or near McBurney’s point, 
which is approximately one-third of the way along a line originating at 
the anterior iliac spine and running to the umbilicus. Gentle pressure 
in the left lower quadrant may elicit pain in the right lower quadrant 
if the appendix is located there. This is Rovsing’s sign (Table 331-4). 
Evidence of parietal peritoneal irritation is often best elicited by gentle 
abdominal percussion, jiggling the patient’s gurney or bed, or mildly 
bumping the feet.

FIGURE 331-2  Locations of the appendix and cecum.

physical findings, and some may not have any abdominal discomfort 
early in the disease process. Soliciting an appropriate history requires 
detecting  and  evaluating  symptoms  that  might  suggest  alternative 
diagnoses.

What  is  the  classic  history?  Nonspecific  complaints  occur  first. 
Patients  may  notice  changes  in  bowel  habits  or  malaise  and  vague, 
perhaps intermittent, crampy abdominal pain in the epigastric or peri-
umbilical  region.  The  pain  subsequently  migrates  to  the  right  lower 
quadrant over 12–24 h, where it is sharper and can be definitively local-
ized as transmural inflammation when the appendix irritates the pari-
etal peritoneum. Parietal peritoneal irritation may be associated with 
local muscle rigidity and stiffness. Patients with appendicitis will most 
often observe that their nausea, if present, followed the development of 
abdominal pain, which can help distinguish them from patients with 
gastroenteritis,  for  example,  in  whom  nausea  occurs  first.  Emesis,  if 
present,  also  occurs  after  the  onset  of  pain  and  is  typically  mild  and 
scant. Thus, timing of the onset of symptoms and the characteristics 
of  the  patient’s  pain  and  any  associated  findings  must  be  rigorously 
assessed.  Anorexia  is  so  common  that  the  diagnosis  of  appendicitis 
should be questioned in its absence.

Arriving  at  the  correct  diagnosis  is  even  more  challenging  when 
the appendix is not located in the right lower quadrant, in women of 
childbearing  age,  and  in  the  very  young  or  elderly.  Because  the  dif-
ferential diagnosis of appendicitis is so broad, often the key question 

TABLE 331-2  Relative Frequency of Common Presenting Symptoms
SYMPTOMS
Abdominal pain
Anorexia
Constipation
Diarrhea
Fever
Migration of pain to right lower 
quadrant
Nausea
Vomiting

FREQUENCY
>95%
>70%
4–16%
4–16%
10–20%
50–60%

>65%
50–75%

TABLE 331-4  Classic Signs of Appendicitis in Patients with  
Abdominal Pain
MANEUVER
Rovsing’s sign

FINDINGS
Palpating in the left lower quadrant causes pain in 
the right lower quadrant
Internal rotation of the hip causes pain, suggesting 
the possibility of an inflamed appendix located in 
the pelvis
Extending the right hip causes pain along 
posterolateral back and hip, suggesting retrocecal 
appendicitis

Obturator sign

Iliopsoas sign

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2514

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAtypical presentation and pain patterns are common, especially in 
the very old or the very young. Diagnosing appendicitis in children can 
be especially challenging because they tend to respond so dramatically 
to  stimulation  and  obtaining  an  accurate  history  may  be  difficult.  In 
addition, it is important to remember that the smaller omentum found 
in  children  may  be  less  likely  to  wall  off  an  appendiceal  perforation. 
Observing the child in a quiet surrounding may be helpful.

Signs  and  symptoms  of  appendicitis  can  be  subtle  in  the  elderly 
who  may  not  react  as  vigorously  to  appendicitis  as  younger  people. 
Pain, if noticed, may be minimal and have originated in the right lower 
quadrant  or,  otherwise,  where  the  appendix  is  located.  It  may  never 
have been noticed to be intermittent, or there may only be significant 
discomfort with deep palpation. Nausea, anorexia, and emesis may be 
the predominant complaints. The rare patient may even present with 
signs and symptoms of distal bowel obstruction secondary to appendi-
ceal inflammation and phlegmon or abscess formation.

 ■ LABORATORY TESTING
Laboratory  testing  does  not  identify  patients  with  appendicitis.  The 
white blood cell count is only mildly to moderately elevated in ~70% 
of  patients  with  simple  appendicitis  (with  a  leukocytosis  of  10,000–
18,000  cells/μL).  A  “left  shift”  toward  immature  polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes is present in >95% of cases. A sickle cell preparation may 
be prudent to obtain in those of African, Spanish, Mediterranean, or 
Indian ancestry. Serum amylase and lipase levels should be measured.
Urinalysis is indicated to help exclude genitourinary conditions that 
may mimic acute appendicitis, but a few red or white blood cells may 
be  present  as  a  nonspecific  finding.  However,  an  inflamed  appendix 
that abuts the ureter or bladder may cause sterile pyuria or hematuria. 
Every woman of childbearing age should have a pregnancy test. Cer-
vical cultures are indicated if pelvic inflammatory disease is suspected. 
Anemia  and  guaiac-positive  stools  should  raise  concern  about  the 
presence of other diseases or complications such as cancer.

 ■ IMAGING
Plain films of the abdomen are rarely helpful and so are not routinely 
obtained unless the clinician is worried about other conditions such as 
intestinal obstruction, perforated viscus, or ureterolithiasis. Less than 
5% of patients will present with an opaque fecalith in the right lower 
quadrant. The presence of a fecalith is not diagnostic of appendicitis, 
although its presence in an appropriate location where the patient com-
plains of pain is suggestive and is associated with a greater likelihood 
of complications.

The effectiveness of ultrasonography as a tool to diagnosis appen-
dicitis  is  highly  operator  dependent.  Even  in  very  skilled  hands,  the 
appendix  may  not  be  visualized.  Its  overall  sensitivity  is  0.86,  with  a 
specificity of 0.81. Ultrasonography, especially intravaginal techniques, 
appears to be most useful for identifying pelvic pathology in women. 
Ultrasonographic  findings  suggesting  the  presence  of  appendicitis 
include  wall  thickening,  an  increased  appendiceal  diameter,  and  the 
presence of free fluid. Current practice in many institutions is to first 
perform ultrasonography and progress to other imaging studies only if 
the findings are equivocal.

The  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  CT  are  at  least  0.94  and  0.95, 
respectively. Thus, CT imaging, given its high negative predictive value, 
may be helpful if the diagnosis is in doubt, although studies performed 
early  in  the  course  of  disease  may  not  have  any  typical  radiographic 
findings. In patients where the diagnosis is uncertain, delaying oper-
ation  at  the  time  of  presentation  to  obtain  CT  does  not  appear  to 
increase the risk of perforation. CT scanning is a superior method for 
assessing the severity of acute appendicitis in the absence of peritoneal 
findings indicative of perforation, abscess, or suspicion of an associated 
malignancy.

Suggestive  findings  on  CT  examination  include  dilatation  >6  mm 
with wall thickening, a lumen that does not fill with enteric contrast, 
and fatty tissue stranding or air surrounding the appendix, which sug-
gests inflammation (Figs. 331-3 and 331-4). The presence of luminal 
air or contrast is not consistent with a diagnosis of appendicitis. Fur-
thermore,  nonvisualization  of  the  appendix  is  a  nonspecific  finding 

2515

FIGURE 331-3  Computed tomography with oral and intravenous contrast of acute 
appendicitis. There is thickening of the wall of the appendix and periappendiceal 
stranding (arrow).

that  should  not  be  used  to  rule  out  the  presence  of  appendiceal  or 
periappendiceal inflammation.
 ■ SPECIAL PATIENT POPULATIONS
Appendicitis is the most common extrauterine general surgical emer-
gency  observed  during  pregnancy.  Early  symptoms  of  appendicitis 
such  as  nausea  and  anorexia  may  be  overlooked.  Diagnosing  appen-
dicitis in pregnant patients may be especially difficult because as the 
uterus  enlarges  the  appendix  may  be  pushed  higher  along  the  right 
flank  even  to  the  right  upper  quadrant  or  because  the  gravid  uterus 
may obscure typical physical findings. Ultrasonography may facilitate 
early  diagnosis.  A  high  index  of  suspicion  is  required  because  of  the 
effects  of  unrecognized  and  untreated  appendicitis  on  the  fetus.  For 
example, the fetal mortality rate is four times greater (from 5 to 20%) 
in patients with perforation.

Immunocompromised patients may present with only mild tender-
ness and may have many other disease processes in their differential 
diagnosis, including atypical infections from mycobacteria, Cytomeg-
alovirus, or other fungi. Enterocolitis is a concern and may be present 
in patients who present with abdominal pain, fever, and neutropenia 
due to chemotherapy. CT imaging may be very helpful, although it is 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
1

A
c
u
t
e
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
c
i
t
i
s
a
n
d
P
e
r
i
t
o
n
i
t
i
s

FIGURE 331-4  Appendiceal fecalith (arrow).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2515

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2516 important not to be overly cautious and delay operative intervention 

for those patients who are believed to have appendicitis.

TREATMENT
Acute Appendicitis

In  the  absence  of  contraindications,  most  patients  who  have 
strongly  suggestive  medical  histories  and  physical  examinations 
with  supportive  laboratory  findings  are  candidates  for  appendec-
tomy. In many instances, imaging studies are not required but are 
often obtained before surgical consultation is requested. Certainly, 
imaging and further study are appropriate in patients whose evalu-
ations are suggestive but not convincing.

CT may accurately indicate the presence of appendicitis or other 
intraabdominal  processes  that  warrant  intervention.  Whenever 
the diagnosis is uncertain, it is prudent to observe the patient and 
repeat  the  abdominal  examination  over  6–8  h.  Any  evidence  of 
progression is an indication for operation. Narcotics can be given 
to patients with severe discomfort.

All  patients  should  be  fully  prepared  for  surgery  and  have  any 
fluid  and  electrolyte  abnormalities  corrected.  Either  laparoscopic 
or  open  appendectomy  is  a  satisfactory  choice  for  patients  with 
uncomplicated  appendicitis,  although  most  procedures  are  now 
performed in a minimally invasive fashion to the patient’s benefit 
in terms of recovery time and complications. Management of those 
who present with a mass representing a phlegmon or abscess can 
be more difficult. Such patients are best served by treatment with 
broad-spectrum  antibiotics,  drainage  if  there  is  an  abscess  >3  cm 
in  diameter,  and  parenteral  fluids  and  bowel  rest  if  they  appear 
to  respond  to  conservative  management.  The  appendix  can  then 
be more safely removed 6–12 weeks later when inflammation has 
diminished.

Laparoscopic appendectomy now accounts for the majority of all 
appendectomies  performed  in  Western  cultures  and  is  associated 
with less postoperative pain, shorter lengths of stay, faster return to 
normal activity, and likely fewer superficial wound complications, 
although  the  risk  of  intraabdominal  abscess  formation  may  be 
higher.

A  laparoscopic  approach  may  also  be  useful  when  the  exact 
diagnosis is uncertain. A laparoscopic approach may also facilitate 
exposure in those who are very obese. Absent complications, most 
patients can be discharged within 24–40 h of operation. The most 
common  postoperative  complications  are  fever  and  leukocytosis. 
Continuation of these findings beyond 5 days should raise concern 
for the presence of an intraabdominal abscess. The mortality rate 
for uncomplicated, nonperforated appendicitis is 0.1–0.5%, which 
approximates the overall risk of general anesthesia. The mortality 
rate  for  perforated  appendicitis  or  other  complicated  disease  is 
much  higher,  ranging  from  3%  overall  to  as  high  as  15%  in  the 
elderly.

ACUTE PERITONITIS
Acute peritonitis, or inflammation of the visceral and parietal perito-
neum, is most often but not always infectious in origin, resulting from 
perforation of a hollow viscus. This is called secondary peritonitis, as 
opposed to primary or spontaneous peritonitis, when a specific intraab-
dominal source cannot be identified. In either instance, the inflamma-
tion can be localized or diffuse.

 ■ ETIOLOGY
Infective  organisms  may  contaminate  the  peritoneal  cavity  after 
spillage from a hollow viscus, because of a penetrating wound of the 
abdominal wall, or because of the introduction of a foreign object like 
a peritoneal dialysis catheter or port that becomes infected. Secondary 
peritonitis  most  commonly  results  from  perforation  of  the  appen-
dix,  colonic  diverticula,  or  the  stomach  and  duodenum.  It  may  also 
occur  as  a  complication  of  bowel  infarction  or  incarceration,  cancer, 

TABLE 331-5  Conditions Leading to Secondary Bacterial Peritonitis
Bowel perforation

 Appendicitis trauma (blunt or 
penetrating)

  Anastomotic leakage
  Adhesion
  Diverticulitis

 Iatrogenic (including endoscopic 
perforation)
Ingested foreign body
Inflammation
Intussusception

  Neoplasms
  Obstruction
  Peptic ulcer disease
  Strangulated hernia

 Vascular (including ischemia or 
embolus)

Perforation or leakage of other organs
 Biliary leakage (e.g., after liver 
biopsy)

  Cholecystitis

Intraperitoneal bleeding

  Pancreatitis
  Salpingitis

 Traumatic or other rupture of urinary 
bladder

Loss of peritoneal integrity

Intraperitoneal chemotherapy
 Iatrogenic (e.g., postoperative 
foreign body)

  Perinephric abscess

 Peritoneal dialysis or other 
indwelling devices

  Trauma

inflammatory  bowel  disease,  and  intestinal  obstruction  or  volvulus. 
Conditions  that  may  cause  secondary  bacterial  peritonitis  and  their 
mechanisms are listed in Table 331-5. Over 90% of the cases of primary 
or  spontaneous  bacterial  peritonitis  occur  in  patients  with  ascites  or 
hypoproteinemia (<1 g/L).

Aseptic  peritonitis  is  most  commonly  caused  by  the  abnormal 
presence  of  physiologic  fluids  such  as  gastric  juice,  bile,  pancreatic 
enzymes, blood, or urine. It can also be caused by the effects of nor-
mally  sterile  foreign  bodies  such  as  surgical  sponges  or  instruments. 
More  rarely,  it  occurs  as  a  complication  of  systemic  diseases  such  as 
lupus erythematosus, porphyria, and familial Mediterranean fever. The 
chemical  irritation  caused  by  stomach  acid  and  activated  pancreatic 
enzymes is extreme, and secondary bacterial infection may occur.

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
The  cardinal  signs  and  symptoms  of  peritonitis  are  acute,  typically 
severe,  abdominal  pain  with  tenderness  and  fever.  How  patients’ 
complaints  of  pain  are  manifested  depends  on  their  overall  physical 
health  and  whether  the  inflammation  is  diffuse  or  localized.  Elderly 
and  immunosuppressed  patients  may  not  respond  as  aggressively  to 
the irritation. Diffuse, generalized peritonitis is most often recognized 
as diffuse abdominal tenderness with local guarding, rigidity, and other 
evidence  of  parietal  peritoneal  irritation.  Physical  findings  may  only 
be identified in a specific region of the abdomen if the intraperitoneal 
inflammatory process is limited or otherwise contained as may occur 
in  patients  with  uncomplicated  appendicitis  or  diverticulitis.  Bowel 
sounds are usually absent to hypoactive.

Most patients present with tachycardia and signs of volume deple-
tion with hypotension. Laboratory testing typically reveals a significant 
leukocytosis, and patients may be severely acidotic. Radiographic stud-
ies may show dilatation of the bowel and associated bowel wall edema. 
Free  air  or  other  evidence  of  leakage  requires  attention  and  could 
represent  a  surgical  emergency.  In  stable  patients  in  whom  ascites  is 
present, diagnostic paracentesis is indicated, where the fluid is tested 
for protein and lactate dehydrogenase and the cell count is measured.

 ■ THERAPY AND PROGNOSIS
Whereas mortality rates can be <10% for reasonably healthy patients 
with  relatively  uncomplicated,  localized  peritonitis,  mortality  rates 
>40%  have  been  reported  for  the  elderly  or  immunocompromised. 
Successful treatment depends on correcting any electrolyte abnormali-
ties, restoration of fluid volume and stabilization of the cardiovascular 
system, appropriate antibiotic therapy, and surgical correction of any 
underlying abnormalities.

Acknowledgment
The  wisdom  and  expertise  of  Dr.  William  Silen  is  gratefully  acknowl-
edged in this updated chapter on acute appendicitis and peritonitis.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2516

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ■ FURTHER READING
Andersson  RE:  Short-term  complications  and  long-term  morbidity 
of laparoscopic and open appendicectomy in a national cohort. Br J 
Surg 101:1135, 2014.

Buckius  MT  et  al:  Changing  epidemiology  of  acute  appendicitis  in 
the United States: Study period 1993–2008. J Surg Res 175:185, 2012.
CODA  Collaborative:  A  randomized  trial  comparing  antibiotics 
with appendectomy for appendicitis. N Engl J Med 383:1907, 2020.
Di  Saverio  S  et  al:  Diagnosis  and  treatment  of  acute  appendicitis: 
2020 update of the WSES Jerusalem guidelines. World J Emerg Surg 
15:27, 2020.

Drake FT et al: Time to appendectomy and risk of perforation in acute 

appendicitis. JAMA Surg 149:837, 2014.

Flum DR: Acute appendicitis—appendectomy of the “antibiotics first” 

strategy. N Engl J Med 372:1937, 2015.

Ohle  R  et  al:  The  Alvarado  score  for  predicting  acute  appendicitis:  

A systematic review. BMC Med 9:139, 2011.

Talan DA, DiSaverio S: Treatment of acute uncomplicated appendicitis. 

N Engl J Med 385:1116, 2021.

Vons C et al: Amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid versus appendicectomy 
for  treatment  of  acute  uncomplicated  appendicitis:  An  open-label, 
non-inferiority, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 377:1573, 2011.

Section 2  Nutrition

332 Nutrient Requirements 
and Dietary Assessment
Johanna T. Dwyer

Nutrients  are  substances  that  are  not  synthesized  in  sufficient  amounts 
in the body and therefore must be supplied by the diet. Nutrient require-
ments for groups of healthy persons have been determined experimen-
tally.  The  absence  of  essential  nutrients  leads  to  growth  impairment, 
organ dysfunction, and failure to maintain nitrogen balance or adequate 
status of protein and other nutrients. For good health, we require energy- 
providing nutrients (protein, fat, and carbohydrate), vitamins, minerals, 
and water. Requirements for organic nutrients include 9 essential amino 
acids, several fatty acids, glucose, 4 fat-soluble vitamins, 10 water-soluble 
vitamins, dietary fiber, and choline. Several inorganic substances, includ-
ing 4 minerals, 7 trace minerals, 3 electrolytes, and the ultratrace elements, 
must also be supplied by diet.

The  amounts  of  essential  nutrients  required  by  individuals  differ  by 
their age and physiologic state. Conditionally essential nutrients are not 
required in the diet but must be supplied to certain individuals who do not 
synthesize them in adequate amounts, such as those with genetic defects; 
those with pathologies such as infection, disease, or trauma with nutri-
tional implications; and developmentally immature infants. For example, 
inositol,  taurine,  arginine,  and  glutamine  may  be  needed  by  premature 
infants. Many other organic and inorganic compounds that are present 
in foods and dietary supplements, including pesticides, lead, phytochem-
icals, zoochemicals, and microbial products, may also have health effects.

 ■ ESSENTIAL NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS
Energy  For weight to remain stable, energy intake must match energy 
output.  The  major  components  of  energy  output  are  resting  energy 
expenditure  (REE)  and  physical  activity;  minor  components  include 
the energy cost of metabolizing food (thermic effect of food, or specific 
dynamic action) and shivering thermogenesis (e.g., cold-induced ther-
mogenesis).  The  average  energy  intake  is  ~2600  kcal/d  for  American 

2517

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
2

N
u
t
r
i
e
n
t
R
e
q
u
i
r
e
m
e
n
t
s
a
n
d
D
i
e
t
a
r
y
A
s
s
e
s
s

m
e
n
t

men and ~1800 kcal/d for American women, although these estimates 
vary with body size and activity level. Formulas for roughly estimating 
REE  are  useful  in  assessing  the  energy  needs  of  an  individual  whose 
weight  is  stable.  Thus,  for  males,  REE  =  900  +  10m,  and  for  females,  
REE = 700 + 7m, where m is mass in kilograms. The calculated REE is 
then adjusted for physical activity level by multiplying by 1.2 for seden-
tary, 1.4 for moderately active, or 1.8 for very active individuals. The final 
figure, the estimated energy requirement (EER), provides an approxima-
tion of total caloric needs in a state of energy balance for a person of a 
certain age, sex, weight, height, and physical activity level. For further 
discussion of energy balance in health and disease, see Chap. 334.

Protein  Dietary protein consists of both essential and nonessential 
amino acids that are required for protein synthesis. The nine essential 
amino  acids  are  histidine,  isoleucine,  leucine,  lysine,  methionine/
cystine,  phenylalanine/tyrosine,  threonine,  tryptophan,  and  valine. 
Certain amino acids, such as alanine, can also be used for energy and 
gluconeogenesis.  When  energy  intake  is  inadequate,  protein  intake 
must  be  increased,  because  ingested  amino  acids  are  diverted  into 
pathways of glucose synthesis and oxidation. In extreme energy depri-
vation, protein-calorie malnutrition may ensue (Chap. 334).

For adults, the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for protein 
is ~0.8 g/kg desirable body mass per day, assuming that energy needs 
are met and that the protein is of relatively high biologic value. Current 
recommendations for a healthy diet call for at least 10–14% of calories 
from protein. Most American diets provide at least those amounts. Bio-
logic value tends to be highest for animal proteins, followed by proteins 
from legumes (beans), cereals (rice, wheat, corn), and roots. Combina-
tions of plant proteins that complement one another in their essential 
amino acid profiles or combinations of animal and plant proteins can 
increase  biologic  value  and  lower  total  protein  intakes  necessary  to 
meet requirements. In healthy people with adequate diets, the timing 
of protein intake over the course of the day has little effect.

Protein  needs  increase  during  growth,  pregnancy,  lactation,  and 
rehabilitation after injury or undernutrition. Tolerance to dietary pro-
tein is decreased in renal insufficiency (with consequent uremia) and 
in liver failure. Usual protein intakes can precipitate encephalopathy in 
patients with cirrhosis of the liver.

Fat  and  Carbohydrate  Fats  are  a  concentrated  source  of  energy 
and constitute, on average, 34% of calories in U.S. diets. However, for 
optimal health, fat intake should total no more than 30% of calories. 
Saturated fat and trans fat should be limited to <10% of calories and 
polyunsaturated  fats  to  <10%  of  calories,  with  monounsaturated  fats 
accounting for the remainder of fat intake. At least 45–55% of total cal-
ories should be derived from carbohydrates. The brain requires ~100 g 
of glucose per day for fuel; other tissues use ~50 g/d. Some tissues (e.g., 
brain and red blood cells) rely on glucose supplied either exogenously 
or  from  muscle  proteolysis.  Over  time,  during  hypocaloric  states, 
adaptations in carbohydrate needs are possible. Like fat (9 kcal/g), car-
bohydrate (4 kcal/g), and protein (4 kcal/g), alcohol (ethanol) provides 
energy (7 kcal/g). However, it is not a nutrient.

Water  For adults, 1–1.5 mL of water per kilocalorie of energy expen-
diture is sufficient under usual conditions to allow for normal variations 
in physical activity, sweating, and solute load of the diet. Water losses 
include 50–100 mL/d in the feces; 500–1000 mL/d by evaporation or 
exhalation; and, depending on the renal solute load, ≥1000 mL/d in the 
urine. If external losses increase, intakes must increase accordingly to 
avoid underhydration. Fever increases water losses by ~200 mL/d per 
°C; diarrheal losses vary but may be as great as 5 L/d in severe diarrhea. 
Heavy  sweating,  vigorous  exercise,  and  vomiting  also  increase  water 
losses. When renal function is normal and solute intakes are adequate, 
the kidneys can adjust to increased water intake by excreting up to 18 L 
of excess water per day (Chap. 381). However, obligatory urine outputs 
can compromise hydration status when there is inadequate water intake 
or when losses increase in disease or kidney damage.

Infants have high requirements for water because of their large sur-
face area to volume ratios, their inability to communicate their thirst, 
and the limited capacity of the immature kidney to handle high renal 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2517

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2518 solute  loads.  Increased  water  needs  during  pregnancy  are  ~30  mL/d. 
During lactation, milk production increases daily water requirements so 
that ~1000 mL of additional water is needed, or 1 mL for each milliliter 
of milk produced. Special attention must also be paid to the water needs 
of  the  elderly,  who  have  reduced  total-body  water  and  blunted  thirst 
sensation and are more likely to be taking medications such as diuretics.

Other Nutrients  See Chap. 333 for detailed descriptions of vita-
mins and minerals.
 ■ DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES AND RDAS
Fortunately,  human  life  and  well-being  can  be  maintained  within  a 
fairly  wide  range  with  most  nutrient  intakes.  However,  the  capacity 
for  adaptation  is  not  infinite—too  much,  as  well  as  too  little,  intake 
of a nutrient can have adverse effects or alter the health benefits con-
ferred  by  another  nutrient.  Therefore,  benchmark  recommendations 
regarding nutrient intakes have been developed to guide clinical prac-
tice.  These  quantitative  estimates  of  nutrient  intakes  are  collectively 
referred  to  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  as  the  dietary  reference 
intakes  (DRIs).  The  DRIs  supplanted  the  RDAs—the  single  reference 
values used in the United States until the early 1990s. DRIs include an 
estimated average requirement (EAR) for nutrients as well as other ref-
erence values used for dietary planning: the RDA, the adequate intake 
(AI), the chronic disease risk reduction intake (CDRR), and the tolera-
ble upper level (UL). The DRIs also include acceptable macronutrient 
distribution  ranges  (AMDRs)  for  protein,  fat,  and  carbohydrate.  The 
current DRIs for vitamins and elements are provided in Tables 332-1  
and  332-2,  respectively.  Table  332-3  provides  DRIs  for  water  and 
macronutrients. EERs are discussed in Chap. 334 on energy balance 
in health and disease.

Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)  When florid manifes-
tations of the classic dietary-deficiency diseases such as rickets (defi-
ciency  of  vitamin  D  and  calcium),  scurvy  (deficiency  of  vitamin  C), 
xerophthalmia (deficiency of vitamin A), and protein-calorie malnutri-
tion were common, nutrient adequacy was inferred from the absence 
of their clinical deficiency signs. Later, biochemical and other changes 
were  used  that  became  evident  long  before  the  deficiency  was  clini-
cally  apparent.  Consequently,  criteria  of  adequacy  are  now  based  on 
biologic markers when they are available. Priority is given to sensitive 
biochemical, physiologic, or behavioral tests that reflect early changes 
in regulatory processes; maintenance of body stores of nutrients; or, if 
available, the amount of a nutrient that minimizes the risk of chronic 
degenerative  disease.  Current  efforts  focus  on  this  last  variable,  but 
relevant markers often are not available, and the long time lags between 
intake and disease outcomes further complicate the picture.

The types of evidence and criteria used to establish nutrient require-
ments  vary  by  nutrient,  age,  and  physiologic  group.  The  EAR  is  the 
amount of a nutrient estimated to be adequate for half of the healthy 
individuals of a specific age and sex. It is not an effective estimate of 
nutrient adequacy in individuals because it is a median requirement for 
a group; 50% of individuals in a group fall below the requirement and 
50% fall above it. Thus, a person with a usual intake at the EAR has a 
50% risk of inadequate intake. For these reasons, the other standards 
described below are more useful for clinical purposes.

Recommended  Dietary  Allowances  The  RDA,  the  nutrient 
intake goal for planning diets of individuals, is the average daily dietary 
intake level that meets the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy 
persons of a specific sex, age, life stage, or physiologic condition (e.g., 
pregnancy or lactation). It is defined statistically as two standard devi-
ations above the EAR to ensure that the needs of any given individual 
are  met.  An  online  tool,  available  at  https://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/
dri-calculator/,  allows  health  professionals  to  calculate  individual-
ized  daily  nutrient  recommendations  for  dietary  planning  based  on 
the  DRIs.  The  RDAs  are  used  to  formulate  food  guides  such  as  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA)  MyPlate  Plan  for  individu-
als  (https://www.choosemyplate.gov/resources/MyPlatePlan),  to  create 
food-exchange  lists  for  therapeutic  diet  planning,  and  as  a  standard 
for describing the nutritional content of foods and nutrient-containing 
dietary supplements on labels.

The risk of dietary inadequacy increases as one’s intake falls below 
the RDA. However, the RDA is an overly generous criterion for evalu-
ating nutrient adequacy. For example, by definition, the RDA exceeds 
the actual requirements of all but ~2–3% of the population. Therefore, 
many people whose intake falls below the RDA are still getting enough 
of the nutrient. On food labels, the nutrient content in a food is stated 
by weight or as a percentage of the daily value (DV), a variant of the 
RDA used on the nutrition facts panel that, for an adult, represents the 
highest RDA for an adult consuming 2000 kcal.

Adequate Intake (AI) 
It is not possible to set an RDA for some 
nutrients that lack an established EAR. In this circumstance, the AI is 
based  on  observed  or  experimentally  determined  approximations  of 
nutrient intakes in healthy people. In the DRIs, AIs rather than RDAs 
are proposed for nutrients consumed by infants (up to age 1 year) as 
well as for chromium, fluoride, manganese, sodium, potassium, panto-
thenic acid, biotin, choline, and water consumed by persons of all ages.

Tolerable Upper Levels (UL)  Healthy individuals gain no estab-
lished  benefit  from  consuming  nutrient  levels  above  the  RDA  or  AI. 
In fact, excessive nutrient intake can disturb body functions and cause 
acute,  progressive,  or  permanent  disabilities.  The  tolerable  UL  is  the 
highest level of chronic (usually daily) nutrient intake that is unlikely to 
pose a risk of adverse health effects for most of the population. Data on 
the adverse effects of large amounts of many nutrients are unavailable 
or too limited to establish a UL. Therefore, the lack of a UL does not 
mean that the risk of adverse effects from high intake is nonexistent. 
Nutrient levels in commonly eaten foods rarely exceed the UL. How-
ever, very highly fortified foods and dietary supplements provide more 
concentrated amounts of nutrients per serving and thus pose a poten-
tial risk of toxicity. Dietary supplements are labeled with Supplement 
Facts that express the amount of nutrients present in absolute units or 
as the percentage of the DV provided per recommended serving size. 
Total nutrient intakes, including that in foods, supplements, and over-
the-counter medications (e.g., antacids), should not exceed RDA levels.

Chronic Disease Risk Reduction Intake (CDRR)  This is the 
level  above  which  a  reduction  in  intake  is  expected  to  lower  chronic 
disease risk. For example, the sodium CDRR for adults is 2300 mg/d, 
and  this  is  the  lowest  level  of  intake  for  which  there  is  sufficiently 
strong evidence to characterize a CDRR. Three is no CDRR for potas-
sium or other nutrients, but the AI for potassium has been reduced to 
2500  mg/d  from  a  higher  prior  level.  At  present,  population  recom-
mendations for CDRR are not available for other nutrients.

Acceptable  Macronutrient  Distribution  Ranges  (AMDRs)  
AMDRs  are  not  experimentally  determined;  rather,  they  are  rough 
ranges  for  energy-providing  macronutrient  intakes  (protein,  carbo-
hydrate,  and  fat)  that  the  National  Academy  of  Medicine’s  (formerly 
Institute of Medicine [IOM]) Food and Nutrition Board considers to 
be healthful. These ranges are 10–35% of calories for protein, 20–35% 
of calories for fat, and 45–65% of calories for carbohydrate. Alcohol, 
which also provides energy, is not a nutrient; therefore, no recommen-
dations are provided.

 ■ FACTORS ALTERING NUTRIENT NEEDS
The  DRIs  are  affected  by  age,  sex,  growth  rate,  pregnancy,  lactation, 
physical activity level, concomitant diseases, drugs, and dietary compo-
sition. If requirements for nutrient sufficiency are close to intake levels 
indicating excess of a nutrient, dietary planning is difficult.

Physiologic  Factors  Growth,  strenuous  physical  activity,  preg-
nancy, and lactation all increase needs for energy and several essential 
nutrients.  Energy  needs  rise  during  pregnancy  due  to  fetal  growth 
demands  and  increased  energy  required  for  milk  production  during 
lactation. Energy needs decrease with loss of lean body mass, the major 
determinant  of  REE.  The  energy  needs  of  older  persons,  especially 
those aged >70 years, tend to be lower than those of younger persons 
because lean tissue, physical activity, and health often decline with age.

Dietary  Composition  Dietary  composition  affects  the  biologic 
availability and use of nutrients. For example, iron absorption may be 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2518

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemI

H
P
M
2
1
e
_
P
a
r
t
1
0
_
p
2
3
8
1
-
p
2
6
7
0

.
i

n
d
d

2
5
1
9

/

2
0
0
1
2
2

/

1
0
:
0
4
P
M

TABLE 332-1  Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs): Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for Vitamins

LIFE-STAGE GROUP

VITAMIN A 
(lg/d)a

VITAMIN C 
(mg/d)

VITAMIN D 
(lg/d)b,c

VITAMIN E 
(mg/d)d

VITAMIN K 
(lg/d)

THIAMIN 
(mg/d)

RIBOFLAVIN 
(mg/d)

NIACIN 
(mg/d)e

VITAMIN B6 
(mg/d)

FOLATE 
(lg/d)F

VITAMIN B12 
(lg/d)

PANTOTHENIC 
ACID (mg/d)

BIOTIN 
(lg/d)

CHOLINE 
(mg/d)G

Infants

Birth to 6 mo
6–12 mo

Children

1–3 y
4–8 y

Males

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

Females

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

Pregnant Women

14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y

Lactating Women

14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y

400*
500*

40*
50*

300
400

600
900
900
900
900
900

600
700
700
700
700
700

750
770
770

15
25

45
75
90
90
90
90

45
65
75
75
75
75

80
85
85

1200
1300
1300

115
120
120

10
10

15
15

15
15
15
15
15
20

15
15
15
15
15
20

15
15
15

15
15
15

4*
5*

6
7

11
15
15
15
15
15

11
15
15
15
15
15

15
15
15

19
19
19

2.0*
2.5*

30*
55*

60*
75*
120*
120*
120*
120*

60*
75*
90*
90*
90*
90*

75*
90*
90*

75*
90*
90*

0.2*
0.3*

0.3*
0.4*

0.5
0.6

0.9
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2

0.9
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

1.4
1.4
1.4

1.4
1.4
1.4

0.5
0.6

0.9
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3

0.9
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

1.4
1.4
1.4

1.6
1.6
1.6

2*
4*

6
8

12
16
16
16
16
16

12
14
14
14
14
14

18
18
18

17
17
17

0.1*
0.3*

0.5
0.6

1.0
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.7
1.7

1.0
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.5

1.9
1.9
1.9

2.0
2.0
2.0

65*
80*

150
200

300
400
400
400
400
400

300
400i
400i
400i
400
400

600j
600j
600j

500
500
500

0.4*
0.5*

0.9
1.2

1.8
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4h
2.4h

1.8
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4h
2.4h

2.6
2.6
2.6

2.8
2.8
2.8

1.7*
1.8*

2*
3*

4*
5*
5*
5*
5*
5*

4*
5*
5*
5*
5*
5*

6*
6*
6*

7*
7*
7*

5*
6*

8*
12*

20*
25*
30*
30*
30*
30*

20*
25*
30*
30*
30*
30*

30*
30*
30*

35*
35*
35*

125*
150*

200*
250*

375*
550*
550*
550*
550*
550*

375*
400*
425*
425*
425*
425*

450*
450*
450*

550*
550*
550*

Note: This table (taken from the DRI reports; see www.nap.edu) presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type followed by an asterisk (*). An RDA is the average daily dietary 
intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97–98%) in a group. The RDA is calculated from an estimated average requirement (EAR). If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish 
an EAR and thus to calculate an RDA, an AI is usually developed. For healthy breast-fed infants, an AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life-stage and sex-specific groups is believed to cover the needs of all healthy individuals in those 
groups, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data makes it impossible to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
aAs retinol activity equivalents (RAEs). 1 RAE = 1 μg retinol, 12 μg β-carotene, 24 μg α-carotene, or 24 μg β-cryptoxanthin. The RAE for dietary provitamin A carotenoids is twofold greater than the retinol equivalent (RE), whereas the RAE for 
preformed vitamin A is the same as the RE. bAs cholecalciferol. 1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D. cUnder the assumption of minimal sunlight. dAs α-tocopherol. α-Tocopherol includes RRR-α-tocopherol, the only form of α-tocopherol 
that occurs naturally in foods, and the 2R-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (RRR-, RSR-, RRS-, and RSS-α-tocopherol) that occur in fortified foods and supplements. It does not include the 2S-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (SRR-, 
SSR-, SRS-, and SSS-α-tocopherol) also found in fortified foods and supplements. eAs niacin equivalents (NEs). 1 mg of niacin = 60 mg of tryptophan; 0–6 months = preformed niacin (not NE). fAs dietary folate equivalents (DFEs). 1 DFE =  
1 μg food folate = 0.6 μg of folic acid from fortified food or as a supplement consumed with food = 0.5 μg of a supplement taken on an empty stomach. gAlthough AIs have been set for choline, there are few data to assess whether a dietary 
supply of choline is needed at all stages of the life cycle, and it may be that the choline requirement can be met by endogenous synthesis at some of these stages. hBecause 10–30% of older people may malabsorb food-bound B12, it is 
advisable for those >50 years of age to meet their RDA mainly by consuming foods fortified with B12 or a supplement containing B12. iIn view of evidence linking inadequate folate intake with neural tube defects in the fetus, it is recommended 
that all women capable of becoming pregnant consume 400 μg of folate from supplements or fortified foods in addition to intake of food folate from a varied diet. j It is assumed that women will continue consuming 400 μg from supplements 
or fortified food until their pregnancy is confirmed and they enter prenatal care, which ordinarily occurs after the end of the periconceptional period—the critical time for formation of the neural tube.
Source: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium. https://doi.org/10.17226/25353. Adapted and reproduced with permission from the National Academy of 
Sciences, Courtesy of the National Academies.

Nutrient Requirements and Dietary Assessment

CHAPTER 332

2
5
1
9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I

H
P
M
2
1
e
_
P
a
r
t
1
0
_
p
2
3
8
1
-
p
2
6
7
0

.
i

n
d
d

2
5
2
0

TABLE 332-2  Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs): Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for Elements
LIFE-STAGE 
GROUP

MANGANESE 
(mg/d)

MAGNESIUM 
(mg/d)

FLUORIDE 
(mg/d)

CALCIUM 
(mg/d)

CHROMIUM 
(lg/d)

COPPER 
(lg/d)

IODINE 
(lg/d)

IRON 
(mg/d)

MOLYBDENUM 
(lg/d)

Infants

Birth to 6 mo 200*
6–12 mo
260*

Children

1–3 y
4–8 y

Males

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

Females

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

700
1000

1300
1300
1000
1000
1000
1200

1300
1300
1000
1000
1200
1200

Pregnant Women

14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y

1300
1000
1000

Lactating Women

14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y

1300
1000
1000

0.2*
5.5*

11*
15*

25*
35*
35*
35*
30*
30*

21*
24*
25*
25*
20*
20*

29*
30*
30*

44*
45*
45*

200*
220*

340
440

700
890
900
900
900
900

700
890
900
900
900
900

1000
1000
1000

1300
1300
1300

0.01*
0.5*

0.7*
1*

2*
3*
4*
4*
4*
4*

2*
3*
3*
3*
3*
3*

3*
3*
3*

3*
3*
3*

110*
130*

0.27*
11

90
90

120
150
150
150
150
150

120
150
150
150
150
150

220
220
220

290
290
290

7
10

8
11
8
8
8
8

8
15
18
18
8
8

27
27
27

10
9
9

30*
75*

80
130

240
410
400
420
420
420

240
360
310
320
320
320

400
350
360

360
310
320

0.003*
0.6*

1.2*
1.5*

1.9*
2.2*
2.3*
2.3*
2.3*
2.3*

1.6*
1.6*
1.8*
1.8*
1.8*
1.8*

2.0*
2.0*
2.0*

2.6*
2.6*
2.6*

2*
3*

17
22

34
43
45
45
45
45

34
43
45
45
45
45

50
50
50

50
50
50

2
5
2
0

PHOSPHORUS 
(mg/d)

SELENIUM 
(lg/d)

ZINC 
(mg/d)

POTASSIUM 
(g/d)

SODIUM 
(g/d)

CHLORIDE 
(g/d)

100*
275*

460
500

1250
1250
700
700
700
700

1250
1250
700
700
700
700

1250
700
700

1250
700
700

15*
20*

20
30

40
55
55
55
55
55

40
55
55
55
55
55

60
60
60

70
70
70

2*
3

3
5

8
11
11
11
11
11

8
9
8
8
8
8

12
11
11

13
12
12

0.4*
0.7*

3.0*
3.8*

4.5*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*

4.5*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*
4.7*

4.7*
4.7*
4.7*

5.1*
5.1*
5.1*

0.12*
0.37*

0.18*
0.57*

1.0*
1.2*

1.5*
1.5*
1.5*
1.5*
1.3*
1.2*

1.5*
1.5*
1.5*
1.5*
1.3*
1.2*

1.5*
1.5*
1.5*

1.5*
1.5*
1.5*

1.5*
1.9*

2.3*
2.3*
2.3*
2.3*
2.0*
1.8*

2.3*
2.3*
2.3*
2.3*
2.0*
1.8*

2.3*
2.3*
2.3*

2.3*
2.3*
2.3*

Note: This table (taken from the DRI reports; see www.nap.edu) presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type followed by an asterisk (*). An RDA is the average daily dietary 
intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97–98%) in a group. The RDA is calculated from an estimated average requirement (EAR). If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish 
an EAR and thus to calculate an RDA, an AI is usually developed. For healthy breast-fed infants, an AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life-stage and sex-specific groups is believed to cover the needs of all healthy individuals in those 
groups, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data makes it impossible to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
Sources: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium. https://doi.org/10.17226/25353. Adapted and reproduced with permission from the National Academy of 
Sciences, Courtesy of the National Academies.

/

2
0
0
1
2
2

/

1
0
:
0
4
P
M

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2521

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
2

N
u
t
r
i
e
n
t
R
e
q
u
i
r
e
m
e
n
t
s
a
n
d
D
i
e
t
a
r
y
A
s
s
e
s
s

m
e
n
t

TABLE 332-3  Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs): Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for Total Water and Macronutrients
LIFE-STAGE 
GROUP

`-LINOLENIC ACID 
(g/d)

CARBOHYDRATE 
(g/d)

TOTAL WATERa 
(L/d)

LINOLEIC ACID 
(g/d)

TOTAL FIBER (g/d)

FAT (g/d)

PROTEINb (g/d)

Infants

Birth to 6 mo
6–12 mo

Children

1–3 y
4–8 y

Males

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

Females

9–13 y
14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y
51–70 y
>70 y

Pregnant Women

14–18 y
19–30 y
31–50 y

Lactating Women

14–18
19–30 y
31–50 y

0.7*
0.8*

1.3*
1.7*

2.4*
3.3*
3.7*
3.7*
3.7*
3.7*

2.1*
2.3*
2.7*
2.7*
2.7*
2.7*

3.0*
3.0*
3.0*

3.8*
3.8*
3.8*

60*
95*

130
130

130
130
130
130
130
130

130
130
130
130
130
130

175
175
175

210
210
210

NDc
ND

19*
25*

31*
38*
38*
38*
30*
30*

26*
26*
25*
25*
21*
21*

28*
28*
28*

29*
29*
29*

31*
30*

ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

4.4*
4.6*

7*
10*

12*
16*
17*
17*
14*
14*

10*
11*
12*
12*
11*
11*

13*
13*
13*

13*
13*
13*

0.5*
0.5*

0.7*
0.9*

1.2*
1.6*
1.6*
1.6*
1.6*
1.6*

1.0*
1.1*
1.1*
1.1*
1.1*
1.1*

1.4*
1.4*
1.4*

1.3*
1.3*
1.3*

9.1*
11.0

13
19

34
52
56
56
56
56

34
46
46
46
46
46

71
71
71

71
71
71

Note: This table (taken from the DRI reports; see www.nap.edu) presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type 
followed by an asterisk (*). An RDA is the average daily dietary intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97–98%) in a group. 
The RDA is calculated from an estimated average requirement (EAR). If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish an EAR and thus to calculate an RDA, an AI 
is usually developed. For healthy breast-fed infants, an AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life-stage and sex-specific groups is believed to cover the needs of all healthy 
individuals in those groups, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data make it impossible to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
aTotal water includes all water contained in food, beverages, and drinking water. bBased on grams of protein per kilogram of body weight for the reference body weight 
(e.g., for adults: 0.8 g/kg body weight for the reference body weight). cNot determined.
Source: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium. https://doi.org/10.17226/25353. Adapted 
and reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, Courtesy of the National Academies.

impaired by large amounts of calcium or lead; likewise, non-heme iron 
uptake may be impaired by a lack of ascorbic acid and amino acids in 
the meal. Bodily protein may be decreased when essential amino acids 
are  not  present  in  sufficient  amounts—a  rare  scenario  in  U.S.  diets. 
Animal foods, such as milk, eggs, and meat, have high biologic values, 
with  most  of  the  needed  amino  acids  present  in  adequate  amounts. 
Plant proteins in corn (maize), soy, rice, and wheat have lower biologic 
values and must be combined with other plant or animal proteins or 
fortified with the amino acids that are deficient to achieve optimal use 
by the body.

Route of Intake  The RDAs apply only to oral intakes. When nutri-
ents  are  administered  parenterally,  similar  values  can  sometimes  be 
used  for  amino  acids,  glucose  (carbohydrate),  fats,  sodium,  chloride, 
potassium, and most vitamins because their intestinal absorption rate 
is nearly 100%. However, the oral bioavailability of most mineral ele-
ments may be only half that obtained by parenteral administration. For 
some nutrients that are not readily stored in the body or that cannot be 
stored in large amounts, timing of administration may also be impor-
tant. For example, amino acids cannot be used for protein synthesis if 
they  are  not  supplied  together;  instead,  they  will  be  used  for  energy 

production, although in healthy individuals eating adequate diets, the 
distribution of protein intake over the course of the day has little effect 
on health.

Disease  Dietary  deficiency  diseases  include  protein-calorie  mal-
nutrition,  iron-deficiency  anemia,  goiter  (due  to  iodine  deficiency), 
rickets  and  osteomalacia  (vitamin  D  deficiency),  xeropthalmia  
(vitamin  A  deficiency),  megaloblastic  anemia  (vitamin  B12  or  folic 
acid deficiency), scurvy (vitamin C/ascorbic acid deficiency), beriberi 
(thiamin deficiency), and pellagra (niacin and tryptophan deficiency) 
(Chaps.  333  and  334).  Each  deficiency  disease  is  characterized  by 
imbalances  at  the  cellular  level  between  the  supply  of  nutrients  or 
energy and the body’s nutritional needs for growth, maintenance, and 
other functions. Imbalances and excesses in nutrient intakes are rec-
ognized as risk factors for certain chronic degenerative diseases, such 
as saturated fat and cholesterol in coronary artery disease; sodium in 
hypertension;  obesity  in  hormone-dependent  cancers  (endometrial 
and breast); and ethanol in alcoholism. Diet is only one of many risk 
factors  because  the  etiology  and  pathogenesis  of  these  disorders  are 
multifactorial.  Osteoporosis,  for  example,  is  associated  with  calcium 
deficiency,  sometimes  secondary  to  vitamin  D  deficiency,  as  well  as 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2521

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2522 with  environment-related  risk  factors  (e.g.,  smoking,  sedentary  life-
style), physiology (e.g., estrogen deficiency), genetic determinants (e.g., 
defects  in  collagen  metabolism),  and  drug  use  (chronic  steroids  and 
aromatase inhibitors) (Chap. 411).
 ■ DIETARY ASSESSMENT
Nutrition  assessment  in  clinical  situations  is  an  iterative  process  that 
involves (1) screening for malnutrition, (2) assessing the diet and other 
data to establish either the absence or the presence of malnutrition and 
its possible causes, (3) planning and implementing the most appropri-
ate  nutritional  therapy,  and  (4)  reassessing  intakes  to  make  sure  that 
they have been consumed. Some disease states affect the bioavailability, 
requirements, use, or excretion of specific nutrients. In these circum-
stances, specific measurements of various nutrients or their biomarkers 
may be required to ensure adequate replacement (Chap. 333).

Most  health  care  facilities  have  nutrition-screening  processes  in 
place  for  identifying  possible  malnutrition  after  hospital  admission. 
Nutritional  screening  is  required  by  The  Joint  Commission,  which 
accredits  and  certifies  health  care  organizations  in  the  United  States. 
However, no universally recognized or validated standards exist. The 
factors  that  are  usually  assessed  include  abnormal  weight  for  height 
or  body  mass  index  (e.g.,  BMI  <19  or  >25);  reported  weight  change 
(involuntary loss or gain of >5 kg in the past 6 months) (Chap. 47); 
diagnoses with known nutritional implications (e.g., metabolic disease, 
any  disease  affecting  the  gastrointestinal  tract,  alcoholism);  present 
therapeutic  dietary  prescription;  chronic  poor  appetite;  presence  of 
chewing and swallowing problems or major food intolerances; need for 
assistance with preparing or shopping for food, eating, or other aspects 
of self-care; and social isolation. The nutritional status of hospitalized 
patients should be reassessed periodically—at least once every week.

A more complete dietary assessment is indicated for patients who 
exhibit a high risk of or frank malnutrition on nutritional screening. 
The type of assessment varies with the clinical setting, the severity of 
the patient’s illness, and the stability of the patient’s condition.

Acute-Care  Settings 
In  acute-care  settings,  anorexia,  various 
other  diseases,  test  procedures,  and  medications  can  compromise 
dietary  intake.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  goal  is  to  identify 
and  avoid  inadequate  intake  and  to  assure  appropriate  alimentation. 
Dietary  assessment  focuses  on  what  patients  are  currently  eating, 
whether  or  not  they  are  able  and  willing  to  eat,  and  whether  or  not 
they experience any problems with eating. Dietary intake assessment is 
based on information from observed intakes; medical records; history; 
clinical examination; and anthropometric, biochemical, and functional 
status  evaluations.  The  objective  is  to  gather  enough  information  to 
establish the likelihood of malnutrition due to poor dietary intake or 
other causes in order to assess whether nutritional therapy is indicated 
(Chap. 335).

Simple observations may suffice to suggest inadequate oral intake. 
These  include  dietitians’  and  nurses’  notes;  observation  of  a  patient’s 
frequent refusal to eat or the amount of food eaten on trays; the fre-
quent  performance  of  tests  and  procedures  that  are  likely  to  cause 
meals to be skipped; adherence to nutritionally inadequate diet orders 
(e.g., clear liquids or full liquids) for more than a few days; the occur-
rence of fever, gastrointestinal distress, vomiting, diarrhea, or a coma-
tose state; and the presence of diseases or use of treatments that involve 
any part of the alimentary tract. Acutely ill patients with diet-related 
diseases  such  as  diabetes  need  assessment  because  an  inappropriate 
diet may exacerbate these conditions and adversely affect other ther-
apies.  Abnormal  biochemical  values  (serum  albumin  levels  <35  g/L 
[<3.5 mg/dL]; serum cholesterol levels <3.9 mmol/L [<150 mg/dL]) are 
nonspecific but may indicate a need for further nutritional assessment.
Most  therapeutic  diets  offered  in  hospitals  are  calculated  to  meet 
individual nutrient requirements and the RDA if they are eaten. Excep-
tions include clear liquids, some full-liquid diets, and test diets (such as 
those adhered to in preparation for gastrointestinal procedures), which 
are inadequate for several nutrients and should not be used, if possible, 
for >24 h. However, because as much as half of the food served to hos-
pitalized patients is not eaten, it cannot be assumed that the intakes of 
hospitalized patients are adequate. Dietary assessment should compare 

how much and what kinds of food the patient has consumed with the 
diet that has been provided. Major deviations in intakes of energy, pro-
tein, fluids, or other nutrients of special concern for the patient’s illness 
should be noted and corrected, especially for long-staying patients.

Nutritional monitoring is especially important for patients who are 
very ill and who have extended lengths of hospital stay. Patients who 
are fed by enteral and parenteral routes also require special nutritional 
assessment and monitoring by physicians and/or dietitians with certi-
fication in nutritional support (Chap. 335).

Ambulatory  Settings  The  aim  of  dietary  assessment  in  the 
outpatient  setting  is  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  patient’s  usual 
diet  is  a  health  risk  in  itself  or  if  it  contributes  to  existing  chronic  
disease–related  problems.  Dietary  assessment  also  provides  the  basis 
for planning a diet that fulfills therapeutic goals while ensuring patient 
adherence.  The  outpatient’s  dietary  assessment  should  review  the 
adequacy  of  present  and  usual  food  intakes,  including  vitamin  and 
mineral  supplements,  oral  nutritional  supplements,  medical  foods, 
other  dietary  supplements,  medications,  and  alcohol,  because  all  of 
these may affect the patient’s nutritional status. The assessment should 
focus on the dietary constituents that are most likely to be involved or 
compromised by a specific diagnosis as well as on any comorbidities 
that are present. More than 1 day’s intake should be reviewed to pro-
vide a better representation of the usual diet, upon which personalized 
dietary recommendations can be based.

There are many ways to assess the adequacy of a patient’s habitual 
diet. These include use of a food guide, a food-exchange list, a diet his-
tory, or a food-frequency questionnaire. A commonly used food guide 
for healthy persons is the USDA’s Choose My Plate, which is useful as 
a rough guide for avoiding inadequate intakes of essential nutrients as 
well as likely excesses in the amounts of fat (especially saturated and 
trans fats), sodium, sugar, and alcohol consumed (Table 332-4). The 
Choose My Plate graphic emphasizes a balance between calories and 

TABLE 332-4  Choose My Plate: A Guide to Individualized  
Dietary Planning

DIETARY FACTOR, UNIT 
OF MEASURE (ADVICE)
Fruits, cups (Focus on 
fruits.)
Vegetables, cups (Vary 
vegetables.)
Grains, oz eq (Make 
at least half of grains 
whole.)a
Protein foods, oz eq  
(Go lean with protein.)b
Dairy, cups or ozc (Choose 
calcium-rich foods.)
“Empty” calories, kcald
Sodium, mg

Physical activity, min

EXAMPLES OF STANDARD PORTION SIZES AT 
INDICATED ENERGY LEVEL

LOWER:  
1600 kcal
1.5

MODERATE: 
2200 kcal
2

HIGHER:  
2800 kcal
2.5

2

5

5

3

3

7

6

3

3.5

10

7

3

400

260

120
<2300 at all 
energy levels
At least 150 min vigorous physical activity per week 
at all energy levels

Note: Oils (formerly listed with portions of 5, 6, and 8 teaspoons for the lower, 
moderate, and higher energy levels, respectively) are no longer singled out in 
Choose My Plate, but rather are included in the empty calories/added sugar 
category with SOFAS (calories from solid fats and added sugars). The limit is 
the remaining number of calories in each food pattern above after intake of the 
recommended amounts of the nutrient-dense foods.
aFor example, 1 serving equals 1 slice bread, 1 cup ready-to-eat cereal, or 0.5 cup 
cooked rice, pasta, or cooked cereal. bFor example, 1 serving equals 1 oz lean meat, 
poultry, or fish; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon peanut butter; 0.25 cup cooked dry beans; or 
0.5 oz nuts or seeds. cFor example, 1 serving equals 1 cup milk or yogurt, 1.5 oz 
natural cheese, or 2 oz processed cheese. dFormerly called “discretionary calorie 
allowance.” Portions are calculated as the number of calories remaining after all of 
the above allotments are accounted for.
Abbreviation: oz eq, ounce equivalent.
Source: Data from U.S. Department of Agriculture (http://www.Choosemyplate.gov).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2522

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
nutritional  needs,  encouraging  increased  intake  of  fruits  and  vege-
tables,  whole  grains,  and  low-fat  milk  in  conjunction  with  reduced 
intake  of  sodium  and  high-calorie  sugary  drinks.  The  Web  version 
of the guide provides a calculator that tailors the number of servings 
suggested  for  healthy  patients  of  different  weights,  sexes,  ages,  and 
life-cycle stages to help them to meet their needs while avoiding excess 
(https://www.myplate.gov/myplate-plan  and  www.ChooseMyPlate.gov). 
Patients who follow ethnic or unusual dietary patterns may need extra 
instruction on how foods should be categorized and on the appropriate 
portion  sizes  that  constitute  a  serving.  The  process  of  reviewing  the 
guide with patients helps them transition to healthier dietary patterns 
and identifies food groups eaten in excess of recommendations or in 
insufficient  quantities.  For  persons  on  therapeutic  diets,  assessment 
against food-exchange lists may be useful. These include, for example, 
American  Diabetes  Association  food-exchange  lists  for  diabetes  and 
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics food-exchange lists for renal 
disease.

 ■ NUTRITIONAL STATUS ASSESSMENT
Full nutritional status assessment is reserved for seriously ill patients 
and  those  at  very  high  nutritional  risk  when  the  cause  of  malnutri-
tion  is  still  uncertain  after  the  initial  clinical  evaluation  and  dietary 
assessment. It involves multiple dimensions, including documentation 
of  dietary  intake,  anthropometric  measurements,  biochemical  mea-
surements  of  blood  and  urine,  clinical  examination,  health  history 
elicitation, and functional status evaluation. Therapeutic dietary pre-
scriptions and menu plans for most diseases are available from most 
hospitals and from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. For fur-
ther discussion of nutritional assessment, see Chap. 334.

 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The DRIs (e.g., the EAR, the UL, and energy needs) are estimates of 
physiologic  requirements  based  on  experimental  evidence.  Assum-
ing  that  appropriate  adjustments  are  made  for  age,  sex,  body  size, 
and  physical  activity  level,  these  estimates  should  be  applicable  to 
individuals in most parts of the world. However, other values are not 
transportable. The AIs are based on customary and adequate intakes 
in  U.S.  and  Canadian  populations,  which  appear  to  be  compatible 
with good health, rather than on a large body of direct experimental 
evidence.  Similarly,  the  AMDRs  represent  expert  opinion  regard-
ing  the  approximate  intakes  of  energy-providing  nutrients  that  are 
healthful  in  these  North  American  populations,  and  the  CDRR  may 
also vary in other populations. Thus, these measures should be used 
with caution in other settings. Nutrient-based standards like the DRIs 
have also been developed by the World Health Organization/Food and 
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations and are available on 
the  Web  (https://www.who.int/activities/establishing-global-nutrient- 
requirements). The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Panel on 
Dietetic  Products,  Nutrition,  and  Allergies  periodically  publishes  its 
recommendations in the online EFSA Journal (https://efsa.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/journal/18314732). Other countries have promulgated sim-
ilar recommendations. The different standards have many similarities 
in  their  basic  concepts,  definitions,  and  nutrient  recommendation 
levels, but there are some differences from the DRIs as a result of the 
functional criteria chosen, environmental differences, the timeliness of 
the evidence reviewed, and expert judgment. There is a growing trend 
toward global harmonization of these recommendations.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Brannon PM et al: Scanning for new evidence to prioritize updates to 
the Dietary Reference Intakes: Case studies for thiamin and phospho-
rus. Am J Clin Nur 104:1366, 2016.

Forster H et al: Personalized nutrition: The role of new dietary assess-

ment methods. Proc Nutr Soc 75:96, 2016.

Gibson  RS:  Principles  of  Nutritional  Assessment,  2nd  ed.  Oxford, 

Oxford University Press, 2005.

Lewis  JL,  Dwyer  JT:  Establishing  nutrient  intake  values,  in  Present 
Knowledge in Nutrition, Vol 2. BP Marriott, DF Birt, VA Stallings, AA 
Yates, eds. London, Academic Press, 2020, pp 267–289.

2523

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

Marriott BP et al: Present knowledge, in Nutrition Vol 1: Basic Nutri-
tion and Metabolism, Vol 2: Clinical and Applied Topics in Nutrition. 
London, Academic Press, 2020.

National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine: 
Guiding Principles for Developing Dietary Reference Intakes Based 
on  Chronic  Disease.  Washington  DC,  National  Academies  Press, 
2017.

National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine: 
Global  Harmonization  of  Methodological  Approaches  to  Nutrient 
Intake Recommendations: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington 
DC, National Academies Press, 2018.

National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine: 
Dietary  Reference  Intakes  for  Sodium  and  Potassium.  Washington 
DC, National Academies Press, 2019.

National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine: 
Advancing  Nutrition  and  Food  Science:  80th  Anniversary  of  the 
Food and Nutrition Board: Proceedings of a Symposium. Washington 
DC, National Academics Press, 2020.

National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine: 
Harmonizing the Process for Establishing Nutrient Reference Values: 
A Tool Kit. Washington DC, National Academies Press, 2020.

Report  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Interpretation  and  Uses  of 
Dietary  Reference  Intakes  and  Upper  Reference  Levels  of 
Nutrients,  and  the  Steering  Committee  on  the  Scientific 
Evaluation  of  Dietary  Reference  Intakes,  Food  and  Nutri-
tion  Board:  Dietary  Reference  Intakes:  Applications  in  Dietary 
Assessment. Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2008.

Stover PJ, King JC: More nutrition precision, better decisions for the 

health of our nation J Nutr 150:3058, 2020.

Yaktine  A  et  al:  Why  the  derivation  of  nutrient  reference  values 
should  be  harmonized  and  how  it  can  be  accomplished.  Adv  Nutr 
11:1112, 2020.

Yetley EA et al: Options for basing Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) 
on  chronic  disease  endpoints  report  from  a  joint  US-/Canadian-
sponsored working group. Am J Clin Nutr 105:249S, 2017.

333 Vitamin and Trace  
Mineral Deficiency and  
Excess
Paolo M. Suter

Vitamins are required constituents of the human diet because they are 
synthesized inadequately or not at all in the human body. Only small 
amounts  of  these  substances  are  needed  to  carry  out  essential  bio-
chemical reactions (e.g., by acting as coenzymes or prosthetic groups). 
Overt vitamin or trace mineral deficiencies are rare in Western coun-
tries because of a plentiful, varied, and inexpensive food supply; food 
fortification;  and  use  of  supplements.  However,  multiple  nutrient 
deficiencies  may  appear  together  in  persons  who  are  chronically  ill, 
alcoholic,  or  living  in  poverty.  After  bariatric  surgery,  patients  are 
at  high  risk  for  multiple  nutrient  deficiencies.  Moreover,  subclinical 
vitamin  and  trace  mineral  deficiencies  (often  designated  as  “hidden 
hunger”), as diagnosed by laboratory testing, are quite common in the 
normal population, especially in the geriatric age group and socioeco-
nomically deprived individuals due to the lack of nutrient-dense foods. 
Conversely, because of the widespread use of nutrient supplements and 
food fortification, nutrient toxicities are gaining pathophysiologic and 
clinical importance.

Victims  of  famine,  emergency-affected  and  displaced  populations, 
refugees, and camp populations are at increased risk for protein-energy 
malnutrition  and  classic  micronutrient  deficiencies  (vitamin  A,  iron, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2523

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2524

zinc,  iodine)  as  well  as  for  overt  deficiencies  in  thiamine  (beriberi), 
riboflavin, vitamin C (scurvy), and niacin (pellagra).

Body stores of vitamins and minerals vary tremendously. For exam-
ple, stores of vitamins B12 and A are large, and an adult may not become 
deficient until ≥1 year after beginning to eat a deficient diet. However, 
folate and thiamine may become depleted within weeks among those 
eating  a  deficient  diet.  Therapeutic  modalities  can  deplete  essential 
nutrients from the body; for example, hemodialysis or diuretics remove 
water-soluble vitamins, which must be replaced by supplementation.

Vitamins and trace minerals play several roles in diseases: (1) defi-
ciencies of vitamins and minerals may be caused by disease states such 
as malabsorption; (2) either deficiency or excess of vitamins and min-
erals can cause disease in and of itself (e.g., vitamin A intoxication and 
liver disease); and (3) vitamins and minerals in high doses may be used 
as drugs (e.g., niacin for hypercholesterolemia). Since they are covered 
elsewhere, the hematologic-related vitamins and minerals (Chaps. 97 
and 99) either are not considered or are considered only briefly in this 
chapter,  as  are  the  bone-related  vitamins  and  minerals  (vitamin  D, 
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium; Chap. 409).

VITAMINS
See also Table 333-1 and Fig. 333-1.
 ■ THIAMINE (VITAMIN B1)
Thiamine  was  the  first  B  vitamin  to  be  identified  and  therefore  is 
referred to as vitamin B1. Thiamine functions in the decarboxylation of 
α-ketoacids (e.g., pyruvate α-ketoglutarate) and branched-chain amino 
acids and thus is essential for energy generation. In addition, thiamine 
pyrophosphate acts as a coenzyme for a transketolase reaction that medi-
ates the conversion of hexose and pentose phosphates. It has been postu-
lated that thiamine plays a role in peripheral nerve conduction, although 
the exact chemical reactions underlying this function are not known.

Food Sources  The median intake of thiamine in the United States 
from food alone is ~2 mg/d. Primary food sources for thiamine include 
yeast, organ meat, pork, legumes, beef, whole grains, and nuts. Milled 
rice  and  grains  contain  little  thiamine.  Thiamine  deficiency  is  there-
fore  more  common  in  cultures  that  rely  heavily  on  a  milled  polished 
rice-based  diet.  Certain  foods  contain  antithiamine  factors  such  as 

TABLE 333-1  Principal Clinical Findings of Vitamin Malnutrition

heat-labile thiaminases (raw fish, shellfish), which destroy the vitamin, 
or  heat-stable  polyhydroxyphenols  (tannins;  in  coffee,  tea,  Brussels 
sprouts,  or  betel  nuts),  which  inactivate  the  vitamin.  Thus,  drinking 
large amounts of tea or coffee could theoretically lower thiamine body 
stores.

Deficiency  Most  dietary  deficiency  of  thiamine  worldwide  is  the 
result  of  poor  dietary  intake  due  to  the  lack  of  food  or  dispropor-
tionate  reliance  on  highly  processed  staple  crops.  Food  processing 
removes  thiamine,  and  high-heat  or  long-duration  cooking  destroys 
it.  In  Western  countries,  the  primary  causes  of  thiamine  deficiency 
are alcoholism and chronic illnesses such as cancer. Alcohol interferes 
directly  with  the  absorption  of  thiamine  and  with  the  synthesis  of 
thiamine pyrophosphate, and it increases urinary excretion. Thiamine 
should always be replenished when a patient with alcoholism is being 
refed,  as  carbohydrate  repletion  without  adequate  thiamine  can  pre-
cipitate  acute  thiamine  deficiency  with  lactic  acidosis.  Other  at-risk 
populations are women with prolonged hyperemesis gravidarum and 
anorexia, patients with overall poor nutritional status who are receiving 
parenteral glucose, patients who have had bariatric/metabolic surgery 
(bariatric  Wernicke),  and  patients  receiving  chronic  diuretic  therapy 
(e.g., in hypertension or systolic heart failure) due to increased urinary 
thiamine  losses.  Different  drugs  (e.g.,  metformin,  verapamil)  could 
inhibit  intestinal  thiamine  transporters  (ThTR-2),  thereby  increasing 
the  risk  of  deficiency  for  this  vitamin.  Maternal  thiamine  deficiency 
can  lead  to  infantile  beriberi  in  breast-fed  children.  Thiamine  defi-
ciency  could  be  an  underlying  factor  in  motor  vehicle  accidents  and 
could be overlooked in the setting of head injury.

Thiamine  deficiency  in  its  early  stage  induces  anorexia  and  non-
specific symptoms (e.g., irritability, decrease in short-term memory). 
Prolonged  thiamine  deficiency  causes  beriberi,  which  is  classically 
categorized  as  wet  or  dry,  although  there  is  considerable  overlap 
between  the  two  categories.  In  either  form  of  beriberi,  patients  may 
complain  of  pain  and  paresthesia.  Wet  beriberi  presents  primarily 
with  cardiovascular  symptoms  that  are  due  to  impaired  myocardial 
energy metabolism and dysautonomia; it can occur after 3 months of a 
thiamine-deficient diet. Patients present with an enlarged heart, tachy-
cardia,  high-output  congestive  heart  failure,  peripheral  edema,  and 
peripheral neuritis. Patients with dry beriberi present with a symmetric 

NUTRIENT
Thiamine

Riboflavin

Niacin

Vitamin B6

Folate

Vitamin B12

Vitamin C

Vitamin A

Vitamin D

Vitamin E

CLINICAL FINDING
Beriberi: neuropathy, muscle weakness and wasting, 
cardiomegaly, edema, ophthalmoplegia, confabulation
Magenta tongue, angular stomatitis, seborrhea, cheilosis, 
ocular symptoms, corneal vascularization
Pellagra: pigmented rash of sun-exposed areas, bright red 
tongue, diarrhea, apathy, memory loss, disorientation
Seborrhea, glossitis, convulsions, neuropathy, depression, 
confusion, microcytic anemia
Megaloblastic anemia, atrophic glossitis, depression,  
↑ homocysteine
Megaloblastic anemia, loss of vibratory and position sense, 
abnormal gait, dementia, impotence, loss of bladder and 
bowel control, ↑ homocysteine, ↑ methylmalonic acid

Scurvy: petechiae, ecchymosis, coiled hairs, inflamed and 
bleeding gums, joint effusion, poor wound healing, fatigue
Xerophthalmia, night blindness, Bitot’s spots, follicular 
hyperkeratosis, impaired embryonic development, immune 
dysfunction
Rickets: skeletal deformation, rachitic rosary, bowed legs; 
osteomalacia
Peripheral neuropathy, spinocerebellar ataxia, skeletal 
muscle atrophy, retinopathy

DIETARY LEVEL PER DAY ASSOCIATED 
WITH OVERT DEFICIENCY IN ADULTS
<0.3 mg/1000 kcal

<0.4 mg

<9.0 niacin equivalents

<0.2 mg

<100 μg/d

<1.0 μg/d

<10 mg/d

<300 μg/d

<2.0 μg/d

Not described unless underlying 
contributing factor is present

Vitamin K

Elevated prothrombin time, bleeding

<10 μg/d

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS TO DEFICIENCY
Alcoholism, chronic diuretic use, bariatric 
surgery, hyperemesis, thiaminases in food
Alcoholism, individuals with poor diets and 
low intake of milk products
Alcoholism, vitamin B6 deficiency, 
riboflavin deficiency, tryptophan deficiency
Alcoholism, isoniazid

Alcoholism, sulfasalazine, pyrimethamine, 
triamterene
Gastric atrophy (pernicious anemia), 
terminal ileal disease, strict vegetarianism, 
acid-reducing drugs (e.g., H2 blockers), 
metformin
Smoking, alcoholism

Fat malabsorption, infection, measles, 
alcoholism, protein-energy malnutrition

Aging, lack of sunlight exposure, fat 
malabsorption, deeply pigmented skin
Occurs only with fat malabsorption 
or genetic abnormalities of vitamin E 
metabolism/transport
Fat malabsorption, liver disease,  
antibiotic use

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2524

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemperipheral neuropathy of the motor and sensory systems, with dimin-
ished  reflexes.  The  neuropathy  affects  the  legs  most  markedly,  and 
patients have difficulty rising from a squatting position.

Alcoholic patients with chronic thiamine deficiency also may have 
central  nervous  system  (CNS)  manifestations  known  as  Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy,  which  consists  of  horizontal  nystagmus,  ophthal-
moplegia  (due  to  weakness  of  one  or  more  extraocular  muscles), 
cerebellar  ataxia,  and  mental  impairment  (Chap.  453).  When  there 

is  an  additional  loss  of  memory  and  a  confabulatory  psychosis,  the 
syndrome  is  known  as  Wernicke-Korsakoff  syndrome.  Despite  the 
typical  clinical  picture  and  history,  Wernicke-Korsakoff  syndrome  is 
underdiagnosed.

The laboratory diagnosis of thiamine deficiency usually is made by 
a functional enzymatic assay of transketolase activity measured before 
and after the addition of thiamine pyrophosphate. A >25% stimulation 
in response to the addition of thiamine pyrophosphate (i.e., an activity 

2525

Active derivative or
  cofactor form

Principal
function

Thiamine pyrophosphate Coenzyme for
  cleavage of
  carbon-carbon
  bonds; amino
  acid and
  carbohydrate
  metabolism

Flavin mononucleotide
  (FMN) and flavin
  adenine dinucleotide
  (FAD)

Cofactor for
  oxidation,
  reduction
  reactions,
  and covalently
  attached
  prosthetic groups
  for some
  enzymes

Nicotinamide adenine
  dinucleotide phosphate
  (NADP) and nicotinamide
  adenine dinucleotide
  (NAD)

Coenzymes for
  oxidation and
  reduction
  reactions

Pyridoxal phosphate

Cofactor for
  enzymes of amino
  acid metabolism

Polyglutamate forms of
  (5, 6, 7, 8)
  tetrahydrofolate with
  carbon unit
  attachments

Coenzyme for one
  carbon transfer in
  nucleic acid and
  amino acid
  metabolism

Vitamin

Thiamine (B1)

NH2

N

N

CH3

N

S

CH2CH2OH

Riboflavin (B2)

O

NH

N

O

N

N

Ribityl

Niacin
O

C O

+
N
H

Vitamin B6
CH2OH

HO

CH2OH

O

H2N

N

N
H

CH2

N

N

N

Folate

O

C

n

COOH

H
N

CH

CH2

CH2

C

O

COOH

CH

N
H

CH2

CH2

C OH

O

Vitamin B12

CH2CH2CONH2

Methylcobalamine
Adenosylcobalamin

CONH2

CH2

H3C

CONH2

H3C

CH2

H3C

CH3

CH2CH2CONH2

N

N

Co+

N

N

CH2CH2CONH2

CH3
CH3

NHCOCH2CH2

CH3

CH3

CH2CH2CONH2

Coenzyme for
  methionine
  synthase
  and
   L-methylmalonyl-
  CoA mutase

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

CH2 CHCH3

N

N

CH3

CH3

O–

P

O

O

O

HO

O
HOCH2

OH Cbl

FIGURE 333-1  Structures and principal functions of vitamins associated with human disorders.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2525

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2526

Vitamin

Vitamin C
O

O

C C

CC

C CH2OH

OH OH

OH

Active derivative or
  cofactor form

Principal
function

Ascorbic acid and
  dehydroascorbic acid

Vitamin A

Retinol, retinaldehyde,
  and retinoic acid

Participation as a
  redox ion in many
  biologic
  oxidation and
  hydrogen transfer
  reactions

Formation of
  rhodopsin (vision)
  and glycoproteins
  (epithelial cell
  function); also
  regulates gene
  transcription

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D Maintenance of
  blood calcium
  and phosphorus
  levels;
  antiproliferative
  hormone

(β-Carotene)

CH2OH

(Retinol)

Vitamin D

OH

CH2

OH

HO

Vitamin E

CH3

O

CH2[CH2

CH2

CH

CH2]3H

Tocopherols and
  tocotrienols

Antioxidants

HO

Vitamin K
O

R

O

Vitamin K hydroquinone Cofactor for

  posttranslation
  carboxylation of
  many proteins
  including essential
  clotting factors

FIGURE 333-1  (Continued)

coefficient of 1.25) is interpreted as abnormal. Thiamine or the phos-
phorylated esters of thiamine in serum or blood also can be measured 
by high-performance liquid chromatography to detect deficiency.

TREATMENT
Thiamine Deficiency

In  acute  thiamine  deficiency  with  either  cardiovascular  or  neu-
rologic  signs,  200  mg  of  thiamine  three  times  daily  should  be 
given intravenously until there is no further improvement in acute 
symptoms; oral thiamine (10 mg/d) should subsequently be given 
until  recovery  is  complete.  Cardiovascular  and  ophthalmoplegic 
improvement  occurs  within  24  h.  Other  manifestations  gradually 
clear,  although  psychosis  in  Wernicke-Korsakoff  syndrome  may 
be  permanent  or  may  persist  for  several  months.  Other  nutrient 
deficiencies  should  be  corrected  concomitantly.  In  view  of  the 
widespread,  often  unrecognized  (subclinical)  deficiency,  a  more 
generous  supplementation  of  this  vitamin  in  the  emergency  care 
setting is warranted.

Toxicity  Although  hypersensitivity/anaphylaxis  has  been  reported 
after high intravenous doses of thiamine, no adverse effects have been 
recorded from either food or supplements at high doses.
 ■ RIBOFLAVIN (VITAMIN B2)
Riboflavin  is  important  for  the  metabolism  of  fat,  carbohydrate,  and 
protein,  acting  as  a  respiratory  coenzyme  and  an  electron  donor. 

Enzymes  that  contain  flavin  adenine  dinucleotide  (FAD)  or  flavin 
mononucleotide  (FMN)  as  prosthetic  groups  are  known  as  fla-
voenzymes  (e.g.,  succinic  acid  dehydrogenase,  monoamine  oxidase, 
glutathione  reductase).  FAD  is  a  cofactor  for  methyltetrahydrofolate 
reductase  and  therefore  modulates  homocysteine  metabolism.  The 
vitamin  also  plays  a  role  in  drug  and  steroid  metabolism,  including 
detoxification reactions.

Although much is known about the chemical and enzymatic reac-
tions of riboflavin, the clinical manifestations of riboflavin deficiency 
are nonspecific and are similar to those of other deficiencies of B vita-
mins. Riboflavin deficiency is manifested principally by lesions of the 
mucocutaneous surfaces of the mouth and skin. In addition, corneal 
vascularization, anemia, and personality changes have been described 
with riboflavin deficiency.
Deficiency and Excess  Riboflavin deficiency almost always is due 
to dietary deficiency. Milk, other dairy products, and enriched breads 
and cereals are the most important dietary sources of riboflavin in the 
United States, although lean meat, fish, eggs, broccoli, and legumes are 
also good sources. Riboflavin is extremely sensitive to light, and milk 
should be stored in containers that protect against photodegradation. 
Laboratory  diagnosis  of  riboflavin  deficiency  can  be  made  by  deter-
mination of red blood cell or urinary riboflavin concentrations or by 
measurement  of  erythrocyte  glutathione  reductase  activity,  with  and 
without added FAD. Because of the limited capacity of the gastrointes-
tinal tract to absorb riboflavin (~27 mg after one oral dose) as well as 
the  instantaneous  urinary  excretion,  riboflavin  toxicity  has  not  been 
described.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2526

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System ■ NIACIN (VITAMIN B3)
The  term  niacin  refers  to  nicotinic  acid  and  nicotinamide  and  their 
biologically  active  derivatives.  Nicotinic  acid  and  nicotinamide  serve 
as  precursors  of  two  coenzymes,  nicotinamide  adenine  dinucleotide 
(NAD) and NAD phosphate (NADP), which are important in numer-
ous oxidation and reduction reactions in the body. In addition, NAD 
and NADP are active in adenine diphosphate–ribose transfer reactions 
involved in DNA repair and calcium mobilization.

Metabolism and Requirements  Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide 
are absorbed well from the stomach and small intestine. The bioavail-
ability of niacin from beans, milk, meat, and eggs is high; bioavailability 
from cereal grains is lower. Since flour is enriched with “free” niacin 
(i.e.,  the  non-coenzyme  form),  bioavailability  is  excellent.  Median 
intakes of niacin in the United States considerably exceed the recom-
mended dietary allowance (RDA).

The  amino  acid  tryptophan  can  be  converted  to  niacin  with  an 
efficiency of 60:1 by weight. Thus, the RDA for niacin is expressed in 
niacin  equivalents.  A  lower-level  conversion  of  tryptophan  to  niacin 
occurs in vitamin B6 and/or riboflavin deficiencies and in the presence 
of  isoniazid.  The  urinary  excretion  products  of  niacin  include  2- 
pyridone and 2-methyl nicotinamide, measurements of which are used 
in the diagnosis of niacin deficiency.

Deficiency  Niacin  deficiency  causes  pellagra,  which  is  found 
mostly  among  people  eating  corn-based  diets  in  parts  of  China, 
Africa, and India. Pellagra in North America is found mainly among 
alcoholics;  among  patients  with  congenital  defects  of  intestinal  and 
kidney  absorption  of  tryptophan  (Hartnup  disease;  Chap.  420);  and 
among patients with carcinoid syndrome (Chap. 84), in which there is 
increased conversion of tryptophan to serotonin. The antituberculosis 
drug  isoniazid  is  a  structural  analogue  of  niacin  and  can  precipitate 
pellagra. In the setting of famine or population displacement, pellagra 
results  from  the  absolute  lack  of  niacin  but  also  from  the  deficiency 
of micronutrients required for the conversion of tryptophan to niacin 
(e.g., iron, riboflavin, and pyridoxine). The early symptoms of pellagra 
include loss of appetite, generalized weakness and irritability, abdomi-
nal pain, and vomiting. Bright red glossitis then ensues and is followed 
by a characteristic skin rash that is pigmented and scaling, particularly 
in skin areas exposed to sunlight. This rash is known as Casal’s necklace 
because it forms a ring around the neck; it is seen in advanced cases. 
Vaginitis and esophagitis also may occur. Diarrhea (due in part to proc-
titis and in part to malabsorption), depression, seizures, and dementia 
are also part of the pellagra syndrome. The primary manifestations of 
this syndrome are sometimes referred to as “the four Ds”: dermatitis, 
diarrhea, and  dementia leading to  death. Aging is characterized by a 
decline in cellular NAD+, and it seems plausible that maintaining and/
or reestablishing cellular NAD+, might favorably modulate the risk of 
chronic diseases of aging (e.g., metabolic disorders).

TREATMENT
Pellagra

Treatment  of  pellagra  consists  of  oral  supplementation  with  100–
200  mg  of  nicotinamide  or  nicotinic  acid  three  times  daily  for   
5 days. High doses of nicotinic acid (2 g/d in a time-release form) 
are used for the treatment of elevated cholesterol and triglyceride 
levels  and/or  low  high-density  lipoprotein  cholesterol  levels,  but 
without proven evidence to prevent cardiovascular disease. Never-
theless, nicotinic acid may be useful in patients with statin intoler-
ance or severe hypertriglyceridemia (Chap. 407).

Toxicity  Prostaglandin-mediated  flushing  due  to  binding  of  the 
vitamin  to  a  G  protein–coupled  receptor  has  been  observed  at  daily 
nicotinic  acid  doses  as  low  as  30  mg  taken  as  a  supplement  or  as 
therapy for dyslipidemia. There is no evidence of toxicity from niacin 
that  is  derived  from  food  sources.  Flushing  always  starts  in  the  face 
and  may  be  accompanied  by  skin  dryness,  itching,  paresthesia,  and 

2527

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

headache.  Flushing  is  subject  to  tachyphylaxis  and  often  improves 
with time; premedication with aspirin may alleviate these symptoms. 
Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain also occur at similar doses of 
niacin.  Hepatic  toxicity  is  the  most  serious  toxic  reaction  caused  by 
sustained-release  niacin  and  may  present  as  jaundice  with  elevated 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
levels. A few cases of fulminant hepatitis requiring liver transplantation 
have been reported at doses of 3–9 g/d. Other toxic reactions include 
glucose  intolerance,  hyperuricemia,  macular  edema,  and  macular 
cysts. The combination of nicotinic acid preparations for dyslipidemia 
plus 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl–coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase 
inhibitors may increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis. The upper limit for 
daily (nontherapeutic) niacin intake has been set at 35 mg.

 ■ PYRIDOXINE (VITAMIN B6)
Vitamin B6 refers to a family of compounds that includes pyridoxine, 
pyridoxal,  pyridoxamine,  and  their  5′-phosphate  derivatives.  5′-Pyri-
doxal  phosphate  (PLP)  is  a  cofactor  for  >100  enzymes  involved  in 
amino  acid  metabolism.  Vitamin  B6  also  is  involved  in  heme  and 
neurotransmitter synthesis and in the metabolism of glycogen, lipids, 
steroids, sphingoid bases, and several vitamins, including the conver-
sion of tryptophan to niacin.

Dietary Sources  Plants contain vitamin B6 in the form of pyridox-
ine, whereas animal tissues contain PLP and pyridoxamine phosphate. 
The  vitamin  B6  contained  in  plants  is  less  bioavailable  than  that  in 
animal tissues. Rich food sources of vitamin B6 include legumes, nuts, 
wheat bran, and meat, although it is present in all food groups.

Deficiency  Symptoms  of  vitamin  B6  deficiency  include  epithelial 
changes,  as  seen  frequently  with  other  B  vitamin  deficiencies.  In 
addition, severe vitamin B6 deficiency can lead to peripheral neurop-
athy,  abnormal  electroencephalograms,  and  personality  changes  that 
include  depression  and  confusion.  In  infants,  diarrhea,  seizures,  and 
anemia  have  been  reported.  Microcytic  hypochromic  anemia  is  due 
to  diminished  hemoglobin  synthesis,  since  the  first  enzyme  involved 
in  heme  biosynthesis  (aminolevulinate  synthase)  requires  PLP  as  a 
cofactor  (Chap.  97).  In  some  case  reports,  platelet  dysfunction  has 
been  reported.  Since  vitamin  B6  is  necessary  for  the  conversion  of 
homocysteine  to  cystathionine,  it  is  possible  that  chronic  low-grade 
vitamin B6 deficiency may result in hyperhomocysteinemia, which has 
been associated with vascular dysfunction and an increased risk of car-
diovascular disease; however, so far, there is only limited randomized 
controlled trial evidence (Chap. 420). Independent of homocysteine, 
low levels of circulating vitamin B6 have been associated with inflam-
mation and elevated levels of C-reactive protein.

Certain medications, such as isoniazid, l-dopa, penicillamine, and 
cycloserine, interact with PLP due to a reaction with carbonyl groups. 
Pyridoxine  should  be  given  concurrently  with  isoniazid  to  avoid 
neuropathy. The increased ratio of AST to ALT seen in alcoholic liver 
disease reflects the relative vitamin B6 dependence of ALT. Vitamin B6 
dependency syndromes that require pharmacologic doses of vitamin B6 
are  rare;  they  include  cystathionine  β-synthase  deficiency,  pyridox-
ine-responsive  (primarily  sideroblastic)  anemias,  and  gyrate  atrophy 
with chorioretinal degeneration due to decreased activity of the mito-
chondrial  enzyme  ornithine  aminotransferase.  In  these  situations, 
100–200 mg/d of oral vitamin B6 is required for treatment.

Severe  nausea  and  vomiting  in  pregnancy  might  respond  to  pyr-
idoxine  combined  with  doxylamine.  High  doses  of  vitamin  B6  have 
been  used  to  treat  carpal  tunnel  syndrome,  premenstrual  syndrome, 
schizophrenia,  autism,  and  diabetic  neuropathy  but  have  not  been 
found to be effective.

The laboratory diagnosis of vitamin B6 deficiency is generally based 
on  low  plasma  PLP  values  (<20  nmol/L).  Vitamin  B6  deficiency  is 
treated with 50 mg/d; higher doses of 100–200 mg/d are given if the 
deficiency is related to medication use. Vitamin B6 should not be given 
with l-dopa, since the vitamin interferes with the action of this drug.

Toxicity  The safe upper limit for vitamin B6 has been set at 100 mg/d, 
although no adverse effects have been associated with high intakes of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2527

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2528 vitamin  B6  from  food  sources  only.  When  toxicity  occurs,  it  causes 
severe  sensory  neuropathy,  leaving  patients  unable  to  walk;  however, 
in most cases, this is reversible upon cessation of the high intake. Med-
ication safety monitoring suggests a rather high prevalence of vitamin 
B6–induced neuropathy. Accordingly, long-term high-dose vitamin B6 
supplementation should be discouraged. Some cases of photosensitiv-
ity and dermatitis have been reported.
 ■ FOLATE (VITAMIN B12)
See Chap. 99.
 ■ VITAMIN C
Both ascorbic acid (only the l-isomer) and its oxidized product dehy-
droascorbic acid are biologically active. Actions of vitamin C include 
antioxidant activity, promotion of nonheme iron absorption, carnitine 
biosynthesis,  conversion  of  dopamine  to  norepinephrine,  tyrosine 
catabolism,  histone  and  DNA  demethylation,  and  synthesis  of  many 
peptide hormones. Vitamin C is also important for connective tissue 
metabolism and cross-linking (proline hydroxylation), and it is a com-
ponent  of  many  drug-metabolizing  enzyme  systems,  particularly  the 
mixed-function oxidase systems.
Absorption  and  Dietary  Sources  Vitamin  C  is  almost  com-
pletely absorbed if <100 mg is administered in a single dose; however, 
only ≤50% is absorbed at doses >1 g. Enhanced degradation and fecal 
and urinary excretion of vitamin C occur at higher intake levels.

Good dietary sources of vitamin C include citrus fruits, green veg-
etables (especially broccoli), tomatoes, and potatoes. Consumption of 
five servings of fruits and vegetables a day provides vitamin C in excess 
of the RDA of 90 mg/d for men and 75 mg/d for women. In addition, 
~40% of the U.S. population consumes vitamin C as a dietary supple-
ment in which “natural forms” of the vitamin are no more bioavailable 
than synthetic forms. Smoking (including “passive” smoking), hemo-
dialysis, pregnancy, lactation, and stress (e.g., infection, trauma) appear 
to increase vitamin C requirements.
Deficiency  Vitamin  C  deficiency  causes  scurvy.  In  the  United 
States, this condition is seen primarily among the poor and the elderly, 
in  alcoholics  who  consume  <10  mg/d  of  vitamin  C,  and  in  young 
adults  who  eat  severely  unbalanced  diets.  In  addition  to  generalized 
fatigue,  symptoms  of  scurvy  primarily  reflect  impaired  formation  of 
mature connective tissue and include bleeding into the skin (petechiae, 
ecchymoses, perifollicular hemorrhages); inflamed and bleeding gums; 
and  manifestations  of  bleeding  into  joints,  the  peritoneal  cavity,  the 
pericardium, and the adrenal glands. In children, vitamin C deficiency 
may cause impaired bone growth. Laboratory diagnosis of vitamin C 
deficiency is based on low plasma or leukocyte levels.

Administration  of  vitamin  C  (200  mg/d)  improves  the  symptoms 
of scurvy within several days. High-dose vitamin C supplementation 
(e.g., 0.2 g up to several grams per day) may slightly decrease the symp-
toms and duration of upper respiratory tract infections. Vitamin C sup-
plementation has also been reported to be useful in Chédiak-Higashi 
syndrome (Chap. 64) and osteogenesis imperfecta (Chap. 413). Diets 
high in vitamin C have been claimed to lower the incidence of certain 
cancers,  particularly  esophageal  and  gastric  cancers.  If  proven,  this 
effect may be because vitamin C can prevent the conversion of nitrites 
and  secondary  amines  to  carcinogenic  nitrosamines.  Emerging  evi-
dence suggests a therapeutic effect of intravenous parenteral (not oral) 
pharmacologic doses of up to 1g/kg body weight of ascorbic acid in the 
treatment of cancers (e.g., metastatic pancreatic, ovarian, glioblastoma, 
and  non-small-cell  lung  cancers).  The  mechanism  of  pharmacologic 
ascorbate  in  cancer  treatment  (as  a  stand-alone  agent  or  with  other 
therapeutic agents) appear to be pro-oxidative, either synergistic (e.g., 
gemcitabine, PD-1 inhibitors, radiation) or additive with other agents.

reasonable to advise patients with a history of kidney stones (especially 
oxalate renal stones) and renal insufficiency not to take large doses of 
vitamin C. There is also an unproven but possible risk that chronic high 
doses of vitamin C could promote iron overload and iron toxicity (e.g., 
in patients with hemochromatosis or thalassemia major). High doses of 
vitamin C can induce hemolysis in patients with glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase  deficiency,  and  doses  >1  g/d  can  cause  false-negative 
guaiac  reactions  and  interfere  with  tests  for  urinary  glucose.  High 
doses  may  interfere  with  the  activity  of  certain  drugs  and  diagnostic 
tests  (e.g.,  false-negative  results  of  guaiac-based  fecal  occult  blood 
tests).

 ■ BIOTIN
Biotin (also known as vitamin B7 or vitamin H) is a water-soluble vita-
min that plays a role in gene expression, gluconeogenesis, and fatty acid 
synthesis and serves as a carbon dioxide (CO2) carrier on the surface 
of both cytosolic and mitochondrial carboxylase enzymes. The vitamin 
also functions in the catabolism of specific amino acids (e.g., leucine) 
and in gene regulation by histone biotinylation. Excellent food sources 
of  biotin  include  organ  meat  such  as  liver  or  kidney,  soy  and  other 
beans,  yeast,  and  egg  yolks;  however,  egg  white  contains  the  protein 
avidin, which strongly binds the vitamin and reduces its bioavailability.
Biotin deficiency due to low dietary intake is rare; rather, deficiency 
is  due  to  inborn  errors  of  metabolism.  Biotin  deficiency  has  been 
induced by experimental feeding of egg white diets and by biotin-free 
parenteral  nutrition  in  patients  with  short  bowels.  In  adults,  biotin 
deficiency  results  in  mental  changes  (depression,  hallucinations), 
paresthesia,  anorexia,  and  nausea.  A  scaling,  seborrheic,  and  erythe-
matous rash may occur around the eyes, nose, and mouth as well as 
on the extremities. In infants, biotin deficiency presents as hypotonia, 
lethargy, and apathy. In addition, infants may develop alopecia and a 
characteristic rash that includes the ears. At present, evidence does not 
support a therapeutic role of high-dose biotin in multiple sclerosis. The 
laboratory diagnosis of biotin deficiency can be established on the basis 
of a decreased concentration of urinary biotin (or its major metabo-
lites),  increased  urinary  excretion  of  3-hydroxyisovaleric  acid  after  a 
leucine challenge, or decreased activity of biotin-dependent enzymes 
in lymphocytes (e.g., propionyl-CoA carboxylase). Treatment requires 
pharmacologic  doses  of  biotin,  that  is,  up  to  10  mg/d.  No  toxicity  is 
known.  High-dose  biotin  supplements  could  interfere  with  different 
immunoassay platforms based on streptavidin-biotin technology (e.g., 
biotinylated immunoassays), resulting in false-positive (e.g., free T4 or 
T3) or false-negative tests (e.g., thyroid-stimulating hormone, troponin, 
β-human chorionic gonadotropin pregnancy test).

 ■ PANTOTHENIC ACID (VITAMIN B5)
Pantothenic acid is a component of coenzyme A and phosphopanteth-
eine, which are involved in fatty acid metabolism and the synthesis of 
cholesterol, steroid hormones, and all compounds formed from isopre-
noid units. In addition, pantothenic acid is involved in the acetylation 
of  proteins.  The  vitamin  is  excreted  in  the  urine,  and  the  laboratory 
diagnosis of deficiency is based on low urinary vitamin levels.

The vitamin is ubiquitous in the food supply. Liver, yeast, egg yolks, 
whole  grains,  and  vegetables  are  particularly  good  sources.  Human 
pantothenic  acid  deficiency  has  been  demonstrated  only  by  experi-
mental feeding of diets low in pantothenic acid or by administration 
of  a  specific  pantothenic  acid  antagonist.  The  symptoms  of  panto-
thenic  acid  deficiency  are  nonspecific  and  include  gastrointestinal 
disturbance, depression, muscle cramps, paresthesia, ataxia, and hypo-
glycemia.  Pantothenic  acid  deficiency  is  believed  to  have  caused  the 
“burning feet syndrome” seen in prisoners of war during World War II. 
No toxicity of this vitamin has been reported.

Toxicity  Taking  >2  g  of  vitamin  C  in  a  single  dose  may  result 
in  abdominal  pain,  diarrhea,  and  nausea.  Since  vitamin  C  may  be 
metabolized  to  oxalate,  it  is  feared  that  chronic  high-dose  vitamin  C 
supplementation  could  result  in  an  increased  prevalence  of  kidney 
stones. However, except in patients with preexisting renal disease, this 
association has not been borne out in several trials. Nevertheless, it is 

 ■ CHOLINE
Choline  is  a  precursor  for  acetylcholine,  phospholipids,  and  betaine. 
Choline  is  necessary  for  the  structural  integrity  of  cell  membranes, 
cholinergic  neurotransmission,  lipid  and  cholesterol  metabolism, 
methyl-group  metabolism,  and  transmembrane  signaling.  Recently, 
a  recommended  adequate  intake  was  set  at  550  mg/d  for  men  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2528

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System425  mg/d  for  women,  although  certain  genetic  polymorphisms  can 
increase an individual’s requirement. Choline is thought to be a “con-
ditionally  essential”  nutrient  in  that  its  de  novo  synthesis  occurs  in 
the  liver  and  results  in  lesser-than-used  amounts  only  under  certain 
stress  conditions  (e.g.,  alcoholic  liver  disease).  The  dietary  require-
ment for choline depends on the status of other nutrients involved in 
methyl-group metabolism (folate, vitamin B12, vitamin B6, and methi-
onine)  and  thus  varies  widely.  Choline  is  widely  distributed  in  food 
(e.g., egg yolks, wheat germ, organ meat, milk) in the form of lecithin 
(phosphatidylcholine). Choline deficiency has occurred only in exper-
imental conditions or in patients receiving parenteral nutrition devoid 
of choline and rarely in specific inborn errors of choline metabolism. 
Deficiency results in fatty liver, elevated aminotransferase levels, and 
skeletal  muscle  damage  with  high  creatine  phosphokinase  values. 
The diagnosis of choline deficiency is currently based on low plasma 
levels, although nonspecific conditions (e.g., heavy exercise) may also 
suppress plasma levels.

Toxicity from choline results in hypotension, cholinergic sweating, 
diarrhea, salivation, and a fishy body odor. The upper limit for choline 
intake  has  been  set  at  3.5  g/d.  Because  of  its  ability  to  lower  choles-
terol  and  homocysteine  levels,  choline  treatment  has  been  suggested 
for patients with dementia and patients at high risk of cardiovascular 
disease. However, the benefits of such treatment have not been firmly 
documented; recently, signals for an increased cardiovascular risk have 
been reported. Choline- and betaine-restricted diets are of therapeutic 
value in trimethylaminuria (“fish odor syndrome”) or in decreasing the 
production  of  the  gut  microbiome-derived  trimethylamine  N-oxide 
(TMAO) as a potential cardiovascular risk modulator.

 ■ FLAVONOIDS
Flavonoids  constitute  a  large  family  of  polyphenols  that  contribute 
to  the  aroma,  taste,  and  color  of  fruits  and  vegetables.  Major  groups 
of  dietary  flavonoids  include  anthocyanidins  in  berries;  catechins  in 
green  tea  and  chocolate;  flavonols  (e.g.,  quercetin)  in  broccoli,  kale, 
leeks,  onions,  and  the  skins  of  grapes  and  apples;  and  isoflavones 
(e.g., genistein) in legumes. Isoflavones have a low bioavailability and 
are partially metabolized by the intestinal flora. The dietary intake of 
flavonoids is estimated at 10–100 mg/d; this figure is almost certainly 
an  underestimate  attributable  to  a  lack  of  information  on  their  con-
centrations in many foods. Several flavonoids have antioxidant activity 
and  affect  cell  signaling.  From  observational  epidemiologic  studies 
and limited clinical (human and animal) studies, flavonoids have been 
postulated to play a role in the prevention of several chronic diseases, 
including  neurodegenerative  disease,  diabetes,  and  osteoporosis.  The 
ultimate  importance  and  usefulness  of  these  compounds  against 
human disease have not been consistently demonstrated. Nevertheless, 
a  dietary  pattern  with  high  intake  of  fruits,  vegetables,  and  legumes 
should  be  encouraged  to  assure  a  higher  intake  of  these  and  others 
nonnutritive bioactives.

 ■ VITAMIN A
Vitamin  A,  in  the  strictest  sense,  refers  to  retinol  and  retinyl  esters. 
However,  the  oxidized  metabolites  retinaldehyde  and  retinoic  acid 
are  also  biologically  active  compounds.  The  term  retinoids  includes 
all  molecules  (including  synthetic  molecules)  that  are  chemically 
related to retinol. Retinaldehyde (11-cis) is the form of vitamin A that 
is  required  for  normal  vision,  whereas  retinoic  acid  is  necessary  for 
normal morphogenesis, growth, and cell differentiation. Retinoic acid 
does not function directly in vision and, in contrast to retinol, is not 
involved in reproduction. Vitamin A also plays a role in iron utiliza-
tion, humoral immunity, T cell–mediated immunity, natural killer cell 
activity, and phagocytosis.

Vitamin  A  is  found  in  the  human  food  supply  in  two  forms:  pre-
formed as retinyl esters and provitamin A carotenoids. There are >700 
carotenoids in nature, ~50 of which can be metabolized to vitamin A. 
β-Carotene is the most prevalent carotenoid with provitamin A activity 
in the food supply. In humans, significant fractions of carotenoids are 
absorbed intact and are stored in liver and fat. It is estimated that in 
healthy humans ≥12 μg (range, 4–27 μg) of dietary all-trans β-carotene 

2529

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

is  equivalent  to  1  μg  of  retinol  activity,  whereas  the  figure  is  ≥24  μg 
for other dietary provitamin A carotenoids (e.g., β-cryptoxanthin, α- 
carotene). The vitamin A equivalency for a β-carotene supplement in 
an oily solution is 2:1.
Metabolism  The liver contains ~90% of the vitamin A reserves in 
healthy individuals and secretes vitamin A in the form of retinol, which 
is  bound  in  the  circulation  to  retinol-binding  protein.  Once  binding 
has  occurred,  the  retinol-binding  protein  complex  interacts  with  a 
second protein, transthyretin. This trimolecular complex functions to 
prevent vitamin A from being filtered by the kidney glomerulus, thus 
protecting the body against the toxicity of retinol and allowing retinol 
to be taken up by specific cell-surface receptors that recognize retinol- 
binding protein. A certain amount of vitamin A enters peripheral cells 
even if it is not bound to retinol-binding protein. After retinol is inter-
nalized by the cell, it becomes bound to a series of cellular retinol-bind-
ing proteins, which function as sequestering and transporting agents 
as well as co-ligands for enzymatic reactions. Certain cells also contain 
retinoic acid–binding proteins, which have sequestering functions but 
also shuttle retinoic acid to the nucleus and enable its metabolism.

Vitamin  A  metabolites  (retinoids)  such  as  retinoic  acid  are  potent 
regulators of gene transcription through nuclear receptor signaling, thus 
playing a key role in many cellular and metabolic pathways. Two fami-
lies of receptors (retinoic acid receptors [RARs] and retinoid X receptors 
[RXRs])  are  active  in  retinoid-mediated  gene  transcription.  Retinoid 
receptors  regulate  transcription  by  binding  as  dimeric  complexes  to 
specific  DNA  sites—the  retinoic  acid  response  elements—in  target 
genes (Chap. 377). The receptors can either stimulate or repress gene 
expression  in  response  to  their  ligands.  RARs  bind  all-trans  retinoic 
acid and 9-cis-retinoic acid, whereas RXRs bind only 9-cis-retinoic acid.
The  retinoid  receptors  play  an  important  role  in  controlling  cell 
proliferation  and  differentiation.  RXRs  dimerize  with  other  nuclear 
receptors to function as coregulators of genes responsive to retinoids, 
but also to thyroid hormone and calcitriol. RXR agonists induce insulin 
sensitivity experimentally, perhaps because RXRs are cofactors for the 
peroxisome  proliferator-activated  receptors,  which  also  mediate  fatty 
acid and carbohydrate metabolism and are targets for different drugs 
including thiazolidinedione drugs (e.g., rosiglitazone and pioglitazone) 
(Chap. 404).
Dietary Sources  The retinol activity equivalent (RAE) is used to 
express the vitamin A value of food: 1 RAE is defined as 1 μg of retinol 
(0.003491 mmol), 12 μg of β-carotene, and 24 μg of other provitamin 
A  carotenoids.  In  older  literature,  vitamin  A  often  was  expressed  in 
international units (IUs), with 1 μg of retinol equal to 3.33 IU of retinol 
and 20 IU of β-carotene. Although these IUs are no longer in scientific 
use, they can still be found in reports of the food industry and in public 
health interventions in low-income countries.

Liver, fish, and eggs are excellent food sources for preformed vita-
min  A;  vegetable  sources  of  provitamin  A  carotenoids  include  dark 
green and deeply colored fruits and vegetables. Moderate cooking of 
vegetables enhances carotenoid release for uptake in the gut. Carote-
noid absorption is also aided by some fat in a meal. Exclusive breast-
feeding  can  cover  the  vitamin  A  needs  of  infants  if  the  mother  has 
an  adequate  vitamin  A  status  and  a  large  enough  volume  of  milk.  If 
the nursing mother has inadequate vitamin A intake or concomitant 
diseases  or  her  infant  was  a  preterm  delivery,  breast  milk  probably 
will not supply enough vitamin A to prevent deficiency. In developing 
countries,  chronic  dietary  deficiency  is  the  main  cause  of  vitamin  A 
deficiency and is exacerbated by infection. In early childhood, low vita-
min A status results from inadequate intakes of animal food sources 
and  edible  oils,  both  of  which  are  expensive,  coupled  with  seasonal 
unavailability  of  vegetables  and  fruits  and  lack  of  marketed  fortified 
food products. Factors that interfere with vitamin A metabolism may 
also affect status or function. For example, concurrent zinc deficiency 
can interfere with the mobilization of vitamin A from liver stores. Alco-
hol interferes with the conversion of retinol to retinaldehyde in the eye 
by competing for alcohol (retinol) dehydrogenase. Drugs that interfere 
with the absorption of vitamin A include mineral oil, neomycin, and 
bile acid sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2529

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2530 Deficiency  Vitamin  A  deficiency  is  endemic  in  areas  where  diets 
are chronically poor, especially in southern Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, 
some parts of Latin America, and the western Pacific, including parts 
of  China.  Vitamin  A  status  is  usually  assessed  by  measuring  serum 
retinol  (normal  range,  1.05–3.50  μmol/L  [30–100  μg/dL])  or  via 
dose-response  tests  or  tests  of  dark  adaptation.  To  assure  a  correct 
biochemical assessment of vitamin A status, a simultaneous assessment 
of the inflammatory status is needed (in analogy to the assessment of 
iron status); not doing so may result in an overestimation of vitamin A 
deficiency. Correction factors to adjust the measured plasma vitamin 
A levels to account for the influence of C-reactive protein and α1-acid 
glycoprotein are available. Stable isotopic or invasive liver biopsy meth-
ods are available to estimate total-body stores of vitamin A. As judged 
by  deficient  serum  retinol  (<0.70  μmol/L  [20  μg/dL]),  vitamin  A 
deficiency worldwide is present in 190 million preschool-age children, 
among  whom  >5  million  have  an  ocular  manifestation  of  deficiency 
termed xerophthalmia. This condition includes milder stages of night 
blindness  and  conjunctival  xerosis  (dryness)  with  Bitot’s  spots  (white 
patches  of  keratinized  epithelium  appearing  on  the  sclera)  that  may 
affect 1–5% of children in deficient populations as well as rare, poten-
tially blinding corneal ulceration and necrosis. Keratomalacia (soften-
ing  of  the  cornea)  leads  to  corneal  scarring  that  blinds  an  estimated 
quarter of a million children each year and is associated with fatality 
rates of 4–25%. However, vitamin A deficiency severe enough to cause 
any clinical stage poses an increased risk of death from diarrhea, dys-
entery, measles, malaria, or respiratory disease. This is because vitamin 
A  deficiency  can  compromise  barrier,  innate,  and  acquired  immune 
defenses  to  infection.  In  areas  where  deficiency  is  widely  prevalent, 
vitamin A supplementation can markedly reduce the risk of childhood 
mortality  (by  23–34%,  on  average).  About  10%  of  pregnant  women 
in undernourished settings also develop night blindness (assessed by 
history)  during  the  latter  half  of  pregnancy;  this  level  of  moderate 
to severe vitamin A deficiency is associated with an increased risk of 
maternal infection and death. Maternal vitamin A deficiency may also 
exacerbate  already  low  vitamin  A  nutrition  and  associated  risks  for 
the newborn. In South Asia, where maternal deficiency is prominent, 
giving infants a single oral dose (50,000 IU) of vitamin A shortly after 
birth  has  reduced  infant  mortality  by  ≥10%,  whereas  in  African  set-
tings less affected by maternal vitamin A deficiency, no effect has been 
noted, revealing differences in risk of deficiency and benefit of supple-
mentation  across  regions.  However,  the  World  Health  Organization 
does not recommend high-dose supplementation to newborns.

TREATMENT
Vitamin A Deficiency

Vitamin A is commercially available for treatment and prevention 
in esterified forms (e.g., acetate, palmitate), which are more stable 
than  other  forms.  Any  stage  of  xerophthalmia  should  be  treated 
with 60 mg (or RAE) or 200,000 IU of vitamin A in oily solution, 
usually contained in a soft-gel capsule. The same dose is repeated 
1  and  14  days  later.  Doses  should  be  reduced  by  half  for  patients 
6–11 months of age. Mothers with night blindness or Bitot’s spots 
should be given vitamin A orally 3 mg daily for at least 3 months. 
These regimens are efficacious, and they are far less expensive and 
more  widely  available  than  injectable  water-miscible  vitamin  A.   
A common approach to prevention is to provide vitamin A supple-
mentation every 4–6 months to young children 6 months to 5 years 
of  age  (both  HIV-positive  and  HIV-negative)  in  high-risk  areas. 
For prevention, infants 6–11 months of age should receive 30 mg of 
vitamin A; children 12–59 months of age should receive 60 mg. For 
reasons that are not clear, although early neonatal vitamin A may 
reduce infant mortality, vitamin A given between 1 and 5 months 
of age has not proven effective in improving survival in high-risk 
settings.

Uncomplicated  vitamin  A  deficiency  is  rare  in  industrialized 
countries. One high-risk group—extremely low-birth-weight (<1000-
g)  infants—is  likely  to  be  vitamin  A  deficient  and  should  receive  a 

supplement  of  1500  μg  (or  RAE)  three  times  a  week  for  4  weeks. 
Severe  measles  in  any  society  can  lead  to  secondary  vitamin  A 
deficiency. Children hospitalized with measles should receive two 
60-mg doses of vitamin A on 2 consecutive days. Vitamin A defi-
ciency  most  often  occurs  in  patients  with  malabsorptive  diseases 
(e.g.,  celiac  sprue,  short-bowel  syndrome)  who  have  abnormal 
dark  adaptation  or  symptoms  of  night  blindness  without  other 
ocular changes. Typically, such patients are diagnosed in advanced 
care settings where they are treated for 1 month with 15 mg/d of a 
water-miscible preparation of vitamin A. This treatment is followed 
by  a  lower  maintenance  dose,  with  the  exact  amount  determined 
by  monitoring  serum  retinol.  Finding  application  elsewhere  in 
medicine, retinoic acid is useful in the treatment of promyelocytic 
leukemia  (Chap.  104)  and  also  is  used  in  the  treatment  of  cystic 
acne because it inhibits keratinization, decreases sebum secretion, 
and possibly alters the inflammatory reaction (Chap. 57).

No specific signs or symptoms result from carotenoid deficiency. 
It was postulated that β-carotene would be an effective chemopre-
ventive  agent  for  cancer  because  numerous  epidemiologic  studies 
had shown that diets high in β-carotene were associated with lower 
incidences  of  cancers  of  the  respiratory  and  digestive  systems. 
However, intervention studies in smokers found that treatment with 
high doses of β-carotene actually resulted in more lung cancers than 
did  treatment  with  placebo.  Non–provitamin  A  carotenoids  such 
as lutein and zeaxanthin have been suggested to confer protection 
against  macular  degeneration,  and  one  large-scale  intervention 
study  did  not  show  a  beneficial  effect  except  in  those  with  a  low 
lutein status. The use of the non–provitamin A carotenoid lycopene 
to protect against prostate cancer has been proposed. However, the 
effectiveness  of  these  agents  has  not  been  proved  by  intervention 
studies, and the mechanisms underlying these purported biologic 
actions are unknown.

Selective plant-breeding techniques that lead to a higher provi-
tamin A carotenoid content in staple foods may decrease vitamin  
A  malnutrition  in  low-income  countries.  Moreover,  a  recently 
developed  genetically  modified  food  (Golden  Rice)  had  a  β- 
carotene–to–vitamin A conversion ratio of ~3:1 in children.

Toxicity  The acute toxicity of vitamin A was first noted in Arctic 
explorers who ate polar bear liver and has also been seen after admin-
istration  of  150  mg  to  adults  or  100  mg  to  children.  Acute  toxicity 
is  manifested  by  increased  intracranial  pressure,  vertigo,  diplopia, 
bulging fontanels (in children), seizures, and exfoliative dermatitis; it 
may result in death. Among children being treated for vitamin A defi-
ciency according to the protocols outlined above, transient bulging of 
fontanels occurs in 2% of infants, and transient nausea, vomiting, and 
headache occur in 5% of preschoolers. Chronic vitamin A intoxication 
is  largely  a  concern  in  industrialized  countries  and  has  been  seen  in 
otherwise healthy adults who ingest 15 mg/d and children who ingest  
6  mg/d  over  a  period  of  several  months.  Manifestations  include  dry 
skin,  cheilosis,  glossitis,  vomiting,  alopecia,  bone  demineralization 
and  pain,  hypercalcemia,  lymph  node  enlargement,  hyperlipidemia, 
amenorrhea,  and  features  of  pseudotumor  cerebri  with  increased 
intracranial  pressure  and  papilledema.  Liver  fibrosis  with  portal 
hypertension  may  also  result  from  chronic  vitamin  A  intoxication. 
Provision of vitamin A in excess to pregnant women has resulted in 
spontaneous  abortion  and  in  congenital  malformations,  including 
craniofacial  abnormalities  and  valvular  heart  disease.  In  pregnancy, 
the  daily  dose  of  vitamin  A  should  not  exceed  3  mg.  Also,  topical 
retinoids should be avoided during pregnancy. Commercially available 
retinoid derivatives are also toxic, including 13-cis-retinoic acid, which 
has been associated with birth defects. Thus, contraception should be 
continued for at least 1 year and possibly longer in women who have 
taken 13-cis-retinoic acid.

In  malnourished  children,  vitamin  A  supplements  (30–60  mg),  in 
amounts  calculated  as  a  function  of  age  and  given  in  several  rounds 
over 2 years, are considered to amplify nonspecific effects of vaccines. 
However, for unclear reasons, in one African setting, there has been a 
negative effect on mortality rates in incompletely vaccinated girls.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2530

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemHigh doses of supplemental carotenoids do not result in toxic symp-
toms but should be avoided in smokers due to an increased risk of lung 
cancer. Very high doses of β-carotene (~200 mg/d) have been used to 
treat or prevent the skin rashes of erythropoietic protoporphyria. Car-
otenemia, which is characterized by a yellowing of the skin (in creases 
of  the  palms  and  soles)  but  not  the  sclerae,  may  follow  ingestion  of  
>30  mg  of  β-carotene  daily.  Hypothyroid  patients  are  particularly 
susceptible to the development of carotenemia due to impaired break-
down  of  carotene  to  vitamin  A.  Reduction  of  carotenes  in  the  diet 
results in the disappearance of skin yellowing and carotenemia over a 
period of 30–60 days.
 ■ VITAMIN D
The metabolism of the fat-soluble vitamin D is described in detail in 
Chap. 409. The biologic effects of this vitamin are mediated by vita-
min D receptors, which are found in most tissues; binding with these 
receptors  potentially  expands  vitamin  D  actions  to  many  different 
cell  systems  and  organs  (e.g.,  immune  cells,  brain,  breast,  colon,  and 
prostate)  in  addition  to  the  classic  endocrine  effects  on  calcium  and 
phosphate  metabolism  and  bone  health.  Vitamin  D  is  thought  to  be 
important  for  maintaining  normal  function  of  many  nonskeletal  tis-
sues  such  as  muscle  (including  heart  muscle),  for  immune  function, 
and  for  inflammation  as  well  as  for  cell  proliferation  and  differen-
tiation.  Older  studies  have  shown  that  vitamin  D  may  be  useful  as 
adjunctive treatment for tuberculosis, psoriasis, and multiple sclerosis 
or for the prevention of certain cancers. Vitamin D insufficiency may 
increase  the  risk  of  type  1  diabetes  mellitus,  cardiovascular  disease 
(insulin resistance, hypertension, or low-grade inflammation), or brain 
dysfunction (e.g., depression). However, the exact physiologic roles of 
vitamin  D  in  these  nonskeletal  diseases  and  the  importance  of  these 
roles have so far not been clarified. Recent placebo-controlled studies 
did not show a therapeutic benefit of vitamin D for cancer prevention, 
control of cardiovascular disease, or risk of type 2 diabetes, depression, 
tuberculosis  infection,  or  other  respiratory  infections.  Presently,  it  is 
not  known  whether  these  effects  of  vitamin  D  supplements  (with  or 
without  calcium)  might  be  different  according  to  the  baseline  status 
(normal vs severely deficient) of patients.

The skin is a major source of vitamin D, which is synthesized upon 
skin exposure to ultraviolet B radiation (UV-B; wavelength, 290–320 nm). 
Except for fish, food (unless fortified) contains only limited amounts of 
vitamin D. Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) is obtained from plant sources 
and is the chemical form found in some supplements.
Deficiency  Vitamin  D  status  has  been  assessed  by  measuring 
serum levels of 25-dihydroxyvitamin D (25[OH] vitamin D); however, 
there is no consensus on a uniform assay, on optimal serum levels, or 
on the real benefit of biochemical screening. The optimal level might, 
in  fact,  differ  according  to  the  targeted  disease  entity.  Epidemiologic 
and  experimental  data  indicate  that  a  25(OH)  vitamin  D  level  of 
>20  ng/mL  (≥50  nmol/L;  to  convert  ng/mL  to  nmol/L,  multiply  by 
2.496) is sufficient for good bone health. The latter 25(OH) vitamin D  
plasma  concentration  would  cover  the  requirements  of  97.5%  of  the 
population. Some experts, however, advocate higher serum levels (e.g., 
>30 ng/mL) for other desirable endpoints of vitamin D action. There 
is insufficient evidence to recommend combined vitamin D and cal-
cium  supplementation  as  a  primary  preventive  strategy  (as  opposed 
to secondary prevention) for reduction of the incidence of fractures in 
healthy men and premenopausal women.

Risk factors for vitamin D deficiency are old age, lack of sun expo-
sure, dark skin (especially among residents of northern latitudes), fat 
malabsorption,  and  obesity;  deficiency  can  also  occur  after  gastric 
bypass surgery. In addition, in African populations, the prevalence of 
vitamin  D  deficiency  might  be  high  (especially  in  women,  newborn 
babies, urban populations, and those living in northern African coun-
tries).  Rickets  represents  the  classic  disease  of  vitamin  D  deficiency. 
Signs  of  deficiency  are  muscle  soreness,  weakness,  and  bone  pain. 
Some  of  these  effects  are  independent  of  calcium  intake.  To  prevent 
glucocorticoid-induced  osteoporosis,  treatment  with  calcium  (1000–
1200 mg/d) and vitamin D (600–800 IU/d) through diet and/or supple-
ments in combination with weight-bearing exercise is recommended.

2531

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

The  U.S.  National  Academy  of  Sciences  recently  advised  that  the 
majority of adult North Americans should receive 600 IU/d of vitamin 
D (RDA = 15 μg/d or 600 IU/d; Chap. 332). However, for people aged 
>70  years,  the  RDA  is  set  at  20  μg/d  (800  IU/d).  The  consumption 
of  fortified  or  enriched  foods  as  well  as  suberythemal  sun  exposure 
should  be  encouraged  for  people  at  risk  for  vitamin  D  deficiency. 
If  adequate  intake  is  impossible,  vitamin  D  supplements  should  be 
taken, especially during the winter months. Vitamin D deficiency can 
be  treated  by  oral  administration  of  50,000  IU/week  for  6–8  weeks 
followed by a maintenance dose of 800 IU/d (20 μg/d) from food and 
supplements  once  normal  plasma  levels  have  been  attained.  There  is 
still uncertainty regarding the optimal therapeutic dosage (high vs low) 
for  elderly  at  risk  of  falls.  The  physiologic  effects  of  vitamin  D2  and  
vitamin  D3  are  similar  when  these  vitamins  are  ingested  over  long 
periods.
Toxicity  The upper limit of intake has been set at 4000 IU/d. Con-
trary to earlier beliefs, acute vitamin D intoxication is rare and usually 
is caused by the uncontrolled and excessive ingestion of supplements or 
by faulty food fortification practices. High plasma levels of 1,25(OH)2 
vitamin  D  and  calcium  are  central  features  of  toxicity  and  mandate 
discontinuation  of  vitamin  D  and  calcium  supplements;  in  addition, 
treatment of hypercalcemia may be required.
 ■ VITAMIN E
Vitamin  E  is  the  collective  designation  for  all  stereoisomers  of  toco-
pherols and tocotrienols, although only the α-tocopherols meet human 
requirements.  Vitamin  E  acts  as  a  chain-breaking  antioxidant  and 
is  an  efficient  peroxyl  radical  scavenger  that  protects  low-density 
lipoproteins  and  polyunsaturated  fats  in  membranes  from  oxidation. 
A  network  of  other  antioxidants  (e.g.,  vitamin  C,  glutathione)  and 
enzymes maintains vitamin E in a reduced state. Vitamin E also inhib-
its prostaglandin synthesis and the activities of protein kinase C and 
phospholipase A2.
Absorption  and  Metabolism  After  absorption,  vitamin  E  is 
taken up from chylomicrons by the liver, and a hepatic α-tocopherol 
transport protein mediates intracellular vitamin E transport and incor-
poration into very-low-density lipoprotein. The transport protein has 
a particular affinity for the RRR isomeric form of α-tocopherol; thus, 
this natural isomer has the most biologic activity.
Requirement  Vitamin  E  is  widely  distributed  in  the  food  supply, 
with particularly high levels in sunflower oil, safflower oil, and wheat 
germ oil; γ-tocotrienols are notably present in soybean and corn oils. 
Vitamin  E  is  also  found  in  meats,  nuts,  and  cereal  grains,  and  small 
amounts are present in fruits and vegetables. Vitamin E pills containing 
doses of 50–1000 mg are ingested by ~10% of the U.S. population. The 
RDA  for  vitamin  E  is  15  mg/d  (34.9  μmol  or  22.5  IU)  for  all  adults. 
Diets  high  in  polyunsaturated  fats  may  necessitate  a  slightly  higher 
intake of vitamin E.

Dietary deficiency of vitamin E does not exist in developed coun-
tries but can occur in developing countries due to inadequate intake. 
Vitamin E deficiency is seen only in severe and prolonged malabsorp-
tive  diseases,  such  as  celiac  disease,  chronic  cholestatic  liver  disease, 
or  after  small-intestinal  resection  or  bariatric  surgery.  Children  with 
cystic  fibrosis  or  prolonged  cholestasis  may  develop  vitamin  E  defi-
ciency  characterized  by  areflexia  and  hemolytic  anemia.  Children 
with abetalipoproteinemia cannot absorb or transport vitamin E and 
become deficient quite rapidly. A familial form of isolated vitamin E 
deficiency also exists; it is due to a defect in the α-tocopherol transport 
protein. Vitamin E deficiency causes axonal degeneration of the large 
myelinated axons and results in posterior column and spinocerebellar 
symptoms. Peripheral neuropathy is initially characterized by areflexia, 
with progression to an ataxic gait, and by decreased vibration and posi-
tion  sensations.  Ophthalmoplegia,  skeletal  myopathy,  and  pigmented 
retinopathy may also be features of vitamin E deficiency. A deficiency 
of either vitamin E or selenium in the host has been shown to increase 
certain viral mutations and, therefore, virulence. The laboratory diag-
nosis of vitamin E deficiency is based on low blood levels of α-toco-
pherol (<5 μg/mL, or <0.8 mg of α-tocopherol per gram of total lipids).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2531

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2532 TREATMENT

Vitamin E Deficiency

Symptomatic vitamin E deficiency should be treated with 800–1200 
mg  of  α-tocopherol  per  day.  Patients  with  abetalipoproteinemia 
may need as much as 5000–7000 mg/d. Children with symptomatic 
vitamin  E  deficiency  should  be  treated  orally  with  water-miscible 
esters (400 mg/d); alternatively, 2 mg/kg per d may be administered 
intramuscularly. Vitamin E in high doses may protect against oxy-
gen-induced retrolental fibroplasia and bronchopulmonary dyspla-
sia as well as intraventricular hemorrhage of prematurity. Vitamin 
E  has  been  suggested  to  increase  sexual  performance,  treat  inter-
mittent  claudication,  and  slow  the  aging  process,  but  convincing 
evidence for these properties is lacking. When given in combina-
tion with other antioxidants, vitamin E may help prevent macular 
degeneration. Vitamin E may have favorable therapeutic effects in 
noncirrhotic  nondiabetic  patients  with  nonalcoholic  steatohepa-
titis. High doses (60–800 mg/d) of vitamin E have been shown in 
controlled  trials  to  improve  parameters  of  immune  function  and 
reduce  colds  in  nursing  home  residents,  but  intervention  studies 
using  vitamin  E  to  prevent  cardiovascular  disease  or  cancer  have 
not shown efficacy, and at doses >400 mg/d, vitamin E may even 
increase  all-cause  mortality  rates  and  prostate  cancer  risk  (espe-
cially in combination with selenium supplements).

Toxicity  All forms of vitamin E are absorbed and could contribute 
to toxicity; however, the toxicity risk seems to be rather low as long as 
liver  function  is  normal.  High  doses  of  vitamin  E  (>800  mg/d)  may 
reduce  platelet  aggregation  and  interfere  with  vitamin  K  metabolism 
and are therefore contraindicated in patients taking warfarin and anti-
platelet agents (such as aspirin or clopidogrel). Nausea, flatulence, and 
diarrhea have been reported at doses >1 g/d.

 ■ VITAMIN K
There are two natural forms of vitamin K: vitamin K1, also known as 
phylloquinone, from vegetable sources, and vitamin K2, or menaquino-
nes, which are synthesized by bacterial flora and found in hepatic tis-
sue. Phylloquinone can be converted to menaquinone in some organs.
Vitamin K is required for the posttranslational carboxylation of glu-
tamic acid, which is necessary for calcium binding to γ-carboxylated 
proteins such as prothrombin (factor II); factors VII, IX, and X; protein 
C;  protein  S;  and  proteins  found  in  bone  (osteocalcin)  and  vascular 
smooth muscle (e.g., matrix Gla protein). However, the importance of 
vitamin K for bone mineralization and prevention of vascular calcifica-
tion is not known. Warfarin-type drugs inhibit γ-carboxylation by pre-
venting the conversion of vitamin K to its active hydroquinone form.

Dietary Sources  Vitamin K is found in green leafy vegetables such 
as kale and spinach, and appreciable amounts are also present in mar-
garine and liver. Vitamin K is present in vegetable oils; olive, canola, 
and soybean oils are particularly rich sources. The average daily intake 
by Americans is estimated to be ~100 μg/d.

Deficiency  The symptoms of vitamin K deficiency are due to hem-
orrhage; newborns are particularly susceptible because of low fat stores, 
low  breast  milk  levels  of  vitamin  K,  relative  sterility  of  the  infantile 
intestinal tract, liver immaturity, and poor placental transport. Intra-
cranial bleeding as well as gastrointestinal and skin bleeding can occur 
in  vitamin  K–deficient  infants  1–7  days  after  birth.  Thus,  vitamin  K 
(0.5–1 mg IM) is given prophylactically at delivery.

Vitamin  K  deficiency  in  adults  may  be  seen  in  patients  with 
chronic  small-intestinal  disease  (e.g.,  celiac  disease,  Crohn’s  disease), 
in  those  with  obstructed  biliary  tracts,  or  after  small-bowel  resec-
tion.  Broad-spectrum  antibiotic  treatment  can  precipitate  vitamin 
K  deficiency  by  reducing  numbers  of  gut  bacteria,  which  synthesize 
menaquinones,  and  by  inhibiting  the  metabolism  of  vitamin  K. 
In  patients  with  warfarin  therapy,  the  antiobesity  drug  orlistat  can 
lead  to  changes  in  international  normalized  ratio  due  to  vitamin  K 

malabsorption. The assessment of the vitamin K status can be done by 
measurement  of  phylloquinone  (vitamin  K1)  concentration  in  serum 
(deficiency  <0.15  μg/L);  the  cellular  utilization  of  vitamin  K  can  be 
assessed by the serum or plasma concentration of undercarboxylated 
prothrombin  (protein  induced  by  vitamin  K  absence/antagonism 
[PIVKA-II]).  An  elevated  prothrombin  time  or  activated  partial 
thromboplastin time or reduced clotting factors are useful markers in 
severe  deficiency  but  are  otherwise  nonspecific  and  lack  sensitivity. 
Vitamin K deficiency is treated with a parenteral dose of 10 mg. For 
patients with chronic malabsorption, 1–2 mg/d should be given orally 
or  1–2  mg  per  week  can  be  taken  parenterally.  Patients  with  liver 
disease  may  have  an  elevated  prothrombin  time  because  of  liver  cell 
destruction as well as vitamin K deficiency. If an elevated prothrombin 
time does not improve during vitamin K therapy, it can be deduced that 
this abnormality is not the result of vitamin K deficiency.
Toxicity  Toxicity from dietary phylloquinones and menaquinones 
has not been described. High doses of vitamin K can impair the actions 
of oral vitamin K antagonist anticoagulants.

MINERALS
See also Table 333-2.
 ■ CALCIUM
See Chap. 409.
 ■ ZINC
Zinc is an integral component of many metalloenzymes in the body; 
it is involved in the synthesis and stabilization of proteins, DNA, and 
RNA  and  plays  a  structural  role  in  ribosomes  and  membranes.  Zinc 
is necessary for the binding of steroid hormone receptors and several 
other transcription factors to DNA. Zinc is essential for normal sper-
matogenesis, fetal growth, and embryonic development.
Absorption  The  absorption  of  zinc  from  the  diet  is  inhibited  by 
dietary  phytate,  fiber,  oxalate,  iron,  and  copper  as  well  as  by  certain 
drugs,  including  penicillamine,  sodium  valproate,  and  ethambutol. 
Protein-containing  foods,  i.e.,  meat,  shellfish,  nuts,  and  legumes,  are 
good sources of bioavailable zinc, whereas zinc in grains and legumes 
is less available for absorption. Grains and legumes contain phytate that 
binds zinc in the intestine and reduces its availability for absorption.
Deficiency  Mild zinc deficiency has been described in many dis-
eases,  including  diabetes  mellitus,  HIV/AIDS,  cirrhosis,  alcoholism, 
inflammatory  bowel  disease,  malabsorption  syndromes,  and  sickle 
cell disease. In these diseases, mild chronic zinc deficiency can cause 
stunted growth in children, decreased taste sensation (hypogeusia), and 
impaired  immune  function.  Severe  chronic  zinc  deficiency  has  been 
described as a cause of hypogonadism and dwarfism in several Middle 
Eastern countries. In these children, hypopigmented hair is also part 
of  the  syndrome.  Acrodermatitis  enteropathica  is  a  rare  autosomal 
recessive  disorder  characterized  by  abnormalities  in  zinc  absorption. 
Clinical  manifestations  include  diarrhea,  alopecia,  muscle  wasting, 
depression, irritability, and a rash involving the extremities, face, and 
perineum. The rash is characterized by vesicular and pustular crusting 
with scaling and erythema. Occasional patients with Wilson’s disease 
have  developed  zinc  deficiency  as  a  consequence  of  penicillamine 
therapy (Chap. 415).

Zinc deficiency is prevalent in many developing countries and usu-
ally coexists with other micronutrient deficiencies (especially iron defi-
ciency). Zinc (20 mg/d until recovery) may be an effective adjunctive 
therapeutic strategy for diarrheal disease and pneumonia in children 
≥6 months of age.

The  diagnosis  of  zinc  deficiency  is  usually  based  on  a  serum  zinc 
level <12 μmol/L (<70 μg/dL). Pregnancy and birth control pills may 
cause a slight depression in serum zinc levels, and hypoalbuminemia 
from any cause can result in hypozincemia. In acute stress situations 
(illness,  but  also  postexercise  recovery),  zinc  may  be  redistributed 
from  serum  into  tissues.  Zinc  deficiency  may  be  treated  with  60  mg 
of elemental zinc taken by mouth twice a day. Zinc gluconate lozenges 
(13 mg of elemental zinc every 2 h while awake) have been reported to 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2532

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 333-2  Deficiencies and Toxicities of Metals

ELEMENT
Boron
Calcium

Copper

Chromium

Fluoride
Iodine
Iron

DEFICIENCY
No biologic function determined
Reduced bone mass, osteoporosis

Anemia, growth retardation, defective 
keratinization and pigmentation of hair, 
hypothermia, degenerative changes in aortic 
elastin, osteopenia, intellectual disability
Impaired glucose tolerance

↑ Dental caries
Thyroid enlargement, ↓ T4, cretinism
Muscle abnormalities, koilonychia, pica, 
anemia, ↓ work performance, impaired 
cognitive development, premature labor,  
↑ perinatal maternal death

Manganese

Molybdenum
Selenium

Impaired growth and skeletal development, 
reproduction, lipid and carbohydrate 
metabolism; upper body rash

Severe neurologic abnormalities
Cardiomyopathy, heart failure, striated muscle 
degeneration

Phosphorus

Zinc

Rickets (osteomalacia), proximal muscle 
weakness, rhabdomyolysis, paresthesia, 
ataxia, seizure, confusion, heart failure, 
hemolysis, acidosis
Growth retardation, ↓ taste and smell, 
alopecia, dermatitis, diarrhea, immune 
dysfunction, failure to thrive, gonadal atrophy, 
congenital malformations

2533

TOLERABLE UPPER (DIETARY) INTAKE 
LEVEL
20 mg/d (extrapolated from animal data)
2500 mg/d (milk-alkali)

TOXICITY
Developmental defects, male sterility, testicular atrophy
Renal insufficiency (milk-alkali syndrome), 
nephrolithiasis, impaired iron absorption,  
thiazide diuretics
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatic failure, tremor, 
psychiatric disturbances, hemolytic anemia, renal 
dysfunction

Occupational: Renal failure, dermatitis, pulmonary 
cancer
Dental and skeletal fluorosis, osteosclerosis
Thyroid dysfunction, acne-like eruptions
Gastrointestinal effects (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
constipation), iron overload with organ damage, acute 
and chronic systemic toxicity, increased susceptibility to 
malaria, increased risk association with certain chronic 
diseases (e.g., diabetes)
General: Neurotoxicity, Parkinson-like symptoms
Occupational: Encephalitis-like syndrome, Parkinson-
like syndrome, psychosis, pneumoconiosis
Reproductive and fetal abnormalities
General: Alopecia, nausea, vomiting, abnormal nails, 
emotional lability, peripheral neuropathy, lassitude, 
garlic odor to breath, dermatitis
Occupational: Lung and nasal carcinomas, liver 
necrosis, pulmonary inflammation
Hyperphosphatemia

10 mg/d (liver toxicity)

Not determined

10 mg/d (fluorosis)
1100 μg/d (thyroid dysfunction)
45 mg/d of elemental iron 
(gastrointestinal side effects)

11 mg/d (neurotoxicity)

2 mg/d (extrapolated from animal data)
400 μg/d (hair, nail changes)

4000 mg/d

General: Reduced copper absorption, gastritis, 
sweating, fever, nausea, vomiting
Occupational: Respiratory distress, pulmonary fibrosis

40 mg/d (impaired copper metabolism)

reduce the duration and symptoms of the common cold in adults, but 
study results are conflicting.

Toxicity  Acute  zinc  toxicity  after  oral  ingestion  causes  nausea, 
vomiting, and fever. Zinc fumes from welding may also be toxic and 
cause  fever,  respiratory  distress,  excessive  salivation,  sweating,  and 
headache. Chronic large doses of zinc (ranging from 150 to 450 mg/d) 
may  depress  immune  function  and  cause  hypochromic  anemia  as  a 
result  of  a  secondary  copper  deficiency.  Intranasal  zinc  preparations 
should be avoided because they may lead to irreversible damage of the 
nasal mucosa and anosmia.

 ■ COPPER
Copper  is  an  integral  part  of  numerous  enzyme  systems,  including 
amine  oxidases,  ferroxidase  (ceruloplasmin),  cytochrome  c  oxidase, 
superoxide  dismutase,  and  dopamine  hydroxylase.  Copper  is  also  a 
component of ferroprotein, a transport protein involved in the baso-
lateral transfer of iron during absorption from the enterocyte. As such, 
copper  plays  a  role  in  iron  metabolism,  melanin  synthesis,  energy 
production,  neurotransmitter  synthesis,  and  CNS  function;  the  syn-
thesis and cross-linking of elastin and collagen; and the scavenging of 
superoxide radicals. Dietary sources of copper include shellfish, liver, 
nuts, legumes, bran, and organ meats.

Deficiency  Dietary  copper  deficiency  is  relatively  rare,  although 
it  has  been  described  in  premature  infants  who  are  fed  milk  diets 
and  in  infants  with  malabsorption  (Table  333-2).  Copper-deficiency 
anemia (refractory to therapeutic iron) has been reported in patients 
with malabsorptive diseases and nephrotic syndrome and in patients 
treated for Wilson’s disease with chronic high doses of oral zinc, which 
can interfere with copper absorption. Menkes kinky hair syndrome is an 

X-linked  metabolic  disturbance  of  copper  metabolism  characterized 
by  intellectual  disability,  hypocupremia,  and  decreased  circulating 
ceruloplasmin (Chap. 413). This syndrome is caused by mutations in 
the copper-transporting ATP7A gene. Children with this disease often 
die within 5 years because of dissecting aneurysms or cardiac rupture. 
Aceruloplasminemia  is  a  rare  autosomal  recessive  disease  character-
ized by tissue iron overload, mental deterioration, microcytic anemia, 
and low serum iron and copper concentrations.

The diagnosis of copper deficiency is usually based on low serum 
levels  of  copper  (<65  μg/dL)  and  low  ceruloplasmin  levels  (<20  mg/
dL). Serum levels of copper may be elevated in pregnancy or stress con-
ditions since ceruloplasmin is an acute-phase reactant and 90% of cir-
culating copper is bound to ceruloplasmin. It has been suggested that 
mild or subclinical copper deficiency is more common than expected; 
at-risk  individuals  include  patients  with  cholestasis  or  chronic  diar-
rheal diseases, dialysis patients, and people on long-term zinc supple-
ments. The role of copper in cardiovascular disease, immune function, 
bone health, or neurodegenerative diseases is still unclear.

Toxicity  Copper toxicity is usually accidental (Table 333-2). In severe 
cases,  kidney  failure,  liver  failure,  and  coma  may  ensue.  In  Wilson’s 
disease,  mutations  in  the  copper-transporting  ATP7B  gene  lead  to 
accumulation  of  copper  in  the  liver  and  brain,  with  low  blood  levels 
due to decreased ceruloplasmin (Chap. 415). A potential negative role 
of copper in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease has been reported.

 ■ SELENIUM
Selenium, in the form of selenocysteine, is a component of the enzyme 
glutathione  peroxidase,  which  serves  to  protect  proteins,  cell  mem-
branes,  lipids,  and  nucleic  acids  from  oxidant  molecules.  As  such, 
selenium is being actively studied as a chemopreventive agent against 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
3

V
i
t
a
m
i
n
a
n
d
T
r
a
c
e
M
i
n
e
r
a
l

D
e
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
a
n
d
E
x
c
e
s
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2533

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2534 certain cancers,  such as  prostate  cancer. However, it  remains unclear 
whether selenium is effective as a chemopreventive agent or whether 
it increases cancer risk (e.g., prostate cancer). Convincing evidence for 
a protective effect of selenium on cognitive decline or cardiovascular 
disease  risk  is  presently  lacking.  Selenocysteine  is  also  found  in  the 
deiodinase enzymes, which mediate the deiodination of thyroxine to 
triiodothyronine (Chap. 382). Rich dietary sources of selenium include 
seafood,  muscle  meat,  and  cereals,  although  the  selenium  content  of 
cereal is determined by the soil concentration. Countries with low soil 
concentrations include parts of Scandinavia, China, and New Zealand. 
Keshan disease is an endemic cardiomyopathy found in children and 
young  women  residing  in  regions  of  China  where  dietary  intake  of 
selenium  is  low  (<20  μg/d).  Concomitant  deficiencies  of  iodine  and 
selenium may worsen the clinical manifestations of cretinism. Chronic 
ingestion  of  large  amounts  of  selenium  leads  to  selenosis,  character-
ized by hair and nail brittleness and loss, garlic breath odor, skin rash, 
myopathy, irritability, and other abnormalities of the nervous system.
 ■ CHROMIUM
Chromium potentiates the action of insulin in patients with impaired 
glucose  tolerance,  presumably  by  increasing  insulin  receptor–medi-
ated  signaling,  although  its  usefulness  in  treating  type  2  diabetes  is 
uncertain. In addition, improvement in blood lipid profiles has been 
reported in some patients. The usefulness of chromium supplements 
in  muscle  building  has  not  been  substantiated.  Rich  food  sources  of 
chromium include yeast, meat, and grain products. Chromium in the 
trivalent state is found in supplements and is largely nontoxic; however, 
chromium-6 is a product of stainless steel welding and is a known pul-
monary carcinogen as well as a cause of liver, kidney, and CNS damage.
 ■ MAGNESIUM
See Chap. 409.
 ■ FLUORIDE, MANGANESE, AND  
ULTRATRACE ELEMENTS
An essential function for fluoride in humans has not been described, 
although  it  is  useful  for  the  maintenance  of  structure  in  teeth  and 
bones.  Adult  fluorosis  results  in  mottled  and  pitted  defects  in  tooth 
enamel as well as brittle bone (skeletal fluorosis).

Manganese  and  molybdenum  deficiencies  have  been  reported  in 
patients with rare genetic abnormalities and in a few patients receiv-
ing  prolonged  total  parenteral  nutrition.  Several  manganese-specific 
enzymes have been identified (e.g., manganese superoxide dismutase). 
Deficiencies of manganese have been reported to result in bone demin-
eralization, poor growth, ataxia, disturbances in carbohydrate and lipid 
metabolism, and convulsions.

Ultratrace  elements  are  defined  as  those  needed  in  amounts  
<1 mg/d. Essentiality has not been established for most ultratrace ele-
ments, although selenium, chromium, and iodine are clearly essential 
(Chap. 382). Molybdenum is necessary for the activity of sulfite and 
xanthine  oxidase,  and  molybdenum  deficiency  may  result  in  skeletal 
and brain lesions.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Combs  GF  Jr,  Mcclung  JP:  The  Vitamins:  Fundamental  Aspects  in 
Nutrition and Health. 5th ed. London, Academic Press, 2017, p 612.
Imdad  A  et  al:  Vitamin  A  supplementation  for  preventing  morbid-
ity  and  mortality  in  children  from  six  months  to  five  years  of  age. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD008524, 2017.

Lassi  ZS  et  al:  Zinc  supplementation  for  the  promotion  of  growth 
and prevention of infections in infants less than six months of age. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD010205, 2020.

Mechanick JI et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative 
nutrition, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of patients undergoing 
bariatric procedures–2019 update. Surg Obes Relat Dis 16:175, 2020.
Namaste  SM  et  al:  Methodologic  approach  for  the  Biomarkers 
Reflecting  Inflammation  and  Nutritional  Determinants  of  Anemia 
(BRINDA) project. Am J Clin Nutr 106(Suppl 1):333S, 2017.

Ngo B et al: Targeting cancer vulnerabilities with high-dose vitamin C. 

Nat Rev Cancer 19:271, 2020.

Ota  Y  et  al:  Comprehensive  review  of  Wernicke  encephalopathy: 
Pathophysiology,  clinical  symptoms  and  imaging  findings.  Jpn  J 
Radiol 38:809, 2020.

Stevens GA et al: Trends and mortality effects of vitamin A deficiency 
in children in 138 low-income and middle-income countries between 
1991  and  2013:  A  pooled  analysis  of  population-based  surveys.  
Lancet Glob Health 3:e528, 2015.

Tanumihardjo  SA  et  al:  Biomarkers  of  nutrition  for  development 

(BOND): Vitamin A review. J Nutr 146:1816S, 2016.

Vinceti  M,  Rothman  KJ:  More  results  but  no  clear  conclusion  on 

selenium and cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 104:245, 2016.

World Health Organization: Guideline: Vitamin A supplementa-
tion in pregnant women. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.

334 Malnutrition and  

Nutritional Assessment
Gordon L. Jensen

Malnutrition occurs in 30–50% of hospitalized patients depending on 
the  setting  and  criteria  that  are  used.  Poor  wound  healing,  compro-
mised  immune  status,  impaired  organ  function,  increased  length  of 
hospital  stay,  and  increased  mortality  are  among  the  notable  adverse 
outcomes  associated  with  malnutrition.  It  is  now  widely  appreciated 
that acute or chronic inflammation contribute to the pathophysiology 
of  disease-related  or  injury-related  malnutrition.  The  presence  of 
inflammation can also render historic nutrition assessment indicators, 
like albumin and prealbumin, unreliable, and inflammation diminishes 
favorable responses to nutrition therapies. In order to guide appropri-
ate care, it is necessary to properly assess and diagnose malnutrition. 
Nutrition assessment is a comprehensive evaluation to diagnose a mal-
nutrition syndrome and to guide intervention and expected outcomes. 
Patients are often targeted for assessment after being identified at nutri-
tional  risk  based  on  screening  procedures  conducted  by  nursing  or 
nutrition personnel within 24 h of hospital admission. Screening tends 
to focus explicitly on a few risk variables like weight loss, compromised 
dietary  intake,  and  high-risk  medical/surgical  diagnoses.  Preferably, 
health  professionals  complement  this  screening  with  a  systematic 
approach to comprehensive nutrition assessment that incorporates an 
appreciation  for  the  contributions  of  inflammation  that  serve  as  the 
basis for new approaches to the diagnosis and management of malnu-
trition syndromes.

 ■ MALNUTRITION SYNDROMES
Famine and starvation have long been leading causes of malnutrition 
and remain so in developing countries. However, with improvements 
in  agriculture,  education,  public  health,  health  care,  and  living  stan-
dards, malnutrition in the settings of disease, surgery, and injury has 
become a prevalent concern throughout the world. Malnutrition now 
encompasses the full continuum of undernutrition and overnutrition 
(obesity). For the objectives of this chapter, we will focus upon the for-
mer. Historic definitions for malnutrition syndromes are problematic 
in their use of diagnostic criteria that suffer poor sensitivity, sensitivity, 
and  interobserver  reliability.  Definitions  overlap,  and  confusion  and 
misdiagnosis  are  frequent.  In  addition,  some  approaches  do  not  rec-
ognize undernutrition in obese persons. While the historic syndromes 
of marasmus, kwashiorkor, and protein-calorie malnutrition remain in 
use, this chapter will instead highlight evolving insights to the diagno-
sis of malnutrition syndromes.

The  Subjective  Global  Assessment,  a  comprehensive  nutrition 
assessment  that  included  a  metabolic  stress  of  disease  component, 
was  described  and  validated  in  the  1980s.  In  2010,  an  International 
Consensus Guideline Committee incorporated a new appreciation for 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2534

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemthe  role  of  inflammatory  response  into  their  proposed  nomenclature 
for nutrition diagnosis in adults in the clinical practice setting. Starva-
tion-associated malnutrition is when there is chronic starvation without 
inflammation, chronic disease–associated malnutrition is when inflam-
mation is chronic and of mild to moderate degree, and acute disease– or 
injury-associated  malnutrition  is  when  inflammation  is  acute  and  of 
severe  degree  (see  Table  334-1  for  examples).  In  2012,  the  Academy 
of  Nutrition  and  Dietetics  and  the  American  Society  for  Parenteral 

and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) extended this approach using clinical 
characteristics  to  support  diagnosis,  including  the  presence  of  illness 
or  injury,  poor  food  intake,  weight  loss,  and  physical  findings  of  fat 
loss, muscle loss, edema, or reduced grip strength. In 2016, the Euro-
pean  Society  for  Parenteral  and  Enteral  Nutrition  (ESPEN)  formally 
adopted  a  disease/inflammation-based  construct  similar  to  these 
earlier  approaches.  Also  in  2016,  the  Global  Leadership  Initiative  on 
Malnutrition  (GLIM),  a  collaborative  effort  of  ASPEN,  ESPEN,  the 

2535

TABLE 334-1  History and Physical Examination Elements
ELEMENT

NOTES

Historical Data

Body weight

Medical and surgical 
conditions; chronic 
disease

Constitutional signs/
symptoms
Eating difficulties/
gastrointestinal 
complaints
Eating disorders
Medication use

Dietary practices and 
supplement use

Influences on 
nutritional status

Ask about usual weight, peak weight, and deliberate weight loss. A 4.5-kg (10-lb) weight loss over 6 months is noteworthy, and a weight loss 
of >10% of usual body weight is prognostic of clinical outcomes. Use medical records, family, and caregivers as information resources.
Look for medical or surgical conditions or chronic disease that can place one at nutritional risk secondary to increased requirements or 
compromised intake or assimilation such as: critical illness, severe burns, major abdominal surgery, multitrauma, closed head injury, previous 
gastrointestinal surgery, severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage, enterocutaneous fistula, gastrointestinal obstruction, mesenteric ischemia, 
severe acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, bacterial overgrowth, solid or hematologic 
malignancy, bone marrow transplant, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and organ failure/transplant—kidney, liver, heart, lung, or gut.
A number of conditions or diseases are characterized by severe acute inflammatory response including critical illness, major infection/sepsis, 
adult respiratory distress syndrome, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, severe burns, major abdominal surgery, multitrauma, and 
closed head injury.
Many conditions or diseases are more typically associated with mild to moderate chronic inflammatory response. Examples include 
cardiovascular disease, congestive heart failure, cystic fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, chronic pancreatitis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, solid tumors, hematologic malignancies, sarcopenic obesity, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, cerebrovascular 
accident, neuromuscular disease, dementia, organ failure/transplant (kidney, liver, heart, lung, or gut), periodontal disease, pressure wounds, 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Note that acute exacerbations, infections, or other complications may superimpose acute 
inflammatory response on such conditions or diseases.
Examples of starvation-associated conditions that generally have little or no discernable inflammatory component include anorexia nervosa 
or compromised intake in the setting of major depression.
Fever or hypothermia can indicate active inflammatory response. Tachycardia is also common. Anorexia is another manifestation of 
inflammatory response and is also often a side effect of treatments and medications.
Poor dentition or problems swallowing can compromise oral intake. Vomiting, nausea, abdominal pain, abdominal distension, diarrhea, 
constipation, and gastrointestinal bleeding can be signs of gastrointestinal pathology that may place one at nutritional risk.

Look for distorted body image, compulsive exercise, amenorrhea, vomiting, tooth loss, dental caries, and use of laxatives, diuretics, or Ipecac.
Many medications can adversely affect nutrient intake or assimilation. Review potential drug–drug and drug–nutrient interactions.  
A pharmacist consultant can be helpful.
Look for dietary practices including therapeutic, weight reduction, vegetarian, macrobiotic, and fad diets. Also record use of dietary 
supplements, including vitamins, minerals, and herbals. Ask about dietary intake. Recall, record, and food frequency tools are available.
It is estimated that 50% or more of adults take dietary supplements.
Ask about factors such as living environment, functional status (activities of daily living and instrumental activities of daily living), 
dependency, caregiver status, resources, dentition, alcohol or substance abuse, mental health (depression or dementia), and lifestyle.

Physical Examination Data

Body mass index (BMI) BMI = weight in kg/(height in meters)2

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
4

M
a
l
n
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n
a
n
d
N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n
a
l

A
s
s
e
s
s

m
e
n
t

Weight loss

Weakness/loss of 
strength
Peripheral edema

Hair examination

BMI <18.5 kg/m2 proposed screen for malnutrition per National Institutes of Health guidelines. BMI ≤15 kg/m2 or less is associated with 
increased mortality. 
Comparison with ideal body weight for stature can also be determined from reference tables. Note hydration status and edema at the time 
body weight is determined.
Look for loss of muscle mass and subcutaneous fat.
Temporal and neck muscle wasting may be readily observed. Anthropometrics including skinfolds and circumferences can be useful but 
require training to achieve reliability.
Decreased handgrip and leg extensor strength have been related to loss of muscle mass in malnourished states. Lower extremity weakness 
may be observed in thiamine deficiency.
Peripheral edema may confound weight measurements and is often observed with reduced visceral proteins as well as inflammatory states. 
Edema may also be observed with thiamine deficiency.
Hair findings are indicative of certain nutrient deficiencies.
Loss: protein, vitamin B12, folate
Brittle: biotin
Color change: zinc
Dry: vitamins A and E
Easy pluckability: protein, biotin, zinc
Coiled, corkscrew: vitamins A and C
Alopecia is common in severely malnourished persons.
Ask about excessive hair loss on pillow or when combing hair.

(Continued)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2535

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2536 TABLE 334-1  History and Physical Examination Elements
NOTES

ELEMENT

(Continued)

Skin examination

Eye examination

Perioral examination

Extremity examination

Mental status/nervous 
system examination

Functional assessment

Skin findings are indicative of certain nutrient deficiencies.
Desquamation: riboflavin
Petechiae: vitamins A and C
Perifollicular hemorrhage: vitamin C
Ecchymosis: vitamins C and K
Xerosis, bran-like desquamation: essential fatty acid
Pigmentation, cracking, crusting: niacin
Acneiform lesions, follicular keratosis, xerosis: vitamin A
Acro-orificial dermatitis, erythematous, vesiculobullous, and pustular: zinc
Characteristic nutritional dermatitis and skin findings may be observed with a number of nutrient deficiencies. Wounds and pressure sores 
should also be noted as indicators of compromised nutritional status.
Ocular findings are indicative of certain nutrient deficiencies.
Bitot’s spots: vitamin A
Xerosis: vitamin A
Angular palpebritis: riboflavin
Also ask about difficulties with night vision/night blindness; indicates vitamin A deficiency.
Perioral findings are indicative of certain nutrient deficiencies.
Angular stomatitis and cheilosis: B complex, iron, protein
Glossitis: niacin, folate, vitamin B12
Magenta tongue: riboflavin
Bleeding gums, gingivitis, tooth loss: vitamin C
Angular stomatitis, cheilosis, and glossitis are associated with vitamin and mineral deficiencies. Note poor dentition, caries, and tooth loss. 
Difficulty swallowing and impairment of gag should also be recognized.
Extremity findings indicate certain nutrient deficiencies
Arthralgia: vitamin C
Calf pain: thiamine
Extremities may also exhibit loss of muscle mass and/or peripheral edema. Neurologic findings in the extremities may also result from 
deficiencies described below.
Mental and nervous system findings indicate certain nutrient deficiencies.
Ophthalmoplegia and foot drop: thiamine
Paresthesia: thiamine, vitamin B12, biotin
Depressed vibratory and position senses: vitamin B12
Anxiety, depression, and hallucinations: niacin
Memory disturbance: vitamin B12
Hyporeflexia, loss of lower extremity deep tendon reflexes: thiamine, vitamin B12
Conduct formal cognitive and depression assessments as appropriate. Dementia and depression are common causes of malnutrition among 
older persons. Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome may be observed with severe thiamine deficiency.
Observe and test physical performance as indicated: gait, chair stands, stair steps, and balance. These provide complex measures of 
integrated neurologic status, coordination, and strength.

Source: Reproduced with permission from GL Jensen: Nutritional Syndromes, In: Korenstein, D (Ed). ACP Smart Medicine [publisher archive]. Philadelphia (PA): American 
College of Physicians, 2013.

Latin  American  Federation  of  Parenteral  and  Enteral  Nutrition,  the 
Parenteral  and  Enteral  Society  of  Asia,  and  other  nutrition  societies, 
embarked  on  an  effort  to  build  global  consensus  around  commonly 
used evidence-based criteria for diagnosis of malnutrition in adults in 
clinical settings. Weight loss, low body mass index, and reduced muscle 
mass were selected as phenotypic criteria, whereas reduced food intake 
and  disease  burden/inflammation  were  selected  as  etiologic  criteria. 
One phenotypic criterion and one etiologic criterion were deemed nec-
essary for the preliminary diagnosis of malnutrition. Where available, 
this  diagnosis  should  trigger  comprehensive  nutrition  assessment  by 
a  skilled  nutrition  professional.  However,  the  primary  objective  is  to 
offer a simple approach that can be readily used in global settings with 
limited  clinical  nutrition  resources.  Recent  studies  suggest  that  these 
newer approaches to diagnosis of malnutrition have similar utility in 
predicting  adverse  outcomes.  This  is  not  surprising  since  they  share 
a number of common criteria including a metabolic stress of disease 
component  that  is  a  proxy  indicator  of  inflammation.  Irrespective  of 
the approach that is selected, assessment of patients can be facilitated 
using  the  indicators  of  malnutrition  and  inflammation  described 
below.

 ■ NUTRITION ASSESSMENT
There is unfortunately no single clinical or laboratory indicator of com-
prehensive nutritional status. Assessment therefore requires systematic 
integration of data from a variety of sources. Micronutrient deficiencies 
of  clinical  relevance  may  be  detected  in  association  with  any  of  the 
malnutrition syndromes, but a detailed discussion of their assessment 
is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Chap. 333). Physical findings 
characteristic of micronutrient deficiencies are, however, summarized 
in Table 334-1.

Medical/Surgical History and Clinical Diagnosis  Knowledge 
of a patient’s medical/surgical history and associated clinical diagnoses 
is  especially  helpful  in  discerning  the  likelihood  of  malnutrition  and 
inflammation.  Nonvolitional  weight  loss  is  a  well-validated  nutrition 
assessment indicator and is often also associated with underlying dis-
ease  or  inflammatory  condition.  The  degree  and  duration  of  weight 
loss determine its clinical significance. A 10% loss of body weight over 
6 months is of clinical relevance, whereas a 30% loss of body weight 
over the same duration is severe and life-threatening. Since weight loss 
history is often unavailable or unreliable, one should query the patient 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2536

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemas well as the medical records, family, and caregivers as appropriate to 
secure a valid weight trajectory.

A number of conditions or diseases are characterized by severe acute 
inflammatory  response,  whereas  others  are  more  typically  associated 
with  a  chronic  inflammatory  response  that  is  mild  to  moderate  in 
severity  and  may  be  relapsing  and  remitting  (Table  334-1).  It  is  also 
common for acute inflammatory events to be superimposed on those 
with chronic conditions; for example, a patient with chronic renal dis-
ease is admitted to the hospital with sepsis. The inflammatory milieu, 
especially when severe, may modify nutrient requirements by elevating 
resting  energy  expenditure  and  promoting  muscle  catabolism  and 
nitrogen losses. Inflammation also promotes anorexia, decreasing food 
intake  and  further  compromising  nutritional  status.  A  deteriorating 
course  may  result  because  the  presence  of  inflammation  may  reduce 
the benefit of nutritional interventions and the associated malnutrition 
may in turn diminish the effectiveness of medical therapies. It is also 
imperative  to  recognize  medical/surgical  conditions  or  diseases  that 
place patients at increased risk to become malnourished because they 
have  increased  nutritional  requirements  or  compromised  intake  or 
assimilation (Table 334-1).

Nutrition  assessment  should  also  include  a  review  of  medications 
with  attention  to  undesirable  side  effects  including  anorexia,  xeros-
tomia,  nausea,  diarrhea,  and  constipation.  Potential  drug–nutrient 
interactions should also be identified.

Clinical Signs and Physical Examination  Nonspecific clinical 
indicators of inflammation include fever, hypothermia, and tachycar-
dia. The nutrition-focused physical examination should identify edema 
as well as signs of weight gain/loss and specific nutrient deficiencies. 
Thorough examination should be particularly directed to those parts 
of  the  body  where  high  cell  turnover  occurs  (e.g.,  hair,  skin,  mouth, 
tongue) as they are most likely to exhibit observable signs of nutritional 
deficiencies (Table 334-1). Physical findings of weight loss associated 
with decreased muscle and subcutaneous fat mass should not be over-
looked, but when appreciable edema is present, these changes may not 
be readily appreciated.
Anthropometric  Data  Body  weight  measurements  are  recom-
mended with each clinic visit or hospitalization so that a reliable weight 
change trajectory may be monitored. Patients should be weighed in a 
consistent manner without overgarments or shoes. In order to secure 
valid measurements, calibration of scales and appropriate staff training 
are  essential.  Chair  or  bed  scales  may  be  used  for  those  who  cannot 
stand. For those who are able, height should be measured in a standing 
position, without shoes, using a stadiometer. If an adult cannot safely 
stand, height can be estimated by doubling the arm span measurement 
(from the patient’s sternal notch to the end of the longest finger). Stat-
ure of frail older persons can also be estimated from measurement of 
knee height using a caliper device.

Body  weight  is  often  standardized  for  height  to  obtain  an  ideal 
weight for comparison, but available reference tables require subjective 
assessment of frame size and offer limited reference data for many rel-
evant population groups, including older persons. A simple measure of 
body size and an indirect measure of body fatness is provided by body 
mass  index  (BMI),  defined  as  weight  (kg)/height  (m2).  The  National 
Institutes  of  Health  BMI  categories  for  adults  are  as  follows:  BMI 
<18.5  =  underweight,  BMI  18.5–24.9  =  desirable,  BMI  25.0–29.9  =  
overweight,  and  BMI  ≥30  =  obese.  Note  that  being  overweight  or 
obese  does  not  mean  that  one  cannot  be  severely  malnourished  due 
to  inadequate  nutrition  intake  or  assimilation.  Underweight  status 
is  not  required  for  the  diagnosis  of  malnutrition.  While  classical 
anthropometric measurements including skinfolds and circumferences 
can  be  helpful,  their  utility  in  routine  patient  care  has  been  limited 
because practitioner training is required to achieve suitable reliability. 
Body  composition  assessment  methodologies  include  bioelectrical 
impedance analysis (BIA), dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), 
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
The  imaging  modalities  have  become  the  state  of  the  art  for  precise 
measurements of muscle mass. It is possible to take advantage of CT or 

MRI studies that are being done for other clinical purposes to evaluate 
musculature.

2537

Laboratory Indicators  Laboratory findings (Table 334-2) are but 
one part of the comprehensive nutrition assessment and must be used 
in  combination  with  other  domains  of  assessment  to  appropriately 
diagnose a malnutrition syndrome. Although serum albumin and pre-
albumin are often measured in patients with suspected malnutrition, 
their  utility  is  limited  due  to  their  poor  sensitivity  and  specificity  as 
indicators  of  nutritional  status.  Patients  with  low  albumin  or  preal-
bumin may or may not prove to be malnourished when evaluated by 
comprehensive nutrition assessment because these proteins are readily 
reduced by the systemic response to injury, disease, or inflammation. 
C-reactive protein is a positive acute-phase reactant that may be mea-
sured  to  help  discern  whether  active  inflammation  is  manifest.  If  C- 
reactive  protein  is  increased  and  albumin  or  prealbumin  decreased, 
inflammation is likely to be a contributing factor. Since it is recognized 
that C-reactive protein suffers limitations as a point-in-time measure, 
trends in levels over the clinical course may be helpful. Research sug-
gests  that  interleukin  6,  and  perhaps  other  cytokines,  may  also  offer 
promise  as  indicators  of  inflammatory  status.  Nonspecific  laboratory 
indicators  that  are  often  associated  with  inflammatory  response 
include  leukocytosis  and  hyperglycemia.  Additional  tests  that  may 
be  obtained  to  help  confirm  the  presence  of  inflammatory  response 
include 24-h urine urea nitrogen and indirect calorimetry. In the set-
ting of severe acute systemic inflammatory response, negative nitrogen 
balance and elevated resting energy expenditure are anticipated.

Dietary  Assessment  Dietary  assessment  can  be  used  to  detect 
inadequate  or  imbalanced  food  or  nutrient  intakes.  While  dietary 
assessment in patient care settings can be quite challenging, 24-h recall 
and modified diet history approaches are sometimes used. A modified 
diet history is targeted to query types and frequencies of intake of spe-
cific foods of interest. It is often necessary to access diverse resources 
for  diet  history  information  including  the  patient,  medical  records, 
family, and caregivers. Consultation of a registered dietitian nutrition-
ist is highly recommended. Dietary practices and supplements should 
be  carefully  reviewed  for  potential  inadequacies  and  toxicities.  Since 
patients will often present to health care practitioners with acute medi-
cal events superimposed upon chronic health conditions, it is common 
for patients to have had decreased food intakes and malnutrition for 
extended  periods  prior  to  assessment.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that 
compromised dietary intake should not be overlooked so that appro-
priate intervention may be undertaken.

Ongoing assessment is indicated when parenteral or enteral feedings 
are initiated, because it is necessary to discern what amount of formula 
is actually being administered to and received by the patient. Enteral 
feedings,  in  particular,  are  often  interrupted  or  held  for  procedures, 
tolerance  issues,  and  feeding  tube  displacements.  It  is  therefore  not 
unusual  for  such  patients  to  be  appreciably  underfed  for  extended 
periods. When a patient is beginning to transition to oral feedings, it 
is  imperative  to  monitor  quantities  of  food  and/or  supplements  that 
are actually consumed as well as patient tolerance to feeding. Meals are 
often delayed or missed for tests or procedures. If possible, the patient 
should  be  queried  about  intake  since  tray  inspection  is  notoriously 
unreliable as an indicator of consumption.

Functional Outcomes  Advanced malnutrition is accompanied by 
declines in muscle mass and function that can be detected by strength 
and physical performance measures. Handgrip strength measured with 
a simple handgrip dynamometer is the most practical routine clinical 
assessment. Physical performance tests such as timed gait, chair stands, 
and stair steps are used in the comprehensive assessment of integrated 
functions in frail older persons.

The  decline  in  overall  functional  status  observed  in  advanced 
malnutrition  is  associated  with  nutrient  deficiencies  and  impairment 
of  organ  system  functions.  Poor  wound  healing  and  immune  com-
promise are examples of such impairments. Improved wound healing 
parameters  and  restored  responsiveness  to  recall  antigens  by  delayed 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
4

M
a
l
n
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n
a
n
d
N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n
a
l

A
s
s
e
s
s

m
e
n
t

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2537

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2538 TABLE 334-2  Body Composition, Laboratories, and Other Studies

TEST

NOTES

Body Composition Studies

Anthropometrics
Bioelectrical impedance

Water displacement
Whole-body counting and isotope 
dilution techniques
Air plethysmography
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA)
Imaging with computed tomography 
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI)

Laboratories and Other Studies

Albumin

Prealbumin

Transferrin

Retinol-binding protein

C-reactive protein
Cholesterol

Carotene
Cytokines
Electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen 
(BUN), creatinine, and glucose

Complete blood count with differential

Total lymphocyte count
Helper/suppressor T-cell ratio
Nitrogen balance

Urine 3-methylhistidine

Creatinine height index (CHI)

Prothrombin time/international 
normalized ratio (INR)
Specific micronutrients

Skin testing—recall antigens
Electrocardiogram

Video fluoroscopy
Endoscopic and x-ray studies of 
gastrointestinal tract
Fat absorption
Schilling test
Indirect calorimetry

Skinfolds and circumferences require training for reliability. Typical coefficient of variation is ≥10%.
Based upon differential resistance of body tissues. Equipment easily portable. Good measure of body water. Requires 
population-specific validation of regression equations.
Impractical for most clinical settings. Weighed in water tank. Historic reference measure.
Research methodologies. Naturally occurring 40K isotope to measure body cell mass by whole-body counting. Total-body 
water measurement by dilution volume of tritium, deuterium, or 18O-labeled water.
Subject sits inside moderately sized BodPod chamber. Validated against water displacement and impedance.
Often used for bone density but can be used for soft tissue measurements with appropriate software. Can compare truncal 
and appendicular components. Modest x-ray exposure.
State of the art research methods for visualizing body tissue compartments. Can quantify visceral fat. Costly, and CT entails 
x-ray exposure.

Lacks sensitivity and specificity for malnutrition. Potent risk indicator for morbidity and mortality. Proxy measure for underlying 
injury, disease, or inflammation. Half-life is 14–20 days. Also consider liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, and protein-wasting 
enteropathy.
Sensitive to short-term changes in inflammation and protein nutrition with half-life of 2–3 days. Otherwise suffers the same 
limitations of albumin with limited sensitivity and specificity for malnutrition. Levels may be decreased in liver failure and 
increased in renal failure.
Acute-phase reactant also altered by perturbation in iron status. Half-life is 8–10 days. Lacks sensitivity and specificity for 
malnutrition.
Responds to very-short-term changes in nutritional status, but utility is also limited by response to stress and inflammation. 
Half-life is 12 h. Also affected by vitamin A deficiency and renal disease.
C-reactive protein is a positive acute-phase reactant. It is generally elevated if an active inflammatory process is manifest.
Low cholesterol (<160 mg/dL) is often observed in malnourished persons with serious underlying disease. It is unrelated to 
dietary intake in many clinical settings. Increased complications and mortality are observed. It appears that low cholesterol is 
again a nonspecific feature of poor health status that reflects cytokine-mediated inflammatory condition. Vegans and patients 
with hyperthyroidism may also exhibit low cholesterol.
Nonspecific indicator of malabsorption and poor nutritional intake.
Research is exploring prognostic use of cytokine measurements as indicators of inflammatory status.
Monitor for abnormalities consistent with under- or overhydration status and purging (contraction alkalosis). BUN may also be 
low in the setting of markedly reduced body cell mass. BUN and creatinine are elevated in renal failure. Hyperglycemia may 
be nonspecific indicator of inflammatory response.
Screen for nutritional anemias (iron, B12, and folate), lymphopenia (malnutrition), and thrombocytopenia (vitamin C and folate). 
Leukocytosis may be observed with inflammatory response.
Relative lymphopenia (total lymphocyte count <1200/μL) is a nonspecific marker for malnutrition.
Ratio may be reduced in severely undernourished patients. Not specific for nutritional status.
24-h urine can be analyzed for urine urea nitrogen (UUN) to determine nitrogen balance and give indication of degree of 
catabolism and adequacy of protein replacement. Requires accurate urine collection and normal renal function. Nitrogen 
balance = (protein/6.25) − (UUN + 4). Generally negative in the setting of acute severe inflammatory response.
Indicator of muscle catabolism and protein sufficiency. Released upon breakdown of myofibrillar protein and excreted without 
reutilization. Urine measurement requires a meat-free diet for 3 days prior to collection.
CHI = (24-h urinary creatinine excretion/ideal urinary creatinine for gender and height) × 100. Indicator of muscle depletion. 
Requires accurate urine collection and normal renal function.
Nonspecific indicator of vitamin K status. Prolonged in liver failure.

When suspected, a variety of specific micronutrient levels may be measured: thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, folate, pyridoxine, 
vitamins A, C, D, E, B12, zinc, iron, selenium, carnitine, and homocysteine—indicator of B12, folate, and pyridoxine status.
Delayed hypersensitivity testing. While malnourished patients are often anergic, this is not specific for nutritional status.
Severely malnourished patients with reduced body cell mass may exhibit low voltage and prolonged QT interval. These 
findings are not specific for malnutrition.
Helpful to evaluate suspected swallowing disorders.
Useful to evaluate impaired function, motility, and obstruction.

72-h fecal fat can be used to quantitate degree of malabsorption.
Identify the cause for impaired vitamin B12 absorption.
Metabolic cart can be used to determine resting energy expenditure (REE) for accurate estimation of energy needs. 
Elevated REE is a sign of systemic inflammatory response.

Source: Reproduced with permission from GL Jensen: Nutritional Syndromes. In: D Korenstein (Ed). ACP Smart Medicine [publisher archive]. Philadelphia (PA): American 
College of Physicians, 2013.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2538

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemhypersensitivity  testing  may  be  measured  to  demonstrate  improve-
ments  with  nutritional  repletion,  though  it  must  be  appreciated  that 
these are multivariable outcomes for which improved nutritional status 
is but one variable.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Cederholm T et al: ESPEN guidelines on definitions and terminology 

of clinical nutrition. Clin Nutr 36:49, 2017.

Detsky AS et al: What is Subjective Global Assessment of nutritional 

status? J Parenter Enteral Nutr 11:8, 1987.

Guerra RS et al: Usefulness of six diagnostic and screening measures 
for undernutrition in predicting length of hospital stay: A compara-
tive analysis. J Acad Nutr Diet 115:927, 2015.

Jensen GL: Inflammation as the key interface of the medical and nutri-
tion  universes:  A  provocative  examination  of  the  future  of  clinical 
nutrition and medicine. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 30:453, 2006.

Jensen  GL:  Malnutrition  and  inflammation—“Burning  down  the 
house”:  Inflammation  as  an  adaptive  physiologic  response  versus 
self-destruction? J Parenter Enteral Nutr 39:56, 2015.

Jensen  GL  et  al:  Adult  starvation  and  disease-related  malnutrition:  
A proposal for etiology-based diagnosis in the clinical practice setting 
from the International Consensus Guideline Committee. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 34:156, 2010.

Jensen GL et al: Adult nutrition assessment tutorial. J Parenter Enteral 

Nutr 36:267, 2012.

Jensen  GL  et  al:  GLIM  Criteria  for  the  diagnosis  of  malnutrition:  
A  consensus  report  from  the  global  clinical  nutrition  community.  
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 43:32, 2019.

Keller H et al: Global Leadership Initiative on Malnutrition (GLIM): 
Guidance on validation of the operational criteria for the diagnosis 
of  protein-energy  malnutrition  in  adults.  J  Parenter  Enteral  Nutr 
44:992, 2020.

White  JV  et  al:  Consensus  statement:  Academy  of  Nutrition  and 
Dietetics and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 
Characteristics recommended for the identification and documenta-
tion of adult malnutrition (under-nutrition). J Parenter Enteral Nutr 
36:275, 2012.

335 Enteral and Parenteral 
Nutrition
L. John Hoffer, Bruce R. Bistrian,  
David F. Driscoll

There  are  three  kinds  of  specialized  nutritional  support  (SNS):  
(1) optimized voluntary nutritional support, which is indicated when 
a  patient’s  barriers  to  adequate  nutrition  can  be  overcome  by  special 
attention to the details of how their food is constituted, prepared, and 
served  and  its  consumption  monitored;  (2)  forced  enteral  nutrition 
(EN), in which a liquid nutrient formula is delivered through a tube 
placed in the stomach or small intestine; and (3) parenteral nutrition 
(PN), in which a nutritionally complete mixture of crystalline amino 
acids, glucose, lipid emulsions, minerals, electrolytes, and micronutri-
ents is infused directly into the bloodstream.

When does a hospitalized patient need SNS? When SNS is indicated, 
how should it be provided? This chapter summarizes the physiologic 
principles that guide the correct use of SNS and offers practical infor-
mation about the diagnosis and management of nutritional disorders 
in adult hospitalized patients.

The management of in-hospital nutritional disorders follows three 
steps:  (1)  screening  and  diagnosis;  (2)  determination  of  the  sever-
ity  and  urgency  of  treating  a  diagnosed  nutritional  disorder  in  its 
overall  clinical  context;  and  (3)  selection  of  the  modality  of  SNS,  its 

2539

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
5

E
n
t
e
r
a
l
a
n
d
P
a
r
e
n
t
e
r
a
l

N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n

composition,  and  the  details  of  providing  it.  To  follow  these  steps 
properly,  physicians  require  a  general  understanding  of  nutritional 
physiology, nutrient requirements, and the pathophysiology and diag-
nosis of the nutritional disorders, and familiarity with the indications, 
advantages,  risks,  and  administration  of  the  different  kinds  of  SNS. 
Because most physicians are incompletely trained in clinical nutrition, 
they must collaborate with clinical dietitians and specialized pharma-
cists in this process.
 ■ NUTRITIONAL PHYSIOLOGY
(See Chaps. 332-334)

Energy  Total daily energy expenditure (TEE) of a healthy sedentary 
adult is ~36 kcal/kg. Resting energy expenditure (REE), which accounts 
for  ~75%  of  TEE,  may  be  measured  by  indirect  calorimetry  or  esti-
mated using a variety of predictive equations that input weight, height, 
age, sex, and sometimes, disease-related factors. Fever and some forms 
of  critical  illness  increase  REE,  whereas  prolonged  semi-starvation 
induces an adaptive reduction in REE and voluntary physical activity. 
Patients’ TEE identifies the amount of dietary energy they must con-
sume and metabolize to maintain their existing store of body fat (and 
protein). The amount of energy a patient requires may be less than TEE 
(in  obesity  therapy  or,  temporarily,  during  periods  of  energy  intoler-
ance) or greater than TEE (during recovery from starvation disease).

Protein  and  Amino  Acids  Dietary  protein  must  be  consumed 
throughout  life  because  endogenous  protein  turnover  entails  a  mini-
mum obligatory rate of amino acid catabolism. Amino acid catabolism 
increases  and  decreases  in  response  to  changes  in  protein  intake, 
but  it  cannot  fall  below  a  certain  minimum  rate  that  determines  an 
individual’s minimum dietary protein requirement. The average daily 
minimum protein requirement of a healthy adult is 0.65 g/kg; the “safe” 
or “recommended” intake is 0.80 g/kg. The average protein consump-
tion in wealthy societies is approximately twice the average minimum 
requirement.

Many  diseases  (or  their  treatments)  increase  the  protein  require-
ment, by (1) increasing amino acid loss from the body (as in malab-
sorption and protein loss via wound exudates, fistulas, or inflammatory 
diarrhea), removing amino acids from the circulation (renal replace-
ment therapy), or (2) increasing muscle protein catabolism, as occurs 
as  a  side  effect  of  high-dose  glucocorticoid  therapy  and  especially 
as  part  of  the  metabolic  response  to  systemic  inflammation.  Highly  
protein-catabolic patients may excrete 15 g N (nitrogen)/d or more in 
their  urine  in  the  absence  of  dietary  protein  provision—this  is  more 
than  three  times  faster  than  during  simple  fasting.  Since  1  g  N  lost 
from the body reflects the loss of 6.25 g formed protein, 15 g N loss/d 
indicates the loss of 15 × 6.25 = 94 g protein/d; since the body’s meta-
bolically active tissue mass (its body cell mass, 80% of which is skeletal 
muscle) is ~20% protein, 94 g protein loss/d indicates the loss from the 
body  of  ~470  g  (1  lb)  of  muscle  mass  per  day!  Sufficiently  generous 
protein provision can reduce this kind of muscle atrophy. The extent 
to which protein-catabolic illness increases the protein requirement is 
debated, but the most frequent current recommendation for critically 
ill patients is 1.5 g protein/kg normal body weight per day—close to the 
habitual protein intake of healthy people in wealthy societies.

Protein-Energy  Interactions  Energy  deficiency  and  systemic 
inflammation  increase  the  dietary  protein  requirement.  Systemic 
inflammation  reduces,  but  does  not  prevent,  the  beneficial  effect  of 
increased protein provision during energy deficiency, so long as there 
is a minimum supply of energy, such as 50% of TEE. Energy provision 
>50–70%  TEE  has  little  further  protein-sparing  effect  in  systemic 
inflammation, and the additional amounts of glucose and fluid volume 
required to deliver it can have adverse effects.

Permissive Underfeeding and Hypocaloric Nutrition  These 
terms  have  different  meanings,  and  they  should  not  be  conflated  or 
confused.  Permissive  underfeeding  is  the  deliberate  underprovision 
of  all  nutrients,  including  protein,  whereas  hypocaloric  nutrition  is 
energy  provision  deliberately  set  less  than  TEE  with  a  compensatory 
increase in protein provision.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2539

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2540 Micronutrients  Minimum  amounts  of  the  nine  water-soluble  
vitamins  (the  B  vitamins  and  vitamin  C),  four  fat-soluble  vitamins  
(A,  D,  E,  and  K),  eight  minerals  (calcium,  phosphorus,  potassium, 
sodium,  chloride,  magnesium,  zinc,  and  iron),  essential  fatty  acids, 
and  several  essential  trace  elements  are  required  to  avoid  deficiency 
diseases.  Overt  deficiencies  of  potassium,  sodium,  magnesium,  and 
phosphorus occur so frequently in hospitalized patients that it is stan-
dard practice to monitor for and correct them. Certain drugs induce 
renal potassium, magnesium, or zinc losses that necessitate appropriate 
increases  in  their  provision.  Gastrointestinal  losses  from  nasogastric 
drainage tubes or intestinal losses from fistulas or diarrhea incur losses 
of  potassium,  sodium,  calcium,  magnesium,  and  zinc  that  increase 
their daily requirement.

Less studied, but common, are subclinical deficiencies of zinc, vita-
min C, vitamin D, and possibly other micronutrients. Physicians often 
assume  that  consumption  of  a  regular  hospital  diet  protects  patients 
from  these  deficiencies.  This  assumption  is  not  warranted  when  the 
patient’s  nutritional  status  was  deficient  when  they  were  admitted  to 
hospital and remains so during their hospital stay.

 ■ MACRONUTRIENT MALNUTRITION SYNDROMES
The decision to embark on SNS must be justified by a well-formulated 
nutritional diagnosis and clearly defined therapeutic goals. This chap-
ter focuses on the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of in-hospital 
starvation-related  malnutrition  (SRM)  and  two  related  conditions: 
chronic disease–related malnutrition (CDM) and acute disease–related 
(or injury-induced) malnutrition (ADM). As explained in Chap. 334, 
SRM  results  solely  from  prolonged  semi-starvation.  CDM  is  usefully 
understood  as  SRM  (i.e.,  simple  starvation)  that  is  complicated  by 
moderately severe systemic inflammation. SRM and CDM are anatom-
ically (phenotypically) similar but etiologically and metabolically dis-
tinct variations of starvation disease. ADM refers to an injury-induced 
metabolic condition that creates a high risk of severe body protein defi-
ciency, rather than to an already-existing anatomic starvation disease.

Starvation-Related  Malnutrition  The  pathologic  features  that 
define SRM—and distinguish it from the semi-starvation that precedes 
it—emerge  when  the  body  cell  mass  has  been  depleted  enough  to 
impair specific physiologic functions. Other terms for SRM are “star-
vation-induced protein-energy malnutrition,” “starvation disease,” and 
“hunger disease.”

The  body  normally  adapts  to  starvation  by  reducing  REE  and 
net  protein  catabolism,  partly  by  means  of  hormone-  and  nervous  
system–regulated changes in cellular metabolism and partly by reduc-
ing its muscle mass. These adaptations allow prolonged survival, but 
survival comes at a cost that includes muscle atrophy (including of the 
cardiac  and  respiratory  muscles),  skin  thinning,  lethargy,  a  tendency 
to  hypothermia,  and  functional  disability.  The  cardinal  anatomic 
diagnostic features of SRM—generalized muscle atrophy and subcuta-
neous adipose tissue depletion—are easily identified by simple physical 
examination.

SRM  always  manifests  as  weight  loss,  but  weight  loss  alone  may 
not  reveal  its  full  severity.  Semistarvation  increases  the  extracellular 
fluid (ECF) volume (and body weight), sometimes seriously enough to 
cause edema (“starvation edema”). In adults with initially normal body 
composition,  starvation-induced  weight  loss  tracks  the  loss  of  body 
cell mass (since weight change due to reductions in adipose tissue and 
increases in ECF volume tend to cancel one another out). A 25% reduc-
tion in body weight significantly compromises physiologic function; a 
50% reduction places otherwise uncompromised young adults on the 
cusp of thermodynamic survival; older patients with comorbidities are 
at  even  greater  risk.  People  with  SRM  feel  unwell,  lack  strength,  are 
frail, and are at risk of hypothermia.

The main cause of SRM worldwide is involuntary food deprivation; 
its causes in hospitalized patients are many. They include inadvertent 
or  physician-ordered  food  deprivation;  psychologic  depression  or 
distress;  anorexia  nervosa;  poorly  controlled  pain  or  nausea;  badly 
presented unappealing food; communication barriers; physical or sen-
sory  disability;  dysphagia  and  other  mechanical  difficulties  ingesting 

food; partial obstruction of the esophagus, stomach, or intestinal tract; 
thrush; intestinal angina; and most commonly, combinations of these 
causes.

Chronic Disease–Related Malnutrition and Cachexia  These 
terms  refer  to  SRM  complicated  by  chronic  systemic  inflammation. 
CDM  is  prevalent  among  patients  with  chronic  infection,  inflamma-
tory  autoimmune  disease,  chronic  severe  hepatic,  renal,  cardiac,  and 
pulmonary  disease,  and  neoplastic  diseases  that  induce  a  systemic 
inflammatory  response  or  cause  tissue  injury.  CDM  causes  and  is 
worsened by anorexia—a strong disinclination to eat even when there 
is no physical barrier to it—and is characterized by an increased rate 
of muscle protein catabolism, muscle atrophy, weakness, fatigue, and a 
subverted adaption to starvation, all of which contribute to a vicious 
cycle of worsening disease. Fortunately, the nutritional deficit on the 
input side of this equation (anorexia-driven inadequate food consump-
tion)  is  often  a  stronger  driver  of  the  patient’s  CDM  than  increased 
nutrient loss on the output side (increased amino acid catabolism and, 
sometimes, increased energy expenditure). This makes CDM amenable 
to a well-organized nutritional intervention while effective treatment 
of the primary disease is implemented. The challenge becomes more 
daunting when there is no effective therapy for the primary disease.

Cachexia is an older term that refers to a disease-induced metabolic 
syndrome characterized by moderate systemic inflammation, unrelent-
ing and severe generalized muscle atrophy, and the symptoms associ-
ated with them; it is, therefore, approximately synonymous with CDM. 
Anyone  with  cachexia  has  CDM,  but  in  the  view  of  some  clinicians, 
CDM that is milder and less sustained does not qualify for the term.

Acute Disease–Related Malnutrition  Other terms for ADM are 
“injury-induced  malnutrition”  and  “protein-catabolic  critical  illness.” 
The metabolic-inflammatory response to severe tissue injury and sep-
sis mobilizes muscle amino acids and leads to rapid and severe general-
ized muscle atrophy and variable increases in REE under conditions in 
which voluntary food intake is almost always impossible. SRM or CDM 
may or may not be present at the onset of their critical illness, but mus-
cle atrophy will rapidly develop or worsen unless the inciting medical 
or surgical disease is rapidly and effectively treated and SNS provided. 
The rate of loss of body cell mass in ADM can be three to five times 
greater than in simple starvation. Death from simple starvation of non-
obese adults occurs within ~8 weeks; death due to untreated starvation 
of patients with sustained ADM will occur correspondingly sooner.

 ■ NUTRITIONAL DIAGNOSIS
The  cardinal  anatomic  features  of  starvation  disease  (SRM  or  CDM) 
are  generalized  muscle  atrophy  and  diminished  body  fat.  A  routine 
physical examination will reveal these features, but what should be an 
easy diagnosis is often overlooked. This section explains the details and 
pitfalls of diagnosing SRM and CDM.

Muscle Mass  Generalized muscle atrophy is easy to identify, and its 
severity is determinable almost at a glance. Serum creatinine adjusted 
for  renal  function  or  urinary  excretion,  adjusted  for  height  and  sex, 
may also confirm severe muscle atrophy. A problem with diagnosing 
SRM and CDM is that muscle atrophy has many causes. They include 
(1)  old  age–related  muscle  atrophy  (sarcopenia);  (2)  disuse  muscle 
atrophy;  (3)  high-dose  glucocorticoid  therapy  and  certain  endocrine 
diseases (uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, adrenocortical insufficiency, 
hyperthyroidism, androgen deficiency, hypopituitarism); and (4) pri-
mary  muscle  or  neuromuscular  diseases.  The  guiding  clinical  prin-
ciple  is  that  SRM  and  CDM  are  extremely  common  causes  of  and 
contributors to muscle atrophy. Whenever generalized muscle atrophy 
is observed, its potential causes should be evaluated and the treatable 
ones addressed. Old age is irreversible, but adequate protein and energy 
provision  to  starving  patients,  combined  with  physical  rehabilitation 
for immobile patients, can be lifesaving.

Generalized  muscle  atrophy  of  any  cause  is  especially  dangerous 
in  ADM,  because  patients  suffering  from  ADM  and  muscle  atrophy 
are closer to the cliff edge of lethal depletion of their body cell mass. 
In addition, a diminished muscle mass is less able to release adequate 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2540

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemamounts  of  amino  acids  into  the  circulation  for  protein  synthesis  at 
sites  of  tissue  injury  and  healing  and  to  the  central  protein  pool  to 
regulate the immunoinflammatory response.

Subcutaneous  Adipose  Tissue  Severe  adipose  tissue  depletion 
indicates  starvation  disease,  but  it  need  not  be  present  to  make  the 
diagnosis.  The  current  obesity  epidemic  has  created  a  population  of 
obese patients with SRM or CDM in whom muscle atrophy has out-
paced  fat  loss.  A  conscientious  physical  examination  easily  identifies 
these patients’ atrophic muscles despite their residual subcutaneous fat.

ECF Volume  The ECF volume normally represents ~20% of body 
weight.  SRM  moderately  increases  ECF  volume.  Patients  with  CDM 
have  additional  edema-promoting  conditions,  especially  hypoalbu-
minemia. Unless the effect of ECF is accounted for, its increased vol-
ume may conceal the severity of muscle atrophy in patients with SRM 
and CDM.

Body  Mass  Index  Body  mass  index  (BMI)  is  defined  as  body 
weight (kg) divided by the square of height (m2). BMI normally ranges 
from 20 to 25 kg/m2; values <19–20 usually indicate reduced muscle 
and  fat  mass.  BMI  <15  indicates  severe  starvation  disease;  BMI  <13 
is  usually  thermodynamically  incompatible  with  life,  especially  in 
older  patients  with  comorbidities.  Some  guidelines  and  clinical  trial 
enrollment criteria define “malnutrition”—in this context, a synonym 
for starvation disease—as a BMI <16 or 17. Using these criteria alone 
can  lead  to  serious  error.  A  BMI  <17  certainly  indicates  starvation 
disease—the body architecture associated with such a BMI can only be 
created by jettisoning a large fraction of the body cell mass and adipose 
tissue store. But a BMI >17 does not rule out starvation disease. Many 
patients with starvation disease have a normal or above-normal BMI 
despite their muscle atrophy because of residual obesity or an expanded 
ECF volume.

Visual  BMI  After  some  practice  and  verification,  clinicians  can 
accurately  predict  the  BMI  of  nonobese,  nonedematous  patients  by 
attentively  examining  their  muscle  groups.  Once  acquired,  this  skill 
enables them to interpolate the severity of starvation disease in obese 
or  edematous  patients—in  whom  measured  BMI  is  unreliable—by 
evaluating their muscles while intuitively discounting their subcutane-
ous fat and edema. Visual BMI may also be used to estimate a patient’s 
normalized dry body weight (i.e., weight adjusted for obesity, edema, 
or ascites). For example, the normalized dry body weight of a 1.75-m 
adult with a visual BMI of 17 is 1.752 × 17 = 52 kg. Since protein and 
energy targets are based on the patient’s body normalized weight, this 
calculation  is  useful  when  body  weight  is  unreliable  or  difficult  to 
measure.

Laboratory  and  Technical  Assessment  Clinical  laboratory 
measurements have three main purposes in the evaluation and man-
agement of starvation disease.
MUSCLE MASS  Bedside ultrasound is a potentially valuable technique 
for quantifying muscle mass at specific body sites, but it need not, nor 
should it, replace the comprehensive evaluation provided by the eyes, 
hands, and discerning mind of a bedside examiner.
SYSTEMIC  INFLAMMATION  The  absence  or  presence  of  systemic 
inflammation distinguishes SRM from CDM. The most useful labora-
tory indicators of systemic inflammation are a reduced serum albumin 
concentration and increased serum C-reactive protein concentration. 
Systemic inflammation increases the permeability of capillary walls to 
large molecules; the resulting osmotic shift increases the ECF volume. 
Intravascular albumin redistributes into this larger volume, decreasing 
the serum albumin concentration (increased albumin catabolism also 
contributes). Dietary protein deficiency and muscle atrophy combine 
to  perpetuate  inflammation-induced  hypoalbuminemia,  because  the 
amino acids used for hepatic albumin synthesis are derived from the 
diet and endogenous muscle protein.

Hypoalbuminemia  and  reduced  serum  prealbumin  concentra-
tions  are  often  claimed  to  diagnose  “malnutrition.”  This  is  incorrect. 
Serum  albumin  and  prealbumin  are  negative  acute-phase  reactants 

2541

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
5

E
n
t
e
r
a
l
a
n
d
P
a
r
e
n
t
e
r
a
l

N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n

that  indicate  systemic  inflammation.  Systemic  inflammation  induces 
anorexia  and  increases  muscle  catabolism,  increasing  the  risk  of 
CDM, but the disease itself may or not exist at the time and may never 
develop.  The  serum  concentrations  of  acute-phase  reactants  will  not 
improve  while  systemic  inflammation  persists,  even  with  prolonged 
optimal nutritional therapy.
PROTEIN-CATABOLIC  INTENSITY  The  defining  feature  of  protein- 
catabolic  disease  (which  occurs  in  a  moderate  form  in  CDM  and 
severely in ADM) is increased net muscle amino acid catabolism. Con-
ditions that substantially increase body protein loss can be identified 
by measuring body N loss. Most N leaves the body in the urine (almost 
all  of  it  in  urea,  ammonium,  and  creatinine).  Total  N  is  not  usually 
measured in hospital laboratories, but the analysis of urinary urea N 
(which  normally  accounts  for  ~85%  of  urinary  N)  is  routinely  avail-
able. A recent, validated formula estimates daily total N loss as follows:  
N loss (g) = g N in urinary urea/0.85 + 2.

Net  muscle  protein  catabolism  follows  approximately  first-order 
kinetics,  such  that  the  rate  of  N  loss  from  muscle  is  proportional  to 
the existing amount of N available to be lost. Muscle-atrophic, protein-
catabolic patients lose less body N per day than equivalently catabolic 
patients  whose  muscle  mass  is  normal,  but  they  are  nevertheless  at 
greater risk of succumbing to their critical illness. The interpretation of 
a patient’s rate of N loss should include an evaluation of their existing 
muscle mass.

Instrumental Nutritional Assessment  Many nutritional assess-
ment instruments claim to identify “malnutrition” by enumerating and 
summing a list of risk factors, laboratory results, and physical findings. 
These  tools  are  often  hindered  by  ambiguity  about  the  definition  of 
malnutrition  and  by  failure  to  distinguish  between  screening  and 
diagnosis. Diagnosis is the process of identifying a known pathologic 
entity—SRM  or  CDM,  for  example—by  considering  the  patient’s 
medical history, pertinent findings on physical examination, and labo-
ratory or imaging reports. Diagnosis also involves an estimation of the 
probability that the diagnosis is correct and a judgment of its severity. 
By contrast, screening is the application of a simple test that identifies 
people at sufficiently high risk of a certain disease to warrant definitive 
procedures  to  establish  the  diagnosis  or  rule  it  out  or  that  identifies 
people  at  sufficiently  high  risk  of  developing  the  disease  to  warrant 
specific  preventive  interventions.  Screening  tools  and  risk  predictors 
are useful, but it is a mistake to confuse them with clinical diagnosis.

 ■ SPECIALIZED NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
Optimized Voluntary Nutritional Support  When feasible, this 
is the approach of choice because it engages and empowers the patient, 
encourages  mobilization  and  reconditioning,  is  consistent  with  the 
objectives of patient-centered medicine, and is risk-free. Its disadvan-
tage is that it is time-consuming and labor-intensive, and it demands 
interest in and attention to the specific needs of individual patients.

Enteral  Nutrition  This  is  nutrition  provided  through  a  feeding 
tube placed through the nose into the stomach or beyond it into the 
duodenum, by insertion of a tube through the abdominal wall into the 
stomach or beyond it into the jejunum, or by an open surgical approach 
to access the stomach or small intestine. EN is the treatment of choice 
when  optimized  voluntary  nutritional  support  is  impossible  or  has 
failed. It is relatively simple, safe, and inexpensive and maintains the 
digestive, absorptive, and immunologic barrier functions of the gastro-
intestinal tract. EN is appropriate when optimized voluntary nutrition 
is  not  feasible  or  has  failed  and  the  patient’s  gastrointestinal  tract  is 
functioning and can be accessed.

EN Products  The most common forms of EN used are commer-
cially manufactured formulas with defined compositions.
STANDARD  POLYMERIC  FORMULAS  These  are  the  most  widely  used 
sources  of  EN.  They  are  available  in  a  wide  variety  of  formats  that 
generally meet the nutritional requirements of a normal, healthy per-
son. Carbohydrates provide most of the energy. The proteins in them 
(casein, whey, or soy) are intact and require normal pancreatic enzyme 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2541

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2542 function for digestion and absorption. They are isotonic or nearly so 

and provide 1000–2000 kcal and 50–70 g protein/L.

POLYMERIC FORMULAS WITH FIBER  The addition of dietary fiber to 
formulas  sometimes  improves  bowel  function  and  feeding  tolerance. 
Fermentable (soluble) fibers such as pectin and guar are metabolized 
by  colonic  bacteria,  yielding  short-chain  fatty  acids  that  fuel  colono-
cytes.  Nonfermentable  (insoluble)  fibers  increase  fecal  bulk,  improve 
peristalsis, and may improve diarrhea.

ELEMENTAL  AND  SEMI-ELEMENTAL  FORMULAS  The  macronutrients 
in  these  formulas  are  partially  or  completely  hydrolyzed.  They  are 
primarily  designed  for  patients  with  known  maldigestion  and  mal-
absorption, but they are sometimes used empirically for patients who 
have had prolonged bowel rest or are critically ill without strong evi-
dence of their superiority, or when a patient is intolerant of a standard 
polymeric formula.
IMMUNE-ENHANCING FORMULAS  In addition to providing macronu-
trients and conventional amounts of micronutrients, these EN products 
contain large amounts of certain nutrients designed to favorably mod-
ulate the immune response: arginine and n-3 fatty acids especially, but 
also various combinations of glutamine, nucleotides, and antioxidants.
PROTEIN-ENRICHED  FORMULAS  Most  EN  formulas  provide  calo-
ries  and  protein  in  a  ratio  appropriate  for  a  healthy  person,  whereas 
protein-enriched  formulas  provide  ~90  g  protein  and  1000  kcal/L. 
Originally  marketed  to  meet  the  increased  protein  requirement  of 
weight-reducing  obese  patients,  these  products  are  increasingly  used 
to  provide  protein-catabolic  patients  with  a  more  generous  amount 
of  protein  without  energy  overfeeding.  EN  can  be  further  pro-
tein-enriched  by  adding  flushes  of  water-soluble  powdered  protein 
supplements.

OTHER FORMULAS  Various disease-specific EN products are available 
for  patients  with  diabetes  and  hepatic,  renal,  or  pulmonary  disease. 
Their use can improve some metabolic endpoints, but there is no defin-
itive evidence that they improve clinical outcomes.

Parenteral  Nutrition  PN  delivers  a  complete  nutritional  regi-
men  directly  into  the  bloodstream  in  the  form  of  crystalline  amino 
acids,  glucose,  triglyceride  emulsions,  minerals  (calcium,  phosphate, 
magnesium,  and  zinc),  electrolytes,  and  micronutrients.  Because  of 
its  high  osmolarity  (>1200  mOsm/L)  and  often  large  volume,  PN  is 
infused  into  a  central  vein  in  adults.  Ready-to-use  PN  admixtures 
typically containing 4–7% hydrated amino acids and 20–25% glucose 
(with  or  without  electrolytes)  are  available  in  two-chamber  (amino 
acids and glucose) or three-chamber (amino acids, glucose, and lipid) 
bags that are intermixed with vitamins, trace minerals, and additional 
electrolytes  then  added  just  prior  to  infusion.  Although  convenient 
and  cost-effective,  these  products  have  fixed  nutrient  compositions 
and  are  dosed  according  to  the  volume  required  to  meet  a  patient’s 
energy requirement but not necessarily their protein requirement. In 
some  situations—especially  ADM—a  more  sophisticated  approach  is 
justified that uses a computer-controlled sterile compounder to create 
combinations of amino acids and glucose that meet the precise protein 
and energy requirements of individual patients.

Amino Acids  PN amino acid admixtures vary, but all of them pro-
vide appropriate amounts of the essential amino acids and nonessential 
amino acid N. The hydrated state of the mixed free amino acids in PN 
solutions reduces their energy density from 4.0 (in formed protein) to 
3.3 kcal/g, and it reduces the amount of protein substrate they provide 
by 17%. For example, 100 g of free mixed amino acids provides 83 g 
protein substrate and 330 kcal.

Carbohydrate and Lipids  The glucose in PN is dextrose monohy-
drate;  its  hydrated  state  reduces  its  energy  density  from  4.0  (in 
formed  carbohydrate)  to  3.4  kcal/g.  Lipid  emulsions  provide  energy  
(~10 kcal/g) and the essential n-6 and n-3 fatty acids. Traditional lipid 
emulsions are based solely on soybean oil, but they are giving way to 
mixed emulsions that include medium-chain triglycerides, n-9 mono-
unsaturated fatty acids, and n-3 fatty acids. Emulsions of pure soybean 

oil, a mixture of 80% olive oil and 20% soybean oil, and a mixture of 
30% soybean oil, 30% medium-chain triglycerides, 25% olive oil, and 
15% fish oil are available in the United States. (A 10% fish oil emulsion 
is  approved  for  intestinal  failure–associated  liver  disease  in  neonates 
and infants.) Fish oil (either as a component of a mixed emulsion or 
administered separately) may reduce the risk of infections and length 
of stay in critically ill patients. The complex lipid emulsions are more 
highly  enriched  in  n-3  fatty  acids  and/or  contain  fewer  n-6  polyun-
saturated fatty acids than soybean lipid, which is more prone to lipid 
peroxidation and could promote the formation of the proinflammatory 
n-6 derivatives. Standard lipid infusion rates should not exceed 8 g/h, 
equivalent to 175 g (1925 kcal)/d in a 70-kg patient; pure fish oil emul-
sions must be infused at lower rates.

Minerals,  Micronutrients,  and  Trace  Elements  The  default 
concentrations  of  electrolytes,  minerals,  and  micronutrients  in  PN 
solutions  are  designed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  a  healthy  adult. 
These starting doses must be adjusted to meet the frequently abnormal 
and often-changing requirements of individual patients. Being unsta-
ble, multivitamin mixtures are injected into PN bags just prior to their 
delivery to the medical unit. Parenteral water-soluble vitamin require-
ments are greater than standard oral requirements, because hospital-
ized patients often have vitamin deficiencies or increased requirements 
and because intravenous administration of vitamins increases their loss 
in  the  urine.  Ascorbic  acid  degrades  spontaneously  in  PN  solutions, 
even  when  light-protected.  The  amount  of  vitamin  D  in  currently 
available intravenous vitamin products is inadequate.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Indications, Selection, and Provision of  
Specialized Nutritional Support

Most hospitalized patients do not require SNS because they can eat 
and  will  improve  with  appropriate  management  of  their  primary 
disease.  Others  have  a  terminal  disease  whose  downward  course 
will  not  be  slowed  by  SNS.  Patients  who  cannot  eat  enough  hos-
pital food and who have or are at high risk for SRM or CDM are 
candidates  for  optimized  voluntary  nutrition  support.  When  this 
most desirable approach is inappropriate or impractical or has been 
properly  tried  and  failed,  invasive  SNS  must  be  considered.  The 
decision to provide or withhold EN or PN is based on a synthesis 
of  four  factors:  (1)  the  determination  that  nutrient  ingestion  will 
likely continue to be inadequate for many days; (2) the patient has 
important  muscle  atrophy  (of  any  cause)  or  fat  depletion;  (3)  the 
patient’s nutrient requirements are increased (as from inflammatory 
diarrhea,  enterocutaneous  fistulas  or  exudates,  or  a  pronounced 
inflammatory  protein-catabolic  state);  and  (4)  the  reasoned  judg-
ment that SNS has a reasonable prospect of improving the patient’s 
clinical outcome or quality of life. 

EN THERAPY
EN  is  indicated  when  the  patient  is  unable  to  eat  enough  food 
and is unlikely to do so for a long time, their gastrointestinal tract 
is  functional  and  accessible,  and  optimized  voluntary  nutrition   
is impossible or cannot meet their nutritional requirements. EN is 
commonly  used  for  patients  with  impaired  consciousness,  severe 
dysphagia,  or  severe  upper  gastrointestinal  tract  dysfunction  or 
obstruction  or  who  need  mechanical  ventilation.  Equally  com-
monly, situations arise in which a patient’s voluntary food intake is 
seriously  curtailed  by  anorexia,  unappealing  food,  nausea,  vomit-
ing, pain, distress, delirium, depression, chewing difficulties, mild 
dysphagia, physical and sensory disability (including dysgeusia), or 
undiagnosed thrush. In these complicated and difficult situations, 
the clinical diagnosis of SRM or CDM should tip the decision from 
optimized voluntary nutrition toward EN or PN.

EN  is  contraindicated  in  patients  with  intestinal  ischemia, 
mechanical  obstruction,  peritonitis,  and  gastrointestinal  hemor-
rhage. High-dose pressor therapy is another relative contraindication, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2542

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemdue to the rare but lethal risk of intestinal ischemic injury. Severe 
coagulopathy,  esophageal  varices,  absent  gag  reflex,  hypotension, 
paralytic ileus, pancreatitis, diarrhea, and nausea and vomiting are 
not absolute contraindications, but they increase the risk of compli-
cations and make it less likely that EN will succeed in achieving its 
nutritional goal. 
Initiation, Progression, and Monitoring  Nasogastric tube feeding 
may  proceed  when  the  patient’s  gastrointestinal  function  is  ade-
quate  with  respect  to  gastric  contractility  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube 
output  <1200  mL/d),  intestinal  contractility  (absence  of  a  known 
or  suspected  intraabdominal  pathologic  process  and  presence  of 
a nondistended abdomen with detectable bowel sounds, although 
the  absence  of  bowel  sounds  is  not,  in  itself,  a  contraindication), 
and adequate colonic function (passage of stools and flatus). After 
consent has been obtained and the appropriate feeding tube (usu-
ally a nasogastric tube for short-term feeding) has been placed and 
its position verified, the head of the patient’s bed is raised to at least 
30°  and  kept  raised  to  reduce  the  risk  of  regurgitation.  Clinical 
dietitians ordinarily order the formula and adjust its rate of provi-
sion.  When  a  standard  polymeric  formula  is  infused,  it  normally 
commences at 50 mL/h and is advanced by 25 mL/h every 4–8 h 
until the goal rate is attained. Elemental formulas are commenced 
at a slower rate and progress more slowly. Intragastric bolus feeding 
is an option (200–400 mL feeding solution infused over 15–60 min 
at  regular  intervals  with  verification  of  residual  gastric  contents 
every 4 h). 
Complications and Their Management  The most common com-
plications of EN are aspiration of regurgitated or vomited formula, 
diarrhea,  fluid  volume  and  electrolyte  derangements,  hyperglyce-
mia,  nausea,  abdominal  pain,  constipation,  and  failure  to  achieve 
the nutritional goal. 
Aspiration  Patients  with  delayed  gastric  emptying,  impaired 
gag  reflex,  and  ineffective  cough  are  at  high  risk  of  aspiration 
pneumonia.  Ventilator-associated  pneumonia  is  mostly  caused  by 
aspiration  of  microbial  pathogens  in  the  mouth  and  throat  past 
the cuffs of endotracheal or tracheostomy tubes, but tracheal suc-
tioning  induces  coughing  and  gastric  regurgitation.  Measures  to 
prevent  ventilator-associated  pneumonia  include  elevation  of  the 
head  of  the  bed,  mouth  hygiene  and  gastrointestinal  decontami-
nation,  nurse-directed  algorithms  for  formula  advancement,  and 
sometimes, postpyloric feeding. EN does not have to be suspended 
for gastric residual volumes <300–400 mL in the absence of other 
signs  of  gastrointestinal  intolerance  (nausea,  vomiting,  severe 
abdominal  pain,  abdominal  distention).  Continuous  EN  is  often 
tolerated better than bolus feeding, and it is the only option during 
jejunal feeding. 
Diarrhea  Diarrhea  commonly  occurs  when  the  patient’s 
bowel  function  is  compromised  by  disease  or  drugs  (most  often, 
broad-spectrum  antibiotics).  Once  infectious  and  inflammatory 
causes  have  been  ruled  out,  EN-associated  diarrhea  may  be  con-
trolled by using a fiber-containing formula or adding an antidiar-
rheal agent to it. H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors may help 
reduce the net volume of fluid presented to the colon. Since luminal 
nutrients  have  trophic  effects  on  the  intestinal  mucosa,  it  is  often 
appropriate to persist with tube feeding despite moderate, tolerable 
diarrhea, even if it necessitates supplemental parenteral fluid sup-
port.  Except  for  patients  with  markedly  impaired  small-intestinal 
absorptive  function,  there  are  no  well-established  indications  for 
elemental formulas, but they may be used empirically when diar-
rhea persists despite the use of fiber-enriched formulas and antidi-
arrheal agents. 
Gastrointestinal Intolerance  Abnormally high gastric residual 
volumes,  abdominal  distention,  pain,  and  nausea  are  distressing 
for  patients,  increase  the  nursing  workload,  and  delay  the  pro-
gression  of  EN.  These  problems  can  be  avoided  or  minimized  by 
ensuring normal fluid and electrolyte balance, by preventing severe 

2543

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
5

E
n
t
e
r
a
l
a
n
d
P
a
r
e
n
t
e
r
a
l

N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n

hyperglycemia, and, when a patient experiences nausea, vomiting, 
or  abdominal  distention,  by  the  judicious  use  of  antiemetic  and 
prokinetic  drugs  (and  sometimes  proton  pump  inhibitors)  on  a 
regular—rather than as-needed—basis. Patients with gastroparesis 
require postpyloric feeding. 
Fluid  Volume,  Electrolyte,  and  Blood  Glucose  Abnormalities   
EN’s  essential  purpose  is  to  provide  macronutrients  at  an  appro-
priate  rate.  EN  also  provides  standard  amounts  of  fluid,  electro-
lytes,  minerals,  and  micronutrients.  They  are  not  designed  to 
manage  abnormal  fluid  volume,  electrolyte,  and  mineral  require-
ments, which vary considerably among different patients and can 
change rapidly. Blood glucose concentrations should be monitored 
regularly,  and  additional  measures—including  intravenous  fluid, 
electrolyte,  and  insulin  therapy—should  be  taken  to  maintain 
homeostasis. 
Failure  to  Reach  the  Nutritional  Goal  EN  is  frequently 
delayed or interrupted by diagnostic tests and procedures (includ-
ing dialysis), physical or occupational therapy, a clogged or pulled 
out tube, and intolerance to EN. The result can be a long delay in 
the  progression  of  EN  and  ultimate  failure  to  meet  the  patient’s 
nutrient requirements. 
EN  in  the  Intensive  Care  Unit  Most  critically  ill  patients  cannot 
eat  anything—they  depend  entirely  on  SNS.  EN  serves  two  pur-
poses in this setting. The first is to meet the patient’s macronutrient 
requirements, especially their often dramatically increased protein 
requirement.  The  second  purpose  is  to  infuse  nutrients  into  the 
intestines at a rate that sustains normal intestinal barrier and immu-
nologic functions in the face of a systemic inflammatory response 
that  threatens  intestinal  integrity  and  immune  function.  Current 
guidelines recommend starting EN soon after a critically ill patient 
has  been  fluid  resuscitated  and  stabilized.  Once  EN  is  underway, 
the rate of delivery is increased as tolerated until the patient’s nutri-
tional goal is achieved. EN often falls far short of the protein pro-
vision target, even after a week or longer in the intensive care unit. 
Newer,  high-protein  EN  products  and  the  addition  of  powdered 
protein supplements can correct this protein shortfall. 
PN THERAPY
PN  is  more  resource-intensive,  is  potentially  riskier,  and  requires 
more expertise than EN. It is used when invasive SNS is indicated 
and  EN  is  impossible,  inappropriate,  or  insufficient  to  meet  the 
patient’s  nutritional  needs.  The  risks  of  PN  are  those  of  inserting 
and maintaining a central venous catheter (traumatic injury from 
the  insertion,  serious  infection,  and  venous  thrombosis);  allergy 
to some of its components; glucose, electrolyte, magnesium, phos-
phate, and acid-base balance abnormalities; and the adverse effects 
of  the  large  intravenous  fluid  volumes.  PN  that  is  prolonged  for 
many weeks—especially when it delivers excess energy—may cause 
or contribute to hepatic dysfunction. 
Initiation,  Progression,  Monitoring,  and  Discontinuation  When 
indicated,  PN  should  begin  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  patient 
has  been  hemodynamically  resuscitated,  glucose,  electrolyte,  and 
acid-base homeostasis has been established, and they can tolerate 
the fluid volume required to deliver it. The high osmolarity of adult 
PN  solutions  and  need  for  strict  sterility  require  their  infusion 
through  a  dedicated  port  in  a  central  venous  catheter.  Jugular  or 
femoral vein catheters should not be used because of the difficulty 
maintaining a dry, sterile dressing over the insertion site. The initial 
dose of glucose should not exceed 200 g/d to avoid hyperglycemia 
(and—in  susceptible  patients  with  adapted  SRM—the  refeeding 
syndrome). The full dose of amino acids can be administered from 
the  very  first  day—an  option  that  is,  unfortunately,  unavailable 
when premixed PN solutions are used.

Most non–critically ill patients (e.g., dry body weight 70 kg) do 
not  require  >500  g  glucose  (1700  kcal)/d,  and  many,  if  not  most, 
patients with ADM do not require >350 g (1200 kcal)/d during the 
intense phase of their disease. A glucose infusion rate of ~200 g/d 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2543

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2544

is physiologic and commonly does not have to be exceeded. When 
it  eventually  becomes  appropriate  to  set  the  energy  goal  equal  to 
TEE, it may be achieved by infusing a lipid emulsion. Even lower 
glucose infusion rates (e.g., 100–200 g/d) are safe during deliberate 
hypocaloric nutrition and may prevent or minimize hyperglycemia 
in insulin-resistant patients.

We recommend hypocaloric nutrition (high in protein but lim-
ited in glucose, lipid, and fluid volume) for the first 2 weeks of SNS 
in fat-sufficient or obese patients with ADM. Energy provision can 
increase,  if  indicated,  after  the  catabolic  storm  abates.  Lipids  are 
commonly introduced after the first week of PN and can be used 
to make up energy shortfalls. Serum triglyceride concentrations are 
measured before commencing lipid infusions to detect preexisting 
hypertriglyceridemia  (>400  mg/dL)—a  relative  contraindication. 
Lipids  may  be  infused  daily  or  two  to  three  times  weekly.  Lipid 
infusions are not necessary to prevent essential fatty acid deficiency 
during hypocaloric nutrition of obese patients, because the mobili-
zation of body fat during energy deficiency provides the body with 
endogenous essential fatty acids.

Capillary  blood  glucose  concentrations  are  monitored  several 
times  daily,  and  subcutaneous  regular  insulin  is  added  to  the  PN 
admixture as required to maintain average serum glucose concen-
trations  <140  mg/dL  and  >80  mg/dL.  (Upper  and  lower  limits  of 
180 and 100 mg/dL appear to be appropriate for critically ill patients 
with  diabetes  mellitus.)  The  dose  of  regular  insulin  required  on 
a given day can be added to the following day’s PN solution. The 
insulin dose increases roughly proportionately to the glucose dose. 
Certain  benchmarks  are  useful.  Basal  endogenous  insulin  secre-
tion  is  ~30  units/d  in  normal  people.  When  insulin  is  required 
for  nondiabetic,  noncatabolic  patients,  10  units  of  regular  insulin 
roughly  cover  100  g  infused  glucose.  Patients  with  non-insulin- 
dependent diabetes require ~20 units/100 g glucose. Noncatabolic 
patients  with  insulin-dependent  diabetes  usually  require  approxi-
mately twice the at-home insulin dose, because parenteral glucose 
stimulates insulin release more potently than oral carbohydrate and 
because some insulin adheres to the infusion bag. 
Biochemical  Monitoring  Serum  urea,  creatinine,  electrolytes, 
glucose, magnesium, phosphate, calcium, and albumin concentra-
tions are measured prior to starting PN and followed daily for the 
first few days, then twice weekly or as required. Serum triglycerides 
and liver function tests (and often ferritin) are measured at base-
line and after PN is underway to confirm that the lipid infusions 
are well tolerated. N balance, calculated from 24-h urinary urea N 
excretion, is useful at the outset for evaluating the severity of pro-
tein catabolism in patients with CDM or ADM, to identify patients 
who require more generous amino acid provision, and during PN 
to  determine  whether  the  patient’s  N  balance  is  improving  with 
therapy. 
Discontinuation  PN  is  tapered  and  discontinued  when  the 
patient can be adequately nourished by the enteral route. The dose 
of PN is gradually reduced as food intake increases. Once a patient 
is tolerating one-half to two-thirds of their food requirement by the 
enteral route and there is no mechanical or other barrier to further 
increases  in  intake,  PN  should  be  terminated.  The  transition  to 
oral nutrition can be slow for patients with CDM. In this situation, 
optimized  voluntary  nutrition,  although  labor-intensive,  is  much 
preferred to replacing PN with invasive EN because it is safe, effec-
tive, fosters well-being, and prepares patients for discharge home. 
The temptation to discontinue PN to stimulate a patient to eat more 
food  should,  in  general,  be  resisted.  PN  does  not  create  anorexia, 
nor does discontinuing it stimulate appetite. Too-early discontinu-
ation of PN may delay a patient’s progression to full voluntary food 
consumption by inducing anxiety and recreating starvation condi-
tions. A patient is most successfully weaned from PN by optimizing 
their  voluntary  nutrition  (including  food  from  home),  providing 
emotional support, encouraging physical activity, and being patient. 
Some  patients,  stuck  on  the  cusp  of  adequate  oral  nutrition,  will 

benefit from discharge to the security and pleasure of home life and 
homemade food; these patients are identified by observing, asking, 
and listening. 
Drawbacks,  Side  Effects,  and  Complications  Patients  receiving 
PN are at greater risk of bloodstream infections than other patients 
with  central  venous  catheters.  Rigorously  aseptic  insertion  tech-
nique,  meticulous  dressing  care,  one  port  dedicated  solely  to  PN, 
and careful glycemic control reduce this risk. 
Hyperglycemia  The  most  frequent  metabolic  complication 
of  PN  is  hyperglycemia  in  patients  with  insulin  resistance  due  to 
non-insulin-dependent  diabetes  mellitus,  high-dose  glucocorti-
coid  therapy,  or  severe  systemic  inflammation;  the  problem  is 
exacerbated by excessively high rates of glucose provision. Glucose 
concentrations  are  most  easily  kept  at  <140  mg/dL  with  the  least 
risk  of  hypoglycemia  by  infusing  hypocaloric  amounts  of  glucose 
and,  when  necessary,  meeting  the  patient’s  energy  requirement 
with  intravenous  lipid.  In  ADM,  the  benefits  of  using  the  lowest 
possible  insulin  dose—minimal  hyperinsulinemia  and  a  reduced 
risk of hypoglycemia—almost always outweigh the doubtful goal of 
rapidly matching energy provision to the energy expenditure rate of 
patients whose existing fat store is normal. 
Hypoglycemia  Reactive  hypoglycemia  is  uncommon  but  may 
occur  when  high-glucose,  non-insulin-containing  PN  is  abruptly 
discontinued.  It  is  prevented  by  slowing  the  PN  infusion  rate  to 
50 mL/h for 1 or 2 h prior to discontinuing it (or replacing it with 
10% glucose) or, when the oral route is available, providing a snack. 
More often, hypoglycemia occurs when the intensity of the patient’s 
metabolic  stress  (or  their  glucocorticoid  dose)  decreases  without 
an  appropriate  downward  adjustment  of  the  insulin  dose.  This 
problem  is  avoided  by  frequent  capillary  glucose  determinations 
and careful attention to medication doses and the patient’s general 
condition. 
Artefactual  Hyperglycemia  and  Hyperkalemia  Blood  sam-
ples must be meticulously collected from a dual-port central venous 
catheter. Intermixing of the sample with even a tiny volume of PN 
solution will falsely indicate hyperglycemia and hyperkalemia and 
may trigger a treatment error. The sampling error is identified when 
the  patient’s  apparent  serum  glucose  (and  potassium)  concentra-
tions abruptly increase without reason and the apparently very high 
glucose  concentration  is  out  of  keeping  with  concurrent  capillary 
glucose readings. 
Volume  Overload  Hypertonic  intravenous  glucose  triggers  a 
more intense insulin response than oral glucose that can increase 
urinary sodium and water retention. In this setting, net fluid reten-
tion is likely when total fluid provision exceeds 2 L/d in patients not 
experiencing  large  gastrointestinal  losses.  The  problem  of  volume 
overload can be minimized by using a compounder to prepare PN 
solutions,  infusing  glucose  at  a  rate  that  minimizes  the  need  for 
exogenous insulin therapy, and avoiding energy overfeeding. 
Hypertriglyceridemia  This complication occurs when the rate 
of  lipid  infusion  exceeds  plasma  triglyceride  clearance  capacity. 
Sepsis,  renal  failure,  diabetes  mellitus,  high-dose  glucocorticoid 
therapy,  and  multiple-organ  failure  reduce  triglyceride  clearance. 
An impaired immune response, increased risk of acute pancreatitis, 
and  altered  pulmonary  hemodynamics  are  potential,  but  not  well 
documented,  complications  of  PN-induced  severe  hypertriglyc-
eridemia.  Lipid  infusion  rates  should  not  usually  exceed  ~50  g   
(500 kcal)/d in ADM. 
Liver  Disease  Mild  elevations  of  serum  liver  enzyme  concen-
trations can occur within 2–4 weeks of initiating PN, but in most 
cases, they return to normal even when PN is continued. Clinically 
important  hepatic  dysfunction,  although  common  in  children,  is 
uncommon in adults when energy overfeeding and resultant fatty 
liver are avoided. Intrahepatic cholestasis occasionally occurs after 
many weeks of continuous PN and is most often multifactorial in 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2544

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemorigin. Cyclic PN—in which PN is infused for only 12 h of the day—
may prevent or reduce the severity of this complication. 
PN  in  the  Intensive  Care  Unit  Current  guidelines  recommend 
starting EN soon after a critically ill patient has been resuscitated, 
stabilized, and enteral access established to an adequately function-
ing gastrointestinal tract. EN is then advanced over the following 
days. If the energy goal has not been achieved after 7–10 days, PN 
is  recommended,  especially  if  the  patient’s  protein-catabolic  state 
has  not  yet  abated.  Soy-based  lipid  emulsions  should  be  avoided 
during the first week of PN during critical illness; alternative lipid 
emulsions may prove to be safe and beneficial. 

SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONS 
Critical  Illness–Nutrition  Paradox  High-quality  evidence  now 
confirms  what  has  long  been  indicated  by  the  biologic  evidence, 
physiologic reasoning, formal observational studies, and objective 
clinical  observation,  namely,  that  personalized  nutritional  inter-
ventions improve the clinical outcomes of starving, non–critically 
ill patients. The case for SNS would appear to be even stronger in 
ADM—with  its  rapid,  severe  muscle  atrophy  and  maintained  or 
increased  energy  expenditure  under  conditions  in  which  patients 
are almost always unable to eat voluntarily—but well-designed clin-
ical trials of nutritional interventions in critical illness have repeat-
edly failed to demonstrate that currently prescribed SNS regimens 
improve the clinical outcomes of critically ill patients. The evidence 
does  indicate  that,  unlike  in  noncritical  illness,  energy  provision 
that is set at or near the rate of energy expenditure in fat-sufficient, 
insulin-resistant critically ill patients does not improve their clinical 
outcomes  and  may  be  deleterious  to  some  of  these  patients.  The 
inability of currently prescribed SNS to improve outcomes in crit-
ical illness has several possible explanations: (1) severe prolonged 
starvation is so harmful to all people, whether critically ill or not, 
that  ethical  considerations  preclude  using  deliberate  starvation  as 
a treatment arm in a clinical trial; (2) critical illness is enormously 
heterogeneous,  and  not  every  critically  ill  patient  is  or  remains 
severely  protein-catabolic  for  long;  (3)  owing  to  more  generous 
admission criteria and thanks to the high quality of modern inten-
sive  care,  many  patients  admitted  to  intensive  care  units  improve 
and  are  discharged  within  a  handful  of  days,  whereas  others  are 
so  mortally  ill  that  their  clinical  outcome  is  virtually  predeter-
mined,  and  proof-of-concept  clinical  trials  that  enroll  and  report 
the  outcomes  of  such  patients  could  fail  to  demonstrate  a  benefit 
from SNS; and (4) in current practice, the EN-based SNS regimens 
that are prescribed for most critically ill patients commonly fail to 
deliver more than one-half the currently recommended amount of 
protein. The low protein-to-energy ratio of most standard EN and 
PN products makes it difficult to provide critically ill patients with 
a  sufficiently  generous  amount  of  protein  or  amino  acids  while 
avoiding energy overfeeding. (The problem can be exacerbated by 
use of the sedative drug propofol, which is infused in a solution of 
10% lipid that commonly delivers ~500 kcal/d.) For these reasons, 
together  with  other  experts,  we  continue  to  recommend  EN  and 
PN for critically ill patients with ADM, with the additional advice 
to avoid energy overfeeding during the initial weeks (or as long as 
systemic  inflammation  remains  severe)  by  deliberately  erring  on 
the  side  of  hypocaloric  nutrition  while  simultaneously  providing 
suitably generous protein or amino acids, as guided by physiologic 
reasoning and a personalized evaluation of the anatomic and etio-
logic-metabolic condition of each patient. 
Iron and PN 
Iron deficiency is common in hospitalized patients; 
its  usual  causes  are  preexisting  deficiency,  inadequate  in-hospital 
dietary  provision,  macro-  or  microscopic  gastrointestinal  blood 
loss,  and  repeated  blood  sampling.  The  diagnosis  is  often  missed 
because the anemia of systemic inflammation is much more com-
mon,  and  it  increases  serum  concentrations  of  ferritin,  a  positive 
acute-phase reactant. Iron is not routinely added to PN mixtures. 
Iron  dextran  is  incompatible  with  lipid  emulsions,  and  although 

2545

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
5

E
n
t
e
r
a
l
a
n
d
P
a
r
e
n
t
e
r
a
l

N
u
t
r
i
t
i
o
n

it  appears  to  be  chemically  compatible  with  aqueous  solutions  of 
amino acids and glucose, there is realistic concern that interactions 
between  iron  molecules  and  certain  vitamins  and  amino  acids 
in  PN  solutions  could  catalyze  the  formation  of  free  radicals  that 
degrade vitamins and exert subtle adverse systemic effects. In prin-
ciple, all micronutrient deficiency states, including iron deficiency, 
should  be  prevented  and  corrected.  In-hospital  iron  deficiency 
causes  and  prevents  recovery  from  anemia,  and  subclinical  iron 
deficiency could contribute to cognitive and immune dysfunction. 
Serum  ferritin  concentrations  should  be  determined  when  PN 
commences  and  remeasured  at  approximately  8-week  intervals. 
Iron  deficiency  is  strongly  suggested  by  an  intermediate  serum 
ferritin concentration in the setting of systemic inflammation and 
by  decreasing  mean  red  cell  volumes  (even  within  the  low-nor-
mal  range).  Intravenous  iron  should  be  administered  according 
to  standard  guidelines.  A  termination  order  should  be  written  to 
prevent inadvertent iron overdosing. Parenteral iron therapy should 
be  avoided  in  ADM  because  a  substantial  rise  in  the  serum  iron 
concentration could release free iron and increase susceptibility to 
gram-negative (and possibly other microbial) infections, as well as 
catalyze the formation of free radicals that increase the intensity of 
the catabolic response to major tissue injury. 
Zinc  One  liter  of  secretory  diarrhea  contains  ~12  mg  of  zinc. 
Patients  with  intestinal  fistulas  or  high-volume  chronic  diarrhea 
require this amount of zinc in addition to their daily requirement of 
15 mg to avoid zinc deficiency. Zinc may be provided parenterally 
or enterally. Because of its low bioavailability, 12 mg of parenteral 
zinc is equivalent to 30 mg of oral zinc. 
Old  Age 
In  addition  to  their  other  frailties,  elderly  people  com-
monly  suffer  from  age-related  muscle  atrophy  (sarcopenia)  com-
pounded  by  disuse  muscle  atrophy.  These  factors  place  them  at 
high risk of the consequences of starvation disease and make them 
candidates for early SNS. 
Inactivity  Physical  activity  and  adequate  nutrition  are  closely 
interdependent.  Reduced  physical  activity  reduces  appetite,  and 
physical rehabilitation and its associated emotional benefits restore 
optimism  and  appetite.  Full  nutrient  provision  will  maintain  or 
normalize  many  physiologic  functions  in  bedridden  patients,  but 
they will not increase muscle mass. 
Renal Failure  Protein provision should not be reduced in patients 
with renal failure unless renal replacement therapy is unavailable. 
Renal replacement therapy removes large amounts of amino acids, 
vitamins,  and  trace  elements  from  the  circulation,  so  protein  and 
micronutrient  provision  should  be  increased  to  compensate  for 
these losses. 
Liver  Failure  Patients  with  severe  hepatic  disease  are  relatively 
intolerant to starvation and commonly have CDM when admitted 
to hospital, so they are prime candidates for SNS. Their SNS should 
be generous both in energy and protein, despite an increased risk of 
hepatic encephalopathy. The risk of encephalopathy can be reduced 
by  meticulous  attention  to  fluid  balance,  acid-base  balance,  and 
electrolyte status and by spreading protein provision over the day 
to accommodate the liver’s reduced capacity to clear amino acid–
derived ammonia. 
Perioperative SNS  Patients with SRM or CDM awaiting elective 
major surgery benefit from 7–10 days of preoperative SNS. When 
feasible and properly implemented, optimized voluntary nutrition 
is  greatly  to  be  preferred,  but  when  a  patient  has  been  admitted 
to  hospital  in  a  semi-urgent  condition,  EN  or  PN  will  meet  the 
patient’s nutritional goal more quickly. Preoperative SNS improves 
immunity and reduces postoperative complications, but it will not 
increase serum albumin concentrations, and it should not be pro-
vided for >7–10 days with that goal in mind. More prolonged preop-
erative EN or PN may confer slight additional nutritional benefits, 
but they are counterbalanced by their risks and the consequences 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2545

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
2546

of  prolonged  hospitalization  and  delayed  surgery.  Surgery  should 
not be delayed for starving patients whose muscle mass is normal 
or  only  mildly  depleted  and  who  are  not  experiencing  systemic 
inflammation  since  they  tolerate  even  major  uncomplicated  sur-
gery well. The urgency of surgery often precludes otherwise indi-
cated preoperative SNS. Early postoperative PN is usually indicated 
for  these  patients,  for  they  are  at  increased  risk  of  postoperative 
complications and are unlikely to consume an adequate amount of 
food voluntarily over the next many days. Patients with only mild 
muscle  atrophy,  no  systemic  inflammation,  and  no  postoperative 
complications do not require postoperative PN unless (1) adequate 
feeding by mouth has not been achieved by day 5–7 after surgery 
or  (2)  there  are  indications  that  voluntary  feeding  will  be  further 
delayed. Perioperative immune-enhancing EN reduces morbidity in 
patients undergoing major elective gastrointestinal surgery. 
Cancer  SNS plays a crucial role in cancer therapy. Many malig-
nant  neoplasms  (especially  those  that  involve  the  gastrointestinal 
tract or induce systemic inflammation) and their cytotoxic thera-
pies create the conditions for starvation and commonly lead to SRM 
or CDM. The prevention or treatment of these starvation diseases 
will improve patients’ quality of life and their tolerance to antican-
cer therapy. EN and PN are generally not prescribed to patients with 
advanced cancer for which there is no effective anticancer therapy 
because the side effects and complications of invasive SNS are not 
counterbalanced by an improved disease trajectory. In some cases, 
the disease may be progressing but so slowly that the patient will die 
of  the  complications  of  starvation  disease  long  before  they  would 
from the cancer. EN or PN is appropriate for these patients. 
Advanced  Dementia  Optimized  voluntary  nutrition  is  the  key 
approach in this situation, and it can be used to deal with problems 
such as disability and dysphagia in patients who get pleasure from 
eating.  There  is  no  evidence  that  EN  or  PN  improves  quality  or 
length  of  life  in  patients  who  have  advanced  dementia  and  show 
little or no interest in food, and the side effects and complications 
of EN and PN are unpleasant and sometimes dangerous. 
REFEEDING SYNDROME
The refeeding syndrome can occur in patients with adapted SRM 
during  the  first  week  of  nutritional  repletion  if  carbohydrate  and 
sodium  are  introduced  too  rapidly.  Carbohydrate  provision  stim-
ulates  insulin  secretion,  which,  owing  to  its  antinatriuretic  effect, 
expands  the  ECF  volume,  especially  when  excessive  sodium  is 
provided. Refeeding edema can be minimized by severely limiting 
sodium  provision  and  increasing  carbohydrate  provision  slowly. 
Carbohydrate  refeeding  may  stimulate  enough  intracellular  glu-
cose-6-phosphate and glycogen synthesis to seriously lower serum 
phosphate concentrations. It also increases the downregulated met-
abolic rate of patients with adapted SRM and stimulates N reten-
tion,  new  cell  synthesis,  and  cellular  rehydration.  Phosphorus, 
potassium,  and  magnesium  deficiencies  occur  and  are  dangerous 
during refeeding; their serum concentrations should be measured 
frequently, and appropriate supplements provided. Left heart failure 
may occur in predisposed patients; it has three causes: (1) an abrupt 
increase of intravascular volume due to the administration of fluids 
and  of  glucose,  which  stimulates  insulin-mediated  renal  sodium 
retention; (2) increased cardiac demand on an atrophic left ventricle 
created by an insulin-mediated increase of resting energy expendi-
ture; and (3) myocardial deficiencies of potassium, phosphorus, or 
magnesium. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur. Acute thiamine defi-
ciency encephalopathy is a devastating preventable complication of 
refeeding, even with simple glucose infusions.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Gomes F et al: ESPEN guidelines on nutritional support for polymor-

bid internal medicine patients. Clin Nutr 37:336, 2018.

Kondrup J: Nutrition risk screening in the ICU. Curr Opin Clin Nutr 

Metab Care 22:159, 2019.

Lambell KJ et al: Nutrition therapy in critical illness: A review of the 

literature for clinicians. Crit Care 24:35, 2020.

Schuetz  P  et  al:  Economic  evaluation  of  individualized  nutritional 
support  in  medical  inpatients:  Secondary  analysis  of  the  EFFORT 
trial. Clin Nutr 25:25, 2020.

Sharma K et al: Pathophysiology of critical illness and role of nutri-

tion. Nutr Clin Pract 34:12, 2019.

Van Zanten ARH et al: Nutrition therapy and critical illness: Practical 
guidance for the ICU, post-ICU, and long-term convalescence phases. 
Crit Care 23:368, 2019.

Yeh DD et al: Advances in nutrition for the surgical patient. Curr Probl 

Surg 56:343, 2019.

Section 3  Liver and Biliary Tract Disease

336

Approach to the Patient 
with Liver Disease
Marc G. Ghany, Jay H. Hoofnagle

A diagnosis of liver disease usually can be made accurately by careful 
elicitation  of  the  patient’s  history,  physical  examination,  and  applica-
tion of a few laboratory tests. In some circumstances, radiologic exami-
nations  are  helpful  or,  indeed,  diagnostic.  Liver  biopsy  is  considered 
the criterion standard in evaluation of liver disease but is now needed 
less  for  diagnosis  than  for  grading  (activity)  and  staging  (fibrosis)  of 
disease.  Noninvasive  means  of  assessing  fibrosis  stage  have  become 
increasingly helpful and may allow for avoidance of biopsy in a pro-
portion of patients. This chapter provides an introduction to diagnosis 
and management of liver disease, briefly reviewing the structure and 
function of the liver; the major clinical manifestations of liver disease; 
and the use of clinical history, physical examination, laboratory tests, 
imaging studies, and liver biopsy.

LIVER STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
The liver is the largest organ of the body, weighing 1–1.5 kg and rep-
resenting 1.5–2.5% of the lean body mass. The size and shape of the 
liver vary and generally match the general body shape—long and lean 
or squat and square. This organ is located in the right upper quadrant 
of the abdomen under the right lower rib cage against the diaphragm 
and projects for a variable extent into the left upper quadrant. It is held 
in  place  by  ligamentous  attachments  to  the  diaphragm,  peritoneum, 
great  vessels,  and  upper  gastrointestinal  organs.  The  liver  receives  a 
dual blood supply; ~20% of the blood flow is oxygen-rich blood from 
the hepatic artery, and 80% is nutrient-rich blood from the portal vein 
arising from the stomach, intestines, pancreas, and spleen.

The majority of cells in the liver are hepatocytes, which constitute 
two-thirds  of  the  organ’s  mass.  The  remaining  cell  types  are  Kupffer 
cells  (members  of  the  reticuloendothelial  system),  stellate  (Ito  or 
fat-storing) cells, endothelial and blood vessel cells, bile ductular cells, 
and cells of supporting structures. Viewed by light microscopy, the liver 
appears to be organized in lobules, with portal areas at the periphery 
and central veins in the center of each lobule. However, from a func-
tional point of view, the liver is organized into acini, with both hepatic 
arterial  and  portal  venous  blood  entering  the  acinus  from  the  portal 
areas (zone 1) and then flowing through the sinusoids to the terminal 
hepatic veins (zone 3); the intervening hepatocytes constitute zone 2. 
The advantage of viewing the acinus as the physiologic unit of the liver 
is that this perspective helps to explain the morphologic patterns and 
zonality  of  many  vascular  and  biliary  diseases  not  explained  by  the 
lobular arrangement.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2546

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemPortal areas of the liver consist of small veins, arteries, bile ducts, and 
lymphatics organized in a loose stroma of supporting matrix and small 
amounts of collagen. Blood flowing into the portal areas is distributed 
through the sinusoids, passing from zone 1 to zone 3 of the acinus and 
draining into the terminal hepatic veins (“central veins”). Secreted bile 
flows  in  the  opposite  direction—that  is,  in  a  countercurrent  pattern 
from zone 3 to zone 1. The sinusoids are lined by unique endothelial 
cells that have prominent fenestrae of variable sizes, allowing the free 
flow of plasma but not of cellular elements. The plasma is thus in direct 
contact with hepatocytes in the subendothelial space of Disse.

Hepatocytes have distinct polarity. The basolateral side of the hepa-
tocyte  lines  the  space  of  Disse  and  is  richly  lined  with  microvilli;  it 
exhibits  endocytotic  and  pinocytotic  activity,  with  passive  and  active 
uptake of nutrients, proteins, and other molecules. The apical pole of 
the  hepatocyte  forms  the  canalicular  membranes  through  which  bile 
components  are  secreted.  The  canaliculi  of  hepatocytes  form  a  fine 
network,  which  fuses  into  the  bile  ductular  elements  near  the  portal 
areas. Kupffer cells usually lie within the sinusoidal vascular space and 
represent the largest group of fixed macrophages in the body. The stel-
late cells are located in the space of Disse but are not usually prominent 
unless  activated,  when  they  produce  collagen  and  matrix.  Red  blood 
cells  stay  in  the  sinusoidal  space  as  blood  flows  through  the  lobules, 
but white blood cells can migrate through or around endothelial cells 
into the space of Disse and from there to portal areas, where they can 
return to the circulation through lymphatics.

Hepatocytes  perform  numerous  and  vital  roles  in  maintaining 
homeostasis  and  health.  These  functions  include  the  synthesis  of 
most essential serum proteins (albumin, carrier proteins, coagulation 
factors,  many  hormonal  and  growth  factors),  the  production  of  bile 
and  its  carriers  (bile  acids,  cholesterol,  lecithin,  phospholipids),  the 
regulation  of  nutrients  (glucose,  glycogen,  lipids,  cholesterol,  amino 
acids), and the metabolism and conjugation of lipophilic compounds 
(bilirubin,  anions,  cations,  drugs)  for  excretion  in  the  bile  or  urine. 
Measurement of these activities to assess liver function is complicated 
by the multiplicity and variability of these functions. The most com-
monly used liver “function” tests are measurements of serum bilirubin, 
serum  albumin,  and  prothrombin  time.  The  serum  bilirubin  level  is 
a  measure  of  hepatic  conjugation  and  excretion;  the  serum  albumin 
level and prothrombin time are measures of protein synthesis. Abnor-
malities  of  bilirubin,  albumin,  and  prothrombin  time  are  typical  of 
hepatic dysfunction. Frank liver failure is incompatible with life, and 
the functions of the liver are too complex and diverse to be subserved 
by a mechanical pump; a dialysis membrane; or a concoction of infused 
hormones, proteins, and growth factors.

LIVER DISEASES
While  there  are  many  causes  of  liver  disease  (Table  336-1),  these 
disorders generally present clinically in a few distinct patterns and are 
usually classified as hepatocellular, cholestatic (obstructive), or mixed. 
In  hepatocellular  diseases  (such  as  viral  hepatitis  and  alcoholic  liver 
disease), features of liver injury, inflammation, and necrosis predomi-
nate. In cholestatic diseases, such as gallstone or malignant obstruction, 
primary  biliary  cholangitis  (previously  referred  to  as  primary  biliary 
cirrhosis), and some drug-induced liver diseases, features of inhibition 
of bile flow predominate. In a mixed pattern, features of both hepato-
cellular and cholestatic injury are present (such as in cholestatic forms 
of viral hepatitis and many drug-induced liver diseases). The pattern 
of onset and prominence of symptoms can rapidly suggest a diagnosis, 
particularly if major risk factors are considered, such as the age and sex 
of the patient and a history of exposure or risk behaviors.

Typical  presenting  symptoms  of  liver  disease  include  jaundice, 
fatigue,  itching,  right-upper-quadrant  pain,  nausea,  poor  appetite, 
abdominal  distention,  and  intestinal  bleeding.  At  present,  however, 
many  patients  are  diagnosed  with  liver  disease  who  have  no  symp-
toms and who have been found to have abnormalities in biochemical 
liver tests as a part of a routine physical examination or screening for 
blood donation or for insurance or employment. The wide availability 
of batteries of liver tests makes it relatively simple to demonstrate the 

TABLE 336-1  Liver Diseases
Inherited hyperbilirubinemia
  Gilbert syndrome

 Crigler-Najjar syndrome, types I 
and II

  Dubin-Johnson syndrome
  Rotor syndrome
Viral hepatitis
  Hepatitis A
  Hepatitis B
  Hepatitis C
  Hepatitis D
  Hepatitis E

 Others (Epstein-Barr virus 
[mononucleosis] herpesvirus, 
cytomegalovirus, adenovirus 
hepatitis)

  Cryptogenic hepatitis
Immune and autoimmune liver 
diseases
  Primary biliary cholangitis
  Autoimmune hepatitis
  Sclerosing cholangitis
  Overlap syndromes
  Graft-versus-host disease
  Allograft rejection
Genetic liver diseases
  α1 Antitrypsin deficiency
  Hemochromatosis
  Wilson disease

 Benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis
 Progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis, types I–III
 Others (galactosemia, tyrosinemia, 
cystic fibrosis, Niemann-Pick-
disease, Gaucher’s disease)

Alcoholic liver disease
  Acute fatty liver
  Acute alcoholic hepatitis
  Laënnec cirrhosis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver
  Steatosis
  Steatohepatitis
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy

Liver involvement in systemic 
diseases
  Sarcoidosis
  Amyloidosis
  Glycogen storage diseases
  Celiac disease
  Tuberculosis

 Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare 
infection

Cholestatic syndromes
  Benign postoperative cholestasis
  Jaundice of sepsis

 Total parenteral nutrition–induced 
jaundice

  Cholestasis of pregnancy
  Cholangitis and cholecystitis

 Extrahepatic biliary obstruction 
(stone, stricture, cancer)

  Biliary atresia
  Caroli disease
  Cryptosporidiosis
Drug-induced liver disease

 Hepatocellular patterns (isoniazid, 
acetaminophen)
 Cholestatic patterns 
(methyltestosterone)
 Mixed patterns (sulfonamides, 
phenytoin)
 Micro- and macrovesicular steatosis 
(methotrexate, fialuridine)

Vascular injury
  Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
  Budd-Chiari syndrome
Ischemic hepatitis
  Passive congestion
  Portal vein thrombosis
  Nodular regenerative hyperplasia
Mass lesions
  Hepatocellular carcinoma
  Cholangiocarcinoma
  Adenoma
  Focal nodular hyperplasia
  Metastatic tumors
  Abscess
  Cysts
  Hemangioma

2547

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
6

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

presence of liver injury as well as to rule it out in someone in whom 
liver disease is suspected.

Evaluation  of  patients  with  liver  disease  should  be  directed  at  (1) 
establishing  the  etiologic  diagnosis,  (2)  estimating  disease  severity 
(grading),  and  (3)  establishing  the  disease  stage  (staging).  Diagnosis 
should focus on the category of disease (hepatocellular, cholestatic, or 
mixed injury) as well as on the specific etiologic diagnosis. Grading refers 
to assessment of the severity or activity of disease—active or inactive 
as well as mild, moderate, or severe. Staging refers to estimation of the 
point in the course of the natural history of the disease, whether early 
or late; or precirrhotic, cirrhotic, or end-stage. This chapter introduces 
general, salient concepts in the evaluation of patients with liver disease 
that help lead to the diagnoses discussed in subsequent chapters.

 ■ CLINICAL HISTORY
The clinical history should focus on the symptoms of liver disease—
their nature, patterns of onset, and progression—and on potential risk 
factors  for  liver  disease.  The  manifestations  of  liver  disease  include 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2547

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2548 constitutional symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, nausea, poor appe-
tite,  and  malaise  and  the  more  liver-specific  symptoms  of  jaundice, 
dark urine, light stools, itching, abdominal pain, and bloating. Symp-
toms can also suggest the presence of cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, 
or  complications  of  cirrhosis  such  as  portal  hypertension.  Generally, 
the constellation of symptoms and their patterns of onset, rather than 
a specific symptom, point to an etiology.

Fatigue  is  the  most  common  and  most  characteristic  symptom  of 
liver disease. It is variously described as lethargy, weakness, listlessness, 
malaise,  increased  need  for  sleep,  lack  of  stamina,  and  poor  energy. 
The fatigue of liver disease typically arises after activity or exercise and 
is rarely present or severe after adequate rest; that is, it is “afternoon” 
rather than “morning” fatigue. Fatigue in liver disease is often intermit-
tent and variable in severity from hour to hour and day to day. In some 
patients, it may not be clear whether fatigue is due to the liver disease 
or due to other problems such as stress, anxiety, sleep disturbance, or 
a concurrent illness.

Nausea occurs with more severe liver disease and may accompany 
fatigue  or  be  provoked  by  smelling  food  odors  or  eating  fatty  foods. 
Vomiting can occur but is rarely persistent or prominent. Poor appetite 
with  weight  loss  occurs  frequently  in  acute  liver  disease  but  is  rare 
in  chronic  disease  except  when  cirrhosis  is  present  and  advanced. 
Diarrhea is uncommon in liver disease except with severe jaundice, in 
which a lack of bile acids reaching the intestine can lead to steatorrhea.
Right-upper-quadrant  discomfort  or  ache  (“liver  pain”)  occurs  in 
many liver diseases and is usually marked by tenderness over the liver 
area. The pain arises from stretching or irritation of Glisson’s capsule, 
which surrounds the liver and is rich in nerve endings. Severe pain is 
most typical of gallbladder disease, liver abscess, and severe sinusoidal 
obstruction  syndrome  (previously  known  as  veno-occlusive  disease) 
but is also an occasional accompaniment of acute hepatitis.

Itching occurs with acute liver disease, appearing early in obstruc-
tive  jaundice  (from  biliary  obstruction)  or  drug-induced  cholestasis 
and somewhat later in hepatocellular disease (acute hepatitis). Itching 
also  occurs  in  chronic  liver  diseases—typically  the  cholestatic  forms 
such as primary biliary cholangitis and sclerosing cholangitis, in which 
it  is  often  the  presenting  symptom,  preceding  the  onset  of  jaundice. 
However, itching can occur in any liver disease, particularly once cir-
rhosis develops.

Jaundice is the hallmark symptom of liver disease and perhaps the 
most reliable marker of severity. Patients usually report darkening of 
the urine before they notice scleral icterus. Jaundice is rarely detectable 
with a bilirubin level <43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL). With severe cholestasis, 
there will also be lightening of the color of the stools and steatorrhea. 
Jaundice without dark urine usually indicates indirect (unconjugated) 
hyperbilirubinemia and is typical of hemolytic anemia and the genetic 
disorders of bilirubin conjugation, the common and benign form being 
Gilbert  syndrome  and  the  rare  and  severe  form  being  Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome. Gilbert syndrome affects up to 5% of the general popula-
tion; the jaundice in this condition is more noticeable after fasting and 
with stress.

Major risk factors for liver disease that should be sought in the clin-
ical  history  include  details  of  alcohol  use,  medication  use  (including 
herbal  compounds,  birth  control  pills,  and  over-the-counter  medica-
tions), personal habits, sexual activity, travel, exposure to jaundiced or 
other high-risk persons, injection drug use, recent surgery, remote or 
recent transfusion of blood or blood products, occupation, accidental 
exposure to blood or needlestick, and familial history of liver disease.

For  assessing  the  risk  of  viral  hepatitis,  a  careful  history  of  sexual 
activity  is  of  particular  importance  and  should  include  the  number 
of lifetime sexual partners and, for men, a history of having sex with 
men. Sexual exposure is a common mode of spread of hepatitis B and 
D but is uncommon for hepatitis C. A family history of hepatitis, liver 
disease, and liver cancer is also important. Maternal-infant transmis-
sion occurs with both hepatitis B and C. Vertical spread of hepatitis B 
can now be prevented by passive and active immunization of the infant 
at  birth.  Additionally,  antiviral  therapy  during  the  third  trimester  of 
pregnancy is now recommended for mothers with levels of HBV DNA 
>200,000 IU/mL. Vertical spread of hepatitis C is uncommon, but there 

are  no  reliable  means  of  prevention.  Transmission  is  more  common 
among HIV-co-infected mothers and is also linked to prolonged and 
difficult labor and delivery, early rupture of membranes, internal fetal 
monitoring, and a high maternal viral load. A history of injection drug 
use,  even  in  the  remote  past,  is  of  great  importance  in  assessing  the 
risk for hepatitis B and C. Injection drug use is now the single most 
common risk factor for hepatitis C. Transfusion with blood or blood 
products is no longer an important risk factor for acute viral hepatitis. 
However, blood transfusions received before the introduction of sen-
sitive enzyme immunoassays for antibody to hepatitis C virus in 1992 
is an important risk factor for chronic hepatitis C. Blood transfusion 
before 1986, when screening for antibody to hepatitis B core antigen 
was introduced, is also a risk factor for hepatitis B. Travel to a develop-
ing area of the world, exposure to persons with jaundice, and exposure 
to young children in day-care centers are risk factors for hepatitis A. 
Tattooing and body piercing (for hepatitis B and C) and eating shell-
fish (for hepatitis A) are frequently mentioned but are actually types of 
exposure that rarely lead to the acquisition of hepatitis.

Hepatitis E is one of the more common causes of jaundice in Asia 
and Africa but is uncommon in developed nations. In endemic areas, 
transmission is usually through exposure to fecally contaminated water. 
Recently,  non-travel-related  (autochthonous)  cases  of  hepatitis  E  have 
been  described  in  developed  countries,  including  the  United  States. 
These  cases  appear  to  be  due  to  strains  of  hepatitis  E  virus  that  are 
endemic in swine and some wild animals (genotypes 3 and 4). While 
occasional cases are associated with eating raw or undercooked pork 
or game (deer and wild boars), most cases of hepatitis E occur without 
known  exposure,  predominantly  in  elderly  men  without  typical  risk 
factors for viral hepatitis. Hepatitis E infection can become chronic in 
immunosuppressed individuals (such as transplant recipients, patients 
receiving chemotherapy, or patients with HIV infection), in whom it 
presents with abnormal serum enzymes in the absence of markers of 
hepatitis B or C.

A  history  of  alcohol  intake  is  important  in  assessing  the  cause  of 
liver disease and in planning management and recommendations. In 
the  United  States,  for  example,  at  least  70%  of  adults  drink  alco-
hol to some degree, but significant alcohol intake is less common; in 
population-based surveys, only 5% of individuals have more than two 
drinks per day, the average drink representing 11–15 g of alcohol. Alcohol 
consumption associated with an increased rate of alcoholic liver disease 
is  probably  more  than  two  drinks  (22–30  g)  per  day  in  women  and 
three drinks (33–45 g) in men. Most patients with alcoholic cirrhosis 
have  a  much  higher  daily  intake  and  have  drunk  excessively  for 
≥10 years before onset of liver disease. In assessing alcohol intake, the 
history should also focus on whether alcohol abuse or dependence is 
present. Alcoholism is usually defined by the behavioral patterns and 
consequences of alcohol intake, not by the amount. Abuse is defined 
by a repetitive pattern of drinking alcohol that has adverse effects on 
social, family, occupational, or health status. Dependence is defined by 
alcohol-seeking  behavior,  despite  its  adverse  effects.  Many  alcoholics 
demonstrate both dependence and abuse, and dependence is consid-
ered the more serious and advanced form of alcoholism. A clinically 
helpful approach to diagnosis of alcohol dependence and abuse is the 
use of the CAGE questionnaire (Table 336-2), which is recommended 
for all medical history-taking.

Family  history  can  be  helpful  in  assessing  liver  disease.  Familial 
causes of liver disease include Wilson disease; hemochromatosis and 

TABLE 336-2  CAGE Questionsa
ACRONYM
C
A
G
E

QUESTION
Have you ever felt you ought to cut down on your drinking?
Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
Have you ever felt guilty or bad about your drinking?
Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to steady 
your nerves or get rid of a hangover (eye-opener)?

aOne “yes” response should raise suspicion of an alcohol use problem, and more 
than one is a strong indication of abuse or dependence.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2548

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemα1  antitrypsin  deficiency;  and  the  less  common  inherited  pediatric 
liver diseases—that is, familial intrahepatic cholestasis, benign recur-
rent  intrahepatic  cholestasis,  and  Alagille  syndrome.  Onset  of  severe 
liver disease in childhood or adolescence in conjunction with a family 
history of liver disease or neuropsychiatric disturbance should lead to 
investigation for Wilson disease. A family history of cirrhosis, diabetes, 
or endocrine failure and the appearance of liver disease in adulthood 
suggest  hemochromatosis  and  should  prompt  investigation  of  iron 
status. Abnormal iron studies in adult patients warrant genotyping of 
the  HFE  gene  for  the  C282Y  and  H63D  mutations  typical  of  genetic 
hemochromatosis.  In  children  and  adolescents  with  iron  overload, 
other non-HFE causes of hemochromatosis should be sought. A family 
history  of  emphysema  should  lead  to  investigation  of  α1  antitrypsin 
levels and, if levels are low, for protease inhibitor (Pi) genotype.

 ■ PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The  physical  examination  rarely  uncovers  evidence  of  liver  dysfunc-
tion  in  a  patient  without  symptoms  or  laboratory  findings,  nor  are 
most signs of liver disease specific to one diagnosis. Thus, the physical 
examination  complements  rather  than  replaces  the  need  for  other 
diagnostic approaches. In many patients, the physical examination is 
normal unless the disease is acute or severe and advanced. Neverthe-
less, the physical examination is important in that it can yield the first 
evidence of hepatic failure, portal hypertension, and liver decompen-
sation. In addition, the physical examination can reveal signs—related 
either to risk factors or to associated diseases or findings—that point 
to a specific diagnosis.

Typical physical findings in liver disease are icterus, hepatomegaly, 
hepatic tenderness, splenomegaly, spider angiomata, palmar erythema, 
and skin excoriations. Signs of advanced disease include muscle wast-
ing,  ascites,  edema,  dilated  abdominal  veins,  hepatic  fetor,  asterixis, 
mental  confusion,  stupor,  and  coma.  In  male  patients  with  cirrhosis, 
particularly  that  related  to  alcohol  use,  signs  of  hyperestrogenemia 
such as gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and loss of male-pattern hair 
distribution may be found.

Icterus is best appreciated when the sclera is inspected under nat-
ural light. In fair-skinned individuals, a yellow tinge to the skin may 
be  obvious.  In  dark-skinned  individuals,  examination  of  the  mucous 
membranes  below  the  tongue  can  demonstrate  jaundice.  Jaundice  is 
rarely detectable if the serum bilirubin level is <43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL) 
but may remain detectable below this level during recovery from jaun-
dice (because of protein and tissue binding of conjugated bilirubin).

Spider  angiomata  and  palmar  erythema  occur  in  both  acute  and 
chronic liver disease; these manifestations may be especially prominent 
in persons with cirrhosis but can develop in normal individuals and are 
frequently found during pregnancy. Spider angiomata are superficial, 
tortuous  arterioles,  and—unlike  simple  telangiectasias—typically  fill 
from  the  center  outward.  Spider  angiomata  occur  only  on  the  arms, 
face,  and  upper  torso;  they  can  be  pulsatile  and  may  be  difficult  to 
detect in dark-skinned individuals.

Hepatomegaly is not a very reliable sign of liver disease because of 
variability in the liver’s size and shape and the physical impediments 
to  assessment  of  liver  size  by  percussion  and  palpation.  Marked 
hepatomegaly is typical of cirrhosis, sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, 
infiltrative disorders such as amyloidosis, metastatic or primary can-
cers  of  the  liver,  and  alcoholic  hepatitis.  Careful  assessment  of  the 
liver edge may also reveal unusual firmness, irregularity of the surface, 
or  frank  nodules.  Perhaps  the  most  reliable  physical  finding  in  the 
liver examination is hepatic tenderness. Discomfort when the liver is 
touched  or  pressed  upon  should  be  carefully  sought  with  percussive 
comparison of the right and left upper quadrants.

Splenomegaly, which occurs in many medical conditions, can be a 
subtle but significant physical finding in liver disease. The availability 
of ultrasound (US) methods for assessment of the spleen allows confir-
mation of the physical finding.

Signs of advanced liver disease include muscle wasting and weight 
loss  as  well  as  hepatomegaly,  bruising,  ascites,  and  edema.  Ascites 
is  best  appreciated  by  attempts  to  detect  shifting  dullness  by  careful 
percussion.  US  examination  will  confirm  the  finding  of  ascites  in 

2549

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
6

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

equivocal cases. Peripheral edema can occur with or without ascites. In 
patients with advanced liver disease, other factors frequently contribute 
to  edema  formation,  including  hypoalbuminemia,  venous  insuffi-
ciency, heart failure, and medications.

Hepatic failure is defined as the occurrence of signs or symptoms of 
hepatic encephalopathy in a person with severe acute or chronic liver 
disease.  The  first  signs  of  hepatic  encephalopathy  can  be  subtle  and 
nonspecific—change in sleep patterns, change in personality, irritabil-
ity, and mental dullness. Thereafter, confusion, disorientation, stupor, 
and eventually coma supervene. In acute liver failure, excitability and 
mania may be present. Physical findings include asterixis and flapping 
tremors of the body and tongue. Fetor hepaticus refers to the slightly 
sweet, ammoniacal odor that can develop in patients with liver failure, 
particularly if there is portal-venous shunting of blood around the liver. 
Other causes of coma and disorientation should be excluded, mainly 
electrolyte  imbalances,  sedative  use,  and  renal  or  respiratory  failure. 
The  appearance  of  hepatic  encephalopathy  during  acute  hepatitis  is 
the major criterion for diagnosis of fulminant hepatitis and indicates 
a  poor  prognosis.  In  chronic  liver  disease,  encephalopathy  is  usually 
triggered by a medical complication such as gastrointestinal bleeding, 
overdiuresis,  uremia,  dehydration,  electrolyte  imbalance,  infection, 
constipation, or use of narcotic analgesics.

A  helpful  measure  of  hepatic  encephalopathy  is  a  careful  mental 
status examination and use of the trail-making test, which consists of 
a series of 25 numbered circles that the patient is asked to connect as 
rapidly as possible using a pencil. The normal range for the connect-
the-dot test is 15–30 s; it is considerably longer in patients with early 
hepatic encephalopathy. Other tests include drawing of abstract objects 
or comparison of a signature to previous examples. More sophisticated 
testing—for example, with electroencephalography and visual evoked 
potentials—can  detect  mild  forms  of  encephalopathy  but  are  rarely 
clinically useful.

Other signs of advanced liver disease include umbilical hernia from 
ascites,  hydrothorax,  prominent  veins  over  the  abdomen,  and  caput 
medusa, a condition that consists of collateral veins radiating from the 
umbilicus  and  results  from  recanulation  of  the  umbilical  vein.  Wid-
ened pulse pressure and signs of a hyperdynamic circulation can occur 
in  patients  with  cirrhosis  as  a  result  of  fluid  and  sodium  retention, 
increased  cardiac  output,  and  reduced  peripheral  resistance.  Patients 
with  long-standing  cirrhosis  and  portal  hypertension  are  prone  to 
develop the hepatopulmonary syndrome, which is defined by the triad 
of  liver  disease,  hypoxemia,  and  pulmonary  arteriovenous  shunting. 
The  hepatopulmonary  syndrome  is  characterized  by  platypnea  and 
orthodeoxia:  shortness  of  breath  and  oxygen  desaturation  that  occur 
paradoxically  upon  the  assumption  of  an  upright  position.  Measure-
ment of oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry is a reliable screening test 
for hepatopulmonary syndrome.

Several  skin  disorders  and  changes  are  common  in  liver  disease. 
Hyperpigmentation is typical of advanced chronic cholestatic diseases 
such as primary biliary cholangitis and sclerosing cholangitis. In these 
same conditions, xanthelasma and tendon xanthomata occur as a result 
of retention and high serum levels of lipids and cholesterol. Slate-gray 
pigmentation  of  the  skin  is  also  seen  with  hemochromatosis  if  iron 
levels are high for a prolonged period. Mucocutaneous vasculitis with 
palpable  purpura,  especially  on  the  lower  extremities,  is  typical  of 
cryoglobulinemia of chronic hepatitis C but can also occur in chronic 
hepatitis B.

Some physical signs point to specific liver diseases. Kayser-Fleischer 
rings  occur  in  Wilson  disease  and  consist  of  a  golden-brown  copper 
pigment  deposited  in  Descemet’s  membrane  at  the  periphery  of  the 
cornea; they are best seen by slit-lamp examination. Dupuytren con-
tracture and parotid enlargement are suggestive of chronic alcoholism 
and  alcoholic  liver  disease.  In  metastatic  liver  disease  or  primary 
hepatocellular carcinoma, signs of cachexia and wasting as well as firm 
hepatomegaly and a hepatic bruit may be prominent.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS OF LIVER DISEASE
The  key  diagnostic  tests  of  major  causes  of  acute  and  chronic  liver 
disease are outlined in Table 336-3, and an algorithm for evaluation of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2549

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2550

DIAGNOSTIC TEST
Anti-HAV IgM

TABLE 336-3  Important Diagnostic Tests in Common Liver Diseases
DISEASE
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
  Acute
  Chronic
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D (delta)
Hepatitis E
Autoimmune hepatitis

HBsAg and anti-HBc IgM
HBsAg and HBeAg and/or HBV DNA
Anti-HCV and HCV RNA
HBsAg and anti-HDV
Anti-HEV IgM and HEV RNA
ANA or SMA, elevated IgG levels, and 
compatible histology
Mitochondrial antibody, elevated IgM levels, 
and compatible histology
P-ANCA, cholangiography
History of drug ingestion
History of excessive alcohol intake and 
compatible histology
Ultrasound or CT evidence of fatty liver and 
compatible histology
Reduced α1 antitrypsin levels, phenotype PiZZ 
or PiSZ
Decreased serum ceruloplasmin and 
increased urinary copper; increased hepatic 
copper level
Elevated iron saturation and serum ferritin; 
genetic testing for HFE gene mutations
Elevated α-fetoprotein level (to >500 ng/mL); 
ultrasound or CT image of mass

Primary biliary cholangitis

Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Drug-induced liver disease
Alcoholic liver disease

Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

α1 Antitrypsin disease

Wilson disease

Hemochromatosis

Hepatocellular cancer

Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibody; anti-HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core 
(antigen); HAV, HBV, HCV, HDV, HEV, hepatitis A, B, C, D, E virus; HBeAg, hepatitis B 
e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; P-ANCA, peripheral antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody.

the patient with suspected liver disease is shown in Fig. 336-1. Specifics 
of diagnosis are discussed in later chapters. The most common causes 
of acute liver disease are viral hepatitis (particularly hepatitis A, B, and 
C), drug-induced liver injury, cholangitis, and alcoholic liver disease. 
Liver biopsy usually is not needed for the diagnosis and management 
of acute liver disease, exceptions being situations where the diagnosis 
remains unclear despite thorough clinical and laboratory investigation. 
Liver biopsy can be helpful in diagnosing drug-induced liver disease 
and acute alcoholic hepatitis.

The most common causes of chronic liver disease, in general order 
of frequency, are chronic hepatitis C, alcoholic liver disease, nonalco-
holic  steatohepatitis,  chronic  hepatitis  B,  autoimmune  hepatitis,  scle-
rosing cholangitis, primary biliary cholangitis, hemochromatosis, and 
Wilson  disease.  Hepatitis  E  virus  is  a  rare  cause  of  chronic  hepatitis, 
with  cases  occurring  mostly  in  persons  who  are  immunosuppressed 
or  immunodeficient.  Strict  diagnostic  criteria  have  not  been  devel-
oped for most liver diseases, but liver biopsy plays an important role 
in the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, 
nonalcoholic and alcoholic steatohepatitis, and Wilson disease (with a 
quantitative hepatic copper level in the last instance).

Laboratory  Testing  Diagnosis  of  liver  disease  is  greatly  aided 
by  the  availability  of  reliable  and  sensitive  tests  of  liver  injury  and 
function. A typical battery of blood tests used for initial assessment of 
liver  disease  includes  measurement  of  levels  of  serum  alanine  (ALT) 
and  aspartate  (AST)  aminotransferases,  alkaline  phosphatase  (AlkP), 
direct and total serum bilirubin and albumin, and prothrombin time. 
The pattern of abnormalities generally points to hepatocellular versus 
cholestatic  liver  disease  and  helps  determine  whether  the  disease  is 
acute or chronic and whether cirrhosis and hepatic failure are present. 
Based  on  these  results,  further  testing  over  time  may  be  necessary. 
Other  laboratory  tests  may  be  helpful,  such  as  γ-glutamyl  transpep-
tidase (γGT) to define whether AlkP elevations are due to liver disease; 
hepatitis serology to define the type of viral hepatitis; and autoimmune 
markers  to  diagnose  primary  biliary  cholangitis  (antimitochondrial 

antibody),  sclerosing  cholangitis  (peripheral  antineutrophil  cyto-
plasmic  antibody),  and  autoimmune  hepatitis  (antinuclear,  smooth- 
muscle, and liver-kidney microsomal antibody). A simple delineation 
of laboratory abnormalities and common liver diseases is given in 
Table 336-3.

The use and interpretation of liver function tests are summarized 

in Chap. 337.

Diagnostic  Imaging  Great  advances  have  been  made  in  hepato-
biliary imaging, although no method is adequately accurate in demon-
strating underlying cirrhosis in its early stages. Of the many modalities 
available  for  imaging  the  liver,  US,  computed  tomography  (CT),  and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the most commonly employed 
and  are  complementary  to  one  another.  In  general,  US  and  CT  are 
highly  sensitive  for  detecting  biliary  duct  dilation  and  are  the  first-
line options for investigating cases of suspected obstructive jaundice. 
All  three  modalities  can  detect  a  fatty  liver,  which  appears  bright  on 
imaging studies. Modifications of CT and MRI can be used to quantify 
liver fat, and this information may ultimately be valuable in monitoring 
response  to  therapy  in  patients  with  fatty  liver  disease.  Advantages, 
disadvantages,  and  clinical  utility  of  each  modality  are  presented  in 
Table 336-4. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) are the 
procedures of choice for visualization of the biliary tree. MRCP offers 
several  advantages  over  ERCP:  there  is  no  need  for  contrast  media 
or ionizing radiation, images can be acquired faster, the procedure is 
less operator dependent, and it carries no risk of pancreatitis. MRCP 
is superior to US and CT for detecting choledocholithiasis but is less 
specific. MRCP is useful in the diagnosis of bile duct obstruction and 
congenital biliary abnormalities, but ERCP is considered more valuable 
in  evaluating  ampullary  lesions  and  primary  sclerosing  cholangitis. 
ERCP permits biopsy, direct visualization of the ampulla and common 
bile duct, and intraductal ultrasonography and brushings for cytologic 
evaluation of malignancy. It also provides several therapeutic options 
in  patients  with  obstructive  jaundice,  such  as  sphincterotomy,  stone 
extraction, and placement of nasobiliary catheters and biliary stents.

Doppler  US  and  MRI  are  used  to  assess  hepatic  vasculature 
and  hemodynamics  and  to  monitor  surgically  or  radiologically 
placed  vascular  shunts,  including  transjugular  intrahepatic  porto-
systemic  shunts.  Multidetector  or  spiral  CT  and  MRI  with  contrast 
enhancement  are  the  procedures  of  choice  for  the  identification  and 
evaluation  of  hepatic  masses,  the  staging  of  liver  tumors,  and  pre-
operative  assessment.  With  regard  to  mass  lesions,  the  sensitivity 
of  hepatic  imaging  continues  to  increase;  unfortunately,  specificity 
remains  a  problem,  and  often  two  and  sometimes  three  studies 
are  needed  before  a  diagnosis  can  be  reached.  An  emerging  imag-
ing  modality  for  the  investigation  of  hepatic  lesions  is  contrast- 
enhanced  US.  This  procedure  permits  enhancement  of  liver  lesions 
in a similar fashion as contrast-enhanced, cross-sectional CT or MRI. 
Major advantages are real-time assessment of liver perfusion through-
out  the  vascular  phases  without  risk  of  nephrotoxicity  and  radiation 
exposure.  Other  advantages  are  its  widespread  availability  and  lower 
cost.  Limitations  include  body  habitus  of  the  patient  and  skill  of  the 
operator.  US  is  the  recommended  modality  for  hepatocellular  car-
cinoma  (HCC)  screening.  Contrast-enhanced  US,  CT,  and  MRI  are 
appropriate for further investigation of lesions detected on screening 
US. The American College of Radiologists has developed a Liver Imag-
ing Reporting and Data System (LI-RADS) to standardize the report-
ing and data collection of CT, MRI, and contrast-enhanced US imaging 
for HCC. This system allows for more consistent reporting and reduces 
imaging interpretation variability and errors.

Recently,  several  US-based  elastographic  techniques  have  been 
developed  and  approved  for  the  measurement  of  hepatic  stiffness, 
providing  an  indirect  assessment  of  fibrosis  and  cirrhosis.  The  most 
commonly  used  approaches  in  clinical  practice  include  transient 
elastography,  acoustic  radiation  force  impulse  imaging,  shear-wave 
elasticity  imaging,  and  supersonic  shear  imaging.  These  techniques 
can eliminate the need for liver biopsy if the only indication for the test 
is the assessment of disease stage. Magnetic resonance elastography is 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2550

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
Suspected liver disease

Abnormal liver tests

Acute
<6 months

Chronic
>6 months

Hepatitic: ⇑⇑ALT
Mixed: ↑ALT,
             ↑AlkP 

Cholestatic:
   ⇑⇑AlkP,
   ⇑⇑gGT,
   ↑ALT

Hepatitic: ⇑⇑ALT
Mixed: ↑ALT,
             ↑AlkP 

Cholestatic:
   ⇑⇑AlkP,
   ⇑⇑gGT,
   ↑ALT

Diagnostic
evaluation
1. IgM Anti-HAV
2. HBsAg
3. IgM Anti-HBc
4. Anti-HCV
5. ANA, SMA
6. Monospot,
    heterophile
7. Ceruloplasmin
8. Alcohol history
9. Drug history

Diagnostic
evaluation
1. AMA
2. Drug history
3. Ultrasound/MRI
4. MRCP/ERCP

Diagnostic
evaluation
1. Drug history
2. AMA
3. P-ANCA
4. Ultrasound
5. MRCP/ERCP

Diagnostic
evaluation
1. HBsAg
2. Anti-HCV
3. Fe saturation,
    ferritin
4. Ceruloplasmin
5. α1AT
6. ANA, SMA
7. Ultrasound
8. Alcohol history

Liver biopsy in acute liver disease:
Reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis
remains unclear despite medical evaluation

Liver biopsy in chronic liver disease:
Often valuable for diagnosis as well as
staging and grading liver disease

FIGURE  336-1  Algorithm  for  evaluation  of  abnormal  liver  tests.  For  patients  with  suspected 
liver  disease,  an  appropriate  approach  to  evaluation  is  initial  routine  liver  testing—for  example, 
measurement  of  serum  bilirubin,  albumin,  alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT),  AST,  and  alkaline 
phosphatase (AlkP). These results (sometimes complemented by testing of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 
[gGT]) will establish whether the pattern of abnormalities is hepatic, cholestatic, or mixed. In addition, 
the duration of symptoms or abnormalities will indicate whether the disease is acute or chronic. If 
the disease is acute and if history, laboratory tests, and imaging studies do not reveal a diagnosis, 
liver biopsy is appropriate to help establish the diagnosis. If the disease is chronic, liver biopsy can 
be helpful not only for diagnosis but also for grading of the activity and staging the progression of 
disease. This approach is generally applicable to patients without immune deficiency. In patients 
with HIV infection or recipients of bone marrow or solid organ transplants, the diagnostic evaluation 
should also include evaluation for opportunistic infections (e.g., with adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, 
Coccidioides, hepatitis E virus) as well as for vascular and immunologic conditions (veno-occlusive 
disease,  graft-versus-host  disease).  α1  AT,  α1  antitrypsin;  AMA;  antimitochondrial  antibody;  ANA, 
antinuclear antibody; anti-HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core (antigen); ERCP, endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography; HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV, hepatitis 
C virus; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; P-ANCA, peripheral antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody.

more  sensitive  than  US  elastography  but  is  also  more 
expensive and requires advanced scheduling and special 
equipment.  Studies  are  ongoing  to  determine  whether 
hepatic  elastography  is  an  appropriate  means  of  mon-
itoring  fibrosis  and  disease  progression  in  untreated 
and  treated  patients.  Finally,  interventional  radiologic 
techniques  allow  for  the  biopsy  of  solitary  lesions, 
the radiofrequency ablation and chemoembolization of 
cancerous  lesions,  the  insertion  of  drains  into  hepatic 
abscesses, the measurement of portal pressure, and the 
creation of vascular shunts in patients with portal hyper-
tension. Which modality to use depends on factors such 
as  availability,  cost,  and  experience  of  the  radiologist 
with each technique.

Liver Biopsy  Liver biopsy remains the gold standard 
in  the  evaluation  of  patients  with  liver  disease,  particu-
larly  chronic  liver  disease.  Liver  biopsy  is  necessary  for 
diagnosis  in  selected  instances  but  is  more  often  useful 
for  assessment  of  the  severity  (grade)  and  stage  of  liver 
damage,  prediction  of  prognosis,  and  monitoring  of  the 
response to treatment. The size of the liver biopsy sample 
is  an  important  determinant  of  reliability;  a  length  of 
1.5–2  cm  with  10  portal  tracts  is  necessary  for  accurate 
assessment of fibrosis. Because liver biopsy is an invasive 
procedure  and  not  without  complications,  it  should  be 
used only when it will contribute materially to decisions 
about management and therapy. In the future, noninva-
sive means of assessing disease activity (batteries of blood 
tests) and fibrosis (elastography and fibrosis markers) may 
replace liver biopsy for the staging and grading of disease.

 ■ GRADING AND STAGING OF LIVER 
DISEASE
Grading refers to an assessment of the severity or activ-
ity  of  liver  disease,  whether  acute  or  chronic;  active  or 
inactive; and mild, moderate, or severe. Liver biopsy is 
the  most  accurate  means  of  assessing  severity,  particu-
larly  in  chronic  liver  disease.  Serum  aminotransferase 
levels serve as convenient and noninvasive markers for 
disease activity but do not always reliably reflect disease 
severity. Thus, normal serum aminotransferase levels in 
patients with hepatitis B surface antigen in serum may 
indicate  the  inactive  carrier  state  or  may  reflect  mild 
chronic  hepatitis  B  or  hepatitis  B  with  fluctuating  dis-
ease activity. Serum testing for hepatitis B e antigen and 
hepatitis B virus DNA can help sort out these different 
patterns, but these markers can also fluctuate and change 

2551

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
6

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

TABLE 336-4  Diagnostic Tests to Assess Liver Fat
IMAGING MODALITY
Ultrasound

ADVANTAGES
No radiation
Widely available

Transient elastography 
with controlled attenuation 
parameter

Computed tomography

No radiation
Point-of-care assessment of liver fat
Provides semiquantitative assessment 
of fat severity
Rapid assessment
Non–operator dependent
Quantitative assessment of fat severity

Magnetic resonance 
imaging–proton density fat 
fraction

Direct assessment of liver fat
Highly sensitive and specific

DISADVANTAGES
Operator dependent
Imprecise qualitative assessment of fat severity, 
particularly mild steatosis
Requires special software
No reliable cutoff for diagnosis of liver fat
Imprecise qualitative assessment of fat severity

Requires radiation
Quantification of fat requires specific protocols
Imprecise quantitative assessment of fat 
severity, particularly mild steatosis
Relatively limited accessibility

CLINICAL UTILITY
Initial screening test for suspected liver fat

Alternate screening test for suspected liver 
fat if available

Not recommended for clinical assessment of 
liver fat due to need for radiation exposure 
and low sensitivity for mild fat

Test of choice for quantitative assessment of 
liver fat if available

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2551

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2552 over  time.  Similarly,  in  chronic  hepatitis  C,  serum  aminotransferase 
levels can be normal despite moderate disease activity. Finally, in both 
alcoholic and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, aminotransferase levels are 
quite unreliable in reflecting severity. In these conditions, liver biopsy 
is helpful in guiding management and identifying appropriate therapy, 
particularly  if  treatment  is  difficult,  prolonged,  and  expensive,  as  is 
often  the  case  in  chronic  viral  hepatitis.  Of  the  several  well-verified 
numerical scales for grading activity in chronic liver disease, the most 
commonly  used  are  the  METAVIR,  histology  activity  index,  and  the 
Ishak fibrosis scale.

Liver  biopsy  is  also  the  most  accurate  means  of  assessing  stage  of 
disease  as  early  or  advanced,  precirrhotic,  and  cirrhotic.  Staging  of 
disease pertains largely to chronic liver diseases in which progression 
to  cirrhosis  and  end-stage  disease  can  occur  but  may  require  years 
or  decades.  Clinical  features,  biochemical  tests,  and  hepatic  imaging 
studies  are  helpful  in  assessing  stage  but  generally  become  abnormal 
only  in  the  middle  to  late  stages  of  cirrhosis.  Noninvasive  tests  that 
suggest advanced fibrosis include mild elevations of bilirubin, prolon-
gation  of  prothrombin  time,  slight  decreases  in  serum  albumin,  and 
mild thrombocytopenia (which is often the first indication of worsen-
ing  fibrosis).  Combinations  of  blood  test  results  that  include  clinical 
features, routine laboratory tests, and special laboratory tests such as 
serum proteins or small molecules that are affected by or involved with 
fibrogenesis have been used to create models for predicting advanced 
liver disease, but these models are not reliable enough to use on a reg-
ular basis or for repeated measures and only separate advanced from 
early  disease  (Table  336-5).  Recently,  elastography  and  noninvasive 
breath  tests  using  13C-labeled  compounds  have  been  proposed  as  a 
means  of  detecting  early  stages  of  fibrosis  and  liver  dysfunction,  but 
their reliability and reproducibility remain to be proven. A major lim-
itation of noninvasive markers is that they can be affected by disease 
activity. Even elastography is limited in this regard, in that it measures 
liver stiffness, not fibrosis per se, and can be affected by inflammation, 
edema, hepatocyte necrosis, and intrasinusoidal cellularity (inflamma-
tory,  malignant,  or  sickled  cells).  Thus,  at  present,  mild  to  moderate 
stages  of  hepatic  fibrosis  are  detectable  only  by  liver  biopsy.  In  the 
assessment of stage, the degree of fibrosis is usually used as the quanti-
tative measure. The amount of fibrosis is generally staged on a scale of 
0 to 4+ (METAVIR scale) or 0 to 6+ (Ishak scale). The importance of 
staging relates primarily to prognosis, recommendation of therapy, and 
optimal management to prevent complications of chronic liver disease. 
Patients with cirrhosis are candidates for screening and surveillance for 
esophageal varices and HCC. Patients without advanced fibrosis need 
not undergo screening.

TABLE 336-5  Selected Noninvasive Methods of Assessing Hepatic 
Fibrosis and Cirrhosis

METHOD PARAMETERS
APRI
ELF
FIB-4
Fibro testa Haptoglobin, α2-macroglobulin, 

AST, platelet count
Age, hyaluronic acid, MMP-3, TIMP-1
Age, AST, ALT, platelet count

TE

ARFI

apolipoprotein A1, γGT, total bilirubin
Measures speed of a shear wave 
generated by vibration through liver 
tissue
Measures speed of shear wave 
generated by acoustic radiation force 
through liver tissue

ADVANCED 
FIBROSIS
>1
>7.7
>1.45
>0.45

>7.3 kPa

>1.3 m/s

CIRRHOSIS
>1.5 (1–2)
>9.3
>3.25
>0.63

>15 kPa 
(9–26.5 
kPa)
>1.87 m/s

aPatented models.
Note: The cut points presented in the table were mostly derived from patients with 
chronic hepatitis C. The cut points for the noninvasive models and tests presented 
in the table vary among different liver diseases and among patients with the same 
disease among different populations.
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; APRI, AST-to-platelet ratio; ARFI, 
acoustic radiation force imaging; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ELF, enhanced 
liver fibrosis panel; γGT, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase; MMP-3, metalloproteinase-3; 
TIMP-1, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1; TE, transient elastography.

TABLE 336-6  Child-Pugh Classification of Cirrhosis

POINTS TOWARD TOTAL SCORE

FACTOR 
Serum bilirubin

Serum albumin

UNITS
μmol/L
mg/dL
g/L
g/dL

Prothrombin time seconds 
prolonged
INRa

Ascites

Hepatic 
encephalopathy

1
<34
<2.0
>35
>3.5
<4

<1.7
None

None

2
34–51
2.0–3.0
30–35
3.0–3.5
4–6

3
>51
>3.0
<30
<3.0
>6

1.7–2.3
Easily 
controlled
Minimal

>2.3
Poorly 
controlled
Advanced

aInternational normalized ratio.
Note: The Child-Pugh score is calculated by adding the scores for the five factors 
and can range from 5 to 15. The resulting Child-Pugh class can be A (a score of 
5–6), B (7–9), or C (≥10). Decompensation indicates cirrhosis, with a Child-Pugh 
score of ≥7 (class B). This level has been the accepted criterion for listing a patient 
for liver transplantation.

Once  cirrhosis  develops,  other  scoring  systems  are  employed  to 
assess compensated versus decompensated disease and prognosis. The 
first staging system used for this purpose was the modified Child-Pugh 
classification, with a scoring system of 5–15: scores of 5 and 6 represent 
Child-Pugh  class  A  (consistent  with  “compensated  cirrhosis”), 
scores  of  7–9  represent  class  B,  and  scores  of  10–15  represent  class 
C (Table 336-6). This scoring system was initially devised to stratify 
patients  with  cirrhosis  into  risk  groups  before  portal  decompressive 
surgery.  The  Child-Pugh  score  is  a  reasonably  reliable  predictor  of 
survival  in  many  liver  diseases  and  predicts  the  likelihood  of  major 
complications  of  cirrhosis,  such  as  bleeding  from  varices  and  spon-
taneous  bacterial  peritonitis.  This  classification  scheme  was  used  to 
assess prognosis in cirrhosis and to provide standard criteria for listing 
a patient as a candidate for liver transplantation (Child-Pugh class B). 
More recently, the Child-Pugh system has been replaced by the Model 
for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) system for the latter purpose. The 
MELD score is a prospectively derived system designed to predict the 
prognosis of patients with liver disease and portal hypertension. This 
score  is  calculated  using  three  readily  available  objective  variables: 
the prothrombin time expressed as the international normalized ratio 
(INR),  the  serum  bilirubin  level,  and  the  serum  creatinine  concen-
tration. The ability of the MELD score to predict outcome after liver 
transplantation is regularly monitored and was modified to increase its 
accuracy and improve allocation of donated livers. These modifications 
include  serum  sodium  concentration  as  a  factor  in  the  model  and  a 
reweighting of the MELD components. A separate scoring system, the 
Pediatric  End-Stage  Liver  Disease  (PELD)  score,  is  used  for  children 
(<12  years  old).  Transient  elastography  has  also  been  used  to  stage 
cirrhosis and has been shown to be useful in predicting complications 
such  as  variceal  hemorrhage,  ascites  development,  and  liver-related 
death.

The  MELD  system  provides  a  more  objective  means  of  assess-
ing  disease  severity  and  has  less  center-to-center  variation  than  the 
Child-Pugh score as well as a wider range of values. The MELD and 
PELD systems are currently used to establish priority listing for liver 
transplantation in the United States. Convenient MELD and PELD cal-
culators are available via the Internet (https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
resources/allocation-calculators/about-meld-and-peld/).
 ■ NONSPECIFIC ISSUES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF 
PATIENTS WITH LIVER DISEASE
Specifics  on  the  management  of  different  forms  of  acute  or  chronic 
liver  disease  are  supplied  in  subsequent  chapters,  but  certain  issues 
are  applicable  to  any  patient  with  liver  disease.  These  issues  include 
advice  regarding  alcohol  use,  medication  use,  vaccination,  and  sur-
veillance  for  certain  liver  diseases  and  complications  of  liver  disease. 
Alcohol  should  be  used  sparingly,  if  at  all,  by  patients  with  liver 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2552

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
 
 
disease. Abstinence from alcohol should be encouraged for all patients 
with alcohol-related liver disease, patients with cirrhosis, and patients 
receiving  interferon-based  therapy  for  hepatitis  B  and  during  anti-
viral  therapy  of  hepatitis  C.  With  regard  to  vaccinations,  all  patients 
with  liver  disease  should  receive  hepatitis  A  vaccine,  and  those  with 
risk  factors  should  receive  hepatitis  B  vaccine  as  well.  Influenza  and 
pneumococcal  vaccination  should  also  be  encouraged,  with  adher-
ence to the recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Patients with liver disease should exercise caution 
in  using  any  medications  other  than  those  that  are  most  necessary. 
Drug-induced  hepatotoxicity  can  mimic  many  forms  of  liver  disease 
and can cause exacerbations of chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis; drugs 
should be suspected in any situation in which the cause of exacerbation 
is unknown. The CDC now recommends universal one-time testing for 
hepatitis C virus among persons aged 18–79 years and screening of all 
pregnant women during each pregnancy except in settings where the 
prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection (hepatitis C virus RNA posi-
tivity) is <0.1%. Finally, consideration should be given to surveillance 
for complications of chronic liver disease such as variceal hemorrhage 
and HCC. Cirrhosis warrants upper endoscopy to assess the presence 
of  varices,  and  the  patient  should  receive  chronic  therapy  with  beta 
blockers  or  should  be  offered  endoscopic  obliteration  if  large  varices 
are found. Moreover, cirrhosis warrants screening and long-term sur-
veillance for development of HCC. While the optimal regimen for such 
surveillance has not been established, an appropriate approach is US of 
the liver at 6- to 12-month intervals.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Friedman  SL  et  al:  Mechanisms  of  NAFLD  development  and  thera-

peutic strategies. Nat Med 24:908, 2018.

Seto WK et al: Chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet 392:2313, 

2018.

Spearman CW et al: Hepatitis C. Lancet 394:1451, 2019.
Tapper EB, Lok AS: Use of liver imaging and biopsy in clinical practice. 

N Engl J Med 377:756, 2017.

337 Evaluation of Liver  
Function
Emily D. Bethea, Daniel S. Pratt

There are a number of tests that can be used to evaluate liver function. 
These tests include biochemical tests, radiologic tests, and pathologic tests.
Serum biochemical tests, also commonly referred to as “liver func-
tion tests,” can be used to (1) detect the presence of liver disease, (2) 
distinguish  among  different  types  of  liver  disorders,  (3)  gauge  the 
extent of known liver damage, and (4) follow the response to treatment. 
However, serum biochemical tests have shortcomings. They lack sensi-
tivity and specificity; they can be normal in patients with serious liver 
disease and abnormal in patients with diseases that do not affect the 
liver. Liver tests rarely suggest a specific diagnosis; rather, they suggest 
a general category of liver disease, such as hepatocellular or cholestatic, 
which then further directs the evaluation. The liver carries out thou-
sands of biochemical functions, most of which cannot be easily mea-
sured by blood tests. Laboratory tests measure only a limited number 
of these functions. In fact, many tests, such as the aminotransferases 
and alkaline phosphatase, do not measure liver function at all. Rather, 
they detect liver cell damage or interference with bile flow. Thus, no 
one biochemical test enables the clinician to accurately assess the liver’s 
total functional capacity.

To  increase  the  sensitivity  and  the  specificity  of  biochemical  tests 
in  the  detection  of  liver  disease,  it  is  best  to  use  them  as  a  battery. 
Tests  usually  employed  in  clinical  practice  include  the  bilirubin, 

aminotransferases,  alkaline  phosphatase,  albumin,  and  prothrombin 
time tests. When more than one of these tests provide abnormal find-
ings or the findings are persistently abnormal on serial determinations, 
the probability of liver disease is high. When all test results are normal, 
the probability of missing occult liver disease is low.

2553

Serum  Bilirubin 
(See  also  Chap.  49)  Bilirubin,  a  breakdown 
product of the porphyrin ring of heme-containing proteins, is found in 
the blood in two fractions—conjugated and unconjugated. The uncon-
jugated fraction, also termed the indirect fraction, is insoluble in water 
and is bound to albumin in the blood. The conjugated (direct) bilirubin 
fraction is water-soluble and can therefore be excreted by the kidney. 
Normal values of total serum bilirubin are reported between 1 and 
1.5  mg/dL with 95% of a normal population falling between 0.2 and 
0.9 mg/dL. If the direct-acting fraction is <15% of the total, the biliru-
bin can be considered to all be indirect. The most frequently reported 
upper limit of normal for conjugated bilirubin is 0.3 mg/dL.

Elevation of the unconjugated fraction of bilirubin is rarely due to 
liver  disease.  An  isolated  elevation  of  unconjugated  bilirubin  is  seen 
primarily in hemolytic disorders and in a number of genetic conditions 
such  as  Crigler-Najjar  and  Gilbert’s  syndromes  (Chap.  49).  Isolated 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin elevated but <15% direct) 
should prompt a workup for hemolysis (Fig. 337-1). In the absence of 
hemolysis, an isolated, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in an other-
wise  healthy  patient  can  be  attributed  to  Gilbert’s  syndrome,  and  no 
further evaluation is required.

In  contrast,  conjugated  hyperbilirubinemia  almost  always  implies 
liver or biliary tract disease. The rate-limiting step in bilirubin metab-
olism is not conjugation of bilirubin, but rather the transport of conju-
gated bilirubin into the bile canaliculi. Thus, elevation of the conjugated 
fraction may be seen in any type of liver disease including fulminant 
liver failure. In most liver diseases, both conjugated and unconjugated 
fractions of the bilirubin tend to be elevated. Except in the presence of a 
purely unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, fractionation of the bilirubin 
is rarely helpful in determining the cause of jaundice.

Although the degree of elevation of the serum bilirubin has not been 
critically assessed as a prognostic marker, it is important in a number of 
conditions. In viral hepatitis, the higher the serum bilirubin, the greater 
is  the  hepatocellular  damage.  Total  serum  bilirubin  correlates  with 
poor  outcomes  in  alcoholic  hepatitis.  It  is  also  a  critical  component 
of the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score, a tool used 
to estimate survival of patients with end-stage liver disease, prioritize 
patients  awaiting  liver  transplantation,  and  assess  operative  risk  of 
patients  with  cirrhosis.  An  elevated  total  serum  bilirubin  in  patients 
with drug-induced liver disease indicates more severe injury.

Unconjugated bilirubin always binds to albumin in the serum and is 
not filtered by the kidney. Therefore, any bilirubin found in the urine 
is conjugated bilirubin; the presence of bilirubinuria implies the pres-
ence of liver disease or obstructive jaundice. A urine dipstick test can 
theoretically give the same information as fractionation of the serum 
bilirubin. This test is almost 100% accurate. Phenothiazines may give 
a false-positive reading with the Ictotest tablet. In patients recovering 
from jaundice, the urine bilirubin clears prior to the serum bilirubin.

Serum Enzymes  The liver contains thousands of enzymes, some of 
which are also present in the serum in very low concentrations. These 
enzymes have no known function in the serum and behave like other 
serum proteins. They are distributed in the plasma and in interstitial 
fluid  and  have  characteristic  half-lives,  which  are  usually  measured 
in days. Very little is known about the catabolism of serum enzymes, 
although  they  are  probably  cleared  by  cells  in  the  reticuloendothe-
lial  system.  The  elevation  of  a  given  enzyme  activity  in  the  serum  is 
thought to primarily reflect its increased rate of entrance into serum 
from damaged liver cells.

Serum enzyme tests can be grouped into two categories: (1) enzymes 
whose  elevation  in  serum  reflects  damage  to  hepatocytes  and  (2) 
enzymes whose elevation in serum reflects cholestasis.

ENZYMES THAT REFLECT DAMAGE TO HEPATOCYTES  The aminotrans-
ferases (transaminases) are sensitive indicators of liver cell injury and 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
7

E
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
o
f
L
i
v
e
r
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2553

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2554

Liver Tests

Isolated elevation
of the bilirubin

Cholestatic pattern
(see Table 337-1)

Fractionate
  bilirubin

Review drugs
Ultrasound

Ducts not
dilated

Dilated ducts

>15% Direct

<15% Direct

Check AMA

CT/MRCP/ERCP

Isolated elevation
of the alkaline
phosphatase

AMA
  negative

AMA positive

ERCP/Liver Bx

Liver Bx

Hepatocellular
pattern
(see Table 337-1)

Fractionate the alkaline
  phosphatase or check
  GGT or 5' nucleotidase
  to assess origin of
  alkaline phosphatase

Alkaline phos.
  of liver origin

Alkaline phos.
  of bone origin

Ultrasound
Review drug list
Check AMA

Ducts not dilated
  and/or AMA positive

Bone Eval

Dilated ducts

Liver biopsy

MRCP

Dubin-Johnson or
  Rotor syndrome

Evaluation for
  hemolysis

W/U negative

W/U
positive

Gilbert’s
  syndrome

Hemolysis

Review drug list
Hepatitis C antibody
Hepatitis B surface Ag
Iron, TIBC, ferritin
ANA, SPEP
Ceruloplasmin
  (if patient <40)
Ultrasound to look 
  for fatty liver

W/U negative

R/O Celiac disease
Consider other
  nonhepatic cause

W/U negative

Consider liver biopsy

FIGURE 337-1  Algorithm for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver tests. Ag, antigen; AMA, antimitochondrial antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; Bx, biopsy; CT, 
computed tomography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; GGT, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; 
R/O, rule out; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity; W/U, workup.

are most helpful in recognizing acute hepatocellular diseases such as 
hepatitis. They include aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine 
aminotransferase  (ALT).  AST  is  found  in  the  liver,  cardiac  muscle, 
skeletal  muscle,  kidneys,  brain,  pancreas,  lungs,  leukocytes,  and  ery-
throcytes in decreasing order of concentration. ALT is found primarily 
in the liver and is therefore a more specific indicator of liver injury. The 
aminotransferases are normally present in the serum in low concentra-
tions.  These  enzymes  are  released  into  the  blood  in  greater  amounts 
when there is damage to the liver cell membrane, resulting in increased 
permeability. Liver cell necrosis is not required for the release of the 
aminotransferases, and there is a poor correlation between the degree 
of liver cell damage and the level of the aminotransferases. Thus, the 
absolute elevation of the aminotransferases is of no prognostic signifi-
cance in acute hepatocellular disorders.

The normal range for aminotransferases varies widely among labo-
ratories, but generally ranges from 10 to 40 IU/L. The interlaboratory 
variation in normal range is due to technical reasons; no reference stan-
dards exist to establish upper limits of normal for ALT and AST. Some 
have recommended revisions of normal limits of the aminotransferases 
to adjust for sex and body mass index, but others have noted the poten-
tial costs and unclear benefits of implementing this change.

Any  type  of  liver  cell  injury  can  cause  modest  elevations  in  the 
serum aminotransferases. Levels of up to 300 IU/L are nonspecific and 
may be found in any type of liver disorder. Minimal ALT elevations in 
asymptomatic blood donors rarely indicate severe liver disease; studies 

have shown that fatty liver disease is the most likely explanation. Strik-
ing elevations—that is, aminotransferases >1000 IU/L—occur almost 
exclusively in disorders associated with extensive hepatocellular injury 
such as (1) viral hepatitis, (2) ischemic liver injury (prolonged hypoten-
sion or acute heart failure), or (3) toxin- or drug-induced liver injury.
The pattern of the aminotransferase elevation can be helpful diag-
nostically.  In  most  acute  hepatocellular  disorders,  the  ALT  is  higher 
than or equal to the AST. Whereas the AST:ALT ratio is typically <1 
in  patients  with  chronic  viral  hepatitis  and  nonalcoholic  fatty  liver 
disease, a number of groups have noted that as cirrhosis develops, this 
ratio rises to >1. An AST:ALT ratio >2:1 is suggestive, whereas a ratio 
>3:1 is highly suggestive, of alcoholic liver disease. The AST in alco-
holic liver disease is rarely >300 IU/L, and the ALT is often normal. A 
low level of ALT in the serum is due to an alcohol-induced deficiency 
of pyridoxal phosphate.

The aminotransferases are usually not greatly elevated in obstructive 
jaundice. One notable exception occurs during the acute phase of bil-
iary obstruction caused by the passage of a gallstone into the common 
bile  duct.  In  this  setting,  the  aminotransferases  can  briefly  be  in  the 
1000–2000  IU/L  range.  However,  aminotransferase  levels  decrease 
quickly, and the biochemical tests rapidly evolve into those typical of 
cholestasis.
ENZYMES  THAT  REFLECT  CHOLESTASIS  The  activities  of  three 
enzymes—alkaline  phosphatase,  5′-nucleotidase,  and  γ-glutamyl 
transpeptidase  (GGT)—are  usually  elevated  in  cholestasis.  Alkaline 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2554

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemphosphatase  and  5′-nucleotidase  are  found  in  or  near  the  bile  cana-
licular  membrane  of  hepatocytes,  whereas  GGT  is  located  in  the 
endoplasmic reticulum and in bile duct epithelial cells. Reflecting its 
more diffuse localization in the liver, GGT elevation in serum is less 
specific for cholestasis than are elevations of alkaline phosphatase or 5′- 
nucleotidase. Some have advocated the use of GGT to identify patients 
with occult alcohol use. Its lack of specificity makes its use in this set-
ting questionable.

The  normal  serum  alkaline  phosphatase  consists  of  many  distinct 
isoenzymes found in the liver, bone, placenta, and, less commonly, the 
small intestine. Patients over age 60 can have a mildly elevated alkaline 
phosphatase  (1–1.5  times  normal),  whereas  individuals  with  blood 
types O and B can have an elevation of the serum alkaline phosphatase 
after eating a fatty meal due to the influx of intestinal alkaline phos-
phatase into the blood. It is also elevated in children and adolescents 
undergoing rapid bone growth because of bone alkaline phosphatase 
and late in normal pregnancies due to the influx of placental alkaline 
phosphatase.

Elevation of liver-derived alkaline phosphatase is not totally specific 
for cholestasis, and a less than threefold elevation can be seen in almost 
any type of liver disease. Alkaline phosphatase elevations greater than 
four  times  normal  occur  primarily  in  patients  with  cholestatic  liver 
disorders,  infiltrative  liver  diseases  such  as  cancer  and  amyloidosis, 
and bone conditions characterized by rapid bone turnover (e.g., Paget’s 
disease). In bone diseases, the elevation is due to increased amounts of 
the bone isoenzymes. In liver diseases, the elevation is almost always 
due to increased amounts of the liver isoenzyme.

If  an  elevated  serum  alkaline  phosphatase  is  the  only  abnormal 
finding in an apparently healthy person or if the degree of elevation is 
higher than expected in the clinical setting, identification of the source 
of  elevated  isoenzymes  is  helpful  (Fig.  330-1).  This  problem  can  be 
approached in two ways. First, and most precise, is the fractionation 
of the alkaline phosphatase by electrophoresis. The second, best sub-
stantiated, and most available approach involves the measurement of 
serum  5′-nucleotidase  or  GGT.  These  enzymes  are  rarely  elevated  in 
conditions other than liver disease.

In the absence of jaundice or elevated aminotransferases, an elevated 
alkaline phosphatase of liver origin often, but not always, suggests early 
cholestasis  and,  less  often,  hepatic  infiltration  by  tumor  or  granulo-
mata.  Other  conditions  that  cause  isolated  elevations  of  the  alkaline 
phosphatase include primary biliary cholangitis, sclerosing cholangitis, 
Hodgkin’s disease, diabetes, hyperthyroidism, congestive heart failure, 
and amyloidosis.

The  level  of  serum  alkaline  phosphatase  elevation  is  not  helpful 
in  distinguishing  between  intrahepatic  and  extrahepatic  cholestasis. 
There is essentially no difference among the values found in obstruc-
tive jaundice due to cancer, common duct stone, sclerosing cholangitis, 
or  bile  duct  stricture.  Values  are  similarly  increased  in  patients  with 
intrahepatic cholestasis due to drug-induced hepatitis, primary biliary 
cholangitis,  sepsis,  rejection  of  transplanted  livers,  and,  rarely,  alcohol- 
induced  steatohepatitis.  Values  are  also  greatly  elevated  in  hepatobil-
iary disorders seen in patients with AIDS (e.g., AIDS cholangiopathy 
due to cytomegalovirus or cryptosporidial infection and tuberculosis 
with hepatic involvement).

 ■ TESTS THAT MEASURE BIOSYNTHETIC 
FUNCTION OF THE LIVER
Serum  Albumin  Serum  albumin  is  synthesized  exclusively  by 
hepatocytes. Serum albumin has a long half-life: 18–20 days, with ~4% 
degraded per day. Because of this slow turnover, the serum albumin is 
not a good indicator of acute or mild hepatic dysfunction; only minimal 
changes in the serum albumin are seen in acute liver conditions such 
as viral hepatitis, drug-related hepatotoxicity, and obstructive jaundice. 
In  hepatitis,  albumin  levels  <3  g/dL  should  raise  the  possibility  of 
chronic liver disease. Hypoalbuminemia is more common in chronic 
liver disorders such as cirrhosis and usually reflects severe liver damage 
and  decreased  albumin  synthesis.  However,  hypoalbuminemia  is  not 
specific for liver disease and may occur in protein malnutrition of any 

2555

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
7

E
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
o
f
L
i
v
e
r
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

cause, as well as protein-losing enteropathies, nephrotic syndrome, and 
chronic infections that are associated with prolonged increases in levels 
of cytokines that inhibit albumin synthesis, such as serum interleukin 1 
and/or tumor necrosis factor. Serum albumin should not be measured 
to  screen  patients  in  whom  there  is  no  suspicion  of  liver  disease.  A 
general medical clinic study of consecutive patients in whom no indi-
cations were present for albumin measurement showed that although 
12% of patients had abnormal test results, the finding was of clinical 
importance in only 0.4%.

Serum Globulins  Serum  globulins  are  a  group  of  proteins  made 
up of γ globulins (immunoglobulins) produced by B lymphocytes and 
α and β globulins produced primarily in hepatocytes. γ Globulins are 
increased in chronic liver disease, such as chronic hepatitis and cirrho-
sis. In cirrhosis, the increased serum γ globulin concentration is due 
to  the  increased  synthesis  of  antibodies,  some  of  which  are  directed 
against intestinal bacteria. This occurs because the cirrhotic liver fails 
to  clear  bacterial  antigens  that  normally  reach  the  liver  through  the 
hepatic circulation.

Increases  in  the  concentration  of  specific  isotypes  of  γ  globulins 
are  often  helpful  in  the  recognition  of  certain  chronic  liver  diseases. 
Diffuse polyclonal increases in IgG levels are common in autoimmune 
hepatitis; increases >100% should alert the clinician to this possibility. 
Increases in the IgM levels are common in primary biliary cholangitis, 
whereas increases in the IgA levels occur in alcoholic liver disease.

 ■ COAGULATION FACTORS
With the exception of factor VIII, which is produced by vascular endo-
thelial cells, the blood clotting factors are made exclusively in hepato-
cytes. Their serum half-lives are much shorter than albumin, ranging 
from 6 h for factor VII to 5 days for fibrinogen. Because of their rapid 
turnover, measurement of the clotting factors is the single best acute 
measure  of  hepatic  synthetic  function  and  helpful  in  both  diagnosis 
and assessing the prognosis of acute parenchymal liver disease. Useful 
for this purpose is the serum prothrombin time, which collectively mea-
sures factors II, V, VII, and X. Biosynthesis of factors II, VII, IX, and 
X depends on vitamin K. The international normalized ratio (INR) is 
used to express the degree of anticoagulation on warfarin therapy. The 
INR  standardizes  prothrombin  time  measurement  according  to  the 
characteristics of the thromboplastin reagent used in a particular lab, 
which is expressed as an International Sensitivity Index (ISI); the ISI is 
then used in calculating the INR.

The prothrombin time may be elevated in hepatitis and cirrhosis as 
well as in disorders that lead to vitamin K deficiency such as obstruc-
tive jaundice or fat malabsorption of any kind. Marked prolongation of 
the prothrombin time, >5 s above control and not corrected by paren-
teral vitamin K administration, is a poor prognostic sign in acute viral 
hepatitis  and  other  acute  and  chronic  liver  diseases.  The  INR,  along 
with the total serum bilirubin and creatinine, are components of the 
MELD score, which is used as a measure of hepatic decompensation 
and to allocate organs for liver transplantation.

 ■ OTHER DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Although tests may direct the physician to a category of liver disease, 
additional biochemical testing, radiologic testing, and procedures are 
often necessary to make the proper diagnosis, as shown in Fig. 337-1. 
The most commonly used ancillary tests are reviewed here, as are the 
noninvasive tests available for assessing hepatic fibrosis.

Ammonia  Ammonia  is  produced  in  the  body  during  normal 
protein metabolism and by intestinal bacteria, primarily those in the 
colon. The liver plays a role in the detoxification of ammonia by con-
verting it to urea, which is excreted by the kidneys. Striated muscle also 
plays a role in detoxification of ammonia, where it is combined with 
glutamic acid to form glutamine. Patients with advanced liver disease 
typically  have  significant  muscle  wasting,  which  likely  contributes 
to  hyperammonemia.  Some  physicians  use  the  blood  ammonia  for 
detecting encephalopathy or for monitoring hepatic synthetic function, 
although  its  use  for  either  of  these  indications  has  problems.  There 
is  very  poor  correlation  between  either  the  presence  or  the  severity 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2555

20/01/22   10:04 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2556

TABLE 337-1  Liver Test Patterns in Hepatobiliary Disorders
BILIRUBIN
TYPE OF DISORDER
Hemolysis/Gilbert’s 
Normal to 86 μmol/L (5 mg/dL)
syndrome
85% due to indirect fractions
No bilirubinuria
Both fractions may be elevated
Peak usually follows 
aminotransferases
Bilirubinuria
Both fractions may be elevated
Bilirubinuria

Acute hepatocellular 
necrosis (viral, ischemic, 
and drug- or toxin-
induced hepatitis)

Chronic hepatocellular 
disorders

AMINOTRANSFERASES
Normal

Elevated, often >500 IU, 
ALT > AST

Elevated, but usually 
<300 IU

Alcoholic hepatitis, 
cirrhosis

Both fractions may be elevated
Bilirubinuria

Intra- and extrahepatic 
cholestasis (obstructive 
jaundice)

Infiltrative diseases 
(tumor, granulomata)

Both fractions may be elevated
Bilirubinuria

Usually normal

AST:ALT >2 suggests 
alcoholic hepatitis or 
cirrhosis

Normal to moderate 
elevation
Rarely >500 IU
Normal to slight elevation

Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.

ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE
Normal

ALBUMIN
Normal

PROTHROMBIN TIME
Normal

Normal to <3× normal 
elevation

Normal

Normal to <3× normal 
elevation

Normal to <3× normal 
elevation

Often 
decreased

Often 
decreased

Elevated, often >4× normal 
elevation

Normal, unless 
chronic

Normal

Elevated, often >4× normal 
elevation
Fractionate, or confirm liver 
origin with 5′-nucleotidase or 
γ-glutamyl transpeptidase

Usually normal. If >5× above 
control and not corrected 
by parenteral vitamin K, 
suggests poor prognosis

Often prolonged
Fails to correct with 
parenteral vitamin K
Often prolonged
Fails to correct with 
parenteral vitamin K
Normal
If prolonged, will correct 
with parenteral vitamin K
Normal

of  acute  encephalopathy  and  elevation  of  blood  ammonia;  it  can  be 
occasionally useful for identifying occult liver disease in patients with 
mental  status  changes.  There  is  also  a  poor  correlation  of  the  blood 
serum ammonia and hepatic function. The ammonia can be elevated 
in patients with severe portal hypertension and portal blood shunting 
around the liver even in the presence of normal or near-normal hepatic 
function.  Elevated  arterial  ammonia  levels  have  been  shown  to  cor-
relate with outcome in fulminant hepatic failure.

Liver Biopsy  Percutaneous biopsy of the liver is a safe procedure 
that  is  easily  performed  with  local  anesthesia  and  ultrasound 
guidance.  Liver biopsy is of proven value in the following situations:  
(1) hepatocellular disease of uncertain cause, (2) prolonged hepatitis with 
the  possibility  of  autoimmune  hepatitis,  (3)  unexplained  hepatomeg-
aly, (4) unexplained splenomegaly, (5) hepatic lesions uncharacterized 
by  radiologic  imaging,  (6)  fever  of  unknown  origin,  and  (7)  staging 
of  malignant  lymphoma.  Liver  biopsy  is  most  accurate  in  disorders 
causing  diffuse  changes  throughout  the  liver  and  is  subject  to  sam-
pling  error  in  focal  disorders.  Liver  biopsy  should  not  be  the  initial 
procedure in the diagnosis of cholestasis. The biliary tree should first 
be assessed for signs of obstruction. Contraindications to performing 
a percutaneous liver biopsy include significant ascites and prolonged 
INR. Under these circumstances, the biopsy can be performed via the 
transjugular approach.

Noninvasive Tests to Detect Hepatic Fibrosis  Although liver 
biopsy is the standard for the assessment of hepatic fibrosis, noninva-
sive measures of hepatic fibrosis have been developed and show prom-
ise.  These  measures  include  multiparameter  tests  aimed  at  detecting 
and  staging  the  degree  of  hepatic  fibrosis  and  imaging  techniques. 
FibroTest  (marketed  as  FibroSure  in  the  United  States)  is  the  best 
evaluated  of  the  multiparameter  blood  tests.  The  test  incorporates 
haptoglobin, bilirubin, GGT, apolipoprotein A-I, and α2-macroglobulin 
and has been found to have high positive and negative predictive values 
for diagnosing advanced fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C, 
chronic hepatitis B, alcoholic liver disease, or nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease and patients taking methotrexate for psoriasis. Transient elas-
tography (TE), marketed as FibroScan, and magnetic resonance elas-
tography (MRE) both have gained U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
approval for use in the management of patients with liver disease. TE 
uses ultrasound waves to measure hepatic stiffness noninvasively. TE 

has  been  shown  to  be  accurate  for  identifying  advanced  fibrosis  in 
patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  primary  biliary  cholangitis,  hemo-
chromatosis,  nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  disease,  and  recurrent  chronic 
hepatitis after liver transplantation. MRE has been found to be superior 
to TE for staging liver fibrosis in patients with a variety of chronic liver 
diseases but requires access to a magnetic resonance imaging scanner 
and is more expensive.

Ultrasonography  Ultrasonography  is  the  first  diagnostic  test 
to  use  in  patients  whose  liver  tests  suggest  cholestasis,  to  look  for 
the  presence  of  a  dilated  intrahepatic  or  extrahepatic  biliary  tree  or 
to  identify  gallstones.  In  addition,  it  shows  space-occupying  lesions 
within the liver, enables the clinician to distinguish between cystic and 
solid masses, and helps direct percutaneous biopsies. Ultrasound with 
Doppler  imaging  can  detect  the  patency  of  the  portal  vein,  hepatic 
artery,  and  hepatic  veins  and  determine  the  direction  of  blood  flow. 
This is the first test ordered in patients suspected of having Budd-Chiari 
syndrome.

 ■ USE OF LIVER TESTS
As previously noted, the best way to increase the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of laboratory tests in the detection of liver disease is to employ 
a  battery  of  tests  that  includes  the  aminotransferases,  alkaline  phos-
phatase,  bilirubin,  albumin,  and  prothrombin  time  along  with  the 
judicious use of the other tests described in this chapter. Table 337-1 
shows  how  patterns  of  liver  tests  can  lead  the  clinician  to  a  category 
of disease that will direct further evaluation. However, it is important 
to remember that no single set of liver tests will necessarily provide a 
diagnosis. It is often necessary to repeat these tests on several occasions 
over days to weeks for a diagnostic pattern to emerge. Figure 337-1 is 
an algorithm for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver tests.

 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The tests and principles presented in this chapter are applicable world-
wide. The causes of liver test abnormalities vary according to region. In 
developing nations, infectious diseases are more commonly the etiol-
ogy of abnormal serum liver tests than in developed nations.

Acknowledgment
This chapter represents a revised version of a chapter in previous editions 
of Harrison’s in which Marshall M. Kaplan was a co-author.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2556

20/01/22   10:04 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System ■ FURTHER READING
Kamath  PS,  Kim  WR:  The  Model  for  End-Stage  Liver  Disease 

(MELD). Hepatology 45:797, 2007.

Kaplan M: Alkaline phosphatase. Gastroenterology 62:452, 1972.
Martínez SM et al: Noninvasive assessment of liver fibrosis. Hepatol-

ogy 53:325, 2011.

Prati D et al: Updated definitions of healthy ranges for serum alanine 

aminotransferase levels. Ann Intern Med 137:1, 2002.

338 The Hyperbilirubinemias

Allan W. Wolkoff

 ■ BILIRUBIN METABOLISM
The details of bilirubin metabolism are presented in Chap. 49. How-
ever, the hyperbilirubinemias are best understood in terms of pertur-
bations of specific aspects of bilirubin metabolism and transport, and 
these will be briefly reviewed here as depicted in Fig. 338-1.

Bilirubin is the end product of heme degradation. Some 70–90% of 
bilirubin is derived from degradation of the hemoglobin of senescent 
red blood cells. Bilirubin produced in the periphery is transported to 
the  liver  within  the  plasma,  where,  due  to  its  insolubility  in  aqueous 
solutions, it is tightly bound to albumin. Under normal circumstances, 
bilirubin  is  removed  from  the  circulation  rapidly  and  efficiently  by 
hepatocytes. Transfer of bilirubin from blood to bile involves four dis-
tinct but interrelated steps (Fig. 338-1).

1.  Hepatocellular  uptake:  Uptake  of  bilirubin  by  the  hepatocyte  has 
carrier-mediated kinetics. Although a number of candidate bilirubin 
transporters  have  been  proposed,  the  identity  of  the  actual  trans-
porter remains elusive.

2.  Intracellular  binding:  Within  the  hepatocyte,  bilirubin  is  kept  in 
solution by binding as a nonsubstrate ligand to several of the gluta-
thione-S-transferases, formerly called ligandins.

ALB

OATP1B1
OATP1B3

BMG
BDG

UCB

MRP3

BT

ALB:UCB

Space
of
Disse

Sinusoid

UCB

UGT1A1

BMG

GST:UCB

UGT1A1

UCB
+
GST

BDG

MRP2
MRP2

BMG
BDG

FIGURE  338-1  Hepatocellular  bilirubin  transport.  Albumin-bound  bilirubin 
in 
sinusoidal blood passes through endothelial cell fenestrae to reach the hepatocyte 
surface,  entering  the  cell  by  both  facilitated  and  simple  diffusional  processes. 
Within  the  cell,  it  is  bound  to  glutathione-S-transferases  and  conjugated  by 
bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase  (UGT1A1)  to  mono-  and  diglucuronides, 
which are actively transported across the canalicular membrane into the bile. In 
addition to this direct excretion of bilirubin glucuronides, a portion are transported 
into the portal circulation by MRP3 and subjected to reuptake into the hepatocyte 
by  OATP1B1  and  OATP1B3.  ALB,  albumin;  BDG,  bilirubin  diglucuronide;  BMG, 
bilirubin  monoglucuronide;  BT,  proposed  bilirubin  transporter;  GST,  glutathione-
S-transferase;  MRP2  and  MRP3,  multidrug  resistance–associated  proteins  2  and 
3;  OATP1B1  and  OATP1B3,  organic  anion  transport  proteins  1B1  and  1B3;  UCB, 
unconjugated bilirubin; UGT1A1, bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase.

2557

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
8

T
h
e
H
y
p
e
r
b
i
l
i
r
u
b
i
n
e
m
i
a
s

3.  Conjugation:  Bilirubin  is  conjugated  with  one  or  two  glucuronic 
acid  moieties  by  a  specific  UDP-glucuronosyltransferase  to  form 
bilirubin  mono-  and  diglucuronide,  respectively.  Conjugation  dis-
rupts the internal hydrogen bonding that limits aqueous solubility 
of  bilirubin,  and  the  resulting  glucuronide  conjugates  are  highly 
soluble  in  water.  Conjugation  is  obligatory  for  excretion  of  bil-
irubin  across  the  bile  canalicular  membrane  into  bile.  The  UDP- 
glucuronosyltransferases  have  been  classified  into  gene  families 
based on the degree of homology among the mRNAs for the various 
isoforms. Those that conjugate bilirubin and certain other substrates 
have  been  designated  the  UGT1  family.  These  are  expressed  from 
a  single  gene  complex  by  alternative  promoter  usage.  This  gene 
complex contains multiple substrate-specific first exons, designated 
A1,  A2,  etc.  (Fig.  338-2),  each  with  its  own  promoter  and  each 
encoding the amino-terminal half of a specific isoform. In addition, 
there  are  four  common  exons  (exons  2–5)  that  encode  the  shared 
carboxyl-terminal  half  of  all  of  the  UGT1  isoforms.  The  various 
first exons encode the specific aglycone substrate binding sites for 
each  isoform,  while  the  shared  exons  encode  the  binding  site  for 
the  sugar  donor,  UDP-glucuronic  acid,  and  the  transmembrane 
domain.  Exon  A1  and  the  four  common  exons,  collectively  desig-
nated as the UGT1A1 gene (Fig. 338-2), encode the physiologically 
critical enzyme bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). 
A functional corollary of the organization of the UGT1 gene is that 
a mutation in one of the first exons will affect only a single enzyme 
isoform. By contrast, a mutation in exons 2–5 will alter all isoforms 
encoded by the UGT1 gene complex.

4.  Biliary  excretion:  It  has  been  thought  until  recently  that  bil-
irubin  mono-  and  diglucuronides  are  excreted  directly  across 
the  canalicular  plasma  membrane  into  the  bile  canaliculus  by 
an  ATP-dependent  transport  process  mediated  by  a  canalicular 
membrane protein called multidrug resistance–associated protein 2 
(MRP2, ABCC2). Mutations of MRP2 result in the Dubin-Johnson 
syndrome  (see  below).  However,  studies  in  patients  with  Rotor 
syndrome  (see  below)  indicate  that  after  formation,  a  portion  of 
the  glucuronides  is  transported  into  the  portal  circulation  by  a 
sinusoidal  membrane  protein  called  multidrug  resistance–associ-
ated protein 3 (MRP3, ABCC3) and is subjected to reuptake into 
the  hepatocyte  by  the  sinusoidal  membrane  uptake  transporters 
organic  anion  transport  protein  1B1  (OATP1B1,  SLCO1B1)  and 
OATP1B3 (SLCO1B3).

 ■ EXTRAHEPATIC ASPECTS OF BILIRUBIN 
DISPOSITION
Bilirubin  in  the  Gut  Following  secretion  into  bile,  conjugated 
bilirubin  reaches  the  duodenum  and  passes  down  the  gastrointesti-
nal  tract  without  reabsorption  by  the  intestinal  mucosa.  An  appre-
ciable  fraction  is  converted  by  bacterial  metabolism  in  the  gut  to 
the  water-soluble  colorless  compound  urobilinogen.  Urobilinogen 
undergoes  enterohepatic  cycling.  Urobilinogen  not  taken  up  by  the 
liver reaches the systemic circulation, from which some is cleared by 
the kidneys. Unconjugated bilirubin ordinarily does not reach the gut 
except in neonates or, by ill-defined alternative pathways, in the pres-
ence of severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (e.g., Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome, type I [CN-I]). Unconjugated bilirubin that reaches the gut 
is partly reabsorbed, amplifying any underlying hyperbilirubinemia.

Renal Excretion of Bilirubin Conjugates  Unconjugated biliru-
bin  is  not  excreted  in  urine,  as  it  is  too  tightly  bound  to  albumin  for 
effective glomerular filtration and there is no tubular mechanism for its 
renal secretion. In contrast, the bilirubin conjugates are readily filtered 
at  the  glomerulus  and  can  appear  in  urine  in  disorders  characterized 
by  increased  bilirubin  conjugates  in  the  circulation.  It  should  be  kept 
in mind that the kidney can serve as an “overflow valve” for conjugated 
bilirubin. Consequently, the level of jaundice in individuals with con-
jugated  hyperbilirubinemia  can  be  amplified  in  the  presence  of  renal 
failure.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2557

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2558

5′

500 kb

Variable (Substrate Specific) First Exons

A13 A12 A11 A10 A9 A8 A7 A6 A5 A4 A3 A2

A1

~286 AA

A(TA)6TAA

TATA Box

FIGURE 338-2  Structural organization of the human UGT1 gene complex. This large complex on chromosome 2 contains 
at least 13 substrate-specific first exons (A1, A2, etc.). Since four of these are pseudogenes, nine UGT1 isoforms with 
differing substrate specificities are expressed. Each exon 1 has its own promoter and encodes the amino-terminal 
substrate-specific ∼286 amino acids of the various UGT1-encoded isoforms, and common exons 2–5 encode the 245 
carboxyl-terminal amino acids common to all of the isoforms. mRNAs for specific isoforms are assembled by splicing a 
particular first exon such as the bilirubin-specific exon A1 to exons 2 to 5. The resulting message encodes a complete 
enzyme, in this particular case, bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). Mutations in a first exon affect only a 
single isoform. Those in exons 2–5 affect all enzymes encoded by the UGT1 complex.

Common Exons

2 3 4

5

3′

novobiocin, and rifampin, as well as var-
ious  cholecystographic  contrast  agents, 
have  been  reported  to  inhibit  biliru-
bin  uptake.  The  resulting  unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia  resolves  with  cessa-
tion of the medication.

~245 AA

Impaired  Conjugation  •  PHYSIO-
LOGIC  NEONATAL  JAUNDICE  Bilirubin 
produced  by  the  fetus  is  cleared  by  the 
placenta  and  eliminated  by  the  mater-
nal  liver.  Immediately  after  birth,  the 
neonatal  liver  must  assume  responsi-
bility  for  bilirubin  clearance  and  excre-
tion. However, many hepatic physiologic 
processes  are  incompletely  developed  at 
birth.  Levels  of  UGT1A1  are  low,  and 
alternative excretory pathways allow pas-
sage  of  unconjugated  bilirubin  into  the 
gut.  Since  the  intestinal  flora  that  con-
vert  bilirubin  to  urobilinogen  are  also 
undeveloped,  an  enterohepatic  circulation  of  unconjugated  bilirubin 
ensues. As a consequence, most neonates develop mild unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia  between  days  2  and  5  after  birth.  Peak  levels  are 
typically <85–170 μmol/L (5–10 mg/dL) and decline to normal adult 
concentrations within 2 weeks, as mechanisms required for bilirubin 
disposition mature. Prematurity, often associated with more profound 
immaturity of hepatic function and hemolysis, can result in higher lev-
els of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. A rapidly rising unconjugated 
bilirubin  concentration,  or  absolute  levels  >340  μmol/L  (20  mg/dL),  
puts  the  infant  at  risk  for  bilirubin  encephalopathy,  or  kernicterus. 
Under these circumstances, bilirubin crosses an immature blood-brain 
barrier  and  precipitates  in  the  basal  ganglia  and  other  areas  of  the 
brain. The consequences range from appreciable neurologic deficits to 
death. Treatment options include phototherapy, which converts biliru-
bin into water-soluble photoisomers that are excreted directly into bile, 
and exchange transfusion. The canalicular mechanisms responsible for 
bilirubin  excretion  are  also  immature  at  birth,  and  their  maturation 
may lag behind that of UGT1A1; this can lead to transient conjugated 
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, especially in infants with hemolysis.
ACQUIRED CONJUGATION DEFECTS  A modest reduction in bilirubin 
conjugating capacity may be observed in advanced hepatitis or cirrho-
sis. However, in this setting, conjugation is better preserved than other 
aspects of bilirubin disposition, such as canalicular excretion. Various 
drugs, including pregnanediol, novobiocin, chloramphenicol, gentami-
cin, and atazanavir, may produce unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia by 
inhibiting  UGT1A1  activity.  Bilirubin  conjugation  may  be  inhibited 
by  certain  fatty  acids  that  are  present  in  breast  milk,  but  not  serum, 
of mothers whose infants have excessive neonatal hyperbilirubinemia 
(breast  milk  jaundice).  Alternatively,  there  may  be  increased  entero-
hepatic  circulation  of  bilirubin  in  these  infants.  The  pathogenesis  of 
breast  milk  jaundice  appears  to  differ  from  that  of  transient  familial 
neonatal  hyperbilirubinemia  (Lucey-Driscoll  syndrome),  in  which 
there may be a UGT1A1 inhibitor in maternal serum.

 ■ HEREDITARY DEFECTS IN BILIRUBIN 
CONJUGATION
Three familial disorders characterized by differing degrees of uncon-
jugated  hyperbilirubinemia  have  long  been  recognized.  The  defining 
clinical features of each are described below (Table 338-1). While these 
disorders have been recognized for decades to reflect differing degrees 
of  deficiency  in  the  ability  to  conjugate  bilirubin,  recent  advances  in 
the molecular biology of the UGT1 gene complex have elucidated their 
interrelationships and clarified previously puzzling features.

Crigler-Najjar Syndrome, Type I  CN-I is characterized by strik-
ing unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia of ∼340–765 μmol/L (20–45 mg/
dL) that appears in the neonatal period and persists for life. Other con-
ventional  hepatic  biochemical  tests  such  as  serum  aminotransferases 

DISORDERS OF BILIRUBIN METABOLISM 
LEADING TO UNCONJUGATED 
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
 ■ INCREASED BILIRUBIN PRODUCTION
Hemolysis 
Increased destruction of erythrocytes leads to increased 
bilirubin turnover and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia; the hyperbi-
lirubinemia is usually modest in the presence of normal liver function. 
In particular, the bone marrow is only capable of a sustained eightfold 
increase in erythrocyte production in response to a hemolytic stress. 
Therefore,  hemolysis  alone  cannot  result  in  a  sustained  hyperbiliru-
binemia of more than ∼68 μmol/L (4 mg/dL). Higher values imply con-
comitant hepatic dysfunction. When hemolysis is the only abnormality 
in an otherwise healthy individual, the result is a purely unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia, with the direct-reacting fraction as measured in a 
typical clinical laboratory being ≤15% of the total serum bilirubin. In 
the presence of systemic disease, which may include a degree of hepatic 
dysfunction,  hemolysis  may  produce  a  component  of  conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia in addition to an elevated unconjugated bilirubin 
concentration.  Prolonged  hemolysis  may  lead  to  the  precipitation  of 
bilirubin salts within the gallbladder or biliary tree, resulting in the for-
mation of gallstones in which bilirubin, rather than cholesterol, is the 
major component. Such pigment stones may lead to acute or chronic 
cholecystitis, biliary obstruction, or any other biliary tract consequence 
of calculous disease.

Ineffective  Erythropoiesis  During  erythroid  maturation,  small 
amounts of hemoglobin may be lost at the time of nuclear extrusion, 
and  a  fraction  of  developing  erythroid  cells  is  destroyed  within  the 
marrow. These processes normally account for a small proportion of 
bilirubin that is produced. In various disorders, including thalassemia 
major,  megaloblastic  anemias  due  to  folate  or  vitamin  B12  deficiency, 
congenital  erythropoietic  porphyria,  lead  poisoning,  and  various 
congenital  and  acquired  dyserythropoietic  anemias,  the  fraction  of 
total  bilirubin  production  derived  from  ineffective  erythropoiesis  is 
increased, reaching as much as 70% of the total. This may be sufficient 
to produce modest degrees of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

Miscellaneous  Degradation  of  the  hemoglobin  of  extravascu-
lar  collections  of  erythrocytes,  such  as  those  seen  in  massive  tissue 
infarctions or large hematomas, may lead transiently to unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia.
 ■ DECREASED HEPATIC BILIRUBIN CLEARANCE
Decreased  Hepatic  Uptake  Decreased  hepatic  bilirubin  uptake 
is  believed  to  contribute  to  the  unconjugated  hyperbilirubinemia  of 
Gilbert’s syndrome (GS), although the molecular basis for this finding 
remains unclear (see below). Several drugs, including flavaspidic acid, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2558

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2559

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
8

T
h
e
H
y
p
e
r
b
i
l
i
r
u
b
i
n
e
m
i
a
s

TABLE 338-1  Principal Differential Characteristics of Gilbert and Crigler-Najjar Syndromes

CRIGLER-NAJJAR SYNDROME

FEATURE 
Total serum bilirubin, μmol/L (mg/dL)

Routine liver tests
Response to phenobarbital
Kernicterus
Hepatic histology

Bile characteristics
  Color
  Bilirubin fractions

TYPE I
310–755 (usually >345) (18–45  
[usually >20])
Normal
None
Usual
Normal

Pale or colorless
>90% unconjugated

Bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 
activity

Typically absent; traces in some  
patients

TYPE II
100–430 (usually ≤345) (6–25 [usually 
≤20])
Normal
Decreases bilirubin by >25%
Rare
Normal

GILBERT SYNDROME 
Typically ≤70 μmol/L (≤4 mg/dL) in 
absence of fasting or hemolysis
Normal
Decreases bilirubin to normal
No
Usually normal; increased lipofuscin 
pigment in some

Pigmented
Largest fraction (mean: 57%) 
monoconjugates
Markedly reduced: 0–10% of normal

Normal dark color
Mainly diconjugates but 
monoconjugates increased (mean: 23%)
Reduced: typically 10–33% of normal
Promoter mutation: recessive
Missense mutations: 7 of 8 dominant;  
1 reportedly recessive

Inheritance (all autosomal)

Recessive

Predominantly recessive

and  alkaline  phosphatase  are  normal,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of 
hemolysis. Hepatic histology is also essentially normal except for the 
occasional  presence  of  bile  plugs  within  canaliculi.  Bilirubin  glucu-
ronides  are  virtually  absent  from  the  bile,  and  there  is  no  detectable 
constitutive expression of UGT1A1 activity in hepatic tissue. Neither 
UGT1A1  activity  nor  the  serum  bilirubin  concentration  responds  to 
administration of phenobarbital or other enzyme inducers. Unconju-
gated bilirubin accumulates in plasma, from which it is eliminated very 
slowly by alternative pathways that include direct passage into the bile 
and small intestine, possibly via bilirubin photoisomers. This accounts 
for  the  small  amount  of  urobilinogen  found  in  feces.  No  bilirubin  is 
found in the urine. First described in 1952, the disorder is rare (esti-
mated  prevalence,  0.6–1.0  per  million).  Many  patients  are  from  geo-
graphically or socially isolated communities in which consanguinity is 
common, and pedigree analyses show an autosomal recessive pattern 
of  inheritance.  The  majority  of  patients  (type  IA)  exhibit  defects  in 
the glucuronide conjugation of a spectrum of substrates in addition to 
bilirubin, including various drugs and other xenobiotics. These indi-
viduals have mutations in one of the common exons (2–5) of the UGT1 
gene  (Fig.  338-2).  In  a  smaller  subset  (type  IB),  the  defect  is  limited 
largely  to  bilirubin  conjugation,  and  the  causative  mutation  is  in  the 
bilirubin-specific  exon  A1.  Estrogen  glucuronidation  is  mediated  by 
UGT1A1 and is defective in all CN-I patients. More than 30 different 
genetic lesions of UGT1A1 responsible for CN-I have been identified, 
including deletions, insertions, alterations in intron splice donor and 
acceptor  sites,  exon  skipping,  and  point  mutations  that  introduce 
premature  stop  codons  or  alter  critical  amino  acids.  Their  common 
feature is that they all encode proteins with absent or, at most, traces of 
bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzymatic activity.

Prior to the use of phototherapy, most patients with CN-I died of 
bilirubin  encephalopathy  (kernicterus)  in  infancy  or  early  childhood. 
A few lived as long as early adult life without overt neurologic damage, 
although  more  subtle  testing  usually  indicated  mild  but  progressive 
brain damage. In the absence of liver transplantation, death eventually 
supervened from late-onset bilirubin encephalopathy, which often fol-
lowed a nonspecific febrile illness. Although isolated hepatocyte trans-
plantation has been used in a small number of cases of CN-I, early liver 
transplantation  (Chap.  345)  remains  the  best  hope  to  prevent  brain 
injury  and  death  at  present.  It  is  anticipated  that  gene  replacement 
therapy may be an option in the future.

Crigler-Najjar  Syndrome,  Type  II  (CN-II)  This  condition 
was  recognized  as  a  distinct  entity  in  1962  and  is  characterized  by 
marked  unconjugated  hyperbilirubinemia  in  the  absence  of  abnor-
malities  of  other  conventional  hepatic  biochemical  tests,  hepatic 
histology,  or  hemolysis.  It  differs  from  CN-I  in  several  specific  ways 
(Table  338-1):  (1)  although  there  is  considerable  overlap,  average 

bilirubin concentrations are lower in CN-II; (2) accordingly, CN-II is 
only infrequently associated with kernicterus; (3) bile is deeply colored, 
and bilirubin glucuronides are present, with a striking, characteristic 
increase in the proportion of monoglucuronides; (4) UGT1A1 in liver 
is usually present at reduced levels (typically ≤10% of normal); and (5) 
while typically detected in infancy, hyperbilirubinemia was not recog-
nized in some cases until later in life and, in one instance, at age 34. As 
with CN-I, most CN-II cases exhibit abnormalities in the conjugation 
of other compounds, such as salicylamide and menthol, but in some 
instances, the defect appears limited to bilirubin. Reduction of serum 
bilirubin  concentrations  by  >25%  in  response  to  enzyme  inducers 
such  as  phenobarbital  distinguishes  CN-II  from  CN-I,  although  this 
response may not be elicited in early infancy and often is not accom-
panied  by  measurable  UGT1A1  induction.  Bilirubin  concentrations 
during phenobarbital administration do not return to normal but are 
typically  in  the  range  of  51–86  μmol/L  (3–5  mg/dL).  Although  the 
incidence of kernicterus in CN-II is low, instances have occurred, not 
only in infants but also in adolescents and adults, often in the setting 
of  an  intercurrent  illness,  fasting,  or  another  factor  that  temporarily 
raises  the  serum  bilirubin  concentration  above  baseline  and  reduces 
serum albumin levels. For this reason, phenobarbital therapy is widely 
recommended, a single bedtime dose often sufficing to maintain clini-
cally safe serum bilirubin concentrations.

Over 100 different mutations in the UGT1 gene have been identi-
fied as causing CN-I or CN-II. It was found that missense mutations 
are  more  common  in  CN-II  patients,  as  would  be  expected  in  this 
less severe phenotype. Their common feature is that they encode for 
a bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase with markedly reduced, but 
detectable, enzymatic activity. The spectrum of residual enzyme activ-
ity explains the spectrum of phenotypic severity of the resulting hyper-
bilirubinemia. Molecular analysis has established that a large majority 
of CN-II patients are either homozygotes or compound heterozygotes 
for  CN-II  mutations  and  that  individuals  carrying  one  mutated  and 
one entirely normal allele have normal bilirubin concentrations.

Gilbert Syndrome  This syndrome is characterized by mild uncon-
jugated  hyperbilirubinemia,  normal  values  for  standard  hepatic  bio-
chemical  tests,  and  normal  hepatic  histology  other  than  a  modest 
increase  of  lipofuscin  pigment  in  some  patients.  Serum  bilirubin 
concentrations  are  most  often  <51  μmol/L  (<3  mg/dL),  although 
both  higher  and  lower  values  are  frequent.  The  clinical  spectrum  of 
hyperbilirubinemia fades into that of CN-II at serum bilirubin concen-
trations of 86–136 μmol/L (5–8 mg/dL). At the other end of the scale, 
the distinction between mild cases of GS and a normal state is often 
blurred.  Bilirubin  concentrations  may  fluctuate  substantially  in  any 
given individual, and at least 25% of patients will exhibit temporarily 
normal  values  during  prolonged  follow-up.  More  elevated  values  are 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2559

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2560 associated  with  stress,  fatigue,  alcohol  use,  reduced  caloric  intake, 
and  intercurrent  illness,  while  increased  caloric  intake  or  adminis-
tration  of  enzyme-inducing  agents  produces  lower  bilirubin  levels. 
GS is most often diagnosed at or shortly after puberty or in adult life 
during  routine  examinations  that  include  multichannel  biochemical 
analyses. UGT1A1 activity is typically reduced to 10–35% of normal, 
and bile pigments exhibit a characteristic increase in bilirubin monog-
lucuronides.  Studies  of  radiobilirubin  kinetics  indicate  that  hepatic 
bilirubin  clearance  is  reduced  to  an  average  of  one-third  of  normal. 
Administration  of  phenobarbital  normalizes  both  the  serum  biliru-
bin  concentration  and  hepatic  bilirubin  clearance;  however,  failure 
of  UGT1A1  activity  to  improve  in  many  such  instances  suggests  the 
possible  coexistence  of  an  additional  defect.  Compartmental  analysis 
of bilirubin kinetic data suggests that GS patients may have a defect in 
bilirubin uptake as well as in conjugation, although this has not been 
shown directly. Defects in the hepatic uptake of other organic anions 
that at least partially share an uptake mechanism with bilirubin, such 
as  sulfobromophthalein  and  indocyanine  green  (ICG),  are  observed 
in a minority of patients. The metabolism and transport of bile acids 
that  do  not  utilize  the  bilirubin  uptake  mechanism  are  normal.  The 
magnitude  of  changes  in  the  serum  bilirubin  concentration  induced 
by provocation tests such as 48 h of fasting or the IV administration 
of  nicotinic  acid  has  been  reported  to  be  of  help  in  separating  GS 
patients from normal individuals. Other studies dispute this assertion. 
Moreover,  on  theoretical  grounds,  the  results  of  such  studies  should 
provide no more information than simple measurements of the base-
line  serum  bilirubin  concentration.  Family  studies  indicate  that  GS 
and  hereditary  hemolytic  anemias  such  as  hereditary  spherocytosis, 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and β-thalassemia trait 
sort independently. Reports of hemolysis in up to 50% of GS patients 
are believed to reflect better case finding, since patients with both GS 
and hemolysis have higher bilirubin concentrations and are more likely 
to be jaundiced than patients with either defect alone.

GS  is  common,  with  many  series  placing  its  prevalence  as  high 
as  8%.  Males  predominate  over  females  by  reported  ratios  ranging 
from 1.5:1 to >7:1. However, these ratios may have a large artifactual 
component since normal males have higher mean bilirubin levels than 
normal females, but the diagnosis of GS is often based on comparison 
to normal ranges established in men. The high prevalence of GS in the 
general population may explain the reported frequency of mild uncon-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia in liver transplant recipients. The disposi-
tion  of  most  xenobiotics  metabolized  by  glucuronidation  appears  to 
be  normal  in  GS,  as  is  oxidative  drug  metabolism  in  the  majority  of 
reported studies. The principal exception is the metabolism of the anti-
tumor agent irinotecan (CPT-11), whose active metabolite (SN-38) is 
glucuronidated specifically by bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. 
Administration of CPT-11 to patients with GS has resulted in several 
toxicities, including intractable diarrhea and myelosuppression. Some 
reports  also  suggest  abnormal  disposition  of  menthol,  estradiol  ben-
zoate, acetaminophen, tolbutamide, and rifamycin SV. Although some 
of these studies have been disputed, and there have been no reports of 
clinical complications from use of these agents in GS, prudence should 
be exercised in prescribing them or any agents metabolized primarily 
by glucuronidation in this condition. It should also be noted that the 
HIV  protease  inhibitors  indinavir  and  atazanavir  (Chap.  202)  can 
inhibit  UGT1A1,  resulting  in  hyperbilirubinemia  that  is  most  pro-
nounced in patients with preexisting GS.

Most older pedigree studies of GS were consistent with autosomal 
dominant  inheritance  with  variable  expressivity.  However,  studies  of 
the  UGT1  gene  in  GS  have  indicated  a  variety  of  molecular  genetic 
bases  for  the  phenotypic  picture  and  several  different  patterns  of 
inheritance. Studies in Europe and the United States found that nearly 
all patients had normal coding regions for UGT1A1 but were homozy-
gous  for  the  insertion  of  an  extra  TA  (i.e.,  A[TA]7TAA  rather  than 
A[TA]6TAA) in the promoter region of the first exon. This appeared 
to  be  necessary,  but  not  sufficient,  for  clinically  expressed  GS,  since 
15% of normal controls were also homozygous for this variant. While 
normal  by  standard  criteria,  these  individuals  had  somewhat  higher 
bilirubin  concentrations  than  the  rest  of  the  controls  studied.  Hete-
rozygotes  for  this  abnormality  had  bilirubin  concentrations  identical 

to those homozygous for the normal A[TA]6TAA allele. The prevalence 
of  the  A[TA]7TAA  allele  in  a  general  Western  population  is  30%,  in 
which  case  9%  would  be  homozygotes.  This  is  slightly  higher  than 
the  prevalence  of  GS  based  on  purely  phenotypic  parameters.  It  was 
suggested that additional variables, such as mild hemolysis or a defect 
in bilirubin uptake, might be among the factors enhancing phenotypic 
expression of the defect.

Phenotypic expression of GS due solely to the A[TA]7TAA promoter 
abnormality is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. A number of 
CN-II  kindreds  have  been  identified  in  whom  there  is  also  an  allele 
containing  a  normal  coding  region  but  the  A[TA]7TAA  promoter 
abnormality.  CN-II  heterozygotes,  who  have  the  A[TA]6TAA  pro-
moter, are phenotypically normal, whereas those with the A[TA]7TAA 
promoter express the phenotypic picture of GS. GS in such kindreds 
may  also  result  from  homozygosity  for  the  A[TA]7TAA  promoter 
abnormality.  Seven  different  missense  mutations  in  the  UGT1  gene 
that reportedly cause GS with dominant inheritance have been found 
in Japanese individuals. Another Japanese patient with mild unconju-
gated hyperbilirubinemia was homozygous for a missense mutation in 
exon 5. GS in her family appeared to be recessive.

DISORDERS OF BILIRUBIN METABOLISM 
LEADING TO MIXED OR PREDOMINANTLY 
CONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
In  hyperbilirubinemia  due  to  acquired  liver  disease  (e.g.,  acute  hep-
atitis,  common  bile  duct  stone),  there  are  usually  elevations  in  the 
serum concentrations of both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin. 
Although biliary tract obstruction or hepatocellular cholestatic injury 
may  present  on  occasion  with  a  predominantly  conjugated  hyperbi-
lirubinemia,  it  is  generally  not  possible  to  differentiate  intrahepatic 
from  extrahepatic  causes  of  jaundice  based  on  the  serum  levels  or 
relative  proportions  of  unconjugated  and  conjugated  bilirubin.  The 
major reason for determining the amounts of conjugated and uncon-
jugated  bilirubin  in  the  serum  is  for  the  initial  differentiation  of 
hepatic parenchymal and obstructive disorders (mixed conjugated and 
unconjugated  hyperbilirubinemia)  from  the  inheritable  and  hemo-
lytic disorders discussed above that are associated with unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia.

 ■ FAMILIAL DEFECTS IN HEPATIC  
EXCRETORY FUNCTION
Dubin-Johnson  Syndrome  (DJS)  This  benign,  relatively  rare 
disorder  is  characterized  by  low-grade,  predominantly  conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia  (Table  338-2).  Total  bilirubin  concentrations  are 
typically between 34 and 85 μmol/L (2 and 5 mg/dL) but on occasion 
can be in the normal range or as high as 340–430 μmol/L (20–25 mg/dL) 
and  can  fluctuate  widely  in  any  given  patient.  The  degree  of  hyper-
bilirubinemia  may  be  increased  by  intercurrent  illness,  oral  contra-
ceptive use, and pregnancy. Because the hyperbilirubinemia is due to 
a  predominant  rise  in  conjugated  bilirubin,  bilirubinuria  is  charac-
teristically  present.  Aside  from  elevated  serum  bilirubin  levels,  other 
routine  laboratory  tests  are  normal.  Physical  examination  is  usually 
normal except for jaundice, although an occasional patient may have 
hepatosplenomegaly.

Patients  with  DJS  are  usually  asymptomatic,  although  some  may 
have vague constitutional symptoms. These latter patients have usually 
undergone  extensive  diagnostic  examinations  for  unexplained  jaun-
dice and have high levels of anxiety. In women, the condition may be 
subclinical until the patient becomes pregnant or receives oral contra-
ceptives,  at  which  time  chemical  hyperbilirubinemia  becomes  frank 
jaundice.  Even  in  these  situations,  other  routine  liver  function  tests, 
including serum alkaline phosphatase and transaminase activities, are 
normal.

A cardinal feature of DJS is the accumulation of dark, coarsely gran-
ular pigment in the lysosomes of centrilobular hepatocytes. As a result, 
the liver may be grossly black in appearance. This pigment is thought 
to be derived from epinephrine metabolites that are not excreted nor-
mally. The pigment may disappear during bouts of viral hepatitis, only 
to reaccumulate slowly after recovery.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2560

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 338-2  Principal Differential Characteristics of Inheritable Disorders of Bile Canalicular Function

2561

Gene
Protein
Cholestasis
Serum GGT
Serum bile 
acids
Clinical 
features

DJS
ABCCA
MRP2
No
Normal
Normal

ROTOR
SLCO1B1/SLCO1B3
OATP1B1/1B3
No
Normal
Normal

PFIC1
ATP8B1
FIC1
Yes
Normal
↑↑

Mild conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia; 
otherwise, normal liver 
function; dark pigment 
in liver; characteristic 
pattern of urinary 
coproporphyrins

Mild conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia; 
otherwise, normal 
liver function; liver 
without abnormal 
pigmentation

Severe cholestasis 
beginning in 
childhood

BRIC1
ATP8B1
FIC1
Episodic
Normal
↑↑ during 
episodes
Recurrent 
episodes of 
cholestasis 
beginning at any 
age

PFIC2
ABCB11
BSEP
Yes
Normal
↑↑

Severe cholestasis 
beginning in 
childhood

BRIC2
ABCB11
BSEP
Episodic
Normal
↑↑ during 
episodes
Recurrent 
episodes of 
cholestasis 
beginning at any 
age

PFIC3
ABCB4
MDR3
Yes

↑↑
↑↑

Severe 
cholestasis 
beginning in 
childhood; 
decreased 
phospholipids 
in bile

Abbreviations: BRIC, benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis; BSEP, bile salt excretory protein; DJS, Dubin-Johnson syndrome; GGT, γ-glutamyl transferase; MRP2, 
multidrug resistance–associated protein 2; OATP1A/1B, organic anion transport proteins 1B1 and 1B3; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; ↑↑, increased.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
8

T
h
e
H
y
p
e
r
b
i
l
i
r
u
b
i
n
e
m
i
a
s

Biliary  excretion  of  a  number  of  anionic  compounds  is  compro-
mised  in  DJS.  These  include  various  cholecystographic  agents,  as 
well  as  sulfobromophthalein  (Bromsulphalein  [BSP]),  a  synthetic 
dye  formerly  used  in  a  test  of  liver  function.  In  this  test,  the  rate  of 
disappearance  of  BSP  from  plasma  was  determined  following  bolus 
IV administration. BSP is conjugated with glutathione in the hepato-
cyte; the resulting conjugate is normally excreted rapidly into the bile 
canaliculus.  Patients  with  DJS  exhibit  characteristic  rises  in  plasma 
concentrations  at  90  min  after  injection,  due  to  reflux  of  conjugated 
BSP into the circulation from the hepatocyte. Dyes such as ICG that 
are taken up by hepatocytes but are not further metabolized prior to 
biliary  excretion  do  not  show  this  reflux  phenomenon.  Continuous 
BSP  infusion  studies  suggest  a  reduction  in  the  time  to  maximum 
plasma concentration (tmax) for biliary excretion. Bile acid disposition, 
including hepatocellular uptake and biliary excretion, is normal in DJS. 
These patients have normal serum and biliary bile acid concentrations 
and do not have pruritus.

By analogy with findings in several mutant rat strains, the selective 
defect  in  biliary  excretion  of  bilirubin  conjugates  and  certain  other 
classes of organic compounds, but not of bile acids, that characterizes 
DJS  in  humans  was  found  to  reflect  defective  expression  of  MRP2 
(ABCC2), an ATP-dependent canalicular membrane transporter. Sev-
eral different mutations in the ABCC2 gene produce the Dubin-Johnson 
phenotype,  which  has  an  autosomal  recessive  pattern  of  inheritance. 
Although MRP2 is undoubtedly important in the biliary excretion of 
conjugated bilirubin, the fact that this pigment is still excreted in the 
absence of MRP2 suggests that other, as yet uncharacterized, transport 
proteins may serve in a secondary role in this process.

Patients  with  DJS  also  have  a  diagnostic  abnormality  in  urinary 
coproporphyrin  excretion.  There  are  two  naturally  occurring  copro-
porphyrin isomers, I and III. Normally, ∼75% of the coproporphyrin 
in urine is isomer III. In urine from DJS patients, total coproporphy-
rin  content  is  normal,  but  >80%  is  isomer  I.  Heterozygotes  for  the 
syndrome show an intermediate pattern. The molecular basis for this 
phenomenon remains unclear.
Rotor Syndrome (RS)  This benign, autosomal recessive disorder 
is clinically similar to DJS (Table 338-2), although it is seen even less 
frequently. A major phenotypic difference is that the liver in patients 
with  RS  has  no  increased  pigmentation  and  appears  totally  normal. 
The only abnormality in routine laboratory tests is an elevation of total 
serum  bilirubin,  due  to  a  predominant  rise  in  conjugated  bilirubin. 
This is accompanied by bilirubinuria. Several additional features differ-
entiate RS from DJS. In RS, the gallbladder is usually visualized on oral 
cholecystography, in contrast to the nonvisualization that is typical of 
DJS. The pattern of urinary coproporphyrin excretion also differs. The 
pattern in RS resembles that of many acquired disorders of hepatobil-
iary  function,  in  which  coproporphyrin  I,  the  major  coproporphyrin 
isomer in bile, refluxes from the hepatocyte back into the circulation 
and is excreted in urine. Thus, total urinary coproporphyrin excretion 
is substantially increased in RS, in contrast to the normal levels seen in 

DJS. Although the fraction of coproporphyrin I in urine is elevated, it 
is usually <70% of the total, compared with ≥80% in DJS. The disorders 
also can be distinguished by their patterns of BSP excretion. Although 
clearance  of  BSP  from  plasma  is  delayed  in  RS,  there  is  no  reflux  of 
conjugated BSP back into the circulation as seen in DJS. Kinetic anal-
ysis of plasma BSP infusion studies suggests the presence of a defect 
in intrahepatocellular storage of this compound. This has never been 
demonstrated  directly.  Recent  studies  indicate  that  the  molecular 
basis  of  RS  results  from  simultaneous  deficiency  of  the  hepatocyte 
plasma membrane transporters OATP1B1 (SLCO1B1) and OATP1B3 
(SLCO1B3). This results in reduced reuptake by these transporters of 
conjugated bilirubin that has been pumped out of the hepatocyte into 
the portal circulation by MRP3 (ABCC3) (Fig. 338-1).

Benign  Recurrent  Intrahepatic  Cholestasis  (BRIC)  This 
rare  disorder  is  characterized  by  recurrent  attacks  of  pruritus  and 
jaundice. The typical episode begins with mild malaise and elevations 
in serum aminotransferase levels, followed rapidly by rises in alkaline 
phosphatase and conjugated bilirubin and onset of jaundice and itch-
ing. The first one or two episodes may be misdiagnosed as acute viral 
hepatitis.  The  cholestatic  episodes,  which  may  begin  in  childhood 
or  adulthood,  can  vary  in  duration  from  several  weeks  to  months, 
followed by a complete clinical and biochemical resolution. Intervals 
between  attacks  may  vary  from  several  months  to  years.  Between 
episodes,  physical  examination  is  normal,  as  are  serum  levels  of  bile 
acids, bilirubin, transaminases, and alkaline phosphatase. The disorder 
is familial and has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. BRIC 
is considered a benign disorder in that it does not lead to cirrhosis or 
end-stage liver disease. However, the episodes of jaundice and pruritus 
can be prolonged and debilitating, and some patients have undergone 
liver transplantation to relieve the intractable and disabling symptoms. 
Treatment during the cholestatic episodes is symptomatic; there is no 
specific treatment to prevent or shorten the occurrence of episodes.

A gene termed FIC1 was recently identified and found to be mutated 
in  patients  with  BRIC.  Curiously,  this  gene  is  expressed  strongly  in 
the small intestine but only weakly in the liver. The protein encoded 
by FIC1 shows little similarity to those that have been shown to play 
a  role  in  bile  canalicular  excretion  of  various  compounds.  Rather,  it 
appears  to  be  a  member  of  a  P-type  ATPase  family  that  transports 
aminophospholipids from the outer to the inner leaflet of a variety of 
cell  membranes.  Its  relationship  to  the  pathobiology  of  this  disorder 
remains  unclear.  A  second  phenotypically  identical  form  of  BRIC, 
termed BRIC type 2, has been described resulting from mutations in 
the bile salt excretory protein (BSEP), the protein that is defective in 
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) type 2 (Table 338-2). 
How some mutations in this protein result in the episodic BRIC phe-
notype is unknown.

Progressive  Familial  Intrahepatic  Cholestasis  This  name  is 
applied to three phenotypically related syndromes (Table 338-2). PFIC 
type  1  (Byler’s  disease)  presents  in  early  infancy  as  cholestasis  that 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2561

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2562 may be initially episodic. However, in contrast to BRIC, Byler’s disease 
progresses to malnutrition, growth retardation, and end-stage liver dis-
ease during childhood. This disorder is also a consequence of an FIC1 
mutation. The functional relationship of the FIC1 protein to the patho-
genesis of cholestasis in these disorders is unknown. Two other types 
of PFIC (types 2 and 3) have been described. PFIC type 2 is associated 
with a mutation in the protein originally named sister of P-glycoprotein, 
now  known  as  bile  salt  excretory  protein  (BSEP,  ABCB11),  which  is 
the major bile canalicular exporter of bile acids. As noted above, some 
mutations of this protein are associated with BRIC type 2, rather than 
the  PFIC  type  2  phenotype.  PFIC  type  3  has  been  associated  with  a 
mutation  of  MDR3  (ABCB4),  a  protein  that  is  essential  for  normal 
hepatocellular  excretion  of  phospholipids  across  the  bile  canaliculus. 
Although all three types of PFIC have similar clinical phenotypes, only 
type  3  is  associated  with  high  serum  levels  of  γ-glutamyl  transferase 
(GGT) activity. In contrast, activity of this enzyme is normal or only 
mildly elevated in symptomatic BRIC and PFIC types 1 and 2. Interest-
ingly, mutations in FIC1 or BSEP are not found in approximately one-
third of patients with clinical PFIC and normal GGT. Recent studies 
have shown that patients with mutations in NR1H4, the gene encoding 
the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a nuclear hormone receptor activated 
by bile acids, have a syndrome identical to PFIC2 with absent expres-
sion  of  BSEP.  Mutations  in  tight  junction  protein  2  (TJP2)  have  also 
been associated with severe cholestasis with normal GGT levels, likely 
due to disruption of tight junctions at the bile canaliculus.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Bull LN, Thompson RJ: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis. 

Clin Liver Dis 22:657, 2018.

Canu G et al: Gilbert and Crigler Najjar syndromes: An update of the 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) gene mutation database. 
Blood Cells Mol Dis 50:273, 2013.

Gomez-Ospina  N  et  al:  Mutations  in  the  nuclear  bile  acid  receptor 
FXR cause progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Nat Commun 
7:10713, 2016.

Hansen TW: Biology of bilirubin photoisomers. Clin Perinatol 43:277, 

2016.

Lamola  AA:  A  pharmacologic  view  of  phototherapy.  Clin  Perinatol 

43:259, 2016.

Memon N et al: Inherited disorders of bilirubin clearance. Pediatr Res 

79:378, 2016.

Sambrotta  M  et  al:  Mutations  in  TJP2  cause  progressive  cholestatic 

liver disease. Nat Genet 46:326, 2014.

Soroka  CJ,  Boyer  JL:  Biosynthesis  and  trafficking  of  the  bile  salt 
export  pump,  BSEP:  Therapeutic  implications  of  BSEP  mutations. 
Mol Aspects Med 37:3, 2014.

van de Steeg E et al: Complete OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 deficiency 
causes human Rotor syndrome by interrupting conjugated bilirubin 
reuptake into the liver. J Clin Invest 122:519, 2012.

van Wessel DBE et al: Genotype correlates with the natural history of 

severe bile salt export pump deficiency. J Hepatol 73:84, 2020.

Wolkoff AW: Organic anion uptake by hepatocytes. Compr Physiol 

4:1715, 2014.

339 Acute Viral Hepatitis

Jules L. Dienstag

Acute viral hepatitis is a systemic infection affecting the liver predomi-
nantly. Almost all cases of acute viral hepatitis are caused by one of five 
viral agents: hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis 
C  virus  (HCV),  the  HBV-associated  delta  agent  or  hepatitis  D  virus 
(HDV), and hepatitis E virus (HEV). All these human hepatitis viruses 
are  RNA  viruses,  except  for  hepatitis  B,  which  is  a  DNA  virus  but 

replicates like a retrovirus. Although these agents can be distinguished 
by their molecular and antigenic properties, all types of viral hepatitis 
produce  clinically  similar  illnesses.  These  range  from  asymptomatic 
and inapparent to fulminant and fatal acute infections common to all 
types,  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  subclinical  persistent  infections  to 
rapidly progressive chronic liver disease with cirrhosis and even hepa-
tocellular  carcinoma,  common  to  the  bloodborne  types  (HBV,  HCV, 
and HDV), on the other.
 ■ VIROLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Hepatitis A  HAV is a nonenveloped 27-nm, heat-, acid-, and ether- 
resistant, single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus in the Hepatovirus 
genus of the picornavirus family (Fig. 339-1). Quasi-enveloped virus 
particles encased in host plasma membrane–derived membranous ves-
icles circulate in the bloodstream. The virion contains four structural 
capsid polypeptides, designated VP1–VP4, as well as six nonstructural 
proteins,  which  are  cleaved  posttranslationally  from  the  polyprotein 
product of a 7500-nucleotide genome. Inactivation of viral activity can 
be  achieved  by  boiling  for  1  min,  by  contact  with  formaldehyde  and 
chlorine,  or  by  ultraviolet  irradiation.  Despite  nucleotide  sequence 
variation of up to 20% among isolates of HAV and despite the recog-
nition  of  six  genotypes  (three  of  which  affect  humans),  all  strains  of 
this  virus  are  immunologically  indistinguishable  and  belong  to  one 
serotype.  Human  HAV  can  infect  and  cause  hepatitis  in  chimpan-
zees,  tamarins  (marmosets),  and  several  monkey  species.  Recently,  a 
hepatotropic  Hepatovirus  related  to,  and  likely  to  have  shared  com-
mon  evolutionary  ancestry  with,  human  HAV  has  been  identified  in 
several  species  of  harbor  seals,  albeit  without  histologic  evidence  for 
liver  injury  or  inflammation;  HAV-like  hepatoviruses  have  also  been 
identified  in  small  mammals,  including  bats  and  rodents.  Hepatitis 
A  has  an  incubation  period  of  ~3–4  weeks.  Its  replication  is  limited 
to the liver, but the virus is present in the liver, bile, stools, and blood 
during the late incubation period and acute preicteric/presymptomatic 
phase of illness. Despite slightly longer persistence of virus in the liver, 
fecal shedding, viremia, and infectivity diminish rapidly once jaundice 
becomes apparent. Detection of HAV RNA by sensitive reverse tran-
scription polymerase chain reaction assays has been reported to persist 
at low levels in stool, the liver, and serum for up to several months after 
acute illness; however, this does not correlate with persistent infectivity, 
probably because of the presence of neutralizing antibody. HAV can be 
cultivated reproducibly in vitro and in primate models.

Antibodies  to  HAV  (anti-HAV)  can  be  detected  during  acute  ill-
ness when serum aminotransferase activity is elevated and fecal HAV 
shedding  is  still  occurring.  This  early  antibody  response  is  predomi-
nantly of the IgM class and persists for several (~3) months, rarely for  
6–12 months. During convalescence, however, anti-HAV of the IgG class 
becomes the predominant antibody (Fig. 339-2). Therefore, the diag-
nosis of hepatitis A is made during acute illness by demonstrating anti-
HAV  of  the  IgM  class.  After  acute  illness,  anti-HAV  of  the  IgG  class 
remains  detectable  indefinitely,  and  patients  with  serum  anti-HAV 
are immune to reinfection. Neutralizing antibody activity parallels the 
appearance  of  anti-HAV,  and  the  IgG  anti-HAV  present  in  immune 
globulin accounts for the protection it affords against HAV infection.

Hepatitis  B  HBV  is  a  DNA  virus  with  a  remarkably  compact 
genomic structure; despite its small, circular, 3200-bp size, HBV DNA 
codes  for  four  sets  of  viral  products  with  a  complex,  multiparticle 
structure. HBV achieves its genomic economy by relying on an efficient 
strategy of encoding proteins from four overlapping genes: S, C, P, and 
X (Fig. 339-3), as detailed below. Once thought to be unique among 
viruses, HBV is now recognized as one of a family of animal viruses, 
hepadnaviruses (hepatotropic DNA viruses), and is classified as hepad-
navirus  type  1.  Similar  viruses  infect  certain  species  of  woodchucks, 
ground and tree squirrels, and Pekin ducks, to mention the most care-
fully characterized; genetic evidence of ancient HBV-like virus forbears 
has been found in fossils of ancient birds, and an HBV-like virus has 
been identified in contemporary fish. Studies of ancient HBV genomes 
date  an  association  between  HBV  and  human  beings  back  as  long  
as 21,000 years ago; primate HBV-like viruses date back millions of years, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2562

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemFIGURE 339-1  Electron micrographs of hepatitis A virus particles and serum from a patient with hepatitis B. Left: 
27-nm hepatitis A virus particles purified from stool of a patient with acute hepatitis A and aggregated by antibody to 
hepatitis A virus. Right: Concentrated serum from a patient with hepatitis B, demonstrating the 42-nm virions, tubular 
forms, and spherical 22-nm particles of hepatitis B surface antigen. 132,000×. (Hepatitis D resembles 42-nm virions of 
hepatitis B but is smaller, 35–37 nm; hepatitis E resembles hepatitis A virus but is slightly larger, 32–34 nm; hepatitis C 
has been visualized as a 55-nm particle.)

2563

B surface antigen (HBsAg). The concen-
tration  of  HBsAg  and  virus  particles  in 
the  blood  may  reach  500  μg/mL  and  10 
trillion  particles  per  milliliter,  respec-
tively.  The  envelope  protein,  HBsAg,  is 
the product of the S gene of HBV.

Envelope  HBsAg 

subdeterminants 
include a common group-reactive antigen, 
a,  shared  by  all  HBsAg  isolates  and  one 
of  several  subtype-specific  antigens—d 
or  y,  w  or  r—as  well  as  other  specific-
ities.  Hepatitis  B  isolates  fall  into  one 
of  at  least  8  subtypes  and  10  genotypes 
(A–J).  Geographic  distribution  of  geno-
types  and  subtypes  varies;  genotypes  A 
(corresponding  to  subtype  adw)  and  D 
(ayw)  predominate  in  the  United  States 
and Europe, whereas genotypes B (adw) 
and  C  (adr)  predominate  in  Asia;  how-
ever, these geographic distinctions have been blunted by recent-decade 
migration  across  continents.  Clinical  course  and  outcome  are  inde-
pendent of subtype, but genotype B appears to be associated with less 
rapidly progressive liver disease and cirrhosis and a lower likelihood, 
or delayed appearance, of hepatocellular carcinoma than genotype C or 
D. Patients with genotype A are more likely to clear circulating viremia 
and achieve hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and HBsAg seroconversion, 
both spontaneously and in response to antiviral therapy. In addition, 
“precore” mutations are favored by certain genotypes (see below).

Upstream of the S gene are the pre-S genes (Fig. 339-3), which code 
for  pre-S  gene  products,  including  receptors  on  the  HBV  surface  for 
polymerized  human  serum  albumin  and  for  hepatocyte  membrane 
proteins. The pre-S region actually consists of both pre-S1 and pre-S2. 
Depending  on  where  translation  is  initiated,  three  potential  HBsAg 
gene  products  are  synthesized.  The  protein  product  of  the  S  gene  is 
HBsAg (major protein), the product of the S region plus the adjacent 
pre-S2 region is the middle protein, and the product of the pre-S1 plus 
pre-S2 plus S regions is the large protein. Compared with the smaller 
spherical  and  tubular  particles  of  HBV,  complete  42-nm  virions  are 
enriched in the large protein. Both pre-S proteins and their respective 
antibodies  can  be  detected  during  HBV  infection,  and  the  period  of 
pre-S antigenemia appears to coincide with other markers of virus rep-
lication, as detailed below; however, pre-S proteins have little clinical 
relevance and are not included in routine serologic testing repertoires.
The intact 42-nm virion contains a 27-nm nucleocapsid core par-
ticle. Nucleocapsid proteins are coded for by the C gene. The antigen 
expressed  on  the  surface  of  the  nucleocapsid  core  is  hepatitis  B  core 
antigen (HBcAg), and its corresponding antibody is anti-HBc. A third 
HBV antigen is HBeAg, a soluble, nonparticulate, nucleocapsid protein 
that  is  immunologically  distinct  from  intact  HBcAg  but  is  a  product 
of the same C gene. The C gene has two initiation codons: a precore 
and a core region (Fig. 339-3). If translation is initiated at the precore 
region, the protein product is HBeAg, which has a signal peptide that 
binds it to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, the secretory apparatus 
of  the  cell,  leading  to  its  secretion  into  the  circulation.  If  translation 
begins at the core region, HBcAg is the protein product; it has no signal 
peptide and is not secreted, but it assembles into nucleocapsid particles, 
which  bind  to  and  incorporate  RNA,  and  which,  ultimately,  contain 
HBV  DNA.  Also  packaged  within  the  nucleocapsid  core  is  a  DNA 
polymerase, which directs replication and repair of HBV DNA. When 
packaging within viral proteins is complete, synthesis of the incomplete 
plus strand stops; this accounts for the single-strand gap and for differ-
ences in the size of the gap. HBcAg particles remain in the hepatocyte, 
where  they  are  readily  detectable  by  immunohistochemical  staining 
and are exported after encapsidation by an envelope of HBsAg. There-
fore, naked core particles do not circulate in the serum. The secreted 
nucleocapsid  protein,  HBeAg,  provides  a  convenient,  readily  detect-
able, qualitative marker of HBV replication and relative infectivity.

HBsAg-positive  serum  containing  HBeAg  is  more  likely  to  be 
highly infectious and to be associated with the presence of hepatitis B 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

suggesting  that  HBV  predated  the  emergence  of  modern  humans. 
Like  HBV,  all  have  the  same  distinctive  three  morphologic  forms, 
have  counterparts  to  the  envelope  and  nucleocapsid  virus  antigens 
of  HBV,  replicate  in  the  liver  but  exist  in  extrahepatic  sites,  contain 
their own endogenous DNA polymerase, have partially double-strand 
and  partially  single-strand  genomes,  are  associated  with  acute  and 
chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma, and rely on a replica-
tive  strategy  unique  among  DNA  viruses  but  typical  of  retroviruses. 
Entry of HBV into hepatocytes is mediated by binding to the sodium 
taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide receptor. Instead of DNA rep-
lication directly from a DNA template, hepadnaviruses rely on reverse 
transcription (effected by the DNA polymerase) of minus-strand DNA 
from  a  “pregenomic”  RNA  intermediate.  Then,  plus-strand  DNA 
is  transcribed  from  the  minus-strand  DNA  template  by  the  DNA- 
dependent DNA polymerase and converted in the hepatocyte nucleus 
to  a  covalently  closed  circular  DNA,  which  serves  as  a  template  for 
messenger RNA and pregenomic RNA. Viral proteins are translated by 
the messenger RNA, and the proteins and genome are packaged into 
virions and secreted from the hepatocyte. Although HBV is difficult to 
cultivate in vitro in the conventional sense from clinical material, sev-
eral cell lines have been transfected with HBV DNA. Such transfected 
cells support in vitro replication of the intact virus and its component 
proteins.
VIRAL  PROTEINS  AND  PARTICLES  Of  the  three  particulate  forms 
of  HBV  (Table  339-1),  the  most  numerous  are  the  22-nm  particles, 
which  appear  as  spherical  or  long  filamentous  forms;  these  are  anti-
genically indistinguishable from the outer surface or envelope protein 
of  HBV  and  are  thought  to  represent  excess  viral  envelope  protein. 
Outnumbered in serum by a factor of 100 or 1000 to 1 compared with 
the  spheres  and  tubules  are  large,  42-nm,  double-shelled  spherical 
particles, which represent the intact hepatitis B virion (Fig. 339-1). The 
envelope protein expressed on the outer surface of the virion and on 
the smaller spherical and tubular structures is referred to as hepatitis 

Jaundice

ALT

Fecal HAV

IgM Anti-HAV

IgG Anti-HAV

0

4

8

12

16

20

Weeks after exposure

FIGURE  339-2  Scheme  of  typical  clinical  and  laboratory  features  of  hepatitis  A 
virus (HAV). ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2563

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2564

Pre-S2

Pre-S1

P

S

C

Pre-C

X

FIGURE 339-3  Compact genomic structure of hepatitis B virus (HBV). This structure, 
with  overlapping  genes,  permits  HBV  to  code  for  multiple  proteins.  The  S  gene 
codes  for  the  “major”  envelope  protein,  HBsAg.  Pre-S1  and  pre-S2,  upstream  of 
S, combine with S to code for two larger proteins, “middle” protein, the product of 
pre-S2 + S, and “large” protein, the product of pre-S1 + pre-S2 + S. The largest gene, 
P,  codes  for  DNA  polymerase.  The  C  gene  codes  for  two  nucleocapsid  proteins, 
HBeAg, a soluble, secreted protein (initiation from the pre-C region of the gene), 
and HBcAg, the intracellular core protein (initiation after pre-C). The X gene codes 
for HBxAg, which can transactivate the transcription of cellular and viral genes; its 
clinical relevance is not known, but it may contribute to carcinogenesis by binding 
to p53.

virions  (and  detectable  HBV  DNA,  see  below)  than  HBeAg-negative 
or  anti-HBe-positive  serum.  For  example,  HBsAg-positive  mothers 
who  are  HBeAg-positive  almost  invariably  (>90%)  transmit  hepatitis 
B  infection  to  their  offspring,  whereas  HBsAg-positive  mothers  with 
anti-HBe rarely (10–15%) infect their offspring.

Early during the course of acute hepatitis B, HBeAg appears tran-
siently; its disappearance may be a harbinger of clinical improvement 
and resolution of infection. Persistence of HBeAg in serum beyond the 
first 3 months of acute infection may be predictive of the development 
of  chronic  infection,  and  the  presence  of  HBeAg  during  chronic 
hepatitis B tends to be associated with ongoing viral replication, infec-
tivity, and inflammatory liver injury (except during the early decades 
after perinatally acquired HBV infection; see below).

The  third  and  largest  of  the  HBV  genes,  the  P  gene  (Fig.  339-3), 
codes  for  HBV  DNA  polymerase;  as  noted  above,  this  enzyme  has 
both DNA-dependent DNA polymerase and RNA-dependent reverse 
transcriptase  activities.  The  fourth  gene,  X,  codes  for  a  small,  non-
particulate  protein,  hepatitis  B  x  antigen  (HBxAg),  that  is  capable 
of  transactivating  the  transcription  of  both  viral  and  cellular  genes  
(Fig. 339-3). In the cytoplasm, HBxAg effects calcium release (possibly 
from  mitochondria),  which  activates  signal-transduction  pathways 
that lead to stimulation of HBV reverse transcription and HBV DNA 
replication.  Such  transactivation  may  enhance  the  replication  of 
HBV, leading to the clinical association observed between the expres-
sion  of  HBxAg  and  antibodies  to  it  in  patients  with  severe  chronic 

TABLE 339-1  Nomenclature and Features of Hepatitis Viruses
HEPATITIS 
TYPE
HAV

VIRUS 
PARTICLE, nm MORPHOLOGY
27

Icosahedral 
nonenveloped

GENOMEa
7.5-kb 
RNA, 
linear, ss, +

CLASSIFICATION
Hepatovirus

ANTIGEN(S) ANTIBODIES REMARKS
Anti-HAV
HAV

HBV

42

Double-shelled 
virion (surface and 
core) spherical

3.2-kb 
DNA, 
circular, 
ss/ds

Hepadnavirus

HBsAg
HBcAg
HBeAg

Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe

27

22

55

HCV

Nucleocapsid core

Spherical and 
filamentous; 
represents excess 
virus coat material
Enveloped

HBcAg
HBeAg

Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe

HBsAg

Anti-HBs

9.4-kb 
RNA, 
linear, ss, +

Hepacivirus

HCV core 
antigen

Anti-HCV

HDV

35–37

Enveloped hybrid 
particle with 
HBsAg coat and 
HDV core

1.7-kb 
RNA, 
circular, 
ss, –

Resembles viroids 
and plant satellite 
viruses (genus 
Deltavirus)

HBsAg
HDAg

Anti-HBs
Anti-HDV

HEV

32–34

Nonenveloped 
icosahedral

7.6-kb 
RNA, 
linear, ss, +

Orthohepevirus

HEV antigen Anti-HEV

ass, single-strand; ss/ds, partially single-strand, partially double-strand; −, minus-strand; +, plus-strand.
Note: See text for abbreviations.

Early fecal shedding
Diagnosis: IgM anti-HAV
Previous infection: IgG anti-HAV
Bloodborne virus; carrier state
Acute diagnosis: HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc
Chronic diagnosis: IgG anti-HBc, HBsAg
Markers of replication: HBeAg, HBV DNA
Liver, lymphocytes, other organs
Nucleocapsid contains DNA and DNA 
polymerase; present in hepatocyte nucleus; 
HBcAg does not circulate; HBeAg (soluble, 
nonparticulate) and HBV DNA circulate—
correlate with infectivity and complete virions
HBsAg detectable in >95% of patients with 
acute hepatitis B; found in serum, body fluids, 
hepatocyte cytoplasm; anti-HBs appears 
following infection—protective antibody
Bloodborne agent, formerly labeled non-A, 
non-B hepatitis
Acute diagnosis: anti-HCV, HCV RNA
Chronic diagnosis: anti-HCV, HCV RNA; 
cytoplasmic location in hepatocytes
Defective RNA virus, requires helper function 
of HBV (hepadnaviruses); HDV antigen (HDAg) 
present in hepatocyte nucleus
Diagnosis: anti-HDV, HDV RNA; HBV/HDV 
co-infection—IgM anti-HBc and anti-HDV; HDV 
superinfection—IgG anti-HBc and anti-HDV
Agent of enterically transmitted hepatitis; rare in 
the United States; occurs in Asia, Mediterranean 
countries, Central America
Diagnosis: IgM/IgG anti-HEV (assays not 
routinely available); virus in stool, bile, 
hepatocyte cytoplasm

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2564

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemJaundice

ALT

HBeAg

HBsAg

Anti-HBe

IgG Anti-HBc

IgM Anti-HBc

Anti-HBs

0

4

8

12

16

24

20
Weeks after exposure

32

28

36

52

100

FIGURE 339-4  Scheme of typical clinical and laboratory features of acute hepatitis 
B. ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

hepatitis  and  hepatocellular  carcinoma.  The  transactivating  activity 
can enhance the transcription and replication of other viruses besides 
HBV, such as HIV. Cellular processes transactivated by X include the 
human  interferon-γ  gene  and  class  I  major  histocompatibility  genes; 
potentially, these effects could contribute to enhanced susceptibility of 
HBV-infected hepatocytes to cytolytic T cells. The expression of X can 
also induce programmed cell death (apoptosis). The clinical relevance 
of HBxAg is limited, however, and testing for it is not part of routine 
clinical practice.
SEROLOGIC AND VIROLOGIC MARKERS  After a person is infected with 
HBV, the first virologic marker detectable in serum within 1–12 weeks, 
usually  between  8  and  12  weeks,  is  HBsAg  (Fig.  339-4).  Circulating 
HBsAg  precedes  elevations  of  serum  aminotransferase  activity  and 
clinical  symptoms  by  2–6  weeks  and  remains  detectable  during  the 
entire icteric or symptomatic phase of acute hepatitis B and beyond. In 
typical cases, HBsAg becomes undetectable 1–2 months after the onset 
of jaundice and rarely persists beyond 6 months. After HBsAg disap-
pears, antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) becomes detectable in serum and 
remains detectable indefinitely thereafter. Because HBcAg is intracellu-
lar and, when in the serum, sequestered within an HBsAg coat, naked 
core particles do not circulate in serum, and therefore, HBcAg is not 
detectable routinely in the serum of patients with HBV infection. By 
contrast, anti-HBc is readily demonstrable in serum, beginning within 
the  first  1–2  weeks  after  the  appearance  of  HBsAg  and  preceding 
detectable  levels  of  anti-HBs  by  weeks  to  months.  Because  variabil-
ity exists in the time of appearance of anti-HBs after HBV infection, 
occasionally  a  gap  of  several  weeks  or  longer  may  separate  the  dis-
appearance  of  HBsAg  and  the  appearance  of  anti-HBs.  During  this 
“gap” or “window” period, anti-HBc may represent the only serologic 
evidence  of  current  or  recent  HBV  infection,  and  blood  containing 
anti-HBc in the absence of HBsAg and anti-HBs has been implicated 
in transfusion-associated hepatitis B. In part because the sensitivity of 
immunoassays  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  has  increased,  however,  this 
window period is rarely encountered. In some persons, years after HBV 
infection, anti-HBc may persist in the circulation longer than anti-HBs. 
Therefore, isolated anti-HBc does not necessarily indicate active virus 
replication;  most  instances  of  isolated  anti-HBc  represent  hepatitis  B 
infection  in  the  remote  past.  Rarely,  however,  isolated  anti-HBc  rep-
resents low-level hepatitis B viremia, with HBsAg below the detection 
threshold,  and  occasionally,  isolated  anti-HBc  represents  a  cross- 
reacting or false-positive immunologic specificity. Recent and remote 
HBV infections can be distinguished by determination of the immuno-
globulin class of anti-HBc. Anti-HBc of the IgM class (IgM anti-HBc) 
predominates during the first 6 months after acute infection, whereas 
IgG anti-HBc is the predominant class of anti-HBc beyond 6 months. 
Therefore, patients with current or recent acute hepatitis B, including 
those in the anti-HBc window, have IgM anti-HBc in their serum. In 
patients who have recovered from hepatitis B in the remote past as well 

as those with chronic HBV infection, anti-HBc is predominantly of the 
IgG class. Infrequently, in ≤1–5% of patients with acute HBV infection, 
levels of HBsAg are too low to be detected; in such cases, the presence 
of IgM anti-HBc establishes the diagnosis of acute hepatitis B. When 
isolated  anti-HBc  occurs  in  the  rare  patient  with  chronic  hepatitis  B 
whose HBsAg level is below the sensitivity threshold of contemporary 
immunoassays (a low-level carrier), anti-HBc is of the IgG class. Gen-
erally, in persons who have recovered from hepatitis B, anti-HBs and 
anti-HBc persist indefinitely.

The temporal association between the appearance of anti-HBs and 
resolution  of  HBV  infection  as  well  as  the  observation  that  persons 
with  anti-HBs  in  serum  are  protected  against  reinfection  with  HBV 
suggests that anti-HBs is the protective antibody. Therefore, strategies 
for  prevention  of  HBV  infection  are  based  on  providing  susceptible 
persons with circulating anti-HBs (see below). Occasionally, in ~10% 
of  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B,  low-level,  low-affinity  anti-HBs 
can  be  detected.  This  antibody  is  directed  against  a  subtype  deter-
minant  different  from  that  represented  by  the  patient’s  HBsAg;  its 
presence  is  thought  to  reflect  the  stimulation  of  a  related  clone  of 
antibody-forming  cells,  but  it  has  no  clinical  relevance  and  does  not 
signal imminent clearance of hepatitis B. These patients with HBsAg 
and  such  nonneutralizing  anti-HBs  should  be  categorized  as  having 
chronic HBV infection.

The  other  readily  detectable  serologic  marker  of  HBV  infection, 
HBeAg, appears concurrently with or shortly after HBsAg. Its appear-
ance  coincides  temporally  with  high  levels  of  virus  replication  and 
reflects the presence of circulating intact virions and detectable HBV 
DNA (with the notable exception of patients with precore mutations 
who  cannot  synthesize  HBeAg—see  “Molecular  Variants”).  Pre-S1 
and  pre-S2  proteins  are  also  expressed  during  periods  of  peak  repli-
cation, but assays for these gene products are not routinely available. 
In self-limited HBV infections, HBeAg becomes undetectable shortly 
after  peak  elevations  in  aminotransferase  activity,  before  the  disap-
pearance of HBsAg, and anti-HBe then becomes detectable, coincid-
ing  with  a  period  of  relatively  lower  infectivity  (Fig.  339-4).  Because 
markers of HBV replication appear transiently during acute infection, 
testing  for  such  markers  is  of  little  clinical  utility  in  typical  cases  of 
acute HBV infection. In contrast, markers of HBV replication provide 
valuable information in patients with protracted infections.

Departing  from  the  pattern  typical  of  acute  HBV  infections,  in 
chronic HBV infection, HBsAg remains detectable beyond 6 months, 
anti-HBc is primarily of the IgG class, and anti-HBs is either undetect-
able or detectable at low levels (see “Laboratory Features”) (Fig. 339-5).  

2565

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

ALT

HBeAg

HBV   DNA

Anti-HBc

IgM   anti-HBc

24

12
36
Months after exposure

48

60

Anti-HBe

120

HBsAg

0

1 2 3 45

6

FIGURE  339-5  Scheme  of  typical  laboratory  features  of  wild-type  chronic 
hepatitis  B.  HBeAg  and  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  DNA  can  be  detected  in  serum 
during  the  relatively  replicative  phase  of  chronic  infection,  which  is  associated 
with  infectivity  and  liver  injury.  Seroconversion  from  the  replicative  phase  to  the 
relatively nonreplicative phase occurs at a rate of ~10% per year and is heralded by 
an acute hepatitis–like elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity; during 
the nonreplicative phase, infectivity and liver injury are limited. In HBeAg-negative 
chronic  hepatitis  B  associated  with  mutations  in  the  precore  region  of  the  HBV 
genome, replicative chronic hepatitis B occurs in the absence of HBeAg.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2565

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2566 During early chronic HBV infection, HBV DNA can be detected both 
in serum and in hepatocyte nuclei, where it is present in free or epi-
somal  form.  This  relatively  highly  replicative  stage  of  HBV  infection 
is the time of maximal infectivity and liver injury; HBeAg is a quali-
tative marker and HBV DNA a quantitative marker of this replicative 
phase, during which all three forms of HBV circulate, including intact 
virions.  Over  time,  the  relatively  replicative  phase  of  chronic  HBV 
infection gives way to a relatively nonreplicative phase. This occurs at 
a rate of ~10% per year and is accompanied by seroconversion from 
HBeAg to anti-HBe. In many cases, this seroconversion coincides with 
a transient, usually mild, acute hepatitis-like elevation in aminotrans-
ferase  activity,  believed  to  reflect  cell-mediated  immune  clearance  of 
virus-infected  hepatocytes.  In  this  relatively  nonreplicative  phase  of 
chronic  infection,  when  HBV  DNA  is  demonstrable  in  hepatocyte 
nuclei,  it  tends  to  be  integrated  into  the  host  genome.  In  this  phase, 
only spherical and tubular forms of HBV, not intact virions, circulate, 
and liver injury tends to subside. Most such patients would be charac-
terized as inactive HBV carriers. In reality, the designations replicative 
and nonreplicative are only relative; even in the so-called nonreplicative 
phase, HBV replication can be detected at levels of approximately ≤103 
virions/mL with highly sensitive amplification probes such as the poly-
merase  chain  reaction  (PCR);  below  this  replication  threshold,  liver 
injury and infectivity of HBV are limited to negligible. Still, the distinc-
tions are pathophysiologically and clinically meaningful. Occasionally, 
nonreplicative  HBV  infection  converts  back  to  replicative  infection. 
Such  spontaneous  reactivations  are  accompanied  by  reexpression  of 
HBeAg  and  HBV  DNA,  and  sometimes  of  IgM  anti-HBc,  as  well  as 
by exacerbations of liver injury. Because high-titer IgM anti-HBc can 
reappear during acute exacerbations of chronic hepatitis B, relying on 
IgM anti-HBc versus IgG anti-HBc to distinguish between acute and 
chronic hepatitis B infection, respectively, may not always be reliable; 
in such cases, patient history and additional follow-up monitoring over 
time are invaluable in helping to distinguish de novo acute hepatitis B 
infection from acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B infection.

MOLECULAR  VARIANTS  Variation  occurs  throughout  the  HBV 
genome, and clinical isolates of HBV that do not express typical viral 
proteins  have  been  attributed  to  mutations  in  individual  or  even 
multiple  gene  locations.  For  example,  variants  have  been  described 
that  lack  nucleocapsid  proteins  (commonly),  envelope  proteins  (very 
rarely),  or  both.  Two  categories  of  naturally  occurring  HBV  variants 
have  attracted  the  most  attention.  One  of  these  was  identified  ini-
tially in Mediterranean countries among patients with severe chronic 
HBV infection and detectable HBV DNA, but with anti-HBe instead 
of  HBeAg.  These  patients  were  found  to  be  infected  with  an  HBV 
mutant  that  contained  an  alteration  in  the  precore  region,  rendering 
the  virus  incapable  of  encoding  HBeAg.  Although  several  potential 
mutation  sites  exist  in  the  pre-C  region,  the  region  of  the  C  gene 
necessary for the expression of HBeAg (see “Virology and Etiology”), 
the  most  commonly  encountered  in  such  patients  is  a  single  base 
substitution,  from  G  to  A  in  the  second  to  last  codon  of  the  pre-C 
gene  at  nucleotide  1896.  This  substitution  results  in  the  replacement 
of the TGG tryptophan codon by a stop codon (TAG), which prevents 
the  translation  of  HBeAg.  Another  mutation,  in  the  core-promoter 
region,  prevents  transcription  of  the  coding  region  for  HBeAg  and 
yields  an  HBeAg-negative  phenotype.  Patients  with  such  mutations 
in the precore region and who are unable to secrete HBeAg may have 
severe liver disease that progresses more rapidly to cirrhosis, or alter-
natively, they are identified clinically later in the course of the natural 
history of chronic hepatitis B, when the disease is more advanced. Both 
“wild-type”  HBV  and  precore-mutant  HBV  can  coexist  in  the  same 
patient,  or  mutant  HBV  may  arise  late  during  wild-type  HBV  infec-
tion. In addition, clusters of fulminant hepatitis B in Israel and Japan 
were  attributed  to  common-source  infection  with  a  precore  mutant. 
Fulminant  hepatitis  B  in  North  America  and  western  Europe,  how-
ever,  occurs  in  patients  infected  with  wild-type  HBV,  in  the  absence 
of  precore  mutants,  and  both  precore  mutants  and  other  mutations 
throughout the HBV genome occur commonly, even in patients with 
typical, self-limited, milder forms of HBV infection. HBeAg-negative 

chronic hepatitis with mutations in the precore region is now the most 
frequently encountered form of hepatitis B in Mediterranean countries 
and in Europe. In the United States, where HBV genotype A (less prone 
to G1896A mutation) is prevalent, precore-mutant HBV is much less 
common; however, as a result of immigration from Asia and Europe, 
the proportion of HBeAg-negative hepatitis B–infected individuals has 
increased  in  the  United  States,  and  they  now  represent  ~30–40%  of 
patients with chronic hepatitis B. Characteristic of such HBeAg-neg-
ative  chronic  hepatitis  B  are  lower  levels  of  HBV  DNA  (usually  
≤105 IU/mL) and one of several patterns of aminotransferase activity—
persistent  elevations,  periodic  fluctuations  above  the  normal  range, 
and periodic fluctuations between the normal and elevated range.

The second important category of HBV mutants consists of escape 
mutants,  in  which  a  single  amino  acid  substitution,  from  glycine  to 
arginine,  occurs  at  position  145  of  the  immunodominant  a  determi-
nant common to all HBsAg subtypes. This HBsAg alteration leads to 
a  critical  conformational  change  that  results  in  a  loss  of  neutralizing 
activity by anti-HBs. This specific HBV/a mutant has been observed 
in two situations, active and passive immunization, in which humoral 
immunologic  pressure  may  favor  evolutionary  change  (“escape”)  in 
the  virus—in  a  small  number  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  recipients  who 
acquired  HBV  infection  despite  the  prior  appearance  of  neutralizing 
anti-HBs and in HBV-infected liver transplant recipients treated with 
a  high-potency  human  monoclonal  anti-HBs  preparation.  Although 
such  mutants  have  not  been  recognized  frequently,  their  existence 
raises a concern that may complicate vaccination strategies and sero-
logic diagnosis.

Different types of mutations emerge during antiviral therapy of 
chronic  hepatitis  B  with  nucleoside  analogues;  such  YMDD  and 
similar mutations in the polymerase motif of HBV are described in 
Chap. 341.
EXTRAHEPATIC  SITES  Hepatitis  B  antigens  and  HBV  DNA  have 
been identified in extrahepatic sites, including the lymph nodes, bone 
marrow, circulating lymphocytes, spleen, and pancreas. Although the 
virus  does  not  appear  to  be  associated  with  tissue  injury  in  any  of 
these  extrahepatic  sites,  its  presence  in  these  “remote”  reservoirs  has 
been invoked (but is not necessary) to explain the recurrence of HBV 
infection after orthotopic liver transplantation. The clinical relevance 
of such extrahepatic HBV is limited.

Hepatitis D  The  delta  hepatitis  agent,  or  HDV,  the  only  member 
of the genus Deltavirus, is a defective RNA virus that co-infects with 
and  requires  the  helper  function  of  HBV  (or  other  hepadnaviruses) 
for  its  replication  and  expression.  Slightly  smaller  than  HBV,  HDV 
is  a  formalin-sensitive,  35-  to  37-nm  virus  with  a  hybrid  structure. 
Its  nucleocapsid  expresses  HDV  antigen  (HDAg),  which  bears  no 
antigenic  homology  with  any  of  the  HBV  antigens,  and  contains  the 
virus genome. The HDV core is “encapsidated” by an outer envelope 
of  HBsAg,  indistinguishable  from  that  of  HBV  except  in  its  relative 
compositions of major, middle, and large HBsAg component proteins. 
The  genome  is  a  small,  1700-nucleotide,  circular,  single-strand  RNA 
of  negative  polarity  that  is  nonhomologous  with  HBV  DNA  (except 
for  a  small  area  of  the  polymerase  gene)  but  that  has  features  and 
the  rolling  circle  model  of  replication  common  to  genomes  of  plant 
satellite viruses or viroids. HDV RNA contains many areas of internal 
complementarity; therefore, it can fold on itself by internal base pairing 
to form an unusual, very stable, rod-like structure that contains a very 
stable,  self-cleaving  and  self-ligating  ribozyme.  HDV  RNA  requires 
host RNA polymerase II for its replication in the hepatocyte nucleus 
via  RNA-directed  RNA  synthesis  by  transcription  of  genomic  RNA 
to a complementary antigenomic (plus strand) RNA; the antigenomic 
RNA, in turn, serves as a template for subsequent genomic RNA syn-
thesis  effected  by  host  RNA  polymerase  I.  HDV  RNA  has  only  one 
open reading frame, and HDAg, a product of the antigenomic strand, 
is the only known HDV protein; HDAg exists in two forms: a small, 
195-amino-acid species, which plays a role in facilitating HDV RNA 
replication,  and  a  large,  214-amino-acid  species,  which  appears  to 
suppress  replication  but  is  required  for  assembly  of  the  antigen  into 
virions.  HDV  antigens  have  been  shown  to  bind  directly  to  RNA 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2566

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systempolymerase II, resulting in stimulation of transcription. Viral assembly 
requires farnesylation of the large HDAg for ribonucleoprotein anchor-
ing to HBsAg. Both HBV and HDV enter hepatocytes via the sodium 
taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide receptor. Although complete 
hepatitis D virions and liver injury require the cooperative helper func-
tion of HBV, intracellular replication of HDV RNA can occur without 
HBV. Genomic heterogeneity among HDV isolates has been described. 
Although  pathophysiologic  and  clinical  consequences  of  this  genetic 
diversity  have  not  been  defined  definitively,  preliminarily,  genotype 
2  has  been  linked  to  milder  disease  and  genotype  3  to  severe  acute 
disease.  The  clinical  spectrum  of  hepatitis  D  is  common  to  all  eight 
genotypes identified, the predominant of which is genotype 1.

HDV  can  either  infect  a  person  simultaneously  with  HBV  (co- 
infection)  or  superinfect  a  person  already  infected  with  HBV  (super-
infection); when HDV infection is transmitted from a donor with one 
HBsAg  subtype  to  an  HBsAg-positive  recipient  with  a  different  sub-
type,  HDV  assumes  the  HBsAg  subtype  of  the  recipient,  rather  than 
the  donor.  Because  HDV  relies  absolutely  on  HBV,  the  duration  of 
HDV infection is determined by the duration of (and cannot outlast) 
HBV  infection.  HDV  replication  tends  to  suppress  HBV  replication; 
therefore, patients with hepatitis D tend to have lower levels of HBV 
replication. HDV antigen is expressed primarily in hepatocyte nuclei 
and is occasionally detectable in serum. During acute HDV infection, 
anti-HDV of the IgM class predominates, and 30–40 days may elapse 
after  symptoms  appear  before  anti-HDV  can  be  detected.  In  self- 
limited infection, anti-HDV is low-titer and transient, rarely remain-
ing  detectable  beyond  the  clearance  of  HBsAg  and  HDV  antigen.  In 
chronic  HDV  infection,  anti-HDV  circulates  in  high  titer,  and  both 
IgM and IgG anti-HDV can be detected. HDV antigen in the liver and 
HDV RNA in serum and liver can be detected during HDV replication.
The recent report that, in vitro, HDV can assemble infectious virus 
particles with envelope glycoproteins from other viruses, both hepato-
tropic and nonhepatotropic, raises the possibility that HDV can repli-
cate without hepadnaviruses; however, to date, co-infections in nature 
with other viruses have not been observed.

Hepatitis  C  Hepatitis  C  virus,  which,  before  its  identification, 
was  labeled  “non-A,  non-B  hepatitis,”  is  a  linear,  single-strand,  posi-
tive-sense, 9600-nucleotide RNA virus, the genome of which is similar 
in organization to that of flaviviruses and pestiviruses; HCV is the only 
member of the genus Hepacivirus in the family Flaviviridae. The HCV 
genome contains a single, large open reading frame (ORF) (gene) that 
codes for a virus polyprotein of ~3000 amino acids, which is cleaved 
after translation to yield 10 viral proteins. The 5′ end of the genome 
consists  of  an  untranslated  region  (containing  an  internal  ribosomal 
entry  site  [IRES])  adjacent  to  the  genes  for  three  structural  proteins, 
the nucleocapsid core protein, C, and two envelope glycoproteins, E1 
and E2. The 5′ untranslated region and core gene are highly conserved 
among  genotypes,  but  the  envelope  proteins  are  coded  for  by  the 

AA

500

1000

1500

2000

Envelope
glycoproteins

Core

Helicase

Serine
protease

5'

C E1

E2

NS2

NS3

NS4B

p7

NS4A

Conserved
region

Hypervariable
region

hypervariable region, which varies from isolate to isolate and may allow 
the virus to evade host immunologic containment directed at accessible 
virus-envelope  proteins.  The  3′  end  of  the  genome  also  includes  an 
untranslated  region  and  contains  the  genes  for  seven  nonstructural 
(NS) proteins: p7, NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B. p7 is a 
membrane  ion  channel  protein  necessary  for  efficient  assembly  and 
release of HCV. The NS2 cysteine protease cleaves NS3 from NS2, and 
the NS3-4A serine protease cleaves all the downstream proteins from 
the  polyprotein.  Important  NS  proteins  involved  in  virus  replication 
include the NS3 helicase; NS3-4A serine protease; the multifunctional 
membrane-associated phosphoprotein NS5A, an essential component 
of the viral replication membranous web (along with NS4B); and the 
NS5B  RNA-dependent  RNA  polymerase  (Fig.  339-6).  Because  HCV 
does not replicate via a DNA intermediate, it does not integrate into 
the host genome. Because HCV tends to circulate in relatively low titer, 
103−107  virions/mL,  visualization  of  the  50-  to  80-nm  virus  particles 
remains  difficult.  Still,  the  replication  rate  of  HCV  is  very  high,  1012 
virions per day; its half-life is 2.7 h. The chimpanzee is a helpful but 
cumbersome  animal  model.  Although  a  robust,  reproducible,  small 
animal  model  is  lacking,  HCV  replication  has  been  documented  in 
an immunodeficient mouse model containing explants of human liver 
and in transgenic mouse and rat models; in addition, an HCV-related 
rat  Hepacivirus  has  been  reported  to  be  a  useful  surrogate  model. 
Although  in  vitro  replication  is  difficult,  replicons  in  hepatocellular 
carcinoma–derived cell lines support replication of genetically manip-
ulated,  truncated,  or  full-length  HCV  RNA  (but  not  intact  virions); 
infectious pseudotyped retroviral HCV particles have been shown to 
yield  functioning  envelope  proteins.  In  2005,  complete  replication  of 
HCV and intact 55-nm virions were described in cell culture systems. 
HCV entry into the hepatocyte occurs via the non-liver-specific CD81 
receptor and the liver-specific tight junction protein claudin-1. A grow-
ing list of additional host receptors to which HCV binds on cell entry 
includes occludin, low-density lipoprotein receptors, glycosaminogly-
cans,  scavenger  receptor  B1,  and  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor, 
among others. Relying on the same assembly and secretion pathway as 
low-density and very-low-density lipoproteins, HCV is a lipoviropar-
ticle and masquerades as a lipoprotein, which may limit its visibility to 
the adaptive immune system and explain its ability to evade immune 
containment and clearance. After viral entry and uncoating, translation 
is initiated by the IRES on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, and 
the HCV polyprotein is cleaved during translation and posttranslation-
ally by host cellular proteases as well as HCV NS2-3 and NS3-4A pro-
teases. Host cofactors involved in HCV replication include cyclophilin 
A, which binds to NS5A and yields conformational changes required 
for viral replication, and liver-specific host microRNA miR-122.

2567

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

NS5A

3'

3000

2500

NS5B

RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase

At least six distinct major genotypes (and a minor genotype 7), as 
well as >50 subtypes within genotypes, of HCV have been identified by 
nucleotide sequencing. Genotypes differ from one another in sequence 
homology  by  ≥30%,  and  subtypes  differ  by  ~20%.  Because  diver-
gence  of  HCV  isolates  within  a  geno-
type  or  subtype  and  within  the  same 
host may vary insufficiently to define a 
distinct  genotype,  these  intragenotypic 
differences are referred to as quasispecies 
and  differ  in  sequence  homology  by 
only  a  few  percent.  The  genotypic  and 
quasispecies  diversity  of  HCV,  result-
ing  from  its  high  mutation  rate,  inter-
feres  with  effective  humoral  immunity. 
Neutralizing  antibodies  to  HCV  have 
been  demonstrated,  but  they  tend  to 
be short-lived, and HCV infection does 
not  induce  lasting  immunity  against 
reinfection  with  different  virus  isolates 
or  even  the  same  virus  isolate.  Thus, 
neither  heterologous  nor  homologous  
immunity appears to develop commonly 
after  acute  HCV  infection.  Some  HCV 
genotypes  are  distributed  worldwide, 

FIGURE 339-6  Organization of the hepatitis C virus genome and its associated, 3000-amino-acid (AA) proteins. The 
three  structural  genes  at  the  5′  end  are  the  core  region,  C,  which  codes  for  the  nucleocapsid,  and  the  envelope 
regions,  E1  and  E2,  which  code  for  envelope  glycoproteins.  The  5′  untranslated  region  and  the  C  region  are  highly 
conserved among isolates, whereas the envelope domain E2 contains the hypervariable region. At the 3′ end are seven 
nonstructural (NS) regions—p7, a membrane protein adjacent to the structural proteins that appears to function as an 
ion channel; NS2, which codes for a cysteine protease; NS3, which codes for a serine protease and an RNA helicase; 
NS4 and NS4B; NS5A, a multifunctional membrane-associated phosphoprotein, an essential component of the viral 
replication membranous web; and NS5B, which codes for an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. After translation of the 
entire polyprotein, individual proteins are cleaved by both host and viral proteases.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2567

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2568 whereas others are more geographically confined (see “Epidemiology 
and Global Features”). In addition, differences exist among genotypes 
in responsiveness to antiviral therapy but not in pathogenicity or clin-
ical progression (except for genotype 3, in which hepatic steatosis and 
clinical progression are more likely).

Currently  available,  third-generation  immunoassays,  which  incor-
porate proteins from the core, NS3, and NS5 regions, detect anti-HCV 
antibodies  during  acute  infection.  The  most  sensitive  indicator  of 
HCV  infection  is  the  presence  of  HCV  RNA,  which  requires  molec-
ular  amplification  by  PCR  or  transcription-mediated  amplification 
(TMA) (Fig. 339-7). To allow standardization of the quantification of 
HCV RNA among laboratories and commercial assays, HCV RNA is 
reported as international units (IUs) per milliliter; quantitative assays 
with a broad dynamic range are available that allow detection of HCV 
RNA with a sensitivity as low as 5 IU/mL. HCV RNA can be detected 
within a few days of exposure to HCV—well before the appearance of 
anti-HCV—and  tends  to  persist  for  the  duration  of  HCV  infection. 
Application of sensitive molecular probes for HCV RNA has revealed 
the  presence  of  replicative  HCV  in  peripheral  blood  lymphocytes  of 
infected persons; however, as is the case for HBV in lymphocytes, the 
clinical relevance of HCV lymphocyte infection is not known.

Hepatitis  E  Previously  labeled  epidemic  or  enterically  transmitted 
non-A,  non-B  hepatitis,  HEV  is  an  enterically  transmitted  virus  that 
causes clinically apparent hepatitis primarily in India, Asia, Africa, and 
Central America; in those geographic areas, HEV is the most common 
cause of acute hepatitis; one-third of the global population appears to 
have been infected. This agent, with epidemiologic features resembling 
those  of  hepatitis  A,  is  a  27-  to  34-nm,  nonenveloped,  heat-stable, 
HAV-like  virus  with  a  7200-nucleotide,  single-strand,  positive-sense 
RNA genome. Like HAV, HEV also exists in a quasi-enveloped form 
enclosed  within  host-cell-derived  membranes.  HEV  has  three  over-
lapping ORFs (genes), the largest of which, ORF1, encodes nonstruc-
tural proteins involved in virus replication (the viral replicase, which 
includes  a  protease,  polymerase,  and  helicase).  A  middle-sized  gene, 
ORF2, encodes the nucleocapsid protein, the major structural protein, 
and  the  smallest,  ORF3,  encodes  a  small  structural  phosphoprotein 
involved in virus particle secretion. All HEV isolates appear to belong 
to a single serotype, despite genomic heterogeneity of up to 25% and 
the existence of four species (A–D) and eight genotypes, only four of 
which, all within species A, have been detected in humans; genotypes 
1 and 2 (common in developing countries) appear to be more virulent 
anthrotropic variants, whereas genotypes 3 (the most common in the 
United States and Europe) and 4 (seen in China), endemic in animal 
species (enzootic variants), are more attenuated, account for subclinical 
infections,  represent  a  zoonotic  reservoir  for  human  infections,  and 
can cause chronic infection in immunocompromised hosts. Contribut-
ing to the perpetuation of this virus are the animal reservoirs described 
above, most notably in swine but also in camels, deer, rats, and rabbits, 
among  others.  No  genomic  or  antigenic  homology,  however,  exists 
between HEV and HAV or other picornaviruses; and HEV, although 
resembling caliciviruses, is sufficiently distinct from any known agent 

Anti-HCV

HCV  RNA

ALT

0 1 2 3 4 5 6

12

24

36

48

60

120

Months after exposure

FIGURE  339-7  Scheme  of  typical  laboratory  features  during  acute  hepatitis  C 
progressing  to  chronicity.  Hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)  RNA  is  the  first  detectable 
event, preceding alanine aminotransferase (ALT) elevation and the appearance of 
anti-HCV.

to  merit  its  own  classification  as  a  unique  genus,  Orthohepevirus, 
within the family Hepeviridae (which includes similar viruses infecting 
mammals, birds, and fish). The virus has been detected in stool, bile, 
and liver and is excreted in the stool during the late incubation period. 
Both  IgM  anti-HEV  during  early  acute  infection  and  IgG  anti-HEV 
predominating after the first 3 months can be detected. The presence 
of HEV RNA in serum and stool accompanies acute infection; viremia 
resolves  as  clinical-biochemical  recovery  ensues,  while  HEV  RNA 
in  stool  may  outlast  viremia  by  several  weeks.  Currently,  serologic/ 
virologic testing for HEV infection—not approved or licensed by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)—can be done in special-
ized laboratories (e.g., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
[CDC]) and some commercial laboratories.

 ■ PATHOGENESIS
Under ordinary circumstances, none of the hepatitis viruses is known 
to  be  directly  cytopathic  to  hepatocytes.  Evidence  suggests  that  the 
clinical manifestations and outcomes after acute liver injury associated 
with viral hepatitis are determined by the immunologic responses of 
the  host.  Among  the  viral  hepatitides,  the  immunopathogenesis  of 
hepatitis B and C has been studied most extensively.

Hepatitis B  For HBV, the existence of inactive hepatitis B carriers 
with  normal  liver  histology  and  function  suggests  that  the  virus  is 
not directly cytopathic. The fact that patients with defects in cellular 
immune  competence  are  more  likely  to  remain  chronically  infected 
rather  than  to  clear  HBV  supports  the  role  of  cellular  immune 
responses  in  the  pathogenesis  of  hepatitis  B–related  liver  injury.  The 
model that has the most experimental support involves cytolytic T cells 
sensitized specifically to recognize host and hepatitis B viral antigens 
on the liver cell surface. Nucleocapsid proteins (HBcAg and possibly 
HBeAg),  present  on  the  cell  membrane  in  minute  quantities,  are  the 
viral target antigens that, with host antigens, invite cytolytic T cells to 
destroy HBV-infected hepatocytes. Differences in the robustness and 
broad  polyclonality  of  CD8+  cytolytic  T-cell  responsiveness;  in  the 
level  of  HBV-specific  helper  CD4+  T  cells;  in  attenuation,  depletion, 
and exhaustion of virus-specific T cells; in viral T-cell epitope escape 
mutations  that  allow  the  virus  to  evade  T-cell  containment;  and  in 
the elaboration of antiviral cytokines by T cells have been invoked to 
explain differences in outcomes between those who recover after acute 
hepatitis and those who progress to chronic hepatitis or between those 
with mild and those with severe (fulminant) acute HBV infection.

Although  a  robust  cytolytic  T-cell  response  occurs  and  eliminates 
virus-infected liver cells during acute hepatitis B, >90% of HBV DNA 
has been found in experimentally infected chimpanzees to disappear 
from  the  liver  and  blood  before  maximal  T-cell  infiltration  of  the 
liver  and  before  most  of  the  biochemical  and  histologic  evidence  of 
liver injury. This observation suggests that components of the innate 
immune  system  and  inflammatory  cytokines,  independent  of  cyto-
pathic antiviral mechanisms, participate in the early immune response 
to HBV infection; this effect has been shown to represent elimination 
of  HBV  replicative  intermediates  from  the  cytoplasm  and  covalently 
closed circular viral DNA from the nucleus of infected hepatocytes. In 
turn, the innate immune response to HBV infection is mediated largely 
by natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity, activated by immunosuppres-
sive cytokines (e.g., interleukin [IL] 10 and transforming growth factor 
[TGF]  β),  reduced  signals  from  inhibitory  receptor  expression  (e.g., 
major  histocompatibility  complex),  or  increased  signals  from  acti-
vating  receptor  expression  on  infected  hepatocytes.  In  addition,  NK 
cells  reduce  helper  CD4+  cells,  which  results  in  reduced  CD8+  cells 
and exhaustion of the virus-specific T-cell response to HBV infection. 
Adding  to  the  evidence  supporting  the  role  of  these  immunologic 
perturbations  in  the  pathogenesis  of  HBV-associated  liver  injury  are 
the observations that many of these departures from normal immune 
function  are  restored  after  successful  antiviral  therapy.  Ultimately, 
HBV-HLA–specific cytolytic T-cell responses of the adaptive immune 
system are felt to be responsible for recovery from HBV infection.

Debate continues over the relative importance of viral and host fac-
tors in the pathogenesis of HBV-associated liver injury and its outcome. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2568

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAs noted above, precore genetic mutants of HBV have been associated 
with the more severe outcomes of HBV infection (severe chronic and 
fulminant  hepatitis),  suggesting  that,  under  certain  circumstances, 
relative pathogenicity is a property of the virus, not the host. The facts 
that concomitant HDV and HBV infections are associated with more 
severe liver injury than HBV infection alone and that cells transfected 
in vitro with the gene for HDV antigen express HDV antigen and then 
become necrotic in the absence of any immunologic influences are also 
consistent  with  a  viral  effect  on  pathogenicity.  Similarly,  in  patients 
who  undergo  liver  transplantation  for  end-stage  chronic  hepatitis  B, 
occasionally, rapidly progressive liver injury appears in the new liver. 
This  clinical  pattern  is  associated  with  an  unusual  histologic  pattern 
in the new liver, fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, which, ultrastructurally, 
appears to represent a choking of the cell with overwhelming quanti-
ties of HBsAg. This observation suggests that, under the influence of 
the  potent  immunosuppressive  agents  required  to  prevent  allograft 
rejection, HBV may have a direct cytopathic effect on liver cells, inde-
pendent of the immune system.

Although  the  precise  mechanism  of  liver  injury  in  HBV  infection 
remains  elusive,  studies  of  nucleocapsid  proteins  have  shed  light  on 
the profound immunologic tolerance to HBV of babies born to moth-
ers with highly replicative (HBeAg-positive), chronic HBV infection. 
In  HBeAg-expressing  transgenic  mice,  in  utero  exposure  to  HBeAg, 
which is sufficiently small to traverse the placenta, induces T-cell tol-
erance to both nucleocapsid proteins. This, in turn, may explain why, 
when infection occurs so early in life, immunologic clearance does not 
occur, and protracted, lifelong infection ensues. An alternative expla-
nation proposed to explain why robust liver injury does not accompany 
neonatal HBV infection but predisposes to chronic infection is defec-
tive priming of HBV-specific T cells during in utero exposure to HBV.

“IMMUNOTOLERANT”  VERSUS  “IMMUNOREACTIVE”  CHRONIC  
HEPATITIS  B  An  important  distinction  should  be  drawn  between 
HBV infection acquired at birth, common in endemic areas, such as 
East Asia, and infection acquired in adulthood, common in the West. 
Infection  in  the  neonatal  period  is  associated  with  the  acquisition  of 
what appears to be a high level of immunologic tolerance to HBV and 
absence  of  an  acute  hepatitis  illness  but  the  almost  invariable  estab-
lishment of chronic, often lifelong infection. Neonatally acquired HBV 
infection  can  culminate  decades  later  in  cirrhosis  and  hepatocellular 
carcinoma (see “Complications and Sequelae”). In contrast, when HBV 
infection is acquired during adolescence or early adulthood, the host 
immune  response  to  HBV-infected  hepatocytes  tends  to  be  robust, 
an acute hepatitis-like illness is the rule, and failure to recover is the 
exception.  After  adulthood-acquired  infection,  chronicity  is  uncom-
mon,  and  the  risk  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma  is  very  low.  Based  on 
these observations, some authorities categorize HBV infection into an 
“immunotolerant”  phase,  an  “immunoreactive”  phase,  and  an  “inac-
tive”  phase.  This  somewhat  simplistic  formulation  does  not  apply  at 
all to the typical adult in the West with self-limited acute hepatitis B, 
in  whom  no  period  of  immunologic  tolerance  occurs.  Even  among 
those with neonatally acquired HBV infection, in whom immunologic 
tolerance appears to be established definitively, immunologic responses 
to HBV infection have been demonstrated (albeit typically at reduced 
levels), and intermittent bursts of hepatic necroinflammatory activity 
punctuate  the  early  decades  of  life  during  which  liver  injury  appears 
to  be  quiescent  (labeled  by  some  as  the  “immunotolerant”  phase; 
however, it more accurately is a period of dissociation between high-
level HBV replication and a paucity of inflammatory liver injury). In 
addition,  even  when  clinically  apparent  liver  injury  and  progressive 
fibrosis  emerge  during  later  decades  (the  so-called  immunoreactive, 
or  immunointolerant,  phase),  the  level  of  immunologic  tolerance  to 
HBV remains substantial. More accurately, in patients with neonatally 
acquired HBV infection, a dynamic equilibrium exists between toler-
ance  and  intolerance,  the  outcome  of  which  determines  the  clinical 
expression of chronic infection. Persons infected as neonates tend to 
have a relatively higher level of immunologic tolerance (high replica-
tion, low necroinflammatory activity) during the early decades of life 
and  a  relatively  lower  level  (but  only  rarely  a  loss)  of  tolerance  (and 

necroinflammatory activity reflecting the level of virus replication) in 
the later decades of life.

2569

Hepatitis  C  Cell-mediated  immune  responses  and  elaboration 
by T cells of antiviral cytokines contribute to the multicellular innate 
and adaptive immune responses involved in the containment of infec-
tion and pathogenesis of liver injury associated with hepatitis C. The 
fact  that  HCV  is  so  efficient  in  evading  these  immune  mechanisms 
is  a  testament  to  its  highly  evolved  ability  to  disrupt  host  immune 
responses  at  multiple  levels.  After  exposure  to  HCV,  the  host  cell 
identifies viral product motifs (pattern recognition receptors) that dis-
tinguish the virus from “self,” resulting in the elaboration of interferons 
and  other  cytokines  that  result  in  activation  of  innate  and  adaptive 
immune responses. Intrahepatic human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class  
1–restricted  cytolytic  T  cells  directed  at  nucleocapsid,  envelope, 
and  nonstructural  viral  protein  antigens  have  been  demonstrated  in 
patients with chronic hepatitis C; however, such virus-specific cytolytic 
T-cell  responses  do  not  correlate  adequately  with  the  degree  of  liver 
injury or with recovery. Yet a consensus has emerged supporting a role 
in  the  pathogenesis  of  HCV-associated  liver  injury  of  virus-activated 
CD4+  helper  T  cells  that  stimulate,  via  the  cytokines  they  elaborate, 
HCV-specific  CD8+  cytotoxic  T  cells.  These  responses  appear  to  be 
more  robust  (higher  in  number,  more  diverse  in  viral  antigen  spec-
ificity,  more  functionally  effective,  and  longer  lasting)  in  those  who 
recover from HCV infection than in those who have chronic infection. 
Contributing to chronic infection are a CD4+ proliferative defect that 
results  in  rapid  contraction  of  CD4+  responses,  mutations  in  CD8+  
T  cell–targeted  viral  epitopes  that  allow  HCV  to  escape  immune- 
mediated clearance, and upregulation of inhibitory receptors on func-
tionally impaired, exhausted T cells. Although attention has focused on 
adaptive immunity, HCV proteins have been shown to interfere with 
innate immunity by resulting in blocking of type 1 interferon responses 
and  inhibition  of  interferon  signaling  and  effector  molecules  in  the 
interferon signaling cascade.

Several  HLA  alleles  have  been  linked  with  self-limited  hepatitis 
C,  the  most  convincing  of  which  is  the  CC  haplotype  of  the  IL28B 
gene, which codes for interferon λ3, a component of innate immune 
antiviral  defense.  The  IL28B  association  is  even  stronger  when  com-
bined with HLA class II DQB1*03:01. The link between non-CC IL28B 
polymorphisms and failure to clear HCV infection has been explained 
by  a  chromosome  19q13.13  frameshift  variant  upstream  of  IL28B, 
the ΔG polymorphism of which creates an ORF in a novel interferon 
gene  (IFN-λ4)  associated  with  impaired  HCV  clearance.  Also  shown 
to  contribute  to  limiting  HCV  infection  are  NK  cells  of  the  innate 
immune  system  that  function  when  HLA  class  I  molecules  required 
for successful adaptive immunity are underexpressed. Both peripheral 
cytotoxicity and intrahepatic NK cell cytotoxicity are dysfunctional in 
persistent  HCV  infection.  Adding  to  the  complexity  of  the  immune 
response,  HCV  core,  NS4B,  and  NS5B  have  been  shown  to  suppress 
the  immunoregulatory  nuclear  factor  (NF)-κB  pathway,  resulting  in 
reduced antiapoptotic proteins and a resultant increased vulnerability 
to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α–mediated cell death. Patients with 
hepatitis  C  and  unfavorable  (non-CC,  associated  with  reduced  HCV 
clearance) IL28B alleles have been shown to have depressed NK cell/
innate  immune  function.  Of  note,  the  emergence  of  substantial  viral 
quasispecies diversity and HCV sequence variation allow the virus to 
evade attempts by the host to contain HCV infection by both humoral 
and cellular immunity.

Finally,  cross-reactivity  between  viral  antigens  (HCV  NS3  and 
NS5A)  and  host  autoantigens  (cytochrome  P450  2D6)  has  been 
invoked  to  explain  the  association  between  hepatitis  C  and  a  subset 
of patients with autoimmune hepatitis and antibodies to liver-kidney 
microsomal (LKM) antigen (anti-LKM) (Chap. 341).

Hepatitis A and E  Viral shedding in these acute hepatitides pre-
dates clinical evidence of liver injury, consistent with the absence of a 
relationship between viral replication and target-organ injury. Instead, 
as  shown  for  hepatitis  B  and  C,  in  hepatitis  A  and  E,  experimental 
evidence supports a cytolytic CD8+ T-cell response as the instrument 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2569

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2570 of liver cell injury, in concert with or dwarfed by CD4+ helper T cells 
or  CD4+  interferon  γ–secreting  cells.  HEV  has  also  been  shown  to 
interfere with host antiviral defenses, such as interferon signaling and 
effector  function,  and  to  downregulate  interferon-stimulated  genes. 
The demonstration of an activated innate immune response in patients 
with these hepatitides argues for a multitude of immunologic mecha-
nisms in the pathogenesis of the acute liver injury resulting from HAV 
and HEV infection.

 ■ EXTRAHEPATIC MANIFESTATIONS
Immune  complex–mediated  tissue  damage  appears  to  play  a  patho-
genetic  role  in  the  extrahepatic  manifestations  of  acute  hepatitis  B. 
The  occasional  prodromal  serum  sickness–like  syndrome  observed 
in  acute  hepatitis  B  appears  to  be  related  to  the  deposition  in  tissue 
blood vessel walls of HBsAg–anti-HBs circulating immune complexes, 
leading to activation of the complement system and depressed serum 
complement levels.

In patients with chronic hepatitis B, other types of immune-complex 
disease may be seen. Glomerulonephritis with the nephrotic syndrome 
is observed occasionally; HBsAg, immunoglobulin, and C3 deposition 
has  been  found  in  the  glomerular  basement  membrane.  Whereas 
generalized  vasculitis  (polyarteritis  nodosa)  develops  in  considerably 
<1%  of  patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection,  20–30%  of  patients 
with  polyarteritis  nodosa  have  HBsAg  in  serum  (Chap.  363).  In 
these patients, the affected small- and medium-size arterioles contain 
HBsAg,  immunoglobulins,  and  complement  components.  Another 
extrahepatic manifestation of viral hepatitis, essential mixed cryoglob-
ulinemia (EMC), was reported initially to be associated with hepatitis B.  
The  disorder  is  characterized  clinically  by  arthritis,  cutaneous  vas-
culitis  (palpable  purpura),  and,  occasionally,  glomerulonephritis  and 
serologically  by  the  presence  of  circulating  cryoprecipitable  immune 
complexes of more than one immunoglobulin class (Chaps. 314 and 
363). Many patients with this syndrome have chronic liver disease, but 
the  association  with  HBV  infection  is  limited;  instead,  a  substantial 
proportion has chronic HCV infection, with circulating immune com-
plexes  containing  HCV  RNA.  Immune-complex  glomerulonephritis 
is  another  recognized  extrahepatic  manifestation  of  chronic  hepatitis 
C  (see  “Complications  and  Sequelae,”  below).  Immune-complex  dis-
orders  have  been  linked,  albeit  rarely,  with  both  hepatitis  A  and  E. 
In  hepatitis  E,  rare  neurologic  (including  Guillain-Barré  syndrome), 
renal, pancreatic, and hematologic complications have been postulated 
to result from both immunologic mechanisms and/or direct extrahe-
patic-site infection with the virus.

 ■ PATHOLOGY
The  typical  morphologic  lesions  of  all  types  of  viral  hepatitis  are 
similar and consist of panlobular infiltration with mononuclear cells, 
hepatic cell necrosis, hyperplasia of Kupffer cells, and variable degrees 
of  cholestasis.  Hepatic  cell  regeneration  is  present,  as  evidenced  by 
numerous mitotic figures, multinucleated cells, and “rosette” or “pseu-
doacinar” formation. The mononuclear infiltration consists primarily 
of small lymphocytes, although plasma cells and eosinophils occasion-
ally are present. Liver cell damage consists of hepatic cell degeneration 
and necrosis, cell dropout, ballooning of cells, and acidophilic degen-
eration  of  hepatocytes  (forming  so-called  Councilman  or  apoptotic 
bodies). Large hepatocytes with a ground-glass appearance of the cyto-
plasm may be seen in chronic but not in acute HBV infection; these 
cells contain HBsAg and can be identified histochemically with orcein 
or  aldehyde  fuchsin.  In  uncomplicated  viral  hepatitis,  the  reticulin 
framework is preserved.

In hepatitis C, the histologic lesion is often remarkable for a relative 
paucity of inflammation, a marked increase in activation of sinusoidal 
lining  cells,  lymphoid  aggregates,  the  presence  of  fat  (more  frequent 
in genotype 3 and linked to increased fibrosis), and, occasionally, bile 
duct lesions in which biliary epithelial cells appear to be piled up with-
out interruption of the basement membrane. Occasionally, microvesic-
ular steatosis occurs in hepatitis D. In hepatitis E, a common histologic 
feature is marked cholestasis. A cholestatic variant of slowly resolving 
acute hepatitis A also has been described.

A  more  severe  histologic  lesion,  bridging  hepatic  necrosis,  also 
termed subacute or confluent necrosis or interface hepatitis, is observed 
occasionally  in  acute  hepatitis.  “Bridging”  between  lobules  results 
from  large  areas  of  hepatic  cell  dropout,  with  collapse  of  the  reticu-
lin  framework.  Characteristically,  the  bridge  consists  of  condensed 
reticulum, inflammatory debris, and degenerating liver cells that span 
adjacent portal areas, portal to central veins, or central vein to central 
vein. This lesion had been thought to have prognostic significance; in 
many of the originally described patients with this lesion, a subacute 
course terminated in death within several weeks to months, or severe 
chronic  hepatitis  and  cirrhosis  developed;  however,  the  association 
between bridging necrosis and a poor prognosis in patients with acute 
hepatitis  has  not  been  upheld.  Therefore,  although  demonstration  of 
this lesion in patients with chronic hepatitis has prognostic significance 
(Chap. 341), its demonstration during acute hepatitis is less meaning-
ful, and liver biopsies to identify this lesion are no longer undertaken 
routinely  in  patients  with  acute  hepatitis.  In  massive  hepatic  necrosis 
(fulminant  hepatitis,  “acute  yellow  atrophy”),  the  striking  feature  at 
postmortem examination is the finding of a small, shrunken, soft liver. 
Histologic examination reveals massive necrosis and dropout of liver 
cells of most lobules with extensive collapse and condensation of the 
reticulin  framework.  When  histologic  documentation  is  required  in 
the management of fulminant or very severe hepatitis, a biopsy can be 
done by the angiographically guided transjugular route, which permits 
the  performance  of  this  invasive  procedure  in  the  presence  of  severe 
coagulopathy.

Immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic studies have local-
ized HBsAg to the cytoplasm and plasma membrane of infected liver 
cells. In contrast, HBcAg predominates in the nucleus, but, occasion-
ally, scant amounts are also seen in the cytoplasm and on the cell mem-
brane.  HDV  antigen  is  localized  to  the  hepatocyte  nucleus,  whereas 
HAV  and  HCV  antigens  are  localized  to  the  cytoplasm.  Hepatitis  E 
ORF-2 protein staining is distributed in both a cytoplasmic and nuclear 
pattern.

 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GLOBAL FEATURES
Before  the  availability  of  serologic  tests  for  hepatitis  viruses,  all  viral 
hepatitis cases were labeled either as “infectious” or “serum” hepatitis. 
Modes of transmission overlap, however, and a clear distinction among 
the different types of viral hepatitis cannot be made solely based on clin-
ical or epidemiologic features (Table 339-2). The most accurate means 
to  distinguish  the  various  types  of  viral  hepatitis  involves  specific 
serologic testing.

Hepatitis  A  This  agent  is  transmitted  almost  exclusively  by  the 
fecal-oral route. Person-to-person spread of HAV is enhanced by poor 
personal  hygiene  and  overcrowding;  large  outbreaks  as  well  as  spo-
radic cases have been traced to contaminated food, water, milk, frozen 
raspberries and strawberries, green onions imported from Mexico, and 
shellfish  (e.g.,  scallops  imported  from  the  Philippines  used  to  make 
sushi, the culprit identified in a 2016 Hawaiian outbreak). Intrafamily 
and  intrainstitutional  spreads  are  also  common.  Early  epidemiologic 
observations supported a predilection for hepatitis A to occur in late 
fall  and  early  winter.  In  temperate  zones,  epidemic  waves  have  been 
recorded every 5–20 years as new segments of nonimmune population 
appeared; however, in developed countries, the incidence of hepatitis 
A has been declining, presumably as a function of improved sanitation, 
and these cyclic patterns are no longer observed. No HAV carrier state 
has been identified after acute hepatitis A; perpetuation of the virus in 
nature  depends  presumably  on  nonepidemic,  inapparent  subclinical 
infection,  ingestion  of  contaminated  food  or  water  in,  or  imported 
from,  endemic  areas,  and/or  contamination  linked  to  environmental 
reservoirs.

In  the  general  population,  anti-HAV,  a  marker  for  previous  HAV 
infection, increases in prevalence as a function of increasing age and 
of decreasing socioeconomic status. In the 1970s, serologic evidence of 
prior hepatitis A infection occurred in ~40% of urban populations in 
the United States, most of whose members never recalled having had 
a symptomatic case of hepatitis. In subsequent decades, however, the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2570

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 339-2  Clinical and Epidemiologic Features of Viral Hepatitis
FEATURE
Incubation (days)
Onset
Age preference

HBV
30–180, mean 60–90
Insidious or acute
Young adults (sexual and 
percutaneous), babies, 
toddlers

HAV
15–45, mean 30
Acute
Children, young 
adults

HCV
15–160, mean 50
Insidious or acute
Any age, but more common 
in adults

HDV
30–180, mean 60–90
Insidious or acute
Any age (similar to HBV)

2571

HEV
14–60, mean 40
Acute
Epidemic cases: young 
adults (20–40 years); 
sporadic cases: older 
adults (>60)

Transmission
  Fecal-oral
  Percutaneous
  Perinatal
  Sexual
Clinical
  Severity
  Fulminant

 Progression to chronicity

  Carrier
  Cancer
  Prognosis
Prophylaxis

Therapy

+++
Unusual
−
±

Mild
0.1%
None
None
None
Excellent
Ig, inactivated 
vaccine
None

−
+++
+
++

+++
−
−
−

Occasionally severe
5–20%b
Commond
Variableg
±
Acute, good; chronic, poor
HBV vaccine (none for 
HBV carriers)
Pegylated interferon ±

Mild
1–2%c
Nonee
None
None
Good
Vaccine

Nonej

−
+++
+++
++

−
+++
±a
±a

Occasionally severe
0.1–1%
Occasional (1–10%)
(90% of neonates)
0.1–30%f + (neonatal infection)
Worse with age, debility
HBIG, recombinant vaccine

Moderate
0.1%
Common (85%)
1.5–3.2%
+
Moderate
None

Interferonh
Lamivudineh
Adefovirh
Pegylated interferoni
Entecaviri
Telbivudinei
Tenofovir disoproxil fumaratei
Tenofovir alafenamidei

Pegylated interferon ribavirin,h 
telaprevir,h boceprevir,h 
simeprevir,h sofosbuvir, 
ledipasvir, paritaprevir/
ritonavir,h ombitasvir,h 
dasabuvir,h daclatasvir,h 
velpatasvir, grazoprevir, 
elbasvir, glecaprevir, 
pibrentasvir, voxilaprevir

aPrimarily with HIV co-infection and high-level viremia in index case; more likely in persons with multiple sex partners or sexually transmitted diseases; risk ~5%. bUp 
to 5% in acute HBV/HDV co-infection; up to 20% in HDV superinfection of chronic HBV infection. e10–20% in pregnant women. dIn acute HBV/HDV co-infection, the 
frequency of chronicity is the same as that for HBV; in HDV superinfection, chronicity is invariable. eExcept as observed in immunosuppressed liver allograft recipients or 
other immunosuppressed hosts. fVaries considerably throughout the world and in subpopulations within countries; see text. gCommon in Mediterranean countries; rare in 
North America and western Europe. hNo longer recommended or not included in first-line therapy. iFirst-line agents. jAnecdotal reports and retrospective studies suggest 
that pegylated interferon and/or ribavirin are effective in treating chronic hepatitis E, observed in immunocompromised persons; ribavirin monotherapy has been used 
successfully in acute, severe hepatitis E.
Abbreviation: HBIG, hepatitis B immunoglobulin. See text for other abbreviations.

prevalence  of  anti-HAV  declined  in  the  United  States.  In  developing 
countries,  exposure,  infection,  and  subsequent  immunity  are  almost 
universal  in  childhood.  As  the  frequency  of  subclinical  childhood 
infections  declines  in  developed  countries,  a  susceptible  cohort  of 
adults emerges. Hepatitis A tends to be more symptomatic in adults; 
therefore,  paradoxically,  as  the  frequency  of  HAV  infection  declines, 
the  likelihood  of  clinically  apparent,  even  severe,  HAV  illnesses 
increases in the susceptible adult population. Travel to endemic areas 
is  a  common  source  of  infection  for  adults  from  nonendemic  areas. 
Important  recognized  epidemiologic  foci  of  HAV  infection  include 
childcare  centers,  neonatal  intensive  care  units,  promiscuous  men 
who have sex with men, injection drug users, and unvaccinated close 
contacts  of  newly  arrived  international  adopted  children,  most  of 
whom  emanate  from  countries  with  intermediate-to-high  hepatitis 
A endemicity. Although hepatitis A is rarely bloodborne, several out-
breaks  have  been  recognized  in  recipients  of  clotting-factor  concen-
trates. In the United States, the introduction of hepatitis A vaccination 
programs  among  children  from  high-incidence  states  has  resulted  in 
a >70% reduction in the annual incidence of new HAV infections and 
has shifted the burden of new infections from children to adults. In the 
2007–2012 U.S. Public Health Service National Health and Nutrition 
Examination  Survey  (NHANES),  the  prevalence  of  anti-HAV  in  the 
U.S. population aged ≥20 years had declined to 24.2% from the 29.5% 
measured in NHANES 1999–2006. While universal childhood vacci-
nation accounted for a high prevalence of vaccine-induced immunity 
in children aged 2–19 years, the lowest age-specific prevalence of anti-
HAV (16.1–17.6%) occurred in adults in the fourth and fifth decades 
(aged 30–49 years). This is a subgroup of the population who remain 

susceptible to acute hepatitis A acquired during travel to endemic areas 
and from contaminated foods, especially those imported from endemic 
countries. Recognized initially in San Diego, California, in 2016, wide-
spread person-to-person outbreaks, attributed to fecally contaminated 
environments, of acute hepatitis A occurred primarily among homeless 
persons and persons who were using injection drugs. Ultimately, this 
outbreak  extended  to  at  least  32  states  (highest  number  of  cases  in 
Kentucky), and by March 2020, 31,950 cases were reported, resulting in 
19,548 hospitalizations (61% of cases) and 322 deaths (1% of reported 
cases, 1.6% of hospitalized cases). The increased clinical severity, rate of 
hospitalization, and death in these outbreaks can be attributed to their 
involving an older population (mean age ranging from 36 to 42 years), 
born before the introduction of universal childhood hepatitis A vacci-
nation and in whom clinical severity, as noted above, is higher than in 
children. Moreover, the affected homeless and drug-using populations 
suffer from multiple comorbidities (including HBV or HCV co-infection) 
and  disparities  in  access  to  health  care.  Addressing  this  multistate 
outbreak has required a vigorous hepatitis A vaccination effort as well 
as environmental sanitation/hygiene and education among these sus-
ceptible populations.

Hepatitis  B  Percutaneous  inoculation  has  long  been  recognized 
as a major route of hepatitis B transmission, but the outmoded desig-
nation  “serum  hepatitis”  is  an  inaccurate  label  for  the  epidemiologic 
spectrum  of  HBV  infection.  As  detailed  below,  most  of  the  hepatitis 
transmitted by blood transfusion is not caused by HBV; moreover, in 
approximately  two-thirds  of  patients  with  acute  type  B  hepatitis,  no 
history  of  an  identifiable  percutaneous  exposure  can  be  elicited.  We 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2571

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2572 now recognize that many cases of hepatitis B result from less obvious 
modes  of  nonpercutaneous  or  covert  percutaneous  transmission. 
HBsAg  has  been  identified  in  almost  every  body  fluid  from  infected 
persons, and at least some of these body fluids—most notably semen 
and  saliva—are  infectious,  albeit  less  so  than  serum,  when  adminis-
tered  percutaneously  or  nonpercutaneously  to  experimental  animals. 
Among  the  nonpercutaneous  modes  of  HBV  transmission,  oral 
ingestion has been documented as a potential but inefficient route of 
exposure. By contrast, the two nonpercutaneous routes considered to 
have  the  greatest  impact  are  intimate  (especially  sexual)  contact  and 
perinatal transmission.

In  sub-Saharan  Africa,  intimate  contact  among  toddlers  is  con-
sidered  instrumental  in  contributing  to  the  maintenance  of  the  high 
frequency  of  hepatitis  B  in  the  population.  Perinatal  transmission 
occurs primarily in infants born to mothers with chronic hepatitis B 
or (rarely) mothers with acute hepatitis B during the third trimester of 
pregnancy or during the early postpartum period. Perinatal transmis-
sion is uncommon in North America and western Europe but occurs 
with great frequency and is the most important mode of HBV perpet-
uation  in  East  Asia  and  developing  countries.  Although  the  precise 
mode  of  perinatal  transmission  is  unknown,  and  although  ~10%  of 
infections may be acquired in utero, epidemiologic evidence suggests 
that most infections occur approximately at the time of delivery and are 
not related to breast-feeding (which is not contraindicated in women 
with  hepatitis  B).  The  likelihood  of  perinatal  transmission  of  HBV 
correlates with the presence of HBeAg and high-level viral replication; 
90% of HBeAg-positive mothers but only 10–15% of anti-HBe-positive 
mothers transmit HBV infection to their offspring. In most cases, acute 
infection in the neonate is clinically asymptomatic, but the child is very 
likely to remain chronically infected.

The  250–290  million  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  in  the 
world  constitute  the  main  reservoir  of  hepatitis  B  in  human  beings. 
Whereas serum HBsAg is infrequent (0.1–0.5%) in normal populations 
in the United States and western Europe, a prevalence of up to 5–10% 
has  been  found  in  East  Asia,  sub-Saharan  Africa,  and  tropical  coun-
tries;  the  prevalence  can  be  even  higher  in  certain  high-risk  groups, 
including persons with Down’s syndrome, lepromatous leprosy, leuke-
mia, Hodgkin’s disease, polyarteritis nodosa, and chronic renal disease 
on hemodialysis, as well as in injection drug users.

Other groups with high rates of HBV infection include spouses of 
acutely infected persons; sexually promiscuous persons (especially pro-
miscuous men who have sex with men); health care workers exposed 
to  blood;  persons  who  require  repeated  transfusions  especially  with 
pooled blood-product concentrates (e.g., hemophiliacs); residents and 
staff  of  custodial  institutions  for  the  developmentally  handicapped; 
prisoners;  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  family  members  of  chronically 
infected  patients.  In  volunteer  blood  donors,  the  prevalence  of  anti-
HBs,  a  reflection  of  previous  HBV  infection,  ranges  from  5  to  10%, 
but the prevalence is higher in lower socioeconomic strata, older age 
groups,  and  persons—including  those  mentioned  above—exposed 
to  blood  products.  Because  of  highly  sensitive  virologic  screening 
(antigen, antibody, and nucleic acid testing) of donor blood, the risk 
of acquiring HBV infection from a blood transfusion is 1 in 230,000 
to 1 in 346,000.

Prevalence of infection, modes of transmission, and human behav-
ior  conspire  to  mold  geographically  different  epidemiologic  patterns 
of HBV infection. In East Asia and Africa, hepatitis B, a disease of the 
newborn  and  young  children,  is  perpetuated  by  a  cycle  of  maternal-
neonatal  spread.  In  North  America  and  western  Europe,  hepatitis  B 
is primarily a disease of adolescence and early adulthood, the time of 
life  when  intimate  sexual  contact  and  recreational  and  occupational 
percutaneous exposures tend to occur. To some degree, however, this 
dichotomy  between  high-prevalence  and  low-prevalence  geographic 
regions  has  been  minimized  by  immigration  from  high-prevalence 
to low-prevalence areas. For example, in the United States, NHANES 
data from 2007 to 2012 revealed an overall prevalence of current HBV 
infection (detectable HBsAg) of 0.3%; however, the prevalence in Asian 
persons,  93%  of  whom  were  foreign-born,  was  tenfold  higher,  3.1%, 
representing  50%  of  the  U.S.  national  disease  burden.  As  a  result  of 

adoption of safe behaviors in high-risk groups as well as screening and 
vaccination programs, the incidence of newly reported HBV infections 
fell by >80% in the United States during the 1990s (with a low of 3050 
reported cases in 2013). Paralleling that trend, the imbalance between 
cases  in  U.S.-born  and  foreign-born  persons  widened;  currently, 
imported  cases  in  non-U.S.-born  persons  outnumber  domestic  cases 
by  manyfold;  in  NHANES  1999–2016,  the  2016  prevalence  of  HBV 
infection was 0.24% in foreign-born versus 0.06% in U.S.-born persons; 
in Asian persons, the 2016 prevalence of HBV infections was 3.85% in 
foreign-born versus 0.79% in U.S.-born persons. The introduction of 
hepatitis B vaccine in the early 1980s and adoption of universal child-
hood  vaccination  policies  in  many  countries  resulted  in  a  dramatic, 
~90% decline in the incidence of new HBV infections in those coun-
tries as well as in the dire consequences of chronic infection, including 
hepatocellular  carcinoma.  In  the  United  States,  as  demonstrated  in 
NHANES 2007–2012, following the 1991 implementation of universal 
childhood vaccination, HBsAg seropositivity had declined in children 
aged 6–19 years to as low as 0.03%, an ~85% reduction. Populations 
and  groups  for  whom  HBV  infection  screening  is  recommended  are 
listed in Table 339-3.

Hepatitis  D 
Infection  with  HDV  has  a  worldwide  distribution, 
but  two  epidemiologic  patterns  exist.  In  Mediterranean  countries 
(northern Africa, southern Europe, the Middle East), HDV infection is 
endemic among those with hepatitis B, and the disease is transmitted 
predominantly  by  nonpercutaneous  means,  especially  close  personal 
contact.  In  nonendemic  areas,  such  as  the  United  States  (where  
hepatitis D is rare among persons with chronic hepatitis B) and northern 
Europe, HDV infection is confined to persons exposed frequently to 
blood  and  blood  products,  primarily  injection  drug  users  (especially 
in HIV-infected injection drug users) and hemophiliacs. In the United 
States, the prevalence of HDV infection in the national population was 
0.02%  in  NHANES  1999–2012  and  0.11%  in  NHANES  2011–2016; 
however,  among  HBsAg-positive  persons,  the  prevalence  of  HDV 
infection is highest in injection drug users (11–36%) and hemophiliacs 
(19%).  HDV  infection  can  be  introduced  into  a  population  through 
drug users or by migration of persons from endemic to nonendemic 
areas.  Thus,  patterns  of  population  migration  and  human  behavior 
facilitating percutaneous contact play important roles in the introduc-
tion and amplification of HDV infection. Occasionally, the migrating 
epidemiology  of  hepatitis  D  is  expressed  in  explosive  outbreaks  of 
severe  hepatitis,  such  as  those  that  have  occurred  in  remote  South 
American  villages  (e.g.,  “Lábrea  fever”  in  the  Amazon  basin)  as  well 
as  in  urban  centers  in  the  United  States.  Ultimately,  such  outbreaks 

TABLE 339-3  High-Risk Populations for Whom HBV Infection 
Screening Is Recommended
Persons born in countries/regions with a high (≥8%) and intermediate (≥2%) 
prevalence of HBV infection including immigrants and adopted children and 
including persons born in the United States who were not vaccinated as infants 
and whose parents emigrated from areas of high HBV endemicity
Household and sexual contacts of persons with hepatitis B
Babies born to HBsAg-positive mothers
Persons who have used injection drugs
Persons with multiple sexual contacts or a history of sexually transmitted disease
Men who have sex with men
Inmates of correctional facilities
Persons with elevated alanine or aspartate aminotransferase levels
Blood/plasma/organ/tissue/semen donors
Persons with HCV or HIV infection
Hemodialysis patients
Pregnant women
Persons who are the source of blood or body fluids that would be an indication 
for postexposure prophylaxis (e.g., needlestick, mucosal exposure, sexual 
assault)
Persons who require immunosuppressive or cytotoxic therapy (including 
anti–tumor necrosis factor α therapy for rheumatologic or inflammatory bowel 
disorders)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2572

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2573

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

of  hepatitis  D—either  of  co-infections  with  acute  hepatitis  B  or  of 
superinfections in those already infected with HBV—may blur the dis-
tinctions between endemic and nonendemic areas. On a global scale, 
HDV infection declined at the end of the 1990s. Even in Italy, an HDV- 
endemic  area,  public  health  measures  introduced  to  control  HBV 
infection (e.g., mass hepatitis B vaccination) resulted during the 1990s 
in a 1.5%/year reduction in the prevalence of HDV infection. Still, the 
frequency  of  HDV  infection  during  the  first  decade  of  the  twenty-
first century has not fallen below levels reached during the 1990s; the 
reservoir has been sustained by survivors infected during 1970–1980 
and  recent  immigrants  from  still-endemic  (e.g.,  eastern  Europe  and 
Central Asia) to less-endemic countries. The current global prevalence 
of HDV infection has been estimated at 62–72 million people. Of the 
eight HDV genotypes, genotype 1 is distributed worldwide, while the 
others  are  more  geographically  confined  (e.g.,  genotypes  2  and  4  in  
the Far East, 3 in South America, and 5–8 in Africa).

Hepatitis C  Routine screening of blood donors for HBsAg and the 
elimination of commercial blood sources in the early 1970s reduced the 
frequency  of,  but  did  not  eliminate,  transfusion-associated  hepatitis. 
During the 1970s, the likelihood of acquiring hepatitis after transfusion 
of voluntarily donated, HBsAg-screened blood was ~10% per patient 
(up to 0.9% per unit transfused); 90–95% of these cases were classified, 
based on serologic exclusion of hepatitis A and B, as “non-A, non-B” 
hepatitis. For patients requiring transfusion of pooled products, such 
as clotting factor concentrates, the risk was even higher, up to 20–30%.
During  the  1980s,  voluntary  self-exclusion  of  blood  donors  with 
risk  factors  for  AIDS  and  then  the  introduction  of  donor  screening 
for anti-HIV reduced further the likelihood of transfusion-associated 
hepatitis  to  <5%.  During  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  the  intro-
duction first of “surrogate” screening tests for non-A, non-B hepatitis 
(alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and anti-HBc, both shown to identify 
blood donors with a higher likelihood of transmitting non-A, non-B 
hepatitis to recipients) and, subsequently, after the discovery of HCV, 
progressively more sensitive immunoassays for anti-HCV and then the 
application of automated PCR testing of donated blood for HCV RNA 
reduced the risk of transfusion-associated hepatitis C even further, to 
almost imperceptible levels ranging between 1 in 2.3 million transfu-
sions to 1 in 4.7 million transfusions.

In  addition  to  being  transmitted  by  transfusion,  hepatitis  C  can 
be  transmitted  by  other  percutaneous  routes,  such  as  injection  drug 
use. This virus can be transmitted by occupational exposure to blood,  
and the likelihood of infection is increased in hemodialysis units. Although 
the  frequency  of  transfusion-associated  hepatitis  C  fell  as  a  result  of 
blood-donor  screening,  the  overall  frequency  of  reported  hepatitis  C 
cases  did  not  change  until  the  1990s,  when  the  overall  frequency  of 
reported cases fell by 80%, in parallel with a reduction in the number 
of new cases in injection drug users, the source of most of the HCV 
reservoir. After the exclusion of anti-HCV-positive plasma units from 
the donor pool, rare, sporadic instances occurred of hepatitis C among 
recipients  of  immunoglobulin  preparations  for  intravenous  (but  not 
intramuscular) use.

Serologic  evidence  for  HCV  infection  occurs  in  90%  of  patients 
with a history of transfusion-associated hepatitis (almost all occurring 
before 1992, when second-generation HCV screening tests were intro-
duced); hemophiliacs and others treated with clotting factors; injection 
drug users; 60–70% of patients with sporadic “non-A, non-B” hepatitis 
who  lack  identifiable  risk  factors;  0.5%  of  volunteer  blood  donors; 
and, in the NHANES survey conducted in the United States between 
1999  and  2002,  1.6%  of  the  general  population  in  the  United  States, 
which  translated  into  4.1  million  persons  (3.2  million  with  viremia), 
the  majority  of  whom  were  unaware  of  their  infections.  Moreover, 
such  population  surveys  do  not  include  higher-risk  groups  such  as 
incarcerated  persons,  homeless  persons,  and  active  injection  drug 
users, indicating that the actual prevalence is even higher (estimated 
to add an additional 1 million with anti-HCV antibody and 0.8 million 
with HCV RNA in a later cohort assessed in 2003–2010). Comparable 
frequencies  of  HCV  infection  occur  in  most  countries  around  the 
world, with 71 million persons infected worldwide, but extraordinarily 

high prevalences of HCV infection occur in certain countries such as 
Egypt, where >20% of the population (as high as 50% in persons born 
prior to 1960) in some cities is infected. The high frequency in Egypt 
is attributable to contaminated equipment used for medical procedures 
and unsafe injection practices in the 1950s to 1980s (during a campaign 
to eradicate schistosomiasis with intravenous tartar emetic). Thanks to 
a 2018–2019 Egyptian government program to screen its entire adult 
population (79% participation among >60 million people) for hepatitis 
C and treat infected persons (2.2 million, 4.6% of those screened; of the 
83% with a documented outcome, 99% were cured; the cost to identify 
and  cure  a  person  was  $130)  with  generic  versions  of  direct-acting 
antiviral  (DAA)  therapy  (Chap.  341),  hepatitis  C  has  been  nearly 
eliminated there.

In  the  United  States,  African  Americans  and  Mexican  Americans 
have  higher  frequencies  of  HCV  infection  than  whites.  Data  from 
NHANES  showed  that  between  1988  and  1994,  30-  to  40-year-old 
men  had  the  highest  prevalence  of  HCV  infection;  however,  in  the 
NHANES  survey  conducted  between  1999  and  2002,  the  peak  age 
decile had shifted to those aged 40–49 years; an increase in hepatitis 
C–related mortality has paralleled this secular trend, increasing since 
1995 predominantly in the 45- to 65-year age group. Thus, despite an 
80% reduction in new reported HCV infections during the 1990s, the 
prevalence  of  HCV  infection  in  the  population  was  sustained  by  an 
aging cohort that had acquired their infections three to four decades 
earlier, during the 1960s and 1970s, as a result predominantly of self- 
inoculation with recreational drugs. Retrospective phylogenetic mapping 
of >45,000 HCV genotype 1a isolates revealed that the hepatitis C epi-
demic emerged in the United States between 1940 and 1965, peaking in 
1950 and aligning temporally with the post–World War II expansion of 
medical procedures (including reuse of glass syringes). Thus, HCV was 
amplified iatrogenically not only in Egypt but also in the United States; 
in the United States, the seeds sewn by medical procedures in the 1950s 
were reaped in the 1960s and 1970s among transfusion recipients and 
injection drug users, even those whose drug use was confined to brief 
adolescent experimentation.

In  NHANES  2003–2010,  the  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  (HCV 
RNA  reactivity)  in  the  United  States  had  actually  fallen  to  1%  (2.7 
million persons) from 1.3% (3.2 million) the decade before (NHANES 
1999–2002),  attributable  to  deaths  among  the  HCV-infected  popu-
lation.  In  NHANES  data  from  2010–2014,  the  prevalence  of  current 
HCV infection (HCV RNA reactivity) had fallen even lower, to 0.65% 
(1.7  million  persons),  coinciding  with  and  attributable  to  the  intro-
duction  of  highly  effective,  oral  DAA  drugs  (Chap.  341).  As  deaths 
resulting  from  HIV  infection  fell  after  1999,  age-adjusted  mortality 
associated with HCV infection surpassed that of HIV infection in 2007; 
>70% of HCV-associated deaths occurred in the “baby boomer” cohort 
born between 1945 and 1965. By 2012, HCV mortality had surpassed 
deaths  from  HIV,  tuberculosis,  hepatitis  B,  and  57  other  notifiable 
infectious diseases (i.e., all infectious diseases) reported to the CDC. In 
NHANES 1999–2002, compared to the 1.6% prevalence of HCV infec-
tion in the population at large, the prevalence in the 1945–1965 birth 
cohort  was  3.2%,  representing  three-quarters  of  all  infected  persons. 
Therefore, in 2012, the CDC and, in 2013, the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task  Force  (USPSTF)  recommended  that  all  persons  born  between 
1945 and 1965 be screened for hepatitis C, without ascertainment of 
risk,  a  recommendation  shown  to  be  cost-effective  and  predicted  to 
identify 800,000 infected persons. Because of the availability of highly 
effective antiviral therapy, such screening would have the potential to 
avert 200,000 cases of cirrhosis and 47,000 cases of hepatocellular car-
cinoma and to prevent 120,000 hepatitis-related deaths; with the avail-
ability of the new generation of DAAs (efficacy >95%, see Chap. 341),  
screening baby boomers and treating those with hepatitis C have been 
predicted  to  reduce  the  HCV-associated  disease  burden  by  50–70% 
through 2050.

Still,  persons  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  identified  by  1945–1965 
birth-cohort screening are older than 50, and by the time they are iden-
tified, >20% already have advanced liver disease. In 2020, based on (1) 
the 95–99% efficacy of all-oral, well-tolerated, highly effective DAAs; 
(2)  the  demonstration  that  the  endpoint  of  DAA  therapy  (sustained 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2573

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2574 virologic response) was associated with a marked decrease in liver and 
all-cause mortality, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (Chap. 341);  
(3)  a  reduction  in  the  initially  high  cost  of  DAA  therapy;  (4)  the 
demonstration  of  higher  cost-effectiveness  of  screening  all  adults 
rather than birth-cohort screening; and (5) the shifting demographics 
of HCV infection (see below), especially since 2010, toward a younger 
population exposed through injection drug use, the American Associa-
tion for the Study of Liver Diseases and the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America as well as the USPSTF and CDC expanded recommended 
hepatitis  C  screening  to  all  adolescents  and  adults  aged  18–79  (and 
because of the substantial increase in HCV infections among women 
of child-bearing age [age 20–39], expanded such screening to pregnant 
women).

Hepatitis  C  accounts  for  40%  of  chronic  liver  disease  and,  before 
the  introduction  of  high-efficacy  DAA  therapy,  was  the  most  fre-
quent  indication  for  liver  transplantation;  hepatitis  C  is  estimated  to 
account  for  8000–10,000  deaths  per  year  in  the  United  States.  The 
distribution of HCV genotypes varies in different parts of the world. 
Worldwide,  genotype  1  is  the  most  common.  In  the  United  States, 
genotype 1 accounts for 70% of HCV infections, whereas genotypes 2 
and 3 account for the remaining 30%; among African Americans, the 
frequency  of  genotype  1  is  even  higher  (i.e.,  90%).  Genotype  4  pre-
dominates in Egypt; genotype 5 is localized to South Africa, genotype 
6 to Hong Kong, and genotype 7 to Central Africa. Most asymptomatic 
blood donors found to have anti-HCV and ~20–30% of persons with 
reported  cases  of  acute  hepatitis  C  do  not  fall  into  a  recognized  risk 
group;  however,  many  such  blood  donors  do  recall  risk-associated 
behaviors when questioned carefully.

As  a  bloodborne  infection,  HCV  potentially  can  be  transmitted 
sexually  and  perinatally;  however,  both  modes  of  transmission  are 
inefficient  for  hepatitis  C.  Although  10–15%  of  patients  with  acute 
hepatitis  C  report  having  potential  sexual  sources  of  infection,  most 
studies  have  failed  to  identify  sexual  transmission  of  this  agent.  The 
chances  of  sexual  and  perinatal  transmission  have  been  estimated  to 
be ~5% but have shown in a prospective study to be only 1% between 
monogamous  sexual  partners,  well  below  comparable  rates  for  HIV 
and HBV infections. Moreover, sexual transmission appears to be con-
fined to such subgroups as persons with multiple sexual partners and 
sexually transmitted diseases; for example, isolated clusters of sexually 
transmitted HCV infection have been reported in HIV-infected men 
who  have  sex  with  men.  Breast-feeding  does  not  increase  the  risk  of 
HCV infection between an infected mother and her infant. Infection 
of health workers is not dramatically higher than among the general 
population; however, health workers are more likely to acquire HCV 
infection through accidental needle punctures, the efficiency of which 
is ~3%. Infection of household contacts is rare as well.

Besides  persons  born  between  1945  and  1965,  other  groups  with 
an increased frequency of HCV infection are listed in Table 339-4. In 
immunosuppressed individuals, levels of anti-HCV may be undetect-
able, and a diagnosis may require testing for HCV RNA. Although new 
acute cases of hepatitis C are rare outside of the injection drug–using 
community,  newly  diagnosed  cases  are  common  among  otherwise 
healthy  persons  who  experimented  briefly  with  injection  drugs,  as 
noted above, four or five decades earlier. Such instances usually remain 
unrecognized  for  years,  until  unearthed  by  laboratory  screening  for 
routine  medical  examinations,  insurance  applications,  and  attempted 
blood  donation.  Although,  overall,  the  annual  incidence  of  new 
HCV  infections  has  continued  to  fall,  the  rate  of  new  infections  has 
been increasing since 2002, has accelerated since 2010 (tripling from 
0.3/100,000  to  1.2/100,000  between  2009  and  2018),  and  has  been 
amplified  by  the  recent  epidemic  of  opioid  use  in  a  new  cohort  of 
young injection drug users aged 20–39 years (accounting for a 3.8-fold 
increase in cases between 2010 and 2017 and for more than two-thirds 
of all acute cases), who, unlike older cohorts, had not learned to take 
precautions to prevent bloodborne infections. Reflecting this emerging 
development,  the  prevalence  of  current  HCV  infection  (HCV  RNA 
reactivity) in the United States rose from 0.65% (1.7 million persons) 
in  a  2010–2014  NHANES  analysis  to  0.84%  (2.04  million  persons) 
in  a  2013–2014  NHANES  analysis.  Moreover,  based  on  an  estimate 

TABLE 339-4  High-Risk Populations for Whom HCV-Infection 
Screening Is Recommended
All adults aged 18–79 should be screened, a recommendation that supplants the 
earlier focus on persons born between 1945 and 1965
Persons who have ever used injection drugs
Persons with HIV infection
Hemophiliacs treated with clotting factor concentrates prior to 1987
Persons who have ever undergone long-term hemodialysis
Persons with unexplained elevations of aminotransferase levels
Transfusion or transplantation recipients prior to July 1992
Recipients of blood or organs from a donor found to be positive for hepatitis C
Children born to women with hepatitis C
Health care, public safety, and emergency medical personnel following needle 
injury or mucosal exposure to HCV-contaminated blood
Sexual partners of persons with hepatitis C infection
Pregnant women

of  populations  excluded  from  this  NHANES  analysis,  the  prevalence 
would  be  even  higher,  0.93%  (2.27  million  persons).  This  late  tem-
poral trend was attributed to the increase of acute cases in injections 
drug users, driven by increases in states most affected by the opioid/
injection drug use epidemic. Also, in parallel with this trend, the prev-
alence of HCV infection in women aged 15–44 years (of child-bearing 
age) doubled between 2016 and 2014; accordingly, screening of preg-
nant women for HCV infection is now recommended as well.

Hepatitis E  This type of hepatitis, identified in India, Asia, Africa, 
the  Middle  East,  and  Central  America  (endemic  areas),  resembles 
hepatitis  A  in  its  primarily  enteric  mode  of  spread.  The  commonly 
recognized cases occur after contamination of water supplies such as 
after  monsoon  flooding,  but  sporadic,  isolated  cases  occur.  An  epi-
demiologic feature that distinguishes HEV from other enteric agents is 
the rarity of secondary person-to-person spread from infected persons 
to their close contacts. Large waterborne outbreaks in endemic areas 
are linked to genotypes 1 and 2, arise in populations that are immune 
to HAV, favor young adults, and account for antibody prevalences of 
30–80%.  The  worldwide  annual  incidence  of  acute  HEV  infections 
has been estimated conservatively to be at least 20 million (of which 
3.3  million  are  symptomatic),  rendering  HEV  infection  as  the  most 
common  cause  of  acute  viral  hepatitis.  In  nonendemic  areas  of  the 
world, such as the United States, clinically apparent acute hepatitis E is 
extremely rare; however, during the 1988–1994 NHANES survey con-
ducted by the U.S. Public Health Service, the prevalence of anti-HEV 
was 21%, reflecting subclinical infections, infection with genotypes 3 
and 4, predominantly in older males (>60 years). A repeat NHANES 
study  in  2009–2010,  however,  showed  a  substantial  70%  two-decade 
reduction in anti-HEV to only 6%, more consistent with the rarity of 
acute hepatitis E in the United States than the previous NHANES result 
would  suggest  and  perhaps  a  reflection  of  a  more  specific  anti-HEV 
assay used in the second time period. Again, older age was associated 
with anti-HEV seropositivity. In nonendemic areas, HEV accounts for 
only a small proportion of cases of sporadic (labeled “autochthonous” 
or indigenous) hepatitis; however, cases imported from endemic areas 
have  been  found  in  the  United  States.  Evidence  supports  a  zoonotic 
reservoir  for  HEV  primarily  in  swine  (but  also  in  deer,  camels,  and 
rabbits), which may account for the mostly subclinical infections pri-
marily of genotypes 3 and 4 in nonendemic areas. A previously unrec-
ognized  high  distribution  of  HEV  infection,  linked  to  uncooked  or 
undercooked pork-product ingestion, has been discovered in western 
Europe  (e.g.,  in  Germany,  an  estimated  annual  incidence  of  300,000 
cases  and  a  17%  prevalence  of  anti-HEV  among  adults;  in  France,  a 
22% prevalence of anti-HEV in healthy blood donors).

 ■ CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FEATURES
Symptoms and Signs  Acute  viral  hepatitis  occurs  after  an  incu-
bation period that varies according to the responsible agent. Generally, 
incubation  periods  for  hepatitis  A  range  from  15  to  45  days  (mean,  

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2574

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2575

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

4 weeks), for hepatitis B and D from 30 to 180 days (mean, 8–12 weeks), 
for hepatitis C from 15 to 160 days (mean, 7 weeks), and for hepatitis 
E from 14 to 60 days (mean, 5–6 weeks). The prodromal symptoms of 
acute  viral  hepatitis  are  systemic  and  quite  variable.  Constitutional 
symptoms of anorexia, nausea and vomiting, fatigue, malaise, arthral-
gias, myalgias, headache, photophobia, pharyngitis, cough, and coryza 
may precede the onset of jaundice by 1–2 weeks. The nausea, vomiting, 
and anorexia are frequently associated with alterations in olfaction and 
taste. A low-grade fever between 38° and 39°C (100°–102°F) is more 
often present in hepatitis A and E than in hepatitis B or C, except when 
hepatitis  B  is  heralded  by  a  serum  sickness–like  syndrome;  rarely,  a 
fever  of  39.5°–40°C  (103°–104°F)  may  accompany  the  constitutional 
symptoms. Dark urine and clay-colored stools may be noticed by the 
patient from 1–5 days before the onset of clinical jaundice.

With  the  onset  of  clinical  jaundice,  the  constitutional  prodromal 
symptoms  usually  diminish,  but  in  some  patients,  mild  weight  loss 
(2.5–5 kg) is common and may continue during the entire icteric phase. 
The  liver  becomes  enlarged  and  tender  and  may  be  associated  with 
right upper quadrant pain and discomfort. Infrequently, patients pres-
ent with a cholestatic picture, suggesting extrahepatic biliary obstruc-
tion.  Splenomegaly  and  cervical  adenopathy  are  present  in  10–20% 
of patients with acute hepatitis. Rarely, a few spider angiomas appear 
during the icteric phase and disappear during convalescence. During 
the  recovery  phase,  constitutional  symptoms  disappear,  but  usually 
some liver enlargement and abnormalities in liver biochemical tests are 
still evident. The duration of the posticteric phase is variable, ranging 
from 2 to 12 weeks, and is usually more prolonged in acute hepatitis B 
and C. Complete clinical and biochemical recovery is to be expected 
1–2 months after all cases of hepatitis A and E and 3–4 months after the 
onset of jaundice in three-quarters of uncomplicated, self-limited cases 
of hepatitis B and C (among healthy adults, acute hepatitis B is self-lim-
ited in 95–99%, whereas hepatitis C is self-limited in only ~15–20%). 
In the remainder, biochemical recovery may be delayed. A substantial 
proportion of patients with viral hepatitis never become icteric.

Infection with HDV can occur in the presence of acute or chronic 
HBV  infection;  the  duration  of  HBV  infection  determines  the  dura-
tion of HDV infection. When acute HDV and HBV infections occur 
simultaneously, clinical and biochemical features may be indistinguish-
able  from  those  of  HBV  infection  alone,  although  occasionally,  they 
are  more  severe.  As  opposed  to  patients  with  acute  HBV  infection, 
patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection  can  support  HDV  replication 
indefinitely,  as  when  acute  HDV  infection  occurs  in  the  presence  of 
a nonresolving acute HBV infection or, more commonly, when acute 
hepatitis D is superimposed on underlying chronic hepatitis B. In such 
cases, the HDV superinfection appears as a clinical exacerbation or an 
episode resembling acute viral hepatitis in someone already chronically 
infected with HBV. Superinfection with HDV in a patient with chronic 
hepatitis B often leads to clinical deterioration (see below).

In  addition  to  superinfections  with  other  hepatitis  agents,  acute 
hepatitis-like  clinical  events  in  persons  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  may 
accompany spontaneous HBeAg to anti-HBe seroconversion or spon-
taneous  reactivation  (i.e.,  reversion  from  relatively  nonreplicative  to 
replicative  infection).  Such  reactivations  can  occur  as  well  in  thera-
peutically  immunosuppressed  patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection 
when  cytotoxic/immunosuppressive  drugs  are  withdrawn;  in  these 
cases, restoration of immune competence is thought to allow resump-
tion  of  previously  checked  cell-mediated  immune  cytolysis  of  HBV- 
infected  hepatocytes.  Occasionally,  acute  clinical  exacerbations  of 
chronic hepatitis B may represent the emergence of a precore mutant 
(see  “Virology  and  Etiology”),  and  the  subsequent  course  in  such 
patients  may  be  characterized  by  periodic  exacerbations.  Cytotoxic 
chemotherapy can lead to reactivation of chronic hepatitis C as well, 
and  treatment  with  other  immunomodulators,  such  as  monoclonal 
antibodies against anti-TNF-α and other cytokines and especially the 
B-cell (CD20)–depleting antibody rituximab, can lead to reactivation 
of both hepatitis B and C.

Laboratory  Features  The  serum  aminotransferases  aspartate 
aminotransferase  (AST)  and  ALT  (previously  designated  SGOT  and 

SGPT)  increase  to  a  variable  degree  during  the  prodromal  phase  of 
acute viral hepatitis and precede the rise in bilirubin level (Figs. 339-2 
and  339-4).  The  level  of  these  enzymes,  however,  does  not  correlate 
well with the degree of liver cell damage. Peak levels vary from ~400 
to ~4000 IU or more; these levels are usually reached at the time the 
patient is clinically icteric and diminish progressively during the recov-
ery phase of acute hepatitis. The diagnosis of anicteric hepatitis is based 
on clinical features and on aminotransferase elevations.

Jaundice is usually visible in the sclera or skin when the serum bil-
irubin value is >43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL). When jaundice appears, the 
serum bilirubin typically rises to levels ranging from 85 to 340 μmol/L 
(5–20 mg/dL). The serum bilirubin may continue to rise despite falling 
serum aminotransferase levels. In most instances, the total bilirubin is 
equally  divided  between  the  conjugated  and  unconjugated  fractions. 
Bilirubin levels >340 μmol/L (20 mg/dL) extending and persisting late 
into the course of viral hepatitis are more likely to be associated with 
severe disease. In certain patients with underlying hemolytic anemia, 
however,  such  as  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  deficiency  and 
sickle  cell  anemia,  a  high  serum  bilirubin  level  is  common,  result-
ing  from  superimposed  hemolysis.  In  such  patients,  bilirubin  levels  
>513 μmol/L (30 mg/dL) have been observed and are not necessarily 
associated with a poor prognosis.

Neutropenia and lymphopenia are transient and are followed by a 
relative lymphocytosis. Atypical lymphocytes (varying between 2 and 
20%) are common during the acute phase. Measurement of the proth-
rombin  time  (PT)  is  important  in  patients  with  acute  viral  hepatitis, 
because a prolonged value may reflect a severe hepatic synthetic defect, 
signify extensive hepatocellular necrosis, and indicate a worse progno-
sis. Occasionally, a prolonged PT may occur with only mild increases in 
the serum bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. Prolonged nausea and 
vomiting, inadequate carbohydrate intake, and poor hepatic glycogen 
reserves may contribute to hypoglycemia noted occasionally in patients 
with severe viral hepatitis. Serum alkaline phosphatase may be normal 
or only mildly elevated, whereas a fall in serum albumin is uncommon 
in  uncomplicated  acute  viral  hepatitis.  In  some  patients,  mild  and 
transient  steatorrhea  has  been  noted,  as  well  as  slight  microscopic 
hematuria and minimal proteinuria.

A diffuse but mild elevation of the γ globulin fraction is common 
during acute viral hepatitis. Serum IgG and IgM levels are elevated in 
about  one-third  of  patients  during  the  acute  phase  of  viral  hepatitis, 
but  the  serum  IgM  level  is  elevated  more  characteristically  during 
acute hepatitis A. During the acute phase of viral hepatitis, antibodies 
to smooth muscle and other cell constituents may be present, and low 
titers of rheumatoid factor, nuclear antibody, and heterophile antibody 
can  also  be  found  occasionally.  In  hepatitis  C  and  D,  antibodies  to 
LKM may occur; however, the species of LKM antibodies in the two 
types of hepatitis are different from each other as well as from the 
LKM  antibody  species  characteristic  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  type  2  
(Chap. 341). The autoantibodies in viral hepatitis are nonspecific and 
can also be associated with other viral and systemic diseases. In con-
trast, virus-specific antibodies, which appear during and after hepatitis 
virus infection, are serologic markers of diagnostic importance.

As  described  above,  serologic  tests  are  available  routinely  with 
which to establish a diagnosis of hepatitis A, B, D, and C. Tests for fecal 
or  serum  HAV  are  not  routinely  available.  Therefore,  a  diagnosis  of 
hepatitis A is based on detection of IgM anti-HAV during acute illness 
(Fig.  339-2).  Rheumatoid  factor  can  give  rise  to  false-positive  results 
in this test.

A  diagnosis  of  HBV  infection  can  usually  be  made  by  detection 
of  HBsAg  in  serum.  Infrequently,  levels  of  HBsAg  are  too  low  to  be 
detected during acute HBV infection, even with contemporary, highly 
sensitive immunoassays. In such cases, the diagnosis can be established 
by the presence of IgM anti-HBc.

The  titer  of  HBsAg  bears  little  relation  to  the  severity  of  clinical 
disease. Indeed, an inverse correlation exists between the serum con-
centration of HBsAg and the degree of liver cell damage. For example, 
titers are highest in immunosuppressed patients, lower in patients with 
chronic liver disease (but higher in mild chronic than in severe chronic 
hepatitis),  and  very  low  in  patients  with  acute  fulminant  hepatitis. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2575

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2576 These observations suggest that in hepatitis B the degree of liver cell 
damage and the clinical course are related to variations in the patient’s 
immune  response  to  HBV  rather  than  to  the  amount  of  circulating 
HBsAg.  In  immunocompetent  persons,  however,  a  correlation  exists 
between markers of HBV replication and liver injury (see below).

Another important serologic marker in patients with hepatitis B is 
HBeAg.  Its  principal  clinical  usefulness  is  as  an  indicator  of  relative 
infectivity.  Because  HBeAg  is  invariably  present  during  early  acute 
hepatitis B, HBeAg testing is indicated primarily in chronic infection.
In  patients  with  hepatitis  B  surface  antigenemia  of  unknown 
duration (e.g., blood donors found to be HBsAg-positive) testing for 
IgM  anti-HBc  may  be  useful  to  distinguish  between  acute  or  recent 
infection  (IgM  anti-HBc-positive)  and  chronic  HBV  infection  (IgM 
anti-HBc-negative,  IgG  anti-HBc-positive).  A  false-positive  test  for 
IgM  anti-HBc  may  be  encountered  in  patients  with  high-titer  rheu-
matoid  factor.  Also,  IgM  anti-HBc  may  be  reexpressed  during  acute 
reactivation of chronic hepatitis B.

Anti-HBs is rarely detectable in the presence of HBsAg in patients 
with acute hepatitis B, but 10–20% of persons with chronic HBV infec-
tion  may  harbor  low-level  anti-HBs.  This  antibody  is  directed  not 
against the common group determinant, a, but against the heterotypic 
subtype  determinant  (e.g.,  HBsAg  of  subtype  ad  with  anti-HBs  of 
subtype y). In most cases, this serologic pattern cannot be attributed 
to infection with two different HBV subtypes but, instead, is thought 
(based on the clonal selection theory of antibody diversity) to reflect 
the  stimulation  of  a  related  clone  of  antibody-forming  cells  and  is 
not  a  harbinger  of  imminent  HBsAg  clearance.  When  such  antibody 
is  detected,  its  presence  is  of  no  recognized  clinical  significance  (see 
“Virology and Etiology”).

After  immunization  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  which  consists  of 
HBsAg  alone,  anti-HBs  is  the  only  serologic  marker  to  appear.  The 
commonly  encountered  serologic  patterns  of  hepatitis  B  and  their 
interpretations  are  summarized  in  Table  339-5.  Tests  for  the  detec-
tion of HBV DNA in liver and serum are now available. Like HBeAg, 
serum HBV DNA is an indicator of HBV replication, but tests for HBV 
DNA are more sensitive and quantitative. First-generation hybridiza-
tion  assays  for  HBV  DNA  had  a  sensitivity  of  105−106  virions/mL,  a 
relative threshold below which infectivity and liver injury are limited 
and HBeAg is usually undetectable. Currently, testing for HBV DNA 
has  shifted  from  insensitive  hybridization  assays  to  amplification 
assays  (e.g.,  the  PCR-based  assay,  which  can  detect  as  few  as  10  or 
100  virions/mL);  among  the  commercially  available  PCR  assays, 
the  most  useful  are  those  with  the  highest  sensitivity  (5–10  IU/mL) 
and  the  largest  dynamic  range  (100–109  IU/mL).  With  increased 

TABLE 339-5  Commonly Encountered Serologic Patterns of Hepatitis B Infection
HBsAg
+
+
+

INTERPRETATION
Acute hepatitis B, high infectivitya
Chronic hepatitis B, high infectivity
1.  Late acute or chronic hepatitis B, low 

ANTI-HBs ANTI-HBc
−
−
−

ANTI-HBe
−
−
+

HBeAg
+
+
−

IgM
IgG
IgG

+

−

−

−
−

+

−

−

+
+

+

+/−

+/−

IgM

+/−

IgG

IgG
−

−

−
−

+/−

+/−

+/−
−

infectivity

2.  HBeAg-negative (“precore-mutant”)  
hepatitis B (chronic or, rarely, acute)
1.  HBsAg of one subtype and heterotypic  

anti-HBs (common)

2.  Process of seroconversion from HBsAg to 

anti-HBs (rare)
1.  Acute hepatitis Ba
2.  Anti-HBc “window”
1.  Low-level hepatitis B carrier
2.  Hepatitis B in remote past
Recovery from hepatitis B
1.  Immunization with HBsAg (after vaccination)
2.  Hepatitis B in the remote past (?)
3.  False-positive

aIgM anti-HBc may reappear during acute reactivation of chronic hepatitis B.
Note: See text for abbreviations.

sensitivity, amplification assays remain reactive well below the current 
103–104 IU/mL threshold for infectivity and liver injury. These markers 
are useful in following the course of HBV replication in patients with 
chronic  hepatitis  B  receiving  antiviral  chemotherapy  (Chap.  341). 
Except  for  the  early  decades  of  life  after  perinatally  acquired  HBV 
infection  (see  above),  in  immunocompetent  adults  with  chronic 
hepatitis B, a general correlation exists between the level of HBV rep-
lication, as reflected by the level of serum HBV DNA, and the degree 
of liver injury. High-serum HBV DNA levels, increased expression of 
viral  antigens,  and  necroinflammatory  activity  in  the  liver  go  hand 
in  hand  unless  immunosuppression  interferes  with  cytolytic  T-cell 
responses  to  virus-infected  cells;  reduction  of  HBV  replication  with 
antiviral  drugs  tends  to  be  accompanied  by  an  improvement  in  liver 
histology.  Among  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B,  high  levels  of 
HBV DNA increase the risk of cirrhosis, hepatic decompensation, and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (see “Complications and Sequelae”).

In patients with hepatitis C, an episodic pattern of aminotransferase 
elevation is common. A specific serologic diagnosis of hepatitis C can 
be made by demonstrating the presence in serum of anti-HCV. When 
contemporary  immunoassays  are  used,  anti-HCV  can  be  detected  in 
acute  hepatitis  C  during  the  initial  phase  of  elevated  aminotransfer-
ase activity and remains detectable after recovery (which is rare) and 
during  chronic  infection  (common).  Nonspecificity  can  confound 
immunoassays  for  anti-HCV,  especially  in  persons  with  a  low  prior 
probability of infection, such as volunteer blood donors, or in persons 
with circulating rheumatoid factor, which can bind nonspecifically to 
assay reagents; testing for HCV RNA can be used in such settings to 
distinguish  between  true-positive  and  false-positive  anti-HCV  deter-
minations. Assays for HCV RNA are the most sensitive tests for HCV 
infection and represent the “gold standard” in establishing a diagnosis 
of hepatitis C. HCV RNA can be detected even before acute elevation 
of aminotransferase activity and before the appearance of anti-HCV in 
patients with acute hepatitis C. In addition, HCV RNA remains detect-
able indefinitely, continuously in most but intermittently in some, in 
patients with chronic hepatitis C (detectable as well in some persons 
with normal liver tests, i.e., inactive carriers). In the very small minor-
ity of patients with hepatitis C who lack anti-HCV, a diagnosis can be 
supported by detection of HCV RNA. If all these tests are negative and 
the patient has a well-characterized case of hepatitis after percutaneous 
exposure to blood or blood products, a diagnosis of hepatitis caused by 
an unidentified agent can be entertained.

Amplification  techniques  are  required  to  detect  HCV  RNA.  Cur-
rently,  such  target  amplification  (i.e.,  synthesis  of  multiple  cop-
ies  of  the  viral  genome)  is  achieved  by  PCR,  in  which  the  viral 
RNA  is  reverse  transcribed  to  complemen-
tary  DNA  and  then  amplified  by  repeated 
cycles  of  DNA  synthesis.  Quantitative  PCR 
assays  provide  a  measurement  of  relative 
“viral  load”;  current  PCR  assays  have  a 
sensitivity  of  10  (lower  limit  of  detection) 
to  25  (lower  limit  of  quantitation)  IU/mL 
and  a  wide  dynamic  range  (10–107  IU/mL).  
Determination  of  HCV  RNA  level  is  not  a 
reliable  marker  of  disease  severity  or  prog-
nosis  but  is  helpful  in  predicting  relative 
responsiveness to antiviral therapy. The same 
is true for determinations of HCV genotype 
(Chap. 341). Of course, HCV RNA monitor-
ing  during  and  after  antiviral  therapy  is  the 
sine  qua  non  for  determining  on-treatment 
and durable responsiveness.

A  proportion  of  patients  with  hepatitis  C  
have isolated anti-HBc in their blood, a reflec-
tion of a common risk in certain populations 
of exposure to multiple bloodborne hepatitis 
agents. The anti-HBc in such cases is almost 
invariably  of  the  IgG  class  and  usually  rep-
resents  HBV  infection  in  the  remote  past 
(HBV DNA undetectable); it rarely represents 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2576

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemcurrent HBV infection with low-level virus carriage. Detectable anti-
HCV in the absence of HCV RNA signifies spontaneous or therapeuti-
cally induced recovery from (“cured”) hepatitis C.

The presence of HDV infection can be identified by demonstrating 
intrahepatic HDV antigen or, more practically, an anti-HDV serocon-
version  (a  rise  in  titer  of  anti-HDV  or  de  novo  appearance  of  anti-
HDV). Circulating HDV antigen, also diagnostic of acute infection, is 
detectable only briefly, if at all. Because anti-HDV is often undetectable 
once HBsAg disappears, retrospective serodiagnosis of acute self-lim-
ited, simultaneous HBV and HDV infection is difficult. Early diagnosis 
of acute infection may be hampered by a delay of up to 30–40 days in 
the appearance of anti-HDV.

When  a  patient  presents  with  acute  hepatitis  and  has  HBsAg  and 
anti-HDV in serum, determination of the class of anti-HBc is helpful 
in establishing the relationship between infection with HBV and HDV. 
Although IgM anti-HBc does not distinguish absolutely between acute 
and chronic HBV infection, its presence is a reliable indicator of recent 
infection and its absence a reliable indicator of infection in the remote 
past. In simultaneous acute HBV and HDV infections, IgM anti-HBc 
will be detectable, whereas in acute HDV infection superimposed on 
chronic  HBV  infection,  anti-HBc  will  be  of  the  IgG  class.  Assays  for 
HDV RNA, available in specialized laboratories and yet to be standard-
ized, can be used to confirm HDV infection and to monitor treatment 
during chronic infection.

The serologic/virologic course of events during acute hepatitis E is 
entirely analogous to that of acute hepatitis A, with brief fecal shedding 
of virus and viremia and an early IgM anti-HEV response that predom-
inates during approximately the first 3 months but is eclipsed thereafter 
by long-lasting IgG anti-HEV. Diagnostic tests of varying reliability for 
hepatitis E are commercially available outside the United States; in the 
United States, although tests for HEV infection are not approved by the 
FDA, reliable diagnostic serologic/virologic assays can be performed at 
the CDC or other commercial or academic laboratories.

Liver biopsy is rarely necessary or indicated in acute viral hepatitis, 
except  when  the  diagnosis  is  questionable  or  when  clinical  evidence 
suggests a diagnosis of chronic hepatitis.

A diagnostic algorithm can be applied in the evaluation of cases of 
acute viral hepatitis. A patient with acute hepatitis should undergo four 
serologic  tests:  HBsAg,  IgM  anti-HAV,  IgM  anti-HBc,  and  anti-HCV 
(Table 339-6). The presence of HBsAg, with or without IgM anti-HBc, 
represents HBV infection. If IgM anti-HBc is present, the HBV infec-
tion is considered acute; if IgM anti-HBc is absent, the HBV infection 
is considered chronic. A diagnosis of acute hepatitis B can be made in 
the absence of HBsAg when IgM anti-HBc is detectable. A diagnosis 
of acute hepatitis A is based on the presence of IgM anti-HAV. If IgM 
anti-HAV coexists with HBsAg, a diagnosis of simultaneous HAV and 
HBV infections can be made; if IgM anti-HBc (with or without HBsAg) 
is  detectable,  the  patient  has  simultaneous  acute  hepatitis  A  and  B, 
and if IgM anti-HBc is undetectable, the patient has acute hepatitis A 
superimposed on chronic HBV infection. The presence of anti-HCV 
supports a diagnosis of acute hepatitis C. Occasionally, testing for HCV 
RNA or repeat anti-HCV testing later during the illness is necessary to 

2577

establish the diagnosis. Absence of all serologic markers is consistent 
with a diagnosis of “non-A, non-B, non-C” hepatitis (no other proven 
human  hepatitis  viruses  have  been  identified),  if  the  epidemiologic 
setting is appropriate.

In  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis,  initial  testing  should  consist  of 
HBsAg  and  anti-HCV.  Anti-HCV  supports  and  HCV  RNA  testing 
establishes the diagnosis of chronic hepatitis C. If a serologic diagno-
sis of chronic hepatitis B is made, testing for HBeAg and anti-HBe is 
indicated to evaluate relative infectivity. Testing for HBV DNA in such 
patients  provides  a  more  quantitative  and  sensitive  measure  of  the 
level of virus replication and therefore is very helpful during antiviral 
therapy (Chap. 341). In patients with chronic hepatitis B and normal 
aminotransferase activity in the absence of HBeAg, serial testing over 
time  is  often  required  to  distinguish  between  inactive  carriage  and 
HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  with  fluctuating  virologic  and 
necroinflammatory  activity.  In  persons  with  hepatitis  B,  testing  for 
anti-HDV  is  useful  in  those  with  severe  and  fulminant  disease,  with 
severe chronic disease, with chronic hepatitis B and acute hepatitis-like 
exacerbations, with frequent percutaneous exposures, and from areas 
where HDV infection is endemic.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

 ■ PROGNOSIS
Virtually all previously healthy patients with hepatitis A recover com-
pletely with no clinical sequelae. Similarly, in acute hepatitis B, 95–99% 
of  previously  healthy  adults  have  a  favorable  course  and  recover 
completely. Certain clinical and laboratory features, however, suggest 
a  more  complicated  and  protracted  course.  Patients  of  advanced  age 
and with serious underlying medical disorders may have a prolonged 
course and are more likely to experience severe hepatitis. Initial pre-
senting  features  such  as  ascites,  peripheral  edema,  and  symptoms  of 
hepatic  encephalopathy  suggest  a  poorer  prognosis.  In  addition,  a 
prolonged PT, low serum albumin level, hypoglycemia, and very high 
serum  bilirubin  values  suggest  severe  hepatocellular  disease.  Patients 
with  these  clinical  and  laboratory  features  deserve  prompt  hospital 
admission.  The  case-fatality  rate  in  hepatitis  A  and  B  is  very  low 
(~0.1%) but is increased by advanced age and underlying debilitating 
disorders.  Among  patients  ill  enough  to  be  hospitalized  for  acute 
hepatitis B, the fatality rate is 1%. Hepatitis C is less severe during the 
acute phase than hepatitis B and is more likely to be anicteric; fatalities 
are rare, but the precise case-fatality rate is not known. In outbreaks of 
waterborne hepatitis E in India and Asia, the case-fatality rate is 1–2% 
and  up  to  10–20%  in  pregnant  women.  Contributing  to  fulminant 
hepatitis E in endemic countries (but only very rarely or not at all in 
nonendemic countries) are instances of acute hepatitis E superimposed 
on underlying chronic liver disease (“acute-on-chronic” liver disease). 
Patients with simultaneous acute hepatitis B and D do not necessarily 
experience a higher mortality rate than do patients with acute hepatitis 
B  alone;  however,  in  several  outbreaks  of  acute  simultaneous  HBV 
and HDV infection among injection drug users, the case-fatality rate 
was ~5%. When HDV superinfection occurs in a person with chronic 
hepatitis B, the likelihood of fulminant hepatitis and death is increased 
substantially.  Although  the  case-fatality  rate  for  hepatitis  D  is  not 
known definitively, in outbreaks of severe 
HDV  superinfection  in  isolated  popula-
tions  with  a  high  hepatitis  B  carrier  rate 
(“Lábrea fever”), a mortality rate >20% has 
been recorded.

TABLE 339-6  Simplified Diagnostic Approach in Patients Presenting with Acute Hepatitis

SEROLOGIC TESTS OF PATIENT’S SERUM

HBsAg
+
+
+
+
−
−

−
−

IgM 
ANTI-HAV
−
−
+
+
+
+

IgM 
ANTI-HBc
+
−
−
+
−
+

ANTI-HCV
−
−
−
−
−
−

−
−

+
−

−
+

Note: See text for abbreviations.

DIAGNOSTIC INTERPRETATION 
Acute hepatitis B
Chronic hepatitis B
Acute hepatitis A superimposed on chronic hepatitis B
Acute hepatitis A and B
Acute hepatitis A
Acute hepatitis A and B (HBsAg below detection 
threshold)
Acute hepatitis B (HBsAg below detection threshold)
Acute hepatitis C

 ■ COMPLICATIONS AND 
SEQUELAE
A small proportion of patients with hepa-
titis A experience relapsing hepatitis weeks 
to  months  after  apparent  recovery  from 
acute hepatitis. Relapses are characterized 
by  recurrence  of  symptoms,  aminotrans-
ferase elevations, occasional jaundice, and 
fecal  excretion  of  HAV.  Another  unusual 
variant  of  acute  hepatitis  A  is  cholestatic 
hepatitis,  characterized  by  protracted 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2577

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2578 cholestatic jaundice and pruritus. Rarely, liver test abnormalities per-
sist for many months, even up to 1 year. Even when these complications 
occur, hepatitis A remains self-limited and does not progress to chronic 
liver disease. During the prodromal phase of acute hepatitis B, a serum 
sickness–like  syndrome  characterized  by  arthralgia  or  arthritis,  rash, 
angioedema,  and,  rarely,  hematuria  and  proteinuria  may  develop  in 
5–10% of patients. This syndrome occurs before the onset of clinical 
jaundice, and these patients are often diagnosed erroneously as having 
rheumatologic diseases. The diagnosis can be established by measuring 
serum  aminotransferase  levels,  which  are  almost  invariably  elevated, 
and serum HBsAg. As noted above, EMC is an immune-complex dis-
ease that can complicate chronic hepatitis C and is part of a spectrum 
of  B-cell  lymphoproliferative  disorders,  which,  in  rare  instances,  can 
evolve to B-cell lymphoma (Chap. 108). Attention has been drawn as 
well to associations between hepatitis C and such cutaneous disorders 
as porphyria cutanea tarda and lichen planus. A mechanism for these 
associations is unknown. Related to the reliance of HCV on lipoprotein 
secretion  and  assembly  pathways  and  on  interactions  of  HCV  with 
glucose  metabolism,  HCV  infection  may  be  complicated  by  hepatic 
steatosis, hypercholesterolemia, insulin resistance (and other manifes-
tations of the metabolic syndrome), and type 2 diabetes mellitus; both 
hepatic  steatosis  and  insulin  resistance  appear  to  accelerate  hepatic 
fibrosis and blunt responsiveness to interferon-based antiviral therapy  
(Chap. 341). Finally, chronic hepatitis C has been linked to multiple 
extrahepatic  disorders,  including  cardiovascular  and  cerebrovascular 
disease,  renal  disease,  rheumatologic/immunologic  disorders,  mental 
health  and  cognitive  disorders  (many  patients  describe  “brain  fog”), 
and, in addition to hepatocellular carcinoma, nonliver malignancies.

The most feared complication of viral hepatitis is fulminant hepatitis 
(massive hepatic necrosis); fortunately, this is a rare event. Fulminant 
hepatitis is seen primarily in hepatitis B, D, and E, but rare fulminant 
cases of hepatitis A occur primarily in older adults and in persons with 
underlying chronic liver disease, including, according to some reports, 
chronic hepatitis B and C. Hepatitis B accounts for >50% of fulminant 
cases  of  viral  hepatitis,  a  sizable  proportion  of  which  are  associated 
with HDV infection and another proportion with underlying chronic 
hepatitis C. Fulminant hepatitis is hardly ever seen in hepatitis C, but 
hepatitis E, as noted above, can be complicated by fatal fulminant hep-
atitis in 1–2% of all cases and in up to 20% of cases in pregnant women. 
Patients  usually  present  with  signs  and  symptoms  of  encephalopathy 
that may evolve to deep coma. The liver is usually small and the PT 
excessively prolonged. The combination of rapidly shrinking liver size, 
rapidly rising bilirubin level, and marked prolongation of the PT, even 
as  aminotransferase  levels  fall,  together  with  clinical  signs  of  confu-
sion,  disorientation,  somnolence,  ascites,  and  edema,  indicates  that 
the  patient  has  hepatic  failure  with  encephalopathy.  Cerebral  edema 
is  common;  brainstem  compression,  gastrointestinal  bleeding,  sepsis, 
respiratory  failure,  cardiovascular  collapse,  and  renal  failure  are  ter-
minal events. The mortality rate is exceedingly high (>80% in patients 
with deep coma), but patients who survive may have a complete bio-
chemical  and  histologic  recovery.  If  a  donor  liver  can  be  located  in 
time, liver transplantation may be lifesaving in patients with fulminant 
hepatitis (Chap. 345).

Documenting  the  disappearance  of  HBsAg  after  apparent  clinical 
recovery from acute hepatitis B is particularly important. Before lab-
oratory methods were available to distinguish between acute hepatitis 
and  acute  hepatitis–like  exacerbations  (spontaneous  reactivations)  of 
chronic  hepatitis  B,  observations  suggested  that  ~10%  of  previously 
healthy  patients  remained  HBsAg  positive  for  >6  months  after  the 
onset of clinically apparent acute hepatitis B. One-half of these persons 
cleared  the  antigen  from  their  circulations  during  the  next  several 
years,  but  the  other  5%  remained  chronically  HBsAg  positive.  More 
recent observations suggest that the true rate of chronic infection after 
clinically apparent acute hepatitis B is as low as 1% in normal, immu-
nocompetent,  young  adults.  Earlier,  higher  estimates  may  have  been 
confounded by inadvertent inclusion of acute exacerbations in chron-
ically  infected  patients;  these  patients,  chronically  HBsAg  positive 
before  exacerbation,  were  unlikely  to  seroconvert  to  HBsAg  negative 
thereafter. Whether the rate of chronicity is 10% or 1%, such patients 

have IgG anti-HBc in serum; anti-HBs is either undetected or detected 
at low titer against the opposite subtype specificity of the antigen (see 
“Laboratory Features”). These patients may (1) be inactive carriers; (2) 
have low-grade, mild chronic hepatitis; or (3) have moderate to severe 
chronic hepatitis with or without cirrhosis. The likelihood of remain-
ing  chronically  infected  after  acute  HBV  infection  is  especially  high 
among  neonates,  persons  with  Down’s  syndrome,  chronically  hemo-
dialyzed patients, and immunosuppressed patients, including persons 
with HIV infection.

Chronic hepatitis is an important late complication of acute hepatitis B  
occurring  in  a  small  proportion  of  patients  with  acute  disease  but 
more  common  in  those  who  present  with  chronic  infection  without 
having experienced an acute illness, as occurs typically after neonatal 
infection or after infection in an immunosuppressed host (Chap. 341). 
The  following  clinical  and  laboratory  features  suggest  progression  of 
acute hepatitis to chronic hepatitis: (1) lack of complete resolution of 
clinical symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and the persistence 
of hepatomegaly; (2) the presence of bridging/interface or multilobular 
hepatic  necrosis  on  liver  biopsy  during  protracted,  severe  acute  viral 
hepatitis;  (3)  failure  of  the  serum  aminotransferase,  bilirubin,  and 
globulin levels to return to normal within 6–12 months after the acute 
illness; and (4) the persistence of HBeAg for >3 months or HBsAg for 
>6 months after acute hepatitis.

Although  acute  hepatitis  D  infection  does  not  increase  the  likeli-
hood of chronicity of simultaneous acute hepatitis B, hepatitis D has 
the  potential  for  contributing  to  the  severity  of  chronic  hepatitis  B. 
Hepatitis  D  superinfection  can  transform  inactive  or  mild  chronic 
hepatitis  B  into  severe,  progressive  chronic  hepatitis  and  cirrhosis;  it 
also  can  accelerate  the  course  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  and  accelerate 
the  risk  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma.  Some  HDV  superinfections  in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B lead to fulminant hepatitis. As defined 
in longitudinal studies over three decades, the annual rate of cirrhosis 
in patients with chronic hepatitis D is 4%. Although HDV and HBV 
infections  are  associated  with  severe  liver  disease,  mild  hepatitis  and 
even inactive carriage have been identified in some patients, and the 
disease may become indolent beyond the early years of infection.

After acute HCV infection, the likelihood of remaining chronically 
infected  approaches  85–90%.  Although  many  patients  with  chronic 
hepatitis  C  have  no  symptoms,  cirrhosis  may  develop  in  as  many 
as  20%  within  10–20  years  of  acute  illness;  in  some  series  of  cases 
reported  by  referral  centers,  cirrhosis  has  been  reported  in  as  many 
as 50% of patients with chronic hepatitis C. Among cirrhotic patients 
with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  the  annual  risk  of  hepatic  decompensation 
is  ~4%.  Although  prior  to  the  availability  of  highly  effective  DAA 
therapy during the second decade of the twenty-first century chronic 
hepatitis C accounted for at least 40% of cases of chronic liver disease 
and  of  patients  undergoing  liver  transplantation  for  end-stage  liver 
disease  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  in  the  majority  of  patients 
with chronic hepatitis C, morbidity and mortality are limited during 
the initial 20 years after the onset of infection. Progression of chronic 
hepatitis  C  may  be  influenced  by  advanced  age  of  acquisition,  long 
duration of infection, immunosuppression, coexisting excessive alco-
hol use, concomitant hepatic steatosis, other hepatitis virus infection, 
or HIV co-infection. In fact, instances of severe and rapidly progres-
sive  chronic  hepatitis  B  and  C  are  being  recognized  with  increasing 
frequency in patients with HIV infection (Chap. 202). In contrast, nei-
ther HAV nor HEV causes chronic liver disease in immunocompetent 
hosts;  however,  cases  of  chronic  hepatitis  E  (including  cirrhosis  and 
end-stage liver disease and even hepatocellular carcinoma) have been 
observed  in  immunosuppressed  organ-transplant  recipients,  persons 
receiving  cytotoxic  chemotherapy,  and  persons  with  HIV  infection. 
Among patients with chronic hepatitis (e.g., caused by hepatitis B or C, 
alcohol, etc.) in endemic countries, hepatitis E has been reported as the 
cause of acute-on-chronic liver failure; however, in most experiences 
among patients from nonendemic countries, HEV has not been found 
to  contribute  commonly  to  hepatic  decompensation  in  patients  with 
chronic hepatitis.

Persons  with  chronic  hepatitis  B,  particularly  those  infected  in 
infancy  or  early  childhood  and  especially  those  with  HBeAg  and/or 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2578

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemhigh-level  HBV  DNA,  have  an  enhanced  risk  of  hepatocellular  car-
cinoma. The risks of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma increase 
with  the  level  of  HBV  replication.  The  annual  rate  of  hepatocellular 
carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis D and cirrhosis is ~3%. 
The  risk  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma  is  increased  as  well  in  patients 
with chronic hepatitis C, almost exclusively in patients with cirrhosis, 
and  almost  always  after  at  least  several  decades,  usually  after  three 
decades  of  disease  (Chap.  82).  Among  such  cirrhotic  patients  with 
chronic  hepatitis  C,  the  annual  risk  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma  is 
~1–4%.

Rare  complications  of  viral  hepatitis  include  pancreatitis,  myocar-
ditis,  atypical  pneumonia,  aplastic  anemia,  transverse  myelitis,  and 
peripheral neuropathy. In children, hepatitis B may present rarely with 
anicteric hepatitis, a nonpruritic papular rash of the face, buttocks, and 
limbs, and lymphadenopathy (papular acrodermatitis of childhood or 
Gianotti-Crosti syndrome).

Rarely,  autoimmune  hepatitis  (Chap.  341)  can  be  triggered  by  a 
bout  of  otherwise  self-limited  acute  hepatitis,  as  reported  after  acute 
hepatitis A, B, and C.

 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Viral diseases such as infectious mononucleosis; those due to cytomeg-
alovirus, herpes simplex, and coxsackieviruses; and toxoplasmosis may 
share certain clinical features with viral hepatitis and cause elevations 
in  serum  aminotransferase  and,  less  commonly,  in  serum  bilirubin 
levels. Tests such as the differential heterophile and serologic tests for 
these  agents  may  be  helpful  in  the  differential  diagnosis  if  HBsAg, 
anti-HBc, IgM anti-HAV, and anti-HCV determinations are negative. 
Aminotransferase  elevations  can  accompany  almost  any  systemic 
viral  infection,  including  the  coronavirus  SARS-CoV-2  (~10%  of  all 
cases and up to half of severe cases); other rare causes of liver injury 
confused with viral hepatitis are infections with Leptospira, Candida, 
Brucella,  Mycobacteria,  and  Pneumocystis.  A  complete  drug  history 
is  particularly  important  because  many  drugs  and  certain  anesthetic 
agents  can  produce  a  picture  of  either  acute  hepatitis  or  cholestasis 
(Chap. 340). Equally important is a history of unexplained “repeated 
episodes”  of  acute  hepatitis.  This  history  should  alert  the  physician 
to the possibility that the underlying disorder is chronic hepatitis, for 
example, autoimmune hepatitis (Chap. 341). Alcoholic hepatitis must 
also be considered, but usually the serum aminotransferase levels are 
not  as  markedly  elevated,  and  other  stigmata  of  alcoholism  may  be 
present. The finding on liver biopsy of fatty infiltration, a neutrophilic 
inflammatory  reaction,  and  “alcoholic  hyaline”  would  be  consistent 
with alcohol-induced rather than viral liver injury. Because acute hep-
atitis may present with right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea 
and vomiting, fever, and icterus, it is often confused with acute chole-
cystitis,  common  duct  stone,  or  ascending  cholangitis.  Patients  with 
acute viral hepatitis may tolerate surgery poorly; therefore, it is impor-
tant to exclude this diagnosis, and in confusing cases, a percutaneous 
liver biopsy may be necessary before laparotomy. Viral hepatitis in the 
elderly  is  often  misdiagnosed  as  obstructive  jaundice  resulting  from 
a  common  duct  stone  or  carcinoma  of  the  pancreas.  Because  acute 
hepatitis in the elderly may be quite severe and the operative mortality 
high, a thorough evaluation including biochemical tests, radiographic 
studies of the biliary tree, and even liver biopsy may be necessary to 
exclude  primary  parenchymal  liver  disease.  Another  clinical  constel-
lation that may mimic acute hepatitis is right ventricular failure with 
passive hepatic congestion or hypoperfusion syndromes, such as those 
associated with shock, severe hypotension, and severe left ventricular 
failure. Also included in this general category is any disorder that inter-
feres with venous return to the heart, such as right atrial myxoma, con-
strictive pericarditis, hepatic vein occlusion (Budd-Chiari syndrome), 
or  veno-occlusive  disease.  Clinical  features  are  usually  sufficient  to 
distinguish among these vascular disorders and viral hepatitis. Acute 
fatty  liver  of  pregnancy,  cholestasis  of  pregnancy,  eclampsia,  and  the 
HELLP  (hemolysis,  elevated  liver  tests,  and  low  platelets)  syndrome 
can  be  confused  with  viral  hepatitis  during  pregnancy.  Very  rarely, 
malignancies metastatic to the liver can mimic acute or even fulminant 
viral hepatitis. Occasionally, genetic or metabolic liver disorders (e.g., 

Wilson’s disease, α1 antitrypsin deficiency) and nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease  are  confused  with  acute  viral  hepatitis.  Among  patients  with 
biochemical evidence for severe liver injury, i.e., aminotransferase lev-
els of ≥1000 IU/L, the most common causes are ischemic liver injury, 
drug-induced liver injury (especially caused by acetaminophen), acute 
viral hepatitis, and pancreaticobiliary disorders.

2579

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

TREATMENT
Acute Viral Hepatitis

Most persons with acute hepatitis (especially hepatitis A, B, and E) 
recover spontaneously and do not require specific antiviral therapy. 
In  hepatitis  B,  among  previously  healthy  adults  who  present  with 
clinically apparent acute hepatitis, recovery occurs in ~99%; there-
fore, antiviral therapy is not likely to improve the rate of recovery 
and  is  not  required.  In  rare  instances  of  severe  acute  hepatitis  B, 
treatment  with  a  nucleoside  analogue  at  oral  doses  used  to  treat 
chronic  hepatitis  B  (Chap.  341)  has  been  attempted  successfully. 
Although clinical trials have not been done to establish the efficacy 
or duration of this approach, most authorities would recommend 
institution  of  antiviral  therapy  with  a  nucleoside  analogue  (ente-
cavir  or  tenofovir,  the  most  potent  and  least  resistance-prone 
agents) for severe, but not mild-moderate, acute hepatitis B. Treat-
ment should continue until 3 months after HBsAg seroconversion 
or 6 months after HBeAg seroconversion.

In typical cases of acute hepatitis C, recovery is rare (~15–20% 
in  most  experiences),  and  progression  to  chronic  hepatitis  is  the 
rule. Patients with jaundice, those with HCV genotype 1, women, 
and  those  with  earlier  age  of  infection,  lower  level  of  HCV  RNA, 
HBV  co-infection,  and  absence  of  current  injection  drug  use  are 
more likely to recover from acute hepatitis C, as are persons who 
have genetic markers associated with spontaneous recovery (IL28B 
CC haplotype).

Because spontaneous recovery can occur and because most cases 
of acute hepatitis C are not clinically severe or rapidly progressive, 
delaying antiviral therapy of acute hepatitis C for 3–6 months (after 
which recovery is unlikely) was a recommended approach during 
the era of interferon-based therapy; however, in the current era of 
highly effective (95–100%) oral DAA therapy, waiting for potential 
spontaneous recovery is no longer advised; instead, early treatment 
with  one  of  the  four  first-line  drug  combinations  (of  polymerase 
inhibitors,  protease  inhibitors,  and/or  NS5A  inhibitors)  approved 
for treatment of chronic hepatitis C (Chap. 341) is recommended 
for treatment of patients with acute hepatitis C. Although abbrevi-
ated treatment courses have been studied, currently, a standard, full 
8- to 12-week course is recommended.

Because of the vast reservoir of acute HCV infections acquired 
four to five decades ago in the 1945–1965 birth cohort, most newly 
recognized HCV infections are chronic. Opportunities to identify and 
treat patients with acute hepatitis C occur in two population subsets:  
(1)  in  health  care  workers  who  sustain  hepatitis  C–contaminated 
needle sticks (occupational accidents), monitoring for ALT eleva-
tions and the presence of HCV RNA identify acute hepatitis C in 
~3%, and this group should be treated; (2) in injection drug users, 
the risk of acute hepatitis C has been on the rise during the previ-
ous decade, and the epidemic of opioid use has contributed to an 
amplification  of  HCV  infection  among  drug  users.  Such  patients 
are candidates for antiviral therapy, and efforts to combine antiviral 
therapy with drug rehabilitation therapy have been very successful.
Notwithstanding  these  specific  therapeutic  considerations,  in 
most cases of typical acute viral hepatitis, specific treatment gener-
ally is not necessary. Although hospitalization may be required for 
clinically severe illness, most patients do not require hospital care. 
Forced  and  prolonged  bed  rest  is  not  essential  for  full  recovery, 
but many patients will feel better with restricted physical activity. 
A  high-calorie  diet  is  desirable,  and  because  many  patients  may 
experience nausea late in the day, the major caloric intake is best 
tolerated  in  the  morning.  Intravenous  feeding  is  necessary  in  the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2579

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2580

acute stage if the patient has persistent vomiting and cannot main-
tain oral intake. Drugs capable of producing adverse reactions such 
as cholestasis and drugs metabolized by the liver should be avoided. 
If  severe  pruritus  is  present,  the  use  of  the  bile  salt–sequestering 
resin cholestyramine is helpful. Glucocorticoid therapy has no value 
in acute viral hepatitis, even in severe cases, and may be deleterious, 
even increasing the risk of chronicity (e.g., of acute hepatitis B).

Physical isolation of patients with hepatitis to a single room and 
bathroom  is  rarely  necessary  except  in  the  case  of  fecal  inconti-
nence for hepatitis A and E or uncontrolled, voluminous bleeding 
for  hepatitis  B  (with  or  without  concomitant  hepatitis  D)  and  C. 
Because most patients hospitalized with hepatitis A excrete little, if 
any, HAV, the likelihood of HAV transmission from these patients 
during their hospitalization is low. Therefore, burdensome enteric 
precautions are no longer recommended. Although gloves should be 
worn when the bed pans or fecal material of patients with hepati-
tis A are handled, these precautions do not represent a departure 
from  sensible  procedure  and  contemporary  universal  precautions 
for  all  hospitalized  patients.  For  patients  with  hepatitis  B  and  C, 
emphasis  should  be  placed  on  blood  precautions  (i.e.,  avoiding 
direct, ungloved hand contact with blood and other body fluids). 
Enteric  precautions  are  unnecessary.  The  importance  of  simple 
hygienic precautions such as hand washing cannot be overempha-
sized. Universal precautions that have been adopted for all patients 
apply  to  patients  with  viral  hepatitis.  Hospitalized  patients  may 
be  discharged  following  substantial  symptomatic  improvement, 
a  significant  downward  trend  in  the  serum  aminotransferase  and 
bilirubin values, and a return to normal of the PT. Mild aminotrans-
ferase elevations should not be considered contraindications to the 
gradual resumption of normal activity.

In fulminant hepatitis, the goal of therapy is to support the patient 
by  maintenance  of  fluid  balance,  support  of  circulation  and  respira-
tion,  control  of  bleeding,  correction  of  hypoglycemia,  and  treatment 
of  other  complications  of  the  comatose  state  in  anticipation  of  liver 
regeneration and repair. Protein intake should be restricted, and oral 
lactulose  administered.  Glucocorticoid  therapy  has  been  shown  in 
controlled trials to be ineffective. Likewise, exchange transfusion, plas-
mapheresis,  human  cross-circulation,  porcine  liver  cross-perfusion, 
hemoperfusion, and extracorporeal liver-assist devices have not been 
proven  to  enhance  survival.  Meticulous  intensive  care  that  includes 
prophylactic  antibiotic  coverage  is  the  one  factor  that  appears  to 
improve survival. Orthotopic liver transplantation is resorted to with 
increasing frequency, with excellent results, in patients with fulminant 
hepatitis (Chap. 345). Fulminant hepatitis C is very rare; however, in 
fulminant hepatitis B, oral antiviral therapy has been used successfully, 
as reported anecdotally. In clinically severe acute hepatitis E or acute-
on-chronic  liver  failure,  successful  therapy  with  ribavirin  (600  mg 
twice  daily,  15  mg/kg)  has  been  reported  anecdotally.  Unfortunately, 
when fulminant hepatitis E occurs in pregnant women (as it does in up 
to 20% of pregnant women with acute hepatitis E), ribavirin, which is 
teratogenic, is contraindicated. In cases of hepatitis E in organ-transplant 
recipients,  reduction  in  overall  immunosuppressive  drug  doses  and 
switching  from  tacrolimus  to  cyclosporine  A  have  been  shown  to  be 
effective,  often  without  antiviral  therapy,  in  achieving  eradication  of 
HEV. If a change in immunosuppression is inadequate, ribavirin treat-
ment for 3 months has been observed to achieve a sustained virologic 
response  in  78%  of  treated  patients;  however,  the  optimal  dose  and 
duration of ribavirin therapy remain to be determined.

 ■ PROPHYLAXIS
Because application of therapy for acute viral hepatitis is limited and 
because chronic viral hepatitis requires prolonged and costly courses 
of  antiviral  therapy  (Chap.  341),  emphasis  is  placed  on  preven-
tion  through  immunization.  The  prophylactic  approach  differs  for 
each  of  the  types  of  viral  hepatitis.  In  the  past,  immunoprophylaxis 
relied  exclusively  on  passive  immunization  with  antibody-containing 

globulin preparations purified by cold ethanol fractionation from the 
plasma  of  hundreds  of  normal  donors.  Currently,  for  hepatitis  A,  B, 
and  E,  active  immunization  with  vaccines  is  the  preferable  approach 
to prevention.

Hepatitis A  Both passive immunization with immunoglobulin (IG) 
and active immunization with killed vaccines are available. All prepara-
tions of IG contain anti-HAV concentrations sufficient to be protective. 
Administration  of  plasma-derived  globulin  is  safe;  all  contemporary 
lots of IG are subjected to viral inactivation steps and must be free of 
HCV RNA as determined by PCR testing. Administration of IM lots 
of IG has not been associated with transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV. 
When  administered  before  exposure  or  during  the  early  incubation 
period,  IG  is  effective  in  preventing  clinically  apparent  hepatitis  A. 
For postexposure prophylaxis of intimate contacts (household, sexual, 
institutional)  of  persons  with  hepatitis  A,  the  administration  of  0.02 
mL/kg is recommended as early after exposure as possible; it may be 
effective even when administered as late as 2 weeks after exposure. Pro-
phylaxis is not necessary for those who have already received hepatitis 
A vaccine, for casual contacts (office, factory, school, or hospital), for 
most elderly persons, who are very likely to be immune, or for those 
known to have anti-HAV in their serum. By the time most common-
source outbreaks of hepatitis A are recognized, it is usually too late in 
the incubation period for IG to be effective; however, prophylaxis may 
have limited the frequency of secondary cases. For travelers to tropi-
cal countries, developing countries, and other areas outside standard 
tourist routes, IG prophylaxis had been recommended before a vaccine 
became available.

Such  IG  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  and  for 
preexposure  prophylaxis  for  international  travel  were  updated  in 
2018.  Currently,  hepatitis  A  vaccine,  not  IG,  is  recommended  for 
all  persons  aged  ≥12  months  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  and  for 
preexposure  prophylaxis  prior  to  international  travel  to  HAV-en-
demic  areas.  For  adults  aged  >40,  IG  (at  an  upward  revised  dose 
of  0.1  mg/kg)  may  be  added  to  postexposure  hepatitis  B  vaccina-
tion  depending  on  an  assessment  of  the  person’s  risk.  Even  though 
hepatitis A vaccine is indicated for children ≥12 months of age, when 
infants aged 6–11 months travel internationally to areas with a risk 
of  HAV  infection,  they  should  receive  the  vaccine  for  preexposure 
prophylaxis; however, this travel-related dose should not be counted 
toward the universal childhood two-dose hepatitis A vaccine recom-
mendation,  which  begins  at  age  12  months.  For  postexposure  pro-
phylaxis of persons with contraindications to hepatitis A vaccination 
and  infants  aged  <12  months,  the  use  of  IG  (0.1  mL/kg)  should  be 
retained. In addition, for postexposure prophylaxis in immunocom-
promised adults and persons with chronic liver disease, both hepatitis 
A  vaccination  and  IG  administration  (0.1  mL/kg),  at  different  IM 
sites, are recommended. Finally, for infants aged <6 months and for 
persons with contraindications to hepatitis A vaccination, preexpo-
sure  prophylaxis  for  travel  consists  of  IG  at  doses  of  0.1  mg/kg  for 
travel durations up to 1 month, 0.2 mg/kg for travel up to 2 months, 
and  repeat  0.2  mg/kg  every  2  months  thereafter  for  the  remainder 
of  travel.  Thus,  except  for  these  limited  considerations,  hepatitis  A 
vaccine  has  supplanted  IG  in  almost  all  cases  for  both  postexpo-
sure  prophylaxis  and  preexposure  prophylaxis  for  travel.  Unlike  IG 
prophylaxis,  the  protection  afforded  by  active  immunization  with 
vaccine is durable and simpler to administer.

Formalin-inactivated  vaccines  made  from  strains  of  HAV  attenu-
ated in tissue culture have been shown to be safe, immunogenic, and 
effective in preventing hepatitis A. Hepatitis A vaccines are approved 
for  use  in  persons  who  are  at  least  1  year  old  and  appear  to  provide 
adequate protection beginning 4 weeks after a primary inoculation. As 
noted above, for travel to an endemic area, hepatitis A vaccine is the 
preferred  approach  to  preexposure  immunoprophylaxis  and  provides 
long-lasting  protection  (protective  levels  of  anti-HAV  should  last  at 
least 20 years after vaccination). Shortly after its introduction, hepatitis 
A vaccine was recommended for children living in communities with 
a  high  incidence  of  HAV  infection;  in  1999,  this  recommendation 
was  extended  to  include  all  children  living  in  states,  counties,  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2580

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 339-7  Hepatitis A Vaccination Schedules

AGE, YEARS

NO. OF DOSES DOSE

HAVRIX (GlaxoSmithKline)a

SCHEDULE, 
MONTHS

1–18
≥19

VAQTA (Merck)

1–18
≥19

2
2

2
2

720 ELUb (0.5 mL)
1440 ELU (1 mL)

25 units (0.5 mL)
50 units (1 mL)

0, 6–12
0, 6–12

0, 6–18
0, 6–18

aA combination of this hepatitis A vaccine and hepatitis B vaccine, TWINRIX, is 
licensed for simultaneous protection against both of these viruses among adults 
(age ≥18 years). Each 1-mL dose contains 720 ELU of hepatitis A vaccine and  
20 μg of hepatitis B vaccine. These doses are recommended at months 0, 1, and 6. 
bEnzyme-linked immunoassay units. cCombination hepatitis A and typhoid vaccines, 
Hepatyrix (GlaxoSmithKline) and Viatim (Sanofi Pasteur), are available, targeted 
primarily for travelers to endemic areas. Please consult product insert for doses 
and schedules

communities with high rates of HAV infection. As of 2006, the Advi-
sory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health 
Service  recommended  routine  hepatitis  A  vaccination  of  all  children. 
Other  groups  considered  being  at  increased  risk  for  HAV  infection 
and  who  are  candidates  for  hepatitis  A  vaccination  include  military 
personnel, populations with cyclic outbreaks of hepatitis A (e.g., Alas-
kan  natives),  employees  of  day-care  centers  and  persons  working  in 
facilities for the developmentally delayed, primate handlers, laboratory 
workers exposed to hepatitis A or fecal specimens, and patients with 
chronic liver disease (including persons with aminotransferase eleva-
tions ≥2 times the upper limit of normal). Because of an increased risk 
of fulminant hepatitis A—observed in some experiences but not con-
firmed  in  others—among  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  patients 
with chronic hepatitis C are candidates for hepatitis A vaccination, as 
are persons with chronic hepatitis B and the expanding population of 
persons with nonalcoholic liver disease. Other populations whose rec-
ognized risk of hepatitis A is increased should be vaccinated, including 
men  who  have  sex  with  men,  injection  or  noninjection  drug  users, 
persons  experiencing  homelessness,  persons  with  clotting  disorders 
who  require  frequent  administration  of  clotting-factor  concentrates, 
persons  traveling  from  the  United  States  to  countries  with  high  or 
intermediate  hepatitis  A  endemicity,  postexposure  prophylaxis  for 
contacts  of  persons  with  hepatitis  A,  and  household  members  and 
other close contacts of adopted children arriving from countries with 
high and moderate hepatitis A endemicity. Hepatitis A vaccine is now 
recommended as well for pregnant women at risk of infection or severe 
outcomes  from  infection  during  pregnancy.  Recommendations  for 
dose and frequency differ for the two approved vaccine preparations in 
the United States and the combination vaccines that include hepatitis 
A  (Table  339-7);  all  injections  are  IM.  Hepatitis  A  vaccine  has  been 
reported to be effective in preventing secondary household and day-
care center–associated cases of acute hepatitis A. In the United States, 
reported mortality resulting from hepatitis A declined in parallel with 
hepatitis  A  vaccine–associated  reductions  in  the  annual  incidence  of 
new infections.

Hepatitis  B  Until  1982,  prevention  of  hepatitis  B  was  based 
on  passive  immunoprophylaxis  either  with  standard  IG,  containing 
modest  levels  of  anti-HBs,  or  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin  (HBIG), 
containing high-titer anti-HBs. The efficacy of standard IG has never 
been established and remains questionable; even the efficacy of HBIG, 
demonstrated  in  several  clinical  trials,  has  been  challenged,  and  its 
contribution appears to be in reducing the frequency of clinical illness, 
not in preventing infection. The first vaccine for active immunization, 
introduced in 1982, was prepared from purified, noninfectious, 22-nm 
spherical HBsAg particles derived from the plasma of healthy HBsAg 
carriers.  In  1987,  the  plasma-derived  vaccine  was  supplanted  by  a 
genetically  engineered  vaccine  derived  from  recombinant  yeast.  The 
latter vaccine consists of HBsAg particles that are nonglycosylated but 
are  otherwise  indistinguishable  from  natural  HBsAg;  two  recombi-
nant vaccines were licensed for use in the United States in the 1980s 

2581

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

(Recombivax-HB  1986;  Engerix-B  1989),  and  a  third  (Heplisav-B)  
was  licensed  in  2017.  Current  recommendations  can  be  divided  into 
those for preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis.

For  preexposure  prophylaxis  against  hepatitis  B  in  settings  of  fre-
quent exposure (health workers exposed to blood; first-responder pub-
lic safety workers; hemodialysis patients and staff; residents and staff of 
custodial  institutions  for  the  developmentally  handicapped;  injection 
drug  users;  incarcerated  inmates  of  correctional  facilities;  persons 
with multiple sexual partners or who have had a sexually transmitted 
disease;  men  who  have  sex  with  men;  persons  such  as  hemophiliacs 
who  require  long-term,  high-volume  therapy  with  blood  derivatives; 
household and sexual contacts of persons with chronic HBV infection; 
persons  living  in  or  traveling  extensively  in  endemic  areas;  unvac-
cinated  children  aged  <18;  unvaccinated  children  who  are  Alaskan 
natives, Pacific Islanders, or residents in households of first-generation 
immigrants from endemic countries; persons born in countries with a 
prevalence of HBV infection ≥2%; patients with chronic liver disease 
[including  persons  with  aminotransferase  levels  >2  times  the  upper 
limit of normal]; persons aged <60 years with diabetes mellitus [those 
≥60 years at the discretion of their physicians]; persons with end-stage 
renal disease; and persons with HIV infection), three IM (deltoid, not 
gluteal) injections of hepatitis B vaccine are recommended at 0, 1, and 
6 months (other, optional schedules are summarized in Table 339-8). 
Pregnancy  is  not  a  contraindication  to  vaccination  (but  Heplisav-B 
is  not  recommended  for  pregnant  women  because  of  the  lack  of 
safety  data  in  this  subpopulation;  details  of  the  use  of  Heplisav-B,  a 
two-injection course a month apart, appear in Table 339-8). In areas of 
low HBV endemicity such as the United States, despite the availability 
of  safe  and  effective  hepatitis  B  vaccines,  a  strategy  of  vaccinating 
persons  in  high-risk  groups  was  not  effective.  The  incidence  of  new 
hepatitis  B  cases  continued  to  increase  in  the  United  States  after  the 
introduction  of  vaccines;  <10%  of  all  targeted  persons  in  high-risk 
groups  were  actually  vaccinated,  and  ~30%  of  persons  with  sporadic 
acute hepatitis B did not fall into any high-risk group category. There-
fore, to have an impact on the frequency of HBV infection in an area of 
low endemicity such as the United States, universal hepatitis B vacci-
nation in childhood is recommended. For unvaccinated children born 
after  the  implementation  of  universal  infant  vaccination,  vaccination 
during  early  adolescence,  at  age  11–12  years,  is  recommended,  and 
this  recommendation  has  been  extended  to  include  all  unvaccinated 
children  aged  0–19  years.  In  HBV-hyperendemic  areas  (e.g.,  Asia), 
universal vaccination of children has resulted in a marked (~70–90%) 
30-year decline in complications of hepatitis B, including liver-related 
mortality and hepatocellular carcinoma.

The  original  two  available  aluminum-adjuvanted  recombi-
nant  hepatitis  B  vaccines  are  comparable,  one  containing  10  μg  of 
HBsAg  (Recombivax-HB)  and  the  other  containing  20  μg  of  HBsAg 
(Engerix-B), and recommended doses for each injection vary for the 
two  preparations  (Table  339-8).  Combinations  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine 
with other childhood vaccines are available as well (Table 339-8).

In 2017, a third recombinant hepatitis B vaccine with a novel adju-
vant that activates Toll-like 9 receptors was approved for adults aged 18 
or older. In a series of prospective trials, compared to three Engerix-B 
injections, two IM doses a month apart yielded higher proportions with 
protective levels of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL): 95% of adults aged 18–55 
or 18–70 (vs 81% for Engerix-B), 90% of older adults aged 40–70 (vs 
71% for Engerix-B), and 90% of adults aged 18–70 with type 2 diabetes 
(vs 65% for Engerix-B). This two-injection regimen may be useful for 
revaccination of persons who failed to respond to the original vaccines. 
Another  novel  recombinant  vaccine  (PreHevbrio,  VBI  Vaccines)  con-
taining of all three hepatitis B surface antigens, S, pre-S1, and pre-S2, 
has been shown in clinical trials (three IM doses at 0, 1, and 6 months) 
to  achieve  higher  proportions  with  protective  anti-HBs  and  higher 
antibody levels than Engerix-B (which contains S antigen only), includ-
ing in older persons (≥45 years), persons with diabetes, and overweight 
persons (body mass index >30); approved originally outside the United 
States, this vaccine was approved by the FDA on December 1, 2021 for 
adults  age  ≥18  years.  Availability  is  expected  during  the  first  quarter 
of 2022.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2581

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2582

TABLE 339-8  Preexposure Hepatitis B Vaccination Schedules
TARGET GROUP

NO. OF DOSES

DOSE

SCHEDULE, MONTHS

Recombivax-HB (Merck)a

Infants, children (<1–10 years)
Adolescents (11–19 years)

Adults (≥20 years)
Hemodialysis patientsb
  <20 years
  ≥20 years

Engerix-B (GlaxoSmithKline)c

Infants, children (<1–10 years)
Adolescents (10–19 years)
Adults (≥20 years)
Hemodialysis patientsb
  <20 years
  ≥20 years

Heplisav-B (Dynavax)d

Adults (≥18 years)

3
3 or 4
or
2
3
3
3

3 or 4
3 or 4
3 or 4

4
4

2

5 μg (0.5 mL)
5 μg (0.5 mL)

0, 1–2, 4–6
0–2, 1–4, 4–6 or 0, 12, 24 or 0, 1, 2, 12

10 μg (1 mL)
10 μg (1 mL)
5 μg (0.5 mL)
40 μg (4 mL)

0, 4–6 (age 11–15)
0–2, 1–4, 4–6
0, 1, 6
0, 1, 6

10 μg (0.5 mL)
10 μg (0.5 mL)
20 μg (1 mL)

0, 1–2, 4–6 or 0, 1, 2, 12
0, 1–2, 4–6 or 0, 12, 24 or 0, 1, 2, 12
0–2, 1–4, 4–6 or 0, 1, 2, 12

10 μg (0.5 mL)
40 μg (2 mL)

0, 1, 2, 6
0, 1, 2, 6

20 μg (0.5 mL)

0, 1

aThis manufacturer produces a licensed combination of hepatitis B vaccine and vaccines against Haemophilus 
influenzae type b and Neisseria meningitides, Comvax, for use in infants and young children. Please consult 
product insert for dose and schedule. bThis group also includes other immunocompromised persons. cThis 
manufacturer produces two licensed combination hepatitis B vaccines: (1) Twinrix, recombinant hepatitis B 
vaccine plus inactivated hepatitis A vaccine, is licensed for simultaneous protection against both of these 
viruses among adults (age ≥18 years). Each 1-mL dose contains 720 ELU (enzyme-linked immunoassay units) of 
hepatitis A vaccine and 20 μg of hepatitis B vaccine. These doses are recommended at months 0, 1, and 6. (2) 
Pediarix, recombinant hepatitis B vaccine plus diphtheria and tetanus toxoid, pertussis, and inactivated poliovirus, 
is licensed for use in infants and young children. A hexavalent vaccine combining diphtheria, tetanus toxoid, 
pertussis, poliovirus, H. influenzae type b, and hepatitis B (Vaxelis, MCM Vaccine Company) was approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2018. Please consult product insert for doses and schedules. dHeplisav-B 
has not been tested for safety and efficacy in children, adolescents, hemodialysis patients, and pregnant women; 
it is not approved for these subpopulations.

against clinical hepatitis B, hepatitis B surface 
antigenemia,  and  chronic  HBV  infection. 
Currently,  booster  immunizations  are  not 
recommended  routinely,  except  in  immu-
nosuppressed  persons  who  have  lost  detect-
able anti-HBs or immunocompetent persons 
who  sustain  percutaneous  HBsAg-positive 
inoculations after losing detectable antibody. 
Specifically, for hemodialysis patients, annual 
anti-HBs  testing  is  recommended  after  vac-
cination;  booster  doses  are  recommended 
when anti-HBs levels fall to <10 mIU/mL. As 
noted above, for persons at risk of both hepa-
titis A and B, a combined vaccine is available 
containing 720 enzyme-linked immunoassay 
units (ELUs) of inactivated HAV and 20 μg of 
recombinant HBsAg (at 0, 1, and 6 months).

Hepatitis  D 
Infection  with  hepatitis  D 
can  be  prevented  by  vaccinating  susceptible 
persons  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine.  No  prod-
uct  is  available  for  immunoprophylaxis  to 
prevent HDV superinfection in persons with 
chronic  HBV  infection;  for  these  patients, 
avoidance  of  percutaneous  exposures  and 
limitation  of  intimate  contact  with  persons 
who have HDV infection are recommended.

For unvaccinated persons sustaining an exposure to HBV, postexpo-
sure prophylaxis with a combination of HBIG (for rapid achievement 
of high-titer circulating anti-HBs) and hepatitis B vaccine (for achieve-
ment of long-lasting immunity as well as its apparent efficacy in atten-
uating  clinical  illness  after  exposure)  is  recommended.  For  perinatal 
exposure of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers, a single dose of 
HBIG,  0.5  mL,  should  be  administered  IM  in  the  thigh  immediately 
after birth, followed by a complete course of three injections of recom-
binant hepatitis B vaccines approved for children (see doses above) to 
be started within the first 12 h of life. For those experiencing a direct 
percutaneous  inoculation  or  transmucosal  exposure  to  HBsAg-posi-
tive blood or body fluids (e.g., accidental needle stick, other mucosal 
penetration,  or  ingestion),  a  single  IM  dose  of  HBIG,  0.06  mL/kg, 
administered as soon after exposure as possible, is followed by a com-
plete course of hepatitis B vaccine to begin within the first week. For 
pregnant mothers with high-level HBV DNA (>2 × 105 IU/mL), adding 
antiviral  nucleoside  analogues  (e.g.,  pregnancy  class  B  tenofovir,  see 
Chap 341) during the third trimester of pregnancy reduces perinatal 
transmission even further. For persons exposed by sexual contact to a 
patient with acute hepatitis B, a single IM dose of HBIG, 0.06 mL/kg,  
should be given within 14 days of exposure, to be followed by a com-
plete course of hepatitis B vaccine. When both HBIG and hepatitis B 
vaccine are recommended, they may be given at the same time but at 
separate sites. Testing adults for anti-HBs after a course of vaccine is 
advisable to document the acquisition of immunity, but because hepa-
titis B vaccine immunogenicity is nearly universal in infants, postvac-
cination anti-HBs testing of children is not recommended.

The  precise  duration  of  protection  afforded  by  hepatitis  B  vac-
cine  is  unknown;  however,  ~80–90%  of  immunocompetent  adult 
vaccinees retain protective levels of anti-HBs for at least 5 years, and 
60–80%  for  10  years,  and  protective  antibody  has  been  documented 
to last for at least two decades after vaccination in infancy. Thereafter 
and  even  after  anti-HBs  becomes  undetectable,  protection  persists 

Hepatitis C 
IG  is  ineffective  in  prevent-
ing  hepatitis  C  and  is  no  longer  recom-
mended  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  in 
cases  of  perinatal,  needle  stick,  or  sexual 
exposure.  Although  prototype  vaccines  that 
induce antibodies to HCV envelope proteins 
have  been  developed,  currently,  hepatitis  C 
vaccination is not feasible practically. Geno-
type and quasispecies viral heterogeneity, as well as rapid evasion of 
neutralizing  antibodies  by  this  rapidly  mutating  virus,  conspire  to 
render HCV a difficult target for immunoprophylaxis with a vaccine. 
Prevention  of  transfusion-associated  hepatitis  C  has  been  accom-
plished by the following successively introduced measures: exclusion 
of commercial blood donors and reliance on a volunteer blood supply; 
screening donor blood with surrogate markers such as ALT (no longer 
recommended) and anti-HBc, markers that identify segments of the 
blood donor population with an increased risk of bloodborne infec-
tions; exclusion of blood donors in high-risk groups for AIDS and the 
introduction of anti-HIV screening tests; and progressively sensitive 
serologic and virologic screening tests for HCV infection.

In  the  absence  of  active  or  passive  immunization,  prevention  of 
hepatitis C includes behavior changes and precautions to limit expo-
sures  to  infected  persons.  Recommendations  designed  to  identify 
patients with clinically inapparent hepatitis as candidates for medical 
management have as a secondary benefit the identification of persons 
whose contacts could be at risk of becoming infected. A so-called look-
back  program  has  been  recommended  to  identify  persons  who  were 
transfused before 1992 with blood from a donor found subsequently 
to have hepatitis C. In addition, anti-HCV testing, once recommended 
for persons born between 1945 and 1965, has now been expanded to 
include all persons 18 year or older, independent of risk factors. Groups 
at higher risk and for whom testing is recommended include anyone 
who  received  a  blood  transfusion  or  a  transplanted  organ  before  the 
introduction of second-generation screening tests in 1992, those who 
ever used injection drugs (or took other illicit drugs by noninjection 
routes), chronically hemodialyzed patients, persons with clotting dis-
orders  who  received  clotting  factors  made  before  1987  from  pooled 
blood products, persons with elevated aminotransferase levels, health 
workers  exposed  to  HCV-positive  blood  or  contaminated  needles, 
recipients  of  blood  or  organs  from  a  donor  found  to  be  positive  for 
hepatitis C, persons with HIV infection, health care and public safety 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2582

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
 
personnel following a needle stick or other nonpercutaneous exposure 
to HCV-infected material, sexual partners of persons with hepatitis C, 
and children born to HCV-positive mothers (Table 339-4).

For  stable,  monogamous  sexual  partners,  sexual  transmission  of 
hepatitis C is unlikely, and sexual barrier precautions are not recom-
mended.  For  persons  with  multiple  sexual  partners  or  with  sexually 
transmitted diseases, the risk of sexual transmission of hepatitis C is 
increased, and barrier precautions (latex condoms) are recommended. 
A person with hepatitis C should avoid sharing such items as razors, 
toothbrushes,  and  nail  clippers  with  sexual  partners  and  family 
members.  No  special  precautions  are  recommended  for  babies  born 
to  mothers  with  hepatitis  C,  and  breast-feeding  does  not  have  to  be 
restricted.

Hepatitis E  For prevention of hepatitis E, IG derived from HEV- 
endemic  populations  does  not  appear  to  be  effective.  Two  safe  and 
effective  three-dose  (0,  1,  and  6  months),  recombinant  genotype  1 
capsid protein vaccines, which protect against other genotypes as well, 
have been shown in randomized, placebo-controlled trials to be highly 
protective  against  symptomatic  acute  hepatitis  E.  A  Chinese  vaccine, 
Hecolin, achieved 100% 12-month efficacy and was licensed in China 
in 2011; its long-lasting protection (87% efficacy) was documented for 
up to 4.5 years. A second vaccine developed by GlaxoSmithKline and 
the U.S. Army vaccine achieved a 12-month 96% efficacy. The second 
vaccine  was  never  developed  commercially.  The  Chinese  vaccine  is 
available  in  China  but  is  not  FDA  approved  or  available  in  the 
United States.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Buckley GJ, Strom BL (eds). Eliminating the Public Health Problem 
of Hepatitis B and C in the United States: Phase One Report. Wash-
ington DC, National Academies Press, 2016.

Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention:  Recommenda-
tions  for  the  identification  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  virus  infection 
among  persons  born  during  1945–1965.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal 
Wkly Rep 61(RR-4):1, 2012.

Chang M-H et al: Long-term effects of hepatitis B immunization of 
infants in preventing liver cancer. Gastroenterology 151:472, 2016.
Debing Y et al: Update on hepatitis E virology: Implications for clin-

ical practice. J Hepatol 65:200, 2016.

Denniston  MM  et  al:  Chronic  hepatitis  C  virus  infection  in  the 
United States, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
2003–2010. Ann Intern Med 160:293, 2014.

Ditah I et al: Current epidemiology of hepatitis E virus infection in 
the United States: Low seroprevalence in the National Health and 
Nutrition Survey. Hepatology 60:815, 2014.

Doshani  M  et  al:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee 
on  Immunization  Practices  for  use  of  hepatitis  A  vaccine  for  per-
sons experiencing homelessness. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
68:153, 2019.

Douam F et al: The mechanism of HCV entry into host cells. Prog 

Mol Biol Transl Sci 129:63, 2015.

Edlin BR et al: Toward a more accurate estimate of the prevalence of 

hepatitis C in the United States. Hepatology 62:1353, 2015.

European Association for the Study of the Liver: EASL clin-
ical  practice  guidelines  on  hepatitis  E  virus  infection.  J  Hepatol 
68:1256, 2018.

Foster M et al: Hepatitis A outbreaks associated with drug use and 
homelessness—California,  Kentucky,  Michigan,  and  Utah  2017. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 67:1208, 2018.

Freedman M et al: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. 
Recommended  adult  immunization  schedule,  United  States,  2020. 
Ann Intern Med 172:337, 2020.

Goldberg  D  et  al:  Changes  in  the  prevalence  of  hepatitis  C  virus 
infection,  nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis,  and  alcoholic  liver  disease 
among  patients  with  cirrhosis  and  liver  failure  on  the  waitlist  for 
liver transplantation. Gastroenterology 152:1090, 2017.

Joy  JB  et  al:  The  spread  of  hepatitis  C  virus  genotype  1a  in  North 
America:  A  retrospective  phylogenetic  study.  Lancet  Infect  Dis 
16:698, 2016.

Koh C et al: Pathogenesis of and new therapies for hepatitis D. Gas-

2583

troenterology 156:461, 2019.

Le  MH  et  al:  Chronic  hepatitis  B  prevalence  among  foreign-born 
and  U.S.-born  adults  in  the  United  States,  1999-2016.  Hepatology 
71:431, 2020.

Lee MH et al: Chronic hepatitis C virus infection increases mortality 
from hepatic and extrahepatic diseases: A community-based long-
term prospective study. J Infect Dis 206:469, 2012.

Lemon SM et al: Type A viral hepatitis: A summary and update on 
the  molecular  virology,  epidemiology,  pathogenesis,  and  preven-
tion. J Hepatol 68:167, 2018.

Lin H-H et al: Changing hepatitis D virus epidemiology in a hepatitis 
B virus endemic area with a national vaccination program. Hepa-
tology 61:1870, 2016.

Nelson NP et al: Update: Recommendations of the Advisory Com-
mittee  on  Immunization  Practices  for  use  of  hepatitis  A  vaccine 
for  postexposure  prophylaxis  and  for  preexposure  prophylaxis 
for international travel. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 67:1216, 
2018.

Pan CQ et al: Tenofovir to prevent hepatitis B transmission in moth-

ers with high viral load. N Engl J Med 374:2324, 2016.

Polaris  Observatory  Collaborators:  Global  prevalence,  treat-
ment, and prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in 2016: A mod-
elling study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 3:383, 2018.

Polaris  Observatory  HCV  Collaborators:  Global  prevalence 
and genotype distribution of hepatitis C virus infection in 2015: A 
modelling study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2:161, 2017.

Rizzetto  M  et  al:  Hepatitis  delta:  The  rediscovery.  Clin  Liver  Dis 

17:475, 2013.

Roberts  H  et  al:  Prevalence  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV) 
infection in U.S. households: National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey (NHANES), 1988–2012. Hepatology 63:388, 2016.
Robinson CL et al: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
recommended immunization schedule for children and adolescents 
aged 18 years or younger—United States, 2020. MMWR Morb Mor-
tal Wkly Rep 69:130, 2020.

Rosenberg ES et al: Prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in US 
States and District of Columbia, 2013-2016. JAMA Network Open 
1:e186371, 2018.

Ryerson  AB  et  al:  Vital  signs:  Newly  reported  acute  and  chronic 
hepatitis C cases—United States, 2009–2018. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 69:399, 2020.

Schillie  S  et  al:  Prevention  of  hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the 
United  States:  Recommendation  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on 
Immunization  Practices.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  67:1, 
2018.

Schillie  S  et  al:  CDC  recommendations  for  hepatitis  C  screening 
among  adults—United  States,  2020.  MMWR  Recommend  Rep 
69(No. RR #2):1, 2020. 

Schweitzer A et al: Estimations of worldwide prevalence of chronic 
hepatitis  B  virus  infection:  A  systematic  review  of  data  published 
between 1965 and 2013. Lancet 386:1546, 2015.

Sureau C et al: The hepatitis delta virus: replication and pathogene-

sis. J Hepatol 64:S102, 2016.

Trépo C et al: Hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet 384:2053, 2014.
U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force:  Screening  for  hepatitis  B 
virus  infection  in  pregnant  women:  US  Preventive  Services  Task 
Force  reaffirmation  recommendation  statement.  JAMA  322:349, 
2019.

U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force:  Screening  for  hepatitis  C 
virus  infection  in  adolescents  and  adults:  US  Preventive  Services 
Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 323:970, 2020.

Waked I et al: Screening and treatment program to eliminate hepati-

tis C in Egypt. N Engl J Med 382:1166, 2020.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
3
9

A
c
u
t
e
V
i
r
a
l

H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2583

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2584

340

Toxic and Drug-Induced 
Hepatitis
William M. Lee, Jules L. Dienstag

Liver injury is a possible consequence of ingestion of any xenobiotic, 
including industrial toxins, pharmacologic agents, and complementary 
and alternative medications (CAMs). Among patients with acute liver 
failure,  drug-induced  liver  injury  (DILI)  is  the  most  common  cause, 
and evidence for hepatotoxicity detected during clinical trials for drug 
development is the most common reason for failure of compounds to 
reach approval status. DILI requires careful history-taking to identify 
unrecognized exposure to chemicals used in work or at home, drugs 
taken by prescription or bought over the counter, and herbal or dietary 
supplement  medicines.  Hepatotoxic  drugs  can  injure  the  hepatocyte 
directly, for example, via a free-radical or metabolic intermediate that 
causes  peroxidation  of  membrane  lipids  and  that  results  in  liver  cell 
injury.  Alternatively,  a  drug  or  its  metabolite  may  activate  compo-
nents  of  the  innate  or  adaptive  immune  system,  stimulate  apoptotic 
pathways, or initiate damage to bile excretory pathways (Fig. 340-1). 
Interference  with  bile  canalicular  pumps  can  allow  endogenous  bile 
acids, which can injure the liver, to accumulate. Such secondary injury, 
in turn, may lead to necrosis of hepatocytes; injure bile ducts, produc-
ing cholestasis; or block pathways of lipid movement, inhibit protein 
synthesis, or impair mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids, resulting in 
lactic  acidosis  and  intracellular  triglyceride  accumulation  (expressed 
histologically  as  microvesicular  steatosis).  In  other  instances,  drug 
metabolites  sensitize  hepatocytes  to  toxic  cytokines.  The  differences 
observed between susceptible and nonsusceptible drug recipients may 
be  attributable  to  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  haplotypes  that 
determine binding of drug-related haptens on the cell surface as well 
as to polymorphisms in elaboration of competing, protective cytokines, 
as has been suggested for acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (see below). 
Immune mechanisms may include cytotoxic lymphocytes or antibody-
mediated cellular cytotoxicity. In addition, a role has been shown for 
activation of nuclear transporters, such as the constitutive androstane 
receptor (CAR) or, more recently, the pregnane X receptor (PXR), in 
the induction of drug hepatotoxicity.

 ■ DRUG METABOLISM
Most drugs, which are water-insoluble, undergo a series of metabolic 
steps,  culminating  in  a  water-soluble  form  appropriate  for  renal  or 
biliary  excretion.  This  process  begins  with  oxidation  or  methylation 
mediated  initially  by  the  microsomal  mixed  function  oxygenases, 
cytochrome  P450  (phase  I  reaction),  followed  by  glucuronidation  or 
sulfation (phase II reaction) or inactivation by glutathione. Most drug 
hepatotoxicity is the result of formation of a phase I toxic metabolite, 
but  glutathione  depletion,  precluding  inactivation  of  harmful  com-
pounds by glutathione S-transferase, can contribute as well by ensuring 
that the toxic compound is not abrogated.

 ■ LIVER INJURY CAUSED BY DRUGS
In general, two major types of chemical hepatotoxicity have been recog-
nized: (1) direct toxic and (2) idiosyncratic. As shown in Table 340-1, 
direct toxic hepatitis occurs with predictable regularity in individuals 
exposed  to  the  offending  agent  and  is  dose-dependent.  The  latent 
period between exposure and liver injury is usually short (often several 
hours), although clinical manifestations may be delayed for 24–48 h. 
Agents producing toxic hepatitis are generally systemic poisons or are 
converted  in  the  liver  to  toxic  metabolites.  The  direct  hepatotoxins 
result in morphologic abnormalities that are reasonably characteristic 
and  reproducible  for  each  toxin.  Examples  of  rare  toxins  currently 
include carbon tetrachloride and trichloroethylene that characteristi-
cally produce a centrilobular zonal necrosis. The hepatotoxic octapep-
tides of Amanita phalloides usually produce massive hepatic necrosis; 
the lethal dose of the toxin is ~10 mg, the amount found in a single 

deathcap  mushroom.  Acetaminophen,  the  prime  example  of  a  direct 
toxin, is discussed below.

In  idiosyncratic  drug  reactions,  the  occurrence  of  liver  injury  is 
infrequent  (1  in  103–105  patients)  and  unpredictable;  the  response 
is  not  as  clearly  dose-dependent  as  is  injury  associated  with  direct 
hepatotoxins, and liver injury may occur at any time after exposure to 
the drug but typically between 5 and 90 days following its initiation. 
Although regarded as not dose-related in the fashion of direct toxins, 
most agents causing idiosyncratic toxicity are given at relatively high 
daily  doses,  typically  exceeding  100  mg,  suggesting  a  role  for  dose—
drugs with low potency must be given in higher doses that engender 
greater  chances  for  “off-target”  effects.  Likewise,  drugs  given  in  mil-
ligram  amounts  are  of  high  potency  and  rarely  cause  liver  or  other 
off-target effects. Adding to the difficulty of predicting or identifying 
idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity is the occurrence of mild, transient, 
nonprogressive  serum  aminotransferase  elevations  that  resolve  with 
continued  drug  use.  Such  “adaptation,”  the  mechanism  of  which 
is  unknown,  is  well  recognized  for  drugs  such  as  isoniazid  (INH), 
valproate,  phenytoin,  and  HMG-CoA  reductase  inhibitors  (statins). 
Extrahepatic manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as rash, arthral-
gias, fever, leukocytosis, and eosinophilia, occur in a small fraction of 
patients with idiosyncratic hepatotoxic drug reactions but are charac-
teristic for certain drugs (phenytoin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) 
and  not  others.  Both  primary  immunologic  injury  and  direct  hepa-
totoxicity  related  to  idiosyncratic  differences  in  generation  of  toxic 
metabolites have been invoked to explain idiosyncratic drug reactions. 
The most current data implicate the adaptive immune system respond-
ing to the formation of immune stimulatory compounds resulting from 
phase I metabolic activation of the offending drug. Differences in host 
susceptibility may result from varying kinetics of toxic metabolite gen-
eration and genetic polymorphisms in downstream drug-metabolizing 
pathways or cytokine activation; in addition, certain HLA haplotypes 
have  been  associated  with  hepatotoxicity  of  certain  drugs  such  as 
amoxicillin-clavulanate  and  flucloxacillin.  Occasionally,  however,  the 
clinical features of an allergic reaction (prominent tissue eosinophilia, 
autoantibodies,  etc.)  are  difficult  to  ignore  and  suggest  activation  of 
IgE pathways. A few instances of drug hepatotoxicity are observed to 
be  associated  with  autoantibodies,  including  a  class  of  antibodies  to 
liver-kidney  microsomes,  anti-LKM2,  directed  against  a  cytochrome 
P450 enzyme. Four agents that specifically have a phenotype of auto-
immune hepatitis with a high likelihood of positive antinuclear anti-
bodies (ANAs) include nitrofurantoin, minocycline, hydralazine, and 
α-methyldopa.

Idiosyncratic reactions lead to a morphologic pattern that is more 
variable than those produced by direct toxins; a single agent is often 
capable of causing a variety of lesions, although certain patterns tend to 
predominate. Depending on the agent involved, idiosyncratic hepatitis 
may result in a clinical and morphologic picture indistinguishable from 
that of viral hepatitis (e.g., INH or ciprofloxacin). So-called hepatocel-
lular injury is the most common form, featuring spotty necrosis in the 
liver  lobule  with  a  predominantly  lymphocytic  infiltrate  resembling 
that observed in acute hepatitis A, B, or C. Drug-induced cholestasis 
ranges from mild to increasingly severe: (1) bland cholestasis with lim-
ited hepatocellular injury (e.g., estrogens, 17,α-substituted androgens); 
(2)  inflammatory  cholestasis  (e.g.,  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid  [the 
most frequently implicated antibiotic among cases of DILI], oxacillin, 
erythromycin  estolate);  (3)  sclerosing  cholangitis  (e.g.,  after  intrahe-
patic  infusion  of  the  chemotherapeutic  agent  floxuridine  for  hepatic 
metastases from a primary colonic carcinoma); and (4) disappearance 
of bile ducts, “ductopenic” cholestasis or vanishing bile duct syndrome, 
similar  to  that  observed  in  chronic  rejection  (Chap.  345)  following 
liver  transplantation  (e.g.,  carbamazepine,  levofloxacin).  Cholestasis 
may result from binding of drugs to canalicular membrane transport-
ers, accumulation of toxic bile acids resulting from canalicular pump 
failure, or genetic defects in canalicular transporter proteins. Clinically, 
the  distinction  between  a  hepatocellular  and  a  cholestatic  reaction  is 
indicated by the R value, the ratio of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) to 
alkaline phosphatase values, both expressed as multiples of the upper 
limit of normal. An R value of >5.0 is associated with hepatocellular 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2584

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemSix Mechanisms of Liver Injury

2585

A

Membrane

B

Hepatocyte

Canaliculus

Transport
pumps (MRP3)

P-450

Heme

Drug

C

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Vesicle

D

Enzyme-drug
adduct

Cytokines

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
0

T
o
x
i
c
a
n
d
D
r
u
g
-
I
n
d
u
c
e
d
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

F

Triglycerides

Free fatty
acid

Inhibition of
β-oxidation, respiration,
or both

E

Cell death

Other
caspases

Other
caspases

Caspase

Caspase

Caspase

DD

DD

DD

DD

Mitochondrion

Lactate

TNF-α receptor,
Fas

Cytolytic
T cell

A. Rupture of cell membrane.
B. Injury of bile canaliculus (disruption of transport pumps).
C. P-450-drug covalent binding (drug adducts).

D. Drug adducts targeted by CTLs/cytokines.
E. Activation of apoptotic pathway by TNFα/Fas.
F. Inhibition of mitochondrial function.

FIGURE 340-1  Potential mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury. The normal hepatocyte may be affected adversely by drugs through (A) disruption of intracellular calcium 
homeostasis that leads to the disassembly of actin fibrils at the surface of the hepatocyte, resulting in blebbing of the cell membrane, rupture, and cell lysis; (B) disruption 
of actin filaments next to the canaliculus (the specialized portion of the cell responsible for bile excretion), leading to loss of villous processes and interruption of transport 
pumps such as multidrug resistance–associated protein 3 (MRP3), which, in turn, prevents the excretion of bilirubin and other organic compounds; (C) covalent binding of 
the heme-containing cytochrome P450 enzyme to the drug, thus creating nonfunctioning adducts; (D) migration of these enzyme-drug adducts to the cell surface in vesicles 
to serve as target immunogens for cytolytic attack by T cells, stimulating an immune response involving cytolytic T cells and cytokines; (E) activation of apoptotic pathways 
by tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) receptor or Fas (DD denotes death domain), triggering the cascade of intercellular caspases, resulting in programmed cell death; or (F) 
inhibition of mitochondrial function by a dual effect on both β-oxidation and the respiratory-chain enzymes, leading to failure of free fatty acid metabolism, a lack of aerobic 
respiration, and accumulation of lactate and reactive oxygen species (which may disrupt mitochondrial DNA). Toxic metabolites excreted in bile may damage bile-duct 
epithelium (not shown). CTLs, cytolytic T lymphocytes. (From WM Lee: Drug-induced hepatotoxicity. N Engl J Med 349:474, 2003. Copyright © 2003, Massachusetts Medical 
Society. Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.)

injury, R <2.0 with cholestatic injury, and R between 2.0 and 5.0 with 
mixed hepatocellular-cholestatic injury.

Morphologic  alterations  may  also  include  hepatic  granulomas 
(e.g.,  sulfonamides)  or  macrovesicular  or  microvesicular  steatosis  or 

steatohepatitis.  Severe  hepatotoxicity  associated  with  steatohepatitis, 
most likely a result of mitochondrial toxicity, was recognized with cer-
tain antiretroviral therapies, although most of these drugs have been 
withdrawn (Chap. 202). Another potential target for idiosyncratic drug 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2585

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2586

TABLE 340-1  Some Features of Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatic Injury

FEATURES 
Predictable and dose-
related toxicity
Latent period
Arthralgia, fever, rash, 
eosinophilia
Liver morphology

DIRECT TOXIC EFFECTa

IDIOSYNCRATICa

OTHERa

CARBON 
TETRACHLORIDE ACETAMINOPHEN
+
+

AMOXICILLIN-
CLAVULANATE
0

Short
0

Short
0

Delayed onset
0

ISONIAZID
0

Variable
0

CIPROFLOXACIN
0

ESTROGENS/
ANDROGENIC STEROIDS
+

May be short
0

Variable
0

Necrosis, fatty 
infiltration

Centrilobular 
necrosis

Mixed hepatocellular/
cholestatic

Hepatocellular injury 
resembling viral 
hepatitis

Hepatocellular injury 
resembling viral 
hepatitis

Cholestasis without portal 
inflammation

aThe drugs listed are typical examples.

hepatotoxicity is sinusoidal lining cells; when these are injured, such as 
by high-dose chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide, mel-
phalan, busulfan) administered prior to bone marrow transplantation, 
veno-occlusive  disease  can  result.  Nodular  regenerative  hyperplasia, 
a  subtle  form  of  portal  hypertension,  may  also  result  from  vascular 
injury  to  portal  or  hepatic  venous  endothelium  following  systemic 
chemotherapy, such as with oxaliplatin, as part of adjuvant treatment 
for colon cancer.

Not  all  adverse  hepatic  drug  reactions  can  be  classified  as  either 
toxic or idiosyncratic. For example, oral contraceptives, which combine 
estrogenic  and  progestational  compounds,  may  result  in  impairment 
of  liver  tests  and,  occasionally,  jaundice;  however,  they  do  not 
produce  necrosis  or  fatty  change,  manifestations  of  hypersensitivity 
are generally  absent,  and  susceptibility  to  the  development  of  oral  
contraceptive–induced  cholestasis  appears  to  be  genetically  deter-
mined. Such estrogen-induced cholestasis is more common in women 
with  cholestasis  of  pregnancy,  a  disorder  linked  to  genetic  defects  in 
multidrug resistance–associated canalicular transporter proteins.

Any idiosyncratic reaction that occurs in <1:10,000 recipients will 
go unrecognized in most clinical trials, which involve at most several 
thousand subjects. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
pharmaceutical companies have learned to look for even subtle indica-
tions of serious toxicity and monitor regularly the number of trial sub-
jects in whom any aminotransferase elevations develop, as a possible 
surrogate for more serious toxicity. Even more valid as a predictor of 
severe hepatotoxicity is the occurrence of jaundice in patients enrolled 
in a clinical drug trial, so-called “Hy’s Law,” named after Dr. Hyman 
Zimmerman, one of the pioneers of the field of drug hepatotoxicity. He 
recognized that, if jaundice occurred during a phase 3 trial, more seri-
ous liver injury was likely, with a 10:1 ratio between cases of jaundice 
and liver failure (i.e., 10 patients with jaundice would result in 1 patient 
with acute liver failure). Thus, the finding of such Hy’s Law (jaundiced) 
cases during drug development often portends failure of approval, par-
ticularly if any of the subjects sustains a bad outcome. Troglitazone, a 
peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ agonist, was the first in its 
class of thiazolidinedione insulin-sensitizing agents. Although in retro-
spect, Hy’s Law cases of jaundice had occurred during phase 3 trials, no 
instances of liver failure were recognized until well after the drug was 
introduced, emphasizing the importance of postmarketing surveillance 
in identifying toxic drugs and in leading to their withdrawal from use. 
Fortunately,  such  hepatotoxicity  is  not  characteristic  of  the  second- 
generation  thiazolidinediones  rosiglitazone  and  pioglitazone;  in  clinical 
trials, the frequency of aminotransferase elevations in patients treated 
with these medications did not differ from that in placebo recipients, 
and isolated reports of liver injury among recipients are extremely rare. 
Since  troglitazone  was  withdrawn  from  the  market  in  2001,  no  fully 
approved drugs have had to be withdrawn from the market by the FDA. 
Several agents have received black box warnings indicating that caution 
is needed; overall, the industry and FDA in concert have been able to 
avert severe toxicity in approved agents over the past 20 years.

Proving  that  an  episode  of  liver  injury  is  caused  by  a  drug  (cau-
sality) is difficult in many cases. DILI is nearly always a presumptive 
diagnosis,  and  many  other  disorders  produce  a  similar  clinicopatho-
logic picture. Thus, causality may be difficult to establish and requires 

several separate supportive assessment variables to lead to a high level 
of  certainty,  including  temporal  association  (time  of  onset,  time  to 
resolution), clinical-biochemical features, type of injury (hepatocellu-
lar vs cholestatic), extrahepatic features, likelihood that a given agent 
is to blame based on its past record, and exclusion of other potential 
causes.  Scoring  systems  such  as  the  Roussel-Uclaf  Causality  Assess-
ment Method (RUCAM) yield residual uncertainty and have not been 
adopted widely. Currently, the U.S. Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network  
(DILIN)  relies  on  a  structured  expert  opinion  process  requiring 
detailed data on each case and a comprehensive review by three experts 
who arrive at a consensus on a five-degree scale of likelihood (definite, 
highly  likely,  probable,  possible,  unlikely);  however,  this  approach  is 
not practical for routine clinical application.

Generally, drug hepatotoxicity is not more frequent in persons with 
underlying chronic liver disease, although the severity of the outcome 
may be amplified. Reported exceptions include hepatotoxicity of aspi-
rin,  methotrexate,  INH  (only  in  certain  experiences),  antiretroviral 
therapy for HIV infection, and certain drugs such as conditioning reg-
imens for bone marrow transplantation in the presence of hepatitis C.

TREATMENT
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatic Disease

Treatment is largely supportive, except in acetaminophen hepato-
toxicity (for which N-acetylcysteine is effective, see below). Acute 
liver  failure  develops  in  10%  of  patients  with  DILI;  spontaneous 
recovery,  once  that  threshold  is  reached,  occurs  in  <30%,  and 
liver transplantation is performed in >40% of those who reach the 
level  of  severity  of  acute  liver  failure  (coagulopathy  and  hepatic 
encephalopathy)  (Chap.  345).  Withdrawal  of  the  suspected  agent 
is  indicated  at  the  first  sign  of  an  adverse  reaction  or  when 
aminotransferase levels reach five times the upper limit of normal. 
A  number  of  studies  have  suggested  that  lethal  outcomes  follow 
continued use of an agent in the face of symptoms and signs of liver 
injury. In the case of the direct toxins, liver involvement should not 
divert attention from renal or other organ involvement, which may 
also threaten survival. Agents used occasionally but of questionable 
value include glucocorticoids for DILI with allergic features, silibi-
nin for mushroom poisoning, and ursodeoxycholic acid for choles-
tatic drug hepatotoxicity; these medications have been shown to be 
effective and cannot be recommended. A double-blind, randomized 
controlled  trial  of  the  use  of  N-acetylcysteine  for  nonacetamin-
ophen  acute  liver  failure,  including  cases  of  DILI,  demonstrated 
benefit, particularly for patients with early-stage hepatic encepha-
lopathy; however, the drug has not been approved by FDA for this 
indication.

In Table 340-2, several classes of chemical agents are listed together 
with examples of the pattern of liver injury they produce. Certain drugs 
appear to be responsible for the development of chronic as well as acute 
hepatic injury. For example, nitrofurantoin, minocycline, hydralazine, 
and methyldopa have been associated with moderate to severe chronic 
hepatitis  with  autoimmune  features.  Methotrexate,  tamoxifen,  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2586

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2587

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
0

T
o
x
i
c
a
n
d
D
r
u
g
-
I
n
d
u
c
e
d
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

TABLE 340-2  Principal Alterations of Hepatic Morphology Produced by Some Commonly Used Drugs and Chemicalsa
PRINCIPAL MORPHOLOGIC 
CHANGE
Cholestasis

CLASS OF AGENT
Anabolic steroid
Antibiotic
Anticonvulsant
Antidepressant
Anti-inflammatory
Antiplatelet
Antihypertensive
Antithyroid
Calcium channel blocker
Immunosuppressive
Lipid-lowering
Oncotherapeutic
Oral contraceptive
Oral hypoglycemic
Tranquilizer
Antiarrhythmic
Antibiotic
Anticonvulsant
Antiviral
Oncotherapeutic
Anesthetic
Antiandrogen
Antibiotic

Fatty liver

Hepatitis

Anticonvulsant
Antidepressant

Antifungal
Antihypertensive
Anti-inflammatory
Antipsychotic
Antiviral
Calcium channel blocker
Cholinesterase inhibitor
Diuretic
Laxative
Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
Oral hypoglycemic
Antibiotic
Antibacterial
Antifungal
Antihistamine
Immunosuppressive
Lipid-lowering
Analgesic
Hydrocarbon
Metal
Mushroom
Solvent
Antiarrhythmic
Antibiotic
Anticonvulsant
Anti-inflammatory
Xanthine oxidase inhibitor
Chemotherapeutic

Mixed hepatitis/cholestatic

Toxic (necrosis)

Granulomas

Vascular injury

EXAMPLE
Methyl testosterone, many other body-building supplements
Erythromycin estolate, nitrofurantoin, rifampin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, oxacillin
Carbamazepine
Duloxetine, mirtazapine, tricyclic antidepressants
Sulindac
Clopidogrel
Irbesartan, fosinopril
Methimazole
Nifedipine, verapamil
Cyclosporine
Ezetimibe
Anabolic steroids, busulfan, tamoxifen, irinotecan, cytarabine, temozolomide
Norethynodrel with mestranol
Chlorpropamide
Chlorpromazineb
Amiodarone
Tetracycline (high-dose, IV)
Valproic acid
Dideoxynucleosides (e.g., zidovudine), protease inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, ritonavir)
Asparaginase, methotrexate, tamoxifen
Halothane, fluothane
Flutamide
Isoniazid,c rifampicin, nitrofurantoin, telithromycin, minocycline,d pyrazinamide, 
trovafloxacine
Phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproic acid, phenobarbital
Iproniazid, amitriptyline, trazodone, venlafaxine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, duloxetine, 
sertraline, nefazodonee
Ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole
Methyldopa,c captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, losartan
Ibuprofen, indomethacin, diclofenac, sulindac, bromfenac
Risperidone
Zidovudine, didanosine, stavudine, nevirapine, ritonavir, indinavir, tipranavir, zalcitabine
Nifedipine, verapamil, diltiazem
Tacrine
Chlorothiazide
Oxyphenisatinc,e
Atomoxetine
Troglitazone,e acarbose
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Clindamycin
Terbinafine
Cyproheptadine
Azathioprine
Nicotinic acid, lovastatin, ezetimibe
Acetaminophen
Carbon tetrachloride
Yellow phosphorus
Amanita phalloides
Dimethylformamide
Quinidine, diltiazem
Sulfonamides
Carbamazepine
Phenylbutazone
Allopurinol
Oxaliplatin, melphalan

aSeveral agents cause more than one type of liver lesion and appear under more than one category. bRarely associated with primary biliary cirrhosis–like lesion. 
cOccasionally associated with chronic hepatitis or bridging hepatic necrosis or cirrhosis. dAssociated with an autoimmune hepatitis–like syndrome. eWithdrawn from use 
because of severe hepatotoxicity.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2587

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2588 amiodarone have been implicated in the development of cirrhosis. Portal 
hypertension in the absence of cirrhosis, termed nodular regenerative 
hyperplasia,  may  result  from  alterations  in  hepatic  architecture  pro-
duced  by  excessive  intake  of  vitamin  A  or  following  chemotherapy 
with  oxaliplatin.  Oral  contraceptives  have  been  implicated  in  the 
development  of  focal  nodular  hyperplasia  or  hepatic  adenoma  (both 
benign lesions) and, rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatic vein 
occlusion  (Budd-Chiari  syndrome).  Another  unusual  lesion,  peliosis 
hepatis (blood cysts of the liver), has been observed in some patients 
treated with anabolic or contraceptive steroids. The existence of these 
hepatic  disorders  expands  the  spectrum  of  liver  injury  induced  by 
chemical agents and emphasizes the need for a thorough drug history 
in all patients with liver dysfunction. The comprehensive, authoritative 
LiverTox  website,  which  contains  up-to-date  information  on  DILI, 
is  available  as  a  valuable  reference  through  the  National  Institutes  of 
Health and the National Library of Medicine (livertox.nih.gov).

The  following  are  patterns  of  adverse  hepatic  reactions  for  some 

prototypic agents.

 ■ ACETAMINOPHEN HEPATOTOXICITY  
(DIRECT TOXIN)
Acetaminophen represents the most prevalent cause of acute liver fail-
ure in the Western world; up to 72% of patients with acetaminophen 
hepatotoxicity  in  Scandinavia—somewhat  lower  frequencies  in  the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States—progress  to  encephalopathy 
and  coagulopathy.  Acetaminophen  causes  dose-related  centrilobular 
hepatic  necrosis  after  single-time-point  ingestions,  as  intentional 
self-harm,  or  over  extended  periods,  as  unintentional  overdoses, 
when  multiple  drug  preparations  or  inappropriate  drug  amounts  are 
used  daily  for  several  days,  for  example,  for  relief  of  pain  or  fever. 
In  these  instances,  8  g/d,  twice  the  daily  recommended  maximum 
dose, over several days can readily lead to liver failure. Use of opioid- 
acetaminophen  combinations  appears  to  be  particularly  harmful, 
because habituation to the opioid may occur with a gradual increase 
in  opioid-acetaminophen  combination  dosing  over  days  or  weeks.  A 
single dose of 10–15 g, occasionally less, may produce clinical evidence 
of liver injury. Fatal fulminant disease is usually (although not invari-
ably) associated with ingestion of ≥25 g. Blood levels of acetaminophen 
correlate with severity of hepatic injury (levels >300 μg/mL 4 h after 
ingestion  are  predictive  of  the  development  of  severe  damage;  levels 
<150  μg/mL  suggest  that  hepatic  injury  is  highly  unlikely).  Nausea, 
vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain,  and  shock  are  early  manifes-
tations  occurring  4–12  h  after  ingestion.  Then  24–48  h  later,  when 
these features are abating, hepatic injury becomes apparent. Maximal 
abnormalities and hepatic failure are evident 3–5 days after ingestion, 
and aminotransferase levels exceeding 10,000 IU/L are not uncommon 
(i.e., levels far exceeding those in patients with viral hepatitis). Renal 
failure and myocardial injury may be present. Whether or not a clear 
history of overdose can be elicited, clinical suspicion of acetaminophen 
hepatotoxicity should be raised by the presence of the extremely high 
aminotransferase  levels  in  association  with  low  bilirubin  levels  that 
are characteristic of this hyperacute injury. This biochemical signature 
should trigger further questioning of the subject if possible; however, 
outright  denial  (or  denial  of  high  doses)  or  altered  mentation  may 
confound diagnostic efforts. In this setting, a presumptive diagnosis is 
reasonable, and the proven antidote, N-acetylcysteine, is both safe and 
will be effective if given early (within 12 h) but is also used even when 
injury has evolved.

Acetaminophen  is  metabolized  predominantly  by  a  phase  II  reac-
tion  to  innocuous  sulfate  and  glucuronide  metabolites;  however,  a 
small proportion is metabolized by a phase I reaction to a hepatotoxic 
metabolite  formed  from  the  parent  compound  by  cytochrome  P450 
CYP2E1. This metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone-imine (NAPQI), 
is  detoxified  by  binding  to  “hepatoprotective”  glutathione  to  become 
harmless,  water-soluble  mercapturic  acid,  which  undergoes  renal 
excretion.  When  excessive  amounts  of  NAPQI  are  formed,  or  when 
glutathione  levels  are  low,  glutathione  levels  are  depleted  and  over-
whelmed,  permitting  covalent  binding  to  nucleophilic  hepatocyte 
macromolecules  forming  acetaminophen-protein  “adducts.”  These 

adducts, which can be measured in serum by high-performance liquid 
chromatography,  hold  promise  as  diagnostic  markers  of  acetamino-
phen hepatotoxicity, and a point-of-care assay for acetaminophen-Cys 
adducts  is  under  development.  The  binding  of  acetaminophen  to 
hepatocyte macromolecules is believed to lead to hepatocyte necrosis; 
the  precise  sequence  and  mechanism  are  unknown.  Hepatic  injury 
may be potentiated by prior administration of alcohol, phenobarbital, 
INH,  or  other  drugs;  by  conditions  that  stimulate  the  mixed-function 
oxidase system; or by conditions such as starvation (including inabil-
ity to maintain oral intake during severe febrile illnesses) that reduce 
hepatic glutathione levels. Alcohol induces cytochrome P450 CYP2E1; 
consequently,  increased  levels  of  the  toxic  metabolite  NAPQI  may 
be  produced  in  chronic  alcoholics  after  acetaminophen  ingestion, 
but the role of alcohol in potentiating acute acetaminophen injury is 
still debated. Alcohol also suppresses hepatic glutathione production. 
Therefore, in chronic alcoholics, the toxic dose of acetaminophen may 
be as low as 2 g, and alcoholic patients should be warned specifically 
about the dangers of even standard doses of this commonly used drug. 
In a 2006 study, aminotransferase elevations were identified in 31–44% 
of normal subjects treated for 14 days with the maximal recommended 
dose  of  acetaminophen,  4  g  daily  (administered  alone  or  as  part  of 
an  acetaminophen-opioid  combination);  because  these  changes  were 
transient  and  never  associated  with  bilirubin  elevation,  the  clinical 
relevance of these findings remains to be determined. Although under-
lying  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)  infection  was  found  to  be  associated 
with an increased risk of acute liver injury in patients hospitalized for 
acetaminophen overdose, generally, in patients with nonalcoholic liver 
disease,  acetaminophen  taken  in  recommended  doses  is  well  toler-
ated. Acetaminophen use in cirrhotic patients has not been associated 
with hepatic decompensation. On the other hand, because of the link 
between acetaminophen use and liver injury and because of the limited 
safety margin between safe and toxic doses, the FDA has recommended 
that the daily dose of acetaminophen be reduced from 4 g to 3 g (even 
lower for persons with chronic alcohol use), that all acetaminophen-
containing  products  be  labeled  prominently  as  containing  acetamin-
ophen,  and  that  the  potential  for  liver  injury  be  prominent  in  the 
packaging of acetaminophen and acetaminophen-containing products. 
Within opioid combination products, the limit for the acetaminophen 
component has been lowered to 325 mg per tablet.

TREATMENT
Acetaminophen Overdosage

Treatment  includes  gastric  lavage,  supportive  measures,  and  oral 
administration of activated charcoal or cholestyramine to prevent 
absorption  of  residual  drug.  Neither  charcoal  nor  cholestyramine 
appears to be effective if given >30 min after acetaminophen inges-
tion;  if  they  are  used,  the  stomach  lavage  should  be  done  before 
other agents are administered orally. The chances of possible, prob-
able, and high-risk hepatotoxicity can be derived from a nomogram 
plot  (Fig.  340-2),  readily  available  in  emergency  departments, 
as  a  function  of  measuring  acetaminophen  plasma  levels  4–8  h 
after  ingestion.  In  patients  with  high  acetaminophen  blood  levels   
(>200  μg/mL  measured  at  4  h  or  >100  μg/mL  at  8  h  after  inges-
tion), the administration of N-acetylcysteine reduces markedly the 
severity of hepatic necrosis. This agent provides sulfhydryl donor 
groups to replete glutathione, which is required to render harmless 
toxic metabolites that would otherwise bind covalently via sulfhy-
dryl  linkages  to  cell  proteins,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  drug 
metabolite-protein adducts. Therapy should be begun within 8 h of 
ingestion but may be at least partially effective when given as late 
as 24–36 h after overdose. Routine use of N-acetylcysteine has sub-
stantially  reduced  the  occurrence  of  fatal  acetaminophen  hepato-
toxicity. N-acetylcysteine may be given orally but is more commonly 
used as an IV solution, with a loading dose of 140 mg/kg  over  1  h, 
followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 h for 15–20 doses. Whenever a patient 
with  potential  acetaminophen  hepatotoxicity  is  encountered,  a 
local poison control center should be contacted. Treatment can be 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2588

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemLower limit for high-risk group
Lower limit for probable-risk group
Study nomogram line

4000

3000

2000

1300

1000

500

100

50

30

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

n
e
h
p
o
n
m
a
t
e
c
a

i

a
m
s
a
P

l

500
400

300

200

150

100

50

10

5

µmol/L µg/mL

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

Hours after acetaminophen ingestion

FIGURE 340-2  Nomogram to define risk of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity according 
to initial plasma acetaminophen concentration. (Reproduced with permission from 
Pediatrics, 55:871. Copyright © 1975 by the AAP.)

stopped  when  plasma  acetaminophen  levels  indicate  that  the  risk 
of liver damage is low. If signs of hepatic failure (e.g., progressive 
jaundice,  coagulopathy,  confusion)  occur  despite  N-acetylcysteine 
therapy  for  acetaminophen  hepatotoxicity,  liver  transplantation 
may  be  the  only  option.  Early  arterial  blood  lactate  levels  among 
such patients with acute liver failure may distinguish patients highly 
likely to require liver transplantation (lactate levels >3.5 mmol/L) 
from those likely to survive without liver replacement. Acute renal 
injury occurs in nearly 75% of patients with severe acetaminophen 
injury but is virtually always self-limited.

Survivors  of  acute  acetaminophen  overdose  rarely,  if  ever,  have 
ongoing liver injury or sequela but may be subject to repeat overdosing.

 ■ ISONIAZID HEPATOTOXICITY (TOXIC AND 
IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION)
INH remains central to most antituberculous prophylactic and thera-
peutic regimens, despite its long-standing recognition as a hepatotoxin. 
In 10% of patients treated with INH, elevated serum aminotransferase 
levels  develop  during  the  first  few  weeks  of  therapy;  however,  these 
elevations  in  most  cases  are  self-limited,  are  mild  (values  for  ALT  
<200  IU/L),  and  resolve  despite  continued  drug  use.  This  adaptive 
response allows continuation of the agent if symptoms and progressive 
enzyme elevations do not follow the initial elevations. Acute hepatoc-
ellular DILI secondary to INH is evident with a variable latency period 
up to 6 months and is more frequent in alcoholics and patients taking 
certain other medications, such as barbiturates, rifampin, and pyrazi-
namide. If the clinical threshold of encephalopathy is reached, severe 
hepatic  injury  is  likely  to  be  fatal  or  to  require  liver  transplantation. 
Liver biopsy reveals morphologic changes similar to those of viral hep-
atitis or bridging hepatic necrosis. Substantial liver injury appears to be 
age-related, increasing substantially after age 35; the highest frequency 
is in patients over age 50, and the lowest is in patients under the age 
of  20.  Even  for  patients  >50  years  of  age  monitored  carefully  during 
therapy,  hepatotoxicity  occurs  in  only  ~2%,  well  below  the  risk  esti-
mate  derived  from  earlier  experiences.  Fever,  rash,  eosinophilia,  and 
other manifestations of drug allergy are distinctly unusual. Antibodies 

2589

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
0

T
o
x
i
c
a
n
d
D
r
u
g
-
I
n
d
u
c
e
d
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

to INH have been detected in INH recipients, but a link to causality 
of liver injury remains unclear. A clinical picture resembling chronic 
hepatitis  has  been  observed  in  a  few  patients.  Many  public  health 
programs that require INH prophylaxis for a positive tuberculin skin 
test or blood test (Quantiferon or T-Spot) include monthly monitoring 
of aminotransferase levels, although this practice has been called into 
question.  Even  more  effective  in  limiting  serious  outcomes  may  be 
encouraging patients to be alert for symptoms such as nausea, fatigue, 
or jaundice, because most fatalities occur in the setting of continued 
INH  use  despite  clinically  apparent  illness.  The  incidence  of  severe 
INH toxicity may be declining as a result of less frequent use and/or 
better management.
 ■ SODIUM VALPROATE HEPATOTOXICITY (TOXIC 
AND IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION)
Sodium  valproate,  an  anticonvulsant  useful  in  the  treatment  of  petit 
mal  and  other  seizure  disorders,  has  been  associated  with  the  devel-
opment of severe hepatic toxicity and, rarely, fatalities, predominantly 
in children but also in adults. Among children listed as candidates for 
liver transplantation, valproate is the most common antiepileptic drug 
implicated. Asymptomatic elevations of serum aminotransferase levels 
have  been  recognized  in  as  many  as  45%  of  treated  patients.  These 
“adaptive”  changes,  however,  appear  to  have  no  clinical  importance, 
because  major  hepatotoxicity  is  not  seen  in  the  majority  of  patients 
despite  continuation  of  drug  therapy.  In  the  rare  patients  in  whom 
jaundice,  encephalopathy,  and  evidence  of  hepatic  failure  are  found, 
examination  of  liver  tissue  reveals  microvesicular  fat  and  bridging 
hepatic  necrosis,  predominantly  in  the  centrilobular  zone.  Bile  duct 
injury  may  also  be  apparent.  Most  likely,  sodium  valproate  is  not 
directly  hepatotoxic,  but  its  metabolite,  4-pentenoic  acid,  may  be 
responsible for hepatic injury. Valproate hepatotoxicity is more com-
mon in persons with mitochondrial enzyme deficiencies and may be 
ameliorated by IV administration of carnitine, which valproate therapy 
can  deplete.  Valproate  toxicity  has  been  linked  to  HLA  haplotypes 
(DR4 and B*1502) and to mutations in mitochondrial DNA polymerase 
gamma 1.

 ■ NITROFURANTOIN HEPATOTOXICITY 
(IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION)
This commonly used antibiotic for urinary tract infections may cause 
an acute hepatitis leading to fatal outcome or, more frequently, chronic 
hepatitis  of  varying  severity  but  indistinguishable  from  autoimmune 
hepatitis. These two scenarios may reflect the frequent use and reuse of 
the drug for treatment of recurrent cystitis in women. Although most 
toxic agents manifest injury within 6 months of first ingestion, nitro-
furantoin may have a longer latency period, in part perhaps because of 
its intermittent, recurrent use. Autoantibodies to nuclear components, 
smooth muscle, and mitochondria are seen and may subside after res-
olution of injury; however, glucocorticoid or other immunosuppressive 
medication  may  be  necessary  to  resolve  the  autoimmune  injury,  and 
cirrhosis may be seen in cases that are not recognized quickly. Intersti-
tial pulmonary fibrosis presenting as chronic cough and dyspnea may 
be present and resolve slowly with medication withdrawal. Histologic 
findings are identical to those of autoimmune hepatitis. A similar dis-
ease pattern can be observed with minocycline, which is used repeat-
edly for the treatment of acne in teenagers, as well as with hydralazine 
and α-methyldopa.

 ■ AMOXICILLIN-CLAVULANATE HEPATOTOXICITY 
(IDIOSYNCRATIC MIXED REACTION)
Currently, the most common agent implicated as causing DILI in the 
United States and in Europe is amoxicillin-clavulanate (most frequent 
brand  name:  Augmentin).  This  medication  causes  a  very  specific 
syndrome of mixed or primarily cholestatic injury. Because hepatotox-
icity may follow amoxicillin-clavulanate therapy after a relatively long 
latency  period,  the  liver  injury  may  begin  to  manifest  after  the  drug 
has  been  withdrawn.  The  high  prevalence  of  hepatotoxicity  reflects 
in  part  the  very  frequent  use  of  this  drug  for  respiratory  tract  infec-
tions, including community-acquired pneumonia. The mechanism of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2589

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
2590 hepatotoxicity is unclear, but the liver injury is thought to be caused 
by amoxicillin toxicity that is potentiated in some way by clavulanate, 
which itself appears not to be toxic. Symptoms include nausea, anorexia, 
fatigue, and jaundice—which may be prolonged—with pruritus. Rash 
is  quite  uncommon.  On  occasion,  amoxicillin-clavulanate,  like  other 
cholestatic  hepatotoxic  drugs,  causes  permanent  injury  to  small  bile 
ducts, leading to the so-called “vanishing bile duct syndrome.” In van-
ishing bile duct syndrome, initially, liver injury is minimal except for 
severe cholestasis; however, over time, histologic evidence of bile duct 
abnormalities is replaced by a paucity and eventual absence of discern-
ible ducts on subsequent biopsies.

 ■ AMIODARONE HEPATOTOXICITY (TOXIC AND 
IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION)
Therapy  with  this  potent  antiarrhythmic  drug  is  accompanied  in 
15–50%  of  patients  by  modest  elevations  of  serum  aminotransferase 
levels that may remain stable or diminish despite continuation of the 
drug. Such abnormalities may appear days to many months after begin-
ning  therapy.  A  proportion  of  those  with  elevated  aminotransferase 
levels have detectable hepatomegaly, and clinically important liver dis-
ease develops in <5% of patients. Features that represent a direct effect 
of the drug on the liver and that are common to the majority of long-
term  recipients  are  ultrastructural  phospholipidosis,  unaccompanied 
by clinical liver disease, and interference with hepatic mixed-function 
oxidase metabolism of other drugs. The cationic amphiphilic drug and 
its  major  metabolite  desethylamiodarone  accumulate  in  hepatocyte 
lysosomes and mitochondria and in bile duct epithelium. The relatively 
common  elevations  in  aminotransferase  levels  are  also  considered  a 
predictable,  dose-dependent,  direct  hepatotoxic  effect.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  rare  patient  with  clinically  apparent,  symptomatic  liver 
disease,  liver  injury  resembling  that  seen  in  alcoholic  liver  disease  is 
observed.  The  so-called  pseudoalcoholic  liver  injury  can  range  from 
steatosis, to alcoholic hepatitis–like neutrophilic infiltration and Mal-
lory’s  hyaline,  to  cirrhosis.  Electron-microscopic  demonstration  of 
phospholipid-laden lysosomal lamellar bodies can help to distinguish 
amiodarone hepatotoxicity from typical alcoholic hepatitis. This cate-
gory of liver injury appears to be a metabolic idiosyncrasy that allows 
hepatotoxic metabolites to be generated. Rarely, an acute idiosyncratic 
hepatocellular injury resembling viral hepatitis or cholestatic hepatitis 
occurs. Hepatic granulomas have occasionally been observed. Because 
amiodarone  has  a  long  half-life,  liver  injury  may  persist  for  months 
after the drug is stopped.

 ■ ANABOLIC STEROIDS (CHOLESTATIC REACTION)
The  most  common  form  of  liver  injury  caused  by  CAMs  is  the  pro-
found  cholestasis  associated  with  anabolic  steroids  used  by  body 
builders.  Unregulated  agents  sold  in  gyms  and  health  food  stores  as 
diet supplements, which are taken by athletes to improve their perfor-
mance, may contain anabolic steroids. In a young male, jaundice that 
is  accompanied  by  a  cholestatic,  rather  than  a  hepatitic,  laboratory 
profile almost invariably will turn out to be caused by the use of one 
of a variety of androgen congeners. Such agents have the potential to 
injure bile transport pumps and to cause intense cholestasis; the time 
to onset is variable, and resolution, which is the rule, may require many 
weeks  to  months.  Initially,  anorexia,  nausea,  and  malaise  may  occur, 
followed by pruritus in some but not all patients. Serum aminotrans-
ferase  levels  are  usually  <100  IU/L,  and  serum  alkaline  phosphatase 
levels are generally moderately elevated with bilirubin levels frequently 
exceeding 342 μmol/L (20 mg/dL). Examination of liver tissue reveals 
cholestasis without substantial inflammation or necrosis. Anabolic ste-
roids have also been used by prescription to treat bone marrow failure. 
In  this  setting,  hepatic  centrizonal  sinusoidal  dilatation  and  peliosis 
hepatis have been reported in rare patients, as have hepatic adenomas 
and hepatocellular carcinoma. Recently, a large series of cases with a 
uniform  phenotype  has  been  described.  Unfortunately,  no  genomic 
signature has become evident despite the unique features of the injury. 
No permanent sequelae are evident besides prolonged jaundice, lasting 
frequently 10 weeks or more.

 ■ TRIMETHOPRIM-SULFAMETHOXAZOLE 
HEPATOTOXICITY (IDIOSYNCRATIC REACTION)
This  antibiotic  combination  is  used  routinely  for  urinary  tract  infec-
tions  in  immunocompetent  persons  and  for  prophylaxis  against  and 
therapy  of  Pneumocystis  jirovecii  pneumonia  in  immunosuppressed 
persons (transplant recipients, patients with AIDS). With its increas-
ing  use,  its  occasional  hepatotoxicity  is  being  recognized  with  grow-
ing  frequency.  Its  likelihood  is  unpredictable,  but  when  it  occurs, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  hepatotoxicity  follows  a  relatively 
uniform latency period of several weeks and is often accompanied by 
eosinophilia,  rash,  and  other  features  of  a  hypersensitivity  reaction, 
including the drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms 
(DRESS) syndrome. Biochemically and histologically, acute hepatocel-
lular necrosis predominates, but cholestatic features are quite frequent. 
Occasionally,  cholestasis  without  necrosis  occurs,  and  very  rarely,  a 
severe cholangiolytic pattern of liver injury is observed. In most cases, 
liver injury is self-limited, but rare fatalities have been recorded. The 
hepatotoxicity is attributable to the sulfamethoxazole component of the 
drug and is similar in features to that seen with other sulfonamides; tis-
sue eosinophilia and granulomas may be seen. The risk of trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxazole  hepatotoxicity  is  increased  in  persons  with  HIV 
infection.  In  a  recent  study,  unique  HLA  associations  in  European 
Americans and in African Americans have been identified.

 ■ HMG-COA REDUCTASE INHIBITORS (STATINS) 
(IDIOSYNCRATIC MIXED HEPATOCELLULAR AND 
CHOLESTATIC REACTION)
Between  1  and  2%  of  patients  taking  lovastatin,  simvastatin,  pravas-
tatin, fluvastatin, or one of the newer statin drugs for the treatment of 
hypercholesterolemia  experience  asymptomatic,  reversible  elevations 
(greater  than  threefold)  of  aminotransferase  activity.  Acute  hepatitis- 
like  histologic  changes,  centrilobular  necrosis,  and  centrilobular 
cholestasis have been described in a very small number of cases. In a 
larger  proportion,  minor  aminotransferase  elevations  appear  during 
the  first  several  weeks  of  therapy.  Careful  laboratory  monitoring  can 
distinguish between patients with minor, transitory changes, who may 
continue therapy, and those with more profound and sustained abnor-
malities, who should discontinue therapy. Because clinically meaning-
ful aminotransferase elevations are so rare after statin use and do not 
differ in meta-analyses from the frequency of such laboratory abnor-
malities in placebo recipients, a panel of liver experts recommended to 
the National Lipid Association’s Safety Task Force that liver test moni-
toring was not necessary in patients treated with statins and that statin 
therapy  need  not  be  discontinued  in  patients  found  to  have  asymp-
tomatic  isolated  aminotransferase  elevations  during  therapy.  Statin 
hepatotoxicity  is  not  increased  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  
hepatic steatosis, or other underlying liver diseases, and statins can be 
used safely in these patients.

 ■ ALTERNATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY 
MEDICINES (IDIOSYNCRATIC HEPATITIS, 
STEATOSIS)
Herbal  medications  that  are  of  scientifically  unproven  efficacy  and 
that  lack  prospective  safety  oversight  by  regulatory  agencies  account 
currently  for  >20%  of  DILI  in  the  United  States.  Besides  anabolic 
steroids,  the  most  common  category  of  dietary  or  herbal  products  is 
weight  loss  agents.  Included  among  the  herbal  remedies  associated 
with  toxic  hepatitis  are  Jin  Bu  Huan,  xiao-chai-hu-tang,  germander, 
chaparral,  senna,  mistletoe,  skullcap,  gentian,  comfrey  (containing 
pyrrolizidine  alkaloids),  ma  huang,  bee  pollen,  valerian  root,  penny-
royal  oil,  kava,  celandine,  Impila  (Callilepis  laureola),  LipoKinetix, 
Hydroxycut,  OxyElite  Pro,  Herbalife,  herbal  nutritional  supplements, 
and herbal teas containing Camellia sinensis (green tea extract). Well 
characterized  are  the  acute  hepatitis-like  histologic  lesions  following 
Jin  Bu  Huan  use:  focal  hepatocellular  necrosis,  mixed  mononuclear 
portal  tract  infiltration,  coagulative  necrosis,  apoptotic  hepatocyte 
degeneration, tissue eosinophilia, and microvesicular steatosis. Mega-
doses of vitamin A can injure the liver, as can pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 
which often contaminate Chinese herbal preparations and can cause a 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2590

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2591

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

veno-occlusive  injury  leading  to  sinusoidal  hepatic  vein  obstruction. 
Because some alternative medicines induce toxicity via active metab-
olites,  alcohol  and  drugs  that  stimulate  cytochrome  P450  enzymes 
may enhance the toxicity of some of these products. Conversely, some 
alternative medicines also stimulate cytochrome P450 and may result 
in or amplify the toxicity of recognized drug hepatotoxins. In many 
instances,  herbal  and  dietary  supplements  actually  contain  chemi-
cals  rather  than  only  leaves,  roots,  and  bark.  Antirheumatic  “herbs” 
have  been  found  to  contain  a  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drug 
(NSAID) such as diclofenac, for example. Given the widespread use 
of such poorly defined herbal preparations, hepatotoxicity is likely to 
be  encountered  with  increasing  frequency;  therefore,  a  drug  history 
in patients with acute and chronic liver disease should include use of 
“alternative  medicines”  and  other  nonprescription  preparations  sold 
in so-called health food stores.

 ■ CHECKPOINT INHIBITOR AND OTHER 
IMMUNOTHERAPIES FOR CANCER
The  introduction  of  a  new  class  of  immunotherapeutic  agents  for 
melanoma  and  other  cancers  has  ushered  in  a  new  kind  of  hepato-
toxicity, that associated with activation of the immune response. The 
three classes of immune-active molecules are cytotoxic T-lymphocyte- 
associated  antigen-4  (CTLA-4),  programmed  cell  death  receptor  1 
(PD-1), and programmed cell death receptor ligand 1 (PD-L1). Within 
weeks of beginning treatment with any one of several agents, including 
ipilimumab  (CTLA-4),  pembrolizumab  (PD-1),  or  nivolumab  (PD-1), 
an  active  hepatitis  evolves  that  is  associated  with  positive  ANAs  and 
appears  to  respond  to  glucocorticoid  therapy.  Histologically,  liver 
histology  does  not  resemble  autoimmune  hepatitis  but,  instead,  a 
nonspecific hepatic injury, assumed to result from the release of host 
modulation of anti-self-immune responses. Immune-mediated injury 
to thyroid, muscle, and colon is also commonly seen. Few deaths have 
been  reported  related  to  these  immunotherapies;  while  these  novel 
agents may need to be halted temporarily, in many cases, they can be 
restarted (and are tolerated better on retreatment) if patients are show-
ing a favorable antitumor response.

 ■ HIGHLY ACTIVE ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY 
FOR HIV INFECTION (MITOCHONDRIAL TOXIC, 
IDIOSYNCRATIC, STEATOSIS; HEPATOCELLULAR, 
CHOLESTATIC, AND MIXED)
The recognition of drug hepatotoxicity in persons with HIV infection 
is  complicated  in  this  population  by  the  many  alternative  causes  of 
liver injury (chronic viral hepatitis, fatty infiltration, infiltrative disor-
ders, mycobacterial infection, etc.), but drug hepatotoxicity associated 
with  highly  active  antiretroviral  therapy  (HAART)  was  a  common 
type of liver injury in HIV-infected persons in the early days of HIV 
therapy;  however,  it  is  less  frequent  now  (Chap.  202).  Implicated 
most  frequently  are  combinations  including  the  nucleoside  analogue 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors zidovudine, didanosine, and, to a lesser 
extent, stavudine; the protease inhibitors ritonavir and indinavir (and 
amprenavir when used together with ritonavir), as well as tipranavir; 
and  the  nonnucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  nevirapine 
and, to a lesser extent, efavirenz. Distinguishing the impact of HAART 
hepatotoxicity in patients with HIV and hepatitis virus co-infection is 
made  challenging  by  the  following:  (1)  both  chronic  hepatitis  B  and 
hepatitis  C  can  affect  the  natural  history  of  HIV  infection  and  the 
response to HAART, and (2) HAART can have an impact on chronic 
viral hepatitis. For example, immunologic reconstitution with HAART 
can  result  in  immunologically  mediated  liver-cell  injury  in  patients 
with  chronic  hepatitis  B  co-infection  if  treatment  with  an  antiviral 
agent  for  hepatitis  B  (e.g.,  nucleoside  analogues  such  as  tenofovir) 
is  withdrawn.  Infection  with  HIV,  especially  with  low  CD4+  T-cell 
counts, has been reported to increase the rate of hepatic fibrosis asso-
ciated with chronic hepatitis C, and HAART therapy can increase levels 
of serum aminotransferases and HCV RNA in patients with hepatitis C 
co-infection. Didanosine or stavudine should not be used with ribavi-
rin  in  patients  with  HIV/HCV  co-infection  because  of  an  increased 
risk of severe mitochondrial toxicity and lactic acidosis.

Acknowledgment
Kurt J. Isselbacher, MD, contributed to this chapter in previous editions 
of Harrison’s.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Ahmad  J  et  al:  Sclerosing  cholangitis-like  changes  on  magnetic  res-
onance cholangiography in patients with drug-induced liver injury. 
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 17:789, 2019.

Björnsson ES, Hoofnagle JL: Categorization of drugs implicated in 
causing liver injury: Critical assessment based upon published case 
reports. Hepatology 63:590, 2016.

Chalasani  N  et  al:  Features  and  outcomes  of  899  patients  with 
drug-induced  liver  injury:  The  DILIN  prospective  study.  Gas-
troenterology 148:1340, 2015.

Cirulli  ET  et  al:  A  missense  variant  in  PTPN22  is  a  risk  factor  for 

drug-induced liver injury. Gastroenterology 156:1707, 2019. 

de  Boer  YS  et  al:  Features  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  in  patients  with 
drug-induced liver injury. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 15:103, 2017. 
Kaplowitz N, Deleve LD (eds): Drug-Induced Liver Disease, 3rd ed. 

London, Elsevier/Academic Press, 2013.

Kleiner DE: Histopathological challenges in suspected drug-induced 

liver injury. Liver Int 38:198, 2018.

Lee WM et al: Intravenous N-acetylcysteine improves transplant-free 
survival  in  early  stage  non-acetaminophen  acute  liver  failure.  Gas-
troenterology 137:856, 2009.

Peeraphatdit  TB  et  al:  Hepatotoxicity  from  immune  checkpoint 
inhibitors:  A  systematic  review  and  management  recommendation. 
Hepatology 72:315, 2020.

Stolz A et al: Severe and protracted cholestasis in 44 young men tak-
ing  bodybuilding  supplements:  Assessment  of  genetic,  clinical  and 
chemical risk factors. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 49:1195, 2019.

341 Chronic Hepatitis

Jules L. Dienstag

Chronic  hepatitis  represents  a  series  of  liver  disorders  of  varying 
causes  and severity in which hepatic inflammation and necrosis con-
tinue  for  at  least  6  months.  Milder  forms  are  nonprogressive  or  only 
slowly  progressive,  while  more  severe  forms  may  be  associated  with 
scarring and architectural reorganization, which, when advanced, lead 
ultimately to cirrhosis. Several categories of chronic hepatitis have been 
recognized. These include chronic viral hepatitis, drug-induced chronic 
hepatitis  (Chap.  340),  and  autoimmune  chronic  hepatitis.  In  many 
cases,  clinical  and  laboratory  features  are  insufficient  to  allow  assign-
ment into one of these three categories; these “idiopathic” cases are also 
believed  to  represent  autoimmune  chronic  hepatitis.  Finally,  clinical 
and  laboratory  features  of  chronic  hepatitis  are  observed  occasionally 
in patients with such hereditary/metabolic disorders as Wilson’s disease 
(copper overload), α1 antitrypsin deficiency (Chaps. 344 and 415), and 
nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  disease  (Chap.  343)  and  even  occasionally  in 
patients with alcoholic liver injury (Chap. 342). Although all types of 
chronic hepatitis share certain clinical, laboratory, and histopathologic 
features, chronic viral and chronic autoimmune hepatitis are sufficiently 
distinct to merit separate discussions. For discussion of acute hepati-
tis, see Chap. 339.

CLASSIFICATION OF CHRONIC HEPATITIS
Common  to  all  forms  of  chronic  hepatitis  are  histopathologic  dis-
tinctions  based  on  localization  and  extent  of  liver  injury.  These 
vary  from  the  milder  forms,  previously  labeled  chronic  persistent 
hepatitis  and  chronic  lobular  hepatitis,  to  the  more  severe  form, 
formerly  called  chronic  active  hepatitis.  When  first  defined,  these 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2591

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2592 designations  were  believed  to  have  prognostic  implications,  which 
were  not  corroborated  by  subsequent  observations.  Categorization 
of  chronic  hepatitis  based  primarily  on  histopathologic  features 
has  been  replaced  by  a  more  informative  classification  based  on  a 
combination of clinical, serologic, and histologic variables. Classifi-
cation of chronic hepatitis is based on (1) its cause; (2) its histologic 
activity, or grade; and (3) its degree of progression based on level of 
fibrosis, or stage. Thus, neither clinical features alone nor histologic 
features—requiring  liver  biopsy  or  noninvasive  markers  of  fibrosis—
alone are sufficient to characterize and distinguish among the several 
categories of chronic hepatitis.
 ■ CLASSIFICATION BY CAUSE
Clinical and serologic features allow the establishment of a diagnosis 
of chronic viral hepatitis, caused by hepatitis B, hepatitis B plus D, or 
hepatitis  C;  autoimmune  hepatitis,  including  several  subcategories,  I 
and II, based on serologic distinctions; drug-associated chronic hepati-
tis; and a category of unknown cause, or cryptogenic chronic hepatitis 
(Table 341-1). These are addressed in more detail below.
 ■ CLASSIFICATION BY GRADE
Grade, a histologic assessment of necroinflammatory activity, is based on 
examination of the liver biopsy. An assessment of important histologic 
features  includes  the  degree  of  periportal  necrosis  and  the  disruption 
of  the  limiting  plate  of  periportal  hepatocytes  by  inflammatory  cells  
(so-called piecemeal necrosis or interface hepatitis); the degree of conflu-
ent necrosis that links or forms bridges between vascular structures—
between portal tract and portal tract or even more important bridges 
between portal tract and central vein—referred to as bridging necrosis; 
the  degree  of  hepatocyte  degeneration  and  focal  necrosis  within  the 
lobule; and the degree of portal inflammation. Several scoring systems 
that take these histologic features into account have been devised, and 
the  most  popular  are  the  histologic  activity  index  (HAI),  used  com-
monly in the United States, and the METAVIR score, used in Europe 
(Table  341-2). Based on the presence and degree of these features of 
histologic  activity,  chronic  hepatitis  can  be  graded  as  mild,  moderate, 
or severe.
 ■ CLASSIFICATION BY STAGE
The stage of chronic hepatitis, which reflects the level of progression 
of the disease, is based on the degree of hepatic fibrosis. When fibrosis 
is so extensive that fibrous septa surround parenchymal nodules and 
alter the normal architecture of the liver lobule, the histologic lesion is 
defined as cirrhosis. Staging is based on the degree of fibrosis as categorized 
on a numerical scale 0−6 (HAI) or 0−4 (METAVIR) (Table 341-2). Several 

noninvasive  approaches  have  been  introduced  to  provide  approxi-
mations  of  hepatic  histologic  stage,  including  serum  biomarkers  of 
fibrosis; fibrosis scores such as FIB-4, a validated algorithm based on 
such routine lab tests as aspartate and alanine aminotransferase (AST 
and ALT) levels and platelet counts (PLT) (age [years] × AST/PLT × 
ALT1/2); and imaging determinations of liver elasticity.

CHRONIC VIRAL HEPATITIS
Both of the enterically transmitted forms of viral hepatitis, hepatitis A 
and E, are self-limited and do not cause chronic hepatitis (rare reports 
notwithstanding in which acute hepatitis A serves as a trigger for the 
onset  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  in  genetically  susceptible  patients  or 
in  which  hepatitis  E  [Chap.  339]  can  cause  chronic  liver  disease  in 
immunosuppressed hosts, for example, after liver transplantation). In 
contrast,  the  entire  clinicopathologic  spectrum  of  chronic  hepatitis 
occurs  in  patients  with  chronic  viral  hepatitis  B  and  C  as  well  as  in 
patients with chronic hepatitis D superimposed on chronic hepatitis B.

 ■ CHRONIC HEPATITIS B
The likelihood of chronicity after acute hepatitis B varies as a function 
of age. Infection at birth is associated with clinically silent acute infec-
tion but a 90% chance of chronic infection, whereas infection in young 
adulthood  in  immunocompetent  persons  is  typically  associated  with 
clinically apparent acute hepatitis but a risk of chronicity of only ~1%. 
Most cases of chronic hepatitis B among adults, however, are recognized 
in patients who never had a recognized episode of clinically apparent 
acute viral hepatitis. The degree of liver injury (grade) in patients with 
chronic hepatitis B is variable, ranging from none in inactive carriers 
to mild to moderate to severe. Among adults with chronic hepatitis B, 
histologic  features  are  of  prognostic  importance.  In  one  long-term 
study of patients with chronic hepatitis B, investigators found a 5-year 
survival  rate  of  97%  for  patients  with  mild  chronic  hepatitis,  86%  
for patients with moderate to severe chronic hepatitis, and only 55% 
for  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  and  postnecrotic  cirrhosis.  The 
15-year survival in these cohorts was 77%, 66%, and 40%, respectively. 
On the other hand, more recent observations do not allow us to be so 
sanguine about the prognosis in patients with mild chronic hepatitis; 
among  such  patients  followed  for  1−13  years,  progression  to  more 
severe chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis has been observed in more than 
a quarter of cases.

More important to consider than histology alone in patients with 
chronic  hepatitis B is the degree of hepatitis B virus (HBV)  replica-
tion. As reviewed in Chap. 339, chronic HBV infection can occur in 
the presence or absence of serum hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), and 

TABLE 341-1  Clinical and Laboratory Features of Chronic Hepatitis
DIAGNOSTIC TEST(S)
TYPE OF HEPATITIS
HBsAg, IgG anti-HBc, HBeAg, HBV DNA
Chronic hepatitis B

AUTOANTIBODIES
Uncommon

Chronic hepatitis C

Anti-HCV, HCV RNA

Anti-LKM1a

THERAPY
IFN-α, PEG IFN-α
Oral agents:
First-line: entecavir, tenofovir
Second-line: lamivudine, adefovir, telbivudine
PEG IFN-α plus ribavirinb
Direct-acting oral agents:
sofosbuvir, ledipasvir, velpatasvir
ritonavir-boosted paritaprevir, ombitasvir, dasabuvir, elbasvir, 
grazoprevir, daclatasvir, simeprevir
IFN-α, PEG IFN-αc
Prednisone, azathioprine

Chronic hepatitis D
Autoimmune hepatitis

Drug-associated
Cryptogenic

Anti-HDV, HDV RNA, HBsAg, IgG anti-HBc
ANAd (homogeneous), anti-LKM1 (±)
Hyperglobulinemia
—
All negative

Anti-LKM3
ANA, anti-LKM1 anti-SLAe

Uncommon
None

Withdraw drug
Prednisone (?), azathioprine (?)

aAntibodies to liver-kidney microsomes type 1 (autoimmune hepatitis type II and some cases of hepatitis C). bSupplanted in almost all cases by combinations of the direct-
acting antiviral agents listed (see www.hcvguidelines.org). cEarly clinical trials suggested benefit of IFN-α therapy; PEG IFN-α is as effective, if not more so, and has 
supplanted standard IFN-α. dAntinuclear antibody (autoimmune hepatitis type I). eAntibodies to soluble liver antigen (autoimmune hepatitis type III).
Abbreviations: HBc, hepatitis B core; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HDV, hepatitis D virus; 
IFN-α, interferon α; IgG, immunoglobulin G; LKM, liver-kidney microsome; PEG IFN-α, pegylated interferon α; SLA, soluble liver antigen.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2592

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 341-2  Histologic Grading and Staging of Chronic Hepatitis

HISTOLOGIC ACTIVITY INDEX (HAI)a METAVIRb

HISTOLOGIC FEATURE

SEVERITY

SCORE

SEVERITY

SCORE

Necroinflammatory Activity (grade)

Periportal necrosis, including piecemeal 
necrosis and/or bridging necrosis (BN)

Intralobular necrosis 

  Confluent

Focal

Portal Inflammation

Fibrosis (stage)

None
Portal fibrosis—some
Portal fibrosis—most
Bridging fibrosis—few
Bridging fibrosis—many
Incomplete cirrhosis
Cirrhosis

None
Mild
Mild/moderate
Moderate
Severe

—None
—Focal
—Zone 3 some
—Zone 3 most
—Zone 3 + BN few
—Zone 3 + BN multiple
—Panacinar/multiacinar
—None
—≤1 focus/10× field
—2–4 foci/10× field
—5–10 foci/10× field
—>10 foci/10× field
None
Mild
Moderate
Moderate/marked
Marked
Total

Total

0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0–18

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
6

generally, for both HBeAg-reactive and HBeAg-negative chronic hep-
atitis B, the level of HBV DNA correlates with the level of liver injury 
and  risk  of  progression.  In  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B,  two 
phases have been recognized based on the relative level of HBV repli-
cation. The relatively replicative phase is characterized by the presence 
in the serum of HBeAg and HBV DNA levels well in excess of 103−104 
IU/mL, sometimes exceeding 109 IU/mL; by the presence in the liver of 
detectable intrahepatocyte nucleocapsid antigens (primarily hepatitis B 
core antigen [HBcAg]); by high infectivity; and by accompanying liver 
injury. In contrast, the relatively nonreplicative phase is characterized 
by the absence of the conventional serum marker of HBV replication 
(HBeAg),  the  appearance  of  anti-HBe,  levels  of  HBV  DNA  below  a 
threshold  of  ~103  IU/mL,  the  absence  of  intrahepatocytic  HBcAg, 
limited infectivity, and minimal liver injury. Patients in the relatively 
replicative phase tend to have more severe chronic hepatitis, whereas 
those  in  the  relatively  nonreplicative  phase  tend  to  have  minimal  or 
mild chronic hepatitis or to be inactive hepatitis B carriers. The likeli-
hood in a patient with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B of convert-
ing spontaneously from relatively replicative to nonreplicative infection 
is  ~10%  per  year.  Distinctions  in  HBV  replication  and  in  histologic 
category,  however,  do  not  always  coincide.  In  patients  with  HBeAg- 
reactive chronic HBV infection, especially when acquired at birth or in 

None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Bridging necrosis

None or mild
Moderate
Severe

0
1
2
3
Yes
No

0
1
2

early  childhood,  as  recognized  commonly 
in  Asian  countries,  a  dichotomy  is  com-
mon  between  very  high  levels  of  HBV 
replication during the early decades of life 
(when the level of apparent host immuno-
logic  tolerance  of  HBV  is  relatively  high) 
and  negligible  levels  of  liver  injury;  dur-
ing  this  phase  of  chronic  hepatitis  B,  the 
level of viral replication does not correlate 
with liver injury or late complications. Yet 
despite  the  relatively  immediate,  appar-
ently  benign  nature  of  liver  disease  for 
many  decades  in  this  population,  in  the 
middle  decades,  activation  of  liver  injury 
emerges as what appears to be the relative 
tolerance of the host to HBV declines, and 
these  patients  with  childhood-acquired 
HBV infection are ultimately at increased 
risk  later  in  life  for  cirrhosis,  hepato-
cellular  carcinoma  (HCC)  (Chap.  82), 
and  liver-related  death;  the  link  between 
high-level HBV replication and these late 
liver complications has been demonstrated 
convincingly  in,  and  confined  mostly  to, 
persons in their middle decades, especially 
age ≥40. A discussion of the pathogenesis 
of  liver  injury  in  patients  with  chronic 
hepatitis B appears in Chap. 339.

2593

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

A0–A3c

F0
F1
F1
F2
F3
F4
F4
4

HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B 
(i.e.,  chronic  HBV  infection  with  active 
virus  replication  and  readily  detect-
able  HBV  DNA  but  without  HBeAg 
[anti-HBe-reactive])  is  more  common 
than  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B 
in  Mediterranean  and  European  coun-
tries and in Asia (and, correspondingly, in 
HBV genotypes other than A). Compared 
to  patients  with  HBeAg-reactive  chronic 
hepatitis  B,  patients  with  HBeAg-nega-
tive  chronic  hepatitis  B  have  HBV  DNA 
levels  several  orders  of  magnitude  lower 
(usually  no  more  than  105−106  IU/mL) 
than  those  observed  in  the  HBeAg- 
reactive subset. Most such cases represent 
precore  or  core-promoter  mutations 
acquired late in the natural history of the 
disease (mostly early-life onset; age range 
40−55  years,  older  than  that  for  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B); 
these mutations prevent translation of HBeAg from the precore com-
ponent  of  the  HBV  genome  (precore  mutants)  or  are  characterized 
by  downregulated  transcription  of  precore  mRNA  (core-promoter 
mutants;  Chap. 339).  Although  their  levels  of  HBV  DNA  tend  to  be 
lower  than  among  patients  with  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B, 
patients  with  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  can  have  progres-
sive  liver  injury  (complicated  by  cirrhosis  and  HCC)  and  experience 
episodic  reactivation  of  liver  disease  reflected  in  fluctuating  levels  of 
aminotransferase  activity  (“flares”).  The  biochemical  and  histologic 
activity  of  HBeAg-negative  disease  tends  to  correlate  closely  with 
levels  of  HBV  replication,  unlike  the  case  mentioned  above  of  Asian 
patients  with  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B  during  the  early 
decades  of  their  HBV  infection.  Worth  reiterating,  the  level  of  HBV 
replication is the most important risk factor for the ultimate develop-
ment of cirrhosis and HCC in both HBeAg-reactive (beyond the early 
decades  of  “relatively  nonreplicative”  infection)  and  HBeAg-negative 
patients.  Although  levels  of  HBV  DNA  are  lower  and  more  readily 
suppressed by therapy to undetectable levels in HBeAg-negative (com-
pared  to  HBeAg-reactive)  chronic  hepatitis  B,  achieving  sustained 
responses that permit discontinuation of antiviral therapy is less likely 
in HBeAg-negative patients (see below). Inactive carriers are patients 

aIshak K, Baptista A, Bianchi L, et al: Histologic grading and staging of chronic hepatitis. J Hepatol 22:696, 1995. 
bBedossa P, Poynard T, French METAVIR Cooperative Study Group: An algorithm for grading activity in chronic 
hepatitis C. Hepatology 24:289, 1996. cNecroinflammatory grade: A0 = none; A1 = mild; A2 = moderate; A3 = severe.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2593

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2594 with  circulating  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg),  normal  serum 
aminotransferase  levels,  minimal  or  no  histologic  evidence  of  liver 
injury,  undetectable  HBeAg,  and  levels  of  HBV  DNA  that  are  either 
undetectable or present at a threshold of ≤103 IU/mL. This serologic 
profile  occurs  not  only  in  inactive  carriers  but  also  in  patients  with 
HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  during  periods  of  relative  inac-
tivity; distinguishing between the two requires sequential biochemical 
and virologic monitoring over many months.

The  spectrum  of  clinical  features  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  is  broad, 
ranging  from  asymptomatic  infection  to  debilitating  disease  or  even 
end-stage,  fatal  hepatic  failure.  As  noted  above,  the  onset  of  the  dis-
ease tends to be insidious in most patients, apart from the very few in 
whom chronic disease follows failure of resolution of clinically appar-
ent acute hepatitis B. The clinical and laboratory features associated 
with progression from acute to chronic hepatitis B are discussed in 
Chap. 339.

Fatigue is a common symptom, and persistent or intermittent jaundice 
is  a  common  feature  in  severe  or  advanced  cases.  Intermittent  deep-
ening  of  jaundice  and  recurrence  of  malaise  and  anorexia,  as  well  as 
worsening  fatigue,  are  reminiscent  of  acute  hepatitis;  such  exacer-
bations  may  occur  spontaneously,  often  coinciding  with  evidence  of 
virologic reactivation; may lead to progressive liver injury; and, when 
superimposed  on  well-established  cirrhosis,  may  cause  hepatic  dec-
ompensation.  Complications  of  cirrhosis  occur  in  end-stage  chronic 
hepatitis and include ascites, edema, bleeding gastroesophageal varices, 
hepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, and hypersplenism. Occasion-
ally, these complications bring the patient to initial clinical attention. 
Extrahepatic complications of chronic hepatitis B, similar to those seen 
during  the  prodromal  phase  of  acute  hepatitis  B,  are  associated  with 
tissue deposition of circulating hepatitis B antigen–antibody immune 
complexes. These include arthralgias and arthritis, which are common, 
and  the  rarer  purpuric  cutaneous  lesions  (leukocytoclastic  vasculi-
tis),  immune-complex  glomerulonephritis,  and  generalized  vasculitis 
(polyarteritis nodosa) (Chap. 363).

Laboratory  features  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  do  not  distinguish 
adequately  between  histologically  mild  and  severe  hepatitis. 
Aminotransferase elevations tend to be modest for chronic hepatitis 
B but may fluctuate in the range of 100−1000 units. As is true for 
acute  viral  hepatitis  B,  ALT  tends  to  be  more  elevated  than  AST; 
however,  once  cirrhosis  is  established,  AST  tends  to  exceed  ALT. 
Levels  of  alkaline  phosphatase  activity  tend  to  be  normal  or  only 
marginally elevated. In severe cases, moderate elevations in serum 
bilirubin  (51.3−171  μmol/L  [3−10  mg/dL])  occur.  Hypoalbumine-
mia  and  prolongation  of  the  prothrombin  time  occur  in  severe  or 
end-stage cases. Hyperglobulinemia and detectable circulating auto-
antibodies are distinctly absent in chronic hepatitis B (in contrast to 
autoimmune  hepatitis).  Viral  markers  of  chronic  HBV  infection 
are discussed in Chap. 339.

TREATMENT
Chronic Hepatitis B

Although progression to cirrhosis is more likely in severe than in 
mild or moderate chronic hepatitis B, all forms of chronic hepatitis B 
can  be  progressive,  and  progression  occurs  primarily  in  patients 
with active HBV replication. Moreover, in populations of patients 
with chronic hepatitis B who are at risk for HCC (Chap. 82), the 
risk  is  highest  for  those  with  continued,  high-level  HBV  replica-
tion and lower for persons in whom initially high-level HBV DNA 
falls  spontaneously  over  time.  Therefore,  management  of  chronic 
hepatitis B is directed at suppressing the level of virus replication. 
Although clinical trials tend to focus on clinical endpoints achieved 
over  1−2  years  (e.g.,  suppression  of  HBV  DNA  to  undetectable 
levels,  loss  of  HBeAg/HBsAg,  improvement  in  histology,  nor-
malization  of  ALT),  these  short-term  gains  translate  into  reduc-
tions  in  the  risk  of  clinical  progression,  hepatic  decompensation, 
HCC, liver transplantation, and death; regression of cirrhosis and 
of  esophageal  varices  has  been  documented  to  follow  long-term 

pharmacologic  suppression  of  HBV  replication.  In  addition,  res-
toration of impaired HBV-specific T-cell function has been shown 
following successful suppression of HBV replication with antiviral 
therapy. To date, eight drugs have been approved for treatment of 
chronic  hepatitis  B:  injectable  interferon  (IFN)  α  and  pegylated 
interferon  (long-acting  IFN  bound  to  polyethylene  glycol,  PEG 
[PEG  IFN])  and  the  oral  agents  lamivudine,  adefovir  dipivoxil, 
entecavir,  telbivudine,  tenofovir  disoproxil  fumarate  (TDF),  and 
tenofovir alafenamide (TAF).

Antiviral  therapy  for  hepatitis  B  has  evolved  rapidly  since  the 
mid-1990s, as has the sensitivity of tests for HBV DNA. When IFN 
and  the  first  oral  antiviral  lamivudine  were  evaluated  in  clinical 
trials, HBV DNA was measured by insensitive hybridization assays 
with detection thresholds of 105−106 virions/mL; when subsequent 
treatments  were  studied  in  clinical  trials,  HBV  DNA  was  mea-
sured by sensitive amplification assays (polymerase chain reaction 
[PCR])  with  detection  thresholds  of  101−103  viral  copies/mL  or 
IU/mL. Recognition of these distinctions is helpful when compar-
ing  results  of  clinical  trials  that  established  the  efficacy  of  these 
therapies  (reviewed  below  in  chronologic  order  of  publication  of 
these efficacy trials). Of the eight approved treatments, PEG IFN, 
entecavir,  and  the  two  tenofovir  preparations  (TDF  and  TAF)  are 
recommended as first-line agents, and generally, the oral agents are 
favored over injectable PEG IFN. 

INTERFERON
IFN-α  was  the  first  approved  therapy  (1992)  for  chronic  hepatitis  B. 
Although it is no longer used to treat hepatitis B, standard IFN is 
important  historically,  having  provided  important  lessons  about 
antiviral  therapy  in  general.  For  immunocompetent  adults  with 
HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B  (who  tend  to  have  high-level 
HBV  DNA  [>105−106  virions/mL]  and  histologic  evidence  of 
chronic  hepatitis  on  liver  biopsy),  a  16-week  course  of  subcuta-
neous IFN, 5 million units daily or 10 million units thrice weekly, 
resulted  in  a  loss  of  HBeAg  and  hybridization-detectable  HBV 
DNA (i.e., a reduction to levels below 105−106 virions/mL) in ~30% 
of  patients,  with  a  concomitant  improvement  in  liver  histology. 
Seroconversion from HBeAg to anti-HBe occurred in ~20%, and, in 
early trials, ~8% lost HBsAg. Successful IFN therapy and serocon-
version were often accompanied by an acute hepatitis-like elevation 
in  aminotransferase  activity,  postulated  to  result  from  enhanced 
cytolytic  T-cell  clearance  of  HBV-infected  hepatocytes.  Relapse 
after successful therapy was rare (1 or 2%). Responsiveness to IFN 
was  higher  in  patients  with  low-level  HBV  DNA  and  substantial 
ALT elevations. Therapy with IFN was not effective in immunosup-
pressed persons, persons with neonatal acquisition of infection and 
minimal-to-mild ALT elevations, or patients with decompensated 
chronic  hepatitis  B  (in  whom  such  therapy  was  actually  detri-
mental, sometimes precipitating decompensation, often associated 
with severe adverse effects). After HBeAg loss during IFN therapy, 
80%  experienced  eventual  loss  of  HBsAg  and  ALT  normalization 
over  the  ensuing  decade.  In  addition,  improved  long-term  and 
complication-free survival as well as a reduction in the frequency 
of HCC were documented among IFN responders, supporting the 
conclusion  that  successful  antiviral  therapy  improves  the  natural 
history of chronic hepatitis B.

Brief-duration  IFN  therapy  in  patients  with  HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis B was disappointing, suppressing HBV replication 
transiently during therapy but almost never resulting in sustained 
antiviral responses; however, more protracted courses for up to 1.5 
years resulted in sustained virologic/biochemical remissions docu-
mented to last for several years in ~20%.

Complications of IFN therapy include systemic “flu-like” symptoms; 
marrow  suppression;  emotional  lability  (irritability,  depression, 
anxiety); autoimmune reactions (especially autoimmune thyroiditis); 
and  miscellaneous  side  effects  such  as  alopecia,  rashes,  diarrhea, 
and  numbness  and  tingling  of  the  extremities.  With  the  possible 
exception  of  autoimmune  thyroiditis,  all  these  side  effects  are 
reversible upon dose lowering or cessation of therapy.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2594

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAlthough  no  longer  competitive  with  the  newer  generation  of 
antivirals, IFN did represent the first successful antiviral approach, 
set  a  standard  against  which  to  measure  efficacy  of  subsequent 
drugs,  and  demonstrated  the  benefit  of  antiviral  therapy  on  the 
natural history of chronic hepatitis B. Standard IFN has been sup-
planted by long-acting PEG IFN (see below), and IFN nonrespond-
ers are now treated with one of the newer oral nucleoside analogues. 
LAMIVUDINE
The  first  of  the  nucleoside  analogues  to  be  approved  (in  1998) 
for hepatitis B, the dideoxynucleoside lamivudine inhibits reverse 

2595

transcriptase  activity  of  both  HIV  and  HBV  and  is  an  effective 
agent  for  chronic  hepatitis  B;  however,  it  is  now  superseded  by 
newer,  more  potent,  less  resistance-prone  agents.  For  a  summary 
of  its  virologic,  serologic,  biochemical,  and  histologic  efficacy, 
as  well  as  its  resistance  profile,  please  refer  to  Table  341-3.  In 
clinical  trials,  lamivudine  therapy  at  daily  doses  of  100  mg  for 
48−52  weeks  suppressed  HBV  DNA,  as  measured  by  sensitive 
PCR amplification assays, by a median of ~5.5 log10 copies/mL in 
HBeAg-positive  chronic  hepatitis  B  and  ~4.5  log10  copies/mL  in 
HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  (baseline  HBV  DNA  levels 

TABLE 341-3  Comparison of Pegylated Interferon (PEG IFN), Lamivudine, Adefovir, Entecavir, Telbivudine, and Tenofovir Therapy for Chronic 
Hepatitis Ba

LAMIVUDINE ADEFOVIR
Oral  
(100 mg/d)

Oral (10 mg/d)

ENTECAVIR
Oral (0.5 mg/d)

TELBIVUDINE
Oral (600 mg/d)

TENOFOVIR 
(TDF)
Oral (300 mg/d)

TENOFOVIR (TAF)
Oral 25 mg/d)

FEATURE
Route of administration

Status

PEG IFNb
Subcutaneous 
injection (180 μg/
week)
First-line

No longer 
preferred

No longer 
preferred

First-line

First-line

No longer 
preferred, 
withdrawn
≥52 weeks
Well tolerated Well tolerated; 

≥48 weeks

Duration of therapyc
Tolerability

≥52 weeks
48–52 weeks
Poorly tolerated Well tolerated Well tolerated; 

≥48 weeks

≥48 weeks
Well tolerated

HBeAg seroconversion
  1 yr Rx
  >1 yr Rx

18–20%
NA

creatinine 
monitoring 
recommended

creatinine 
monitoring 
recommended

16–21%
up to 50% at 
5 yrs

12%
43% at 3 yrsd

21%
31% at 2 yrs
44% at 6 yrs

22%
30% at 2 yrs

21%
40% at 5 yrs

4.5
4.1

5.5
4.4–4.7

Median 3.5–5
Median 3.5–3.9

6.9
5.0

6.4
5.2

10–25%
63%

36–44%
60–73%

13–21%
48–77%

67% (91% at 4 yrs)
90%

60%
88%

6.2
4.6

76%
93%

39%
34–38%
3–4%
12% 5 yr after  
1 yr of Rx

41–75%
62–79%
≤1%
No data

48–61%
48–77%
0%
5% at yr 5

68%
78%
2%
6% at yr 6

77%
74%
<1%
No data

68%
76%
3%
8% at yr 5

Log10 HBV DNA reduction 
(mean copies/mL)
  HBeAg-reactive
  HBeAg-negative

HBV DNA PCR negative 
(at then current PCR 
sensitivitya) at end of yr 1
  HBeAg-reactive
  HBeAg-negative

ALT normalization at end 
of yr 1
  HBeAg-reactive
  HBeAg-negative

HBsAg loss, yr 1
  >yr 1

Histologic improvement 
(≥2 point reduction in HAI) 
at yr 1
  HBeAg-reactive

  HBeAg-negative

Viral resistance

49–62%
61–66%

53–68%
64%

72%
70%

65%
67%

74%
72%

38% 6 months 
after
48% 6 months 
after
None

Pregnancy category

C

Cf

C

C

15–30% at 1 yr
70% at 5 yrs

None at 1 yr
29% at 5 yrs

≤1% at 1 yre
1.2% at 6 yrse

Up to 5% at yr 1
Up to 22% at 
yr 2
B

0% at yr 1
0% through yr 8

0% at yr 1
 0% through yr 2

B

B

aGenerally, these comparisons are based on data on each drug tested individually versus placebo in registration clinical trials; with rare exception, these comparisons are 
not based on head-to-head testing of these drugs. In addition, the sensitivity of HBV DNA assays increased in sensitivity over the two decades between the introduction 
of the earliest and latest of these approved drugs. Therefore, relative advantages and disadvantages should be interpreted cautiously. bAlthough standard interferon 
α administered daily or three times a week is approved as therapy for chronic hepatitis B, it has been supplanted by PEG IFN, which is administered once a week and 
is more effective. Standard interferon has no advantages over PEG IFN. cDuration of therapy in clinical efficacy trials; use in clinical practice may vary. dBecause of a 
computer-generated randomization error that resulted in misallocation of drug versus placebo during the second year of clinical trial treatment, the frequency of HBeAg 
seroconversion beyond the first year is an estimate (Kaplan-Meier analysis) based on the small subset in whom adefovir was administered correctly. e7% during a year of 
therapy (43% at year 4) in lamivudine-resistant patients. fDespite its category C designation, lamivudine has an extensive pregnancy safety record in women with HIV/AIDS.
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HAI, histologic activity index; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; NA, not 
applicable; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; Rx, therapy; yr, year; TAF, tenofovir alafenamide; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2595

20/01/22   10:05 PM

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

First-line

48 weeks
Well tolerated

10% (14% HBeAg loss)
18% at yr 2 (HBeAg 
loss 22%)

Not reported in clinical 
trials, likely same as 
TDF

64%
94%

72%
83%
1%
 1%

Not included in clinical 
trials

 
 
2596

are  lower  in  HBeAg-negative  than  in  HBeAg-positive  chronic 
hepatitis B) and to undetectable levels in ~40% and ~70%, respec-
tively. Lamivudine, which was shown to improve histology, retard 
hepatic fibrosis, and prevent progression to cirrhosis, was effective 
in patients resistant to IFN (e.g., those with high-level HBV DNA) 
or who had failed prior IFN therapy. As was true for IFN therapy of 
chronic hepatitis B, lamivudine-associated HBeAg seroconversion 
occurred in ~20%; patients with near-normal ALT activity tended 
not  to  experience  HBeAg  responses  (despite  suppression  of  HBV 
DNA), while patients with ALT levels ≥5× the upper limit of nor-
mal  could  expect  1-year  HBeAg  seroconversion  rates  of  50−60%. 
Generally, HBeAg seroconversions were confined to patients who 
achieved suppression of HBV DNA to <104 copies/mL (equivalent 
to  ~103  IU/mL).  Lamivudine-associated  HBeAg  responses  were 
accompanied  by  a  delayed  posttreatment  HBsAg  seroconversion 
rate  comparable  to  that  seen  after  IFN.  Among  Western  patients 
who  experienced  HBeAg  responses  during  a  year-long  course  of 
therapy and in whom the response was sustained for 4−6 months 
after  cessation  of  therapy,  the  response  was  durable  thereafter  in 
the vast majority (>80%); therefore, the achievement of an HBeAg 
response  represented  a  viable  stopping  point  in  therapy.  Reduced 
durability,  however,  was  reported  in  Asian  patients;  therefore,  to 
support  the  durability  of  HBeAg  responses,  a  period  of  consoli-
dation  therapy  of  ≥6  months  in  Western  patients  and  ≥1  year  in 
Asian patients was recommended after HBeAg seroconversion (see 
treatment guidelines below; a full 12-month consolidation period 
is recommended currently for treatment extension after oral-agent-
induced HBeAg seroconversion). Close posttreatment monitoring 
was  recommended  to  identify  HBV  reactivation  promptly  and  to 
resume  therapy.  If  HBeAg  was  unaffected  by  lamivudine  therapy, 
lamivudine was continued until an HBeAg response occurred, but 
long-term therapy was required to suppress HBV replication and, in 
turn, limit liver injury; HBeAg seroconversions increased to a level 
of 50% after 5 years of therapy. After a cumulative course of 3 years 
of lamivudine therapy, necroinflammatory activity was reduced in 
the majority of patients, and even cirrhosis was shown to regress to 
precirrhotic stages in as many as three-quarters of patients.

Losses  of  HBsAg  were  few  during  the  first  year  of  lamivudine 
therapy,  and  this  observation  had  been  cited  as  an  advantage  of 
IFN-based therapy over lamivudine therapy; however, in head-to-
head  comparisons  between  standard  IFN  and  lamivudine  mono-
therapy,  HBsAg  losses  were  rare  in  both  groups.  Trials  in  which 
lamivudine  and  IFN  were  administered  in  combination  failed  to 
show a benefit of combination therapy over lamivudine monother-
apy for either treatment-naïve patients or prior IFN nonresponders.
Patients  with  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  (i.e.,  in  those 
with  precore  and  core-promoter  HBV  mutations  and  who  lack 
HBeAg) cannot achieve an HBeAg response to nucleoside analogue 
therapy—a  stopping  point  in  HBeAg-reactive  patients;  almost 
invariably, when therapy was discontinued, reactivation was the rule. 
Therefore, these patients required long-term lamivudine therapy.

Clinical and laboratory side effects of lamivudine were negligible 
and  indistinguishable  from  those  observed  in  placebo  recipients; 
however, lamivudine doses were reduced in patients with reduced 
creatinine  clearance.  During  lamivudine  therapy,  transient  ALT 
elevations,  resembling  those  seen  during  IFN  therapy  and  dur-
ing  spontaneous  HBeAg-to-anti-HBe  seroconversions,  occurred 
in  one-fourth  of  patients.  These  ALT  elevations  may  result  from 
restored  cytolytic  T-cell  activation  permitted  by  suppression  of 
HBV  replication.  Similar  ALT  elevations,  however,  occurred  at 
an  identical  frequency  in  placebo  recipients;  however,  ALT  ele-
vations  associated  temporally  with  HBeAg  seroconversion  in 
clinical trials were confined to lamivudine-treated patients. When 
therapy was stopped after a year of therapy, two- to threefold ALT 
elevations  occurred  in  20−30%  of  lamivudine-treated  patients, 
representing renewed liver-cell injury as HBV replication returned. 
Although  these  posttreatment  flares  were  almost  always  transient 
and mild, rare severe exacerbations, especially in cirrhotic patients, 
were observed, mandating close and careful clinical and virologic 

monitoring  after  discontinuation  of  treatment.  Many  authorities 
cautioned against discontinuing therapy in patients with cirrhosis, 
in whom posttreatment flares could precipitate decompensation.

Long-term  monotherapy  with  lamivudine  was  associated 
with  methionine-to-valine  (M204V)  or  methionine-to-isoleucine 
(M204I) mutations, primarily at amino acid 204 in the tyrosine-me-
thionine-aspartate-aspartate  (YMDD)  motif  of  the  C  domain  of 
HBV  DNA  polymerase,  analogous  to  mutations  that  occur  in 
HIV-infected  patients  treated  with  this  drug.  During  a  year  of 
therapy, YMDD mutations occurred in 15−30% of patients; the fre-
quency increased with each year of therapy, reaching 70% at year 5. 
Ultimately, patients with YMDD mutants experienced degradation 
of clinical, biochemical, and histologic responses; therefore, if treat-
ment was begun with lamivudine monotherapy, the emergence of 
lamivudine resistance, reflected clinically by a breakthrough from 
suppressed levels of HBV DNA and ALT, was managed by adding 
another antiviral to which YMDD variants are sensitive (e.g., ade-
fovir, tenofovir; see below).

Currently,  lamivudine  has  been  eclipsed  by  more  potent  anti-
virals  that  have  superior  resistance  profiles  (see  below);  it  is 
no  longer  recommended  as  first-line  therapy.  Still,  as  the  first 
successful  oral  antiviral  agent  for  use  in  hepatitis  B,  lamivudine 
provided proof of principle that polymerase inhibitors can achieve 
virologic,  serologic,  biochemical,  and  histologic  benefits,  includ-
ing  retardation  and  reversal  of  fibrosis  and  even  of  cirrhosis.  In 
addition,  lamivudine  was  shown  to  be  effective  in  the  treatment 
of patients with decompensated hepatitis B (for whom IFN is con-
traindicated), in some of whom decompensation can be reversed. 
Moreover,  among  patients  with  cirrhosis  or  advanced  fibrosis, 
lamivudine  was  shown  to  be  effective  in  reducing  the  risk  of 
progression to hepatic decompensation and, based on subsequent 
population studies, the risk of HCC. In the half decade following 
the  introduction  in  the  United  States  of  lamivudine  therapy  for 
hepatitis B, referral of patients with HBV-associated end-stage liver 
disease  for  liver  transplantation  fell  by  ~30%,  supporting  further 
the beneficial impact of oral antiviral therapy on the natural his-
tory of chronic hepatitis B.

Because  lamivudine  monotherapy  in  persons  with  HIV  infec-
tion can result universally in the rapid emergence of YMDD vari-
ants,  testing  for  HIV  infection  was  recommended  for  all  patients 
with chronic hepatitis B prior to lamivudine therapy; if HIV infec-
tion was identified, lamivudine monotherapy at the HBV daily dose 
of 100 mg was contraindicated. These patients require treatment for 
both HIV and HBV with an HIV drug regimen that includes or is 
supplemented by at least two drugs active against HBV; antiretro-
viral therapy (ART) often contains two drugs with antiviral activity 
against HBV (e.g., tenofovir and emtricitabine), but if lamivudine 
was  part  of  the  regimen,  the  300-mg  daily  dose  was  required 
(Chap.  202).  The  safety  of  lamivudine  during  pregnancy  has  not 
been  established;  however,  the  drug  is  not  teratogenic  in  rodents 
and  has  been  used  safely  in  pregnant  women  with  HIV  infection 
and  with  HBV  infection.  As  shown  for  subsequent  nucleoside 
analogues, administration of lamivudine during the last months of 
pregnancy to mothers with high-level hepatitis B viremia reduced 
the likelihood of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B. 

ADEFOVIR DIPIVOXIL
At an oral daily dose of 10 mg, the acyclic nucleotide analogue ade-
fovir dipivoxil, the prodrug of adefovir (approved for hepatitis B in 
2002), reduces HBV DNA by ~3.5−4 log10 copies/mL, i.e., it is less 
potent  than  lamivudine  or  any  of  the  newer  antiviral  agents.  For 
a  summary  of  its  virologic,  serologic,  biochemical,  and  histologic 
efficacy, as well as its resistance profile, please refer to Table 341-3. 
Like  IFN  and  lamivudine,  adefovir  dipivoxil  is  more  likely  to 
achieve  an  HBeAg  response  in  patients  with  high  baseline  ALT; 
HBeAg responses to it are highly durable and can be relied upon as 
a treatment stopping point, after a period of consolidation therapy; 
and  biochemical,  serologic,  and  virologic  outcomes  improve  over 
time with continued therapy.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2596

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemIn  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B,  as  was  true  for  lami-
vudine,  because  HBeAg  responses—a  potential  stopping  point—
cannot be achieved, reactivation is the rule when adefovir therapy 
is  discontinued,  and  indefinite,  long-term  therapy  is  required. 
Reported attempts to stop adefovir after 5 years were followed by a 
period of maintained suppression of HBV DNA and ALT; however, 
most  such  patients  had  persistent  hepatitis  B  viremia,  and  most 
HBeAg-negative  patients  were  treated  indefinitely  unless  HBsAg 
loss, albeit very rare, was achieved.

Adefovir  contains  a  flexible  acyclic  linker  instead  of  the 
L-nucleoside  ring  of  lamivudine,  avoiding  steric  hindrance  by 
mutated amino acids. In addition, the molecular structure of phos-
phorylated adefovir is very similar to that of its natural substrate; 
therefore,  mutations  to  adefovir  would  also  affect  binding  of  the 
natural  substrate,  dATP.  Thus,  resistance  to  adefovir  was  much 
less  likely  than  resistance  to  lamivudine,  and  no  resistance  was 
encountered in 1 year of clinical trial therapy. In subsequent years, 
however, adefovir resistance began to emerge (asparagine to thre-
onine at amino acid 236 [N236T] and alanine to valine or threonine 
at amino acid 181 [A181V/T], primarily), occurring in 2.5% after  
2  years  but  in  29%  after  5  years  of  therapy  (reported  in 
HBeAg-negative patients). The primary contribution of adefovir, its 
effectiveness  in  lamivudine-resistant,  YMDD-mutant  HBV,  led  to 
its adoption for lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B. When lamivudine 
resistance occurred, adding adefovir (i.e., maintaining lamivudine 
to  preempt  the  emergence  of  adefovir  resistance)  was  superior  to 
switching to adefovir. Almost invariably, patients with adefovir-in-
duced  HBV  mutations  respond  to  lamivudine  (or  newer  agents, 
such as entecavir, see below). When, in the past, adefovir had been 
evaluated  as therapy for HIV infection, doses of 60−120 mg were 
required to suppress HIV, and, at these doses, the drug was nephro-
toxic. Even at 30 mg/d, creatinine elevations of 44 μmol/L (0.5 mg/
dL) occurred in 10% of patients; however, at the HBV-effective dose 
of  10  mg,  such  creatinine  elevations  were  encountered  rarely  and 
hardly ever before 6−8 months of therapy. Although renal tubular 
injury was a rare potential side effect, and although creatinine moni-
toring was recommended during treatment, the therapeutic index of 
adefovir dipivoxil was high, and the nephrotoxicity observed in clin-
ical trials at higher doses was reversible. For patients with underly-
ing renal disease, frequency of administration of adefovir had to be 
reduced, and it could be given only once a week for patients under-
going hemodialysis. Adefovir was very well tolerated, and ALT ele-
vations during and after withdrawal of therapy were similar to those 
observed  and  described  above  in  clinical  trials  of  lamivudine.  An 
advantage of adefovir was its relatively favorable resistance profile; 
however, it was not as potent as the other approved oral agents, it did 
not suppress HBV DNA as rapidly or as uniformly as the others, it 
was the least likely of all agents to result in HBeAg seroconversion, 
and  20−50%  of  patients  failed  to  suppress  HBV  DNA  by  2  log10 
(“primary nonresponders”). For these reasons, adefovir, which has 
been supplanted in both treatment-naïve and lamivudine-resistant 
patients  by  the  more  potent,  less  resistance-prone  tenofovir  (see 
below), is no longer recommended as first-line therapy. 

PEGYLATED IFN
After  long-acting  PEG  IFN  was  shown  to  be  effective  in  the 
treatment  of  hepatitis  C  (see  below),  this  more  convenient  IFN 
preparation was evaluated in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B. 
Once-a-week PEG IFN is more effective than the more frequently 
administered,  standard  IFN,  and  several  large-scale  trials  of  PEG 
IFN versus oral lamivudine were conducted in patients with chronic 
hepatitis B.

In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, two large-scale studies were 
done. In one study, PEG IFN-α2b (100 μg weekly for 32 weeks, then 
50 μg weekly for another 20 weeks for a total of 52 weeks) was eval-
uated against a comparison arm of combination PEG IFN with oral 
lamivudine in 307 subjects. The other study involved PEG IFN-α2a 
(180 μg weekly for 48 weeks) in 814 primarily Asian patients, three-
fourths  of  whom  had  ALT  ≥2×  the  upper  limit  of  normal,  with 

2597

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

comparison arms of lamivudine monotherapy and combination PEG 
IFN  plus  lamivudine.  At  the  end  of  therapy  (48−52  weeks)  in  the 
PEG IFN monotherapy arms, HBeAg loss occurred in ~30%, HBeAg 
seroconversion in 22−27%, undetectable HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL 
by PCR) in 10−25%, and normal ALT in 34−39%, and a mean reduc-
tion in HBV DNA of 2 log10 copies/mL (PEG IFN-α2b) to 4.5 log10 
copies/mL  (PEG  IFN-α2a)  was  seen.  Six  months  after  completing 
PEG  IFN  monotherapy  in  these  trials,  HBeAg  losses  were  present 
in ~35%, HBeAg seroconversion in ~30%, undetectable HBV DNA 
in 7−14%, and normal ALT in 32−41%, and the mean reduction in 
HBV DNA was 2−2.4 log10 copies/mL. Although the combination of 
PEG IFN and lamivudine was superior at the end of therapy in one 
or  more  serologic,  virologic,  or  biochemical  outcomes,  neither  the 
combination arm (in both studies) nor the lamivudine monotherapy 
arm (in the PEG IFN-α2a trial) demonstrated any benefit compared 
to the PEG IFN monotherapy arms 6 months after therapy. Moreover, 
HBsAg  seroconversion  occurred  in  3−7%  of  PEG  IFN  recipients 
(with or without lamivudine); some of these seroconversions were 
identified by the end of therapy, but many were identified during 
the posttreatment follow-up period. The likelihood of HBeAg loss 
in PEG IFN–treated HBeAg-reactive patients was associated with 
HBV genotype A > B > C > D (shown for PEG IFN-α2b but not for 
PEG IFN-α2a). PEG IFN-α2a was approved in the United States for 
hepatitis B in 2005; PEG IFN-α2b, which is not approved for hepa-
titis B in the United States, is used in other countries.

Based  on  these  results,  some  authorities  concluded  that  PEG 
IFN  monotherapy  should  be  the  first-line  therapy  of  choice  in 
HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B;  however,  this  conclusion  has 
been  challenged.  Although  a  finite,  1-year  course  of  PEG  IFN 
results  in  a  higher  rate  of  sustained  response  (6  months  after 
treatment)  than  is  achieved  with  oral  nucleoside/nucleotide  ana-
logue therapy, the comparison is confounded by the fact that oral 
agents  are  not  discontinued  at  the  end  of  1  year.  Instead,  taken 
orally and free of side effects, therapy with oral agents is extended 
indefinitely  or  until  after  the  occurrence  of  an  HBeAg  response. 
The  rate  of  HBeAg  responses  after  2  years  of  oral-agent  nucleo-
side analogue therapy is at least as high as, if not higher than, that 
achieved  with  PEG  IFN  after  1  year;  favoring  oral  agents  is  the 
absence of injections, difficult-to-tolerate side effects, and labora-
tory  monitoring  as  well  as  lower  direct  and  indirect  medical  care 
costs and inconvenience. The association of HBsAg responses with 
PEG IFN therapy occurs in such a small proportion of patients that 
subjecting  everyone  to  PEG  IFN  for  the  marginal  gain  of  HBsAg 
responses during or immediately after therapy in such a very small 
minority  is  questionable.  Moreover,  HBsAg  responses  occur  in  a 
comparable  proportion  of  patients  treated  with  early-generation 
nucleoside/nucleotide  analogues  in  the  years  after  therapy,  and, 
with  the  newer,  more  potent  nucleoside  analogues,  the  frequency 
of  HBsAg  loss  during  the  first  year  of  therapy  equals  that  of 
PEG  IFN  and  is  exceeded  during  year  2  and  beyond  (see  below).  
Of course, resistance is not an issue during PEG IFN therapy, but 
the  risk  of  resistance  is  much  lower  with  new  agents  (≤1%  up  to 
3−8 years in previously treatment-naïve, entecavir-treated patients 
and 0% in tenofovir-treated patients; see below). Finally, the level of 
HBV DNA inhibition that can be achieved with the newer agents, 
and even with lamivudine, exceeds that achieved with PEG IFN, in 
some cases by several orders of magnitude.

In HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, a trial of PEG IFN-α2a 
(180  μg  weekly  for  48  weeks  vs  comparison  arms  of  lamivudine 
monotherapy and of combination therapy) in 564 patients showed 
that PEG IFN monotherapy resulted at the end of therapy in sup-
pression of HBV DNA by a mean of 4.1 log10 copies/mL, undetect-
able HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL by PCR) in 63%, normal ALT in 
38%, and loss of HBsAg in 4%. Although lamivudine monotherapy 
and combination lamivudine−PEG IFN therapy were both superior 
to  PEG  IFN  at  the  end  of  therapy,  no  advantage  of  lamivudine 
monotherapy or combination therapy was apparent over PEG IFN 
monotherapy  6  months  after  therapy—suppression  of  HBV  DNA 
by a mean of 2.3 log10 copies/mL, undetectable HBV DNA in 19%, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2597

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2598

and normal ALT in 59%. In patients involved in this trial followed 
for  up  to  5  years,  among  the  two-thirds  followed  who  had  been 
treated  initially  with  PEG  IFN,  17%  maintained  HBV  DNA  sup-
pression to <400 copies/mL, but ALT remained normal in only 22%; 
HBsAg loss increased gradually to 12%. Among the half followed 
who had been treated initially with lamivudine monotherapy, HBV 
DNA  remained  <400  copies/mL  in  7%  and  ALT  normal  in  16%; 
by year 5, 3.5% had lost HBsAg. As was the case for standard IFN 
therapy in HBeAg-negative patients, only a small proportion main-
tained responsiveness after completion of PEG IFN therapy, raising 
questions  about  the  relative  value  of  a  finite  period  of  PEG  IFN 
versus a longer course with a potent, low-resistance oral nucleoside 
analogue  in  these  patients.  Moreover,  the  value  of  PEG  IFN  for 
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B has not been confirmed. In the 
only other controlled clinical trial of PEG IFN for HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis B, the hepatitis C regimen of PEG IFN plus ribavi-
rin  was  compared  to  PEG  IFN  monotherapy.  In  this  trial,  HBV 
DNA suppression (<400 copies/mL) occurred in only 7.5% of the 
two groups combined, and no study subject lost HBsAg.

In patients treated with PEG IFN, HBeAg and HBsAg responses 
have  been  associated  with  IL28B  (now  renamed  IFN  lambda-3, 
IFNL3) genotype CC, the favorable genotype identified in trials of 
PEG  IFN  for  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Also,  reductions  in  quantitative 
HBsAg levels have been shown to correlate with and to be predictive 
of responsiveness to PEG IFN in chronic hepatitis B. If HBsAg levels 
fail to fall within the first 12–24 weeks or to reach <20,000 IU/mL 
by week 24, PEG IFN therapy is unlikely to be effective and should 
be  discontinued.  (Similar  observations  of  HBsAg  levels  in  oral-
agent-treated patients are of interest but of limited clinical relevance, 
given  the  very  high  likelihood  of  virologic  responses  during  such 
therapy.) While PEG IFN remains one of the recommended first-
line  agents  for  hepatitis  B,  subsequent-generation,  injection-free, 
very-well-tolerated, high-barrier-to-resistance, oral agents are used 
much more widely. 

ENTECAVIR
Entecavir,  an  oral  cyclopentyl  guanosine  analogue  polymerase 
inhibitor  (approved  in  2005),  appears  to  be  the  most  potent  of 
the  HBV  antivirals  and  is  just  as  well  tolerated  as  lamivudine.  In 
a  709-subject  clinical  trial  among  HBeAg-reactive  patients,  oral 
entecavir, 0.5 mg daily, was compared to lamivudine, 100 mg daily. 
At 48 weeks, entecavir was superior to lamivudine in suppression 
of  HBV  DNA  (mean  6.9  vs  5.5  log10  copies/mL),  percentage  with 
undetectable  HBV  DNA  (<300  copies/mL  by  PCR;  67  vs  36%), 
histologic  improvement  (≥2-point  improvement  in  necroinflam-
matory HAI score; 72 vs 62%), and normal ALT (68 vs 60%). The 
two  treatments  were  indistinguishable  in  percentage  with  HBeAg 
loss (22 vs 20%) and seroconversion (21 vs 18%). Among patients 
treated  with  entecavir  for  96  weeks,  HBV  DNA  was  undetectable 
cumulatively  in  80%  (vs  39%  for  lamivudine),  and  HBeAg  sero-
conversions  had  occurred  in  31%  (vs  26%  for  lamivudine).  After 
3–6  years  of  entecavir,  HBeAg  seroconversions  were  observed  in 
39–44% and HBsAg loss in 5–6%. Similarly, in a 638-subject clinical 
trial  among  HBeAg-negative  patients,  at  week  48,  oral  entecavir,   
0.5  mg  daily,  was  superior  to  lamivudine,  100  mg  daily,  in  sup-
pression  of  HBV  DNA  (mean  5.0  vs  4.5  log10  copies/mL)  and  in 
percentage  with  undetectable  HBV  DNA  (90  vs  72%),  histologic 
improvement (70 vs 61%), and normal ALT (78 vs 71%). No resis-
tance  mutations  were  encountered  in  previously  treatment-naïve, 
entecavir-treated  patients  during  96  weeks  of  therapy,  and  in  a 
cohort  of  subjects  treated  for  up  to  6  years,  resistance  emerged 
in  only  1.2%.  Entecavir-induced  HBeAg  seroconversions  are  as 
durable as those achieved with other antivirals. Its high barrier to 
resistance coupled with its high potency renders entecavir a first-
line drug for patients with chronic hepatitis B.

Entecavir  is  also  effective  against  lamivudine-resistant  HBV 
infection. In a trial of 286 lamivudine-resistant patients, entecavir, 
at a higher daily dose of 1 mg, was superior to lamivudine, as mea-
sured  at  week  48,  in  achieving  suppression  of  HBV  DNA  (mean 

5.1 vs 0.48 log10 copies/mL), undetectable HBV DNA (72 vs 19%), 
normal ALT (61 vs 15%), HBeAg loss (10 vs 3%), and HBeAg sero-
conversion (8 vs 3%). In this population of lamivudine-experienced 
patients, however, entecavir resistance emerged in 7% at 48 weeks. 
Although  entecavir  resistance  requires  both  a  YMDD  mutation 
and  a  second  mutation  at  one  of  several  other  sites  (e.g.,  T184A, 
S202G/I, or M250V), resistance to entecavir in lamivudine-resistant 
chronic  hepatitis  B  was  reported  to  increase  progressively  to  43% 
at 4 years and 57% at 6 years; therefore, entecavir is not as attrac-
tive  a  choice  (and  is  not  recommended,  despite  its  approval  for 
this indication) as adefovir was or as tenofovir is for patients with 
lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B.

In  clinical  trials,  entecavir  had  an  excellent  safety  profile.  In 
addition, on-treatment and posttreatment ALT flares are relatively 
uncommon and relatively mild in entecavir-treated patients. Doses 
should  be  reduced  for  patients  with  reduced  creatinine  clearance. 
Entecavir  does  have  low-level  antiviral  activity  against  HIV  and 
cannot  be  used  as  monotherapy  to  treat  HBV  infection  in  HIV/
HBV co-infected persons. 

TELBIVUDINE
Telbivudine, a cytosine analogue (approved in 2006), is similar in 
efficacy  to  entecavir  but  slightly  less  potent  in  suppressing  HBV 
DNA (a slightly less profound median 6.4 log10 reduction in HBeAg- 
reactive disease and a similar 5.2 log10 reduction in HBeAg-negative 
disease).  In  its  registration  trial,  telbivudine  at  an  oral  daily  dose 
of  600  mg  suppressed  HBV  DNA  to  <300  copies/mL  in  60%  of 
HBeAg-positive and 88% of HBeAg-negative patients, reduced ALT 
to normal in 77% of HBeAg-positive and 74% of HBeAg-negative 
patients,  and  improved  histology  in  65%  of  HBeAg-positive  and 
67%  of  HBeAg-negative  patients.  Although  resistance  to  telbivu-
dine (M204I, not M204V, mutations) was less frequent than resis-
tance to lamivudine at the end of 1 year, resistance mutations after 
2 years of treatment occurred in up to 22%. Generally well tolerated, 
telbivudine  was  associated  with  a  low  frequency  of  asymptomatic 
creatine kinase elevations and with a very low frequency of periph-
eral neuropathy; frequency of administration had to be reduced for 
patients  with  impaired  creatinine  clearance.  Its  excellent  potency 
notwithstanding, the inferior resistance and safety profile of telbi-
vudine  limited  its  appeal;  telbivudine  is  neither  recommended  as 
first-line therapy nor widely used. 

TENOFOVIR
Tenofovir  disoproxil  fumarate  (TDF),  an  acyclic  nucleotide  ana-
logue  and  potent  antiretroviral  agent  used  to  treat  HIV  infection 
(approved for hepatitis B in 2008), is similar to adefovir but more 
potent in suppressing HBV DNA and inducing HBeAg responses; 
it is highly active against both wild-type and lamivudine-resistant 
HBV  and  active  in  patients  whose  response  to  adefovir  is  slow 
and/or limited. At an oral once-daily dose of 300 mg for 48 weeks,  
tenofovir  suppressed  HBV  DNA  by  6.2  log10  (to  undetectable 
levels  [<400  copies/mL]  in  76%)  in  HBeAg-positive  patients  and 
by  4.6  log10  (to  undetectable  levels  in  93%)  in  HBeAg-negative 
patients;  reduced  ALT  to  normal  in  68%  of  HBeAg-positive  and 
76%  of  HBeAg-negative  patients;  and  improved  histology  in 
74%  of  HBeAg-positive  and  72%  of  HBeAg-negative  patients.  In 
HBeAg-positive patients, HBeAg seroconversions occurred in 21% 
by the end of year 1, 27% by year 2, 34% by year 3, and 40% by year 
5  of  tenofovir  treatment;  HBsAg  loss  occurred  in  3%  by  the  end 
of year 1, 6% at year 2, and 8% by year 5. After 5 years of tenofo-
vir  therapy,  87%  of  patients  experienced  histologic  improvement, 
including reduction in fibrosis score (51%) and regression of cirrhosis 
(71%). The 5-year safety (negligible renal toxicity, in 1%, and mild 
reduction  in  bone  density,  in  ~0.5%)  and  resistance  profiles  (none 
recorded  through  8  years)  of  tenofovir  are  very  favorable  as  well; 
therefore, tenofovir has supplanted adefovir both as first-line therapy 
for chronic hepatitis B and as rescue therapy for lamivudine-resistant 
chronic  hepatitis  B.  Studies  of  tenofovir  and  entecavir  reviewed  in 
2015  showed  no  difference  in  long-term  risks  of  renal  and  bone 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2598

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemtoxicity;  however,  among  patients  treated  with  tenofovir,  instances 
of  acute  renal  failure  and  of  low  blood  phosphate  levels  have  been 
reported. Thus, in patients receiving tenofovir, monitoring bone den-
sity is not recommended, but periodic (at least annual) monitoring 
for renal injury is recommended (serum creatinine and phosphate, 
urine glucose and protein). Frequency  of  tenofovir  administration 
should be reduced for patients with impaired creatinine clearance.
Tenofovir  alafenamide  (TAF),  a  second-generation  tenofovir 
approved in 2016, is a prodrug of tenofovir that requires activation 
to  tenofovir  in  hepatocytes.  This  targeted  delivery  to  hepatocytes 
allows  a  lower  dose  to  suffice  and  reduces  systemic  exposure  by 
90%,  thereby  minimizing  TDF-associated  proximal  tubular  renal 
injury,  its  associated  phosphate  wasting,  and  the  potential  con-
sequent  loss  of  bone  mineral  density.  The  dose  of  TAF  is  25  mg, 
which  is  equivalent  in  antiviral  potency  to  300  mg  of  TDF;  both 
formulations  have  the  same  high  barrier  to  resistance,  and  clini-
cal resistance has not been encountered. Randomized, controlled, 
double-blind, phase 3 noninferiority trials, one in HBeAg-positive 
patients  and  the  other  in  HBeAg-negative  patients,  provided  the 
safety and efficacy data to support TAF approval.

In 873 HBeAg-positive patients treated for 48 weeks, TAF versus 
TDF  achieved  (1)  HBV  DNA  reductions  to  <29  IU/mL  in  64% 
versus 67%; (2) ALT normalization in 72% versus 67% (an unex-
plained TAF biochemical advantage confirmed in other trials); (3) 
HBeAg loss in 14% versus 12%; (4) HBeAg seroconversion in 10% 
versus 8%; and (5) a negligible loss of HBsAg in 1% versus 0.3%. 
Compared to TDF, TAF was associated with reduced impairment of 
renal function (median reduction in estimated glomerular filtration 
rate of –0.6 mL/min for TAF vs –5.4 mL/min for TDF) and of bone 
density (in hip measurements, mean reduction of –0.10% for TAF 
vs –1.72% for TDF; adjusted difference, 1.62%).

In the parallel trial among 426 HBeAg-negative patients treated 
for 48 weeks, reductions in HBV DNA to <29 IU/mL occurred in 
94% versus 93% of individuals treated with TAF versus TDF, respec-
tively; normalization of ALT occurred in 83% versus 75%, but no 
HBsAg  loss  occurred  in  either  group.  Similar  TAF  advantages  in 
maintaining renal function and bone density were reported: reduc-
tion in median estimated glomerular filtration rate (–1.8 mL/min 
for TAF vs –4.8 mL/min for TDF) and in median bone density (in 
hip measurements, mean reduction of –0.29% for TAF vs –2.16% 
for TDF; adjusted percentage difference, 1.87%).

At  week  96,  TAF  and  TDF  HBV  DNA  and  ALT  reductions 
(including  the  TAF  advantage  observed  at  48  weeks)  were  main-
tained. In the original TDF group, when TDF was switched to TAF 
after week 96, all differences observed during the first 96 weeks (in 
normalization  of  ALT  and  reductions  in  renal  function  and  bone 
density)  had  resolved  at  week  120.  Resistance  did  not  emerge  to 
either TAF or TDF throughout the trial.

Based  on  these  trial  outcomes,  TAF  joined  the  list  of  recom-
mended  first-line  antiviral  agents  for  chronic  hepatitis  B.  This 
drug is recommended over TDF by the American Association for 
the  Study  of  Liver  Diseases  (AASLD)  and  the  European  Associ-
ation  for  the  Study  of  the  Liver  (EASL)  for  patients  with  reduced 
renal  function  (creatinine  clearance  <50  mL/min),  reduced  bone 
density,  and  risk  factors  for  renal  injury  (including,  according 
to  EASL  guidelines,  decompensated  cirrhosis,  creatinine  clearance   
<60  mL/min,  poorly  controlled  hypertension  or  diabetes,  pro-
teinuria,  active  glomerulonephritis,  concomitant  nephrotoxic 
medications,  or  solid-organ  transplantation);  the  EASL  recom-
mendation  extends  to  persons  >60  years,  who  are  at  increased 
risk  of  TDF  nephrotoxicity.  In  patients  with  creatinine  clearances   
<15 mL/min, neither TDF nor TAF is recommended.

A  comparison  of  antiviral  therapies  for  chronic  hepatitis  B 
appears  in  Table  341-3;  their  relative  potencies  in  suppressing 
HBV DNA are shown in Fig. 341-1.

COMBINATION THERAPY
Although  the  combination  of  lamivudine  and  PEG  IFN  sup-
presses  HBV  DNA  more  profoundly  during  therapy  than  does 

2599

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

A
N
D
V
B
H
0
1
g
o
L

0

–1

–2

–3

–4

–5

–6

–7

–3.5

–4.5

–5.5

–6.2

–6.4

ADV

PEG IFN

LAM

TDF

TBV

–6.9
ETV

FIGURE  341-1  Relative  potency  of  antiviral  drugs  for  hepatitis  B,  as  reflected 
by median log10 hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA reduction in HBeAg-positive chronic 
hepatitis B. These data are from individual reports of large, randomized controlled 
registration trials that were the basis for approval of the drugs. In most instances, 
these data do not represent direct comparisons among the drugs, because study 
populations  were  different,  baseline  patient  variables  were  not  always  uniform, 
and  the  sensitivity  and  dynamic  range  of  the  HBV  DNA  assays  used  in  the  trials 
varied. ADV, adefovir dipivoxil; ETV, entecavir; LAM, lamivudine; PEG IFN, pegylated 
interferon  α2a;  TBV,  telbivudine;  TDF,  tenofovir  disoproxil  fumarate.  Because 
of potency and a high barrier to resistance, ETV and tenofovir (either TDF or the 
second-generation tenofovir alafenamide) are recommended as first-line therapy. 
While PEG IFN remains a first-line agent, the oral agents developed earlier, LAM, 
ADV, and TBV, are no longer preferred agents.

monotherapy with either drug alone (and is much less likely to be 
associated  with  lamivudine  resistance),  this  combination  used  for 
a year is no better than a year of PEG IFN in achieving sustained 
responses.  To  date,  combinations  of  oral  nucleoside/nucleotide 
agents have not achieved an enhancement in virologic, serologic, or 
biochemical efficacy over that achieved by the more potent of the 
combined drugs given individually. In a 2-year trial of combination 
entecavir and tenofovir versus entecavir monotherapy, for a small 
subgroup  of  patients  with  very  high  HBV  DNA  levels  (≥108  IU/
mL),  a  reduction  in  HBV  DNA  to  <50  IU/mL  was  higher  in  the 
combination group (79 vs 62%); however, no differences in HBeAg 
responses or any other endpoint were observed between the com-
bination-therapy and monotherapy groups, even in the high-HBV 
DNA  subgroup.  For  resistance  to  lamivudine  or  adefovir,  add-
ing  a  second,  non-cross-resistant  agent  was  the  chosen  approach. 
Whereas, initially, in clinical studies of adefovir as rescue therapy 
for  lamivudine  resistance,  adding  adefovir  to  lamivudine  (com-
bination  therapy)  was  considered  a  better  strategy  than  replacing 
lamivudine  with  adefovir  monotherapy  (to  minimize  ALT  flares 
and  to  avoid  adefovir  resistance),  according  to  current  treatment 
recommendations of the AASLD and the EASL, switching from the 
resistant  drug  to  the  new  drug  is  preferred.  Because  the  current 
generation of antivirals is so potent and has such a high barrier to 
resistance,  monotherapy  with  the  rescue  drug  (e.g.,  tenofovir  for 
lamivudine resistance) is as effective (as demonstrated in observa-
tional  reports  for  up  to  5  years)  in  maintaining  viral  suppression 
without  the  emergence  of  resistance  as  combination  therapy  with 
the resistant drug and the rescue drug. Generally, in patients treated 
with entecavir and tenofovir preparations, antiviral drug resistance 
is no longer encountered. For currently rare patients who already 
have acquired multidrug resistance (to both nucleoside analogues 
[lamivudine,  entecavir,  telbivudine]  and  nucleotide  analogues  [ade-
fovir,  tenofovir]),  treatment  with  a  combination  of  entecavir  and 
tenofovir has been shown to be highly effective in suppressing HBV 
DNA and overcoming drug resistance. 

NOVEL ANTIVIRALS AND STRATEGIES
In  addition  to  the  eight  approved  antiviral  drugs  for  hepatitis 
B,  emtricitabine,  a  fluorinated  cytosine  analogue  very  similar  to 
lamivudine  in  structure,  efficacy,  and  resistance  profile,  offers  no 
advantage  over  lamivudine.  A  combination  of  emtricitabine  and 
tenofovir  is  approved  for  the  treatment  of  HIV  infection  and  is 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2599

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2600

an  appealing  combination  therapy  for  hepatitis  B,  especially  for 
lamivudine-resistant  disease;  however,  neither  emtricitabine  nor 
the combination is approved for hepatitis B. Several initially prom-
ising antiviral agents have been abandoned because of toxicity (e.g., 
clevudine, which was linked to myopathy during its clinical devel-
opment). The current generation of oral antivirals have been very 
successful in the management of chronic hepatitis B; however, most 
patients  require  long-duration,  usually  indefinite,  therapy.  Ideally, 
an  approach  to  achieving  “cure”  (eradication  of  HBV  infection) 
with  finite-duration  therapy  would  be  welcome.  Currently,  inno-
vative approaches being investigated focus on viral-targeting strat-
egies or immunomodulatory strategies. The direct viral approaches 
include  viral  entry  inhibitors,  nucleocapsid  assembly  inhibitors, 
HBV secretion (HBsAg release) inhibitors, covalently closed circular 
(ccc)  DNA  silencing/inhibition/cleavage,  RNA  interference,  HBx 
inhibitors,  and  CRISPR/Cas9  gene  editing.  Immunomodulators 
being studied have included Toll receptor agonists, T-cell vaccines, 
programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) blockade, reconstitution of innate 
and adaptive immune responses, and HBV mRNA recognition and 
activation  of  innate  immune  signaling  by  retinoic  acid–inducible 
gene-I  (RIG-I).  While  data  supporting  several  of  these  unconven-
tional approaches have begun to appear, some have been abandoned 
for lack of efficacy or for toxicity (e.g., RIG-I and some of the capsid 
inhibitors). Even after almost a decade of early clinical trials, none 
has been shown to “cure” hepatitis B, and none is likely to be com-
petitive, unless it can be shown to go beyond current antivirals in 
achieving recovery (HBsAg seroconversion) from HBV infection. 

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
Several learned societies and groups of expert physicians have issued 
treatment  recommendations  for  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B; 
the most authoritative and updated are those of the AASLD and the 

EASL.  Although  the  recommendations  differ  slightly,  a  consensus 
has  emerged  on  most  of  the  important  points  (Table  341-4).  No 
treatment is recommended or available for inactive “nonreplicative” 
hepatitis  B  carriers  (undetectable  HBeAg  with  normal  ALT  and 
HBV DNA ≤103 IU/mL documented serially over time). In patients 
with detectable HBeAg and HBV DNA levels >2 × 104 IU/mL, treat-
ment is recommended by the AASLD for those with ALT levels >2× 
the  upper  limit  of  normal.  (The  EASL  recommends  treatment  in 
HBeAg-positive patients for HBV DNA levels >2 × 103 IU/mL and 
ALT above the upper limit of normal.) For HBeAg-positive patients 
with  ALT  ≤2×  the  upper  limit  of  normal,  in  whom  sustained 
responses are not likely and who would require multiyear therapy, 
antiviral  therapy  is  not  recommended  currently.  This  pattern  is 
common  during  the  early  decades  of  life  among  Asian  patients 
infected at birth; even in this group, therapy would be considered 
for those >40 years of age, patients with extrahepatic manifestations 
of  HBV  infection,  patients  with  a  family  history  of  cirrhosis  or 
HCC, if the liver biopsy or noninvasive testing shows moderate to 
severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis, or if the patient has a 
history of previous treatment. In this group, when, eventually, ALT 
becomes elevated later in life, antiviral therapy should be instituted. 
For  patients  with  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B,  ALT  >2× 
the upper limit of normal (above the upper limit of normal accord-
ing  to  EASL),  and  HBV  DNA  >2  ×  103  IU/mL,  antiviral  therapy 
is  recommended.  If  HBV  DNA  is  >2  ×  103  IU/mL  and  ALT  is  1 
to  >2×  the  upper  limit  of  normal,  the  same  considerations  apply 
as  for  HBeAg-positive  patients  with  borderline  ALT  levels—for 
those  >40  years  of  age,  patients  with  extrahepatic  manifestations 
of  HBV  infection,  patients  with  a  family  history  of  cirrhosis  or 
HCC, if the liver biopsy or noninvasive testing shows moderate to 
severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis, or if the patient has 
a history of previous treatment (treatment in this subset would be 

TABLE 341-4  Recommendations for Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis Ba
HBeAg STATUS
HBeAg-reactive

HBV DNA (IU/mL)
>2 × 104

CLINICAL
b

ALT
≤2 × ULNc,d

Chronic hepatitis
Cirrhosis compensated

Cirrhosis decompensated

HBeAg-negative

b

Chronic hepatitis

>2 × 104d
>2 × 103
<2 × 103
Detectable
Undetectable
≤2 × 103
>2 × 103

>2 × ULNd
< or > ULN
>ULN
< or > ULN
< or > ULN
≤ULN
1 to >2 × ULNd

Chronic hepatitis
Cirrhosis compensated

Cirrhosis decompensated

>2 × 103
>2 × 103
<2 × 103
Detectable
Undetectable

>2 × ULNd
< or > ULN
>ULN
< or > ULN
< or > ULN

RECOMMENDATION
No treatment; monitor, except in patients >40, with family history of cirrhosis 
or hepatocellular carcinoma, with extrahepatic manifestations, with a history 
of previous treatment, and/or with liver biopsy (or noninvasive fibrosis 
determination) evidence for moderate to severe inflammation or fibrosis
Treate
Treate with oral agents, not PEG IFN
Treatment suggestedf
Treate with oral agentsg, not PEG IFN; refer for liver transplantation
Observe; refer for liver transplantation
Inactive carrier; treatment not necessary
No treatment; monitor, except in patients >40, with family history of cirrhosis 
or hepatocellular carcinoma, with extrahepatic manifestations, with a history 
of previous treatment, and/or with liver biopsy (or noninvasive fibrosis 
determination) evidence for moderate to severe inflammation or fibrosis
Treath,i
Treate with oral agents, not PEG IFN
Treatment suggestedf
Treath with oral agentsg, not PEG IFN; refer for liver transplantation
Observe; refer for liver transplantation

aBased on practice guidelines of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Except as indicated in footnotes, these guidelines are similar to those 
issued by the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). bLiver disease tends to be mild or inactive clinically; most such patients do not undergo liver biopsy. 
cThis pattern is common during early decades of life in Asian patients infected at birth. dAccording to the EASL guidelines, treat if HBV DNA is >2 × 103 IU/mL and ALT >ULN. 
eOne of the potent oral drugs with a high barrier to resistance (entecavir or tenofovir) or PEG IFN can be used as first-line therapy (see text). These oral agents, but not 
PEG IFN, should be used for interferon-refractory/intolerant and immunocompromised patients. PEG IFN is administered weekly by subcutaneous injection for a year; the oral 
agents are administered daily for at least a year and continued indefinitely or until at least 6 months after HBeAg seroconversion. fAccording to EASL guidelines, patients 
with compensated cirrhosis and detectable HBV DNA at any level, even with normal ALT, are candidates for therapy. Most authorities would treat indefinitely, even in HBeAg-
positive disease after HBeAg seroconversion. gBecause the emergence of resistance can lead to loss of antiviral benefit and further deterioration in decompensated cirrhosis, 
a low-resistance regimen is recommended—entecavir or tenofovir monotherapy or combination therapy with the more resistance-prone lamivudine (or telbivudine) plus 
adefovir. Therapy should be instituted urgently. hBecause HBeAg seroconversion is not an option, the goal of therapy is to suppress HBV DNA and maintain a normal ALT. 
PEG IFN is administered by subcutaneous injection weekly for a year; caution is warranted in relying on a 6-month posttreatment interval to define a sustained response, 
because the majority of such responses are lost thereafter. Oral agents, entecavir or tenofovir, are administered daily, usually indefinitely or until, as very rarely occurs, 
virologic and biochemical responses are accompanied by HBsAg seroconversion. iFor older patients and those with advanced fibrosis, consider lowering the HBV DNA 
threshold to >2 × 103 IU/mL.
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; ULN, 
upper limit of normal.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2600

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemrecommended  according  to  EASL  guidelines,  because  ALT  is  ele-
vated). Per current AASLD recommendations, antiviral treatment 
with  oral  agents  can  be  stopped  after  HBeAg  seroconversion  in 
noncirrhotics, and the suggested period of consolidation therapy is  
12 months with close monitoring for recurrent viremia (monthly × 6, 
then every 3 months for the rest of a year) after cessation of therapy. 
For  patients  with  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis,  the  current 
recommendation with oral agents is for indefinite therapy; stopping 
therapy in this group can be considered after HBsAg loss.

The  potential  for  stopping  antiviral  therapy  in  noncirrhotic 
HBeAg-negative  patients  after  protracted  (≥2–5  years)  antiviral 
therapy  has  been  the  subject  of  several  studies.  After  such  pro-
longed courses of entecavir or tenofovir, in one study (DARING-B), 
18-month  virologic  relapse  rates  (HBV  DNA  >2000  IU/mL)  in   
57 patients were high (in 72%), but only 26% met study criteria for 
resumption of therapy (ALT >10× upper limit of normal, ALT >5× 
upper  limit  of  normal  with  bilirubin  >2  mg/mL,  ALT  >3×  upper 
limit  of  normal  with  HBV  DNA  >105  IU/mL,  or  ALT  >2×  upper 
limit of normal and HBV DNA >2 × 103 IU/mL on three sequential 
visits).  Moreover,  25%  underwent  HBsAg  loss.  In  a  similar  study 
(FINITE), virologic relapse rates were high, but 62% did not meet 
criteria  for  retreatment,  and  19%  lost  HBsAg.  In  contrast,  in  a 
study  among  Asian  patients,  only  ~30%  had  sustained  responses 
for which resumption of therapy was not introduced, and HBsAg 
responses  were  negligible.  In  other  reports,  including  on  patients 
with 8 years of TDF treatment prior to stopping, only 35–60% had 
sustained  treatment-free  outcomes,  and  only  5–13%  lost  HBsAg. 
In the only randomized, controlled trial of stopping therapy versus 
continuing  therapy  in  HBeAg-negative  patients  after  prolonged 
antiviral  therapy  (Toronto  STOP  study),  only  33%  had  sustained 
responses after cessation of therapy, and HBsAg loss occurred with 
equal,  small  frequencies  in  both  the  stop-treatment  group  (4%) 
and the continue-treatment group (5%). Generally, then, although 
HBsAg loss can be achieved in a small fraction and although a sub-
group may not require reintroduction of therapy in the short run, 
enthusiasm for this approach is limited, and for most HBeAg-nega-
tive patients, recommendations support indefinite treatment, unless 
they experience HBsAg loss.

For patients with compensated cirrhosis, because antiviral ther-
apy  has  been  shown  to  retard  clinical  progression,  treatment  is 
recommended  regardless  of  HBeAg  status  and  ALT  as  long  as 
HBV DNA is detectable at >2 × 103 IU/mL (detectable at any level 
according  to  the  EASL);  therapy  is  suggested,  however,  even  for 
those with HBV DNA <2 × 103 IU/mL, regardless of ALT level. For 
patients with decompensated cirrhosis, treatment is recommended 
regardless of serologic and biochemical status, as long as HBV DNA 
is  detectable.  Patients  with  decompensated  cirrhosis  should  be 
evaluated as candidates for liver transplantation. Cirrhotics should 
be  treated  indefinitely  (see  considerations  for  stopping  antiviral 
therapy in noncirrhotics, above).

Among  the  eight  available  drugs  for  hepatitis  B,  PEG  IFN  has 
supplanted standard IFN, entecavir has supplanted lamivudine, and 
tenofovir has supplanted adefovir. PEG IFN, entecavir, or tenofovir 
(TDF or TAF) is recommended as first-line therapy (Table 341-3). 
PEG IFN requires finite-duration therapy, achieves the highest rate 
of HBeAg responses after a year of therapy, and does not support 
viral mutations, but it requires subcutaneous injections and is asso-
ciated  with  inconvenience,  more  intensive  clinical  and  laboratory 
monitoring,  and  intolerability.  Oral  nucleoside  analogues  require 
long-term  therapy  in  most  patients,  and  when  used  alone,  lami-
vudine  and  telbivudine  foster  the  emergence  of  viral  mutations, 
adefovir  somewhat  less  so,  and  entecavir  (except  in  lamivudine-
experienced patients) and tenofovir rarely at all. Oral agents do not 
require injections or cumbersome laboratory monitoring, are very 
well  tolerated,  lead  to  improved  histology  in  50−90%  of  patients, 
suppress  HBV  DNA  more  profoundly  than  PEG  IFN,  and  are 
effective even in patients who fail to respond to IFN-based therapy. 
Although  oral  agents  are  less  likely  to  result  in  HBeAg  responses 
during the first year of therapy, as compared to PEG IFN, treatment 

TABLE 341-5  Pegylated Interferon Versus Oral Nucleoside Analogues 
for the Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B

2601

Administration
Tolerability

Duration of therapy

Maximum mean HBV DNA 
suppression
Effective in high-level HBV 
DNA (≥109 IU/mL)
HBeAg seroconversion
  During 1 year of therapy
  During >1 year of therapy
HBeAg-negative 
posttreatment HBV DNA 
suppression
HBsAg loss
  During 1 year of therapy
  During >1 year of therapy

  After 1 year of 

therapy–HBeAg-negative
Antiviral resistance

PEG IFN
Weekly injection
Poorly tolerated, 
intensive monitoring
Finite 48 weeks

4.5 log10

No

~30%
Not applicable

17% at 5 years

3–4%
Not applicable
12% at 5 years

None

Use in cirrhosis, 
transplantation, 
immunosuppressed
Cost, 1 year of therapy

No

++++

NUCLEOSIDE 
ANALOGUES
Daily, orally
Well tolerated, limited 
monitoring
≥1 year, indefinite in most 
patients
6.9 log10

Yes

~20%
30% (year 2) to up to 50% 
(year 5)

7% at 4 years 
(lamivudine)

0–3%
3–8% at 5 years of 
therapy
3.5% at 5 years

Lamivudine: ~30% year 1, 
~70% year 5
Adefovir: 0% year 1, 
~30% year 5
Telbivudine: up to 4% 
year 1, 22% year 2
Entecavir: ≤1.2% through 
year 6
Tenofovir: 0% through 
year 8
Yes

+ to ++

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

Abbreviations: HBV, hepatitis B virus; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, 
hepatitis B surface antigen; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon.

with oral agents is usually extended beyond the first year and, by the 
end of the second year (of the current generation of potent agents 
entecavir and tenofovir), yields HBeAg responses (and even HBsAg 
responses) comparable in frequency to those achieved after 1 year 
of PEG IFN (and without the associated side effects) (Table 341-5). 
In a 2016 systematic review of 1716 patients involved in 25 clinical 
trials, responses after oral-agent therapy were found to be durable. 
Among  patients  with  HBeAg-reactive  chronic  hepatitis  B,  the 
pooled  rates  of  durable  HBeAg  seroconversions  maintained  after 
cessation of nucleoside/nucleotide analogue therapy (including all 
the oral agents) were 92% and 88% at posttreatment months 12 and 
24, respectively, unaffected by the duration of post-HBeAg-response 
consolidation  therapy  (>6  months  in  all  studies  evaluated);  the 
pooled rate of durable biochemical remission after therapy in this 
population was 76%. Even for HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, 
for which most authorities recommend indefinite therapy, pooled 
rates  of  virologic  remissions  maintained  after  cessation  of  oral-
agent therapy were 44%, 31%, and 30% at posttreatment months 12, 
24, and 36, and the pooled rate of durable biochemical remission in 
this population was 57%.

Although  adefovir  and  tenofovir  (TDF)  are  safe,  renal  moni-
toring  (e.g.,  serum  creatinine  and  phosphate,  urine  glucose  and 
protein)  is  recommended  (not  for  TAF).  Substantial  experience 
with  lamivudine  during  pregnancy  (see  above)  has  identified  no 
teratogenicity; although widely used during pregnancy, lamivudine 
remains classified as pregnancy category C. Although IFNs do not 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2601

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
2602

appear  to  cause  congenital  anomalies,  these  have  antiproliferative 
properties and should be avoided during pregnancy. Adefovir dur-
ing pregnancy has not been associated with birth defects; however, 
the risk of spontaneous abortion may be increased, and adefovir is 
categorized as pregnancy category C. Data on the safety of entecavir 
during pregnancy have not been published (pregnancy category C). 
Sufficient data in animals and limited data in humans suggest that 
telbivudine and tenofovir (both pregnancy category B) can be used 
safely during pregnancy; however, telbivudine is not an acceptable 
first-line drug. In general, then, except for lamivudine and tenofo-
vir, and until additional data become available, the other antivirals 
for hepatitis B should be avoided or used with extreme caution dur-
ing pregnancy. Tenofovir is the current drug of choice in pregnancy.
For  children  aged  2  to  <18  years  old  with  HBeAg-reactive 
hepatitis B (most children will be HBeAg-reactive; no studies have 
been  done  in  children  with  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B), 
treatment  is  recommended  if  HBV  DNA  is  detectable  and  ALT 
levels  are  elevated,  but  not  if  ALT  levels  are  normal.  Each  of  the 
available drugs, except telbivudine, is approved for different child-
hood  age  groups  (standard  IFN  α2b  age  ≥1  year;  PEG  IFN  α2a 
age  ≥5  years  [approved  for  hepatitis  C,  not  B,  but  can  be  used  in 
hepatitis  B];  lamivudine  and  entecavir  age  ≥2  years;  adefovir  and 
tenofovir  age  ≥12  years).  Package  inserts  should  be  consulted  for 
childhood doses.

As noted above, some physicians prefer to begin with PEG IFN, 
while other physicians and patients prefer oral agents as first-line 
therapy. For patients with decompensated cirrhosis, the emergence 
of resistance can result in further deterioration and loss of antiviral 
effectiveness. Therefore, in this patient subset, therapy with a very 
favorable resistance profile (e.g., entecavir or tenofovir) should be 
used. PEG IFN should not be used in patients with compensated or 
decompensated cirrhosis.

Several observational studies have suggested that TDF is supe-
rior to entecavir in reducing the risk of HCC. Such studies, however, 
sophisticated  statistical  analyses  notwithstanding,  are  subject  to 
confounding  influences  that  could  favor  TDF;  in  addition,  while 
several  studies  confirm  a  differential  effect  of  TDF  on  long-term 
HCC  risk,  many  others  do  not.  Therefore,  currently,  the  prepon-
derance of data is insufficient to support this benefit of TDF over 
entecavir.

For  patients  with  end-stage  chronic  hepatitis  B  who  undergo 
liver transplantation, reinfection of the new liver is almost universal 
in the absence of antiviral therapy. The majority of patients become 
high-level  viremic  carriers  with  minimal  liver  injury.  Before  the 
availability  of  antiviral  therapy,  an  unpredictable  proportion 
experienced  severe  hepatitis  B−related  liver  injury,  sometimes  a 
fulminant-like  hepatitis  and  sometimes  a  rapid  recapitulation  of 
the  original  severe  chronic  hepatitis  B  (Chap.  339).  Currently, 
however, prevention of recurrent hepatitis B after liver transplan-
tation  has  been  achieved  definitively  by  combining  short-term 
(5–7 days) intravenous hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) with 
lifelong low-resistance oral entecavir or TDF or TAF (Chap. 345); 
in  some  patients,  especially  those  with  a  low  risk  for  recurrence, 
the  newer,  more  potent,  and  less  resistance-prone  oral  agents 
may be used instead of HBIG for posttransplantation therapy. For 
patients  at  high  risk  for  recurrence  and  progressive  disease  (e.g., 
patients  with  HDV-HBV  or  HIV-HBV  co-infection  as  well  as 
for  nonadherent  patients,  lifelong  combination  HBIG-oral  agent 
therapy  should  be  considered.  For  patients  receiving  livers  from 
anti-HBc-positive  donors,  lifelong  oral-agent  therapy  is  recom-
mended (without HBIG).

Patients  with  HBV-HIV  co-infection  can  have  progressive 
HBV-associated liver disease and, occasionally, a severe exacerba-
tion of hepatitis B resulting from immunologic reconstitution fol-
lowing ART. Lamivudine should never be used as monotherapy in 
patients with HBV-HIV infection because HIV resistance emerges 
rapidly to both viruses. Adefovir was used successfully in the past to 
treat chronic hepatitis B in HBV-HIV co-infected patients but is no 
longer considered a first-line agent for HBV. Entecavir has low-level 

activity against HIV and can result in selection of HIV resistance; 
therefore, it is not preferable in HBV-HIV co-infection. Tenofovir 
and the combination of tenofovir and emtricitabine in one pill are 
approved  therapies  for  HIV  and  represent  excellent  choices  for 
treating  HBV  infection  in  HBV-HIV  co-infected  patients.  Gener-
ally, even for HBV-HIV co-infected patients who do not yet meet 
treatment  criteria  for  HIV  infection,  treating  for  both  HBV  and 
HIV is recommended. In HIV-HBV co-infection, TAF is preferable 
to TDF because of its better safety profile.

Patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  who  undergo  cytotoxic  che-
motherapy for treatment of malignancies as well as patients treated 
with  immunosuppressive,  anticytokine,  or  anti–tumor  necrosis 
factor (TNF) therapies (the risk varies, from highest [e.g., B cell–
depleting  agents,  anthracycline  derivatives,  moderate-/high-dose 
corticosteroids for ≥4 weeks] to moderate [e.g., TNF-α inhibitors, 
cytokine or integrin inhibitors, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, low-dose 
corticosteroids  for  ≥4  weeks]  to  lowest  [e.g.,  immunosuppressive 
agents  like  methotrexate  and  azathioprine,  intraarticular  corti-
costeroids,  any  dose  of  corticosteroids  for  ≤1  week])  experience 
enhanced  HBV  replication  and  viral  expression  on  hepatocyte 
membranes during chemotherapy coupled with suppression of cel-
lular  immunity.  When  chemotherapy  is  withdrawn,  such  patients 
are  at  risk  for  reactivation  of  hepatitis  B,  often  severe  and  occa-
sionally  fatal.  Such  rebound  reactivation  represents  restoration  of 
cytolytic  T-cell  function  against  a  target  organ  enriched  in  HBV 
expression.  Preemptive  treatment  with  the  first  of  the  oral  HBV 
antivirals, lamivudine, prior to the initiation of chemotherapy was 
shown to reduce the risk of such reactivation substantially; treating 
after  reactivation  has  occurred  is  less  effective.  The  newer,  more 
potent oral antiviral agents, entecavir and tenofovir, which are even 
more  effective  in  preventing  hepatitis  B  reactivation  and  with  a 
lower  risk  of  antiviral  drug  resistance,  are  preferred.  The  optimal 
duration  of  antiviral  therapy  after  completion  of  chemotherapy  is 
not known, but a suggested approach is 6 months (12 months for 
B cell–depleting agents) for inactive hepatitis B carriers and longer-
duration  therapy  in  patients  with  baseline  HBV  DNA  levels  >2  × 
103 IU/mL, until standard clinical endpoints are met (Table 341-4). 
Such  chemotherapy-associated  reactivation  of  hepatitis  B  is  com-
mon  (4–68%,  median  25%,  in  a  meta-analysis)  in  persons  with 
ongoing HBV infection (HBsAg-reactive); however, such reactiva-
tion can occur, albeit less commonly, in persons who have cleared 
HBsAg  but  express  anti-HBc  (moderate  risk,  <10%)  and  rarely 
(<5%)  even  in  persons  with  serologic  evidence  of  recovery  from 
HBV  infection  (anti-HBs-reactive,  anti-HBc-reactive).  Therefore, 
most authorities (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 
AASLD; American Gastroenterological Association; EASL) recom-
mend HBsAg and anti-HBc (± anti-HBs) screening of all patients 
undergoing  such  chemotherapy  and  preemptive  antiviral  prophy-
laxis  for  HBsAg-reactive  persons  and  anti-HBc-reactive  persons 
treated with the most potent immunomodulatory agents (especially 
B cell–depleting agents like rituximab) and close on-therapy mon-
itoring  of  other  anti-HBc-reactive/anti-HBs-reactive  persons  with 
treatment if and when reactivation occurs. 

CHRONIC HEPATITIS D (DELTA HEPATITIS)
Chronic  hepatitis  D  virus  (HDV)  may  follow  acute  co-infection 
with HBV but at a rate no higher than the rate of chronicity of acute 
hepatitis  B.  That  is,  although  HDV  co-infection  can  increase  the 
severity of acute hepatitis B, HDV does not increase the likelihood 
of progression to chronic hepatitis B. When, however, HDV super-
infection  occurs  in  a  person  who  is  already  chronically  infected 
with HBV, long-term HDV infection is the rule, and a worsening 
of the liver disease is the expected consequence. Except for severity, 
chronic hepatitis B plus D has similar clinical and laboratory fea-
tures  to  those  seen  in  chronic  hepatitis  B  alone.  Relatively  severe 
and progressive chronic hepatitis, with or without cirrhosis, is the 
rule,  and  mild  chronic  hepatitis  is  the  exception.  Occasionally, 
however,  mild  hepatitis  or  even,  rarely,  inactive  carriage  occurs 
in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  plus  D,  and  the  disease  may 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2602

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systembecome  indolent  after  several  years  of  infection.  A  distinguish-
ing  serologic  feature  of  chronic  hepatitis  D  is  the  presence  in  the 
circulation  of  antibodies  to  liver-kidney  microsomes  (anti-LKM); 
however, the anti-LKM seen in hepatitis D, anti-LKM3, are directed 
against  uridine  diphosphate  glucuronosyltransferase  and  are  dis-
tinct from anti-LKM1 seen in patients with autoimmune hepatitis 
and in a subset of patients with chronic hepatitis C (see below). The 
clinical  and  laboratory  features  of  chronic  HDV  infection  are 
summarized in Chap. 339.

TREATMENT
Chronic Hepatitis D

Management is not well defined, and the host cellular RNA poly-
merase upon which HDV replication depends cannot be targeted 
by conventional antiviral agents. Glucocorticoids are ineffective and 
are  not  used.  Preliminary  experimental  trials  of  IFN-α  suggested 
that  conventional  doses  and  durations  of  therapy  lower  levels  of 
HDV  RNA  and  aminotransferase  activity  only  transiently  during 
treatment but have no impact on the natural history of the disease. 
In contrast, high-dose IFN-α (9 million units three times a week) 
for 12 months was reported to be associated with a sustained loss of 
HDV replication and clinical improvement in up to 50% of patients. 
Moreover, in anecdotal reports, the beneficial impact of treatment 
has been observed to persist for 15 years and to be associated with 
a reduction in grade of hepatic necrosis and inflammation, rever-
sion of advanced fibrosis (improved stage), and clearance of HDV 
RNA in some patients. A suggested approach to therapy has been 
high-dose,  long-term  IFN  for  at  least  a  year  and,  in  responders, 
extension of therapy until HDV RNA and HBsAg clearance; how-
ever, extension of therapy to a second year provided no advantage, 
and sustained responses after completion of therapy have been rare. 
While  standard  IFN-α  is  the  only  approved  drug  for  hepatitis  D, 
PEG IFN has been shown to be more effective but still of limited 
therapeutic value; after 48 weeks of therapy, durable undetectable 
HDV RNA for 24 posttreatment weeks has been reported in a quar-
ter to just over a half of patients. Disappointingly, loss of virologic 
responses (reappearance of HDV RNA) was observed during long-
term (median 4.5 years) monitoring in a majority of 24-week-post-
treatment  responders,  with  durable  HDV  RNA  suppression  to 
undetectable  in  only  12%.  Even  extending  PEG  IFN  therapy  for 
5 years and driving treatment doses up to 270 μg weekly (of PEG 
IFN-α2a),  as  reported  in  a  small  trial  among  13  patients,  while 
achieving serologic, virologic, histologic, biochemical, and clinical 
improvement, yielded sustained virologic responses (SVRs) in only 
3  patients  (58–246  weeks  of  posttreatment  observation).  None  of 
the nucleoside analogue antiviral agents for hepatitis B is effective 
in hepatitis D, and adding oral nucleoside agents to PEG IFN is no 
more effective than PEG IFN monotherapy. While recommended, 
12 months of PEG IFN therapy is far from satisfactory.

Preliminary trials have been performed with an oral prenylation 
inhibitor,  lonafarnib,  and  with  an  inhibitor  of  HBV/HDV  viral 
entry into hepatocytes, myrcludex B. Prenylation, the posttransla-
tional covalent addition of the prenyl lipid farnesyl to large HDV 
antigen,  is  required  for  this  HDV  protein  to  interact  and  form 
secreted  viral  particles  with  HBsAg.  In  14  patients  treated  twice 
daily  for  28  days  with  100  or  200  mg  of  lonafarnib,  HDV  RNA 
fell by 0.73 log10 IU/mL and 1.54 log10 IU/mL, respectively, before 
rebounding  after  completion  of  therapy.  HBV  entry  into  hepato-
cytes  requires  the  binding  of  the  myristolated  N-terminal  pre-S1 
peptide  of  large  HBsAg  to  sodium  taurocholate  co-transporting 
peptide,  the  functional  receptor  for  HBV  into  hepatocytes.  The 
application  of  myrcludex  B,  a  synthetic  homologous  myristolated 
lipopeptide  that  competes  for  binding  with  HBsAg,  was  reported 
in  a  study  of  24  patients  (with  a  baseline  mean  of  4.1–4.2  log10 
copies/mL  of  HDV  RNA)  randomized  to  24  weeks  of  treatment 
with myrcludex B (2 mg daily subcutaneously) as monotherapy or 
combined with PEG IFN compared to PEG IFN alone. A reduction 

2603

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

in  HDV  RNA  occurred  in  all  three  groups,  by  1.67  log10  copies/
mL (in two of eight patients RNA became undetectable), 2.59 log10 
copies/mL (in five of eight patients RNA became undetectable), and 
2.17  log10  copies/mL  (in  two  of  eight  patients  RNA  became  unde-
tectable), respectively. No change occurred, however, in the level of 
HBsAg, which would have been expected. In these two exploratory 
brief-duration  trials,  sustained  responses  were  not  achieved,  and 
toxicities were encountered (e.g., intermittent vomiting and weight 
loss  [lonafarnib]  and  transient  amylase  and  lipase  elevations 
[myrcludex  B]);  however,  from  these  proof-of-principle  trials, 
more  definitive  and  larger-scale  studies  of  efficacy  are  awaited. 
Additional  experimental  approaches  to  the  treatment  of  hepa-
titis  D  include  nucleic  acid  polymer  therapy  to  inhibit  HBsAg 
release,  administered  alone  or  with  PEG  IFN  and/or  nucleoside 
analogues;  so  far,  these  studies  have  been  done  in  one  Eastern 
European site, have yielded some promising reductions in HDV 
RNA and HBsAg, but have been plagued by adverse effects, includ-
ing marked ALT elevations. PEG IFN lambda has also been studied 
in small numbers of patients with hepatitis D; both IFN-associated 
side  effects  and  elevations  of  aminotransferase  and  bilirubin  lev-
els  accompanied  modest  on-treatment  reductions  in  HDV  RNA.   
Follow-up studies in larger numbers of patients have been frustrat-
ingly slow to materialize.

In  patients  with  end-stage  liver  disease  secondary  to  chronic 
hepatitis  D,  liver  transplantation  has  been  effective.  If  hepatitis  D 
recurs  in  the  new  liver  without  the  expression  of  hepatitis  B 
(an unusual serologic profile in immunocompetent persons but 
common  in  transplant  patients),  liver  injury  is  limited.  In  fact, 
the outcome of transplantation for chronic hepatitis D is supe-
rior to that for chronic hepatitis B; in such patients, combination 
HBIG and nucleoside analogue therapy for hepatitis B is indicated 
(Chap. 345).

 ■ CHRONIC HEPATITIS C
Regardless  of  the  epidemiologic  mode  of  acquisition  of  hepatitis  C 
virus  (HCV)  infection,  chronic  hepatitis  follows  acute  hepatitis  C  in 
50−70%  of  cases;  chronic  infection  is  common  even  in  those  with 
a  return  to  normal  in  aminotransferase  levels  after  acute  hepatitis 
C,  adding  up  to  an  85%  likelihood  of  chronic  HCV  infection  after 
acute  hepatitis  C.  Few  clues  had  emerged  to  explain  host  differences 
associated  with  chronic  infection  until  recently,  when  variation  in  a 
single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP)  on  chromosome  19,  IL28B 
(which  codes  for  IFN-λ3,  now  renamed  IFNL3),  was  identified  that 
distinguished  between  responders  and  nonresponders  to  IFN-based 
antiviral  therapy  (see  below).  The  same  variants  correlated  with 
spontaneous  resolution  after  acute  infection:  53%  in  genotype  C/C, 
30% in genotype C/T, but only 23% in genotype T/T. The association 
with HCV clearance after acute infection is even stronger when IL28B 
(IFNL3)  haplotype  is  combined  with  haplotype  G/G  of  a  SNP  near 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II DBQ1*03:01.

In patients with chronic hepatitis C followed for 20 years, progres-
sion to cirrhosis occurs in ~20−25%. Such is the case even for patients 
with relatively clinically mild chronic hepatitis, including those without 
symptoms,  with  only  modest  elevations  of  aminotransferase  activity, 
and  with  mild  chronic  hepatitis  on  liver  biopsy.  Even  in  cohorts  of 
well-compensated patients with chronic hepatitis C referred for clini-
cal research trials (no complications of chronic liver disease and with 
normal  hepatic  synthetic  function),  the  prevalence  of  cirrhosis  may 
be as high as 50%. Most cases of hepatitis C are identified initially in 
asymptomatic patients who have no history of acute hepatitis C (e.g., 
those discovered while attempting to donate blood, while undergoing 
lab  testing  as  part  of  an  application  for  life  insurance,  or  as  a  result 
of  routine  laboratory  tests).  The  source  of  HCV  infection  in  many 
of these cases is not defined, although a long-forgotten percutaneous 
exposure  (e.g.,  injection  drug  use)  in  the  remote  past  can  be  elicited 
in a substantial proportion and probably accounts for most infections; 
most of these infections were acquired in the 1960s and 1970s among 
persons in the 1945–1965 birth cohort (Chap. 339), coming to clinical 
attention decades later.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2603

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2604

Approximately  one-third  of  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  have 
normal or near-normal aminotransferase activity; although one-third to 
one-half of these patients have chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy, the grade 
of liver injury and stage of fibrosis tend to be mild in the vast majority. 
In some cases, more severe liver injury has been reported—even, rarely, 
cirrhosis,  most  likely  the  result  of  previous  histologic  activity.  Among 
patients with persistent normal aminotransferase activity sustained over 
≥5−10 years, histologic progression has been shown to be rare; however, 
approximately  one-fourth  of  patients  with  normal  aminotransferase 
activity  experience  subsequent  aminotransferase  elevations,  and  his-
tologic  injury  can  be  progressive  once  abnormal  biochemical  activity 
resumes. Therefore, continued clinical monitoring and antiviral therapy 
are indicated, even for patients with normal aminotransferase activity.

Despite this substantial rate of progression of chronic hepatitis C and 
even though liver failure can result from end-stage chronic hepatitis C, 
the  long-term  prognosis  over  1–2  decades  for  chronic  hepatitis  C  in 
most  patients  is  relatively  benign.  Mortality  over  10−20  years  among 
patients with transfusion-associated chronic hepatitis C has been shown 
not  to  differ  from  mortality  in  a  matched  population  of  transfused 
patients  in  whom  hepatitis  C  did  not  develop.  Although  death  in  the 
hepatitis group is more likely to result from liver failure and although 
hepatic decompensation may occur in ~15% of such patients over the 
course of a decade, the majority (almost 60%) of patients remain asymp-
tomatic and well compensated, with no clinical sequelae of chronic liver 
disease. Overall, chronic hepatitis C tends to be very slowly and insid-
iously progressive, if at all, in most patients, whereas in approximately 
one-fourth  of  cases,  chronic  hepatitis  C  will  progress  eventually  to 
end-stage cirrhosis. In fact, because HCV infection is so prevalent, and 
because a proportion of patients progress inexorably to end-stage liver 
disease, hepatitis C was the most frequent indication for liver transplan-
tation (Chap. 345) in the era prior to the availability of direct-acting anti-
viral (DAA) therapy (see below). In the United States, hepatitis C accounts 
for up to 40% of all chronic liver disease; as of 2007, mortality caused by 
hepatitis C surpassed that associated with HIV/AIDS, and as of 2012, 
reported deaths caused by hepatitis C surpassed those associated with 
all  other  notifiable  infectious  diseases  (HIV,  tuberculosis,  hepatitis  B, 
and 57 other infectious diseases). Moreover, because the prevalence of 
HCV  infection  is  so  much  higher  in  the  “baby  boomer”  cohort  born 
between  1945  and  1965,  three-quarters  of  the  mortality  associated 
with  hepatitis  C  occurs  in  this  age  cohort.  Referral  bias  may  account 
for the more severe outcomes described in cohorts of patients reported 
from  tertiary  care  centers  (20-year  progression  of  ≥20%)  versus  the 
more  benign  outcomes  in  cohorts  of  patients  monitored  from  initial 
blood-product-associated acute hepatitis or identified in community 
settings (20-year progression of only 4−7%). Still unexplained, how-
ever, are the wide ranges in reported progression to cirrhosis, from 2% 
over 17 years (eventually 19% over 36 years) in a population of Irish 
women with hepatitis C infection acquired from contaminated anti-D 
immune globulin to 30% over ≤11 years in recipients of contaminated 
intravenous immune globulin.

Progression of liver disease in patients with chronic hepatitis C has 
been reported to be more likely in patients with older age, longer dura-
tion of infection, advanced histologic stage and grade, more complex 
HCV quasispecies diversity, increased hepatic iron, concomitant other 
liver disorders (alcoholic liver disease, chronic hepatitis B, hemochro-
matosis, α1 antitrypsin deficiency, and steatohepatitis), HIV infection, 
and  obesity.  Among  these  variables,  however,  duration  of  infection 
appears to be one of the most important, and some of the others prob-
ably reflect disease duration to some extent (e.g., quasispecies diver-
sity,  hepatic  iron  accumulation).  No  other  epidemiologic  or  clinical 
features of chronic hepatitis C (e.g., severity of acute hepatitis, level of 
aminotransferase activity, level of HCV RNA, presence or absence of 
jaundice during acute hepatitis) are predictive of eventual outcome. 
Despite the relatively benign nature of chronic hepatitis C over time 
in  many  patients,  cirrhosis  following  chronic  hepatitis  C  has  been 
associated with the late development, after several decades, of HCC 
(Chap. 82); the annual rate of HCC in cirrhotic patients with hepatitis 
C is 1−4%, occurring primarily in patients who have had HCV infec-
tion for 30 years or more.

Perhaps the best prognostic indicator in chronic hepatitis C is liver 
histology; the rate of hepatic fibrosis may be slow, moderate, or rapid. 
Patients  with  mild  necrosis  and  inflammation  as  well  as  those  with 
limited fibrosis have an excellent prognosis and limited progression to 
cirrhosis. In contrast, among patients with moderate to severe necro-
inflammatory activity or fibrosis, including septal or bridging fibrosis, 
progression to cirrhosis is highly likely over the course of 10−20 years. 
The  pace  of  fibrosis  progression  may  be  accelerated  by  such  factors 
as concomitant HIV infection, other causes of liver disease, excessive 
alcohol use, and hepatic steatosis. Among patients with compensated 
cirrhosis associated with hepatitis C, the 10-year survival rate is close 
to 80%; mortality occurs at a rate of 2−6% per year; decompensation 
at a rate of 4−5% per year; and, as noted above, HCC at a rate of 1−4% 
per year. Estimates of the natural history of chronic hepatitis C have 
been made, based on data available on the prevalence of HCV infec-
tion  in  the  U.S.  population  and  on  the  rate  of  disease  progression. 
Weighted primarily by the concentration of chronic hepatitis C in the 
baby  boomer  generation,  the  peak  prevalence  was  estimated  to  have 
occurred in 2015. The calculated frequency of cirrhosis in U.S. patients 
with hepatitis C was 5% in 1990 and 25% in 2010 and was projected to 
be 37% in 2020. Estimated peak mortality has been predicted to occur 
in 2032. A discussion of the pathogenesis of liver injury in patients 
with chronic hepatitis C appears in Chap. 339.

Clinical features of chronic hepatitis C are similar to those described 
above  for  chronic  hepatitis  B.  Generally,  fatigue  is  the  most  common 
symptom;  jaundice  is  rare.  Immune  complex–mediated  extrahepatic 
complications of chronic hepatitis C are less common than in chronic 
hepatitis B (despite the fact that assays for immune complexes are often 
positive in patients with chronic hepatitis C), with the exception of essen-
tial mixed cryoglobulinemia (Chap. 339), which is linked to cutaneous 
vasculitis  and  membranoproliferative  glomerulonephritis  as  well  as 
lymphoproliferative disorders such as B-cell lymphoma and unexplained 
monoclonal  gammopathy.  In  addition,  chronic  hepatitis  C  has  been 
associated with extrahepatic complications unrelated to immune-com-
plex injury. These include Sjögren’s syndrome, lichen planus, porphyria 
cutanea tarda, renal injury, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and the metabolic 
syndrome (including insulin resistance and steatohepatitis). In addition, 
a  link  has  been  observed  between  HCV  infection  and  cardiovascular/
cerebrovascular disease, rheumatologic/immunologic disorders, mental 
health and cognitive disorders, and nonliver malignancies.

Laboratory  features  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  are  similar  to  those  in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B, but aminotransferase levels tend to 
fluctuate more (the characteristic episodic pattern of aminotransferase 
activity) and to be lower, especially in patients with long-standing dis-
ease. An interesting and occasionally confusing finding in patients with 
chronic hepatitis C is the presence of autoantibodies. Rarely, patients 
with  autoimmune  hepatitis  (see  below)  and  hyperglobulinemia  have 
false-positive immunoassays for anti-HCV. On the other hand, some 
patients with serologically confirmable chronic hepatitis C have circu-
lating anti-LKM. These antibodies are anti-LKM1, as seen in patients 
with autoimmune hepatitis type 2 (see below), and are directed against 
a 33-amino-acid sequence of cytochrome P450 IID6. The occurrence 
of  anti-LKM1  in  some  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  may  result 
from the partial sequence homology between the epitope recognized 
by  anti-LKM1  and  two  segments  of  the  HCV  polyprotein.  In  addi-
tion, the presence of this autoantibody in some patients with chronic 
hepatitis  C  suggests  that  autoimmunity  may  be  playing  a  role  in  the 
pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis C.

Histopathologic features of chronic hepatitis C, especially those that 

distinguish hepatitis C from hepatitis B, are described in Chap. 339.

TREATMENT
Chronic Hepatitis C

Therapy  for  chronic  hepatitis  C  has  evolved  substantially  in  the 
30  years  since  IFN-α  was  introduced  for  this  indication  in  1991. 
The  therapeutic  armamentarium  grew  to  include  PEG  IFN  with 
ribavirin and, then, in 2011, the introduction of the first protease 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2604

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systeminhibitors,  telaprevir  and  boceprevir,  used  in  combination  with 
PEG IFN and ribavirin in patients with HCV genotype 1. The field 
of  antiviral  therapy  for  hepatitis  C  was  transformed  beginning  in 
2013, with the approval of the first nucleoside analogue polymerase 
inhibitor,  sofosbuvir.  Although  several  of  these  combination  regi-
mens have been supplanted by better, later-generation drugs, as of 
2020, five all-oral, highly effective (>95%), low-resistance, pangeno-
typic, well-tolerated, short-duration (primarily 8–12 weeks) combi-
nation regimens of DAA drugs are recommended. The remarkable 
historical evolution of antiviral therapy for hepatitis C is instructive. 
THE INTERFERON ERA (1991–2011)
IFN-based therapy has been supplanted by DAA agents introduced 
in  the  second  decade  of  the  twenty-first  century;  however,  many 
important  lessons  about  antiviral  therapy  for  chronic  hepatitis  C 
were  learned  from  the  experience  with  IFN-based  treatment,  and 
many of the limitations of—and disparities in responsiveness to—
IFN-based  therapy  have  been  overcome  by  current-generation 
DAA  treatments.  Mechanistically,  HCV  proteins  inhibit  several 
steps  of  the  JAK-STAT  signal  transduction  pathway,  and  by  acti-
vation  of  JAK-STAT  signaling,  exogenous  IFN  culminates  in  and 
restores intracellular expression of IFN-stimulated genes and their 
protein products that have antiviral properties.

When  first  approved,  subcutaneous  IFN-α  three  times  a  week 
for  6  months  achieved  an  SVR  (Fig.  341-2)  (defined  then  as  a 
reduction of HCV RNA to PCR-undetectable levels ≥24 weeks after 
completion of therapy) in <10%. Doubling the duration of therapy 
increased  the  SVR  rate  to  ~20%,  and  addition  to  the  regimen  of 
daily  ribavirin  (ineffective  when  used  alone),  an  oral  guanosine 
nucleoside,  increased  the  SVR  rate  to  40%  by  reducing  the  likeli-
hood of virologic relapse after completion of treatment (Fig. 341-2). 
Although  its  mechanism  of  action  remains  poorly  understood, 
ribavirin retains a limited role in supporting DAA agents in several 
subgroups of otherwise refractory patients (see below).

Peginterferon and Ribavirin

Null
Nonresponse
Partial

Undetectable

RVR EVR

l

m
U

/

I

0
1
g
o

l

A
N
R
V
C
H

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Relapse

ETR

SVR

–8 –4 –2

0

4

8 12

16 20 24 32 40 48 52 60 72

Weeks after start of therapy

FIGURE 341-2  Classification of virologic responses based on outcomes during and 
after a 48-week course of pegylated interferon (PEG IFN) plus ribavirin antiviral 
therapy  in  patients  with  hepatitis  C,  genotype  1  or  4  (for  genotype  2  or  3,  the 
course would be 24 weeks). Nonresponders can be classified as null responders 
(hepatitis  C  virus  [HCV]  RNA  reduction  of  <2  log10  IU/mL)  or  partial  responders 
(HCV RNA reduction ≥2 log10 IU/mL but not suppressed to undetectable) by week 24 
of  therapy.  In  responders,  HCV  RNA  can  become  undetectable,  as  shown  with 
sensitive  amplification  assays,  within  4  weeks  (rapid  virologic  response  [RVR]); 
can be  reduced  by  ≥2  log10  IU/mL  within  12  weeks  (early  virologic  response 
[EVR]; if HCV RNA is undetectable at 12 weeks, the designation is “complete” EVR); 
or can be undetectable at the end of therapy, 48 weeks (end-treatment response 
[ETR]). In responders, if HCV RNA remains undetectable for 24 weeks after ETR, week 
72, the patient has a sustained virologic response (SVR), but if HCV RNA becomes 
detectable  again,  the  patient  is  considered  to  have  relapsed.  The  posttreatment 
week-24  SVR  (SVR24)  has  been  supplanted  by  an  SVR  at  week  12  (SVR12),  which 
has been shown to be equivalent to an SVR24. In patients treated with direct-acting 
antiviral therapy, RVR and EVR milestones are largely irrelevant, being met by almost 
all patients. (Reproduced with permission from Marc G. Ghany, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health and the 
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 49:1335, 2009.)

2605

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

Treatment  with  the  combination  of  PEG  IFN  and  ribavirin 
increased SVR rates to 55% overall—to >40% in genotypes 1 and 4, 
requiring 48 weeks of therapy, and to >80% in genotypes 2 and 3, 
requiring  only  24  weeks  of  therapy—and  histologic  improvement 
in approximately three-fourths of patients. After initiation of IFN 
treatment, ALT levels fell precipitously, and up to 90% of virologic 
responses were achieved within the first 12 weeks of therapy. Failure 
to achieve an early virologic response (EVR), a ≥2-log10 reduction in 
HCV RNA by week 12, predicted failure to experience a subsequent 
SVR. Similarly, patients in whom HCV RNA became undetectable 
within 4 weeks (i.e., who achieve a rapid virologic response [RVR]) 
had a very high likelihood of achieving an SVR (Fig. 341-2). Sur-
prisingly,  however,  high-dose  induction  with  IFN-based  therapy 
did not yield higher SVR rates.

Most relapses occurred within the first 12 weeks after treatment, 
and absence of HCV RNA 12 weeks after completion of therapy has 
become the current standard for SVR (SVR12); relapses are very rare 
6 months to a year after SVR and almost unheard of after 2 years. 
Of documented durability decades after successful therapy, an SVR 
to antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C is tantamount to a cure 
and is followed by marked improvements in liver-disease outcomes 
(see below).

Patient variables that correlated with IFN-based SVRs included 
favorable genotype (genotypes 2 and 3 as opposed to genotypes 1 
and 4; genotype 1b as opposed to genotype 1a); low baseline HCV 
RNA  level  (<800,000  IU/mL),  low  HCV  quasispecies  diversity, 
and  histologically  mild  hepatitis  and  minimal  fibrosis,  especially 
absence  of  cirrhosis;  immunocompetence;  low  liver  iron  levels; 
age <40; female gender; and absence of obesity, insulin resistance, 
type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hepatic steatosis. High levels of HCV 
RNA,  more  histologically  advanced  liver  disease,  and  high  HCV 
quasispecies diversity all went hand in hand with advanced dura-
tion of infection and reduced IFN responsiveness. Also associated 
with poor responses to IFN-based therapy were African-American 
ethnicity  (contributed  to,  but  not  explained  entirely  by,  a  higher 
proportion  with  genotype  1,  slower  early  treatment  viral  kinetics, 
impaired  HCV-specific  immunity,  and  host  genetic  differences  in 
IL28B [IFNL3] alleles, described below), Latino ethnicity, and poor 
treatment adherence (<80% of IFN and ribavirin doses and <80% of 
prescribed duration of therapy). Ironically, patients whose disease 
was least likely to progress were the ones most likely to respond to 
IFN and vice versa.

As  described  above  in  the  discussion  of  spontaneous  recovery 
from  acute  hepatitis  C,  IFN  gene  variants  discovered  in  genome-
wide association studies were shown to have a substantial impact on 
IFN responsiveness of patients with genotype 1 to antiviral therapy. 
In studies of patients treated with PEG IFN and ribavirin, variants 
of  the  IL28B  (now  renamed  IFNL3)  SNP  that  code  for  IFN-λ3   
(a type III IFN, the receptors for which are more discretely distrib-
uted  than  IFN-α  receptors  and  more  concentrated  in  hepatocytes) 
correlated significantly with responsiveness. Homozygotes for the C 
allele at this locus (C/C) achieved SVRs of ~80%, heterozygotes (C/T) 
SVRs of ~35%, and homozygotes for the T allele (T/T) SVRs of ~25%.
Side effects of IFN therapy are described in the section on treat-
ment of chronic hepatitis B (see above). Besides ribavirin-associated 
nasal and chest congestion, pruritus, and precipitation of gout, the 
most pronounced ribavirin side effect is hemolysis, often requiring 
dose reduction or addition of erythropoietin therapy (not shown, 
however,  to  increase  the  likelihood  of  an  SVR);  therefore,  close 
monitoring  of  blood  counts  is  crucial,  and  ribavirin  should  be 
avoided  in  patients  with  anemia,  hemoglobinopathies,  coronary 
artery disease or cerebrovascular disease, or renal insufficiency (the 
drug is excreted renally) and in pregnancy (the drug is teratogenic, 
mandating contraception during, and for several months after, ther-
apy in women of child-bearing age [because of their antiprolifera-
tive properties, IFNs also are contraindicated during pregnancy]). 
Overall,  combination  IFN-ribavirin  therapy  was  more  difficult  to 
tolerate  than  IFN  monotherapy  and  more  likely  to  lead  to  dose 
reductions and discontinuation of therapy.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2605

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
2606

Beginning  in  2011,  for  the  treatment  of  hepatitis  C,  standard 
IFNs were supplanted by PEG IFNs, which have substantially longer 
half-lives, permitting administration once (rather than three times) 
a  week.  Once-a-week  PEG  IFN  monotherapy  was  twice  as  effec-
tive as IFN monotherapy, approached the efficacy of combination 
standard IFN plus ribavirin, and was as well tolerated as standard 
IFNs. For most of the decade prior to 2011, when protease inhibi-
tors were introduced for HCV genotype 1 (see below), the standard 
of care was a combination of PEG IFN plus ribavirin for all HCV 
genotypes.

Two  PEG  IFNs  were  available:  PEG  IFN-α2b,  a  12-kD,  linear 
PEG  molecule  bound  to  IFN-α2b,  and  PEG  IFN-α2a,  a  larger, 
40-kD, branched PEG molecule bound to IFN-α2a; because of its 
larger  size  and  smaller  volume  of  extravascular  distribution,  PEG 
IFN-α2a could be given at a uniform dose independent of weight, 
whereas the dose of the smaller PEG IFN-α2b, which has a much 
wider  volume  distribution,  had  to  be  weight-based.  Between  the 
two PEG IFNs, PEG IFN-α2a appeared to be slightly better tolerated 
and slightly more effective than PEG IFN-α2b in registration trials. 
The frequency of an SVR to PEG IFN–ribavirin therapy could be 
increased by tailoring therapy according to baseline variables and 
on-treatment  virologic  responsiveness.  For  example,  in  patients 
with baseline variables weighing against a response (e.g., high HCV 
RNA, obesity), raising the dose of PEG IFN and/or of ribavirin or 
extending therapy to 72 weeks for patients with genotype 1 and a 
slow  virologic  response,  SVR  rates  could  be  improved.  In  contra-
distinction, in the ≤20% of patients with genotype 1 (and 4) who had 
a  4-week  RVR  and  low  baseline  HCV  RNA,  treatment  could  be 
abbreviated to 24 weeks and SVR rates of ~90% achieved.

For most of the decade prior to 2011, when protease inhibitors 
were introduced for HCV genotype 1 (see below), the standard of 
care was a combination of PEG IFN plus ribavirin (unless ribavi-
rin  was  contraindicated)  for  all  HCV  genotypes.  Even  after  the 
introduction of protease inhibitors for genotypes 1 and 4, however, 
PEG IFN–ribavirin remained the standard of care for patients with 
genotypes 2 and 3 until late 2013. Responsiveness to IFN-ribavirin–
based  therapy  was  diminished  in  immunocompromised  patients 
and  in  patients  with  HIV-HCV  co-infection  and  contraindicated 
in  patients  with  decompensated  liver  disease  or  end-stage  renal 
disease.  The  cumbersome  nature  of  IFN-ribavirin–based  therapy 
(injections,  complicated  laboratory  monitoring,  side  effects  and 
poor  tolerability,  modest  efficacy,  variables  and  patient  subsets 
associated with poor responsiveness, tailored therapy, futility rules, 
etc.) was supplanted eventually (in 2016) by DAAs for all genotypes 
(see below). Most of the variables associated with poor responsive-
ness to IFN-based therapy became irrelevant, and difficult-to-treat 
patient  subpopulations  began  to  experience  responses  to  DAAs 
that  were  indistinguishable  from  responses  in  standard  patients 
(see below).

Persons  with  chronic  HCV  infection  suffer  increased  liver- 
related mortality, all-cause mortality, and multiple extrahepatic dis-
orders (see above). On the other hand, successful antiviral therapy 
of chronic hepatitis C resulting in an SVR was shown to improve 
survival (and to reduce the need for liver transplantation); to lower 
the risk of liver failure, liver-related death, and all-cause mortality; 
to slow the progression of chronic hepatitis C; to reverse fibrosis and 
even  cirrhosis;  and  to  improve  such  HCV-associated  extrahepatic 
disorders as type 2 diabetes and renal disease. Whereas the 10- and 
20-year  survival  in  the  absence  of  an  SVR  is  reduced  in  cirrhotic 
patients with chronic hepatitis C, survival at these intervals after an 
SVR has been found to be indistinguishable from that of the gen-
eral population. In cirrhotic patients (and in those with advanced 
fibrosis), although successful treatment reduces mortality and liver 
failure (three- to fourfold 10-year reduction) and reduces the need 
for liver transplantation and the likelihood of HCC (14-fold 10-year 
reduction), the risk of liver-related death and HCC persists, albeit at 
a much reduced level, necessitating continued clinical monitoring 
and cancer surveillance after SVR in cirrhotics. On the other hand, 
in the absence of an SVR, IFN-based therapy does not reduce the 

risk  of  HCC.  Fortunately,  PEG  IFN–ribavirin  nonresponders  can 
now be retreated with DAAs and experience SVR rates comparable 
to those in treatment-naïve persons (see below). 

FIRST-GENERATION PROTEASE INHIBITORS (2011–2013)
The  HCV  RNA  genome  encodes  a  single  polyprotein,  which  is 
cleaved  during  and  after  translation  by  host  and  viral-encoded 
proteases. One protease involved in the cleavage of the viral poly-
protein is an NS3/4A viral protein that has serine protease activity. 
Telaprevir and boceprevir are serine protease inhibitors that target 
NS3/4A.  In  2011,  telaprevir  and  boceprevir  used  in  combination 
with PEG IFN and ribavirin were approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug  Administration  (FDA)  as  the  first  oral  DAA  agents  for  the 
treatment of hepatitis C genotype 1 (not other genotypes) in adults 
with stable liver disease, both in patients who had not been treated 
before and in patients who had failed previous treatment. Although 
now  replaced  by  more  effective,  all-oral  regimens,  these  first-in-
class agents represented a breakthrough in the treatment of chronic 
hepatitis  C  and  established  milestones  against  which  subsequent 
therapies could be measured.

Because resistance developed rapidly during monotherapy with 
telaprevir and boceprevir, these drugs had to be used in combina-
tion with PEG IFN and ribavirin. Ribavirin in particular appeared 
to  reduce  relapse  rates  significantly  in  protease-inhibitor-based 
regimens,  such  that  those  who  could  not  take  or  were  intolerant 
to  ribavirin  were  unlikely  to  benefit  from  the  addition  of  these 
agents.  Telaprevir  and  boceprevir  regimens  consisted  of  periods 
of  triple  therapy  (protease  inhibitor  plus  PEG  IFN  plus  ribavirin) 
and  periods  of  dual  therapy  (PEG  IFN  plus  ribavirin).  Telapre-
vir  regimens  began  with  12  weeks  of  triple  therapy  followed  by 
dual therapy of a duration based on HCV RNA status at weeks 4 
and  12  (“response-guided  therapy”)  and  prior  treatment  status. 
Boceprevir-based regimens consisted of a 4-week lead-in period of 
dual (PEG IFN–ribavirin) therapy followed by triple therapy and, in 
some instances, a further extension of dual therapy, with duration 
of response-guided therapy based on HCV RNA status at weeks 4, 
8, and 24 and prior treatment status.

For patients with HCV genotype 1, protease inhibitors improved 
the frequency of RVRs and SVRs significantly as compared to PEG 
IFN plus ribavirin alone. In treatment-naïve patients, telaprevir-based 
SVRs  were  achieved  in  up  to  79%  of  patients  who  received   
12 weeks of triple therapy followed by 12–36 weeks of dual therapy, 
and among those with EVRs (undetectable HCV RNA at weeks 4 
and 12) and response-guided therapy stopped at week 24 (12 weeks 
of  triple  therapy,  then  12  weeks  of  dual  therapy),  SVRs  occurred 
in 83–92%. In studies with boceprevir in treatment-naïve patients, 
SVRs occurred in 59–66% of patients, and among those with unde-
tectable HCV RNA at 8 weeks, the SVR rate increased to 86–88%. 
Adding to the complexity of treatment with these protease inhibi-
tors were absolute stopping rules for futility, that is, absence of HCV 
RNA reductions at critical treatment milestones, which were shown 
to be invariably predictive of nonresponse (telaprevir: HCV RNA 
>1000 IU/mL at weeks 4 or 12, or detectable at week 24; boceprevir: 
HCV RNA ≥100 IU/mL at week 12, or detectable at week 24).

In patients previously treated unsuccessfully with PEG IFN plus 
ribavirin, telaprevir-based treatment achieved SVRs in 83–88% of 
prior relapsers, 54–59% of partial responders (HCV RNA reduced 
by ≥2 log10 IU/mL but not to undetectable levels), and 29–33% of 
null  responders  (HCV  RNA  reduced  by  <2  log10  IU/mL).  With 
boceprevir, a similar degradation in SVR rate occurred as a func-
tion of prior responsiveness—in 75% of prior relapsers, in 40–52% 
of previous partial responders, and in ~30–40% of null responders. 
In  a  substantial  proportion  of  protease  inhibitor  nonresponders, 
resistance-associated  substitutions  (RASs,  previously  referred  to 
as  resistance-associated  variants  [RAVs])  could  be  identified,  but 
these variants were not archived, and wild-type HCV reemerged in 
almost all cases within 1.5–2 years. SVRs to these protease inhibitors 
were highest in prior relapsers and treatment-naïve patients (white 
> black ethnicity), lower in prior partial responders, lower still in 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2606

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemprior null responders, and lowest in cirrhotic prior null responders, 
for  whom  no  benefit  accrued  over  PEG  IFN–ribavirin  treatment. 
Responses  to  protease  inhibitor  triple-drug  regimens  were  higher 
in  patients  with  IL28B  (IFNL3)  C  than  non-C  genotypes,  HCV 
genotype 1b than genotype 1a, less advanced than more advanced 
fibrosis  stage,  whites  than  blacks,  lower  body  mass  index  (BMI) 
than elevated BMI, and, for boceprevir, achievement of a >1 log10 
HCV RNA reduction during 4 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in 
therapy. Age and HCV RNA level were less influential and insulin 
resistance was noninfluential on response to these antiviral agents.
Both protease inhibitors had substantial toxicities. Telaprevir was 
associated with a severe, generalized (trunk and extremities), often 
confluent, maculopapular, pruritic rash in ~6% of treated patients 
(that required careful dermatologic monitoring in all patients and 
systemic  corticosteroid  therapy  in  the  most  severely  affected). 
Other common side effects included pruritus, rectal burning, nau-
sea,  diarrhea,  fatigue,  dysgeusia  (altered  or  unpleasant  taste),  and 
anemia, which required close monitoring, could be relatively refrac-
tory, and occasionally required transfusion and even hospitalization 
(especially  in  cirrhotic  prior  nonresponders).  Anemia  occurred 
in  half  of  boceprevir-treated  patients,  neutropenia  in  up  to  30%, 
and  thrombocytopenia  in  3–4%.  Other  side  effects  of  boceprevir 
included  fatigue,  nausea,  headache,  dysgeusia,  dry  mouth,  vomit-
ing, and diarrhea.

Both  drugs  came  with  an  inconveniently  high  pill  burden  and 
had to be administered every 8 h with food (telaprevir with a 20-g 
fat  meal).  Use  of  protease  inhibitors  was  further  complicated  by 
numerous drug-drug interactions. As telaprevir and boceprevir are 
both  eliminated  by  and  inhibit  CYP3A4,  these  agents  could  not 
be  administered  with  other  medications  that  induce  CYP3A4  or 
are  dependent  on  CYP3A4  for  elimination.  Care  had  to  be  taken 
to  examine  for  any  potential  interactions  between  these  protease 
inhibitors  and  other  medications  the  patient  was  taking,  and  a 
convenient  website  became  available  to  check  for  such  drug-drug 
interactions (www.hep-druginteractions.org).

Despite the improvement in SVRs with protease-inhibitor-based 
regimens for genotype 1 compared to PEG IFN–ribavirin (e.g., in 
treatment-naïve patients 66–79% vs 38–44%), triple-drug protease 
inhibitor  therapy  was  hampered  by  amplified  intolerability,  the 
complexity of response-guided regimens and futility stopping rules, 
the  inconvenience  of  thrice-daily  dosing  with  meals  and  a  high 
pill burden, the need for PEG IFN injections and ribavirin with all 
their intolerability, and multiple drug-drug interactions. Moreover, 
side effects appeared to be more severe and burdensome once these 
drugs  entered  practice,  especially  in  cirrhotic  nonresponders,  in 
whom studies reported from Europe showed serious adverse events 
in  up  to  45%  and  deaths  in  up  to  3%.  All  these  issues,  as  well  as 
rapidly accelerating progress on next-generation and all-oral DAA 
therapy (see below), conspired to temper enthusiasm for these new 
antivirals; after a brief stint as recommended therapy (2011–2013), 
these  drugs  became  obsolete  and  are  no  longer  recommended  or 
available. 

DIRECT-ACTING ANTIVIRAL COMBINATIONS OF SECOND-
GENERATION PROTEASE INHIBITORS, FIRST-GENERATION 
POLYMERASE INHIBITORS, AND FIRST-GENERATION NS5A 
INHIBITORS (2014–2015)
Since  late  2013,  the  number  of  new  antiviral  agents  for  hepati-
tis  C  has  expanded  substantially,  and  currently,  PEG  IFN–based 
treatments  have  been  supplanted  by  five  remaining  therapeutic 
regimens,  which  are  all  oral,  IFN-free,  highly  efficacious  (>95% 
SVR),  and  well  tolerated,  with  high  barriers  to  resistance,  simple 
dosing, low pill burdens, treatment durations as brief as 8–12 weeks, 
and  pangenotypic  efficacy  (Table  341-6).  These  drugs  are  dis-
tributed  among  three  classes  of  DAAs:  NS3/4  protease  inhibitors 
(which  cleave  the  single  HCV  polyprotein  into  constituent  struc-
tural and nonstructural proteins [drug name ending in “-previr”]), 
NS5B nucleoside and nonnucleoside polymerase inhibitors (which 
interfere  with  the  RNA-dependent  RNA  polymerase  [a  replicase] 

2607

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

involved in synthesis of viral RNA [drug name ending in “-buvir”]), 
and NS5A inhibitors (which interfere with a membrane-associated 
phosphoprotein  essential  to  the  HVC  RNA  replication  complex 
[drug name ending in “-asvir”]).

The first of the new DAA agents (approved in November 2013) 
was simeprevir, a second-generation protease inhibitor for genotype 
1,  followed  shortly  thereafter  (December  2013)  by  sofosbuvir,  a 
pangenotypic  nucleoside  polymerase  inhibitor.  For  genotype  1, 
both  of  these  agents  had  to  be  combined  with  PEG  IFN  and 
ribavirin; for genotypes 2 and 3, sofosbuvir was administered with 
ribavirin,  without  PEG  IFN;  however,  these  treatment  regimens 
have been supplanted by combinations of all-oral, IFN-free DAAs, 
and  ribavirin  is  rarely  needed  and  retained  only  for  very  limited 
indications.

Simeprevir:  When  simeprevir  was  used  with  PEG  IFN,  its  effi-
cacy  (genotype  1b  >  1a)  was  similar  to  that  of  first-generation 
protease  inhibitors  but  required  only  once-a-day  dosing  without 
the  complexity  of  response-guided  therapy.  Similar  to  first-gen-
eration  protease  inhibitors,  simeprevir  was  hampered  by  many 
drug-drug  interactions  and  side  effects  (including  photosensitiv-
ity,  rash,  and  mild  hyperbilirubinemia);  moreover,  patients,  with 
HCV NS3 polymorphism Q80K had markedly reduced drug effi-
cacy,  necessitating  pretreatment  genetic  testing  and  disqualifying 
approximately a third of potential treatment candidates. Little about 
simeprevir  supported  its  adoption  in  combination  with  PEG  IFN 
and  ribavirin.  On  the  other  hand,  the  combination  of  simeprevir   
(150 mg) along with sofosbuvir (400 mg) for 12 weeks was found to 
be effective in treatment-naïve (97% SVR12) or treatment-experienced  
(95% SVR12) patients without cirrhosis and in treatment-naïve (88% 
SVR12) or treatment-refractory (79% SVR12) patients with cirrhosis. 
Like  first-generation  protease  inhibitors,  however,  simeprevir  was 
limited to genotype 1, required pretreatment genotyping that dis-
qualified  a  third  of  recipients,  usually  required  concomitant  PEG 
IFN  and  ribavirin,  had  multiple  drug-drug  interactions  and  side 
effects, and was not competitive with the improved combinations 
that followed; therefore, simeprevir is no longer recommended.

Sofosbuvir:  Sofosbuvir,  the  first  nonprotease  inhibitor  DAA  to 
be  approved,  has  an  excellent  profile—high  potency,  high  barrier 
to resistance, pangenotypic activity, very well tolerated with limited 
adverse effects (most commonly mild fatigue, insomnia, headache, 
and nausea), once-daily oral administration, and relative freedom 
from  major  drug-drug  interactions.  Sofosbuvir  has  efficacy  in  all 
genotypes  (1–6);  in  treatment-naïve  subjects  and  prior  nonre-
sponders to PEG IFN–based and protease-inhibitor-based therapy; 
with PEG IFN–ribavirin or in IFN-free regimens; in combination 
with ribavirin or with NS5A inhibitors (see below); and for treat-
ment periods as brief as 8–12 weeks. Currently, sofosbuvir is used 
in combination with one of two NS5A inhibitors and is a compo-
nent  of  three  of  the  five  currently  recommended  DAA  regimens 
(Table 341-6).

Sofosbuvir-ledipasvir:  The  DAA  combination  that  has  had  a 
dominant role in the treatment of hepatitis C is sofosbuvir (400 mg) 
plus the NS5A inhibitor ledipasvir (90 mg) in a once-a-day, fixed-
dose, single pill, approved in October 2014 for genotype 1 and in 
November 2015 for genotypes 4, 5, and 6. Phase 3 trials were con-
ducted in treatment-naïve noncirrhotic patients, in treatment-naïve 
cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients, and in treatment-experienced 
cirrhotic  and  noncirrhotic  patients  treated  for  8,  12,  or  24  weeks, 
both with and without ribavirin. In treatment-naïve noncirrhotics, 
an SVR12 was achieved in 97–99% of subjects, and no benefit was 
observed  by  extending  therapy  from  12  to  24  weeks  or  by  add-
ing ribavirin. Moreover, for treatment-naïve, noncirrhotic patients 
with baseline HCV RNA <6 × 106 IU/mL, a treatment duration of  
8 weeks was as effective as one of 12 weeks (94–95% SVR12), which 
may  be  a  consideration  for  a  proportion  of  patients.  In  cirrhotic 
patients, SVR12 was achieved in 97–100% of treatment-naïve sub-
jects  (no  advantage  of  extending  therapy  from  12  to  24  weeks  or 
of adding ribavirin); however, for cirrhotic prior nonresponders to 
IFN-based therapy, 12 weeks of therapy was inferior (86% SVR12) 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2607

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2608 TABLE 341-6  Indications and Recommendations for Antiviral Therapy of Chronic Hepatitis Ca

Standard Indications for Therapy
All patients with chronic HCV infection (detectable HCV RNA, with or without 
elevated ALT) except for those with short life expectancies owing to comorbid 
conditions.
Any stage of fibrosis; pretreatment biopsy is no longer embraced and has 
been supplanted by noninvasive measures of fibrosis, e.g., imaging to 
determine liver elasticity.
Responsiveness in groups previously refractory to interferon-based 
therapy (HIV-HCV co-infection, renal insufficiency, African-American and 
Latino ethnicity, IL28B non-C haplotype, obesity, insulin resistance, hepatic 
decompensation, etc.) is not diminished to contemporary direct-acting oral 
combination regimens.
Retreatment Recommended
Relapsers, partial responders, or nonresponders after a previous course 
of interferon-based therapy or prior direct-acting antiviral therapy (see 
genotype-specific recommendations below).
Antiviral Therapy Not Recommended
Pregnancy: No clinical studies of direct-acting antivirals during pregnancy 
are available. Ribavirin is contraindicated during pregnancy; therefore, any 
regimen including ribavirin should not be used. Sofosbuvir; sofosbuvir + 
ledipasvir; and paritaprevir-ritonavir + ombitasvir + dasabuvir are classified 
as pregnancy category B, but the other direct-acting antivirals do not have 
a pregnancy classification. Therefore, these therapies are not indicated 
routinely in pregnancy and should be used, with caution, only if the benefit of 
treatment outweighs the potential for fetal risk.
Therapeutic Regimens (based on AASLD-IDSA recommendations,  
www.hcvguidelines.org)b
The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) recommendations 
diverge slightly from AASLD-IDSA recommendations.c

TREATMENT-NAÏVE OR RELAPSED AFTER PRIOR PEG  
IFN–RIBAVIRIN THERAPY

Genotype 1a and 1b
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks (consider 8 weeks for noncirrhotic  
HIV-negative patients with HCV RNA <6 × 106 IU/mL)
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks (no cirrhosis or cirrhosis sans ELB NS5A 
RASs)
Genotype 2
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
Genotype 3
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks (in cirrhotics, recommended only if 
without baseline NS5A RAS Y93H for velpatasvir)
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks + weight-based ribavirin (in cirrhotics with 
baseline NS5A RAS Y93H for velpatasvir)
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir + voxilaprevir 12 weeks (in cirrhotics with baseline 
NS5A RAS Y93H for velpatasvir)
Genotype 4
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks (12 weeks for HIV co-infection)
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks (consider 8 weeks for noncirrhotic HIV-
negative patients with HCV RNA <6 × 10 6 IU/mL)
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks
Genotypes 5, 6
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks (except for genotype 6e)

FAILED PRIOR PEG IFN/RIBAVIRIN THERAPY, NO CIRRHOSISd
Genotype 1a and 1b
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks (without ELB NS5A RASs)
Genotype 2
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
Genotype 3
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks (for patients without baseline NS5A RAS Y93H for 
velpatasvir)
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 16 weeks
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir + voxilaprevir 12 weeks for patients with baseline NS5A RAS 
Y93H for velpatasvir
Genotype 4
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks (for prior relapse)
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks
Genotypes 5, 6
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 8 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks 

FAILED PRIOR PEG IFN–RIBAVIRIN THERAPY, COMPENSATED CIRRHOSISd

Genotype 1a
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 12 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks (without ELB NS5A RASs)
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir + RBV 12 weeks
Genotype 1b
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 12 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir + RBV 12 weeks
Genotype 2
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 12 weeks
Genotype 3
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir + voxilaprevir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 16 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir + RBV 12 weeks
Genotype 4
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 12 weeks
grazoprevir + elbasvir 12 weeks (for prior relapse)
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks
Genotypes 5, 6
sofosbuvir + velpatasvir 12 weeks
glecaprevir + pibrentasvir 12 weeks
ledipasvir + sofosbuvir 12 weeks

FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH REDUCED RESPONSIVENESS TO DIRECT-ACTING 
ANTIVIRAL COMBINATION THERAPY
Genotype and subtype (genotype 1a less responsive than genotype 1b for several drugs)
Treatment experience
Advanced fibrosis (bridging fibrosis, cirrhosis)
Reduced adherence

(Continued)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2608

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
 
2609

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

TABLE 341-6  Indications and Recommendations for Antiviral Therapy of Chronic Hepatitis Ca (Continued)
aRapidly evolving new recommendations continue to be issued; for up-to-date treatment recommendations, please see www.hcvguidelines.org. bFor treatment-naïve 
patients, simplified treatment regimen recommendations are in bold font (based on broad applicability, pangenotypic coverage, and simplicity). For treatment-experienced 
patients, recommended regimens are in bold font, and alternative regimens are in standard font. cThe following EASL recommendations differ from those of AASLD-IDSA:
Genotype 1
For genotype 1a, noncirrhotic, prior IFN/RBV nonresponders, sofosbuvir + ledipasvir is not recommended.
For genotype 1b, treatment-naïve or -experienced patients, EASL retains paritaprevir/ritonavir + ombitasvir + dasabuvir for 12 weeks (for 8 weeks in patients with stage 
F0–F2 fibrosis).
For genotype 1b, noncirrhotic, treatment-naïve or -experienced patients with stage F0–F2 fibrosis, the recommended duration of grazoprevir + elbasvir is 8 weeks.
Genotype 3
For cirrhotic, treatment-naïve or -experienced patients (IFN-based regimen failures), sofosbuvir + velpatasvir is not recommended. For noncirrhotic patients with genotype 3, 
sofosbuvir + ledipasvir + voxilaprevir is not recommended.
Genotype 4
For genotype 4, prior IFN/RBV nonresponders, sofosbuvir + ledipasvir is not recommended. In treatment-naïve noncirrhotics, shorter duration (8 weeks) is not recommended 
for patients with HCV RNA ≤6 × 106 IU/mL.
dFor nonresponders to prior direct-acting antiviral therapy (protease, polymerase, or NS5A inhibitors) and for decompensated cirrhosis, please consult www.hcvguidelines 
.org.
Abbreviations: AASLD, American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; ELB NS5A RASs, elbasvir NS5A resistance-associated 
substitutions; HCV, hepatitis C virus; IFN, interferon; IDSA, Infectious Diseases Society of America; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; IU, international units (1 IU/mL is 
equivalent to ~2.5 copies/mL); RASs, resistance-associated substitutions; RBV, ribavirin.

to 24 weeks of therapy (100% SVR12). This combination, which is 
equally  effective  in  patients  with  HIV-HCV  co-infection  and  in 
African-American patients, has been shown to be highly effective 
in  patients  with  decompensated  cirrhosis  and  in  patients  with   
hepatitis  C  after  liver  transplantation  and  after  kidney  trans-
plantation.  Initially,  sofosbuvir-ledipasvir  was  not  recommended 
in  patients  with  advanced  renal  failure;  however,  subsequently, 
the  safety  and  efficacy  of  sofosbuvir-ledipasvir  in  patients  with 
advanced renal failure were established, and the DAA was approved 
for this indication (November 2019). All sofosbuvir-containing reg-
imens  can  be  associated  with  severe  bradycardia  in  patients  taking 
the  antiarrhythmic  agent  amiodarone,  especially  along  with  beta 
blockers;  sofosbuvir-containing  combinations  are  contraindicated 
with amiodarone. Drug-drug interactions are few, but P-glycoprotein 
inducers,  such  as  St.  John’s  wort  and  rifampin,  and  proton  pump 
gastric  acid  inhibitors,  such  as  omeprazole,  may  reduce  sofosbu-
vir-ledipasvir concentrations. Generally, responsiveness to sofosbu-
vir-ledipasvir is not reduced in patients with baseline RASs to these 
agents,  with  the  exception  of  treatment-experienced  patients  who 
have baseline NS5A RASs (see Table 341-6).

Paritaprevir-ritonavir,  ombitasvir,  and  dasabuvir:  The  combi-
nation  of  ritonavir  (100  mg)–boosted  paritaprevir  (150  mg),  a 
protease  inhibitor;  ombitasvir  (25  mg),  an  NS5A  inhibitor;  and 
dasabuvir (250 mg), a nonnucleoside polymerase inhibitor, with or 
without weight-based ribavirin (total of five drugs), was approved 
in December 2014 for genotypes 1 and 4. Paritaprevir-ritonavir and 
ombitasvir, formulated in a single tablet, are taken once daily, and 
both dasabuvir (a separate pill) and weight-based ribavirin (when 
included in the regimen) are taken twice daily. In clinical trials, this 
combination achieved SVR12 rates of 87–100% in treatment-naïve 
and  treatment-experienced  patients  with  genotype  1;  without 
ribavirin, this combination in genotype 1a was ~7% less responsive 
than  in  genotype  1b.  Therefore,  in  treatment-naïve  patients  with 
genotype 1a, this combination was administered with ribavirin for 
12 weeks in the absence of cirrhosis (95–97% SVR12) or for 24 weeks 
in  the  presence  of  compensated  cirrhosis  (94%  SVR12),  whereas 
in  patients  with  genotype  1b,  the  combination  did  not  require 
ribavirin, and the duration of therapy was 12 weeks for both non-
cirrhotics and cirrhotics (99–100% SVR12). In prior nonresponders 
without cirrhosis, the combination was administered for 12 weeks, 
with ribavirin in genotype 1a (96% SVR12) and without ribavirin in 
genotype 1b (100% SVR12). In prior nonresponders with cirrhosis, 
the  combination  was  administered  for  24  weeks  with  ribavirin  in 
genotype 1a (SVR12 100% in prior relapsers and partial responders, 
95% in prior null responders [in whom treatment without ribavirin 
was associated with an 80% SVR12]), but only for 12 weeks and with-
out ribavirin in genotype 1b (100% SVR12). For genotype 4, the regi-
men was given for 12 weeks with ribavirin but without dasabuvir in 

treatment-naïve and treatment-experienced patients (100% SVR12), 
including those with compensated cirrhosis. In July 2016, the FDA 
approved a long-acting formulation of dasabuvir, allowing once-a-
day instead of twice-a-day treatment; for genotype 1a, twice-daily 
ribavirin dosing remained.

This  combination  was  well  tolerated  with  generally  mild  side 
effects,  for  example,  fatigue,  asthenia,  insomnia,  headache,  and 
pruritus. Hyperbilirubinemia (primarily unconjugated) and eleva-
tions in alanine aminotransferase activity could occur but resolved 
during or shortly after treatment. Because of occasional hyperbil-
irubinemia and potential hepatotoxicity (FDA warning letter issued 
October  2015  regarding  hepatic  failure/decompensation  reported 
in treated cirrhotic patients), this combination (and all subsequently 
introduced  protease-inhibitor-containing  combinations)  was  con-
traindicated in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, and treated 
cirrhotic  patients  had  be  monitored  closely  for  decompensation; 
however,  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  this  combination  was  demon-
strated  for  patients  with  advanced  renal  insufficiency.  Similar  to 
other  regimens  containing  protease  inhibitors,  drug-drug  inter-
actions are common with other drugs that induce CYP3A4 or are 
dependent  on  CYP3A4  for  elimination.  Checking  for  potential 
drug-drug  interactions  was  important  prior  to  initiating  ther-
apy  with  this  drug  combination  (www.hep-druginteractions.org). 
Responsiveness  to  this  multidrug  regimen  was  not  reduced  in 
patients with baseline RASs to these agents.

Compared to sofosbuvir-ledipasvir, this regimen had the disad-
vantage of requiring twice-a-day ribavirin therapy for genotype 1a 
and of being contraindicated in decompensated cirrhosis; however, 
it had the advantage of offering a 12-week, ribavirin-free regimen 
for prior null responders with cirrhosis and providing an option for 
patients with renal failure. Based on regimen simplicity and supe-
riority,  subsequent-generation,  ribavirin-free  combination  DAAs 
have  supplanted  paritaprevir-ritonavir,  ombitasvir,  and  dasabuvir; 
this  regimen  is  no  longer  recommended  at  all  by  the  AASLD; 
however, it is retained in EASL recommendations as an alternative 
regimen for genotype 1b only.

Sofosbuvir and daclatasvir: Daclatasvir, an NS5A inhibitor, along 
with the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir, was approved by the FDA 
in July 2015 for genotype 3 and in February 2016 for genotype 1. 
At the time of its approval for genotype 3, daclatasvir filled a need 
inadequately  met  by  other  available  combination  DAAs;  how-
ever, eventually, recommendation of this combination regimen was 
extended to genotypes 1–4 in the United States and to all genotypes 
(1–6) in Europe. Daclatasvir, a 60-mg tablet, and sofosbuvir, a sepa-
rate 400-mg tablet, were taken once a day for 12–24 weeks.

In clinical trials among treatment-naïve or treatment-experienced 
patients, SVR12 rates for 12 weeks of daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir were 
98%  for  genotype  1  (comparable  results  in  genotypes  1a  and  1b), 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2609

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2610

92%  for  genotype  2,  and  89%  for  genotype  3.  For  noncirrhotic 
patients,  the  addition  of  ribavirin  or  the  extension  of  therapy  to 
24  weeks  did  not  improve  efficacy.  In  patients  with  compensated 
cirrhosis,  limited  prospective  data  and  data  from  observational 
cohorts suggested that extending therapy to 24 weeks, with or with-
out ribavirin, improved efficacy. In cirrhotics, SVR12 was achieved 
in 93% with Child-Pugh class A and B but in only 56% with class C 
decompensated cirrhosis. For patients with genotype 3 and cirrhosis, 
the combination was effective in treatment-naïve patients (94% SVR12) 
but  less  so  in  prior  nonresponders  (69%  SVR12).  Outcomes  in 
patients with HIV-HCV co-infection were comparable.

Like other sofosbuvir–NS5A inhibitor combinations, daclatasvir 
plus sofosbuvir was well tolerated (mild fatigue, headache, nausea, 
or  diarrhea  in  5–14%)  but  could  cause  severe  bradycardia  when 
administered  with  amiodarone  (contraindicated),  especially  along 
with  beta  blockers.  Because  daclatasvir  is  a  substrate  for  CYP3A, 
CYP3A inducers can reduce daclatasvir levels, and CYP3A inhib-
itors  reduce  daclatasvir  levels.  Similarly,  daclatasvir,  an  inhibitor 
of  P-glycoprotein,  OATP1B1  and  OATP1B3,  and  breast  cancer 
resistance  protein  (BCRP),  can  increase  the  levels  of  drugs  that 
are substrates of these transporters. Responsiveness to daclatasvir-
containing  drug  combination  therapy  was  reduced  in  cirrhotic 
patients  with  genotype  1a  and  in  both  cirrhotic  and  noncirrhotic 
patients  with  genotype  3  who  had  baseline  daclatasvir-associated 
NS5A RASs.

As  new  combination  DAAs  were 

introduced,  however, 
daclatasvir-sofosbuvir  was  less  competitive  and  no  longer  filled  a 
niche; it has been supplanted by better, later-generation combina-
tion DAAs and is no longer recommended. 

DIRECT-ACTING ANTIVIRAL COMBINATIONS OF THIRD-
GENERATION PROTEASE INHIBITORS AND SECOND-
GENERATION NS5A INHIBITORS (2016)
Elbasvir-grazoprevir:  Elbasvir  (50  mg),  an  NS5A  inhibitor,  com-
bined  in  a  single,  fixed-dose  pill  with  grazoprevir  (100  mg),  an 
NS3/4  protease  inhibitor,  was  approved  in  January  2016  as  a 
once-a-day  (with  or  without  food)  treatment  for  genotypes  1 
and  4.  In  clinical  trials,  a  12-week  course  was  effective  in  treat-
ment-naïve  and  treatment-experienced  patients  without  cirrhosis 
or  with  compensated  cirrhosis.  In  treatment-naïve  patients,  this 
combination  yielded  an  SVR12  in  92%  of  patients  with  genotype 
1a, 99% with genotype 1b, and 100% with genotype 4 (very small 
numbers,  however);  10  patients  with  genotype  6  were  included, 
but only 80% achieved SVR12. Cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients 
had comparable rates of SVR12, 97% and 94%, respectively. For this 
drug  combination,  however,  ~11%  of  patients  with  genotype  1a 
harbor NS5A polymorphisms, that is, RASs, at baseline. If present, 
these  NS5A  RASs  reduce  efficacy  of  elbasvir-grazoprevir  (unlike 
baseline  RASs  to  most  of  the  other  combination  DAA  regimens 
described  above  and  below)  from  99  to  58%  in  treatment-naïve 
patients.  Therefore,  all  patients  with  genotype  1a  require  baseline 
RAS testing; when these RASs were present, treatment extension to  
16  weeks  and  the  addition  of  weight-based  ribavirin  were  docu-
mented to bring SVR12 rates up to expected levels of close to 100%. 
In  treatment-experienced  patients,  both  extending  treatment  to 
16 weeks and adding ribavirin were studied; however, generally, in 
the absence of baseline NS5A RASs, SVR12 rates were not increased 
over those without ribavirin for 12 weeks (94–97%). For genotype 
1a, among prior nonresponders to PEG IFN–ribavirin, 12 weeks of 
elbasvir-grazoprevir  sufficed  without  ribavirin  except  for  patients 
with baseline NS5A RASs, who required 16 weeks of therapy and 
ribavirin.  Among  nonresponders  to  prior  protease  inhibitor  ther-
apy, even in the absence of baseline NS5A RASs, ribavirin had to 
be added to a 12-week regimen; in the presence of baseline NS5A 
RASs, treatment was extended to 16 weeks and ribavirin added. For 
genotype 1b, NS5A RASs are not an issue, and the only subgroup 
requiring modification of a 12-week course of therapy were prior 
nonresponders to protease inhibitor regimens, for whom ribavirin 
was added. For genotype 4, the recommended regimen for all prior 

nonresponders (whether to PEG IFN–ribavirin or protease inhib-
itor regimens) was 16 weeks of elbasvir-grazoprevir plus ribavirin. 
Now  that  simpler,  improved  combination  regimens  are  available, 
for  patients  with  NS5A  RASs,  extending  the  duration  of  elbasvir- 
grazoprevir and adding ribavirin have been abandoned (Table 341-6); 
however,  elbasvir-grazoprevir  is  one  of  the  currently  recommended 
DAA combinations (Table 341-6).

This combination is just as effective in patients with HIV-HCV 
co-infection and in patients with advanced renal failure (including 
those  requiring  hemodialysis),  but  like  all  protease-inhibitor- 
including DAA combinations, it is contraindicated in decompensated 
cirrhosis. In this vein, like other protease inhibitor regimens, elbasvir- 
grazoprevir  can  be  associated  with  aminotransferase  elevations 
and  potential  hepatotoxicity;  because  these  drugs  are  excreted  by 
the  liver,  plasma  drug  concentrations  may  become  elevated  sub-
stantially in the presence of impaired hepatic function. Therefore, 
all treated patients should have ALT screening periodically during 
therapy,  and  the  drug  should  be  stopped  for  elevations  exceeding 
tenfold  or  for  elevations  of  conjugated  bilirubin,  alkaline  phos-
phatase, or prothrombin time.

Elbasvir-grazoprevir  is  well  tolerated,  with  only  low  levels  of 
mild adverse effects (fatigue, headache, or nausea in 5–11%) seen 
just as frequently in placebo recipients. Both elbasvir and grazopre-
vir are substrates for CYP3A and are subject to multiple potential 
drug-drug  interactions.  Therefore,  this  combination  should  not 
be  used  with  potent  CYP3A  inducers;  conversely,  CYP3A  and 
OATP1B1  inhibitors  can  lead  to  untoward  elevations  of  plasma 
elbasvir-grazoprevir  concentrations.  Checking  for  potential  drug-
drug  interactions  is  advisable  prior  to  initiating  therapy  (www 
.hep-druginteractions.org).

Compared  to  other  available  regimens  for  genotypes  1  and  4, 
elbasvir-grazoprevir has the disadvantage/inconvenience of requir-
ing baseline NS5A RAS testing but the advantages of a comparable 
regimen for cirrhotics and noncirrhotics, for treatment-naïve and 
treatment-experienced patients, and for patients with normal renal 
function and with renal failure.

Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir:  The  combination  in  a  single,  fixed-dose 
pill  of  velpatasvir  (100  mg),  a  highly  potent,  pangenotypic  NS5A 
inhibitor,  and  the  polymerase  inhibitor  sofosbuvir  (400  mg)  was 
approved  in  June  2016  for  genotypes  1–6  in  treatment-naïve  and 
treatment-experienced  noncirrhotics  and  cirrhotics.  In  August 
2017,  approval  was  extended  to  include  patients  with  HCV-HIV 
co-infection.  Ribavirin  is  not  required,  including  in  patients  with 
genotypes 2 and 3, except in patients with decompensated cirrhosis.
In  a  series  of  clinical  trials,  this  combination  for  12  weeks  in 
the  absence  of  ribavirin  was  shown  to  yield  a  99%  SVR12  (range 
97–100%)  in  genotypes  1,  2,  4,  5,  and  6  and  95%  in  genotype  3. 
Baseline NS5A RASs had no impact on responsiveness.

Prior to the availability of this drug combination, patients with 
genotype 3, especially those with cirrhosis and prior null response 
to  other  therapies,  proved  to  be  the  most  refractory  subset  of 
patients.  In  treatment-naïve  patients  with  genotype  3,  12  weeks 
of  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir  (95%  SVR12)  was  superior  to  24  weeks 
of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (80% SVR12). In patients with geno-
type  3,  the  combination  of  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir  for  12  weeks 
was  comparable  in  noncirrhotics  (97%  SVR12)  and  cirrhotics   
(91%  SVR12)  and  in  treatment-naïve  (97%  SVR12)  and  treatment-
experienced  (90%  SVR12)  patients  and  was  superior  in  all  these 
categories to 24 weeks of sofosbuvir plus ribavirin (87%, 66%, 86%, 
and  63%,  respectively).  In  cirrhotic  null  responders,  most  avail-
able IFN-free regimens for genotype 3 (including daclatasvir plus 
sofosbuvir, which had been approved specifically for this genotype) 
achieved SVR12 rates in the range of ~60–75%, while the combina-
tion of PEG IFN, ribavirin, and sofosbuvir could boost SVR12 to the 
mid-80% range. For treatment-experienced patients with genotype 
3, sofosbuvir-velpatasvir in noncirrhotics and cirrhotics had simi-
larly high efficacy (91% and 89% SVR12, respectively); this was the 
highest  recorded  SVR12  for  genotype  3  cirrhotic  null  responders 
treated  with  IFN-free  DAA  regimens.  Finally,  in  patients  with 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2610

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemgenotypes  1–4  and  6  and  with  decompensated,  class  B  cirrhosis 
(55% treatment-experienced), sofosbuvir-velpatasvir plus ribavirin 
for 12 weeks yielded an SVR12 in 94%; this result was better than 
sofosbuvir-velpatasvir without ribavirin for 12 weeks (83% SVR12) 
or 24 weeks (86% SVR12).

Like  other  all-oral  DAAs,  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir  was  very  well 
tolerated; in noncirrhotic and compensated cirrhotic patients, mild 
headache and fatigue were seen in >10% (this occurred in a com-
parable  proportion  of  placebo  recipients),  and  in  patients  with 
decompensated  cirrhosis,  mild  fatigue,  headache,  nausea,  insom-
nia, diarrhea, and anemia (ribavirin was part of the regimen) were 
seen in >10%. Like other sofosbuvir-containing regimens, sofosbu-
vir-velpatasvir should not be administered along with amiodarone 
(potential serious bradycardia); in addition, P-glycoprotein inducers 
and moderate-to-potent CYP3A inducers can reduce plasma levels 
of  sofosbuvir  and/or  velpatasvir.  Checking  for  drug-drug  interac-
tions prior to therapy is advisable (www.hep-druginteractions.org). 
Baseline RASs do not influence responsiveness to this combination. 
Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir is one of the currently recommended DAA 
combinations  for  hepatitis  C  (Table  341-6).  Because  it is so simple 
and  broadly  effective  across  patient  subgroups,  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir 
is  one  of  the  two  combination  DAA  regimens  recommended  by  the 
AASLD  and  EASL  as  a  preferred,  simplified  treatment  algorithm 
(Table 341-6). 

DIRECT-ACTING ANTIVIRAL COMBINATIONS OF 
THIRD-GENERATION NS5A INHIBITORS AND FOURTH-
GENERATION PROTEASE INHIBITORS—CURRENT 
STANDARD OF CARE (SINCE 2017)
Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir:  Approved  in  July  2017,  the 
pangenotypic,  high-barrier-to-resistance  protease  inhibitor  vox-
ilaprevir  (100  mg)  added  to  the  polymerase  inhibitor–NS5A 
inhibitor  combination  of  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir  yields  a  very 
well-tolerated triple-drug combination with ~97% SVR12 across all 
HCV  genotypes  and  patient  subgroups.  These  include  the  small 
percentage of patients with genotype 1 and genotype 3 refractory 
to previously approved DAA combinations as well as noncirrhotic/
cirrhotic,  treatment-naïve/treatment-experienced  groups,  includ-
ing those who had or who had not received prior NS5A treatment. 
Efficacy was independent of the number of prior DAA drug classes 
received, and no effects of baseline NS5A RASs were noted.

The  potential  for  abbreviated  (8-week)  treatment  with  this 
triple  combination  was  explored  in  a  clinical  trial  involving 
treatment-naïve  patients;  however,  the  shortened  duration  was 
inferior to a full 12-week course. The side effect profile for sofosbu-
vir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir was similar to that in the placebo arm of 
clinical trial patients and included mild and uncommon headache, 
fatigue, nausea, and diarrhea.

Because  other  DAA  regimens  are  so  effective  in  most  patients 
with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  recommendations  for  sofosbuvir-vel-
patasvir-voxilaprevir are limited to a small subset of otherwise refractory 
patients:  for  treatment-naïve  cirrhotic  patients  with  genotype  3  and 
baseline NS5A velpatasvir RAS Y93H, for treatment-naïve (according 
to AASLD, not EASL) or IFN-ribavirin–experienced noncirrhotic or 
cirrhosis patients with genotype 3 (Table 341-6), and for patients with 
or without compensated cirrhosis and prior, failed NS5A inhibitor–
containing therapy (consult www.hcvguidelines.org).

This  triple-drug  combination,  like  all  sofosbuvir-containing 
combinations,  is  contraindicated  in  patients  taking  amiodarone 
and, like all protease inhibitor-containing combinations, in patients 
with  decompensated  cirrhosis.  Concomitant  omeprazole,  20  mg, 
can be taken with this sofosbuvir-containing regimen. Prior to initi-
ating therapy, checking for drug-drug interactions is recommended.
Glecaprevir-pibrentasvir: A regimen of 8 weeks of this single-pill, 
fixed-dose  combination  of  the  protease  inhibitor  glecaprevir   
(300 mg) and NS5A inhibitor pibrentasvir (120 mg), two pangeno-
typic, high-potency DAAs with high barriers to resistance (approved 
in August 2017), achieves SVR12 in close to 100% of treatment-naïve 
patients  with  all  genotypes,  with  or  without  cirrhosis:  SVR12  of 

2611

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

~99% for genotypes 1, 2, and 4–6 and of 95–98% for genotype 3. 
Extended treatment for 12 weeks did not increase efficacy. In trials 
among treatment-experienced patients, treatment with 12 weeks of 
this DAA combination was just as effective as 16 weeks for all geno-
types except genotype 3; however, with increasing numbers of prior 
treatment courses, SVR12 rates fell—100% for patients treated with 
a  protease  inhibitor  only,  88%  for  patients  treated  with  an  NS5A 
inhibitor only, and 79% for patients treated previously with both a 
protease inhibitor and an NS5A inhibitor. Similarly, baseline RASs 
reduced  SVR12  rates—from  100%  without  RASs  (or  with  RASs 
limited to those reflecting protease inhibitor resistance) to 89% for 
baseline NS5A RASs.

For  retreatment  of  patients  with  prior  glecaprevir-pibrentasvir 
failure,  16  weeks  of  glecaprevir-pibrentasvir  plus  sofosbuvir  are 
recommended  (alternatively,  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir 
for  12  weeks  [+  ribavirin  in  cirrhotics]).  Glecaprevir-pibrentasvir 
for  16  weeks  is  recommended  as  well  after  failure  to  respond  to 
the  triple-drug  combination  of  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir   
(see  below).  For  retreatment  of  patients  with  sofosbuvir- 
velpatasvir-voxilaprevir failure, 16 weeks of glecaprevir-pibrentasvir 
plus  ribavirin  is  recommended,  as  is  a  repeat  course  of  sofosbuvir- 
velpatasvir-voxilaprevir plus ribavirin for 24 weeks.

As is the case for any DAA combination containing a protease 
inhibitor,  glecaprevir-pibrentasvir  is  contraindicated  in  decom-
pensated cirrhosis; it has been shown to achieve an SVR12 in 98% 
of  patients  with  stage  4  or  5  renal  disease  (in  treatment-naïve  or 
experienced, cirrhotic or noncirrhotic patients) and is a preferred 
treatment  for  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment.  This  DAA 
combination should be taken with food, and drug-drug interactions 
should be considered prior to initiating treatment. Because it is so 
simple and broadly effective across patient subgroups (8 weeks for all 
noncirrhotic treatment-naïve patients except patients with HIV co-in-
fection [12 weeks]; 12 weeks for all treatment-experienced cirrhotics 
and  treatment-naïve  cirrhotics  with  genotype  3  [except  treatment-
experienced  cirrhotic  or  noncirrhotic  genotype  3  (16  weeks)]),   
glecaprevir-pibrentasvir is one of the two combination DAA regimens 
recommended  by  the  AASLD  and  EASL  as  a  preferred,  simplified 
treatment algorithm (Table 341-6).

Emerging  data  on  the  impact  of  DAAs  on  the  natural  history 
of chronic hepatitis C indicated that, as was documented for IFN-
based therapy, successful DAA therapy is associated with a gradual 
reduction  in  fibrosis  progression  and  a  regression  of  advanced 
fibrosis  (cirrhosis),  improvement  in  survival  among  patients  with 
decompensated  cirrhosis,  a  reduction  in  HCC,  and  a  decline  in 
the  number  of  patients  with  hepatitis  C  being  referred  for  liver 
transplantation. Early observations purported to show an increase 
in  HCC  after  a  DAA-associated  SVR  for  chronic  hepatitis  C.  On 
the contrary, HCC rates are reduced dramatically and consistently 
after successful DAA therapy. Ultimately, the initial observation was 
attributed to a cohort bias resulting from the application of simple-
to-use DAA therapy to an older and sicker population with more 
advanced chronic hepatitis C (including decompensated cirrhosis); 
this cohort effect explains why the baseline risk for HCC was higher 
in DAA-treated patients than it had been when IFN-based therapy 
was withheld from such patients. Thus, the increased risk in HCC 
cases was not linked to DAA treatment but to more advanced liver 
disease  at  baseline  in  patients  treated  with  DAAs.  The  reports  of 
HCC  after  DAA  therapy  drive  home  the  residual  HCC  risk  after 
SVR  in  patients  with  cirrhosis  (advanced  hepatic  fibrosis)  treated 
either  in  the  IFN  or  DAA  era;  therefore,  continued  HCC  sur-
veillance  after  therapy  is  recommended  for  anyone  with  baseline 
advanced fibrosis prior to therapy.

Based  on  the  known  prevalence,  natural  history,  and  rate  of 
progression of chronic hepatitis C and on the efficacy of DAA ther-
apies and their impact on the complications of hepatitis C, modeling 
estimates have suggested that the availability and application of these 
therapies have the potential to reduce the hepatitis C–associated dis-
ease burden, including liver-related death, HCC, decompensated cir-
rhosis, and liver transplantation, by 50–70% between 2015 and 2050. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2611

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2612

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
Because the pace of new drug development and approval has been 
so rapid, the AASLD and the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
(IDSA)  have  been  providing  a  consensus  of  updated  treatment 
recommendations  for  patients  with  hepatitis  C;  these  recommen-
dations,  which  continue  to  be  revised  regularly  based  on  new 
data,  are  available  online  at  www.hcvguidelines.org  and  should  be 
consulted before initiating therapy (Table 341-6). The EASL issues 
similar  (but  not  identical)  treatment  recommendations  annually 
for  hepatitis  C  (www.easl.eu),  most  recently  in  November  2020. 
Divergences  between  AASLD-IDSA  and  EASL  recommendations 
are noted in Table 341-6.

Prior to therapy, HCV genotype should be determined, because 
the genotype contributes to decisions about which treatment regi-
mens are indicated (Table 341-6). Monitoring of serum HCV RNA 
levels  before,  during,  and  after  treatment  is  crucial  in  assessing 
response to therapy; moreover, the baseline level may contribute to 
determining the duration of therapy (e.g., in noncirrhotic patients 
with genotype 1 and HCV RNA <6 × 106 IU/mL, 8 [instead of the 
usual  12]  weeks  of  sofosbuvir-ledipasvir  may  be  a  consideration). 
The  goal  of  treatment  is  to  eradicate  HCV  RNA  during  therapy 
and  to  document  that  the  virus  remains  undetectable  for  at  least 
12 weeks after completion of therapy (SVR12). Several reports have 
appeared  describing  hepatitis  B  reactivation,  often  severe,  during 
and after DAA therapy in patients co-infected with HCV and HBV 
who  were  not  being  treated  for  their  HBV  infections.  Therefore, 
screening  for  HBV  infection  is  recommended  prior  to  initiating 
DAA  therapy  for  hepatitis  C  (which  should  have  been  done  to 
determine  HBV  immunity  status  as  a  prelude  to  recommended 
hepatitis  B  vaccination  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C),  and 
therapy for HBV infection (for those meeting HBV treatment cri-
teria, see above) should be initiated prior to or simultaneously with 
HCV therapy.

Because  of  their  high  efficacy  and  pangenotypic  range,  two 
DAA regimens, glecaprevir-pibrentasvir (8 weeks) and sofosbuvir- 
velpatasvir  (12  weeks),  are  recommended  as  simplified  treatment 
algorithms  that  can  be  prescribed  for  all  treatment-naïve  patients 
with or without cirrhosis (Table 341-6). 
INDICATIONS FOR ANTIVIRAL THERAPY
Patients with chronic hepatitis C who have detectable HCV RNA 
in  serum,  whether  or  not  aminotransferase  levels  are  increased, 
and  chronic  hepatitis  of  any  grade  and  stage  are  candidates  for 
antiviral  therapy  with  DAA  agents.  The  only  exception  would  be 
patients with short life expectancies, for whom treating hepatitis C 
would have no influence on longevity. Certainly, for patients with 
advanced  liver  disease,  early  treatment  merits  a  high  priority. 
Although patients with persistently normal aminotransferase activ-
ity  tend  to  progress  histologically  very  slowly  or  not  at  all,  they 
respond to antiviral therapy just as well as do patients with elevated 
aminotransferase levels; therefore, such patients are candidates for 
antiviral therapy. As noted above, antiviral therapy has been shown 
to  improve  survival  and  complication-free  survival  and  to  slow 
progression of and to reverse fibrosis.
HCV  genotype  determines 

to  be  selected 
(Table  341-6).  Similarly,  the  absence  or  presence  of  cirrhosis  or 
advanced  fibrosis  determines  the  treatment  options  from  which 
to select, including the antiviral agents to be used, the duration of 
therapy, and the now rare need for ribavirin (Table 341-6). In the 
past,  a  pretreatment  liver  biopsy  was  relied  upon  to  assess  histo-
logic grade and stage as well as to identify such histologic factors 
as  steatosis,  which  can  influence  responsiveness  to  therapy.  As 
therapy has improved for patients with a broad range of histologic 
severity and as noninvasive measures of the stage of fibrosis (e.g., 
assessment of liver elasticity by imaging, FIB-4 score [see above]) 
have  gained  in  accuracy  and  popularity,  noninvasive  approaches 
have supplanted histology in almost most cases. As noted above, if 
cirrhosis  or  advanced  fibrosis  is  present  prior  to  therapy,  the  risk 
of  HCC,  although  reduced  substantially  by  successful  therapy,  is 

the  regimen 

not  eliminated,  and  twice-yearly  posttreatment  imaging  for  HCC 
surveillance (and endoscopic surveillance for esophageal varices at 
intervals of 1–3 years) is indicated even after an SVR. In patients 
with low-level fibrosis at baseline, achievement of an SVR allows the 
cessation of such surveillance.

Patients  who  have  relapsed  after,  or  failed  to  respond  to,  a 
course  of  IFN-based  or  DAA  agent–based  therapy  are  candi-
dates for retreatment with a DAA therapy regimen (Table 341-6). 
For  patients  who  have  failed  to  respond  to  a  DAA  combination, 
options include increasing the duration of therapy with the failed 
regimen,  adding  ribavirin,  or  changing  the  drug  class  (e.g.,  after 
failed  protease  and  polymerase  inhibitors,  switching  to  an  NS5A-
containing  combination).  In  the  presence  of  cirrhosis  or  a  need 
for  urgent  retreatment,  patients  who  have  failed  protease  inhibi-
tor  plus  polymerase  inhibitor  combination  therapy  or  who  have 
failed  an  NS5A  combination  are  candidates  for  RAS  testing  and 
tailored  therapy  based  on  such  resistance  testing.  If  reliable  RAS 
testing is not available, adding ribavirin or extending the duration 
of  therapy  are  options.  For  prior  nonresponders  to  IFN-based 
therapy, NS5A inhibitor–containing regimens are highly effective; 
however,  reduced  responsiveness  can  be  encountered,  especially 
in  cirrhotic  patients.  For  this  relatively  refractory  group,  ideally, 
the  most  potent  or  effective  NS5A  regimen  should  be  selected 
to  give  such  patients  the  best  chance  of  responding  and  to  avoid 
treatment-emergent  NS5A  RASs.  Noted  above  (see  discussion  of 
sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir and of glecaprevir-pibrentasvir) 
are potential retreatment approaches after failure of a prior NS5A-
containing regimen. Additional details for treatment of such patient 
subgroups  can  be  found  at  www.hcvguidelines.org.  It  is  worth 
reiterating that protease inhibitors are contraindicated for patients 
with decompensated cirrhosis, and sofosbuvir-containing regimens 
are  not  recommended  for  patients  taking  amiodarone  (especially 
with  beta  blockers)  for  treatment  of  cardiac  arrhythmias.  While 
sofosbuvir-containing DAA combinations were not recommended 
initially for patients with advanced renal failure, subsequent studies 
demonstrated safety and efficacy in this subgroup, and sofosbuvir-
containing  DAA  combinations  are  now  approved  for  advanced 
renal failure.

Persons  with  acute  hepatitis  C  are  also  candidates  for  antiviral 
therapy (Chap. 339) with the same pangenotypic combination DAA 
agents  (and  the  same  duration  of  treatment)  approved  for  chronic 
hepatitis  C;  delaying  the  initiation  of  therapy  to  allow  for  sponta-
neous  recovery  is  no  longer  recommended.  According  to  EASL 
recommendations, patients with acute hepatitis C should be treated 
ideally  with  a  currently  recommended  8-week  DAA  regimen.  In 
patients with biochemically and histologically mild chronic hepatitis 
C, the rate of progression is slow; however, such patients respond just 
as well to antiviral therapy as those with elevated aminotransferase 
levels  and  more  histologically  severe  hepatitis.  Because  of  the  high 
cost of DAA treatments, in the past, a higher priority was assigned to 
patients with advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis; however, this controversial 
approach was relied upon by some medical insurers and pharmacy 
benefit management organizations to withhold therapy from patients 
with low-level fibrosis. Unfortunately, delaying therapy until fibrosis 
becomes advanced misses the opportunity to prevent all the dire con-
sequences of chronic hepatitis C (liver failure, death/transplantation, 
HCC),  which  can  be  reduced,  but  not  eliminated  completely,  once 
advanced fibrosis is established. Therefore, therapy for patients with 
mild disease is justified as well as cost-effective.

Patients with compensated cirrhosis can respond to therapy, and 
their likelihood of a sustained response with DAAs is comparable to 
that in noncirrhotics. Patients with decompensated cirrhosis, who 
were not candidates for IFN-based antiviral therapy, respond well 
to DAA therapy regimens consisting of combinations of polymerase 
inhibitors and NS5A inhibitors (e.g., sofosbuvir-ledipasvir, sofosbu-
vir-velpatasvir);  however,  protease-inhibitor-containing  combina-
tions have been associated with potential hepatotoxicity and hepatic 
decompensation  and,  as  noted  above,  are  contraindicated  in  this 
patient  subset.  For  decompensated  cirrhosis,  ribavirin  should  be 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2612

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemadded to a 12-week course of sofosbuvir-NS5A therapy; however, 
in  cases  of  ribavirin  ineligibility,  the  duration  of  therapy  should 
be  extended  to  24  weeks.  In  cases  of  prior  failure  to  respond  to 
sofosbuvir-NS5A therapy, the sofosbuvir-NS5A regimen should be 
repeated but supplemented with ribavirin and extended to 24 weeks 
(www.hcvguidelines.org).  Patients  with  decompensated  cirrhosis 
should be referred to a liver transplantation center. DAAs are highly 
effective not only for patients with end-stage liver disease awaiting 
liver transplantation but also for patients with recurrent hepatitis C 
after liver transplantation. Ideally, patients should be treated prior 
to  liver  transplantation;  however,  a  concern  is  that  eradication  of 
HCV infection will disqualify such patients from accepting donor 
livers  from  persons  with  HCV  infection,  thus  contracting  the 
potential donor pool and limiting accessibility to donor organs and 
timely transplantation. In addition, responsiveness to DAA therapy 
appears  to  be  reduced  in  patients  with  decompensated  cirrhosis 
and with high Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) scores; 
in  this  subgroup,  responsiveness  after  liver  transplantation  would 
be  substantially  better.  Therefore,  advocacy  has  been  expressed 
for  postponing  DAA  therapy  in  patients  with  high-MELD-score 
(≥18–20), HCV-associated, end-stage liver disease until after liver 
transplantation; for patients with MELD scores <18–20, pretrans-
plantation  DAA  therapy  is  advised.  Still,  the  decision  whether  to 
treat pretransplantation or posttransplantation should be individu-
alized thoughtfully for each patient, based on such factors as MELD 
score, time anticipated prior to availability of a donor organ, relative 
clinical  stability,  and  comorbidities  (Chap.  345).  Because  DAA 
therapy  is  so  effective,  many  transplantation  centers,  to  expand 
the  donor  pool,  are  accepting  organs  from  HCV-infected  donors, 
transplanting  them  into  HCV-uninfected  recipients,  and  treating 
recipients  with  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir  for  12  weeks  or  glecapre-
vir-pibrentasvir  for  8  weeks  after  transplantation—with  excellent 
results.

The cutaneous and renal vasculitis of HCV-associated essential 
mixed  cryoglobulinemia  (Chap.  339)  may  respond  to  antiviral 
therapy, but sustained responses were rare after discontinuation of 
therapy in the IFN era, and prolonged, potentially indefinite, ther-
apy  was  recommended.  Now  that  more  effective  DAAs  are  avail-
able, a 12-week course of sofosbuvir-based combination therapy has 
been shown to yield an SVR12 rate exceeding 80% in cryoglobuline-
mic vasculitis. Anecdotal reports suggest that IFN-based antiviral 
therapy may be effective in porphyria cutanea tarda or lichen planus 
associated with hepatitis C; whether the more appealing DAAs are 
effective in these groups remains to be documented.

In patients with HCV/HIV co-infection, hepatitis C is more pro-
gressive and severe than in HCV-monoinfected patients. Although 
patients  with  HCV/HIV  co-infection  responded  less  well  to  IFN-
based  antiviral  therapy  for  hepatitis  C,  they  respond  as  well  as 
patients with HCV infection alone to DAA combination regimens. 
For  patients  with  HCV/HIV  co-infection,  an  abbreviated,  8-week 
course of sofosbuvir-ledipasvir for low-level HCV RNA is not recom-
mended, and a full 12 weeks should be given; similarly, for patients 
with  genotype  4,  a  12-week  course  of  glecaprevir-pibrentasvir  is 
recommended instead of an 8-week course for treatment-naïve or 
-experienced  patients  with  or  without  cirrhosis  (Table  341-6).  In 
HCV/HIV-infected  patients,  ribavirin  can  potentiate  the  toxicity 
of  didanosine  (e.g.,  lactic  acidosis)  and  the  lipoatrophy  of  stavu-
dine, and zidovudine can exacerbate ribavirin-associated hemolytic 
anemia;  therefore,  these  drug  combinations  should  be  avoided. 
In  HCV/HIV  co-infected  persons,  the  list  of  potential  drug-drug 
interactions  is  extensive  and  should  be  consulted  carefully  before 
beginning DAA treatment (www.hcvguidelines.org).

Patients  with  a  history  of  injection  drug  use  and  alcoholism 
can  be  treated  successfully  for  chronic  hepatitis  C,  preferably  in 
conjunction with drug and alcohol treatment programs. Moreover, 
because injection drug users, as a source of transmission to others, 
account  disproportionately  for  perpetuating  the  spread  of  HCV 
infection in the population, the impact of treating active injection 
drug users is amplified by reducing such transmission.

The  approved  oral  DAA  combinations  are  effective  in  patients 
with  mild-modest  renal  failure  and  require  no  dose  adjustments. 
For  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  (creatinine  clearances 
<30  mL/min),  including  those  undergoing  hemodialysis,  recom-
mended  combinations  are  12  weeks  of  elbasvir-grazoprevir  for 
genotypes  1  and  4  or  12  weeks  of  glecaprevir-pibrentasvir  for  all 
genotypes. Both in severe renal impairment and after renal trans-
plantation, levels of SVR12 in patients treated with these oral DAA 
combinations  have  approached  100%.  Initially,  in  patients  with 
severe renal impairment, sofosbuvir-containing combinations were 
not  recommended.  Subsequently,  however,  based  on  efficacy  and 
safety in a series of clinical trials, sofosbuvir-containing regimens 
were  approved  by  the  FDA  in  November  2019  for  patients  with 
severe renal impairment.

No  clinical  studies  of  the  use  of  DAAs  during  pregnancy  are 
available. Ribavirin is contraindicated during pregnancy; therefore, 
any  regimen  including  ribavirin  should  not  be  used.  Sofosbuvir; 
sofosbuvir-ledipasvir;  and  paritaprevir-ritonavir,  ombitasvir,  and 
dasabuvir  are  classified  as  pregnancy  category  B;  the  other  DAAs 
do  not  have  a  pregnancy  classification.  Therefore,  these  therapies 
are not indicated routinely in pregnancy and should be used, with 
caution, only if the benefit of treatment is compelling and justified 
compared  to  the  potential  for  fetal  risk.  Currently,  screening  all 
pregnant women for HCV infection is recommended. Breast feed-
ing is not contraindicated in women with HCV infection (unless the 
mother has a break in the integrity of the nipples or is co-infected 
with HIV). 
Choosing  Among  Available  Treatment  Options  Choosing  among 
the  number  of  all-oral  DAA  combinations  approved  since  2013 
was  daunting  to  treating  clinicians.  Currently,  however,  the  num-
ber  of  recommended  DAA  combinations  has  narrowed  to  a 
very  manageable  few.  The  most  popular  of  the  regimens  have 
been fixed-dose, single-pill, pangenotypic combinations. Although 
sofosbuvir-ledipasvir  and  elbasvir-grazoprevir  are  among  the  rec-
ommended  DAA  combinations  (Table  341-6),  for  simplicity,  two 
“one-size-fits-all”  pangenotypic  regimens—sofosbuvir-velpatasvir 
and glecaprevir-pibrentasvir—can be used, for 8–12 weeks, mostly 
without  ribavirin,  in  almost  all  treatment-naïve,  noncirrhotic  and 
cirrhotic  patients,  including  those  with  advanced  renal  failure 
and HCV-HIV co-infection. Applicability of the triple-drug com-
bination  sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir  is  quite  limited  in 
treatment-naïve  patients,  reserved  primarily  for  cirrhotic  patients 
with  genotype  3.  As  noted  above,  protease-inhibitor-containing 
DAA regimens (elbasvir-grazoprevir, glecaprevir-pibrentasvir, and 
sofosbuvir-velpatasvir-voxilaprevir) are contraindicated in decom-
pensated cirrhosis.

2613

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

AUTOIMMUNE HEPATITIS
 ■ DEFINITION
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic disorder characterized by contin-
uing  hepatocellular  necrosis  and  inflammation,  usually  with  fibrosis, 
which can progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. When fulfilling cri-
teria  of  severity,  this  type  of  chronic  hepatitis,  when  untreated,  may 
have a 6-month mortality of as high as 40%. Based on contemporary 
estimates of the natural history of autoimmune hepatitis, the 10-year 
survival  is  80−98%  for  treated  and  67%  for  untreated  patients.  The 
prominence of extrahepatic features of autoimmunity and seroimmu-
nologic abnormalities in this disorder supports an autoimmune process 
in its pathogenesis; this concept is reflected in the prior labels lupoid 
and plasma cell hepatitis. Autoantibodies and other typical features of 
autoimmunity, however, do not occur in all cases; among the broader 
categories of “idiopathic” or cryptogenic chronic hepatitis, many, per-
haps the majority, are probably autoimmune in origin. Cases in which 
hepatotropic viruses, metabolic/genetic derangements (including non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease), and hepatotoxic drugs have been excluded 
represent  a  spectrum  of  heterogeneous  liver  disorders  of  unknown 
cause, a proportion of which are most likely autoimmune hepatitis.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2613

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2614

 ■ IMMUNOPATHOGENESIS
The  weight  of  evidence  suggests  that  the  progressive  liver  injury  in 
patients  with  autoimmune  hepatitis  is  the  result  of  a  cell-mediated 
immunologic attack directed against liver cells in the setting of a loss 
of, or failed, immunologic tolerance for self-liver antigens. In all like-
lihood, predisposition to autoimmunity is inherited, whereas the liver 
specificity of this injury is triggered by environmental (e.g., chemical, 
drug [e.g., minocycline], or viral) factors. For example, patients have 
been described in whom apparently self-limited cases of acute hepatitis 
A, B, or C led to autoimmune hepatitis, presumably because of genetic 
susceptibility  or  predisposition.  Evidence  to  support  an  autoimmune 
pathogenesis in this type of hepatitis includes the following: (1) in the 
liver, the histopathologic lesions are composed predominantly of cyto-
toxic T cells and plasma cells; (2) circulating autoantibodies (nuclear, 
smooth muscle, thyroid, etc.; see below), rheumatoid factor, and hyper-
globulinemia are common; (3) other autoimmune disorders—such as 
autoimmune thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia,  ulcerative  colitis,  membranoproliferative  glomerulonephri-
tis,  juvenile  diabetes  mellitus,  vitiligo,  celiac  disease,  and  Sjögren’s 
syndrome—occur with increased frequency in patients who have auto-
immune hepatitis and in their relatives; (4) histocompatibility haplo-
types associated with autoimmune diseases, such as HLA-B1, B8, DR3, 
and  DR4  as  well  as  extended  haplotype  DRB1*0301  and  DRB1*0401 
alleles, are common in patients with autoimmune hepatitis; and (5) this 
type of chronic hepatitis is responsive to glucocorticoid/immunosup-
pressive therapy, effective in a variety of autoimmune disorders.

Cellular immune mechanisms appear to be important in the patho-
genesis of autoimmune hepatitis. In vitro studies have suggested that 
in  patients  with  this  disorder,  CD4+  T  lymphocytes  are  capable  of 
becoming sensitized to hepatocyte membrane proteins and of destroy-
ing liver cells. Molecular mimicry by cross-reacting antigens that con-
tain epitopes similar to liver antigens is postulated to activate these T 
cells, which infiltrate, and result in injury to, the liver. Abnormalities 
of  immunoregulatory  control  over  cytotoxic  lymphocytes  (impaired 
regulatory  CD4+CD25+  T-cell  influences)  may  play  a  role  as  well. 
Studies of genetic predisposition to autoimmune hepatitis demonstrate 
that  certain  haplotypes  are  associated  with  the  disorder,  as  enumer-
ated above, as are polymorphisms in cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigens 
(CTLA-4) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFA*2). The precise trigger-
ing  factors,  genetic  influences,  and  cytotoxic  and  immunoregulatory 
mechanisms involved in this type of liver injury remain incompletely 
defined.

Intriguing clues into the pathogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis come 
from the observation that circulating autoantibodies are prevalent in 
patients  with  this  disorder.  Among  the  autoantibodies  described  in 
these patients are antibodies to nuclei (so-called antinuclear antibodies 
[ANAs],  primarily  in  a  homogeneous  pattern)  and  smooth  muscle 
(so-called anti-smooth-muscle antibodies, directed at actin, vimentin, 
and skeletin), antibodies to F-actin, anti-LKM (see below), antibodies 
to  “soluble  liver  antigen”  (directed  against  a  uracil-guanine-adenine 
transfer  RNA  suppressor  protein),  antibodies  to  α-actinin,  and  anti-
bodies  to  the  liver-specific  asialoglycoprotein  receptor  (or  “hepatic 
lectin”)  and  other  hepatocyte  membrane  proteins.  Although  some  of 
these  provide  helpful  diagnostic  markers,  their  involvement  in  the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis has not been established.

Humoral immune mechanisms have been shown to play a role in the 
extrahepatic  manifestations  of  autoimmune  and  idiopathic  hepatitis. 
Arthralgias,  arthritis,  cutaneous  vasculitis,  and  glomerulonephritis 
occurring in patients with autoimmune hepatitis appear to be mediated 
by the deposition of circulating immune complexes in affected tissue 
vessels, followed by complement activation, inflammation, and tissue 
injury.  While  specific  viral  antigen-antibody  complexes  can  be  iden-
tified  in  acute  and  chronic  viral  hepatitis,  the  nature  of  the  immune 
complexes in autoimmune hepatitis has not been defined.

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Many  of  the  clinical  features  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  are  similar  to 
those  described  for  chronic  viral  hepatitis.  The  onset  of  disease  may 
be  insidious  or  abrupt;  the  disease  may  present  initially  like,  and  be 

confused with, acute viral hepatitis; a history of recurrent bouts of what 
had been labeled acute hepatitis is not uncommon. In approximately a 
quarter of patients, the diagnosis is made in the absence of symptoms, 
based  on  abnormal  liver  laboratory  tests.  A  subset  of  patients  with 
autoimmune hepatitis has distinct features. Such patients are predom-
inantly young to middle-aged women with marked hyperglobulinemia 
and high titer circulating ANAs. This is the group with positive lupus 
erythematosus  (LE)  preparations  (initially  labeled  lupoid  hepatitis) 
in  whom  other  autoimmune  features  are  common.  Fatigue,  malaise, 
anorexia,  amenorrhea,  acne,  arthralgias,  and  jaundice  are  common. 
Occasionally, arthritis, maculopapular eruptions (including cutaneous 
vasculitis),  erythema  nodosum,  colitis,  pleuritis,  pericarditis,  ane-
mia, azotemia, and sicca syndrome (keratoconjunctivitis, xerostomia) 
occur. In some patients, complications of cirrhosis, such as ascites and 
edema  (associated  with  portal  hypertension  and  hypoalbuminemia), 
encephalopathy,  hypersplenism,  coagulopathy,  or  variceal  bleeding 
may bring the patient to initial medical attention.

The  course  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  may  be  variable.  In  patients 
with mild disease or limited histologic lesions (e.g., piecemeal necro-
sis  [inflammation  and  erosion  of  the  limiting  place  of  periportal 
hepatocytes]  without  bridging),  progression  to  cirrhosis  is  limited, 
but,  even  in  this  subset,  clinical  monitoring  is  important  to  identify 
progression;  up  to  half  left  untreated  can  progress  to  cirrhosis  over 
the  course  of  15  years.  In  North  America,  cirrhosis  at  presentation 
is more common in African Americans than in whites. In those with 
severe  symptomatic  autoimmune  hepatitis  (aminotransferase  levels 
>10 times normal, marked hyperglobulinemia, “aggressive” histologic 
lesions—bridging  necrosis  or  multilobular  collapse,  cirrhosis),  the 
6-month mortality without therapy may be as high as 40%. Such severe 
disease  accounts  for  only  20%  of  cases;  the  natural  history  of  milder 
disease  is  variable,  often  accentuated  by  spontaneous  remissions  and 
exacerbations. In a 10-year (2006–2016) national Dutch study, mortal-
ity in patients with autoimmune hepatitis was higher than that of the 
general population only in patients with cirrhosis; for patients without 
cirrhosis,  survival  was  comparable  to  that  of  the  general  population. 
Especially poor prognostic signs include the presence histologically of 
multilobular collapse at the time of initial presentation and failure of 
serum bilirubin to improve after 2 weeks of therapy. Death may result 
from  hepatic  failure,  hepatic  coma,  other  complications  of  cirrhosis 
(e.g., variceal hemorrhage), and intercurrent infection. In patients with 
established cirrhosis, HCC may be a late complication (Chap. 82) but 
occurs less frequently than in cirrhosis associated with viral hepatitis.

Laboratory  features  of  autoimmune  hepatitis  are  similar  to  those 
seen in chronic viral hepatitis. Liver biochemical tests are invariably 
abnormal  but  may  not  correlate  with  the  clinical  severity  or  histo-
pathologic  features  in  individual  cases.  Many  patients  with  autoim-
mune  hepatitis  have  normal  serum  bilirubin,  alkaline  phosphatase, 
and  globulin  levels  with  only  minimal  aminotransferase  elevations. 
Serum  AST  and  ALT  levels  are  increased  and  fluctuate  in  the  range 
of 100−1000 units. In severe cases, the serum bilirubin level is mod-
erately  elevated  (51−171  μmol/L  [3−10  mg/dL]).  Hypoalbuminemia 
occurs in patients with very active or advanced disease. Serum alkaline 
phosphatase  levels  may  be  moderately  elevated  or  near  normal.  In 
a  small  proportion  of  patients,  marked  elevations  of  alkaline  phos-
phatase activity occur; in such patients, clinical and laboratory features 
overlap  with  those  of  primary  biliary  cholangitis  (Chap.  344).  The 
prothrombin time is often prolonged, particularly late in the disease or 
during active phases.

Polyclonal  hypergammaglobulinemia  (>2.5  g/dL)  is  common  in 
autoimmune hepatitis, as is the presence of rheumatoid factor. As noted 
above, circulating autoantibodies are also prevalent, most characteris-
tically ANAs in a homogeneous staining pattern. Smooth-muscle anti-
bodies are less specific, seen just as frequently in chronic viral hepatitis. 
Because  of  the  high  levels  of  globulins  achieved  in  the  circulation  of 
some  patients  with  autoimmune  hepatitis,  occasionally  the  globulins 
may  bind  nonspecifically  in  solid-phase  binding  immunoassays  for 
viral antibodies. This has been recognized most commonly in tests for 
antibodies to HCV, as noted above. In fact, studies of autoantibodies 
in autoimmune hepatitis have led to the recognition of new categories 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2614

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemof  autoimmune  hepatitis.  Type  I  autoimmune  hepatitis  is  the  classic 
syndrome prevalent in North America and northern Europe occurring 
in  young  women,  associated  with  marked  hyperglobulinemia,  lupoid 
features,  circulating  ANAs,  and  HLA-DR3  or  HLA-DR4  (especially 
B8-DRB1*03).  Also  associated  with  type  I  autoimmune  hepatitis  are 
autoantibodies against actin and atypical perinuclear antineutrophilic 
cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA). Included in the spectrum of type I 
autoimmune hepatitis is a subset of patients who lack ANA and anti-
LKM1  but  who  have  circulating  antibodies  to  soluble  liver  antigen. 
Most  of  these  patients  are  women  and  have  clinical  features  similar 
to,  or  perhaps  more  severe  than,  those  of  other  patients  with  type  I 
autoimmune hepatitis.

Type II autoimmune hepatitis, often seen in children, more common 
in  Mediterranean  populations,  and  linked  to  HLA-DRB1  and  HLA-
DQB1  haplotypes,  is  associated  not  with  ANA  but  with  anti-LKM. 
Actually,  anti-LKM  represent  a  heterogeneous  group  of  antibodies. 
In type II autoimmune hepatitis, the antibody is anti-LKM1, directed 
against cytochrome P450 2D6. This is the same anti-LKM seen in some 
patients with chronic hepatitis C. Anti-LKM2 is seen in drug-induced 
hepatitis, and anti-LKM3 (directed against uridine diphosphate glucu-
ronyltransferases) is seen in patients with chronic hepatitis D. Another 
autoantibody  observed  in  type  II  autoimmune  hepatitis  is  directed 
against  liver  cytosol  formiminotransferase  cyclodeaminase  (anti-liver 
cytosol 1).

Liver biopsy abnormalities are similar to those described for chronic 
viral hepatitis. Expanding portal tracts and extending beyond the plate 
of  periportal  hepatocytes  into  the  parenchyma  (designated  interface 
hepatitis  or  piecemeal  necrosis)  is  a  mononuclear  cell  infiltrate  that, 
in  autoimmune  hepatitis,  may  include  the  presence  of  plasma  cells. 
Necroinflammatory  activity  characterizes  the  lobular  parenchyma, 
and  evidence  of  hepatocellular  regeneration  is  reflected  by  “rosette” 
formation, the occurrence of thickened liver cell plates, and regenera-
tive “pseudolobules.” Septal fibrosis, bridging fibrosis, and cirrhosis are 
frequent. In patients with early autoimmune hepatitis presenting as an 
acute-hepatitis-like illness, lobular and centrilobular (as opposed to the 
more common periportal) necrosis has been reported. Bile duct injury 
and  granulomas  are  uncommon;  however,  a  subgroup  of  patients 
with autoimmune hepatitis has histologic, biochemical, and serologic 
features overlapping those of primary biliary cholangitis (Chap. 344).

 ■ DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
An  international  group  has  suggested  a  set  of  criteria  for  establish-
ing  a  diagnosis  of  autoimmune  hepatitis.  Exclusion  of  liver  disease 
caused  by  genetic  disorders,  viral  hepatitis,  drug  hepatotoxicity,  and 
alcohol is linked with such inclusive diagnostic criteria as hyperglob-
ulinemia,  autoantibodies,  and  characteristic  histologic  features.  This 
international  group  has  also  suggested  a  comprehensive  diagnostic 
scoring  system  that,  rarely  required  for  typical  cases,  may  be  helpful 
when  typical  features  are  not  present.  Factors  that  weigh  in  favor  of 
the  diagnosis  include  female  gender;  predominant  aminotransferase 
elevation; presence and level of globulin elevation; presence of nuclear, 
smooth-muscle,  LKM1,  and  other  autoantibodies;  concurrent  other 
autoimmune  diseases;  characteristic  histologic  features  (interface 
hepatitis,  plasma  cells,  rosettes);  HLA-DR3  or  DR4  markers;  and 
response  to  treatment  (see  below).  A  more  simplified,  more  specific 
scoring  system  relies  on  four  variables:  autoantibodies,  serum  IgG 
level,  typical  or  compatible  histologic  features,  and  absence  of  viral 
hepatitis  markers.  Weighing  against  the  diagnosis  are  predominant 
alkaline  phosphatase  elevation,  mitochondrial  antibodies,  markers  of 
viral hepatitis, history of hepatotoxic drugs or excessive alcohol, histo-
logic evidence of bile duct injury, or such atypical histologic features as 
fatty infiltration, iron overload, and viral inclusions.

 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Early during the course of chronic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis may 
resemble typical acute viral hepatitis (Chap. 339). Without histologic 
assessment,  severe  chronic  hepatitis  cannot  be  readily  distinguished 
based on clinical or biochemical criteria from mild chronic hepatitis. 
In  adolescence,  Wilson’s  disease  (Chaps.  344  and  415)  may  present 

with features of chronic hepatitis long before neurologic manifestations 
become  apparent  and  before  the  formation  of  Kayser-Fleischer  rings 
(copper  deposition  in  Descemet’s  membrane  in  the  periphery  of  the 
cornea). In this age group, serum ceruloplasmin and serum and uri-
nary  copper  determinations  plus  measurement  of  liver  copper  levels 
establish  the  correct  diagnosis.  Postnecrotic  or  cryptogenic  cirrhosis 
and  primary  biliary  cholangitis  (Chap.  344)  share  clinical  features 
with autoimmune hepatitis, and both alcoholic hepatitis (Chap. 342) 
and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (Chap. 343) may present with many 
features common to autoimmune hepatitis; historic, biochemical, sero-
logic,  and  histologic  assessments  are  usually  sufficient  to  allow  these 
entities  to  be  distinguished  from  autoimmune  hepatitis.  Of  course, 
the  distinction  between  autoimmune  and  chronic  viral  hepatitis  is 
not  always  straightforward,  especially  when  viral  antibodies  occur 
in  patients  with  autoimmune  disease  or  when  autoantibodies  occur 
in  patients  with  viral  disease.  Furthermore,  the  presence  of  extrahe-
patic features such as arthritis, cutaneous vasculitis, or pleuritis—not 
to  mention  the  presence  of  circulating  autoantibodies—may  cause 
confusion  with  rheumatologic  disorders  such  as  rheumatoid  arthritis 
and systemic LE. The existence of clinical and biochemical features of 
progressive necroinflammatory liver disease distinguishes chronic hep-
atitis from these other disorders, which are not associated with severe 
liver disease. Rarely, hepatic venous outflow obstruction (Budd-Chiari 
syndrome) may present with features suggestive of autoimmune hep-
atitis, but painful hepatomegaly, ascites, and vascular imaging provide 
distinguishing diagnostic clues. Other diagnostic considerations would 
include  celiac  disease  and  ischemic  liver  disease,  which  would  be 
readily  distinguishable  by  clinical  and  laboratory  features  from  auto-
immune hepatitis.

In  patients  treated  with  immune  checkpoint  inhibitors  for  malig-
nancy,  the  liver  may  be  one  of  the  autoimmune  targets  of  therapy; 
the  syndrome  resembles  autoimmune  hepatitis  in  clinical  features 
and response to glucocorticoid-based treatment. Finally, occasionally, 
features of autoimmune hepatitis overlap with features of autoimmune 
biliary disorders such as primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (Chaps. 344 and 346), or, even more rarely, mitochondrial 
antibody-negative  autoimmune  cholangitis.  Such  overlap  syndromes 
are  difficult  to  categorize,  and  often  response  to  therapy  may  be  the 
distinguishing factor that establishes the diagnosis.

2615

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
1

C
h
r
o
n
i
c
H
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

TREATMENT
Autoimmune Hepatitis

The mainstay of management in autoimmune hepatitis is glucocor-
ticoid  therapy.  Several  controlled  clinical  trials  have  documented 
that such therapy leads to symptomatic, clinical, biochemical, and 
histologic improvement as well as increased survival. A therapeutic 
response can be expected in up to 80% of patients. Unfortunately, 
therapy  has  not  been  shown  in  clinical  trials  to  prevent  ultimate 
progression  to  cirrhosis;  however,  instances  of  reversal  of  fibrosis 
and  cirrhosis  have  been  reported  in  patients  responding  to  treat-
ment, and rapid treatment responses within 1 year do translate into 
a  reduction  in  progression  to  cirrhosis.  Although  some  advocate 
the  use  of  prednisolone  (the  hepatic  metabolite  of  prednisone), 
prednisone  is  just  as  effective  and  is  favored  by  most  authorities. 
Therapy  may  be  initiated  at  20  mg/d,  but  a  popular  regimen  in 
the United States relies on an initiation dose of 60 mg/d. This high 
dose  is  tapered  successively  over  the  course  of  a  month  down  to 
a  maintenance  level  of  20  mg/d.  An  alternative,  but  equally  effec-
tive, more appealing approach is to begin with half the prednisone 
dose  (30  mg/d)  along  with  azathioprine  (50  mg/d).  With  azathio-
prine  maintained  at  50  mg/d,  the  prednisone  dose  is  tapered  over  
the  course  of  a  month  down  to  a  maintenance  level  of  10  mg/d. 
The advantage of the combination approach is a reduction, over the 
span of an 18-month course of therapy, in serious, life-threatening 
complications  of  steroid  therapy  (e.g.,  cushingoid  features,  hyper-
tension, diabetes, osteoporosis) from 66% down to <20%. Genetic 
analysis for thiopurine S-methyltransferase allelic variants does not 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2615

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2616

correlate  with  azathioprine-associated  cytopenias  or  efficacy  and 
is  not  assessed  routinely  in  patients  with  autoimmune  hepatitis. 
In  combination  regimens,  6-mercaptopurine  may  be  substituted 
for  its  prodrug  azathioprine,  but  this  is  rarely  required.  Azathio-
prine  alone,  however,  is  not  effective  in  achieving  remission,  nor 
is  alternate-day  glucocorticoid  therapy.  Limited  experience  with 
budesonide in noncirrhotic patients suggests that this steroid side 
effect−sparing drug may be effective; however, the few randomized 
controlled  trials  of  budesonide  have  not  consistently  shown  effi-
cacy.  Although  therapy  has  been  shown  to  be  effective  for  severe 
autoimmune  hepatitis  (AST  ≥10×  the  upper  limit  of  normal  or 
≥5× the upper limit of normal in conjunction with serum globulin 
greater than or equal to twice normal; bridging necrosis or multi-
lobular necrosis on liver biopsy; presence of symptoms), therapy is 
not indicated for mild forms of chronic hepatitis, and the efficacy 
of therapy in mild or asymptomatic autoimmune hepatitis has not 
been established.

Improvement  of  fatigue,  anorexia,  malaise,  and  jaundice  tends 
to  occur  within  days  to  several  weeks;  biochemical  improvement 
occurs  over  the  course  of  several  weeks  to  months,  with  a  fall  in 
serum bilirubin and globulin levels and an increase in serum albu-
min.  Serum  aminotransferase  levels  usually  drop  promptly,  but 
improvements in AST and ALT alone do not appear to be reliable 
markers of recovery in individual patients; histologic improvement, 
characterized  by  a  decrease  in  mononuclear  infiltration  and  in 
hepatocellular  necrosis,  may  be  delayed  for  6−24  months.  Still,  if 
interpreted  cautiously,  aminotransferase  levels  are  valuable  indi-
cators  of  relative  disease  activity,  and,  although  recommended, 
many authorities do not advocate for serial liver biopsies to assess 
therapeutic  success  or  to  guide  decisions  to  alter  or  stop  therapy. 
Rapidity of response is more common in older patients (≥69 years) 
and  those  with  HLA  DBR1*04;  although  rapid  responders  may 
progress less slowly to cirrhosis and liver transplantation, they are 
no less likely than slower responders to relapse after therapy. Ther-
apy should continue for at least 12−18 months. After tapering and 
cessation of therapy, the likelihood of relapse is at least 50%, even if 
posttreatment histology has improved to show mild chronic hepa-
titis, and most patients require therapy at maintenance doses indef-
initely. Continuing azathioprine alone (2 mg/kg body weight daily) 
after  cessation  of  prednisone  therapy  has  been  shown  to  reduce 
the  frequency  of  relapse.  Long-term  maintenance  with  low-dose 
prednisone  (≤10  mg  daily)  has  also  been  shown  to  keep  autoim-
mune hepatitis in check without the theoretical risk of azathioprine 
marrow  suppression  and,  in  young  women  of  child-bearing  age, 
teratogenicity; however, maintenance azathioprine is more effective 
in preserving remission.

In  medically  refractory  cases,  an  attempt  should  be  made  to 
intensify  treatment  with  high-dose  glucocorticoid  monotherapy   
(60  mg  daily)  or  combination  glucocorticoid  (30  mg  daily)  plus 
high-dose  azathioprine  (150  mg  daily)  therapy.  After  a  month, 
doses of prednisone can be reduced by 10 mg a month, and doses 
of azathioprine can be reduced by 50 mg a month toward ultimate, 
conventional maintenance doses. Patients refractory to this regimen 
may  be  treated  with  cyclosporine,  tacrolimus,  or  mycophenolate 
mofetil.  Similarly,  in  exploratory  studies,  infusions  of  monoclo-
nal  antibodies  directed  at  tumor  necrosis  factor  (infliximab)  and 
against  the  B-lymphocyte  antigen  CD20  (rituximab)  have  been 
reported to be of clinical benefit (improved aminotransferase levels, 
immunoglobulin G levels, histologic inflammatory activity) as res-
cue therapy for refractory autoimmune hepatitis. To date, however, 
only  limited,  often  anecdotal,  data  in  small  numbers  of  patients 
support  these  alternative  approaches.  If  medical  therapy  fails,  or 
when  chronic  hepatitis  progresses  to  cirrhosis  and  is  associated 
with  life-threatening  complications  of  liver  decompensation,  liver 
transplantation is the only recourse  (Chap. 345); in patients with 
severe  autoimmune  hepatitis,  failure  of  the  bilirubin  to  improve 
after 2 weeks of therapy should prompt early consideration of the 
patient for liver transplantation. Recurrence of autoimmune hepati-
tis in the new liver occurs rarely in most experiences but in as many 

as 35−40% of cases in others; nonetheless, 5-year patient and graft 
survival exceed 80%.

Like  all  patients  with  chronic  liver  disease,  patients  with  auto-
immune  hepatitis  should  be  vaccinated  against  hepatitis  A  and 
B,  ideally  before  immunosuppressive  therapy  is  begun,  if  practi-
cal.  Patients  with  autoimmune  hepatitis  and  cirrhosis  should  be 
screened  for  HCC  with  ultrasound  at  6-month  intervals  and  for 
gastroesophageal varices with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at 
intervals of 1–3 years, based on severity of liver disease.

 ■ FURTHER READING
AASLD/IDSA  HCV  Guidance  Panel:  Hepatitis  C  guidance  2019 
update:  American  Association  for  the  Study  of  Liver  Diseases–
Infectious Diseases Society of America recommendations for testing, 
managing,  and  treating  hepatitis  C  virus  infection.  Hepatology 
71:686, 2020. Updated regularly and available at http://www.hcvguide-
lines.org. Accessed April 20, 2020.

Bersoff-Matcha  SJ  et  al:  Hepatitis  B  virus  reactivation  associated 
with direct-acting antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C virus: A 
review of cases reported to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
Adverse Event Reporting System. Ann Intern Med 166:792, 2017.
Bourliere M et al: Sofosbuvir, velpatasvir, and voxilaprevir for previ-

ously treated HCV infection. N Engl J Med 376:2134, 2017.

Buti M et al: Tenofovir alafenamide versus tenofovir disproxil fuma-
rate  for  the  treatment  of  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  virus 
infection: A randomized, double-blind, phase 3 non-inferiority trial. 
Lance Gastroenterol Hepatol 1:196, 2017.

Butt  AA  et  al:  Direct-acting  antiviral  therapy  for  HCV  infection  is 
associated with a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease events. Gas-
troenterology 156:987, 2019.

Carbone M, Neuberger JM: Autoimmune liver disease, autoimmu-

nity and liver transplantation. J Hepatol 60:210, 2014.

Carrat F et al: Clinical outcomes in patients with chronic hepatitis C 
after  direct-acting  antiviral  treatments:  A  prospective  cohort  study. 
Lancet 393:1453, 2019.

Chan  HLY  et  al:  Tenofovir  alafenamide  versus  tenofovir  disproxil 
fumarate  for  the  treatment  of  HBeAg-positive  chronic  hepatitis  B 
virus infection: A randomized, double-blind, phase 3 non-inferiority 
trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 1:185, 2017.

European  Association  for  the  Study  of  the  Liver:  EASL  2017 
clinical  practice  guidelines  on  the  management  of  hepatitis  B  virus 
infection. J Hepatol 67:370, 2017.

European Association for the Study of the Liver: EASL recom-
mendations on treatment of hepatitis C 2018. J Hepatol 69:461, 2018.
European Association for the Study of the Liver: EASL recom-
mendations on treatment of hepatitis C: Final update of the series. J 
Hepatol 73:1170, 2020.

Forns  X  et  al:  Glecaprevir  plus  pibrentasvir  for  chronic  hepatitis  C 
virus genotype 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 infection in adults with compensated 
cirrhosis  (EXPEDITION-1):  A  single-arm,  open-label,  multicentre 
phase 3 trial. Lancet Infect Dis 17:1062, 2017.

Jacobson IM et al: American Gastroenterological Association Institute 
clinical  practice  update-expert  review:  Care  of  patients  who  have 
achieved  a  sustained  virologic  response  after  antiviral  therapy  for 
chronic hepatitis C infection. Gastroenterology 152:1578, 2017.

Kwo PY et al: Glecaprevir and pibrentasvir yield high response rates in 
patients with HCV genotype 1-6 without cirrhosis. J Hepatol 67:263, 
2017.

Liem KS et al: Limited sustained response after stopping nucleos(t)ide 
analogues  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B:  Results  from  a  ran-
domized controlled trial (Toronto STOP study). Gut 68:2206, 2019.
Lok ASG et al: Antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis B viral infection 
in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology 63:284, 
2016.

Loomba R, Liang TJ: Hepatitis B reactivation associated with immune 
suppressive  and  biological  modifier  therapies:  Current  concepts, 
management  strategies,  and  future  directions.  Gastroenterology 
152:1297, 2017.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2616

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemMcglynn EA et al: Assessing the safety of direct-acting antiviral agents 

for hepatitis C. JAMA Open Network 2(6):e194765, 2019.

Papatheodoridis  GV  et  al:  Eight-year  survival  in  chronic  hepatitis 
B  patients  under  long-term  entecavir  or  tenofovir  is  similar  to  the 
general population. J Hepatol 68:1129, 2018.

Papatheodoridis GV et al: DARING-B: Discontinuation of effective 
entecavir or tenofovir disoporxil fumarate long-term therapy before 
HBsAg  loss  in  non-cirrhotic  HBeAg-negative  chronic  hepatitis  B. 
Antivir Ther 23:677, 2018.

Pawlotsky J-M et al: From non-A, non-B hepatitis to hepatitis C virus 

cure. J Hepatol 62:S87, 2015.

Perrillo RP et al: American Gastroenterological Association Institute 
technical  review  on  prevention  and  treatment  of  hepatitis  B  virus 
reactivation  during  immunosuppressive  drug  therapy.  Gastroenter-
ology 148:221, 2015.

Reddy  KJ  et  al:  American  Gastroenterological  Association  Institute 
guideline on the prevention and treatment of hepatitis B virus reac-
tivation during immunosuppressive drug therapy. Gastroenterology 
148:215, 2015.

Rossi  C  et  al:  Sustained  virologic  response  from  interferon-based 
hepatitis C regimens is associated with reduced risk of extrahepatic 
manifestations. J Hepatol 71:1116, 2019.

Singal AG et al: AGA clinical practice update on interaction between 
oral  direct-acting  antivirals  for  chronic  hepatitis  C  infection  and 
hepatocellular carcinoma: Expert review. Gastroenterology 156:2149, 
2019.

Singh S et al: Magnitude and kinetics of decrease in liver stiffness after 
antiviral  therapy  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C:  A  systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 16:27, 2018.

Spearman CW et al: Hepatitis C. Lancet 394:1451, 2019.
Tang LS et al: Chronic hepatitis B infection: A review. JAMA 319:1802, 

2018.

Terrault N et al: Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of 
chronic  hepatitis  B:  AASLD  2018  hepatitis  B  guidance.  Hepatology 
67:1560, 2018.

Van  Den  Brand  FF  et  al:  Increased  mortality  among  patients  with 
vs  without  cirrhosis  and  autoimmune  hepatitis.  Clin  Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 17:940, 2019.

Yurdaydin C et al: Treating chronic hepatitis delta: The need for sur-

rogate markers of treatment efficacy. J Hepatol 70:1008, 2019.

342 Alcohol-Associated  
Liver Disease
Bernd Schnabl

Alcohol-associated  liver  diseases  (ALD)  comprise  a  spectrum  of  dis-
eases  associated  with  chronic  alcohol  consumption  ranging  from 
alcohol-associated  fatty  liver  disease  and  steatohepatitis  to  more 
advanced liver disease including fibrosis and cirrhosis. Acute alcoholic 
hepatitis  is  an  acute-on-chronic  form  of  ALD  that  is  associated  with 
liver failure and high mortality.
 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
Approximately 5.8% of adults in the United States have an alcohol use 
disorder, defined as >2 drinks per day in women and >3 drinks per day 
in men, or partake in binge drinking, defined as 4 drinks for women 
and 5 drinks for men in ~2 h (1 drink equals ~14 g of ethanol, which 
is 1 beer, 4 oz of wine, or 1 oz of 80% spirits). Prevalence of ALD cor-
relates  with  the  amount  of  alcohol  consumption  in  different  regions. 
Prevalence of alcohol-associated fatty liver disease is 4.7% of the general 
population in the United States, and 1.5% has stage 2 or greater fibrosis. 

Liver  cirrhosis  is  the  eleventh  leading  cause  of  mortality  worldwide, 
causing 1.16 million deaths annually; 48% of cases of cirrhosis can be 
attributed  to  alcohol.  Among  patients  with  alcohol  use  disorder,  18% 
had  fibrosis,  26%  had  cirrhosis,  and  7%  had  acute  alcoholic  hepatitis 
without underlying cirrhosis. In the European population, the annual 
incidence  rate  for  acute  alcoholic  hepatitis  is  between  24  and  27  per 
million persons in women and between 46 and 65 per million persons 
in men.

2617

 ■ PATHOGENESIS
Alcohol in the form of ethanol is rapidly absorbed in the upper gas-
trointestinal tract and predominantly metabolized in the liver. Ethanol 
reaches the liver through the portal vein, and the majority of ethanol 
is  oxidized  via  alcohol  dehydrogenase  1  (ADH1)  into  acetaldehyde 
in hepatocytes. Chronic alcohol consumption induces the expression 
of  a  second  ethanol-metabolizing  enzyme,  cytochrome  P450  family 
2 subfamily E member 1 (CYP2E1), which also converts ethanol into 
acetaldehyde. In addition to the direct cellular toxic effects of acetal-
dehyde,  metabolism  of  ethanol  into  acetaldehyde  causes  the  genera-
tion  of  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS),  resulting  in  further  injury  of 
hepatocytes via lipid peroxidation and DNA damage. Acetaldehyde is 
then  oxidized  into  acetate  via  acetaldehyde  dehydrogenase  (ALDH). 
Inherited  deficiency  of  ALDH2  is  common  in  Asian  countries  and 
leads to acetaldehyde accumulation after alcohol consumption. These 
individuals  develop  nausea  and  cutaneous  flushing.  Several  mecha-
nisms  contribute  to  the  development  of  hepatic  steatosis  related  to 
alcohol  consumption.  Acetate  is  converted  into  acetyl-coenzyme  A 
(CoA),  which  contributes  to  fatty  acid  and  triglyceride  synthesis. 
Alcohol, in part through epigenetic changes, increases the expression 
of  genes  involved  in  lipogenesis,  while  genes  involved  in  fatty  acid 
transport and oxidation are suppressed. Alcohol also increases the ratio 
of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)/oxidized NAD 
(NADH/NAD+) in hepatocytes, which further reduces mitochondrial 
β-oxidation.  Alcohol  can  increase  fatty  acid  mobilization  in  adipose 
tissue and the intestine, which will lead to hepatic accumulation of fatty 
acids  and  increased  hepatic  steatosis.  Overall,  the  net  effect  of  these 
processes contributes to fat accumulation in the liver.

 ■ RISK FACTORS FOR PROGRESSION OF ALD
Daily alcohol consumption or heavy drinking results in hepatic steato-
sis, but only 10–20% of such individuals will develop progressive liver 
disease  and  cirrhosis.  Therefore,  other  cofactors  such  as  behavioral, 
environmental, and genetic factors play important roles in progression 
of ALD (Table 342-1). There is a dose-dependent increase, with regard 
to  the  amount  of  alcohol  consumed,  in  the  likelihood  of  developing 
liver  cirrhosis.  Women  develop  ALD  at  a  lower  daily  alcohol  intake. 
Cigarette smoking is an independent risk factor for alcohol-associated 
cirrhosis.  The  drinking  pattern,  in  particular  binge  drinking  and 
excessive  alcohol  drinking  outside  meals,  increases  the  risk  of  devel-
oping progressive ALD. Obesity and other chronic liver diseases such 
as  viral  hepatitis,  hemochromatosis,  and  nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis 
(NASH),  are  frequent  cofactors  contributing  to  progression  of  ALD. 
Twin studies demonstrated a genetic predisposition to alcohol-associ-
ated liver cirrhosis that is independent from the genetic predisposition 
to  alcohol  use  disorder.  Gene  polymorphisms  conferring  increased 
risk  of  alcohol-associated  liver  cirrhosis  have  been  found  in  three 
genes,  patatin-like  phospholipase  domain-containing  3  (PNPLA3), 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
2

A
l
c
o
h
o
l
-

A
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
d
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

TABLE 342-1  Factors for Progression of Alcohol-Associated Liver 
Disease
•	 Alcohol dose (>1 drink per day for women, >2 drinks per day for men)
•	 Drinking pattern (drinking without meal, binge drinking)
•	 Genetic factors, especially PNPLA3 polymorphism
•	 Female gender
•	 Smoking
•	 Increased body mass index and chronic liver diseases
•	 Intestinal microbiota

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2617

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2618

TABLE 342-2  Symptoms and Signs Associated with Alcohol-Associated 
Cirrhosis and Alcoholic Hepatitis
•	 Tiredness
•	 Malnutrition and sarcopenia
•	 Abdomen: abdominal discomfort, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, caput 

medusae, ascites with weight gain, abdominal pain, and shortness of breath

•	 Skin: spider angioma, palmar erythema, jaundice, ecchymoses
•	 Eyes: icteric sclerae
•	 Hands: Dupuytren contracture
•	 Face: rhinophyma
•	 Reproductive system: gynecomastia, gonadal atrophy, loss of libido, 

amenorrhea
•	 Neurologic:

•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Alcohol withdrawal: tachycardia, agitation, tremor, seizures, delirium
•	 Hepatic encephalopathy: asterixis (flapping tremor), forgetfulness, inversion 
of sleep/wake pattern, altered consciousness, confusion, lethargy, coma

•	 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome

membrane bound O-acyltransferase domain-containing 7 (MBOAT7), 
and  transmembrane  6  superfamily  member  2  (TM6SF2),  although 
the molecular mechanism is not well understood. A subset of patients 
with alcohol use disorder develop changes in the gut microbiome and 
increased  intestinal  permeability  resulting  in  activation  of  hepatic 
inflammation,  hepatocyte  death,  and  activation  of  fibrotic  pathways. 
Ongoing fibrosis due to continued alcohol consumption can result in 
the development of cirrhosis with portal hypertension (Chap. 344).

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
The  development  of  alcohol-associated  steatosis,  steatohepatitis,  and 
cirrhosis is most often clinically silent. Symptoms arise once the patient 
with  alcohol-associated  liver  cirrhosis  decompensates  or  develops 
alcoholic hepatitis (Table 342-2). Patients with alcoholic hepatitis have 
been drinking heavily for typically >5 years and until at least 8 weeks 
before onset of symptoms. They present with rapid onset of jaundice 
(serum  bilirubin  >3  mg/dL),  often  accompanied  by  fever,  malaise, 
tender  hepatomegaly,  and  clinical  signs  of  hepatic  decompensation, 
such  as  ascites,  bacterial  infection,  variceal  bleeding,  and  hepatic 
encephalopathy.  Infections  occur  in  12–26%  of  patients  with  severe 
alcoholic hepatitis at the time of admission. Alcoholic hepatitis is often 
accompanied by systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and 
acute kidney injury (AKI) secondary to hepatorenal syndrome.

 ■ LABORATORY FINDINGS
Patients  with  simple  hepatic  steatosis  can  present  with  normal  liver 
function  tests.  Steatohepatitis  is  characterized  by  elevated  levels  of 
aspartate  aminotransferase  (AST)  and  γ-glutamyl  transferase  (GGT). 
Characteristic laboratory parameters for ALD include a ratio of AST 
to  alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  of  >1,  and  serum  AST  is  rarely 
>300 IU/L. Serum bilirubin and international normalized ratio (INR) 
are typically normal. Elevated bilirubin and INR and low serum albu-
min and platelet count are common laboratory finings in patients with 
cirrhosis.  Patients  with  alcoholic  hepatitis  have  AST  and  ALT  eleva-
tions  that  do  not  exceed  400  IU/L,  with  AST/ALT  ratio  of  >1.5  and 
serum bilirubin >3 mg/dL.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
The Alcohol Use Disorders Inventory Test (AUDIT) is a validated tool 
for identifying patients with alcohol use disorder (Chap. 453). Diagno-
sis of ALD requires exclusion of other liver diseases in heavy drinkers. 
Alcohol-associated  steatosis  can  be  diagnosed  by  simple  ultrasound, 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  (MRI),  or  computed  tomography  (CT). 
Noninvasive  quantification  of  hepatic  fat  can  be  achieved  with  the 
ultrasound  technique  of  controlled  attenuation  parameter  (CAP)  or 
with magnetic resonance proton density fat fraction (MR-PDFF). Liver 
biopsy  is  rarely  indicated  for  diagnosing  alcohol-associated  hepatic 
steatosis  or  steatohepatitis.  Liver  biopsy  typically  shows  hepatocytes 

with large lipid droplets (macrovesicular steatosis) around pericentral 
veins (zone 3). Morphologic features of alcohol-associated steatohep-
atitis  include  hepatocyte  injury  and  ballooning  with  Mallory-Denk 
bodies,  necrosis,  and  lobular  inflammation  with  mononuclear  and 
neutrophilic granulocytes.

Progression  of  alcohol-associated  steatohepatitis  to  fibrosis  can  be 
diagnosed  using  liver  stiffness  measurement  by  techniques  such  as 
transient elastography (e.g., FibroScan). Liver stiffness <6 kPa indicates 
normal liver, whereas cutoffs for each stage of alcohol-associated liver 
fibrosis have been validated (>8 kPa indicates ≥F3 advanced fibrosis; 
>12.5  kPa  indicates  F4  cirrhosis).  Histology  shows  initially  periven-
ular fibrosis with subsequent extension of collagen fibers into hepatic 
lobules, described as septal fibrosis. Patients with cirrhosis show liver 
nodularity on imaging with ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan. Radiologic 
signs of portal hypertension include ascites, splenomegaly, and portal-
systemic collateral vessels. Prognosis and risk of mortality are assessed 
using Child-Pugh-Turcotte (CPT) or Model for End-Stage Liver Dis-
ease (MELD; or sodium-MELD) scores (Chap. 344).

In patients presenting with features suggestive of alcoholic hepatitis, 
imaging is obtained to exclude biliary obstruction and hepatocellular 
carcinoma  (HCC).  In  addition,  other  causes  of  liver  disease  such  as 
viral hepatitis, Wilson’s disease, and severe autoimmune liver disease 
should be ruled out. Histology shows macrovesicular steatosis, hepa-
tocyte  ballooning  with  Mallory-Denk  bodies,  megamitochondria, 
neutrophil infiltration, bilirubinostasis, and chicken wire fibrosis. The 
majority of patients with alcoholic hepatitis have underlying cirrhosis 
(80%) (Chap. 344), and 10–20% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
alcoholic hepatitis will have other liver diseases on biopsy. Therefore, in 
the presence of potential confounding factors, including possible ische-
mic hepatitis (in the setting of, e.g., hypotension, massive gastrointes-
tinal  bleeding,  recent  cocaine  use,  septic  shock),  drug-induced  liver 
injury (DILI), autoimmune liver disease, uncertain alcohol use assess-
ment, or atypical laboratory tests (AST <50 IU/L or >400 IU/L, AST/ALT 
ratio <1.5), a transjugular liver biopsy is recommended to confirm the 
diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis. Infections need to be assessed routinely 
with chest x-ray and blood, urine, and ascites cultures in patients pre-
senting with alcoholic hepatitis.

TREATMENT
Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease (Fig. 342-1)

To date, the most effective therapy to reduce the progression of and 
reverse ALD is prolonged alcohol abstinence. In particular, alcohol- 
associated  hepatic  steatosis  and  steatohepatitis  are  reversible  with 
cessation of alcohol consumption. Thus, treatment of the underly-
ing alcohol use disorder is an integral part for therapy of ALD. There 
are currently no approved drugs for treatment of alcohol-associated 
steatosis and steatohepatitis with or without fibrosis.

Patients  with  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis  and  ongoing  alcohol 
consumption  are  at  risk  for  decompensation  and  development 
of  hepatic  encephalopathy,  ascites,  variceal  bleeding,  hepatorenal 
syndrome,  and  HCC  (Chap.  344).  Patients  with  cirrhosis  should 
undergo an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to screen for varices. 
HCC  screening  is  recommended  using  ultrasonography  every  6 
months in patients with cirrhosis. Management of complications of 
cirrhosis such as variceal bleeding, ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, 
and HCC does not differ from patients with cirrhosis due to a dif-
ferent etiology (Chap. 344). Liver transplantation for patients with 
alcohol-associated decompensated cirrhosis or HCC is a definitive 
therapy and is currently the leading indication for liver transplan-
tation in the United States. Liver transplantation evaluation should 
be taken into consideration for patients with end-stage liver disease 
(Chap. 345).

In patients diagnosed with alcoholic hepatitis, short-term mor-
tality  can  be  predicted  using  the  Maddrey  discriminant  function 
(MDF;  calculated  as  4.6  ×  [the  prolongation  of  the  prothrombin 
time above control {seconds}] + serum bilirubin [mg/dL]), MELD 
score  (Chap.  344),  or  age-bilirubin-INR-creatinine  (ABIC)  score. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2618

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAlcoholic Hepatitis (AH)
Clinical diagnosis with
laboratory findings 

Confounding
diagnostic
factors

Moderate AH
MDF <32
or MELD ≤20

Severe AH
MDF ≥32
or MELD >20

TJ liver biopsy

- Alcohol
  abstinence
- Nutritional
  support

Oral prednisolone 40 mg/d
(unable to take oral medications:
methylprednisolone 32 mg/d IV)

Contraindications
for corticosteroids

7 days

Lille score <0.45

Lille score ≥0.45

Continue prednisolone
for 28 days total

Stop prednisolone

- If eligible, early liver transplantation (LT)
- If not eligible for LT: Supportive/palliative care

FIGURE  342-1  Treatment  algorithm  for  alcoholic  hepatitis.  In  patients  with  a 
clinical  diagnosis  of  alcoholic  hepatitis,  confounding  factors  (see  text)  need  to 
be ruled out, if necessary, by transjugular (TJ) liver biopsy. Patients with severe 
alcoholic  hepatitis  (AH),  defined  as  Maddrey  discriminant  function  (MDF)  ≥32  or 
Model  for  End-Stage  Liver  Disease  (MELD)  score  >20,  without  contraindications 
for glucocorticoids (see text) are candidates for such treatment. Nonresponders or 
patients with contraindications for treatment should be considered for early liver 
transplantation (LT) or supportive or palliative care, as clinically appropriate.

Patients with MDF <32 or MELD ≤20 are defined as having moder-
ate alcoholic hepatitis. Currently, patients with moderate alcoholic 
hepatitis  are  treated  under  a  multidisciplinary  team  including  an 
alcohol use disorder specialist, dietitian for nutritional supplemen-
tation for patients with markedly reduced intake, and hepatologist 
for managing liver disease complications. Enteral nutrition with a 
goal of >21 kcal/kg and supplementation of micronutrients (in par-
ticular zinc) and vitamin supplementation (in particular vitamin B1) 
are recommended for patients with alcoholic hepatitis. Intravenous 
albumin  is  preferred  for  volume  expansion.  MDF  ≥32  or  MELD 
>20  identifies  patients  with  severe  alcoholic  hepatitis  and  high 
short-term mortality who will have a survival benefit with gluco-
corticoid treatment. Contraindications for glucocorticoid treatment 
include uncontrolled infections or sepsis, AKI and hepatorenal syn-
drome, uncontrolled upper gastrointestinal bleeding, concomitant 
diseases (including viral hepatitis, HCC, pancreatitis, DILI, active 
tuberculosis, and HIV), multiorgan failure, and shock. Glucocorti-
coids can be used once infection, sepsis, and gastrointestinal bleed-
ing are adequately controlled. Glucocorticoid use reduces the risk 
of death in patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis within 28 days 
of treatment but not in the following 6 months. Oral prednisolone, 
40 mg/d for a total duration of 4 weeks, is preferred. For patients 
unable to take oral medications, methylprednisolone, 32 mg/d IV, 
is used. The combination of glucocorticoids with N-acetylcysteine 
infusion might add short-term survival benefit at 1 month. Failure 
of improvement of Lille score (≥0.45) after 7 days of glucocorticoid 
treatment  will  determine  patients  with  severe  alcoholic  hepatitis 
who will unlikely benefit from continued treatment with glucocor-
ticoids. Glucocorticoids should be stopped in nonresponders, and 
early  liver  transplantation  should  be  considered.  Although  short-
term  prognosis  is  dependent  on  liver  disease  severity  at  the  time 
of presentation, long-term prognosis (>1 year) largely depends on 

2619

alcohol  abstinence  and  underlying  cirrhosis.  Patients  with  severe 
alcoholic  hepatitis  that  is  nonresponsive  to  medical  therapy  have 
high 30-day mortality and are therefore unable to fulfill a minimum 
of 6 months of alcohol abstinence, which is required in many cen-
ters for liver transplantation evaluation. Early liver transplantation 
can  be  successfully  performed  in  highly  selected  patients  with  an 
excellent  psychosocial  profile  (Chap.  345).  If  a  nonresponder  is 
ineligible  for  early  liver  transplantation,  supportive  or  palliative 
care should be considered for patients with multiple-organ failure.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Crabb DW et al: Standard definitions and common data elements for 
clinical  trials  in  patients  with  alcoholic  hepatitis:  Recommendation 
from  the  NIAAA  Alcoholic  Hepatitis  Consortia.  Gastroenterology 
150:785, 2016.

Crabb DW et al: Diagnosis and treatment of alcohol-associated liver 
diseases: 2019 practice guidance from the American Association for 
the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 71:306, 2020.

Louvet A et al: Corticosteroids reduce risk of death within 28 days for 
patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis, compared with pentoxifylline 
or placebo-a meta-analysis of individual data from controlled trials. 
Gastroenterology 155:458, 2018.

Seitz HK et al: Alcoholic liver disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 4:16, 2018.
Singal AK et al: ACG clinical guideline: Alcoholic liver disease. Am J 

Gastroenterol 113:175, 2018.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
3

N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
F
a
t
t
y
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
a
n
d
N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
S
t
e
a
t
o
h
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

343 Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver 
Diseases and Nonalcoholic 
Steatohepatitis
Manal F. Abdelmalek, Anna Mae Diehl

 ■ INCIDENCE, PREVALENCE,  
AND NATURAL HISTORY
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common cause 
of chronic liver disease in the United States, as well as worldwide. The 
global prevalence of NAFLD is estimated to be as high as one billion. 
In  the  United  States,  NAFLD  is  estimated  to  effect  between  80  and  
100  million  individuals.  NAFLD  is  strongly  associated  with  insulin 
resistance,  overweight/obesity,  and  metabolic  syndrome.  However,  it 
can also occur in lean individuals and is particularly common in those 
with  a  paucity  of  adipose  depots  (i.e.,  lipodystrophy).  Ethnic/racial 
factors also appear to influence liver fat accumulation; the documented 
prevalence  of  NAFLD  is  lowest  in  African  Americans  (~25%),  high-
est  in  Americans  of  Hispanic  ancestry  (~50%),  and  intermediate  in 
American whites (~33%).

NAFLD encompasses a spectrum of liver pathology with different 
clinical  prognoses  (Fig.  343-1).  The  simple  accumulation  of  triglyc-
eride  within  hepatocytes  (hepatic  steatosis)  is  on  the  most  clinically 
benign  extreme  of  the  spectrum.  On  the  opposite,  most  clinically 
ominous  extreme,  are  cirrhosis  (Chap.  344)  and  primary  liver  can-
cer  (Chap.  82).  The  risk  of  developing  cirrhosis  is  extremely  low  in 
individuals  with  isolated  steatosis  (nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  [NAFL]) 
but increases as steatosis becomes complicated by liver-cell injury and 
death  and  the  accumulation  of  inflammatory  cells  (i.e.,  nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis [NASH]). At least a quarter of adults with NAFLD are 
presumed to have NASH. NASH itself is also a heterogeneous condi-
tion; it can improve to steatosis or normal histology, remain relatively 
stable for years, or cause progressive accumulation of fibrous scar that 
eventuates in cirrhosis (stage 4 fibrosis). Advanced hepatic fibrosis is 
the primary predictor of eventual liver-related morbidity and mortality 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2619

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2620

A

B

C

D

Healthy liver

Steatosis (NAFL)

Steatohepatitis (NASH)

Cirrhosis

FIGURE 343-1  Histopathologic spectrum of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD encompasses a dynamic spectrum of liver pathology. A. Healthy liver. 
B. Simple steatosis (nonalcoholic fatty liver [NAFL]); arrow shows fatty hepatocyte. C. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH); ballooned hepatocyte (arrow) near central vein 
with adjacent blue-stained pericellular fibrosis (arrowheads). D. Cirrhosis with blue-stained bridging fibrosis surrounding micronodules of liver parenchyma.

Dynamic process

in NAFLD. Once NAFLD-related cirrhosis develops, the annual inci-
dence of primary liver cancer can be as high as 1–2% per year.

Abdominal  imaging  is  not  able  to  determine  which  individuals 
with  NAFLD  have  associated  liver-cell  death  and  inflammation  (i.e., 
NASH), and specific blood tests to diagnose NASH are not yet avail-
able. However, population-based studies that have used elevated serum 
alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  as  a  marker  of  liver  injury  indicate 
that ~6–8% of American adults have serum ALT elevations that cannot 
be  explained  by  excessive  alcohol  consumption,  other  known  causes 
of fatty liver disease (Table 343-1), viral hepatitis, or drug-induced or 
congenital liver diseases. Because the prevalence of such “cryptogenic” 

TABLE 343-1  Alternative Causes of Hepatic Steatosis
•	 Alcoholic liver disease
•	 Hepatitis C (particularly genotype 3)
•	 Inborn errors of metabolism
•	 Abetalipoproteinemia
•	 Cholesterol ester storage disease
•	 Galactosemia
•	 Glycogen storage disease
•	 Hereditary fructose intolerance
•	 Homocystinuria
•	 Systemic carnitine deficiency
•	 Tyrosinemia
•	 Weber-Christian syndrome
•	 Wilson’s disease
•	 Wolman’s disease

•	 Medications (see Table 343-2)
•	 Miscellaneous

•	 Industrial exposure to petrochemical
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Lipodystrophy
•	 Bacterial overgrowth
•	 Starvation
•	 Parenteral nutrition

•	 Surgical procedures

•	 Bilopancreatic diversion
•	 Extensive small-bowel resection
•	 Gastric bypass
•	 Jejunoileal bypass

•	 Reye’s syndrome
•	 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
•	 HELLP syndrome (hemolytic anemia, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet 

count)

ALT  elevations  increases  with  body  mass  index,  it  is  presumed  that 
they  are  due  to  NASH.  Hence,  at  any  given  point  in  time,  NASH  is 
present in ~25% of individuals who have NAFLD (i.e., ~6–8% of the 
general  U.S.  adult  population  has  NASH).  Smaller  cross-sectional 
studies in which liver biopsies have been performed on NASH patients 
at tertiary referral centers consistently demonstrate advanced fibrosis 
or  cirrhosis  in  ~25%  of  those  cohorts.  By  extrapolation,  therefore, 

TABLE 343-2  Medications Associated with Hepatic Steatosis
•	 Cytotoxic and cytostatic drugs

l-Asparaginase

•	 5-Fluorouraci
•	
•	 Azacitidine
•	 Azaserine
•	 Bleomycin
•	 Methotrexate
•	 Puromycin
•	 Tetracycline
•	 Doxycycline

•	 Metals

•	 Antimony
•	 Barium salts
•	 Chromates
•	 Phosphorus
•	 Rare earths of low atomic number
•	 Thallium compounds
•	 Uranium compounds
•	 Other drugs and toxins

•	 Amiodarone
•	 4,4’-Diethylaminoethoxyhexesterol
•	 Ethionine
•	 Ethyl bromide
•	 Estrogens
•	 Glucocorticoids

•	 Highly active antiretroviral therapy

•	 Hydralazine
•	 Hypoglycin
•	 Orotate
•	 Perhexiline maleate
•	 Safrole
•	 Tamoxifen
•	 Valproic acid
•	 Acetylsalicylic acid intoxication
•	 Apo-B inhibitors: Mipomersen and lomitapide

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2620

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemcirrhosis develops in ~6% of individuals with NAFLD (i.e., in ~1.5–2% 
of the general U.S. population). The risk for advanced liver fibrosis is 
highest in individuals with NASH who are aged >45–50 years and over-
weight/obese  or  afflicted  with  type  2  diabetes.  Having  a  first-degree 
relative with cryptogenic hepatitis or cirrhosis also increases the risk 
for developing cirrhosis.

Heritable  factors  clearly  impact  susceptibility  to  hepatic  steatosis, 
NASH,  liver  fibrosis,  and  liver  cancer.  Genetic  variants  on  or  near 
TM6SF2  or  MBOAT7  (genes  involved  in  lipid  homeostasis)  and 
palatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 3 gene (PNPLA3, a gene 
that encodes an enzyme involved in intracellular trafficking of lipids) 
may increase the heritability of NAFLD. A recent meta-analysis showed 
that  PNPLA3  exerts  a  strong  influence  not  only  on  hepatic  fat  accu-
mulation but also on the severity of NASH and liver fibrosis. Indeed, 
recent twin studies suggest that inheritance accounts for about half the 
risk  for  developing  cirrhosis.  Epigenetic  factors  (i.e.,  heritable  traits 
that  do  not  result  from  direct  changes  in  DNA)  may  also  influence 
NAFLD pathogenesis and/or progression based on evidence that intra-
uterine exposures influence susceptibility to obesity and the metabolic 
syndrome in adolescence. Studies of families with adult-onset obesity 
have  identified  genome-wide  epigenetic  alterations  that  dysregulate 
metabolic pathways controlling adiposity, insulin sensitivity, and tissue 
generation  or  regeneration.  Whether  such  epigenetic  mechanisms 
influence susceptibility to NASH and cirrhosis is being investigated.

NAFLD is currently the leading indication for liver transplantation 
in the United States. Similar to cirrhosis caused by other liver diseases, 
cirrhosis caused by NAFLD increases the risk for primary liver cancer. 
Both  hepatocellular  carcinoma  and  intrahepatic  cholangiocarcinoma 
(ICC)  have  also  been  reported  to  occur  in  NAFLD  patients  without 
cirrhosis, suggesting that NAFLD per se may be a premalignant condi-
tion. NAFLD, NASH, and NAFLD-related cirrhosis are not limited to 
adults. All have been well documented in children. As in adults, obesity 
and insulin resistance are the main risk factors for pediatric NAFLD. 
Thus,  the  rising  incidence  and  prevalence  of  childhood  obesity  sug-
gests  that  NAFLD  will  be  a  major  contributor  to  society’s  burden  of 
liver disease in the future.

 ■ PATHOGENESIS
The  mechanisms  underlying  the  pathogenesis  and  progression  of 
NAFLD  are  not  entirely  clear.  The  best-understood  mechanisms 
pertain to hepatic steatosis. This is proven to result when hepatocyte 
mechanisms for triglyceride synthesis (e.g., lipid uptake and de novo 
lipogenesis)  overwhelm  mechanisms  for  triglyceride  disposal  (e.g., 
degradative  metabolism  and  lipoprotein  export),  leading  to  accu-
mulation  of  fat  (i.e.,  triglyceride)  within  hepatocytes.  Obesity  stimu-
lates  hepatocyte  triglyceride  accumulation  by  altering  the  intestinal 
microbiota to enhance both energy harvest from dietary sources and 
intestinal  permeability.  Reduced  intestinal  barrier  function  increases 
hepatic  exposure  to  gut-derived  products,  which  stimulate  liver  cells 
to generate inflammatory mediators that inhibit insulin actions. Obese 
adipose depots also produce excessive soluble factors (adipokines) that 
inhibit tissue insulin sensitivity. Insulin resistance promotes hypergly-
cemia, which drives the pancreas to produce more insulin to maintain 
glucose  homeostasis.  However,  hyperinsulinemia  also  promotes  lipid 
uptake, fat synthesis, and fat storage. The net result is hepatic triglycer-
ide accumulation (i.e., steatosis).

Triglyceride per se is not hepatotoxic. However, its precursors (e.g., 
fatty acids and diacylglycerols) and metabolic by-products (e.g., reac-
tive  oxygen  species)  may  damage  hepatocytes,  leading  to  hepatocyte 
lipotoxicity.  Lipotoxicity  also  triggers  the  generation  of  other  factors 
(e.g.,  inflammatory  cytokines,  hormonal  mediators)  that  deregulate 
systems that normally maintain hepatocyte viability. The net result is 
increased  hepatocyte  death.  Dying  hepatocytes,  in  turn,  release  vari-
ous  factors  that  trigger  wound  healing  responses  that  aim  to  replace 
(regenerate) lost hepatocytes. Such repair involves transient expansion 
of  other  cell  types,  such  as  myofibroblasts  and  progenitor  cells,  that 
make  and  degrade  matrix,  remodel  the  vasculature,  and  generate 
replacement  hepatocytes,  as  well  as  the  recruitment  of  immune  cells 
that  release  factors  that  modulate  liver  injury  and  repair.  NASH  is 

2621

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
3

N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
F
a
t
t
y
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
a
n
d
N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
S
t
e
a
t
o
h
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

the  morphologic  manifestation  of  lipotoxicity  and  resultant  wound 
healing responses. Because the severity and duration of lipotoxic liver 
injury dictate the intensity and duration of repair, the histologic fea-
tures and outcomes of NASH are variable. Cirrhosis and liver cancer 
are potential outcomes of chronic NASH. Cirrhosis results from futile 
repair,  i.e.,  progressive  accumulation  of  wound  healing  cells,  fibrous 
matrix,  and  abnormal  vasculature  (scarring),  rather  than  efficient 
reconstruction/regeneration  of  healthy  hepatic  parenchyma.  Primary 
liver cancers develop when malignantly transformed liver cells escape 
mechanisms  that  normally  control  regenerative  growth.  The  mecha-
nisms responsible for futile repair (cirrhosis) and liver carcinogenesis 
are  not  well  understood.  Because  normal  liver  regeneration  is  a  very 
complex  process,  there  are  multiple  opportunities  for  deregulation 
and,  thus,  pathogenic  heterogeneity.  To  date,  this  heterogeneity  has 
confounded  development  of  both  diagnostic  tests  and  treatments  for 
defective/deregulated  liver  repair  (i.e.,  cirrhosis  and  cancer).  Hence, 
current strategies focus on circumventing misrepair by preventing and/
or reducing lipotoxic liver injury.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosing  NAFLD  requires  demonstration  of  increased  liver  fat  in 
the  absence  of  hazardous  levels  of  alcohol  consumption.  Thresholds 
for potentially dangerous alcohol ingestion have been set at more than 
one drink per day in women and two drinks per day in men based on 
epidemiologic evidence that the prevalence of serum aminotransferase 
elevations  increases  when  alcohol  consumption  habitually  exceeds 
these levels. In those studies, one drink was defined as having 10 g 
of  ethanol and, thus, is equivalent to one can of beer, 4 oz of wine, 
or 1.5 oz (one shot) of distilled spirits. Other causes of liver fat accu-
mulation  (particularly  exposure  to  certain  drugs;  Table  343-2)  and 
liver injury (e.g., viral hepatitis, autoimmune liver disease, iron or copper 
overload, α1 antitrypsin deficiency) must also be excluded. Thus, estab-
lishing the diagnosis of NAFLD does not require invasive testing: it can be 
accomplished by history and physical examination, liver imaging (ultra-
sound is an acceptable first-line test; computed tomography [CT] or mag-
netic resonance imaging [MRI] enhances sensitivity for liver fat detection 
but adds expense), and blood tests to exclude other liver diseases.

It is important to emphasize that, in individuals with NAFLD, the 
liver  may  not  be  enlarged  and  serum  aminotransferases  and  liver 
function  tests  (e.g.,  bilirubin,  albumin,  prothrombin  time)  may  be 
completely normal. Because there is yet no one specific blood test for 
NAFLD, confidence in the diagnosis of NAFLD is increased by identi-
fication of NAFLD risk factors. The latter include increased body mass 
index, insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus, and other parameters 
indicative  of  the  metabolic  syndrome  (e.g.,  systemic  hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, hyperuricemia/gout, cardiovascular disease; Chap. 408) 
in the patient or family members. Individuals who have, or have had, 
pituitary or hypothalamic neoplasms and women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome are also at increased risk for NAFLD. Hypothyroidism and 
obstructive sleep apnea may also increase NAFLD, presumably by pro-
moting obesity and/or exacerbating the metabolic syndrome.

Establishing the severity of NAFLD-related liver injury and related 
scarring (i.e., staging NAFLD) is more difficult than simply diagnosing 
NAFLD. Staging is critically important, however, because it is necessary 
to  define  prognosis  and  thereby  determine  treatment  recommenda-
tions. The goal of staging is to distinguish patients with NASH from 
those with simple steatosis and to identify which of the NASH patients 
have  advanced  fibrosis.  The  10-year  probability  of  developing  liver- 
related morbidity or mortality in steatosis is negligible, and hence, this 
subgroup of NAFLD patients tends to be managed conservatively (see 
below). In contrast, more intensive follow-up and therapy are justified 
in NASH patients, and the subgroup with advanced fibrosis merits the 
most intensive scrutiny and intervention because their 10-year risk of 
liver-related morbidity and mortality is clearly increased.

Staging  approaches  can  be  separated  into  noninvasive  testing 
(i.e.,  blood  testing,  physical  examination,  and  imaging)  and  invasive 
approaches (i.e., liver biopsy). Blood test evidence of hepatic dysfunc-
tion  (e.g.,  hyperbilirubinemia,  hypoalbuminemia,  prothrombin  time 
prolongation)  or  portal  hypertension  (e.g.,  thrombocytopenia)  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2621

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2622 stigmata of portal hypertension on physical examination (e.g., spider 
angiomata, palmar erythema, splenomegaly, ascites, clubbing, enceph-
alopathy)  suggest  a  diagnosis  of  advanced  NAFLD.  Liver  biopsy  has 
been the gold standard for establishing the severity of liver injury and 
fibrosis because it is both more sensitive and more specific than these 
other tests for establishing NAFLD severity. Further, although invasive, 
liver biopsy is seldom complicated by serious adverse sequelae such as 
significant bleeding, pain, or inadvertent puncture of other organs and 
thus is relatively safe. However, biopsy suffers from potential sampling 
error unless tissue cores of 2 cm or longer are acquired. Also, exami-
nation of tissue at a single point in time is not reliable for determining 
whether  the  pathologic  processes  are  progressing  or  regressing.  The 
risk  of  serial  liver  biopsies  within  short  time  intervals  is  generally 
deemed  as  unacceptable  outside  of  research  studies.  These  limita-
tions  of  liver  biopsy  have  stimulated  efforts  to  develop  noninvasive 
approaches to stage NAFLD.

As is true for many other types of chronic liver disease, in NAFLD, 
the  levels  of  serum  aminotransferases  (aspartate  aminotransferase 
[AST] and ALT) do not reliably reflect the severity of liver cell injury, 
extent  of  liver-cell  death,  or  related  liver  inflammation  and  fibrosis. 
Thus,  they  are  imperfect  for  determining  which  individuals  with 
NAFLD  have  NASH.  This  has  prompted  efforts  to  identify  superior 
markers of NASH and, particularly, liver fibrosis, because fibrosis stage 
predicts eventual liver outcomes and mortality in NASH. Algorithms 
that  combine  various  laboratory  tests  (e.g.,  Enhanced  Liver  Fibrosis 
[ELF]  score,  BARD  score,  AST  to  Platelet  Ratio  Index  [APRI]  score, 
NAFLD  fibrosis  score,  and  Fibrosis-4  [FIB-4]  score)  are  somewhat 
helpful in separating NASH patients with advanced versus mild liver 
fibrosis.  The  NAFLD  fibrosis  score  (NFS)  and  FIB-4  score,  two  of 
the  most  commonly  employed  noninvasive  tests  to  assess  severity  of 
hepatic  fibrosis,  can  be  calculated  from  a  few  readily  available  clini-
cal variables (age, body mass index, glucose, platelet count, albumin, 
AST,  ALT)  using  published  formulas  that  are  readily  accessed  via  an 
online  calculator.  Both  scores  are  helpful  for  gauging  the  severity  of 
NASH  and  liver  fibrosis.  Combining  these  tests  with  new  imaging 
approaches  that  permit  noninvasive  quantification  of  liver  fat  (e.g., 
MRI using proton density fat fraction [MRI-PDFF]) and liver stiffness, 
a surrogate marker of liver fibrosis (e.g., magnetic resonance elastog-
raphy [MRE], and transient elastography [FibroScan]), improves their 
predictive  power  (Chap.  337).  Transient  elastography  in  particular 
has  become  widely  available  and  is  relatively  inexpensive.  It  is  most 
useful  for  excluding  advanced  liver  fibrosis  as  cirrhosis  is  extremely 
unlikely when the liver stiffness score is low. However, higher stiffness 
scores must be interpreted with caution since several factors (obesity, 
nonfasting state, hepatic inflammation, iron overload, and/or hepatic 
congestion) decrease the specificity of the test. Increasingly, these new 
serologic and imaging tools are being used serially or in combination 
to monitor fibrosis progression and regression in NAFLD patients. As 
a  result,  liver  biopsy  staging  is  becoming  restricted  to  patients  who 
cannot be stratified reliably using these noninvasive assessments. Inde-
terminant or discordant results of noninvasive testing should prompt 
referral to a liver specialist and consideration of liver biopsy.

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES OF NAFLD
Most subjects with NAFLD are asymptomatic. The diagnosis is often 
made when abnormal liver aminotransferases or features of fatty liver 
are noted during an evaluation performed for other reasons. NAFLD 
may  also  be  diagnosed  during  the  workup  of  vague  right  upper 
quadrant  abdominal  pain,  hepatomegaly,  or  an  abnormal-appearing 
liver at time of abdominal surgery. Obesity is present in 50–90% of sub-
jects. Most patients with NAFLD also have other features of the meta-
bolic syndrome (Chap. 408). Some have subtle stigmata of chronic liver 
disease, such as spider angiomata, palmer erythema, or splenomegaly. 
In a small minority of patients with advanced NAFLD, complications 
of end-stage liver disease (e.g., jaundice, features of portal hypertension 
such as ascites or variceal hemorrhage) may be the initial findings.

The  association  of  NAFLD  with  obesity,  diabetes,  hypertriglyceri-
demia, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease is well known. Other 
associations  include  chronic  fatigue,  mood  alterations,  obstructive 

sleep  apnea,  thyroid  dysfunction,  polycystic  ovary  syndrome,  and 
chronic pain syndrome. NAFLD is an independent risk factor for meta-
bolic syndrome (Chap. 408). Longitudinal studies suggest that patients 
with NASH are at two- to threefold increased risk for the development 
of  metabolic  syndrome.  Similarly,  studies  have  shown  that  patients 
with NASH have a higher risk for the development of hypertension and 
diabetes mellitus. The presence of NAFLD is also independently associ-
ated with endothelial dysfunction, increased carotid intimal thickness, 
and the number of plaques in carotid and coronary arteries. Such data 
indicate that NAFLD has many deleterious effects on health in general.
 ■ TREATMENT OF NAFLD
Treatment of NAFLD can be divided into three components: (1) specific 
therapy  of  NAFLD-related  liver  disease;  (2)  treatment  of  NAFLD- 
associated  comorbidities;  and  (3)  treatment  of  the  complications  of 
advanced  NAFLD.  The  subsequent  discussion  focuses  on  specific 
therapies  for  NAFLD,  with  some  mention  of  their  impact  on  major 
NAFLD comorbidities (insulin resistance/diabetes, obesity, and dyslip-
idemia). Treatment of the complications of advanced NAFLD involves 
management  of  the  complications  of  cirrhosis  and  portal  hyperten-
sion, including primary liver cancers. Approaches to accomplish these 
objectives are similar to those used in other chronic liver diseases and 
are covered elsewhere in the textbook (Chaps. 344 and 82).

At present, there are no U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
approved  therapies  for  the  treatment  of  NAFLD.  Thus,  the  current 
approach  to  NAFLD  management  focuses  on  treatment  to  improve 
the  risk  factors  for  NASH  (i.e.,  obesity,  insulin  resistance,  metabolic 
syndrome,  dyslipidemia).  Based  on  our  understanding  of  the  natu-
ral  history  of  NAFLD,  only  patients  with  NASH  or  hepatic  fibrosis 
are  considered  currently  for  targeted  pharmacologic  therapies.  This 
approach may change as our understanding of disease pathophysiology 
improves and potential targets of therapy evolve.

Diet  and  Exercise  Lifestyle  changes  and  dietary  modifications 
that result in weight loss and/or improve insulin sensitivity are the pri-
mary treatments for NAFLD. Many studies indicate that loss of 3–5% 
of  body  weight  improves  steatosis  and  that  greater  weight  loss  (i.e., 
≥7–10%)  improves  steatohepatitis  and  hepatic  fibrosis.  The  benefits 
of  modifying  dietary  macronutrient  contents  (e.g.,  low-carbohydrate 
vs  low-fat  diets,  saturated  vs  unsaturated  fat  diets)  generally  parallel 
changes  in  calorie  consumption,  suggesting  that  diet  modifications 
are mainly beneficial because they reduce energy intake and improve 
obesity.  However,  a  Mediterranean-type  diet  has  been  reported  to 
improve NASH and liver fibrosis independently of weight loss. Exclud-
ing foods and beverages high in added fructose and increasing coffee 
consumption are also recommended because high-fructose diets have 
been shown to exacerbate hepatic steatosis, steatohepatitis, and fibro-
sis,  and  consuming  two  or  more  cups  of  coffee  per  day  is  associated 
with reduced risk of liver fibrosis. Changes in diet composition partic-
ularly merit consideration in lean individuals with NAFLD, although 
available data are insufficient to determine if this improves their liver 
histology. Modifying lifestyle to increase physical activity (i.e., energy 
expenditure) complements dietary caloric restriction and, thus, expe-
dites  weight  loss.  Exercise  also  improves  muscle  insulin  sensitivity, 
which improves the metabolic syndrome independent of weight loss. 
Both  aerobic  exercise  and  resistance  training  effectively  reduce  liver 
fat. At least 30 min of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise or resistance 
training five times per week is recommended. The choice of training 
should  be  tailored  to  patients’  preferences  and  functional  capacity  to 
enable long-term maintenance. Any activity is better than remaining 
sedentary. Unfortunately, most NAFLD patients cannot sustain long-
term  compliance  with  diet  and  lifestyle  modifications  and,  thus,  fail 
to maintain a healthier weight. Although pharmacologic therapies to 
facilitate  weight  loss,  such  as  orlistat,  topiramate,  phentermine,  and 
GLP-1  receptor  agonists,  are  available,  their  role  in  the  treatment  of 
NAFLD remains experimental.

Pharmacologic  Therapies  Several  drug  therapies  have  been 
tried  in  both  research  and  clinical  settings.  There  are  currently  no 
FDA-approved drugs for the treatment of NAFLD. Hence, at present, 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2622

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemNAFLD patients without NASH or fibrosis should receive only coun-
seling for healthy diet and physical activity. Consideration of additional 
specific  pharmacotherapy  for  liver  disease  is  restricted  to  NAFLD 
patients with more serious liver damage (i.e., NASH or liver fibrosis). 
A number of large clinical trials designed to identify effective and safe 
treatments  for  these  conditions  are  in  progress.  Because  NAFLD  is 
strongly associated with the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes 
(Chaps. 403 and 404), the efficacy of various insulin-sensitizing agents 
has been examined. Metformin, an agent that mainly improves hepatic 
insulin  sensitivity,  has  been  evaluated  in  several  small,  open-label 
studies  in  adults  and  a  recent  larger,  prospectively  randomized  trial 
in children (dubbed the TONIC study). Although several of the adult 
NASH studies suggested improvements in aminotransferases and, less 
consistently, liver histology, metformin did not improve liver histology 
in the TONIC study of children with NASH. Thus, it is not currently 
recommended as a treatment for NASH. Thiazolidinediones (pioglita-
zone and rosiglitazone), drugs known to improve systemic insulin resis-
tance, have been studied  in  adults  with  NASH.  Both  agents  reduced 
aminotransferases  and  improved  some  of  the  histologic  features  of 
NASH in small, uncontrolled studies. A large, randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, 
the  PIVENS  Study  (Pioglitazone  vs  Vitamin  E  vs  Placebo  for  the 
Treatment  of  247  Nondiabetic  Adults  with  NASH),  demonstrated 
that  resolution  of  histologic  NASH  occurred  more  often  in  subjects 
treated  with  pioglitazone  (30  mg/d)  than  with  placebo  for  18  months 
(47 vs 21%, p = .001). However, many subjects in the pioglitazone group 
gained weight, and liver fibrosis did not improve. Five-year follow-up of 
subjects who were treated with rosiglitazone for up to 2 years demon-
strated that extending treatment and follow-up duration did not further 
improve NASH or liver fibrosis, and rosiglitazone has been associated 
with increased long-term risk for cardiovascular mortality. Pioglitazone 
may  be  safer  than  rosiglitazone,  however,  because  in  a  recent  large 
meta-analysis it was associated with reduced overall morality, myocar-
dial infarction, and stroke. Caution is still warranted, however, because 
long-term  use  of  thiazolidinediones  has  been  associated  with  weight 
gain, increased risk for bladder cancer, and bone fractures in women.

Incretin mimetics, drugs that act on the pancreas to optimize insulin 
and glucagon release, have improved liver enzyme elevations. A small 
pilot trial of daily injections of liraglutide and phase 2 studies of semag-
lutide demonstrated remission of NASH without worsening liver fibro-
sis. Agents that improve hyperglycemia by blocking renal reabsorption 
of glucose, sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT2) inhibitors, have been 
observed  to  improve  serum  liver  enzymes  in  diabetic  patients  with 
and  are  also  under  formal  evaluation  as  treatments  for  NASH.  Both 
incretin mimetics and SGLT2 inhibitors can be used in NASH patients 
with type 2 diabetes or obesity (conditions for which the drugs have 
an FDA-registered indication for use); however, they are not currently 
approved specifically for the treatment of NASH.

Antioxidants have also been evaluated for the treatment of NAFLD 
because oxidant stress is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of 
NASH.  Vitamin  E,  an  inexpensive  yet  potent  antioxidant,  has  been 
examined  in  several  small  pediatric  and  adult  studies  with  varying 
results. In all of those studies, vitamin E was well tolerated, and most 
studies  showed  modest  improvements  in  aminotransferase  levels, 
radiographic features of hepatic steatosis, and/or histologic features of 
NASH. Vitamin E (800 IU/d) was compared to placebo in the PIVENS 
and  TONIC  studies.  In  PIVENS,  vitamin  E  was  the  only  agent  that 
achieved  the  predetermined  primary  endpoint  (i.e.,  improvement 
in  steatohepatitis  without  worsening  of  fibrosis).  This  endpoint  was 
met in 43% of patients in the vitamin E group (p = .001 vs placebo), 
34%  in  the  pioglitazone  group  (p  =  .04  vs  placebo),  and  19%  in  the 
placebo group. Vitamin E also improved NASH histology in pediatric 
patients with NASH (TONIC trial). However, recent population-based 
studies  suggest  that  chronic  vitamin  E  therapy  may  increase  the  risk 
for cardiovascular mortality, hemorrhagic stroke, and prostate cancer. 
Thus, vitamin E should only be considered as a first-line pharmaco-
therapy  for  nondiabetic,  noncirrhotic  NASH  patients  who  are  at  low 
risk for cardiovascular disease or prostate cancer. Further studies are 
needed  before  firm  recommendations  can  be  made  regarding  the 

2623

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
3

N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
F
a
t
t
y
L
i
v
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
a
n
d
N
o
n
a
l
c
o
h
o
l
i
c
S
t
e
a
t
o
h
e
p
a
t
i
t
i
s

risk-to-benefit  ratio  and  long-term  therapeutic  efficacy  of  vitamin 
E  in  NASH.  Ursodeoxycholic  acid  (a  bile  acid  that  improves  certain 
cholestatic  liver  diseases)  and  betaine  (a  metabolite  of  choline  that 
raises  S-adenosylmethionine  [SAM]  levels  and  decreases  cellular 
oxidative damage) offer no histologic benefit over placebo in patients 
with NASH. Experimental evidence to support the use of omega-3 fatty 
acids in NAFLD exists; however, a recent large, multicenter, placebo-
controlled study failed to demonstrate a histologic benefit.

Many  other  pharmacotherapies  that  target  dysregulated  energy 
homeostasis, lipotoxicity, cell death, and liver inflammation, processes 
that  are  critically  involved  in  the  pathogenesis  and/or  progression  of 
NASH and liver fibrosis, are currently in clinical trials (e.g., probiotics, 
farnesoid  X  receptor  agonists,  fibroblast  growth  factor  agonists,  anti-
apoptotic  agents,  anticytokine  agents,  dipeptidyl  IV  antagonists,  PPAR 
modulators, thyroid hormone receptor β-selective agonists, stearyl-CoA 
desaturase-1  inhibitors,  DGAT  inhibitors,  acyl-CoA  carboxylase  inhib-
itors, and direct modulators of liver fibrosis). Sufficient data do not yet 
exist to justify their use as NASH treatments in clinical practice. Given 
that liver disease outcomes in NASH patients are highly heterogeneous, 
optimal treatment of NASH may need to be individualized by tailoring 
therapy  based  on  clinical  or  histologic  phenotypes  of  NASH  and/or 
genetic susceptibility for disease progression.

Statins  are  an  important  class  of  agents  to  treat  dyslipidemia  and 
decrease  cardiovascular  risk.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that 
statins  cause  liver  failure  in  patients  with  any  chronic  liver  disease, 
including NAFLD. The incidence of liver enzyme elevations in NAFLD 
patients taking statins is also no different than that of healthy controls 
or patients with other chronic liver diseases. Moreover, several studies 
have  suggested  that  statins  may  improve  aminotransferases  and  his-
tology  in  patients  with  NASH.  Yet  there  is  continued  reluctance  to 
use statins in patients with NAFLD. The lack of evidence that statins 
harm the liver in NAFLD patients, combined with the increase risk for 
cardiovascular  morbidity  and  mortality  in  NAFLD  patients,  justifies 
the use of statins to treat dyslipidemia in patients with NAFLD/NASH.
Bariatric  Surgery  Although  interest  in  bariatric  surgery  as  a 
treatment  for  NAFLD  exists,  a  recently  published  Cochrane  review 
concluded that lack of randomized clinical trials or adequate clinical 
studies prevents definitive assessment of benefits and harms of bariat-
ric surgery as a treatment for NASH. Most studies of bariatric surgery 
have shown that bariatric surgery is generally safe in individuals with 
well-compensated chronic liver disease and improves hepatic steatosis 
and  necroinflammation  (i.e.,  features  of  NAFLD/NASH);  however, 
effects on hepatic fibrosis have been variable. Concern lingers because 
some  of  the  largest  prospective  studies  suggest  that  hepatic  fibrosis 
might  progress  after  bariatric  surgery.  Thus,  the  Cochrane  review 
deemed  it  premature  to  recommend  bariatric  surgery  as  a  primary 
treatment for NASH. This opinion was challenged by a recently study 
that  demonstrated  that  fibrosis  stage  had  improved  by  5  years  after 
surgery in about half the patients in one large bariatric surgery cohort. 
However, most of those individuals had relatively mild fibrosis initially, 
and thus, it is unclear if similar outcomes would occur in individuals 
with  more  advanced  liver  disease.  Indeed,  there  is  general  agree-
ment  that  patients  with  NAFLD-related  cirrhosis  and,  particularly, 
those  with  portal  hypertension  should  be  excluded  as  candidates  for 
bariatric surgery. However, given growing evidence for the benefits of 
bariatric surgery on metabolic syndrome complications in individuals 
with refractory obesity, it is not contraindicated in otherwise eligible 
patients with NAFLD or NASH.
Liver Transplantation  Patients with NAFLD in whom end-stage 
liver  disease  develops  should  be  evaluated  for  liver  transplantation 
(Chap.  345).  The  outcomes  of  liver  transplantation  in  well-selected 
patients with NAFLD are generally good, but comorbid medical con-
ditions associated with NAFLD, such as diabetes mellitus, obesity, and 
cardiovascular disease, often limit transplant candidacy. NAFLD may 
recur  after  liver  transplantation.  The  risk  factors  for  recurrent  or  de 
novo NAFLD after liver transplantation are multifactorial and include 
hypertriglyceridemia, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and immunosuppres-
sive therapies, particularly glucocorticoids.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2623

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2624

 ■ GLOBAL HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
Obesity  is  an  accelerating  global  disease.  The  worldwide  prevalence 
of  obesity  has  more  than  doubled  since  1980,  and  there  are  now  >1 
billion  overweight  adults,  of  whom  at  least  300  million  are  obese.  In 
the  wake  of  the  obesity  epidemic  follow  numerous  comorbidities, 
including NAFLD. NAFLD is the most common liver disease identified 
in Western countries and the fastest rising form of chronic liver disease 
worldwide.  The  economic  burden  directly  attributable  to  NAFLD  is 
already enormous (estimated direct medical costs of ~$103 billion/year 
in  the  United  States  and  €35  billion/year  in  the  Europe-4  countries: 
Germany, France, Italy, and United Kingdom) and predicted to increase 
tenfold  by  the  year  2025.  Present  understanding  of  NAFLD’s  natural 
history is based mainly on studies in whites who became overweight/
obese  and  developed  the  metabolic  syndrome  in  adulthood.  The 
impact of the global childhood obesity epidemic on NAFLD pathogen-
esis/progression  is  unknown.  Emerging  evidence  demonstrates  that 
advanced  NAFLD,  including  cirrhosis  and  primary  liver  cancer,  can 
occur in children, prompting concerns that childhood-onset NAFLD 
might  follow  a  more  aggressive  course  than  typical  adult-acquired 
NAFLD.  Some  of  the  most  populated  parts  of  the  world  are  in  the 
midst of industrial revolutions, and certain environmental pollutants 
seem to exacerbate NAFLD. Some studies also suggest that the risk for 
NASH and NAFLD-related cirrhosis may be higher in certain ethnic 
groups such as Asians, Hispanics, and Native Americans, and lower in 
others  such  as  African  Americans,  compared  with  whites.  Although 
all  of  these  variables  confound  efforts  to  predict  the  net  impact  of 
this obesity-related liver disease on global health, it seems likely that 
NAFLD will remain a major cause of chronic liver disease worldwide 
for the foreseeable future.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Chalasani  N  et  al:  The  diagnosis  and  management  of  nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease: Practice guidance from the American Association 
for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 67:328, 2018.

Diehl AM, Day CSC: Cause, pathogenesis, and treatment of nonalco-

holic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 377:2063, 2017.

European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) et al: 
EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management 
of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 64:1388, 2016.

Vos MB et al: NASPGHAN clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis 
and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in children: Recom-
mendations from the Expert Committee on NAFLD (ECON) and the 
North  American  Society  of  Pediatric  Gastroenterology,  Hepatology 
and  Nutrition  (NASPGHAN).  J  Pediatr  Gastroenterol  Nutr  64:319, 
2017.

344 Cirrhosis and Its 
Complications
Alex S. Befeler, Bruce R. Bacon

Cirrhosis  is  a  condition  that  is  defined  histopathologically  and  has  a 
variety  of  clinical  manifestations  and  complications,  some  of  which 
can be life-threatening. In the past, it has been thought that cirrhosis 
was never reversible; however, it has become apparent that when the 
underlying insult that has caused the cirrhosis has been removed, there 
can  be  reversal  of  fibrosis.  This  is  most  apparent  with  the  successful 
treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  C;  however,  reversal  of  fibrosis  is  also 
seen  in  patients  with  hemochromatosis  who  have  been  successfully 
treated  and  in  patients  with  alcohol  associate  liver  disease  who  have 
discontinued alcohol use.

Regardless of the cause of cirrhosis, the pathologic features consist 
of the development of fibrosis to the point that there is architectural 

TABLE 344-1  Causes of Cirrhosis
Alcohol
Chronic viral hepatitis
  Hepatitis B
  Hepatitis C
Autoimmune hepatitis
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Biliary cirrhosis
  Primary biliary cholangitis
  Primary sclerosing cholangitis
  Autoimmune cholangiopathy

Cardiac cirrhosis
Inherited metabolic liver disease
  Hemochromatosis
  Wilson’s disease
  α1 Antitrypsin deficiency
  Cystic fibrosis
Cryptogenic cirrhosis

distortion with the formation of regenerative nodules. This results in a 
decrease in hepatocellular mass, and thus function, and an alteration of 
blood flow. The induction of fibrosis occurs with activation of hepatic 
stellate  cells,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  increased  amounts  of  col-
lagen and other components of the extracellular matrix.

Clinical  features  of  cirrhosis  are  the  result  of  pathologic  changes 
and mirror the severity of the liver disease. Most hepatic pathologists 
provide  an  assessment  of  grading  and  staging  when  evaluating  liver 
biopsy  samples.  These  grading  and  staging  schemes  vary  between 
disease states and have been developed for most conditions, including 
chronic  viral  hepatitis,  nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  disease,  and  primary 
biliary cholangitis. Advanced fibrosis usually includes bridging fibrosis 
with nodularity designated as stage 3 and cirrhosis designated as stage 4. 
Patients who have cirrhosis have varying degrees of liver function, and 
clinicians need to differentiate between those who have stable, compen-
sated cirrhosis and those who have decompensated cirrhosis. Patients 
who have developed ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, or variceal bleed-
ing  are  classified  as  decompensated.  They  should  be  considered  for 
liver  transplantation,  particularly  if  the  decompensations  are  poorly 
controlled. Many of the complications of cirrhosis will require specific 
therapy.  Portal  hypertension  is  a  significant  complicating  feature  of 
decompensated  cirrhosis  and  is  responsible  for  the  development  of 
ascites and bleeding from esophagogastric varices, two complications 
that signify decompensated cirrhosis. Loss of hepatocellular function 
results in jaundice, coagulation disorders, and hypoalbuminemia and 
contributes to the causes of portosystemic encephalopathy. The com-
plications of cirrhosis are basically the same regardless of the etiology. 
Nonetheless, it is useful to classify patients by the cause of their liver 
disease  (Table  344-1);  patients  can  be  divided  into  broad  groups, 
including  those  with  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis,  cirrhosis  due  to 
chronic viral hepatitis, biliary cirrhosis, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 
and other, less common causes, such as cardiac cirrhosis, cryptogenic 
cirrhosis, and other miscellaneous causes.

ALCOHOL-ASSOCIATED CIRRHOSIS
Excessive  chronic  alcohol  use  can  cause  several  different  types  of 
chronic  liver  disease,  including  alcohol-associated  fatty  liver,  alco-
holic  hepatitis,  and  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis.  Furthermore,  use  of 
excessive alcohol can contribute to liver damage in patients with other 
liver  diseases,  such  as  hepatitis  C,  hemochromatosis,  and  fatty  liver 
disease related to obesity. Chronic alcohol use can produce fibrosis in 
the absence of accompanying inflammation and/or necrosis. Fibrosis 
can be centrilobular, pericellular, or periportal. When fibrosis reaches 
a  certain  degree,  there  is  disruption  of  the  normal  liver  architecture 
and  replacement  of  liver  cells  by  regenerative  nodules.  In  alcohol- 
associated cirrhosis, the nodules are usually <3 mm in diameter; this 
form of cirrhosis is referred to as micronodular. With cessation of alco-
hol use, larger nodules may form, resulting in a mixed micronodular 
and macronodular cirrhosis.

Pathogenesis  Alcohol  is  the  most  commonly  used  drug  in  the 
United  States,  and  >70%  of  adults  drink  alcohol  each  year.  Twenty 
percent  have  had  a  binge  within  the  past  month,  and  >7%  of  adults 
regularly  consume  more  than  four  or  five  drinks  five  or  more  times 
a month. Unfortunately, >14 million adults in the United States meet 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2624

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
the  diagnostic  criteria  for  alcohol  use  disorder.  In  the  United  States, 
chronic  liver  disease  is  the  tenth  most  common  cause  of  death  in 
adults,  and  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis  accounts  for  ~48%  of  deaths 
due to cirrhosis.

Ethanol  is  mainly  absorbed  by  the  small  intestine  and,  to  a  lesser 
degree,  through  the  stomach.  Gastric  alcohol  dehydrogenase  (ADH) 
initiates  alcohol  metabolism.  Three  enzyme  systems  account  for 
metabolism of alcohol in the liver. These include cytosolic ADH, the 
microsomal ethanol oxidizing system (MEOS) utilizing the inducible 
cytochrome  P450  CYP2E1,  and  peroxisomal  catalase.  Normally  the 
majority of ethanol oxidation occurs via ADH to form acetaldehyde, 
which is a highly reactive molecule that may have multiple effects. The 
MEOS  pathway  in  chronic  alcohol  use  causes  induction  of  CYP2E1, 
which  leads  to  generation  of  reactive  oxygen  species  and  produces 
more acetaldehyde. Ultimately, acetaldehyde is metabolized to acetate 
by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Intake of ethanol increases intra-
cellular  accumulation  of  triglycerides  by  increasing  fatty  acid  uptake 
and by reducing fatty acid oxidation and lipoprotein secretion. Protein 
synthesis, glycosylation, and secretion are impaired. Oxidative damage 
to hepatocyte membranes occurs due to the formation of reactive oxy-
gen species; acetaldehyde is a highly reactive molecule that combines 
with  proteins  and  nucleic  acids  to  form  acetaldehyde  adducts.  These 
adducts may interfere with specific enzyme activities, including micro-
tubular formation and hepatic protein trafficking. With acetaldehyde-
mediated hepatocyte damage, certain reactive oxygen species can result 
in Kupffer cell activation. As a result, profibrogenic cytokines are pro-
duced that initiate and perpetuate stellate cell activation, with the resul-
tant production of excess collagen and extracellular matrix. Connective 
tissue appears in both periportal and pericentral zones and eventually 
connects portal triads with central veins forming regenerative nodules. 
Hepatocyte  loss  occurs,  and  with  increased  collagen  production  and 
deposition, together with continuing hepatocyte destruction, the liver 
contracts and shrinks in size. This process generally takes from years 
to decades to occur and requires repeated insults.

Clinical  Features  The  diagnosis  of  alcohol  associate  liver  disease 
requires  an  accurate  history  regarding  both  amount  and  duration  of 
alcohol  consumption.  Patients  with  alcohol  associate  liver  disease  can 
present with nonspecific symptoms such as vague right upper quadrant 
abdominal  pain,  fever,  nausea  and  vomiting,  diarrhea,  anorexia,  and 
malaise. Alternatively, they may present with more specific complications 
of chronic liver disease, including ascites, edema, upper gastrointestinal 
(GI) hemorrhage, jaundice, or encephalopathy. Many cases present inci-
dentally at the time of autopsy or elective surgery. The abrupt onset of 
any of these complications may be the first event prompting the patient to 
seek medical attention. Other patients may be identified in the course of 
an evaluation of routine laboratory studies that are found to be abnormal. 
On physical examination, the liver and spleen may be enlarged, with the 
liver edge being firm and nodular. Other frequent findings include scleral 
icterus,  palmar  erythema  (Fig.  344-1),  spider  angiomas  (Fig.  344-2), 

FIGURE 344-1  Palmar erythema. This figure shows palmar erythema in a patient with 
alcohol-associated cirrhosis. The erythema is peripheral over the palm with central pallor.

2625

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
4

C
i
r
r
h
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
I
t
s
C
o
m
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s

FIGURE 344-2  Spider angioma. This figure shows a spider angioma in a patient with 
hepatitis C cirrhosis. With release of central compression, the arteriole fills from the 
center and spreads out peripherally.

parotid gland enlargement, digital clubbing, muscle wasting, edema, and 
ascites.  Men  may  have  decreased  body  hair  and  gynecomastia  as  well 
as testicular atrophy, which may be a consequence of hormonal abnor-
malities or a direct toxic effect of alcohol on the testes. In women with 
advanced  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis,  menstrual  irregularities  usually 
occur including amenorrhea. These changes are often reversible following 
cessation of alcohol ingestion.

Laboratory  tests  may  be  completely  normal  in  patients  with  early 
compensated  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis.  Alternatively,  in  advanced 
liver disease, many abnormalities usually are present. Patients may be 
anemic from chronic GI blood loss, nutritional deficiencies, or hyper-
splenism or as a direct suppressive effect of alcohol on the bone marrow. 
A unique form of hemolytic anemia (with spur cells and acanthocytes) 
called Zieve’s syndrome can occur in patients with severe alcoholic hep-
atitis. Platelet counts are often reduced early in the disease, reflective of 
portal hypertension with hypersplenism. Serum total bilirubin can be 
normal or elevated with advanced disease. Prothrombin times are often 
prolonged and usually do not respond to administration of parenteral 
vitamin K. Serum sodium levels are usually normal unless patients have 
ascites and then can be depressed, largely due to ingestion of excess free 
water. Serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases (ALT, AST) are 
typically elevated, particularly in patients who continue to drink, with 
AST levels being higher than ALT levels, usually by a 2:1 ratio.

Diagnosis  Patients who have any of the above-mentioned clinical 
features, physical examination findings, or laboratory studies should be 
considered to have alcohol associate liver disease. The diagnosis, how-
ever, requires accurate knowledge that the patient is continuing to use 
or has recently stopped alcohol. Furthermore, other forms of chronic 
liver disease (e.g., chronic viral hepatitis or metabolic or autoimmune 
liver diseases) must be considered or ruled out, or if present, an esti-
mate of relative causality along with the alcohol use should be deter-
mined. Liver biopsy can be helpful to confirm a diagnosis but generally 
is not performed unless there is a suspicion of an alternative diagnosis.
In  patients  who  have  had  complications  of  cirrhosis  and  who 
continue  to  drink,  there  is  a  <50%  5-year  survival.  In  contrast,  in 
patients who are able to remain abstinent, the prognosis is significantly 
improved,  particularly  when  they  have  resolution  of  liver  complica-
tions; however, some individuals who remain abstinent do not improve 
and liver transplantation is a viable option.

TREATMENT
Alcohol-Associated Cirrhosis and Alcoholic Hepatitis

Abstinence  is  the  cornerstone  of  therapy  for  patients  with  alcohol 
associate liver disease. In addition, patients require good nutrition 
and long-term medical supervision to manage underlying complica-
tions that may develop. Complications such as the development of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2625

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2626

ascites and edema, variceal hemorrhage, or portosystemic encepha-
lopathy all require specific management and treatment. Liver trans-
plantation  can  be  an  effective  long-term  treatment  in  those  who 
have been deemed a low enough risk for alcohol relapse and do not 
respond to other treatments.

Glucocorticoids  are  occasionally  used  in  patients  with  severe 
alcoholic hepatitis in the absence of infection. Short-term survival 
has been shown to be improved in certain studies and meta-analysis, 
although 6-month survival is more dependent on abstinence. Treat-
ment  is  restricted  to  patients  with  a  discriminant  function  (DF) 
value of >32. The DF is calculated as the serum total bilirubin plus 
the difference in the patient’s prothrombin time compared to upper 
limit  of  control  (in  seconds)  multiplied  by  4.6.  Failure  to  improve 
total bilirubin after 7 days predicts treatment failure, and glucocor-
ticoids can be stopped; otherwise, they are continued for 28 days.

There is modest evidence that intravenous N-acetylcysteine plus 
glucocorticoids  may  have  survival  benefit  in  alcoholic  hepatitis  if 
the  DF  is  >32.  Other  therapies  including  oral  pentoxifylline,  par-
enterally administered inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α 
such as infliximab or etanercept, anabolic steroids, propylthiouracil, 
antioxidants,  colchicine,  and  penicillamine  have  not  shown  clear-
cut  benefits  and  are  not  recommended.  A  variety  of  nutritional 
therapies  have  been  tried,  both  parenteral  and  enteral  feedings; 
however,  there  is  no  clear  evidence  of  improved  survival.  There 
is evidence that persons who consume >21.5 kcal/kg body weight 
per  day  have  better  survival,  so  achieving  better  caloric  intake  is 
recommended. Finally, in highly selected patients with good social 
support structure who fail other treatments for alcoholic hepatitis, 
early liver transplant can be an effective treatment.

The cornerstone to treatment is cessation of alcohol use. Recent 
experience with medications that reduce craving for alcohol, such 
as acamprosate calcium and baclofen, have been favorable. Patients 
may take other necessary medications even in the presence of cir-
rhosis.  Acetaminophen  use  is  often  discouraged  in  patients  with 
liver disease; however, if no more than 2 g of acetaminophen per 
day are consumed, there generally are no problems unless there is 
active alcohol use.

 ■ CIRRHOSIS DUE TO CHRONIC VIRAL  
HEPATITIS B OR C
Of  patients  exposed  to  the  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV),  ~80%  develop 
chronic hepatitis C, and of those, ~20–30% will develop cirrhosis over 
20–30  years.  Many  of  these  patients  have  had  concomitant  alcohol 
use,  and  the  true  incidence  of  cirrhosis  due  to  hepatitis  C  alone  is 
unknown. It is expected that an even higher percentage will go on to 
develop  cirrhosis  over  longer  periods  of  time.  In  the  United  States, 
~5–6 million people have been exposed to HCV, and ~4–5 million are 
chronically  viremic.  Worldwide,  ~170  million  individuals  have  hep-
atitis C, with some areas of the world (e.g., Egypt) having up to 15% 
of  the  population  infected.  HCV  is  a  noncytopathic  virus,  and  liver 
damage  is  probably  immune-mediated.  Progression  of  liver  disease 
due to chronic hepatitis C is characterized by portal-based fibrosis with 
bridging fibrosis and nodularity developing, ultimately culminating in 
the development of cirrhosis. In cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis C, 
the liver is small and shrunken with characteristic features of a mixed 
micro-  and  macronodular  cirrhosis  seen  on  liver  biopsy.  In  addition 
to the increased fibrosis that is seen in cirrhosis due to hepatitis C, an 
inflammatory infiltrate is found in portal areas with interface hepatitis 
and occasionally some lobular hepatocellular injury and inflammation. 
In patients with HCV genotype 3, steatosis is often present.

Similar findings are seen in patients with cirrhosis due to chronic 
hepatitis  B.  Of  adult  patients  exposed  to  hepatitis  B,  ~5%  develop 
chronic hepatitis B, and ~20% of those patients will go on to develop 
cirrhosis.  Special  stains  for  hepatitis  B  core  (HBc)  and  hepatitis  B 
surface  (HBs)  antigen  will  be  positive,  and  ground-glass  hepatocytes 
signifying HBs antigen (HBsAg) may be present. In the United States, 
there  are  ~2  million  carriers  of  hepatitis  B,  whereas  in  other  parts 
of  the  world  where  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  is  endemic  (i.e.,  Asia, 

Southeast  Asia,  sub-Saharan  Africa),  up  to  15%  of  the  population 
may be infected, having acquired the infection vertically at the time of 
birth. Thus, >300–400 million individuals are thought to have hepatitis 
B worldwide. Approximately 25% of these individuals may ultimately 
develop cirrhosis.

Clinical Features and Diagnosis  Patients with cirrhosis due to 
either chronic hepatitis C or B can present with the usual symptoms 
and signs of chronic liver disease. Fatigue, malaise, vague right upper 
quadrant  pain,  and  laboratory  abnormalities  are  frequent  presenting 
features. Diagnosis requires a thorough laboratory evaluation, includ-
ing quantitative HCV RNA testing and analysis for HCV genotype, or 
hepatitis B serologies to include HBsAg, anti-HBs, HBeAg (hepatitis B 
e antigen), anti-HBe, and quantitative HBV DNA levels.

TREATMENT
Cirrhosis due to Chronic Viral Hepatitis B or C

Management of complications of cirrhosis revolves around specific 
therapy for treatment of whatever complications occur (e.g., esoph-
ageal  variceal  hemorrhage,  development  of  ascites  and  edema,  or 
encephalopathy).  In  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B,  numerous 
studies have shown beneficial effects of antiviral therapy, which is 
effective at viral suppression, as evidenced by reducing aminotrans-
ferase  levels  and  HBV  DNA  levels  and  improving  histology  by 
reducing inflammation and fibrosis. Several clinical trials and case 
series  have  demonstrated  that  patients  with  decompensated  liver 
disease can become compensated with the use of antiviral therapy 
directed  against  hepatitis  B.  Currently  available  therapy  includes 
lamivudine, adefovir, telbivudine, entecavir, and tenofovir, with the 
latter two being preferred because of reduced risk of viral resistance. 
Interferon α can also be used for treating hepatitis B, but it should 
not be used in cirrhotics (see Chap. 341).

Treatment of patients with cirrhosis due to hepatitis C used to be 
more difficult because the side effects of pegylated interferon and 
ribavirin  therapy  were  difficult  to  manage.  Over  the  past  several 
years,  interferon-based  regimens  have  been  replaced  by  direct- 
acting  antiviral  protocols  that  are  highly  successful  (>95%  cure 
rate), well tolerated, and usually of short duration (8–12 weeks), but 
costly. These medications have truly revolutionized the treatment of 
hepatitis C (see Chap. 341).

CIRRHOSIS FROM AUTOIMMUNE 
HEPATITIS AND NONALCOHOLIC FATTY 
LIVER DISEASE
Other causes of posthepatitic cirrhosis include autoimmune hepatitis 
(AIH) and cirrhosis due to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Many patients 
with AIH present with cirrhosis that is already established. Typically, 
these patients will not benefit from immunosuppressive therapy with 
glucocorticoids  or  azathioprine  because  the  AIH  is  “burned  out.”  In 
this  situation,  liver  biopsy  does  not  show  a  significant  inflammatory 
infiltrate.  Diagnosis  in  this  setting  requires  positive  autoimmune 
markers  such  as  antinuclear  antibody  (ANA)  or  anti-smooth-muscle 
antibody (ASMA). When patients with AIH present with cirrhosis and 
active inflammation accompanied by elevated liver enzymes, there can 
be considerable benefit from the use of immunosuppressive therapy.

Patients  with  nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis  are  increasingly  being 
found  to  have  progressed  to  cirrhosis.  With  the  epidemic  of  obesity 
that  continues  in  Western  countries,  more  and  more  patients  are 
identified with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (Chap. 343). Of these, 
a significant subset has nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and can progress 
to increased fibrosis and cirrhosis. Over the past several years, it has 
been increasingly recognized that many patients who were thought to 
have  cryptogenic  cirrhosis  in  fact  have  nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis. 
As their cirrhosis progresses, they become catabolic and then lose the 
telltale signs of steatosis seen on biopsy. Management of complications 
of cirrhosis due to either AIH or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is similar 
to that for other forms of cirrhosis.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2626

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System ■ BILIARY CIRRHOSIS
Biliary  cirrhosis  has  pathologic  features  that  are  different  from  either 
alcohol-associated  cirrhosis  or  posthepatitic  cirrhosis,  yet  the  manifes-
tations of end-stage liver disease are the same. Cholestatic liver disease 
may  result  from  necroinflammatory  lesions,  congenital  or  metabolic 
processes, or external bile duct compression. Thus, two broad categories 
reflect  the  anatomic  sites  of  abnormal  bile  retention:  intrahepatic  and 
extrahepatic. The distinction is important for obvious therapeutic reasons. 
Extrahepatic obstruction may benefit from surgical or endoscopic biliary 
tract decompression, whereas intrahepatic cholestatic processes will not 
improve with such interventions and require a different approach.

The  major  causes  of  chronic  cholestatic  syndromes  are  primary 
biliary  cholangitis  (PBC),  autoimmune  cholangitis  (AIC),  primary 
sclerosing  cholangitis  (PSC),  and  idiopathic  adulthood  ductopenia. 
These syndromes are usually clinically distinguished from each other 
by antibody testing, cholangiographic findings, and clinical presenta-
tion.  However,  they  all  share  the  histopathologic  features  of  chronic 
cholestasis,  such  as  cholate  stasis;  copper  deposition;  xanthomatous 
transformation of hepatocytes; and irregular, so-called biliary fibrosis. 
In addition, there may be chronic portal inflammation, interface activ-
ity,  and  chronic  lobular  inflammation.  Ductopenia  is  a  result  of  this 
progressive disease as patients develop cirrhosis.
 ■ PRIMARY BILIARY CHOLANGITIS
PBC  is  seen  in  about  100–200  individuals  per  million,  with  a  strong 
female  preponderance  and  a  median  age  of  ~50  years  at  the  time  of 
diagnosis. The cause of PBC is unknown; it is characterized by portal 
inflammation and necrosis of cholangiocytes in small- and medium-
sized  bile  ducts.  Cholestatic  features  prevail,  and  biliary  cirrhosis  is 
characterized by an elevated bilirubin level and progressive liver fail-
ure. Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis due to PBC. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is 
the first-line treatment that has some degree of efficacy by slowing the 
rate of progression of the disease.

Antimitochondrial  antibodies  (AMAs)  are  present  in  ~95%  of 
patients with PBC. These autoantibodies recognize lipoic acid on the 
inner mitochondrial membrane proteins that are enzymes of the pyru-
vate  dehydrogenase  complex  (PDC),  the  branched-chain  2-oxoacid 
dehydrogenase complex, and the 2-oxogluterate dehydrogenase com-
plex.  These  autoantibodies  are  not  pathogenic,  but  rather  are  useful 
markers for making a diagnosis.

Pathology  Histopathologic  analyses  of  liver  biopsies  of  patients 
with PBC have resulted in identifying four distinct stages of the disease 
as  it  progresses.  The  earliest  lesion  is  termed  chronic  nonsuppurative 
destructive cholangitis and is a necrotizing inflammatory process of the 
portal tracts. Medium and small bile ducts are infiltrated with lympho-
cytes and undergo duct destruction. Mild fibrosis and sometimes bile 
stasis can occur. With progression, the inflammatory infiltrate becomes 
less  prominent,  but  the  number  of  bile  ducts  is  reduced  and  there  is 
proliferation of smaller bile ductules. Increased fibrosis ensues with the 
expansion of periportal fibrosis to bridging fibrosis. Finally, cirrhosis, 
which may be micronodular or macronodular, develops.

Clinical  Features  Currently,  most  patients  with  PBC  are  middle- 
aged  women  diagnosed  well  before  the  end-stage  manifestations  of 
the disease are present, and as such, most patients are asymptomatic. 
When  symptoms  are  present,  they  most  prominently  include  a  sig-
nificant  degree  of  fatigue  out  of  proportion  to  either  the  severity  of 
the liver disease or the age of the patient. Pruritus is seen in ~50% of 
patients at the time of diagnosis, and it can be debilitating. It might be 
intermittent and usually is most bothersome in the evening. In some 
patients,  pruritus  can  develop  toward  the  end  of  pregnancy  and  can 
be mistaken for cholestasis of pregnancy. Pruritus that presents prior 
to  the  development  of  jaundice  indicates  severe  disease  and  a  poor 
prognosis.

Physical  examination  can  show  jaundice  and  other  complications 
of chronic liver disease including hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, 
and edema. Other features that are unique to PBC include hyperpig-
mentation, xanthelasma, and xanthomata, which are related to altered 

cholesterol  metabolism.  Hyperpigmentation  is  evident  on  the  trunk 
and  the  arms  and  is  seen  in  areas  of  exfoliation  and  lichenification 
associated  with  progressive  scratching  related  to  the  pruritus.  Bone 
pain resulting from osteopenia or osteoporosis is occasionally seen at 
diagnosis.

2627

Laboratory  Findings  Laboratory  findings  in  PBC  show  choles-
tatic liver enzyme abnormalities with an elevation in γ-glutamyl trans-
peptidase  and  alkaline  phosphatase  (ALP)  along  with  mild  elevations 
in  aminotransferases  (ALT  and  AST).  Immunoglobulins,  particularly 
IgM,  are  typically  increased.  Hyperbilirubinemia  usually  is  seen  once 
cirrhosis  has  developed.  Thrombocytopenia,  leukopenia,  and  anemia 
may  be  seen  in  patients  with  portal  hypertension  and  hypersplenism. 
Liver biopsy shows characteristic features as described above and should 
be evident to any experienced hepatopathologist. Up to 10% of patients 
with characteristic PBC will have features of AIH (moderate to severe 
interphase hepatitis on biopsy, elevated ALT >5× the upper limit of nor-
mal, and elevated IgG levels) as well and are defined as having “overlap” 
syndrome. These patients are usually treated as PBC patients and may 
progress to cirrhosis with the same frequency as typical PBC patients. 
Some patients require immunosuppressive medications as well.

Diagnosis  PBC  should  be  considered  in  patients  with  chronic 
cholestatic liver enzyme abnormalities. AMA testing may be negative 
in as many as 5–10% of patients with PBC. These patients usually are 
positive  for  other  PBC-specific  autoantibodies  including  sp100  or 
gp210, although these tests are not universally available. Liver biopsy is 
most important in this setting of AMA-negative PBC. In patients who 
are AMA negative with cholestatic liver enzymes, PSC should be ruled 
out by way of cholangiography.

TREATMENT
Primary Biliary Cholangitis

Treatment  of  the  typical  manifestations  of  cirrhosis  is  no  differ-
ent  for  PBC  than  for  other  forms  of  cirrhosis.  UDCA  has  been 
shown  to  improve  both  biochemical  and  histologic  features  of 
the disease, thus slowing but not reversing or curing the disease. 
Improvement is greatest when therapy is initiated early; the like-
lihood of significant improvement with UDCA is low in patients 
with  PBC  who  present  with  manifestations  of  cirrhosis.  UDCA 
is  given in doses of 13–15 mg/kg  per  d;  the  medication  is  usually 
well  tolerated,  although  some  patients  have  worsening  pruritus 
with initiation of therapy. A small proportion of patients may have 
diarrhea or headache as a side effect of the drug. About 30–40% of 
patients  with  PBC  do  not  have  a  satisfactory  response  to  UDCA; 
about half of these patients will have significant improvement with 
obeticholic acid. Patients with PBC require long-term follow-up by 
a physician experienced with the disease. Certain patients may need 
to be considered for liver transplantation should their liver disease 
decompensate.

The  main  symptoms  of  PBC  are  fatigue  and  pruritus,  and 
symptom  management  is  important.  Several  therapies  have  been 
tried  for  treatment  of  fatigue,  but  none  of  them  has  been  suc-
cessful;  frequent  naps  should  be  encouraged.  Pruritus  is  treated 
with  antihistamines,  narcotic  receptor  antagonists  (naltrexone), 
and  rifampin.  Cholestyramine,  a  bile  salt–sequestering  agent,  has 
been helpful in some patients but is somewhat tedious and difficult 
to take. Plasmapheresis has been used rarely in patients with severe 
intractable pruritus. There is an increased incidence of osteopenia 
and osteoporosis in patients with cholestatic liver disease, and bone 
density testing should be performed. Oral calcium and vitamin D 
are also recommended. Treatment with a bisphosphonate should be 
instituted when bone disease is identified.

 ■ PRIMARY SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS
As  in  PBC,  the  cause  of  PSC  remains  unknown.  PSC  is  a  chronic 
cholestatic syndrome that is characterized by diffuse inflammation and 
fibrosis involving the entire biliary tree, resulting in chronic cholestasis. 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
4

C
i
r
r
h
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
I
t
s
C
o
m
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2627

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2628 This  pathologic  process  ultimately  results  in  obliteration  of  both  the 
intra- and extrahepatic biliary tree, leading to biliary cirrhosis, portal 
hypertension,  and  liver  failure.  The  cause  of  PSC  remains  unknown 
despite extensive investigation into various mechanisms related to bac-
terial and viral infections, toxins, genetic predisposition, and immuno-
logic mechanisms, all of which have been postulated to contribute to 
the pathogenesis and progression of this syndrome.

Liver  biopsy  changes  in  PSC  are  not  pathognomonic,  and  estab-
lishing the diagnosis of PSC must involve imaging of the biliary tree. 
Pathologic  changes  occurring  in  PSC  show  bile  duct  proliferation  as 
well as ductopenia and fibrous cholangitis (pericholangitis). Periductal 
fibrosis is occasionally seen on biopsy specimens and can be quite help-
ful in making the diagnosis. As the disease progresses, biliary cirrhosis 
is the end-stage manifestation of PSC.
Clinical Features  The usual clinical features of PSC are those found 
in cholestatic liver disease, with fatigue, pruritus, steatorrhea, deficien-
cies of fat-soluble vitamins, and the associated consequences. As in PBC, 
the fatigue is profound and nonspecific. Pruritus can often be debilitat-
ing  and  is  related  to  the  cholestasis.  The  severity  of  pruritus  does  not 
correlate with the severity of the disease. Metabolic bone disease, as seen 
in PBC, can occur with PSC and should be treated (see above).
Laboratory  Findings  Patients  with  PSC  typically  are  identified 
during  an  evaluation  of  abnormal  liver  enzymes.  Most  patients  have 
at least a twofold increase in ALP and may have elevated aminotrans-
ferases  as  well.  Albumin  levels  may  be  decreased,  and  prothrombin 
times are prolonged in a substantial proportion of patients at the time 
of  diagnosis.  Some  degree  of  correction  of  a  prolonged  prothrombin 
time may occur with parenteral vitamin K. A small subset of patients 
has  aminotransferase  elevations  >5×  the  upper  limit  of  normal  and 
may have features of AIH on biopsy indicating an overlap syndrome 
between  PSC  and  AIH.  Autoantibodies  are  frequently  positive  in 
patients  with  the  overlap  syndrome  but  are  typically  negative  in 
patients who only have PSC. One autoantibody, the perinuclear anti-
neutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibody  (pANCA),  is  positive  in  ~65%  of 
patients  with  PSC.  Sixty  to  eighty  percent  of  patients  with  PSC  have 
inflammatory  bowel  disease,  predominately  ulcerative  colitis  (UC); 
thus, a colonoscopy is recommended at diagnosis.
Diagnosis  The  definitive  diagnosis  of  PSC  requires  cholangio-
graphic  imaging.  Over  the  past  several  years,  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  (MRI)  with  magnetic  resonance  cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) has been used as the imaging technique of choice for initial 
evaluation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
should  be  performed  if  the  MRCP  provided  suboptimal  images  or  if 
there is clinical (newly elevated total bilirubin or worsening pruritus) 
or MRCP evidence of a dominant stricture. Typical cholangiographic 
findings in PSC are multifocal stricturing and beading involving both 
the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree. These strictures are typi-
cally short and with intervening segments of normal or slightly dilated 
bile ducts that are distributed diffusely, producing the classic beaded 
appearance. The gallbladder and cystic duct can be involved in up to 
15%  of  cases.  Gradually,  biliary  cirrhosis  develops,  and  patients  will 
progress to decompensated liver disease with all the manifestations of 
ascites, esophageal variceal hemorrhage, and encephalopathy.

TREATMENT
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
There  is  no  specific  proven  treatment  for  PSC.  Some  clinicians 
use UDCA at “PBC dosages” of 13–15 mg/kg per d with anecdotal 
improvement, although no study has shown convincing evidence of 
clinical benefit. A study of high-dose (28–30 mg/kg per d) UDCA 
found it to be harmful. Endoscopic dilatation of dominant strictures 
can  be  helpful,  but  the  ultimate  treatment  is  liver  transplantation 
when  decompensated  cirrhosis  develops.  Episodes  of  cholangitis 
should be treated with antibiotics. A dreaded complication of PSC 
is the development of cholangiocarcinoma, which is a relative con-
traindication to liver transplantation.

 ■ CARDIAC CIRRHOSIS
Definition  Patients with long-standing right-sided congestive heart 
failure may develop chronic liver injury and cardiac cirrhosis. This is 
an increasingly uncommon, if not rare, cause of chronic liver disease 
given the advances made in the care of patients with heart failure.

Etiology  and  Pathology 
In  the  case  of  long-term  right-sided 
heart failure, there is an elevated venous pressure transmitted via the 
inferior vena cava and hepatic veins to the sinusoids of the liver, which 
become dilated and engorged with blood. The liver becomes enlarged 
and swollen, and with long-term passive congestion and relative ische-
mia  due  to  poor  circulation,  centrilobular  hepatocytes  can  become 
necrotic, leading to pericentral fibrosis. This fibrotic pattern can extend 
to the periphery of the lobule outward until a unique pattern of fibrosis 
causing cirrhosis can occur.

Clinical Features  Patients typically have signs of congestive heart 
failure and will manifest an enlarged firm liver on physical examina-
tion. ALP levels are characteristically elevated, and aminotransferases 
may  be  normal  or  slightly  increased,  with  AST  usually  higher  than 
ALT.  It  is  unlikely  that  patients  will  develop  variceal  hemorrhage  or 
encephalopathy.

Diagnosis  The diagnosis is usually made in someone with clear-cut 
cardiac disease who has an elevated ALP and an enlarged liver. Liver 
biopsy shows a pattern of fibrosis that can be recognized by an experi-
enced hepatopathologist. Differentiation from Budd-Chiari syndrome 
(BCS) can be made by seeing extravasation of red blood cells in BCS, 
but  not  in  cardiac  hepatopathy.  Veno-occlusive  disease,  now  termed 
sinusoidal  obstructive  syndrome,  can  also  affect  hepatic  outflow  and 
has characteristic features on liver biopsy. Sinusoidal obstructive syn-
drome can be seen under the circumstances of conditioning for bone 
marrow  transplant  with  radiation  and  chemotherapy;  it  can  also  be 
seen with the ingestion of certain herbal teas as well as pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids.  This  is  typically  seen  in  Caribbean  countries  and  rarely  in 
the United States. Treatment is based on management of the underlying 
cardiac disease.

OTHER TYPES OF CIRRHOSIS
There are several other less common causes of chronic liver disease that 
can progress to cirrhosis. These include inherited metabolic liver dis-
eases such as hemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease, α1 antitrypsin (α1AT) 
deficiency, and cystic fibrosis. For these disorders, the manifestations 
of cirrhosis are similar, with some minor variations, to those seen in 
other patients with other causes of cirrhosis.

Hemochromatosis  is  an  inherited  disorder  of  iron  metabolism  that 
results in a progressive increase in hepatic iron deposition, which, over 
time, can lead to a portal-based fibrosis progressing to cirrhosis, liver 
failure, and hepatocellular cancer. While the frequency of hemochro-
matosis is relatively common, with genetic susceptibility occurring in 
1 in 250 individuals, the frequency of end-stage manifestations due to 
the disease is relatively low, and <5% of those patients who are geno-
typically  susceptible  will  go  on  to  develop  severe  liver  disease  from 
hemochromatosis. Diagnosis is made with serum iron studies showing 
an elevated transferrin saturation and an elevated ferritin level, along 
with abnormalities identified by HFE mutation analysis. Treatment is 
straightforward, with regular therapeutic phlebotomy.

Wilson’s disease is an inherited disorder of copper homeostasis with 
failure to excrete excess amounts of copper, leading to an accumulation 
in the liver. This disorder is relatively uncommon, affecting 1 in 30,000 
individuals.  Wilson’s  disease  typically  affects  adolescents  and  young 
adults.  Prompt  diagnosis  before  end-stage  manifestations  become 
irreversible  can  lead  to  significant  clinical  improvement.  Diagnosis 
requires  determination  of  ceruloplasmin  levels,  which  are  low;  24-h 
urine  copper  levels,  which  are  elevated;  typical  physical  examination 
findings,  including  Kayser-Fleischer  corneal  rings;  and  character-
istic  liver  biopsy  findings.  Treatment  consists  of  copper-chelating 
medications.

α1AT deficiency results from an inherited disorder that causes abnor-
mal folding of the α1AT protein, resulting in failure of secretion of that 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2628

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemprotein from the liver. It is unknown how the retained protein leads to 
liver disease. Patients with α1AT deficiency at greatest risk for develop-
ing chronic liver disease have the ZZ phenotype, but only ~10–20% of 
such individuals will develop chronic liver disease. Diagnosis is made 
by  determining  α1AT  levels  and  phenotype.  Characteristic  periodic 
acid–Schiff (PAS)–positive, diastase-resistant globules are seen on liver 
biopsy. The only effective treatment is liver transplantation, which is 
curative.

Cystic fibrosis is an uncommon inherited disorder affecting whites 
of northern European descent. A biliary-type cirrhosis can occur, and 
some patients derive benefit from the chronic use of UDCA.

MAJOR COMPLICATIONS OF CIRRHOSIS
These  include  gastroesophageal  variceal  hemorrhage,  splenomegaly, 
ascites,  hepatic  encephalopathy,  spontaneous  bacterial  peritonitis 
(SBP),  hepatorenal  syndrome  (HRS),  and  hepatocellular  carcinoma 
(Table 344-2). There are also more rare complications in the pulmo-
nary system including hepatopulmonary syndrome and portopulmo-
nary hypertension.
 ■ PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Portal  hypertension  is  defined  as  the  elevation  of  the  hepatic  venous 
pressure gradient (HVPG) to >5 mmHg. Portal hypertension is caused 
by  a  combination  of  two  simultaneously  occurring  hemodynamic 
processes: (1) increased intrahepatic resistance to the passage of blood 
flow  through  the  liver  due  to  cirrhosis,  regenerative  nodules,  and 
microthrombi, and (2) increased splanchnic blood flow secondary to 
vasodilation  within  the  splanchnic  vascular  bed.  In  more  advanced 
stages,  there  is  also  activation  of  neurohumoral  responses  and  vaso-
constrictive systems resulting in sodium and water retention, increased 
blood  volume,  and  hyperdynamic  circulatory  system  producing  more 
portal  hypertension.  There  is  usually  an  initial  stage  of  compensated 
cirrhosis with HVPG between 5 and 10 mmHg that can be asymptomatic 
and last for ≥10 years, but when clinically significant portal hypertension 
develops (defined as a HVPG ≥10 mmHg), there is substantial risk of 
decompensation with variceal bleeding, ascites, or hepatic encephalopa-
thy. With decompensation, median mortality is <2 years. Variceal hemor-
rhage is an immediate life-threatening problem with a 20–30% mortality 
rate associated with each episode of bleeding. The portal venous system 
normally drains blood from most of the GI tract including the stomach, 
small and large intestines, spleen, pancreas, and gallbladder.

The  causes  of  portal  hypertension  are  usually  subcategorized  as 
prehepatic,  intrahepatic,  and  posthepatic  (Table  344-3).  Prehepatic 
causes of portal hypertension are those affecting the portal venous sys-
tem before it enters the liver; they include portal vein thrombosis and 
splenic  vein  thrombosis.  Posthepatic  causes  encompass  those  affect-
ing  the  hepatic  veins  and  venous  drainage  to  the  heart;  they  include 
BCS  and  chronic  right-sided  cardiac  congestion.  Intrahepatic  causes 
account for >95% of cases of portal hypertension and are represented 
by  the  major  forms  of  cirrhosis.  Intrahepatic  causes  of  portal  hyper-
tension can be further subdivided into presinusoidal, sinusoidal, and 
postsinusoidal  causes.  Postsinusoidal  causes  include  veno-occlusive 

TABLE 344-2  Complications of Cirrhosis
Portal hypertension
  Gastroesophageal varices
  Portal hypertensive gastropathy
  Splenomegaly, hypersplenism
  Ascites

 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis

Hepatorenal syndrome
  Type 1
  Type 2
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Portopulmonary hypertension
Malnutrition

Coagulopathy
  Factor deficiency
  Fibrinolysis
  Thrombocytopenia
Bone disease
  Osteopenia
  Osteoporosis
  Osteomalacia
Hematologic abnormalities
  Anemia
  Hemolysis
  Thrombocytopenia
  Neutropenia

2629

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
4

C
i
r
r
h
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
I
t
s
C
o
m
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s

TABLE 344-3  Classification of Portal Hypertension
Prehepatic
  Portal vein thrombosis
  Splenic vein thrombosis
  Massive splenomegaly (Banti’s syndrome)
Hepatic
  Presinusoidal

  Schistosomiasis
  Congenital hepatic fibrosis

  Sinusoidal

  Cirrhosis—many causes
  Alcoholic hepatitis

  Postsinusoidal

  Hepatic sinusoidal obstruction (veno-occlusive syndrome)

Posthepatic
  Budd-Chiari syndrome

Inferior vena caval webs

  Cardiac causes

  Restrictive cardiomyopathy
  Constrictive pericarditis
  Severe congestive heart failure

disease, whereas presinusoidal causes include congenital hepatic fibro-
sis and schistosomiasis. Sinusoidal causes are related to cirrhosis from 
various causes.

Cirrhosis is the most common cause of portal hypertension in the 
United States, and clinically significant portal hypertension is present 
in  >60%  of  patients  with  cirrhosis.  Portal  vein  obstruction  may  be 
idiopathic or can occur in association with cirrhosis or with infection, 
pancreatitis, or abdominal trauma.

Coagulation  disorders  that  can  lead  to  the  development  of  portal 
vein thrombosis include polycythemia vera; essential thrombocytosis; 
deficiencies  in  protein  C,  protein  S,  antithrombin  III,  and  factor  V 
Leiden; and abnormalities in the gene-regulating prothrombin produc-
tion. Some patients may have a subclinical myeloproliferative disorder.
Clinical  Features  The  three  primary  complications  of  portal 
hypertension  are  gastroesophageal  varices  with  hemorrhage,  ascites, 
and hypersplenism. Thus, patients may present with upper GI bleed-
ing, which, on endoscopy, is found to be due to esophageal or gastric 
varices; with the development of ascites along with peripheral edema; 
or with an enlarged spleen with associated reduction in platelets and 
white blood cells on routine laboratory testing.
ESOPHAGEAL  VARICES  Over  the  past  decade,  it  has  become  com-
mon practice to screen known cirrhotics with endoscopy to look for 
esophageal  varices.  Such  screening  studies  have  shown  that  approx-
imately  one-third  of  patients  with  histologically  confirmed  cirrhosis 
have  varices.  Approximately  5–15%  of  cirrhotics  per  year  develop 
varices, and it is estimated that the majority of patients with cirrhosis 
will develop varices over their lifetimes. Furthermore, it is anticipated 
that roughly one-third of patients with varices will develop bleeding. 
Several factors predict the risk of bleeding, including the severity of cir-
rhosis (Child-Pugh class, Model for End-Stage Liver Disease [MELD] 
score); the height of wedged-hepatic vein pressure; the size of the varix; 
the  location  of  the  varix;  and  certain  endoscopic  stigmata,  including 
red  wale  signs,  hematocystic  spots,  diffuse  erythema,  bluish  color, 
cherry red spots, or white-nipple spots. Patients with tense ascites are 
also at increased risk for bleeding from varices.
Diagnosis 
In patients with cirrhosis who are being followed chroni-
cally, the development of portal hypertension is usually revealed by the 
presence of thrombocytopenia; the appearance of an enlarged spleen; 
or  the  development  of  ascites,  encephalopathy,  and/or  esophageal 
varices with or without bleeding. In previously undiagnosed patients, 
any  of  these  features  should  prompt  further  evaluation  to  determine 
the presence of portal hypertension and liver disease. Varices should 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2629

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2630 be  identified  by  endoscopy.  Contrasted-enhanced  abdominal  imag-
ing,  either  by  computed  tomography  (CT)  or  MRI,  can  be  helpful 
in  demonstrating  a  nodular  liver  and  in  finding  changes  of  portal 
hypertension  with  intraabdominal  collateral  circulation.  Rarely,  the 
HVPG is measured by interventional radiology. Patients with a gradient 
>12 mmHg are at risk for variceal hemorrhage.

TREATMENT
Variceal Hemorrhage

Treatment for esophageal varices as a complication of portal hyper-
tension is divided into two main categories: (1) primary prophylaxis 
and  (2)  prevention  of  rebleeding  once  there  has  been  an  initial 
variceal hemorrhage. Primary prophylaxis requires routine surveil-
lance by endoscopy of all patients with cirrhosis. Upper endoscop-
ies  are  recommended  at  diagnosis  of  compensated  cirrhosis  and 
then  every  2  years  if  the  liver  disease  is  active  or  every  3  years  if 
inactive (alcohol cessation, viral hepatitis eradication). Endoscopy 
is also recommended at the time of hepatic decompensation. Once 
varices that are at increased risk for bleeding are identified, usually 
defined as medium or large varices or small varices with high-risk 
stigmata or in decompensated cirrhosis, primary prophylaxis can be 
achieved either through nonselective beta blockade (NSBB) titrated 
with a goal heart rate of 55–60 beats/min with systolic blood pres-
sure >90 mmHg or by variceal band ligation. Numerous placebo-
controlled  clinical  trials  of  either  propranolol  or  nadolol  show  a 
lower risk of variceal hemorrhage and mortality related to variceal 
hemorrhage but no clear benefit on overall survival.

Endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL) has been compared to NSBB 
for primary prophylaxis against variceal bleeding, and EVL appears 
to have equivalent efficacy. Two more recent trials comparing EVL 
to carvedilol, a drug with NSBB and anti–α1-adrenergic properties, 
showed similar efficacy. Thus, either NSSB or EVL is effective for 
primary  prophylaxis  of  bleeding,  and  the  choice  should  be  based 
on patient and physician preference and tolerability. Once primary 
prophylaxis has been initiated, repeat endoscopy for surveillance of 
varices is unnecessary.

The approach to patients once they have had a variceal bleed is 
first to treat the acute bleed, which can be life-threatening, and then 
to  prevent  further  bleeding.  Treatment  of  acute  bleeding  requires 
both fluid and red blood cell replacement to stabilize hemodynam-
ics. A recent randomized trial of restricted transfusion starting when 
hemoglobin is <7 g/dL with a goal hemoglobin of 7–9 g/dL, com-
pared to a more liberal strategy, resulted in reduced early rebleeding 
and mortality. This strategy is recommended, although adjustments 
should be made based on cardiac risks and hemodynamics. Correct-
ing  an  elevated  prothrombin  time  with  fresh  frozen  plasma  is  not 
recommended  unless  there  is  evidence  of  coagulopathy  (bleeding 
at other sites such as IV lines). The use of vasoconstricting agents, 
usually somatostatin or octreotide, has been shown to improve initial 
bleeding control and reduce transfusion requirements and all-cause 
mortality. Prophylactic antibiotics, usually with ceftriaxone, started 
prior to endoscopy result in reduced infections, recurrent bleeding, 
and  mortality.  Balloon  tamponade  (Sengstaken-Blakemore  tube  or 
Minnesota tube) can be used in patients who need stabilization prior 
to endoscopic therapy or as a bridge to transjugular intrahepatic por-
tosystemic shunt (TIPS) after endoscopic failure. Control of bleeding 
can  be  achieved  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases;  however,  bleeding 
recurs in the majority of patients if definitive endoscopic therapy has 
not been instituted. Upper endoscopy is used as first-line treatment 
to diagnose the cause of the bleeding and to control bleeding acutely 
with EVL. When esophageal varices extend into the proximal stom-
ach  or  the  bleeding  varices  are  entirely  within  the  stomach,  band 
ligation is often unsuccessful. In these situations, consideration for a 
TIPS should be made. This technique creates a portosystemic shunt 
by a percutaneous approach using an expandable metal stent, which 
is  advanced  under  angiographic  guidance  to  the  hepatic  veins  and 
then through the substance of the liver to create a direct portocaval 

shunt.  Encephalopathy  can  occur  in  as  many  as  20%  of  patients 
after TIPS and is particularly problematic in elderly patients and in 
patients  with  preexisting  encephalopathy.  TIPS  is  usually  reserved 
for individuals who fail or are unable to receive endoscopic therapy, 
although  there  is  emerging  evidence  that  patient  who  are  highly 
selected to be at high risk for rebleeding may also benefit. TIPS can 
sometimes be used as a bridge to transplantation, and all patients 
requiring  TIPS  should  be  considered  for  transplant  evaluation. 
Some  gastric  varices  are  associated  with  a  splenorenal  shunt  and 
can be effectively treated with a balloon occluded retrograde trans-
venous  obliteration  (BRTO)  of  varices  sometimes  in  combination 
with a TIPS. Prevention of further bleeding is usually accomplished 
with repeated variceal band ligation until varices are obliterated in 
combination with NSBB. If recurrent variceal bleeding occurs, then 
TIPS  should  be  performed  for  long-term  prevention  of  bleeding. 
Once a TIPS has been performed, there is no need for further endo-
scopies for variceal surveillance; however, the TIPS should be period-
ically monitored with Doppler ultrasound for stenosis. (Fig. 344-3).

 ■ PORTAL HYPERTENSIVE GASTROPATHY
Portal  hypertensive  gastropathy  can  cause  both  acute  clinical  GI 
bleeding and chronic bleeding resulting in iron-deficiency anemia. It 
is associated with all causes of portal hypertension and is diagnosed by 
characteristic  endoscopy  findings  showing  a  snake  skin–like  mosaic 
pattern of gastric mucosa often with central red or brown spots. When 
there is bleeding, treatment is with NSBB and iron repletion. Refrac-
tory bleeding may respond to TIPS.
 ■ SPLENOMEGALY AND HYPERSPLENISM
Congestive  splenomegaly  with  hypersplenism  is  common  in  patients 
with  portal  hypertension  and  is  usually  the  first  indication  of  portal 
hypertension.  Clinical  features  include  the  presence  of  an  enlarged 
spleen  on  physical  examination  and  the  development  of  thrombocy-
topenia and leukopenia in patients who have cirrhosis. Some patients 
will have significant left-sided and left upper quadrant abdominal pain 

Recurrent acute bleeding

Endoscopic therapy
+
Pharmacologic therapy

Control of bleeding

Compensated cirrhosis
Child’s class A

Decompensated cirrhosis
Child’s class B or C

TIPS

Transplant evaluation

Consider liver
transplantation
evaluation

Endoscopic therapy or
beta blockers

Consider TIPS

Liver transplantation

FIGURE  344-3  Management  of  recurrent  variceal  hemorrhage.  This  algorithm 
describes  an  approach  to  management  of  patients  who  have  recurrent  bleeding 
from esophageal varices. Initial therapy is generally with endoscopic therapy often 
supplemented  by  pharmacologic  therapy.  With  control  of  bleeding,  a  decision 
needs to be made as to whether patients should go on to transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt (TIPS; if they are Child’s class A) or if they should have TIPS 
and be considered for transplant (if they are Child’s class B or C).

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2630

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemCirrhosis

Portal hypertension

Splanchnic vasodilation

↑ Splanchnic pressure

Arterial underfilling

Lymph formation

Formation of ascites

Activation of 
vasoconstrictors and
antinatriuretic factors*

Plasma volume
expansion

Sodium retention

FIGURE 344-4  Development of ascites in cirrhosis. This flow diagram illustrates the 
importance of portal hypertension with splanchnic vasodilation in the development 
of  ascites.  *Antinatriuretic  factors  include  the  renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system and the sympathetic nervous system.

related to an enlarged spleen. Splenomegaly itself usually requires no 
specific treatment.
 ■ ASCITES
Definition  Ascites  is  the  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  peri-
toneal  cavity.  Overwhelmingly,  the  most  common  cause  of  ascites  is 
portal  hypertension  related  to  cirrhosis;  however,  clinicians  should 
remember that malignant, infectious, and cardiac causes of ascites can 
be present as well, and careful differentiation of these other causes is 
obviously important for patient care.
Pathogenesis  The  presence  of  portal  hypertension  contributes  to 
the development of ascites in patients who have cirrhosis (Fig. 344-4). 
There is an increase in intrahepatic resistance, causing increased portal 
pressure, but there is also vasodilation of the splanchnic arterial system, 
which,  in  turn,  results  in  an  increase  in  portal  venous  inflow.  Both 
abnormalities  result  in  increased  production  of  splanchnic  lymph. 
Vasodilating factors such as nitric oxide are responsible for the vaso-
dilatory effect. There is activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system with the development of hyperaldosteronism and activation of 
the  sympathetic  nervous  system  as  a  consequence  of  a  homeostatic 
response caused by underfilling of the arterial circulation secondary to 
arterial vasodilation in the splanchnic vascular bed. The renal effects 
of increased aldosterone and activation of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem lead to sodium retention causing fluid accumulation and expan-
sion  of  the  extracellular  fluid  volume,  resulting  in  peripheral  edema 
and ascites. Because the retained fluid is constantly leaking out of the 
intravascular compartment into the peritoneal cavity, the sensation of 
vascular filling is not achieved, and the process continues. Hypoalbu-
minemia from decreased synthetic function in a cirrhotic liver results 
in reduced plasma oncotic pressure and contributes to the loss of fluid 
from the vascular compartment into the peritoneal cavity.
Clinical  Features  Patients  typically  note  an  increase  in  abdomi-
nal girth that is often accompanied by the development of peripheral 
edema. The development of ascites is often insidious, and it is surpris-
ing  that  some  patients  wait  so  long  and  become  so  distended  before 
seeking medical attention. Patients usually have at least 1–2 L of fluid 
in the abdomen before they are aware that there is an increase. If ascitic 
fluid  is  massive,  respiratory  function  can  be  compromised,  causing 
dyspnea.  Hepatic  hydrothorax  may  also  contribute  to  respiratory 
symptoms.  Patients  with  massive  ascites  are  often  malnourished  and 
have muscle wasting and excessive fatigue and weakness.

Diagnosis  Diagnosis  of  ascites  is  by  physical  examination  and  is 
often aided by abdominal imaging. Patients will have bulging flanks, 

2631

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
4

C
i
r
r
h
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
I
t
s
C
o
m
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s

may have a fluid wave, or may have the presence of shifting dullness. 
This is determined by taking patients from a supine position to lying 
on  either  their  left  or  right  side  and  noting  the  movement  of  the 
dullness  to  percussion.  Subtle  amounts  of  ascites  can  be  detected  by 
ultrasound or CT scanning. Hepatic hydrothorax is more common on 
the right side and implicates a rent in the diaphragm with free flow of 
ascitic fluid into the thoracic cavity.

When  patients  present  with  ascites  for  the  first  time,  it  is  recom-
mended  that  a  diagnostic  paracentesis  be  performed  to  characterize 
the fluid. This should include the determination of total protein and 
albumin  content,  blood  cell  counts  with  differential,  and  cultures.  In 
the  appropriate  setting,  amylase  may  be  measured  and  cytology  per-
formed.  In  patients  with  cirrhosis,  the  protein  concentration  of  the 
ascitic  fluid  is  low,  usually  <2.5  g/dL.  The  serum  ascites-to-albumin 
gradient  (SAAG),  calculated  by  subtracting  the  fluid  albumin  level 
from  the  serum  albumin  level,  has  replaced  the  description  of  exu-
dative or transudative fluid. When the SAAG is >1.1 g/dL, the cause 
of the ascites is most likely due to portal hypertension; this is usually 
in the setting of cirrhosis. Cardiac ascites can be identified by SAAG 
>1.1 g/dL and ascites protein >2.5g/dL. When the SAAG is <1.1 g/dL, 
infectious or malignant causes of ascites should be considered. When 
ascitic fluid protein is very low, <1.5 g/dL, patients are at increased risk 
for developing SBP. A high level of red blood cells in the ascitic fluid 
usually signifies a traumatic tap but can also rarely occur with hepato-
cellular cancer or a ruptured omental varix. When the absolute level of 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes is >250/μL, infection is likely.

TREATMENT
Ascites
Patients  with  small  amounts  of  ascites  can  usually  be  managed 
with  dietary  sodium  restriction  alone.  Most  average  diets  in  the 
United States contain 6–8 g of sodium per day, and if patients eat at 
restaurants or fast-food outlets, the amount of sodium in their diet 
can exceed this amount. Thus, it is often extremely difficult to get 
patients to change their dietary habits to ingest 2 g of sodium per 
day, equivalent to slightly more than three-quarters of a teaspoon 
of  salt,  which  is  the  recommended  amount.  Sodium  educational 
pamphlets  are  helpful.  Often,  a  simple  recommendation  is  to  eat 
fresh or frozen foods, avoiding canned or processed foods. When 
a moderate amount of ascites is present, diuretic therapy is usually 
necessary. Traditionally, spironolactone at 100 mg/d as a single dose 
is started, and furosemide may be added at 40 mg/d, particularly in 
patients  who  have  peripheral  edema.  Failure  of  the  diuretics  sug-
gests  that  patients  may  not  be  compliant  with  a  low-sodium  diet. 
If compliance is confirmed and ascitic fluid is not being mobilized, 
there should be incremental increases in spironolactone to a maxi-
mum of 400 mg/d and furosemide to 160 mg/d. If a large amount of 
ascites is still present on diuretics in patients who are compliant with 
a low-sodium diet, then they are defined as having refractory ascites, 
and  alternative  treatment  modalities  including  repeated  large- 
volume paracentesis (LVP) or a TIPS procedure should be consid-
ered (Fig. 344-5). After LVP of ≥5 L, IV 25% albumin at a dose of 
~8  g/L  of  removed  ascites  should  be  given  to  prevent  circulatory 
dysfunction.  Multiple  studies  have  shown  that  TIPS,  although 
effective at managing the ascites, does not improve survival. Unfor-
tunately,  TIPS  is  often  associated  with  an  increased  frequency  of 
hepatic encephalopathy and must be considered carefully on a case-
by-case basis. The prognosis for patients with cirrhosis with ascites 
is poor, and some studies have shown that <50% of patients survive 
2  years  after  the  onset  of  ascites.  Thus,  there  should  be  consider-
ation for liver transplantation in patients with ascites. Patients with 
cirrhosis and ascites are at increased risk for renal failure from cer-
tain  medications  including  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs 
and  aminoglycosides;  therefore,  these  medications  should  gener-
ally  be  avoided.  Angiotensin-converting  enzyme  inhibitors  and 
angiotensin receptor blockers should be used cautiously with close 
monitoring of blood pressure and renal function.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2631

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2632

Symptomatic ascites

Large-volume paracentesis (LVP) + albumin

Dietary sodium restriction + diuretics

Ascites reaccumulation

Consider TIPS

Continue LVP with 
albumin as needed

Consider liver 
transplantation

FIGURE  344-5  Treatment  of  refractory  ascites.  In  patients  who  develop  azotemia 
in the course of receiving diuretics in the management of their ascites, some will 
require  repeated  large-volume  paracentesis  (LVP),  some  may  be  considered  for 
transjugular  intrahepatic  portosystemic  shunt  (TIPS),  and  some  would  be  good 
candidates for liver transplantation. These decisions are all individualized.

 ■ SPONTANEOUS BACTERIAL PERITONITIS
SBP is a common and severe complication of ascites characterized by 
spontaneous  infection  of  the  ascitic  fluid  without  an  intraabdominal 
source.  In  hospitalized  patients  with  cirrhosis  and  ascites,  SBP  can 
occur  in  up  to  30%  of  individuals  and  can  have  a  25%  in-hospital 
mortality  rate.  Bacterial  translocation  is  the  presumed  mechanism 
for  development  of  SBP,  with  gut  flora  traversing  the  intestine  into 
mesenteric  lymph  nodes,  leading  to  bacteremia  and  seeding  of  the 
ascitic  fluid.  The  most  common  organisms  are  Escherichia  coli  and 
other  gut  bacteria;  however,  gram-positive  bacteria,  including  Strep-
tococcus  viridans,  Staphylococcus  aureus,  and  Enterococcus  spp.,  can 
also  be  found.  If  more  than  two  organisms  are  identified,  secondary 
bacterial peritonitis due to a perforated viscus should be considered. 
The diagnosis of SBP is made when the fluid sample has an absolute 
neutrophil  count  >250/μL.  Bedside  cultures  should  be  obtained  by 
direct injection of ascitic fluid into blood culture bottles. Patients with 
ascites  may  present  with  fever,  altered  mental  status,  elevated  white 
blood  cell  count,  abdominal  pain  or  discomfort,  and  acute  kidney 
injury, or they may present without any of these features. Therefore, it 
is necessary to have a high degree of clinical suspicion, and peritoneal 
taps  are  recommended  for  most  cirrhosis  patients  hospitalized  with 
ascites and cirrhosis complications or signs of infection. Treatment is 
commonly with intravenous third-generation cephalosporin for 5 days. 
In addition, intravenous albumin (1.5 g/kg body weight on day and 
1.0 g/kg on day 3) has been shown to reduce the risk of renal failure 
and to improve survival. In patients with variceal hemorrhage, the fre-
quency of SBP is significantly increased, and prophylaxis against SBP 
is recommended when a patient presents with upper GI bleeding. Fur-
thermore, in patients who have had an episode (or multiple episodes) 
of SBP and recovered, quinolone antibiotic prophylaxis should be given 
to prevent recurrent SBP.

 ■ HEPATORENAL SYNDROME
HRS  is  a  form  of  functional  renal  failure  without  renal  pathology 
that occurs in ~10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis or acute liver 
failure. There are marked disturbances in the arterial renal circulation 
in patients with HRS; these include an increase in vascular resistance 
accompanied by a reduction in systemic vascular resistance. The rea-
son for renal vasoconstriction is most likely multifactorial and is poorly 
understood. The diagnosis is made usually in the presence of a large 
amount of ascites in patients who have a stepwise progressive increase 
in creatinine. Type 1 HRS is characterized by a progressive impairment 
in  renal  function  and  a  significant  reduction  in  creatinine  clearance 
within  1–2  weeks  of  presentation.  Type  2  HRS  is  characterized  by  a 
reduction in glomerular filtration rate with an elevation of serum crea-
tinine level, but it is stable and is associated with a better outcome than 
that of type 1 HRS.

HRS  requires  exclusion  of  other  causes  of  acute  renal  failure, 
most  notably  volume  depletion.  Diuretics  should  be  stopped,  and 
infusion  of  albumin  1  g/kg  per  day  is  recommended.  Treatment  is 
with vasoconstrictors such as terlipressin (not currently available in 
North America) or low-dose norepinephrine (requires intensive care 
unit monitoring). Midodrine, an α-agonist, along with octreotide and 
intravenous  albumin  are  also  commonly  used  in  the  United  States. 
The  best  therapy  for  HRS  is  liver  transplantation;  recovery  of  renal 
function is typical in this setting. In patients with either type 1 or type 
2 HRS, the prognosis is poor unless transplant can be achieved within 
a short period of time.
 ■ HEPATIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Portosystemic  encephalopathy  is  a  serious  complication  of  chronic 
liver disease and is broadly defined as an alteration in mental status and 
cognitive function occurring in the presence of liver failure. In severe 
acute liver injury, the development of encephalopathy is a requirement 
for a diagnosis of acute liver failure and can be seen in association with 
life-threatening  brain  edema,  which  is  not  a  feature  in  chronic  liver 
disease. Encephalopathy is much more commonly seen in patients with 
chronic  liver  disease.  Gut-derived  neurotoxins  that  are  not  removed 
by the liver because of vascular shunting and decreased hepatic mass 
reach  the  brain  and  cause  the  symptoms  known  as  hepatic  enceph-
alopathy.  Ammonia  levels  are  typically  elevated,  but  the  correlation 
between severity of liver disease and height of ammonia levels is often 
poor, and most hepatologists do not rely on ammonia levels to make 
a diagnosis or follow clinical progress. Other compounds and metabo-
lites that may contribute to the development of encephalopathy include 
certain false neurotransmitters and mercaptans.

Clinical  Features 
In  acute  liver  failure,  changes  in  mental  status 
can  occur  rapidly.  Brain  edema  can  be  seen  in  these  patients,  with 
severe  encephalopathy  associated  with  swelling  of  the  gray  matter. 
Cerebral herniation is a feared complication of brain edema in acute 
liver  failure,  and  treatment  to  decrease  edema  is  with  mannitol  and 
judicious use of intravenous fluids.

In  patients  with  cirrhosis,  encephalopathy  is  often  found  as  a 
result  of  certain  precipitating  events  such  as  hypokalemia,  infection, 
an increased dietary protein load, or volume depletion. Patients may 
be confused or exhibit a change in personality. They may actually be 
quite  violent  and  difficult  to  manage;  alternatively,  patients  may  be 
very sleepy and difficult to rouse. Precipitating events are common, so 
they should be sought carefully. If patients have ascites, this should be 
tapped to rule out infection. Evidence of GI bleeding should be sought, 
and patients should be appropriately hydrated. Electrolytes should be 
measured  and  abnormalities  corrected.  In  patients  presenting  with 
encephalopathy, asterixis is often present. Asterixis can be elicited by 
having patients extend their arms and bend their wrists back. Patients 
who are encephalopathic have a “liver flap”—that is, a sudden forward 
movement of the wrist. This requires patients to be able to cooperate 
with the examiner. Alternative causes for altered mental status should 
also be considered.

The  diagnosis  of  hepatic  encephalopathy  is  clinical  and  requires 
an experienced clinician to recognize and put together all the various 
features. Often when patients have encephalopathy for the first time, 
they (and/or their caregivers) are unaware of what is transpiring, but 
once they have been through the experience, they can identify when 
this is developing in subsequent situations and can often self-medicate 
to prevent the development or worsening of encephalopathy.

TREATMENT
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Treatment is multifactorial and includes management of the above-
mentioned  precipitating  factors.  Sometimes  hydration  and  cor-
rection  of  electrolyte  imbalance  are  all  that  is  necessary.  In  the 
past, restriction of dietary protein was used; however, the negative 
impact of that maneuver on overall nutrition is thought to outweigh 
the  benefit,  and  it  is  thus  strongly  discouraged.  The  mainstay  of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2632

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemtreatment  for  encephalopathy  is  to  use  lactulose,  a  nonabsorb-
able disaccharide, which results in colonic acidification. Catharsis 
ensues, contributing to the elimination of nitrogenous products in 
the gut that are responsible for the development of encephalopathy. 
The goal of lactulose therapy is to promote two to three soft stools 
per day. Patients are asked to titrate their amount of ingested lac-
tulose to achieve the desired effect. Lactulose is usually continued 
after the initial episode of encephalopathy. Poorly absorbed antibi-
otics are often used as adjunctive therapies for patients who have 
a  difficult  time  with  lactulose.  The  alternating  administration  of 
neomycin and metronidazole has been used in the past to reduce 
the individual side effects of each: neomycin for renal insufficiency 
and ototoxicity and metronidazole for peripheral neuropathy. More 
recently,  rifaximin  at  550  mg  twice  daily  has  been  very  effective 
in  preventing  recurrent  encephalopathy.  Zinc  supplementation  is 
sometimes  helpful  and  is  relatively  harmless.  The  development 
of encephalopathy in patients with chronic liver disease is a poor 
prognostic sign, but this complication can be managed in the vast 
majority of patients.

 ■ LIVER-LUNG SYNDROMES
Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is characterized by arterial hypox-
emia in a patient with cirrhosis without significant lung disease. The 
liver  disease  causes  intrapulmonary  vascular  dilations  resulting  in 
blood shunting past alveoli and significant ventilation-perfusion mis-
match. Clinical symptoms include dyspnea and platypnea. HPS is com-
mon, occurring in 4–32% of patients with cirrhosis; however, it is often 
mild. Diagnosis involves demonstrating hypoxemia, without evidence 
of  significant  lung  disease,  and  shunt  on  bubble  echocardiography. 
Treatment is with oxygen supplementation and liver transplantation.

Portopulmonary hypertension (PPHT) is pulmonary hypertension 
in a patient with portal hypertension. The portal hypertension results 
in  the  production  of  vasoconstrictor  substances  that  affect  the  pul-
monary  artery.  Many  patients  are  asymptomatic,  especially  early  in 
the disease; however, they later can develop dyspnea on exertion and 
fatigue.  PPHT  is  rare,  occurring  in  ~5%  of  patients  with  advanced 
cirrhosis. Diagnosis includes initial identification on echocardiogram 
and confirmation on right heart catheterization showing elevated mean 
pulmonary  artery  pressure,  elevated  pulmonary  vascular  resistance, 
and  normal  pulmonary  capillary  wedge  pressure.  Prognosis  is  poor, 
although  liver  transplantation  after  effective  reduction  in  pulmonary 
artery pressure with vasodilatory medications can be effective.
 ■ MALNUTRITION IN CIRRHOSIS
Because  the  liver  is  principally  involved  in  the  regulation  of  protein 
and energy metabolism in the body, it is not surprising that patients 
with  advanced  liver  disease  are  commonly  malnourished.  Once 
patients  become  cirrhotic,  they  are  more  catabolic,  and  muscle  pro-
tein  is  metabolized.  There  are  multiple  factors  that  contribute  to  the 
malnutrition of cirrhosis, including poor dietary intake, alterations in 
gut nutrient absorption, and alterations in protein metabolism. Close 
attention to food intake is helpful in preventing patients from becom-
ing catabolic. General recommendations include multiple small meals 
including a late evening snack with total calories of 25–30 kcal per kg 
of ideal body weight per day and 1.2–1.5 g of protein per kg of ideal 
body weight per day.

 ■ ABNORMALITIES IN COAGULATION
Coagulation disorders in cirrhosis are poorly understood, and typical 
clinical  measures  of  coagulation,  such  as  the  prothrombin  time  and 
international  normalized  ratio,  are  not  reliable  measures  of  clotting 
ability. There is decreased synthesis of both pro- and anticoagulant fac-
tors and thus some rebalancing in coagulation; however, the coagula-
tion cascade can easily tip toward thrombosis or bleeding. In addition, 
patients may have thrombocytopenia from hypersplenism due to portal 
hypertension and some platelet dysfunction, which is counterbalanced 
with  increased  von  Willebrand  factor.  Adequate  thrombin  formation 
can occur with platelet levels from cirrhosis patients >50,000–60,000/L. 
Synthesis  of  vitamin  K–dependent  clotting  factors  II,  VII,  IX,  and  X 

is diminished in patients with chronic cholestatic syndromes because 
absorption of vitamin K requires good bile flow. Intravenous or intra-
muscular vitamin K can quickly correct this abnormality. Overall, the 
status of coagulation in a cirrhotic patient needs to be judged clinically 
rather than relying on current laboratory tests.
 ■ BONE DISEASE IN CIRRHOSIS
Osteoporosis  is  common  in  patients  with  chronic  cholestatic  liver 
disease because of malabsorption of vitamin D and decreased calcium 
ingestion. The rate of bone resorption exceeds that of new bone forma-
tion in patients with cirrhosis, resulting in bone loss. Dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA) is a useful method for determining osteopo-
rosis or osteopenia. When a DEXA scan shows osteoporosis, treatment 
with bisphosphonates is effective.
 ■ HEMATOLOGIC ABNORMALITIES IN CIRRHOSIS
Numerous hematologic manifestations of cirrhosis are present, includ-
ing anemia from a variety of causes including hypersplenism, hemoly-
sis,  iron  deficiency,  and  perhaps  folate  deficiency  from  malnutrition. 
Macrocytosis is a common abnormality in red blood cell morphology 
seen in patients with chronic liver disease, and neutropenia may be a 
result of hypersplenism.
 ■ FURTHER READING
AASLD/IDSA  HCV  Guidance  Panel:  Hepatitis  C  guidance  2019 
update: AASLD-IDSA recommendations for testing, managing, and 
treating hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology 71:686, 2020.

Biggins  SW  et  al:  Diagnosis,  evaluation  and  management  of  ascites 
and hepatorenal syndrome: 2021 Practice guidance by the American 
Association  for  the  Study  of  Liver  Diseases.  Hepatology  74:1014, 
2021.

Garcia-Tsao G et al: Portal hypertensive bleeding in cirrhosis: Risk 
stratification, diagnosis and management: 2016 practice guidance by 
the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 
65:310, 2017.

Terrault NA et al: Update on prevention, diagnosis and treatment of 
chronic  hepatitis  B:  AASLD  2018  hepatitis  B  guidance.  Hepatology 
67:1560, 2018.

Vilstrup  H  et  al:  Hepatic  encephalopathy  in  chronic  liver  disease: 
2014 Practice Guideline by the American Association for the Study 
of Liver Diseases and the European Association for the Study of the 
Liver. Hepatology 60:715, 2014.

2633

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
5

L
i
v
e
r
T
r
a
n
s
p
l
a
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

345 Liver Transplantation

Raymond T. Chung, Jules L. Dienstag

Liver transplantation—the replacement of the native, diseased liver by 
a  normal  organ  (allograft)—has  matured  from  an  experimental  pro-
cedure  reserved  for  desperately  ill  patients  to  an  accepted,  lifesaving 
operation  applied  more  optimally  in  the  natural  history  of  end-stage 
liver  disease.  The  preferred  and  technically  most  advanced  approach 
is orthotopic transplantation, in which the native organ is removed and 
the donor organ is inserted in the same anatomic location. Pioneered 
in the 1960s by Thomas Starzl at the University of Colorado and, later, at 
the University of Pittsburgh and by Roy Calne in Cambridge, England, 
liver  transplantation  is  now  performed  routinely  worldwide.  Success 
measured as 1-year survival has improved from ~30% in the 1970s to 
>90% today. These improved prospects for prolonged survival resulted 
from refinements in operative technique, improvements in organ pro-
curement  and  preservation,  advances  in  immunosuppressive  therapy, 
and, perhaps most influentially, more enlightened patient selection and 
timing. Despite the perioperative morbidity and mortality, the technical 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2633

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2634 and management challenges of the procedure, and its costs, liver trans-
plantation  has  become  the  approach  of  choice  for  selected  patients 
whose  chronic  or  acute  liver  disease  is  progressive,  life-threatening, 
and unresponsive to medical therapy. Based on the current level of suc-
cess, the number of liver transplants has continued to grow each year; 
in 2020, 8906 patients received liver allografts in the United States. Still, 
the demand for new livers continues to outpace availability; as of 2021, 
11,710 patients in the United States were on a waiting list for a donor 
liver. In response to this drastic shortage of donor organs, many trans-
plantation  centers  supplement  deceased-donor  liver  transplantation 
with living-donor transplantation.

INDICATIONS
Potential  candidates  for  liver  transplantation  are  children  and  adults 
who,  in  the  absence  of  contraindications  (see  below),  suffer  from 
severe, irreversible liver disease for which alternative medical or sur-
gical treatments have been exhausted or are unavailable. Timing of the 
operation is of critical importance. Indeed, improved timing and better 
patient  selection  are  felt  to  have  contributed  more  to  the  increased 
success  of  liver  transplantation  in  the  1980s  and  beyond  than  all  the 
impressive technical and immunologic advances combined. Although 
the  disease  should  be  advanced,  and  although  opportunities  for 
spontaneous or medically induced stabilization or recovery should be 
allowed,  the  procedure  should  be  done  sufficiently  early  to  give  the 
surgical  procedure  a  fair  chance  for  success.  Ideally,  transplantation 
should be considered in patients with end-stage liver disease who are 
experiencing  or  have  experienced  a  life-threatening  complication  of 
hepatic  decompensation  or  whose  quality  of  life  has  deteriorated  to 
unacceptable levels. Although patients with well-compensated cirrho-
sis can survive for many years, many patients with quasi-stable chronic 
liver disease have much more advanced disease than may be apparent. 
As discussed below, the better the status of the patient prior to trans-
plantation, the higher will be its anticipated success rate. The decision 
about when to transplant is complex and requires the combined judg-
ment  of  an  experienced  team  of  hepatologists,  transplant  surgeons, 
anesthesiologists,  and  specialists  in  support  services,  not  to  mention 
the well-informed consent of the patient and the patient’s family.
 ■ TRANSPLANTATION IN CHILDREN
Indications  for  transplantation  in  children  are  listed  in  Table  345-1. 
The  most  common  is  biliary  atresia.  Inherited  or  genetic  disorders 
of  metabolism  associated  with  liver  failure  constitute  another  major 

TABLE 345-1  Indications for Liver Transplantation
CHILDREN
Biliary atresia
Neonatal hepatitis
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Alagille’s syndromea
Byler’s diseaseb
α1 Antitrypsin deficiency
Inherited disorders of metabolism
  Wilson’s disease
  Tyrosinemia
  Glycogen storage diseases
  Lysosomal storage diseases
  Protoporphyria
  Crigler-Najjar disease type I
  Familial hypercholesterolemia
  Primary hyperoxaluria type I
  Hemophilia

ADULTS
Primary biliary cholangitis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Caroli’s diseasec
Cryptogenic cirrhosis
Chronic hepatitis with cirrhosis
Hepatic vein thrombosis
Fulminant hepatitis
Alcohol-associated cirrhosis
Chronic viral hepatitis
Primary hepatocellular malignancies
Hepatic adenomas
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy

aArteriohepatic dysplasia, with paucity of bile ducts, and congenital malformations, 
including pulmonary stenosis. bIntrahepatic cholestasis, progressive liver failure, 
and mental and growth retardation. cMultiple cystic dilatations of the intrahepatic 
biliary tree.

indication for transplantation in children and adolescents. In Crigler-
Najjar  disease  type  I  and  in  certain  hereditary  disorders  of  the  urea 
cycle  and  of  amino  acid  or  lactate-pyruvate  metabolism,  transplan-
tation  may  be  the  only  way  to  prevent  impending  deterioration  of 
central nervous system function, despite the fact that the native liver 
is  structurally  normal.  Combined  heart  and  liver  transplantation  has 
yielded dramatic improvement in cardiac function and in cholesterol 
levels  in  children  with  homozygous  familial  hypercholesterolemia; 
combined  liver  and  kidney  transplantation  has  been  successful  in 
patients  with  primary  hyperoxaluria  type  I.  In  hemophiliacs  with 
transfusion-associated hepatitis and liver failure, liver transplantation 
has been associated with recovery of normal factor VIII synthesis.

 ■ TRANSPLANTATION IN ADULTS
Liver  transplantation  is  indicated  for  end-stage  cirrhosis  of  all  causes 
(Table  345-1).  In  sclerosing  cholangitis  and  Caroli’s  disease  (multiple 
cystic dilatations of the intrahepatic biliary tree), recurrent infections 
and  sepsis  associated  with  inflammatory  and  fibrotic  obstruction 
of  the  biliary  tree  may  be  an  indication  for  transplantation.  Because 
prior  biliary  surgery  complicates  and  is  a  relative  contraindication 
for  liver  transplantation,  surgical  diversion  of  the  biliary  tree  has 
been  all  but  abandoned  for  patients  with  sclerosing  cholangitis.  In 
patients  who  undergo  transplantation  for  hepatic  vein  thrombosis 
(Budd-Chiari  syndrome),  postoperative  anticoagulation  is  essential; 
underlying myeloproliferative disorders may have to be treated but are 
not  a  contraindication  to  liver  transplantation.  If  a  donor  organ  can 
be  located  quickly,  before  life-threatening  complications—including 
cerebral edema—set in, patients with acute liver failure are candidates 
for  liver  transplantation.  Currently,  alcohol-associated  liver  disease, 
chronic hepatitis C, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are 
the  most  common  indications  for  liver  transplantation,  accounting 
for >40% of all adult candidates who undergo the procedure. Patients 
with alcohol-associated cirrhosis can be considered as candidates for 
transplantation if they meet strict criteria for abstinence and reform; 
however, these criteria still do not prevent recidivism in up to a quarter 
of cases. In highly selected cases in a limited but growing number of 
centers,  transplantation  for  severe  acute  alcohol-associated  hepatitis 
has been performed with success; however, because patients with acute 
alcohol-associated hepatitis are still actively using alcohol and because 
continued  alcohol  abuse  remains  a  concern,  acute  alcohol-associated 
hepatitis is not a routine indication for liver transplantation. Patients 
with  chronic  hepatitis  C  have  early  allograft  and  patient  survival 
comparable  to  those  of  other  subsets  of  patients  after  transplanta-
tion; however, reinfection in the donor organ is universal, recurrent 
hepatitis C had been insidiously progressive, with allograft cirrhosis 
and  failure  occurring  at  a  higher  frequency  beyond  5  years.  Fortu-
nately, with the introduction of highly effective direct-acting antiviral 
(DAA) agents targeting hepatitis C virus (HCV), allograft outcomes 
have  improved  substantially.  In  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B,  in 
the absence of measures to prevent recurrent hepatitis B, survival after 
transplantation is reduced by ~10–20%; however, prophylactic use of 
hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIg) during and after transplantation 
increases the success of transplantation to a level comparable to that 
seen  in  patients  with  nonviral  causes  of  liver  decompensation.  Spe-
cific oral antiviral drugs (e.g., entecavir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, 
tenofovir alafenamide) (Chap. 341) can be used both for prophylaxis 
against and for treatment of recurrent hepatitis B, facilitating further 
the management of patients undergoing liver transplantation for end-
stage hepatitis B; most transplantation centers rely on antiviral drugs 
with  or  without  HBIg  to  manage  patients  with  hepatitis  B.  Issues  of 
disease  recurrence  are  discussed  in  more  detail  below.  Patients  with 
nonmetastatic primary hepatobiliary tumors—primary hepatocellular 
carcinoma  (HCC),  cholangiocarcinoma,  hepatoblastoma,  angiosar-
coma,  epithelioid  hemangioendothelioma,  and  multiple  or  massive 
hepatic  adenomata—have  undergone  liver  transplantation;  however, 
for  some  hepatobiliary  malignancies,  overall  survival  is  significantly 
lower than that for other categories of liver disease. Most transplan-
tation centers have reported 5-year recurrence-free survival rates in 
patients with unresectable HCC for single tumors <5 cm in diameter 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2634

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
or for three or fewer lesions all <3 cm comparable to those seen in 
patients  undergoing  transplantation  for  nonmalignant  indications. 
Consequently, liver transplantation is currently restricted to patients 
whose hepatic malignancies meet these criteria. Expanded criteria for 
patients with HCC continue to be evaluated. Because the likelihood 
of  recurrent  cholangiocarcinoma  is  very  high,  only  highly  selected 
patients with limited disease are being evaluated for transplantation 
after intensive chemotherapy and radiation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Absolute contraindications for transplantation include life-threatening 
systemic diseases, uncontrolled extrahepatic bacterial or fungal infec-
tions, preexisting advanced cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, mul-
tiple  uncorrectable  life-threatening  congenital  anomalies,  metastatic 
malignancy, and active drug or alcohol abuse (Table 345–2). Because 
carefully  selected  patients  in  their  sixties  and  even  seventies  have 
undergone transplantation successfully, advanced age per se is no lon-
ger considered an absolute contraindication; however, in older patients, 
a  more  thorough  preoperative  evaluation  should  be  undertaken  to 
exclude  ischemic  cardiac  disease  and  other  comorbid  conditions. 
Advanced  age  (>70  years),  however,  should  be  considered  a  relative 
contraindication—that is, a factor to be considered with other relative 
contraindications. Other relative contraindications include portal vein 
thrombosis,  preexisting  renal  disease  not  associated  with  liver  dis-
ease (which may prompt consideration of combined liver and kidney 
transplantation), intrahepatic or biliary sepsis, severe hypoxemia (Po2  
<50 mmHg) resulting from right-to-left intrapulmonary shunts, porto-
pulmonary hypertension with high mean pulmonary artery pressures 
(>35  mmHg),  previous  extensive  hepatobiliary  surgery,  any  uncon-
trolled  serious  psychiatric  disorder,  and  lack  of  sufficient  social  sup-
ports. Any one of these relative contraindications is insufficient in and 
of itself to preclude transplantation. For example, the problem of portal 
vein  thrombosis  can  be  overcome  by  constructing  a  graft  from  the 
donor liver portal vein to the recipient’s superior mesenteric vein. Now 
that combination antiretroviral therapy has dramatically improved the 
survival of persons with HIV infection (Chap. 202), and because end-
stage  liver  disease  caused  by  chronic  hepatitis  C  and  B  has  emerged 
as  a  serious  source  of  morbidity  and  mortality  in  the  HIV-infected 
population, liver transplantation has now been performed successfully 

TABLE 345-2  Contraindications to Liver Transplantation
ABSOLUTE
Uncontrolled extrahepatobiliary 
infection
Active, untreated sepsis
Uncorrectable, life-limiting congenital 
anomalies
Active substance abuse

RELATIVE
Age >70

Prior extensive hepatobiliary surgery
Portal vein thrombosis

Advanced cardiopulmonary disease

Extrahepatobiliary malignancy (not 
including nonmelanoma malignancy 
skin cancer)
Metastatic malignancy to the liver
Cholangiocarcinoma (except those 
tumors that fit into protocols)
AIDS

Life-threatening systemic diseases

Renal failure not attributable to 
liver disease (consider dual organ 
transplantation)
Previous extrahepatic malignancy (not 
including nonmelanoma skin cancer)
Severe obesity

Severe malnutrition/wasting
Medical noncompliance

HIV seropositivity with failure to control 
HIV viremia or CD4 <100/μL
Intrahepatic sepsis
Severe hypoxemia secondary to right-
2 <50 
to-left intrapulmonary shunts (Po
mmHg)
Severe pulmonary hypertension (mean 
pulmonary artery pressure >35 mmHg)
Uncontrolled psychiatric disorder

2635

in  selected  HIV-positive  persons  who  have  excellent  control  of  HIV 
infection.  Selected  patients  with  CD4+  T-cell  counts  >100/μL  and 
with  pharmacologic  suppression  of  HIV  viremia  have  undergone 
transplantation for end-stage liver disease. HIV-infected persons who 
have received liver allografts for end-stage liver disease resulting from 
chronic hepatitis B have experienced survival rates comparable to those 
of HIV-negative persons undergoing transplantation for the same indi-
cation.  In  contrast,  recurrent  HCV  in  the  allograft  has  until  recently 
limited  long-term  success  in  persons  with  HCV-related  end-stage 
liver disease. Again, the availability of DAA agents targeting HCV (see 
below  and  Chap.  341)  is  expected  has  improved  allograft  outcomes 
significantly.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
5

L
i
v
e
r
T
r
a
n
s
p
l
a
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
 ■ DECEASED-DONOR SELECTION
Deceased-donor livers for transplantation are procured primarily from 
victims of head trauma. Organs from brain-dead donors up to age 60 
are acceptable if the following criteria are met: hemodynamic stability, 
adequate oxygenation, absence of bacterial or fungal infection, absence 
of  abdominal  trauma,  absence  of  hepatic  dysfunction,  and  serologic 
exclusion  of  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV),  HCV,  and  HIV.  Occasionally, 
organs from donors with hepatitis B and C are used, particularly for 
recipients  with  prior  hepatitis  B  and  C,  respectively.  Organs  from 
donors with antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) can also 
be  used  when  the  need  is  especially  urgent,  and  recipients  of  these 
organs  are  treated  prophylactically  with  antiviral  drugs.  Increasingly, 
with  the  early  administration  of  highly  effective  DAA  agents,  organs 
from donors with hepatitis C have been used successfully in previously 
uninfected  recipients.  Cardiovascular  and  respiratory  functions  are 
maintained  artificially  until  the  liver  can  be  removed.  Transplanta-
tion of organs procured from deceased donors who have succumbed 
to  cardiac  death  can  be  performed  successfully  under  selected  cir-
cumstances,  when  ischemic  time  is  minimized  and  liver  histology 
preserved. Encouraging improvements in normothermic ex vivo liver 
perfusion techniques may make broader use of these organs possible. 
Compatibility in ABO blood group and organ size between donor and 
recipient  are  important  considerations  in  donor  selection;  however, 
ABO-incompatible,  split-liver,  or  reduced-donor-organ  allografts  can 
be performed in emergencies or marked donor scarcity. Tissue typing 
for  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  matching  is  not  required,  and 
preformed cytotoxic HLA antibodies do not preclude liver transplan-
tation.  Following  perfusion  with  cold  electrolyte  solution,  the  donor 
liver is removed and packed in ice. The use of University of Wisconsin 
(UW)  solution,  rich  in  lactobionate  and  raffinose,  has  permitted  the 
extension  of  cold  ischemic  time  up  to  20  h;  however,  12  h  may  be  a 
more  reasonable  limit.  Improved  techniques  for  harvesting  multiple 
organs from the same donor have increased the availability of donor 
livers,  but  the  availability  of  donor  livers  is  far  outstripped  by  the 
demand. Currently in the United States, all donor livers are distributed 
through  a  nationwide  organ-sharing  network  (United  Network  for 
Organ  Sharing  [UNOS])  designed  to  allocate  available  organs  based 
on  regional  considerations  and  recipient  acuity.  Recipients  who  have 
the  highest  disease  severity  generally  have  the  highest  priority,  but 
allocation  strategies  that  balance  highest  urgency  against  best  out-
comes  continue  to  evolve  to  distribute  deceased-donor  organs  most 
effectively. Allocation based on the Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score, 
which  uses  five  clinical  variables  (encephalopathy  stage,  ascites,  bil-
irubin,  albumin,  and  prothrombin  time)  and  waiting  time,  has  been 
replaced  by  allocation  based  on  urgency  alone,  calculated  using  the 
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score. The MELD score is 
based on a mathematical model that includes bilirubin, creatinine, and 
prothrombin  time  expressed  as  international  normalized  ratio  (INR) 
(Table 345-3). Neither waiting time (except as a tie breaker between 
two  potential  recipients  with  the  same  MELD  scores)  nor  posttrans-
plantation outcome is taken into account, but use of the MELD score 
has been shown to reduce waiting list mortality, to reduce waiting time 
prior to transplantation, to be the best predictor of pretransplantation 
mortality, to satisfy the prevailing view that medical need should be the 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2635

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2636

TABLE 345-3  United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS)  
Liver Transplantation Waiting List Criteria
Status 1

Fulminant hepatic failure (including primary graft nonfunction 
and hepatic artery thrombosis within 7 days after transplantation 
as well as acute decompensated Wilson’s disease)a

The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD)-Na score, on a continuous 
scale,b determines allocation of the remainder of donor organs. This model is 
based on the following calculation:
MELD = 3.78 × loge bilirubin (mg/100 mL) + 11.2 × loge international normalized ratio 
(INR) + 9.57 × loge creatinine (mg/100 mL) + 6.43.c,d,e
MELD-Na = MELD + 1.32 * (137 – Na [meq/L]) – [0.033 * MELD * (137 – Na [meq/L])
Online calculators to determine MELD scores are available, such as the following: 
https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/resources/allocation-calculators/meld-calculator/

aFor children <18 years of age, status 1 includes acute or chronic liver failure plus 
hospitalization in an intensive care unit or inborn errors of metabolism. Status 1 is 
retained for those persons with fulminant hepatic failure and supersedes the MELD 
score. bThe MELD scale is continuous, with 34 levels ranging between 6 and 40 (scores 
above 40 are categorized as 40). Donor organs usually do not become available unless 
the MELD score exceeds 20. cPatients with stage T2 hepatocellular carcinoma receive 
22 disease-specific points. dCreatinine is included because renal function is a validated 
predictor of survival in patients with liver disease. For adults undergoing dialysis twice 
a week, the creatinine in the equation is set to 4 mg/100 mL. eFor children <18 years of 
age, the Pediatric End-Stage Liver Disease (PELD) scale is used. This scale is based 
on albumin, bilirubin, INR, growth failure, and age. Status 1 is retained.

decisive  determinant,  and  to  eliminate  both  the  subjectivity  inherent 
in the CTP scoring system (presence and degree of ascites and hepatic 
encephalopathy) and the differences in waiting times among different 
regions of the country. Data indicate that liver recipients with MELD 
scores <15 experienced higher posttransplantation mortality rates than 
similarly  classified  patients  who  remained  on  the  waiting  list.  This 
observation led to the modification of UNOS policy to allocate donor 
organs to candidates with MELD scores exceeding 15 within the local 
or regional procurement organization before offering the organ to local 
patients whose scores are <15. In 2016, the MELD score was modified 
to incorporate serum sodium, another important predictor of survival 
in liver transplantation candidates (the MELD-Na score).

The highest priority (status 1) continues to be reserved for patients 
with fulminant hepatic failure or primary graft nonfunction. Because 
candidates for liver transplantation who have HCC may not be suffi-
ciently decompensated to compete for donor organs based on urgency 
criteria  alone  and  because  protracted  waiting  for  deceased-donor 
organs  often  results  in  tumor  growth  beyond  acceptable  limits  for 
transplantation,  such  patients  are  assigned  disease-specific  MELD 
points (Table 345–3). Other disease-specific MELD exceptions include 
portopulmonary  hypertension,  hepatopulmonary  syndrome,  familial 
amyloid  polyneuropathy,  primary  hyperoxaluria  (necessitating  liver- 
kidney transplantation), cystic fibrosis liver disease, and highly selected 
cases of hilar cholangiocarcinoma.
 ■ LIVING-DONOR TRANSPLANTATION
Occasionally,  especially  for  liver  transplantation  in  children,  one 
deceased-donor organ can be split between two recipients (one adult 
and one child). A more viable alternative, transplantation of the right 
lobe of the liver from a healthy adult donor into an adult recipient, has 
gained  increased  popularity.  Living-donor  transplantation  of  the  left 
lobe  (left  lateral  segment),  introduced  in  the  early  1990s  to  alleviate 
the  extreme  shortage  of  donor  organs  for  small  children,  accounts 
currently for approximately one-third of all liver transplantation pro-
cedures in children. Driven by the shortage of deceased-donor organs, 
living-donor  transplantation  involving  the  more  sizable  right  lobe  is 
being  considered  with  increasing  frequency  in  adults;  however,  living- 
donor  liver  transplantation  cannot  be  expected  to  solve  the  donor 
organ shortage; 524 such procedures were done in 2019, representing 
only ~4% of all liver transplant operations done in the United States.

Living-donor  transplantation  can  reduce  waiting  time  and  cold 
ischemia time; is done under elective, rather than emergency, circum-
stances; and may be lifesaving in recipients who cannot afford to wait 
for a deceased donor. The downside, of course, is the risk to the healthy 
donor  (a  mean  of  10  weeks  of  medical  disability;  biliary  complica-
tions  in  ~5%;  postoperative  complications  such  as  wound  infection, 

small-bowel obstruction, and incisional hernias in 9–19%; and even, in 
0.2–0.4%, death) as well as the increased frequency of biliary (15–32%) 
and  vascular  (10%)  complications  in  the  recipient.  Potential  donors 
must  participate  voluntarily  without  coercion,  and  transplantation 
teams should go to great lengths to exclude subtle coercive or inappro-
priate psychological factors as well as outline carefully to both donor 
and recipient the potential benefits and risks of the procedure. Donors 
for the procedure should be 18–60 years old; have a compatible blood 
type with the recipient; have no chronic medical problems or history of 
major abdominal surgery; be related genetically or emotionally to the 
recipient;  and  pass  an  exhaustive  series  of  clinical,  biochemical,  and 
serologic evaluations to unearth disqualifying medical disorders. The 
recipient should meet the same UNOS criteria for liver transplantation 
as recipients of a deceased donor allograft.

 ■ SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
Removal  of  the  recipient’s  native  liver  is  technically  difficult,  particu-
larly in the presence of portal hypertension with its associated collat-
eral  circulation  and  extensive  varices  and  especially  in  the  presence 
of  scarring  from  previous  abdominal  operations.  The  combination  of 
portal hypertension and coagulopathy (elevated prothrombin time and 
thrombocytopenia) may translate into large blood product transfusion 
requirements. After the portal vein and infrahepatic and suprahepatic 
inferior  vena  cava  are  dissected,  the  hepatic  artery  and  common  bile 
duct  are  dissected.  Then  the  native  liver  is  removed  and  the  donor 
organ  inserted.  During  the  anhepatic  phase,  coagulopathy,  hypogly-
cemia,  hypocalcemia,  and  hypothermia  are  encountered  and  must 
be  managed  by  the  anesthesiology  team.  Caval,  portal  vein,  hepatic 
artery, and bile duct anastomoses are performed in succession, the last 
by end-to-end suturing of the donor and recipient common bile ducts 
(Fig. 345-1) or by choledochojejunostomy to a Roux-en-Y loop if the 
recipient common bile duct cannot be used for reconstruction (e.g., in 
sclerosing cholangitis). A typical transplant operation lasts 8 h, with a 
range of 6–18 h. Because of excessive bleeding, large volumes of blood, 
blood products, and volume expanders may be required during surgery; 
however, blood requirements have fallen sharply with improvements in 
surgical technique, blood-salvage interventions, and experience.

As noted above, emerging alternatives to orthotopic liver transplan-
tation  include  split-liver  grafts,  in  which  one  donor  organ  is  divided 
and inserted into two recipients, and living-donor procedures, in which 
part of the left (for children), the left (for children or small adults), or 

Donor
liver

Suprahepatic
vena cava

Hepatic artery

Common bile duct

Portal vein

Infrahepatic vena cava

FIGURE 345-1  The anastomoses in orthotopic liver transplantation. The anastomoses 
are  performed  in  the  following  sequence:  (1)  suprahepatic  and  infrahepatic  vena 
cava, (2) portal vein, (3) hepatic artery, and (4) common bile duct-to-duct anastomosis. 
(From JL Dienstag, AB Cosimi: Liver transplantation—a vision realized. N Engl J Med 
367:1483,  2012.  Copyright  ©  2012  Massachusetts  Medical  Society.  Reprinted  with 
permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2636

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemthe right (for adults) lobe of the liver is harvested from a living donor 
for transplantation into the recipient. In the adult procedure, once the 
right lobe is removed from the donor, the donor right hepatic vein is 
anastomosed to the recipient right hepatic vein remnant, followed by 
donor-to-recipient anastomoses of the portal vein and then the hepatic 
artery.  Finally,  the  biliary  anastomosis  is  performed,  duct-to-duct  if 
practical or via Roux-en-Y anastomosis. Heterotopic liver transplanta-
tion, in which the donor liver is inserted without removal of the native 
liver, has met with very limited success and acceptance, except in a very 
small number of centers. In attempts to support desperately ill patients 
until a suitable donor organ can be identified, several transplantation 
centers  are  studying  extracorporeal  perfusion  with  bioartificial  liver 
cartridges constructed from hepatocytes bound to hollow fiber systems 
and used as temporary hepatic-assist devices, but their efficacy remains 
to  be  established.  Areas  of  research  with  the  potential  to  overcome 
the shortage of donor organs include hepatocyte transplantation and 
xenotransplantation  with  genetically  modified  organs  of  nonhuman 
origin (e.g., swine).

POSTOPERATIVE COURSE AND 
MANAGEMENT
 ■ IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE THERAPY
The  introduction  in  1980  of  cyclosporine  as  an  immunosuppressive 
agent  contributed  substantially  to  the  improvement  in  survival  after 
liver  transplantation.  Cyclosporine,  a  calcineurin  inhibitor,  blocks 
early activation of T cells and is specific for T-cell functions that result 
from  the  interaction  of  the  T  cell  with  its  receptor  and  that  involve 
the  calcium-dependent  signal  transduction  pathway.  As  a  result,  the 
activity  of  cyclosporine  leads  to  inhibition  of  lymphokine  gene  acti-
vation, blocking interleukins 2, 3, and 4, tumor necrosis factor α, and 
other  lymphokines.  Cyclosporine  also  inhibits  B-cell  functions.  This 
process  occurs  without  affecting  rapidly  dividing  cells  in  the  bone 
marrow,  which  may  account  for  the  reduced  frequency  of  posttrans-
plantation systemic infections. The most common and important side 
effect  of  cyclosporine  therapy  is  nephrotoxicity.  Cyclosporine  causes 
dose-dependent renal tubular injury and direct renal artery vasospasm. 
Following renal function is therefore important in monitoring cyclo-
sporine  therapy  and  is  perhaps  even  a  more  reliable  indicator  than 
blood levels of the drug. Nephrotoxicity is reversible and can be man-
aged by dose reduction. Other adverse effects of cyclosporine therapy 
include hypertension, hyperkalemia, tremor, hirsutism, glucose intol-
erance, and gingival hyperplasia.

Tacrolimus, a macrolide lactone antibiotic isolated from a Japanese 
soil  fungus,  Streptomyces  tsukubaensis,  has  the  same  mechanism  of 
action  as  cyclosporine  but  is  10–100  times  more  potent.  Initially 
applied  as  “rescue”  therapy  for  patients  in  whom  rejection  occurred 
despite the use of cyclosporine, tacrolimus was shown to be associated 
with  a  reduced  frequency  of  acute,  refractory,  and  chronic  rejection. 
Although patient and graft survival are the same with these two drugs, 
the advantage of tacrolimus in minimizing episodes of rejection, reduc-
ing  the  need  for  additional  glucocorticoid  doses,  and  reducing  the 
likelihood of bacterial and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection has sim-
plified  the  management  of  patients  undergoing  liver  transplantation. 
In addition, the oral absorption of tacrolimus is more predictable than 
that of cyclosporine, especially during the early postoperative period 
when T-tube drainage interferes with the enterohepatic circulation of 
cyclosporine.  As  a  result,  in  most  transplantation  centers,  tacrolimus 
has  now  supplanted  cyclosporine  for  primary  immunosuppression, 
and many centers rely on oral rather than IV administration from the 
outset.  For  transplantation  centers  that  prefer  cyclosporine,  a  better- 
absorbed microemulsion preparation is available.

Although  more  potent  than  cyclosporine,  tacrolimus  is  also  more 
toxic  and  more  likely  to  be  discontinued  for  adverse  events.  The 
toxicity  of  tacrolimus  is  similar  to  that  of  cyclosporine;  nephrotox-
icity and neurotoxicity are the most commonly encountered adverse 
effects, and neurotoxicity (tremor, seizures, hallucinations, psychoses, 
coma) is more likely and more severe in tacrolimus-treated patients. 
Both drugs can cause diabetes mellitus, but tacrolimus does not cause 

2637

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
5

L
i
v
e
r
T
r
a
n
s
p
l
a
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

hirsutism  or  gingival  hyperplasia.  Because  of  overlapping  toxicity 
between  cyclosporine  and  tacrolimus,  especially  nephrotoxicity,  and 
because  tacrolimus  reduces  cyclosporine  clearance,  these  two  drugs 
should not be used together. Because 99% of tacrolimus is metabolized 
by the liver, hepatic dysfunction reduces its clearance; in primary graft 
nonfunction (when, for technical reasons or because of ischemic dam-
age prior to its insertion, the allograft is defective and does not func-
tion normally from the outset), tacrolimus doses have to be reduced 
substantially, especially in children. Both cyclosporine and tacrolimus 
are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 IIIA system, and therefore, 
drugs  that  induce  cytochrome  P450  (e.g.,  phenytoin,  phenobarbital, 
carbamazepine, rifampin) reduce available levels of cyclosporine and 
tacrolimus, and drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 (e.g., erythromy-
cin, fluconazole, ketoconazole, clotrimazole, itraconazole, verapamil, 
diltiazem,  danazol,  metoclopramide,  the  HIV  protease  inhibitor 
ritonavir, and the HCV protease inhibitors glecaprevir [cyclosporine 
only]  and  grazoprevir)  increase  cyclosporine  and  tacrolimus  blood 
levels. Indeed, itraconazole is used occasionally to help boost tacroli-
mus levels. Like azathioprine, cyclosporine and tacrolimus appear to 
be  associated  with  a  risk  of  lymphoproliferative  malignancies  (see 
below), which may occur earlier after cyclosporine or tacrolimus than 
after azathioprine therapy. Because of these side effects, combinations 
of  cyclosporine  or  tacrolimus  with  prednisone  and  an  antimetabo-
lite  (azathioprine  or  mycophenolic  acid,  see  below)—all  at  reduced 
doses—are preferable regimens for immunosuppressive therapy.

Mycophenolic  acid,  a  nonnucleoside  purine  metabolism  inhibitor 
derived as a fermentation product from several Penicillium species, is 
another immunosuppressive drug being used for patients undergoing 
liver transplantation. Mycophenolate has been shown to be better than 
azathioprine,  when  used  with  other  standard  immunosuppressive 
drugs, in preventing rejection after renal transplantation and has been 
adopted widely as well for use in liver transplantation. The most com-
mon  adverse  effects  of  mycophenolate  are  bone  marrow  suppression 
and gastrointestinal complaints.

In patients with pretransplantation renal dysfunction or renal dete-
rioration that occurs intraoperatively or immediately postoperatively, 
tacrolimus or cyclosporine therapy may not be practical; under these 
circumstances, induction or maintenance of immunosuppression with 
antithymocyte  globulin  (ATG;  thymoglobulin)  or  monoclonal  anti-
bodies to T cells, OKT3, may be appropriate. Therapy with these agents 
has  been  especially  effective  in  reversing  acute  rejection  in  the  post-
transplantation period and is the standard treatment for acute rejection 
that fails to respond to methylprednisolone boluses. Available data sup-
port the use of thymoglobulin induction to delay calcineurin inhibitor 
use  and  its  attendant  nephrotoxicity.  IV  infusions  of  thymoglobulin 
may be complicated by fever and chills, which can be ameliorated by 
premedication  with  antipyretics  and  a  low  dose  of  glucocorticoids. 
Infusions of OKT3 may be complicated by fever, chills, and diarrhea 
or by pulmonary edema, which can be fatal. Because OKT3 is such a 
potent immunosuppressive agent, its use is also more likely to be com-
plicated  by  opportunistic  infection  or  lymphoproliferative  disorders; 
therefore, because of the availability of alternative immunosuppressive 
drugs, OKT3 is now used sparingly.

Sirolimus,  an  inhibitor  of  the  mammalian  target  of  rapamycin 
(mTOR),  blocks  later  events  in  T-cell  activation  and  is  approved  for 
use in kidney transplantation, but it is not formally approved for use 
in liver transplant recipients because of the reported association with 
an increased frequency of hepatic artery thrombosis in the first month 
after  transplantation.  In  patients  with  calcineurin  inhibitor–related 
nephrotoxicity,  conversion  to  sirolimus  has  been  demonstrated  to  be 
effective in preventing rejection with accompanying improvements in 
renal function. Because of its profound antiproliferative effects, siroli-
mus has also been suggested to be a useful immunosuppressive agent 
in patients with a prior or current history of malignancy, such as HCC. 
Side  effects  include  hyperlipidemia,  peripheral  edema,  oral  ulcers, 
and  interstitial  pneumonitis.  Everolimus  is  a  hydroxyethyl  derivative 
of  sirolimus  that,  when  used  in  conjunction  with  low-dose  tacroli-
mus, also provides successful protection against acute rejection, with 
decreased renal impairment compared to that associated with standard 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2637

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2638

tacrolimus  dosing.  Everolimus  and  sirolimus  share  a  similar  adverse 
events profile. The most important principle of immunosuppression is 
that the ideal approach strikes a balance between immunosuppression 
and  immunologic  competence.  In  general,  given  sufficient  immuno-
suppression, acute liver allograft rejection is nearly always reversible. 
On one hand, incompletely treated acute rejection predisposes to the 
development  of  chronic  rejection,  which  can  threaten  graft  survival. 
On the other hand, if the cumulative dose of immunosuppressive ther-
apy is too large, the patient may succumb to opportunistic infection. 
In hepatitis C, pulse glucocorticoids or OKT3 use accelerates recurrent 
allograft  hepatitis,  although  the  routine  use  of  DAA  therapy  to  clear 
the allograft of HCV should remove this concern. Further complicating 
matters,  acute  rejection  can  be  difficult  to  distinguish  histologically 
from recurrent hepatitis C. Therefore, immunosuppressive drugs must 
be used judiciously, with strict attention to the infectious consequences 
of  such  therapy  and  careful  confirmation  of  the  diagnosis  of  acute 
rejection.  In  this  vein,  efforts  have  been  made  to  minimize  the  use 
of  glucocorticoids,  a  mainstay  of  immunosuppressive  regimens,  and 
steroid-free  immunosuppression  can  be  achieved  in  some  instances. 
Patients  who  undergo  liver  transplantation  for  autoimmune  diseases 
such  as  primary  biliary  cholangitis,  autoimmune  hepatitis,  and  pri-
mary  sclerosing  cholangitis  are  less  likely  to  achieve  freedom  from 
glucocorticoids.
 ■ POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
Complications of liver transplantation can be divided into nonhepatic 
and  hepatic  categories  (Tables  345-4  and  345-5).  In  addition,  both 
immediate postoperative and late complications are encountered. As a 
rule, patients who undergo liver transplantation have been chronically 
ill for protracted periods and may be malnourished and wasted. The 
impact of such chronic illness and the multisystem failure that accom-
panies liver failure continue to require attention in the postoperative 
period. Because of the massive fluid losses and fluid shifts that occur 

Hematologic

Renal dysfunction

Pulmonary compromise

TABLE 345-4  Nonhepatic Complications of Liver Transplantation
COMPLICATION
CATEGORY
Arrhythmias
Cardiovascular instability
Congestive heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
Pneumonia
Pulmonary capillary vascular permeability
Fluid overload
Prerenal azotemia
Hypoperfusion injury (acute tubular necrosis)
Drug nephrotoxicity
↓ Renal blood flow secondary to ↑ intraabdominal 
pressure
Anemia secondary to gastrointestinal and/or 
intraabdominal bleeding
Hemolytic anemia, aplastic anemia
Thrombocytopenia
Bacterial: early, common postoperative infections
Fungal/parasitic: late, opportunistic infections
Viral: late, opportunistic infections, recurrent 
hepatitis
Seizures
Metabolic encephalopathy
Depression
Difficult psychosocial adjustment
Infectious
Malignant
B-cell lymphoma (posttransplantation 
lymphoproliferative disorders)
De novo neoplasms (particularly squamous cell 
skin carcinoma)

Diseases of donor

Neuropsychiatric

Malignancy

Infection

TABLE 345-5  Hepatic Complications of Liver Transplantation
Hepatic Dysfunction Common after Major Surgery

Prehepatic

Intrahepatic
  Early

  Late

  Posthepatic

Pigment load
Hemolysis
Blood collections (hematomas, abdominal 
collections)

Hepatotoxic drugs and anesthesia
Hypoperfusion (hypotension, shock, sepsis)
Benign postoperative cholestasis
Transfusion-associated hepatitis
Exacerbation of primary hepatic disease
Biliary obstruction
↓ Renal clearance of conjugated bilirubin (renal 
dysfunction)

Hepatic Dysfunction Unique to Liver Transplantation

Primary graft nonfunction
Vascular compromise

Bile duct disorder
Rejection
Recurrent primary 
hepatic disease

Portal vein obstruction
Hepatic artery thrombosis
Anastomotic leak with intraabdominal bleeding
Stenosis, obstruction, leak

during the operation, patients may remain fluid overloaded during the 
immediate postoperative period, straining cardiovascular reserve; this 
effect can be amplified in the face of transient renal dysfunction and 
pulmonary  capillary  vascular  permeability.  Continuous  monitoring 
of cardiovascular and pulmonary function, measures to maintain the 
integrity  of  the  intravascular  compartment  and  to  treat  extravascu-
lar  volume  overload,  and  scrupulous  attention  to  potential  sources 
and  sites  of  infection  are  of  paramount  importance.  Cardiovascular 
instability  may  also  result  from  the  electrolyte  imbalance  that  may 
accompany reperfusion of the donor liver as well as from restoration 
of  systemic  vascular  resistance  following  implantation.  Pulmonary 
function may be compromised further by paralysis of the right hem-
idiaphragm associated with phrenic nerve injury. The hyperdynamic 
state  with  increased  cardiac  output  that  is  characteristic  of  patients 
with liver failure reverses rapidly after successful liver transplantation.
Other  immediate  management  issues  include  renal  dysfunction. 
Prerenal  azotemia,  acute  kidney  injury  associated  with  hypoperfu-
sion (acute tubular necrosis), and renal toxicity caused by antibiotics, 
tacrolimus,  or  cyclosporine  are  encountered  frequently  in  the  post-
operative period, sometimes necessitating dialysis. Hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome can be associated with cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or OKT3. 
Occasionally, postoperative intraperitoneal bleeding may be sufficient 
to increase intraabdominal pressure, which, in turn, may reduce renal 
blood flow; this effect is rapidly reversible when abdominal distention 
is relieved by exploratory laparotomy to identify and ligate the bleeding 
site and to remove intraperitoneal clot.

Anemia may also result from acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding 
or from transient hemolytic anemia, which may be autoimmune, espe-
cially when blood group O livers are transplanted into blood group A 
or  B  recipients.  This  autoimmune  hemolytic  anemia  is  mediated  by 
donor intrahepatic lymphocytes that recognize red blood cell A or B 
antigens  on  recipient  erythrocytes.  Transient  in  nature,  this  process 
resolves once the donor liver is repopulated by recipient bone marrow–
derived  lymphocytes;  the  hemolysis  can  be  treated  by  transfusing 
blood group O red blood cells and/or by administering higher doses 
of  glucocorticoids.  Transient  thrombocytopenia  is  also  commonly 
encountered. Aplastic anemia, a late occurrence, is rare but has been 
reported in almost 30% of patients who underwent liver transplanta-
tion for acute, severe hepatitis of unknown cause.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2638

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemBacterial,  fungal,  or  viral  infections  are  common  and  may  be 
life-threatening  postoperatively.  Early  after  transplant  surgery,  com-
mon postoperative infections predominate—pneumonia, wound infec-
tions,  infected  intraabdominal  collections,  urinary  tract  infections, 
and  IV  line  infections—rather  than  opportunistic  infections;  these 
infections may involve the biliary tree and liver as well. Beyond the first 
postoperative month, the toll of immunosuppression becomes evident, 
and opportunistic infections—CMV, herpes viruses, fungal infections 
(Aspergillus, Candida, cryptococcal disease), mycobacterial infections, 
parasitic  infections  (Pneumocystis,  Toxoplasma),  and  bacterial  infec-
tions (Nocardia, Legionella, Listeria)—predominate. Rarely, early infec-
tions represent those transmitted with the donor liver, either infections 
present  in  the  donor  or  infections  acquired  during  procurement 
processing. De novo viral hepatitis infections acquired from the donor 
organ  or,  almost  unheard  of  now,  from  transfused  blood  products 
occur  after  typical  incubation  periods  for  these  agents  (well  beyond 
the first month). Obviously, infections in an immunosuppressed host 
demand  early  recognition  and  prompt  management;  prophylactic 
antibiotic therapy is administered routinely in the immediate postop-
erative period. Use of sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim reduces the 
incidence of postoperative Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia. Antiviral 
prophylaxis  for  CMV  with  ganciclovir  should  be  administered  in 
patients  at  high  risk  (e.g.,  when  a  CMV-seropositive  donor  organ  is 
implanted into a CMV-seronegative recipient).

Neuropsychiatric complications include seizures (commonly associated 
with cyclosporine and tacrolimus toxicity), metabolic encephalopathy, 
depression,  and  difficult  psychosocial  adjustment.  Rarely,  diseases 
are  transmitted  by  the  allograft  from  the  donor  to  the  recipient.  In 
addition  to  viral  and  bacterial  infections,  malignancies  of  donor  ori-
gin have occurred. Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders, 
especially B-cell lymphoma, are a recognized complication associated 
with immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine, tacrolimus, and 
cyclosporine  (see  above).  Epstein-Barr  virus  has  been  shown  to  play 
a contributory role in some of these tumors, which may regress when 
immunosuppressive therapy is reduced. De novo neoplasms appear at 
increased frequency after liver transplantation, particularly squamous 
cell carcinomas of the skin. Routine screening should be performed.

Long-term  complications  after  liver  transplantation  attributable 
primarily  to  immunosuppressive  medications  include  diabetes  melli-
tus and osteoporosis (associated with glucocorticoids and calcineurin 
inhibitors)  as  well  as  hypertension,  hyperlipidemia,  and  chronic 
renal  insufficiency  (associated  with  cyclosporine  and  tacrolimus). 
Monitoring  and  treating  these  disorders  are  routine  components  of 
posttransplantation  care;  in  some  cases,  they  respond  to  changes  in 
immunosuppressive regimen, while in others, specific treatment of the 
disorder is introduced. Data from a large U.S. database showed that the 
prevalence of renal failure was 18% at year 5 and 25% at year 10 after 
liver transplantation. Similarly, the high frequency of diabetes, hyper-
tension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and the metabolic syndrome renders 
patients  susceptible  to  cardiovascular  disease  after  liver  transplanta-
tion; although hepatic complications account for most of the mortality 
after liver transplantation, renal failure and cardiovascular disease are 
the other leading causes of late mortality after liver transplantation.

 ■ HEPATIC COMPLICATIONS
Hepatic dysfunction after liver transplantation is similar to the hepatic 
complications  encountered  after  major  abdominal  and  cardiothoracic 
surgery;  however,  in  addition,  hepatic  complications  include  primary 
graft  failure,  vascular  compromise,  failure  or  stricture  of  the  biliary 
anastomoses, and rejection. As in nontransplantation surgery, postoper-
ative jaundice may result from prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic 
sources. Prehepatic sources represent the massive hemoglobin pigment 
load from transfusions, hemolysis, hematomas, ecchymoses, and other 
collections  of  blood.  Early  intrahepatic  liver  injury  includes  effects  of 
hepatotoxic  drugs  and  anesthesia;  hypoperfusion  injury  associated 
with hypotension, sepsis, and shock; and benign postoperative choles-
tasis.  Late  intrahepatic  sources  of  liver  injury  include  exacerbation  of 
primary  disease.  Posthepatic  sources  of  hepatic  dysfunction  include 
biliary obstruction and reduced renal clearance of conjugated bilirubin. 

Hepatic complications unique to liver transplantation include primary 
graft  failure  associated  with  ischemic  injury  to  the  organ  during  har-
vesting;  vascular  compromise  associated  with  thrombosis  or  stenosis 
of the portal vein or hepatic artery anastomoses; vascular anastomotic 
leak; stenosis, obstruction, or leakage of the anastomosed common bile 
duct; recurrence of primary hepatic disorder (see below); and rejection.

2639

 ■ TRANSPLANT REJECTION
Despite  the  use  of  immunosuppressive  drugs,  rejection  of  the  trans-
planted  liver  still  occurs  in  a  proportion  of  patients,  beginning  1–2 
weeks after surgery. Clinical signs suggesting rejection are fever, right 
upper quadrant pain, and reduced bile pigment and volume. Leukocy-
tosis may occur, but the most reliable indicators are increases in serum 
bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. Because these tests lack specific-
ity, distinguishing among rejection, biliary obstruction, primary graft 
nonfunction,  vascular  compromise,  viral  hepatitis,  CMV  infection, 
drug  hepatotoxicity,  and  recurrent  primary  disease  may  be  difficult. 
Radiographic  visualization  of  the  biliary  tree  and/or  percutaneous 
liver biopsy often help to establish the correct diagnosis. Morphologic 
features  of  acute  rejection  include  a  mixed  portal  cellular  infiltrate, 
bile  duct  injury,  and/or  endothelial  inflammation  (“endothelialitis”); 
some  of  these  findings  are  reminiscent  of  graft-versus-host  disease, 
primary biliary cholangitis, or recurrent allograft hepatitis C. As soon 
as transplant rejection is suspected, treatment consists of IV methyl-
prednisolone in repeated boluses; if this fails to abort rejection, many 
centers  use  thymoglobulin  or  OKT3.  Caution  should  be  exercised 
when  managing  acute  rejection  with  pulse  glucocorticoids  or  OKT3 
in patients with HCV infection, because of the high risk of triggering 
recurrent allograft hepatitis C. The availability of DAAs for HCV has 
effectively obviated this concern.

Chronic rejection is a relatively rare outcome that can follow repeated 
bouts of acute rejection or that occurs unrelated to preceding rejection 
episodes.  Morphologically,  chronic  rejection  is  characterized  by  pro-
gressive cholestasis, focal parenchymal necrosis, mononuclear infiltra-
tion, vascular lesions (intimal fibrosis, subintimal foam cells, fibrinoid 
necrosis), and fibrosis. This process may be reflected as ductopenia—
the vanishing bile duct syndrome, which is more common in patients 
undergoing liver transplantation for autoimmune liver disease. Revers-
ibility of chronic rejection is limited; in patients with therapy-resistant 
chronic rejection, retransplantation has yielded encouraging results.

OUTCOME
 ■ SURVIVAL
The  survival  rate  for  patients  undergoing  liver  transplantation  has 
improved steadily since 1983. One-year survival rates have increased 
from ~70% in the early 1980s to 85–90% from 2003 to the present time. 
Currently, the 5-year survival rate exceeds 60%. An important obser-
vation is the relationship between clinical status before transplantation 
and  outcome.  For  patients  who  undergo  liver  transplantation  when 
their level of compensation is high (e.g., still working or only partially 
disabled), a 1-year survival rate of >85% is common. For those whose 
level  of  decompensation  mandates  continuous  in-hospital  care  prior 
to transplantation, the 1-year survival rate is ~70%, whereas for those 
who are so decompensated that they require life support in an intensive 
care unit, the 1-year survival rate is ~50%. Since the adoption by UNOS 
in 2002 of the MELD system for organ allocation, posttransplantation 
survival  has  been  found  to  be  affected  adversely  for  candidates  with 
MELD scores >25, considered high disease severity. Thus, irrespective 
of allocation scheme, high disease severity before transplantation cor-
responds to diminished posttransplantation survival. Another impor-
tant distinction in survival has been drawn between high- and low-risk 
patient  categories.  For  patients  who  do  not  fit  any  “high-risk”  desig-
nations, 1- and 5-year survival rates of 85 and 80%, respectively, have 
been  recorded.  In  contrast,  among  patients  in  high-risk  categories—
cancer,  fulminant  hepatitis,  age  >65,  concurrent  renal  failure,  respi-
rator dependence, portal vein thrombosis, and history of a portacaval 
shunt or multiple right upper quadrant operations—survival statistics 
fall into the range of 60% at 1 year and 35% at 5 years. Survival after 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
5

L
i
v
e
r
T
r
a
n
s
p
l
a
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2639

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
2640 retransplantation  for  primary  graft  nonfunction  is  ~50%.  Causes  of 
failure of liver transplantation vary with time. Failures within the first 
3 months result primarily from technical complications, postoperative 
infections, and hemorrhage. Transplant failures after the first 3 months 
are more likely to result from infection, rejection, or recurrent disease 
(such as malignancy or viral hepatitis).

 ■ RECURRENCE OF PRIMARY DISEASE
Features of autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and 
primary  biliary  cholangitis  overlap  with  those  of  rejection  or  post-
transplantation  bile  duct  injury.  Whether  autoimmune  hepatitis  and 
sclerosing cholangitis recur after liver transplantation is controversial; 
data  supporting  recurrent  autoimmune  hepatitis  (in  up  to  one-third 
of patients in some series) are more convincing than those supporting 
recurrent sclerosing cholangitis. Similarly, reports of recurrent primary 
biliary cholangitis after liver transplantation have appeared; however, 
the  histologic  features  of  primary  biliary  cholangitis  and  chronic 
rejection  are  virtually  indistinguishable  and  occur  as  frequently  in 
patients  with  primary  biliary  cholangitis  as  in  patients  undergoing 
transplantation for other reasons. The presence of a florid inflamma-
tory bile duct lesion is highly suggestive of the recurrence of primary 
biliary cholangitis, but even this lesion can be observed in acute rejec-
tion. Hereditary disorders such as Wilson’s disease and α1 antitrypsin 
deficiency  have  not  recurred  after  liver  transplantation;  however, 
recurrence of disordered iron metabolism has been observed in some 
patients  with  hemochromatosis.  Hepatic  vein  thrombosis  (Budd- 
Chiari syndrome) may recur; this can be minimized by treating under-
lying  myeloproliferative  disorders  and  by  anticoagulation.  Because 
cholangiocarcinoma  recurs  almost  invariably,  few  centers  now  offer 
transplantation to such patients; however, a few highly selected patients 
with  operatively  confirmed  stage  I  or  II  cholangiocarcinoma  who 
undergo liver transplantation combined with neoadjuvant chemoradi-
ation may experience excellent outcomes. In patients with intrahepatic 
HCC who meet criteria for transplantation, 1- and 5-year survivals are 
similar to those observed in patients undergoing liver transplantation 
for nonmalignant disease. Finally, metabolic disorders such as NAFLD 
recur frequently, especially if the underlying metabolic predisposition 
is  not  altered.  The  metabolic  syndrome  occurs  commonly  after  liver 
transplantation  as  a  result  of  recurrent  NAFLD,  immunosuppressive 
medications, and/or, in patients with hepatitis C related to the impact 
of HCV infection on insulin resistance, diabetes and fatty liver.

Hepatitis  A  can  recur  after  transplantation  for  fulminant  hepatitis 
A, but such acute reinfection has no serious clinical sequelae. In ful-
minant hepatitis B, recurrence is not the rule; however, in the absence 
of  any  prophylactic  measures,  hepatitis  B  usually  recurs  after  trans-
plantation for end-stage chronic hepatitis B. Before the introduction of 
prophylactic  antiviral  therapy,  immunosuppressive  therapy  sufficient 
to  prevent  allograft  rejection  led  inevitably  to  marked  increases  in 
hepatitis  B  viremia,  regardless  of  pretransplantation  levels.  Overall 
graft and patient survival were poor, and some patients experienced a 
rapid recapitulation of severe injury—severe chronic hepatitis or even 
fulminant hepatitis—after transplantation. Also recognized in the era 
before availability of antiviral regimens was fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, 
rapidly  progressive  liver  injury  associated  with  marked  hyperbiliru-
binemia, substantial prolongation of the prothrombin time (both out 
of proportion to relatively modest elevations of aminotransferase activ-
ity), and rapidly progressive liver failure. This lesion has been suggested 
to  represent  a  “choking  off ”  of  the  hepatocyte  by  an  overwhelming 
density of HBV proteins. Complications such as sepsis and pancreatitis 
were also observed more frequently in patients undergoing liver trans-
plantation for hepatitis B prior to the introduction of antiviral therapy. 
The introduction of long-term prophylaxis with HBIg revolutionized 
liver  transplantation  for  chronic  hepatitis  B.  Preoperative  hepatitis  B 
vaccination,  preoperative  or  postoperative  interferon  (IFN)  therapy, 
or short-term (≤2 months) HBIg prophylaxis has not been shown to 
be effective, but a retrospective analysis of data from several hundred 
European patients followed for 3 years after transplantation has shown 
that long-term (≥6 months) prophylaxis with HBIg is associated with a 

lowering of the risk of HBV reinfection from ~75 to 35% and a reduc-
tion in mortality from ~50 to 20%.

As  a  result  of  long-term  HBIg  use  following  liver  transplantation 
for  chronic  hepatitis  B,  similar  improvements  in  outcome  have  been 
observed  in  the  United  States,  with  1-year  survival  rates  between  75 
and 90%. Currently, with HBIg prophylaxis, the outcome of liver trans-
plantation  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  is  indistinguishable  from  that  for 
chronic liver disease unassociated with chronic hepatitis B; essentially, 
medical concerns regarding liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B 
have been eliminated. Passive immunoprophylaxis with HBIg is begun 
during  the  anhepatic  stage  of  surgery,  repeated  daily  for  the  first  6 
postoperative days, and then continued with infusions that are given 
either  at  regular  intervals  of  4–6  weeks  or,  alternatively,  when  anti–
hepatitis B surface (HBs) levels fall below a threshold of 100 mIU/mL. 
The current approach in most centers is to continue HBIg indefinitely, 
which can add ~$20,000 per year to the cost of care; some centers are 
evaluating regimens that shift to less frequent administration or to IM 
administration  in  the  late  posttransplantation  period  or,  in  low-risk 
patients,  maintenance  with  antiviral  therapy  (see  below)  alone.  Still, 
“breakthrough” HBV infection occasionally occurs.

Further improving the outcome of liver transplantation for chronic 
hepatitis B is the current availability of such antiviral drugs as entecavir, 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and tenofovir alafenamide (Chap. 341). 
When  these  drugs  are  administered  to  patients  with  decompensated 
liver  disease,  a  proportion  improves  sufficiently  to  postpone  immi-
nent  liver  transplantation.  In  addition,  antiviral  therapy  can  be  used 
to  prevent  recurrence  of  HBV  infection  when  administered  prior  to 
transplantation;  to  treat  hepatitis  B  that  recurs  after  transplantation, 
including  in  patients  who  break  through  HBIg  prophylaxis;  and  to 
reverse  the  course  of  otherwise  fatal  fibrosing  cholestatic  hepatitis. 
Clinical trials have shown that entecavir or tenofovir antiviral therapy 
reduces  the  level  of  HBV  replication  substantially,  sometimes  even 
resulting in clearance of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); reduces 
alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  levels;  and  improves  histologic  fea-
tures of necrosis and inflammation. Currently, most liver transplanta-
tion centers combine HBIg plus one of the high-barrier-to-resistance 
oral  nucleoside  (entecavir)  or  nucleotide  analogues  (tenofovir).  In 
low-risk patients with no detectable hepatitis B viremia at the time of 
transplantation, a number of clinical trials have suggested that antiviral 
prophylaxis can suffice, without HBIg or with a finite duration of HBIg, 
to prevent recurrent HBV infection of the allograft. In patients docu-
mented at the time of liver transplantation to have undetectable HBV 
DNA  in  serum  and  covalently  closed  circular  DNA  in  the  liver  (i.e., 
with low risk for recurrence of HBV infection), a preliminary clinical 
trial suggested that, after receipt of 5 years of combined therapy, both 
HBIg and oral-agent therapy can be withdrawn sequentially (over two 
6-month periods) with a success rate, as monitored over a median of 
6 years after withdrawal, of 90% and an anti-HBs seroconversion rate 
of 60% (despite transient reappearance of HBV DNA and/or HBsAg in 
some of these patients).

Antiviral  prophylactic  approaches  applied  to  patients  undergoing 
liver  transplantation  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  are  being  used  as  well 
for  patients  without  hepatitis  B  who  receive  organs  from  donors 
with antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) but do not have 
HBsAg. Patients who undergo liver transplantation for chronic hepa-
titis B plus D are less likely to experience recurrent liver injury than 
patients undergoing liver transplantation for hepatitis B alone; still, such 
co-infected patients would also be offered standard posttransplantation 
prophylactic therapy for hepatitis B.

Until recently, the most common indication for liver transplantation 
was  end-stage  liver  disease  resulting  from  chronic  hepatitis  C.  For 
patients  undergoing  liver  transplantation  for  hepatitis  C,  because  of 
an  aggressive  natural  history  of  recurrent  allograft  hepatitis  C,  graft 
and patient survival were diminished substantially compared to other 
indications for transplantation.

The  approval  over  the  last  decade  of  several  DAA  agents  and  of 
IFN-free DAA regimens against HCV has had a major impact on the 
management  and  outcome  of  both  pretransplantation  and  posttrans-
plantation  HCV  infection.  Such  therapeutic  approaches  (1)  permit 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2640

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemthe clearance of viremia in a substantial proportion of decompensated 
cirrhotics,  thereby  preventing  recurrent  allograft  infection  and  even 
improving  the  clinical  status  of  most  of  these  patients,  delaying  or 
obviating  the  need  for  liver  replacement;  and  (2)  achieve  sustained 
virologic responses in a much higher proportion of persons with allog-
raft  HCV  infection,  because  of  improvements  in  antiviral  treatment 
efficacy  and  tolerability.  Ideally,  patients  should  be  treated  prior  to 
liver transplantation. This approach has already reduced the numbers 
of  patients  referred  for  liver  transplantation  and  led  to  delisting  of 
others. A concern, however, is that eradication of HCV infection will 
reduce  the  MELD  score  and  lower  the  priority  for  a  donor  organ  in 
some  patients  who  still  require  transplantation  because  of  continued 
hepatic decompensation and profound reduction in quality of life. In 
addition, elimination of HCV infection prior to transplantation would 
disqualify  such  patients  from  accepting  donor  livers  from  persons 
with HCV infection, contracting the potential donor pool and limiting 
accessibility  to  donor  organs  and  timely  transplantation.  Therefore, 
consideration should be given to postponing DAA therapy in patients 
with  high-MELD  HCV-associated  end-stage  liver  disease  until  after 
liver  transplantation;  however,  a  distinct  threshold  at  which  to  treat 
pretransplantation  or  posttransplantation  has  not  yet  been  estab-
lished. Regardless, the approach to treatment should be individualized 
thoughtfully  for  each  patient,  based  on  such  factors  as  MELD  score, 
time anticipated prior to availability of a donor organ, relative clinical 
stability, and comorbidities.

DAA combinations that have been used successfully against allog-
raft  HCV  include  ledipasvir,  sofosbuvir,  and  ribavirin;  velpatasvir, 
sofosbuvir,  and  ribavirin;  and  grazoprevir  and  pibrentasvir.  (For 
updated guidelines, see www.hcvguidelines.org.) In patients with recur-
rent HCV infection after liver transplantation, each of these regimens 
has  yielded  response  rates  approaching  those  seen  in  compensated 
nontransplant patient populations.

A small number of allograft recipients have historically succumbed 
to  early  HCV-associated  liver  injury,  and  a  syndrome  reminiscent  of 
fibrosing  cholestatic  hepatitis  (see  above)  has  been  observed  rarely. 
Currently, however, the routine use of DAA regimens early after trans-
plantation, before the onset of these variant presentations, has already 
had a profound impact on the frequency of severe recurrent allograft 
hepatitis C.

Patients  who  undergo  liver  transplantation  for  end-stage  alco-
hol-associated cirrhosis are at risk of resorting to drinking again after 
transplantation, a potential source of recurrent alcohol-associated liver 
injury. Currently, alcohol-associated liver disease is the most common 
indication  for  liver  transplantation,  accounting  for  30%  of  all  liver 
transplantation  procedures,  and  most  transplantation  centers  screen 
candidates carefully for predictors of continued abstinence. Recidivism 
is more likely in patients whose sobriety prior to transplantation was 
<6  months.  For  abstinent  patients  with  alcohol-associated  cirrhosis, 
liver  transplantation  can  be  undertaken  successfully,  with  outcomes 
comparable to those for other categories of patients with chronic liver 
disease, when coordinated by a team approach that includes substance 
abuse counseling.
 ■ POSTTRANSPLANTATION QUALITY OF LIFE
Full rehabilitation is achieved in most patients who survive the early 
postoperative  months  and  escape  chronic rejection or  unmanageable 
infection.  Psychosocial  maladjustment  interferes  with  medical  com-
pliance in a small number of patients, but most manage to adhere to 
immunosuppressive  regimens,  which  must  be  continued  indefinitely. 
In one study, 85% of patients who survived their transplant operations 
returned to gainful activities. In fact, some women have conceived and 
carried pregnancies to term after transplantation without demonstra-
ble injury to their infants.
 ■ FURTHER READING
AASLD/IDSA  HCV  Guidance  Panel:  Hepatitis  C  guidance  2019 
update: American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases-Infectious 
Diseases  Society  of  America  recommendations  for  testing,  man-
aging,  and  treating  hepatitis  C  virus  infection.  Hepatology  71:686, 

*Deceased. 

2641

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

2020.  (Updated  regularly,  available  at  http://www.hcvguidelines.org.) 
Accessed August 24, 2021.     

Cotter  TG  et  al:  Improved  graft  survival  after  liver  transplantation 
for recipients with hepatitis C virus in the direct-acting antiviral era. 
Liver Transpl 25:598, 2019.

European Association for the Study of the Liver: EASL clinical 
practice guidelines: Liver transplantation. J Hepatol 64:433, 2016.
Fung J et al: Outcomes including liver histology after liver transplan-
tation for chronic hepatitis B using oral antiviral therapy alone. Liver 
Transpl 21:1504, 2015.

Goldberg  D  et  al:  Changes  in  the  prevalence  of  hepatitis  C  virus 
infection,  nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis,  and  alcoholic  liver  disease 
among patients with cirrhosis or liver failure on the waitlist for liver 
transplantation. Gastroenterology 152:1090, 2017.

Kwo PY et al: An interferon-free antiviral regimen for HCV after liver 

transplantation. N Engl J Med 371:2375, 2014.

Lenci  I  et  al:  Complete  hepatitis  B  virus  prophylaxis  withdrawal  in 
hepatitis  B  surface  antigen-positive  liver  transplant  recipients  after 
long-term  minimal  immunosuppression.  Liver  Transpl  22:1205, 
2016.

Lucey MR et al: Long-term management of the successful adult liver 
transplant: 2012 practice guideline by the American Association for 
the Study of Liver Diseases and the American Society of Transplanta-
tion. Liver Transpl 19:3, 2013.

Manns  M  et  al:  Ledipasvir  and  sofosbuvir  plus  ribavirin  in  patients 
with genotype 1 or 4 hepatitis C virus infection and advanced liver 
disease: A multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet 
Infect Dis 16:685, 2016.

Martin  P  et  al:  Evaluation  for  liver  transplantation  in  adults:  2013 
practice guideline by the American Association for the Study of Liver 
Diseases  and  the  American  Society  of  Transplantation.  Hepatology 
59:1145, 2014.

Reau  N  et  al:  Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir  treatment  in  liver  or  kidney 
transplant  patients  with  hepatitis  C  virus  infection.  Hepatology 
68:1298, 2018.

346 Diseases of the  

Gallbladder and Bile Ducts
Norton J. Greenberger*, Gustav Paumgartner, 
Daniel S. Pratt

PHYSIOLOGY OF BILE PRODUCTION  
AND FLOW
 ■ BILE SECRETION AND COMPOSITION
Bile formed in hepatocytes is secreted into a complex network of cana-
liculi, small bile ductules, and larger bile ducts that run with lymphatics 
and branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery in portal tracts situ-
ated between hepatic lobules. These interlobular bile ducts coalesce to 
form larger septal bile ducts that join to form the right and left hepatic 
ducts,  which  in  turn,  unite  to  form  the  common  hepatic  duct.  The 
common hepatic duct is joined by the cystic duct of the gallbladder to 
form the common bile duct (CBD), which enters the duodenum (often 
after joining the main pancreatic duct) through the ampulla of Vater.

Hepatic  bile  is  an  isotonic  fluid  with  an  electrolyte  composition 
resembling  blood  plasma.  The  electrolyte  composition  of  gallbladder 
bile  differs  from  that  of  hepatic  bile  because  most  of  the  inorganic 
anions, chloride, and bicarbonate have been removed by reabsorption 
across  the  gallbladder  epithelium.  As  a  result  of  water  reabsorption, 
total  solute  concentration  of  bile  increases  from  3–4  g/dL  in  hepatic 
bile to 10–15 g/dL in gallbladder bile.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2641

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2642 Major  solute  components  of  bile  by  moles  percent  include  bile 
acids (80%), phospholipids (lecithins, cephalins, and sphingomyelin) 
(16%), and unesterified cholesterol (4.0%). In the lithogenic state, the 
cholesterol value can be as high as 8–10%. Other constituents include 
conjugated bilirubin; proteins (all immunoglobulins, albumin, metab-
olites of hormones, and other proteins metabolized in the liver); elec-
trolytes; mucus; heavy metals; and, often, drugs and their metabolites.
The total daily basal secretion of hepatic bile is ~500–600 mL. Many 
substances taken up or synthesized by the hepatocyte are secreted into 
the bile canaliculi. The canalicular membrane forms microvilli and is 
associated with microfilaments of actin, microtubules, and other con-
tractile elements. Prior to their secretion into the bile, many substances 
are taken up into the hepatocyte, while others, such as phospholipids, 
a portion of primary bile acids, and some cholesterol, are synthesized 
de  novo  in  the  hepatocyte.  Three  mechanisms  are  important  in  reg-
ulating  bile  flow:  (1)  active  transport  of  bile  acids  from  hepatocytes 
into  the  bile  canaliculi,  (2)  active  transport  of  other  organic  anions, 
and (3) cholangiocellular secretion. The last is a secretin-mediated and 
cyclic  AMP–dependent  mechanism  that  results  in  the  secretion  of  a 
bicarbonate-rich fluid into the bile ducts.

Active  vectorial  trans-hepatocellular  movement  of  bile  acids  from 
the  portal  blood  into  the  bile  canaliculi  is  driven  by  a  set  of  trans-
port systems at the basolateral (sinusoidal) and the canalicular apical 
plasma membrane domains of the hepatocyte. Two sinusoidal bile salt 
uptake  systems  have  been  cloned  in  humans,  the  Na+/taurocholate 
cotransporter (NTCP, SLC10A1) and the organic anion–transporting 
proteins (OATP1B1/1B3), which also transport a large variety of non–
bile salt organic anions. Several ATP-dependent canalicular transport 
systems,  “export  pumps”  (ATP-binding  cassette  transport  proteins, 
also  known  as  ABC  transporters),  have  been  identified,  the  most 
important  of  which  are  the  bile  salt  export  pump  (BSEP,  ABCB11); 
the anionic conjugate export pump (MRP2, ABCC2), which mediates 
the canalicular excretion of various amphiphilic conjugates formed by 
phase  II  conjugation  (e.g.,  bilirubin  mono-  and  diglucuronides  and 
drugs);  the  multidrug  export  pump  (MDR1,  ABCB1)  for  hydropho-
bic cationic compounds; and the phospholipid export pump (MDR3, 
ABCB4). Two hemitransporters, ABCG5/G8, functioning as a couple, 
constitute the canalicular cholesterol and phytosterol transporter. F1C1 
(ATP8B1)  is  an  aminophospholipid  transferase  (“flippase”)  essential 
for maintaining the lipid asymmetry of the canalicular membrane. The 
canalicular  membrane  also  contains  ATP-independent  transport  sys-
tems such as the Cl/HCO3 anion exchanger isoform 2 (AE2, SLC4A2) 
for  canalicular  bicarbonate  secretion.  For  most  of  these  transporters, 
genetic  defects  have  been  identified  that  are  associated  with  various 
forms of cholestasis or defects of biliary excretion. F1C1 (ATP8B1) is 
defective in progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 (PFIC1) 
and  benign  recurrent  intrahepatic  cholestasis  type  1  (BRIC1)  and 
results  in  ablation  of  all  other  ATP-dependent  transporter  functions. 
BSEP (ABCB11) is defective in PFIC2 and BRIC2. Mutations of MRP2 
(ABCC2)  cause  the  Dubin-Johnson  syndrome,  an  inherited  form 
of  conjugated  hyperbilirubinemia  (Chap.  338).  A  defective  MDR3 
(ABCB4) results in PFIC3. ABCG5/G8, the canalicular half transport-
ers  for  cholesterol  and  other  neutral  sterols,  are  defective  in  sitoster-
olemia. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR, ABCC7), 
located on bile duct epithelial cells but not on canalicular membranes, 
is defective in cystic fibrosis, which is associated with impaired cholan-
giocellular pH regulation during ductular bile formation and chronic 
cholestatic liver disease, occasionally resulting in biliary cirrhosis.

 ■ THE BILE ACIDS
The  primary  bile  acids,  cholic  acid  and  chenodeoxycholic  acid 
(CDCA), are synthesized in hepatocytes from cholesterol, conjugated 
with glycine or taurine, and secreted into the bile canaliculus. Second-
ary bile acids, including deoxycholate and lithocholate, are formed in 
the colon as bacterial metabolites of the primary bile acids. However, 
lithocholic acid is much less efficiently absorbed from the colon than 
deoxycholic  acid.  Another  secondary  bile  acid,  found  in  low  concen-
tration, is ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a stereoisomer of CDCA. In 
healthy subjects, the ratio of glycine to taurine conjugates in bile is ~3:1.

Bile  acids  are  detergent-like  molecules  that  in  aqueous  solutions 
and above a critical concentration of ~2 mM form molecular aggre-
gates called micelles. Cholesterol alone is sparingly soluble in aqueous 
environments,  and  its  solubility  in  bile  depends  on  both  the  total 
lipid  concentration  and  the  relative  molar  percentages  of  bile  acids 
and lecithin. Normal ratios of these constituents favor the formation 
of  solubilizing  mixed  micelles,  while  abnormal  ratios  promote  the 
precipitation of cholesterol crystals in bile via an intermediate liquid 
crystal phase.

In  addition  to  facilitating  the  biliary  excretion  of  cholesterol,  bile 
acids facilitate the normal intestinal absorption of dietary fats, mainly 
cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins, via a micellar transport mecha-
nism (Chap. 325). Bile acids also serve as a major physiologic driving 
force for hepatic bile flow and aid in water and electrolyte transport in 
the small bowel and colon.

Bile acids also function as hormones binding to nuclear (farnesoid X 
receptor [FXR]) and G protein–coupled (TGR5) receptors that regulate 
bile acid metabolism and their enterohepatic circulation.

 ■ ENTEROHEPATIC CIRCULATION
Bile acids are efficiently conserved under normal conditions. Uncon-
jugated, and to a lesser degree also conjugated, bile acids are absorbed 
by  passive  diffusion  along  the  entire  gut.  Quantitatively  much  more 
important  for  bile  salt  recirculation,  however,  is  the  active  transport 
mechanism for conjugated bile acids in the distal ileum (Chap. 325). 
The reabsorbed bile acids enter the portal bloodstream and are taken 
up  rapidly  by  hepatocytes,  reconjugated,  and  resecreted  into  bile 
(enterohepatic circulation).

The normal bile acid pool size is ~2–4 g. During digestion of a meal, 
the bile acid pool undergoes at least one or more enterohepatic cycles, 
depending on the size and composition of the meal. Normally, the bile 
acid  pool  circulates  ~5–10  times  daily.  Intestinal  reabsorption  of  the 
pool is ~95% efficient; therefore, daily fecal loss of bile acids is in the 
range  of  0.2–0.4  g.  In  the  steady  state,  this  fecal  loss  is  compensated 
by an equal daily synthesis of bile acids by the liver, and thus, the size 
of the bile acid pool is maintained. Bile acids in the intestine stimulate 
the  release  of  fibroblast  growth  factor  19  (FGF19),  which  suppresses 
the  hepatic  synthesis  of  bile  acids  from  cholesterol  by  inhibiting  the 
rate-limiting  enzyme  cytochrome  P450  7A1  (CYP7A1).  FGF19  also 
promotes gallbladder relaxation. While the loss of bile salts in stool is 
usually matched by increased hepatic synthesis, the maximum rate of 
synthesis is ~5 g/d, which may be insufficient to replete the bile acid 
pool size when there is pronounced impairment of intestinal bile salt 
reabsorption.

The expression of ABC transporters in the enterohepatic circulation 
and  of  the  rate-limiting  enzymes  of  bile  acid  and  cholesterol  syn-
thesis  are  regulated  in  a  coordinated  fashion  by  nuclear  receptors, 
which are ligand-activated transcription factors. The hepatic BSEP 
(ABCB11)  is  upregulated  by  the  FXR  that  also  represses  bile  acid 
synthesis. The expression of the cholesterol transporter, ABCG5/G8, 
is upregulated by the liver X receptor (LXR), which is an oxysterol 
sensor.

 ■ GALLBLADDER AND SPHINCTERIC FUNCTIONS
In the fasting state, the sphincter of Oddi (SOD) offers a high-pressure 
zone of resistance to bile flow from the CBD into the duodenum. Its 
tonic contraction serves to (1) prevent reflux of duodenal contents into 
the pancreatic and bile ducts and (2) promote filling of the gallblad-
der. The major factor controlling the evacuation of the gallbladder is 
the peptide hormone cholecystokinin (CCK), which is released from 
the  duodenal  mucosa  in  response  to  the  ingestion  of  fats  and  amino 
acids. CCK produces (1) powerful contraction of the gallbladder, (2) 
decreased resistance of the SOD, and (3) enhanced flow of biliary con-
tents into the duodenum.

Hepatic  bile  is  “concentrated”  within  the  gallbladder  by  energy- 
dependent transmucosal absorption of water and electrolytes. Almost 
the entire bile acid pool may be sequestered in the gallbladder follow-
ing an overnight fast for delivery into the duodenum with the first meal 
of the day. The normal capacity of the gallbladder is ~30 mL.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2642

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemDISEASES OF THE GALLBLADDER
 ■ CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
Anomalies of the biliary tract are not uncommon and include abnor-
malities  in  number,  size,  and  shape  (e.g.,  agenesis  of  the  gallbladder, 
duplications, rudimentary or oversized “giant” gallbladders, and diver-
ticula). Phrygian cap is a clinically innocuous entity in which a partial 
or  complete  septum  (or  fold)  separates  the  fundus  from  the  body. 
Anomalies of position or suspension are not uncommon and include 
left-sided  gallbladder,  intrahepatic  gallbladder,  retrodisplacement  of 
the gallbladder, and “floating” gallbladder. The latter condition predis-
poses to acute torsion, volvulus, or herniation of the gallbladder.

 ■ GALLSTONES
Epidemiology and Pathogenesis  Gallstones are quite prevalent 
in most Western countries. Gallstone formation increases after age 50. 
In  the  United  States,  the  prevalence  is  highest  in  Native  Americans 
followed by Hispanics, non-Hispanic whites, and black Americans. The 
prevalence is higher in women than men across all ages.

Gallstones  form  because  of  abnormal  bile  composition.  They  are 
divided  into  two  major  types:  cholesterol  stones  and  pigment  stones. 
Cholesterol stones account for >90% of all gallstones in Western industri-
alized countries. Cholesterol gallstones usually contain >50% cholesterol 
monohydrate plus an admixture of calcium salts, bile pigments, proteins, 
and fatty acids. Pigment stones are composed primarily of calcium biliru-
binate; they contain <20% cholesterol and are classified into “black” and 
“brown” types, the latter forming secondary to chronic biliary infection.
CHOLESTEROL  STONES  AND  BILIARY  SLUDGE  Cholesterol  is  essen-
tially  water-insoluble  and  requires  aqueous  dispersion  into  either 
micelles  or  vesicles,  both  of  which  require  the  presence  of  a  second 
lipid  to  solubilize  the  cholesterol.  Cholesterol  and  phospholipids  are 
secreted into bile as unilamellar bilayered vesicles, which are converted 
into  mixed  micelles  consisting  of  bile  acids,  phospholipids,  and  cho-
lesterol by the action of bile acids. If there is an excess of cholesterol 
in  relation  to  phospholipids  and  bile  acids,  unstable,  cholesterol-rich 
vesicles remain, which aggregate into large multilamellar vesicles from 
which cholesterol crystals precipitate (Fig. 346-1).

There  are  several  important  mechanisms  in  the  formation  of 
lithogenic  (stone-forming)  bile.  The  most  important  is  increased 
biliary  secretion  of  cholesterol.  This  may  occur  in  association  with 
obesity,  the  metabolic  syndrome,  high-caloric  and  cholesterol-rich 
diets, or drugs (e.g., clofibrate) and may result from increased activity 
of  hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme  A  (HMG-CoA)  reductase,  the 
rate-limiting  enzyme  of  hepatic  cholesterol  synthesis,  and  increased 
hepatic uptake of cholesterol from blood. In patients with gallstones, 
dietary cholesterol increases biliary cholesterol secretion. This does not 
occur in non-gallstone patients on high-cholesterol diets. In addition 
to  environmental  factors  such  as  high-caloric  and  cholesterol-rich 
diets,  genetic  factors  play  an  important  role  in  gallstone  disease.  A 
large study of symptomatic gallstones in Swedish twins provided strong 
evidence for a role of genetic factors in gallstone pathogenesis. Genetic 
factors accounted for 25%, shared environmental factors for 13%, and 
individual environmental factors for 62% of the phenotypic variation 
among monozygotic twins. A single nucleotide polymorphism of the 
gene  encoding  the  hepatic  cholesterol  transporter  ABCG5/G8  has 
been found in 21% of patients with gallstones, but only in 9% of the 
general  population.  It  is  thought  to  cause  a  gain  of  function  of  the 
cholesterol transporter and to contribute to cholesterol hypersecretion. 
A high prevalence of gallstones is found among first-degree relatives of 
gallstone carriers and in certain ethnic populations such as American 
Indians, Chilean Indians, and Chilean Hispanics. A common genetic 
trait has been identified for some of these populations by mitochon-
drial DNA analysis. In some patients, impaired hepatic conversion of 
cholesterol to bile acids may also occur, resulting in an increase of the 
lithogenic cholesterol/bile acid ratio. Although most cholesterol stones 
have a polygenic basis, there are rare monogenic (Mendelian) causes. 
Mutations  in  the  CYP7A1  gene  have  been  described  that  result  in  a 
deficiency  of  the  enzyme  cholesterol  7-hydroxylase,  which  catalyzes 

ABCG5/G8

CYP7A1

MDR3 (ABCB4)

2643

I.

Cholesterol
Normal bile acids
Normal lecithin

Normal cholesterol
Bile acids
Normal lecithin

Normal cholesterol
Normal bile acids
Lecithin

II. Supersaturation

Promote nucleation
Mucous glycoproteins
Heat-labile proteins

Inhibit nucleation
Apolipoproteins
Lecithin vesicles

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

III. Nucleation

IV. Microstone

Gallstone

FIGURE  346-1  Scheme  showing  pathogenesis  of  cholesterol  gallstone 
formation.  Conditions  or  factors  that  increase  the  ratio  of  cholesterol  to  bile 
acids  and  phospholipids  (lecithin)  favor  gallstone  formation.  ABCB4,  ATP-binding 
cassette  transporter;  ABCG5/8,  ATP-binding  cassette  (ABC)  transporter  G5/G8; 
CYP7A1, cytochrome P450 7A1; MDR3, multidrug resistance protein 3, also called 
phospholipid export pump.

the  initial  step  in  cholesterol  catabolism  and  bile  acid  synthesis.  The 
homozygous  state  is  associated  with  hypercholesterolemia  and  gall-
stones. Because the phenotype is expressed in the heterozygote state, 
mutations in the CYP7A1 gene may contribute to the susceptibility to 
cholesterol gallstone disease in the population. Mutations in the MDR3 
(ABCB4)  gene,  which  encodes  the  phospholipid  export  pump  in  the 
canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, may cause defective phospho-
lipid secretion into bile, resulting in cholesterol supersaturation of bile 
and  formation  of  cholesterol  gallstones  in  the  gallbladder  and  in  the 
bile ducts. Thus, an excess of biliary cholesterol in relation to bile acids 
and  phospholipids  is  primarily  due  to  hypersecretion  of  cholesterol, 
but  hyposecretion  of  bile  acids  or  phospholipids  may  contribute.  An 
additional disturbance of bile acid metabolism that is likely to contrib-
ute to supersaturation of bile with cholesterol is enhanced conversion 
of  cholic  acid  to  deoxycholic  acid,  with  replacement  of  the  cholic 
acid  pool  by  an  expanded  deoxycholic  acid  pool.  It  may  result  from 
enhanced dehydroxylation of cholic acid and increased absorption of 
newly formed deoxycholic acid. An increased deoxycholate secretion is 
associated with hypersecretion of cholesterol into bile.

While supersaturation of bile with cholesterol is an important pre-
requisite for gallstone formation, it is generally not sufficient by itself 
to  produce  cholesterol  precipitation  in  vivo.  Most  individuals  with 
supersaturated  bile  do  not  develop  stones  because  the  time  required 
for cholesterol crystals to nucleate and grow is longer than the time bile 
remains in the gallbladder.

An important mechanism is nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate 
crystals, which is greatly accelerated in human lithogenic bile. Acceler-
ated nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate in bile may be due to either 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2643

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2644 an excess of pronucleating factors or a deficiency of antinucleating factors. 
Mucin and certain nonmucin glycoproteins, principally immunoglob-
ulins,  appear  to  be  pronucleating  factors,  while  apolipoproteins  A-I 
and A-II and other glycoproteins appear to be antinucleating factors. 
Pigment particles may possibly play a role as nucleating factors. In a 
genome-wide  analysis  of  serum  bilirubin  levels,  the  uridine  diphos-
phate-glucuronyltransferase  1A1  (UGT1A1)  Gilbert’s  syndrome  gene 
variant was associated with the presence of gallstone disease. Because 
most gallstones associated with the UGT1A1 variant were cholesterol 
stones, this finding points to the role of pigment particles in the patho-
genesis of gallbladder stones. Cholesterol monohydrate crystal nucle-
ation  and  crystal  growth  probably  occur  within  the  mucin  gel  layer. 
Vesicle fusion leads to liquid crystals, which, in turn, nucleate into solid 
cholesterol  monohydrate  crystals.  Continued  growth  of  the  crystals 
occurs  by  direct  nucleation  of  cholesterol  molecules  from  supersatu-
rated unilamellar or multilamellar biliary vesicles.

A third important mechanism in cholesterol gallstone formation is 
gallbladder hypomotility. If the gallbladder emptied all supersaturated 
or crystal-containing bile completely, stones would not be able to grow. 
A  high  percentage  of  patients  with  gallstones  exhibits  abnormalities 
of gallbladder emptying. Ultrasonographic studies show that gallstone 
patients  display  an  increased  gallbladder  volume  during  fasting  and 
after a test meal (residual volume) and that fractional emptying after 
gallbladder  stimulation  is  decreased.  The  incidence  of  gallstones  is 
increased  in  conditions  associated  with  infrequent  or  impaired  gall-
bladder  emptying  such  as  fasting,  parenteral  nutrition,  or  pregnancy 
and in patients using drugs that inhibit gallbladder motility.

Biliary  sludge  is  a  thick,  mucous  material  that,  upon  microscopic 
examination,  reveals  lecithin-cholesterol  liquid  crystals,  cholesterol 
monohydrate  crystals,  calcium  bilirubinate,  and  mucin  gels.  Biliary 
sludge  typically  forms  a  crescent-like  layer  in  the  most  dependent 
portion  of  the  gallbladder  and  is  recognized  by  characteristic  echoes 
on ultrasonography (see below). The presence of biliary sludge implies 
two abnormalities: (1) the normal balance between gallbladder mucin 
secretion  and  elimination  has  become  deranged,  and  (2)  nucleation 
of biliary solutes has occurred. That biliary sludge may be a precursor 
form of gallstone disease is evident from several observations. In one 
study, 96 patients with gallbladder sludge were followed prospectively 
by serial ultrasound studies. In 18%, biliary sludge disappeared and did 
not recur for at least 2 years. In 60%, biliary sludge disappeared and 
reappeared;  in  14%,  gallstones  (8%  asymptomatic,  6%  symptomatic) 
developed; and in 6%, severe biliary pain with or without acute pan-
creatitis occurred. In 12 patients, cholecystectomies were performed, 6 
for gallstone-associated biliary pain and 3 in symptomatic patients with 
sludge but without gallstones who had prior attacks of pancreatitis; the 
latter did not recur after cholecystectomy. It should be emphasized that 
biliary sludge can develop with disorders that cause gallbladder hypo-
motility; that is, surgery, burns, total parenteral nutrition, pregnancy, and 
oral contraceptives—all of which are associated with gallstone formation. 
However, the presence of biliary sludge implies supersaturation of bile 
with either cholesterol or calcium bilirubinate.

Two  other  conditions  are  associated  with  cholesterol-stone  or 
biliary-sludge  formation:  pregnancy  and  rapid  weight  reduction 
through a very-low-calorie diet. There appear to be two key changes 
during  pregnancy  that  contribute  to  a  “cholelithogenic  state”:  (1)  a 
marked  increase  in  cholesterol  saturation  of  bile  during  the  third 
trimester  and  (2)  sluggish  gallbladder  contraction  in  response  to  a 
standard meal, resulting in impaired gallbladder emptying. That these 
changes are related to pregnancy per se is supported by several studies 
that  show  reversal  of  these  abnormalities  quite  rapidly  after  delivery. 
During pregnancy, gallbladder sludge develops in 20–30% of women 
and gallstones in 5–12%. Although biliary sludge is a common finding 
during pregnancy, it is usually asymptomatic and often resolves spon-
taneously after delivery. Gallstones, which are less common than sludge 
and  frequently  associated  with  biliary  colic,  may  also  disappear  after 
delivery because of spontaneous dissolution related to bile becoming 
unsaturated with cholesterol postpartum.

Approximately  10–20%  of  persons  with  rapid  weight  reduction 
achieved  through  very-low-calorie  dieting  develop  gallstones.  In  a 

study  involving  600  patients  who  completed  a  3-month,  520-kcal/d 
diet,  UDCA  in  a  dosage  of  600  mg/d  proved  highly  effective  in 
preventing  gallstone  formation;  gallstones  developed  in  only  3%  of 
UDCA  recipients,  compared  to  28%  of  placebo-treated  patients.  In 
obese patients treated by gastric banding, 500 mg/d of UDCA reduced 
the risk of gallstone formation from 30 to 8% within a follow-up of  
6 months.

To summarize, cholesterol gallstone disease occurs because of several 
defects,  which  include  (1)  bile  supersaturation  with  cholesterol,  (2) 
nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate with subsequent crystal retention 
and  stone  growth,  and  (3)  abnormal  gallbladder  motor  function  with 
delayed  emptying  and  stasis.  Other  important  factors  known  to  pre-
dispose to cholesterol-stone formation are summarized in Table 346-1.
PIGMENT  STONES  Black  pigment  stones  are  composed  of  either 
pure  calcium  bilirubinate  or  polymer-like  complexes  with  calcium 
and  mucin  glycoproteins.  They  are  more  common  in  patients  who 
have  chronic  hemolytic  states  (with  increased  conjugated  bilirubin 
in  bile);  cirrhosis,  especially  related  to  alcohol;  Gilbert’s  syndrome; 
or  cystic  fibrosis.  Gallbladder  stones  in  patients  with  ileal  diseases, 
ileal resection, or ileal bypass generally are also black pigment stones. 

TABLE 346-1  Predisposing Factors for Cholesterol and  
Pigment Gallstone Formation
Cholesterol Stones

1.  Demographic/genetic factors: Prevalence highest in North American Indians, 
Chilean Indians, and Chilean Hispanics, greater in Northern Europe and North 
America than in Asia, lowest in Japan; familial disposition; hereditary aspects

2.  Obesity, metabolic syndrome: Normal bile acid pool and secretion but 

increased biliary secretion of cholesterol

3.  Rapid weight loss: Mobilization of tissue cholesterol leads to increased 

biliary cholesterol secretion while enterohepatic circulation of bile acids is 
decreased

4.  Female sex hormones

a.  Estrogens stimulate hepatic lipoprotein receptors, increase uptake of 

dietary cholesterol, and increase biliary cholesterol secretion

b.  Natural estrogens, other estrogens, and oral contraceptives lead to 

decreased bile salt secretion and decreased conversion of cholesterol to 
cholesteryl esters

5.  Pregnancy: Impaired gallbladder emptying caused by progesterone 

combined with the influence of estrogens, which increase biliary cholesterol 
secretion

6.  Increasing age: Increased biliary secretion of cholesterol, decreased size of 

bile acid pool, decreased secretion of bile salts

7.  Gallbladder hypomotility leading to stasis and formation of sludge

a.  Total parenteral nutrition
b.  Fasting
c.  Pregnancy
d.  Drugs such as octreotide

8.  Clofibrate therapy: Increased biliary secretion of cholesterol
9.  Decreased bile acid secretion

a.  Genetic defect of the CYP7A1 gene

10. Decreased phospholipid secretion: Genetic defect of the MDR3 gene
11. Miscellaneous

a.  High-calorie, high-fat diet
b.  Spinal cord injury

Pigment Stones

1.  Demographic/genetic factors: Asia, rural setting (presumed due to increased 
prevalence of parasitic biliary infections; the incidence has been dropping 
with time)

2.  Chronic hemolysis (example: sickle cell disease)
3.  Alcohol related liver cirrhosis
4.  Ineffective erythropoiesis (example: pernicious anemia)
5.  Cystic fibrosis
6.  Chronic biliary tract infection, parasite infections
7.  Increasing age
8.  Ileal disease, ileal resection or bypass

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2644

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemEnterohepatic recycling of bilirubin in ileal disease states contributes 
to their pathogenesis. Brown pigment stones are composed of calcium 
salts  of  unconjugated  bilirubin  with  varying  amounts  of  cholesterol 
and  protein.  They  are  caused  by  the  presence  of  increased  amounts 
of  unconjugated,  insoluble  bilirubin  in  bile  that  precipitates  to  form 
stones.  Deconjugation  of  an  excess  of  soluble  bilirubin  mono-  and 
diglucuronides may be mediated by endogenous β-glucuronidase but 
may also occur by spontaneous hydrolysis. Sometimes, the enzyme is 
also produced when bile is chronically infected by bacteria, and such 
stones are brown. Pigment stone formation is frequent in Asia and is 
often associated with parasitic infections in the gallbladder and biliary 
tree (Table 346-1).

Diagnosis  Procedures of potential use in the diagnosis of cholelith-
iasis and other diseases of the gallbladder are detailed in Table 346-2. 
Ultrasonography of the gallbladder is very accurate in the identifica-
tion of cholelithiasis and has replaced oral cholecystography (OCG) 
(Fig.  346-2A).  Stones  as  small  as  1.5  mm  in  diameter  may  be  con-
fidently  identified  provided  that  firm  criteria  are  used  (e.g.,  acoustic 
“shadowing” of opacities that are within the gallbladder lumen and that 
change with the patient’s position [by gravity]). In major medical cen-
ters, the false-negative and false-positive rates for ultrasound in gall-
stone patients are ~2–4%. Biliary sludge is material of low echogenic 
activity that typically forms a layer in the most dependent position of 
the gallbladder. This layer shifts with postural changes but fails to pro-
duce acoustic shadowing; these two characteristics distinguish sludges 
from  gallstones.  Ultrasound  can  also  be  used  to  assess  the  emptying 
function of the gallbladder.

TABLE 346-2  Diagnostic Evaluation of the Gallbladder
DIAGNOSTIC 
ADVANTAGES

DIAGNOSTIC 
LIMITATIONS

COMMENT

Bowel gas
Massive obesity
Ascites

Procedure of choice for 
detection of stones

Ultrasound

Rapid
Accurate identification of 
gallstones (>95%)
Simultaneous scanning 
of GB, liver, bile ducts, 
pancreas
“Real-time” scanning 
allows assessment of GB 
volume, contractility
Not limited by jaundice, 
pregnancy
May detect very small 
stones

Plain Abdominal X-Ray

Low cost
Readily available

Relatively low yield
Contraindicated in 
pregnancy

Cholescintigraphy (HIDA, DISIDA, etc.)

Accurate identification of 
cystic duct obstruction
Simultaneous 
assessment of bile ducts

Contraindicated in 
pregnancy
Serum bilirubin >103–205 
μmol/L (6–12 mg/dL)
Cholecystogram of low 
resolution

Pathognomonic findings 
in: calcified gallstones, 
limey bile, porcelain GB,
emphysematous 
cholecystitis,
gallstone ileus

Indicated for 
confirmation of 
suspected acute 
cholecystitis; less 
sensitive and less 
specific in chronic 
cholecystitis; useful 
in the diagnosis 
of acalculous 
cholecystopathy, 
especially if given 
with CCK to assess GB 
emptying

Abbreviations: CCK, cholecystokinin; DISIDA, diisopropyl iminodiacetic acid; GB, 
gallbladder; HIDA, hydroxyl iminodiacetic acid.

2645

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

The  plain  abdominal  film  may  detect  gallstones  containing  suffi-
cient  calcium  to  be  radiopaque  (10–15%  of  cholesterol  and  ~50%  of 
pigment stones). Plain radiography may also be of use in the diagnosis 
of emphysematous cholecystitis, porcelain gallbladder, limey bile, and 
gallstone ileus.

OCG was historically a useful procedure for the diagnosis of gall-
stones  but  has  been  replaced  by  ultrasound  and  is  now  regarded  as 
obsolete.  It  may  be  used  to  assess  the  patency  of  the  cystic  duct  and 
gallbladder  emptying  function.  Further,  OCG  can  also  delineate  the 
size and number of gallstones and determine whether they are calci-
fied, useful information if medical dissolution is being considered.

Radiopharmaceuticals such as 99mTc-labeled N-substituted iminodi-
acetic acids (HIDA and DISIDA) are rapidly extracted from the blood 
and  are  excreted  into  the  biliary  tree  in  high  concentration  even  in 
the  presence  of  mild  to  moderate  serum  bilirubin  elevations.  Failure 
to image the gallbladder in the presence of biliary ductal visualization 
may  indicate  cystic  duct  obstruction,  acute  or  chronic  cholecystitis, 
or  surgical  absence  of  the  organ.  Such  scans  have  application  in  the 
diagnosis of acute cholecystitis and may play a role in the detection of 
a postcholecystectomy bile leak.
Symptoms  of  Gallstone  Disease  Gallstones  usually  produce 
symptoms  by  causing  inflammation  or  obstruction  following  their 
migration into the cystic duct or CBD. The most specific and charac-
teristic symptom of gallstone disease is biliary colic that is a constant 
and  often  long-lasting  pain  (see  below).  Obstruction  of  the  cystic 
duct or CBD by a stone produces increased intraluminal pressure and 
distention  of  the  viscus  that  cannot  be  relieved  by  repetitive  biliary 
contractions. The resultant visceral pain is characteristically a severe, 
steady  ache  or  fullness  in  the  epigastrium  or  right  upper  quadrant 
(RUQ)  of  the  abdomen  with  frequent  radiation  to  the  interscapular 
area, right scapula, or shoulder.

Biliary  colic  begins  quite  suddenly  and  may  persist  with  severe 
intensity for 30 min to 5 h, subsiding gradually or rapidly. It is steady 
rather  than  intermittent,  as  would  be  suggested  by  the  word  colic, 
which must be regarded as a misnomer, although it is in widespread 
use.  An  episode  of  biliary  pain  persisting  beyond  5  h  should  raise 
the suspicion of acute cholecystitis (see below). Nausea and vomiting 
frequently  accompany  episodes  of  biliary  pain.  An  elevated  level  of 
serum bilirubin and/or alkaline phosphatase suggests a common duct 
stone.  Fever  or  chills  (rigors)  with  biliary  pain  usually  imply  a  com-
plication, that is, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, or cholangitis. Complaints 
of  short-lasting,  vague  epigastric  fullness,  dyspepsia,  eructation,  or 
flatulence,  especially  following  a  fatty  meal,  should  not  be  confused 
with biliary pain. Such symptoms are frequently elicited from patients 
with or without gallstone disease but are not specific for biliary calculi. 
Biliary colic may be precipitated by eating a fatty meal, by consumption 
of a large meal following a period of prolonged fasting, or by eating a 
normal meal; it is frequently nocturnal, occurring within a few hours 
of retiring.
Natural History  Gallstone disease discovered in an asymptomatic 
patient or in a patient whose symptoms are not referable to cholelithiasis 
is  a  common  clinical  problem.  Sixty  to  80%  of  persons  with  asymp-
tomatic gallstones remain asymptomatic over follow-up periods of up 
to  25  years.  The  probability  of  developing  symptoms  within  5  years 
after diagnosis is 2–4% per year and decreases in the years thereafter to 
1–2%. The yearly incidence of complications is about 0.1–0.3%. Patients 
remaining  asymptomatic  for  15  years  were  found  to  be  unlikely  to 
develop symptoms during further follow-up, and most patients who did 
develop complications from their gallstones experienced prior warning 
symptoms.  Similar  conclusions  apply  to  diabetic  patients  with  silent 
gallstones. Decision analysis has suggested that (1) the cumulative risk 
of  death  due  to  gallstone  disease  while  on  expectant  management  is 
small, and (2) prophylactic cholecystectomy is not warranted.

Complications requiring cholecystectomy are much more common 
in  gallstone  patients  who  have  developed  symptoms  of  biliary  pain. 
Patients  found  to  have  gallstones  at  a  young  age  are  more  likely  to 
develop symptoms from cholelithiasis than are patients >60 years at the 
time of initial diagnosis. Patients with diabetes mellitus and gallstones 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2645

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2646

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 346-2  Examples of ultrasound and radiologic studies of the biliary tract. A. An ultrasound study showing a distended gallbladder (GB) containing a single large 
stone  (arrow),  which  casts  an  acoustic  shadow.  B.  Endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatogram  (ERCP)  showing  normal  biliary  tract  anatomy.  In  addition  to  the 
endoscope and large vertical gallbladder filled with contrast dye, the common hepatic duct (CHD), common bile duct (CBD), and pancreatic duct (PD) are shown. The arrow 
points to the ampulla of Vater. C. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERC) showing choledocholithiasis. The biliary tract is dilated and contains multiple radiolucent 
calculi. D. ERCP showing sclerosing cholangitis. The CBD shows areas that are strictured and narrowed.

may  be  somewhat  more  susceptible  to  septic  complications,  but  the 
magnitude of risk of septic biliary complications in diabetic patients is 
incompletely defined.

TREATMENT
Gallstones

SURGICAL THERAPY
In  asymptomatic  gallstone  patients,  the  risk  of  developing  symp-
toms or complications requiring surgery is quite small (see above). 
Thus,  a  recommendation  for  cholecystectomy  in  a  patient  with 
gallstones should probably be based on assessment of three factors: 
(1)  the  presence  of  symptoms  that  are  frequent  enough  or  severe 
enough to interfere with the patient’s general routine; (2) the pres-
ence  of  a  prior  complication  of  gallstone  disease,  that  is,  history 
of acute cholecystitis, pancreatitis, gallstone fistula, etc.; or (3) the 
presence  of  an  underlying  condition  predisposing  the  patient  to 
increased  risk  of  gallstone  complications  (e.g.,  a  previous  attack 
of  acute  cholecystitis  regardless  of  current  symptomatic  status). 
Patients with very large gallstones (>3 cm in diameter) and patients 
harboring gallstones in a congenitally anomalous gallbladder might 
also  be  considered  for  prophylactic  cholecystectomy.  Although 
young age is a worrisome factor in asymptomatic gallstone patients, 
few authorities would now recommend routine cholecystectomy in 
young  patients  with  silent  stones.  Laparoscopic  cholecystectomy 
is  a  minimal-access  approach  for  the  removal  of  the  gallbladder 
together  with  its  stones.  Its  advantages  include  a  markedly  short-
ened  hospital  stay,  minimal  disability,  and  decreased  cost,  and  it 
is  the  procedure  of  choice  for  most  patients  referred  for  elective 
cholecystectomy.

From  several  studies  involving  >4000  patients  undergoing 
laparoscopic  cholecystectomy,  the  following  key  points  emerge: 
(1)  complications  develop  in  ~4%  of  patients,  (2)  conversion  to 
laparotomy occurs in 5%, (3) the death rate is remarkably low (i.e., 
<0.1%), and (4) the rate of bile duct injuries is low (i.e., 0.2–0.6%) 
and  comparable  with  open  cholecystectomy.  These  data  indicate 
why laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the “gold standard” 
for treating symptomatic cholelithiasis. 
MEDICAL THERAPY—GALLSTONE DISSOLUTION
In  carefully  selected  patients  with  a  functioning  gallbladder  and 
with radiolucent stones <10 mm in diameter, complete dissolution 
can be achieved in ~50% of patients within 6 months to 2 years. For 

good results within a reasonable time period, this therapy should 
be  limited  to  radiolucent  stones  <5  mm  in  diameter.  The  dose  of 
UDCA should be 10–15 mg/kg per d. Stones >10 mm in size rarely 
dissolve. Pigment stones are not responsive to UDCA therapy. Prob-
ably ≤10% of patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis are candidates 
for such treatment. However, in addition to the vexing problem of 
recurrent stones (30–50% over 3–5 years of follow-up), there is also 
the factor of taking a drug for up to 2 years and perhaps indefinitely. 
The advantages and success of laparoscopic cholecystectomy have 
largely  reduced  the  role  of  gallstone  dissolution  to  patients  who 
wish  to  avoid  or  are  not  candidates  for  elective  cholecystectomy. 
However,  patients  with  cholesterol  gallstone  disease  who  develop 
recurrent  choledocholithiasis  after  cholecystectomy  should  be  on 
long-term treatment with UDCA.

 ■ ACUTE AND CHRONIC CHOLECYSTITIS
Acute  Cholecystitis  Acute  inflammation  of  the  gallbladder  wall 
usually follows obstruction of the cystic duct by a stone. Inflammatory 
response can be evoked by three factors: (1) mechanical inflammation 
produced  by  increased  intraluminal  pressure  and  distention  with 
resulting  ischemia  of  the  gallbladder  mucosa  and  wall,  (2)  chemical 
inflammation caused by the release of lysolecithin (due to the action 
of phospholipase on lecithin in bile) and other local tissue factors, and 
(3) bacterial inflammation, which may play a role in 50–85% of patients 
with  acute  cholecystitis.  The  organisms  most  frequently  isolated  by 
culture  of  gallbladder  bile  in  these  patients  include  Escherichia  coli, 
Klebsiella spp., Streptococcus spp., and Clostridium spp.

Acute cholecystitis often begins as an attack of biliary pain that pro-
gressively  worsens.  Approximately  60–70%  of  patients  report  having 
experienced prior attacks that resolved spontaneously. As the episode 
progresses,  however,  the  pain  of  acute  cholecystitis  becomes  more 
generalized in the right upper abdomen. As with biliary colic, the pain 
of cholecystitis may radiate to the interscapular area, right scapula, or 
shoulder. Peritoneal signs of inflammation such as increased pain with 
jarring or on deep respiration may be apparent. The patient is anorectic 
and often nauseated. Vomiting is relatively common and may produce 
symptoms  and  signs  of  vascular  and  extracellular  volume  depletion. 
Jaundice is unusual early in the course of acute cholecystitis but may 
occur  when  edematous  inflammatory  changes  involve  the  bile  ducts 
and surrounding lymph nodes.

A  low-grade  fever  is  characteristically  present,  but  shaking  chills 
or  rigors  are  not  uncommon.  The  RUQ  of  the  abdomen  is  almost 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2646

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systeminvariably tender to palpation. An enlarged, tense gallbladder is palpa-
ble in 25–50% of patients. Deep inspiration or cough during subcostal 
palpation of the RUQ usually produces increased pain and inspiratory 
arrest  (Murphy’s  sign).  Localized  rebound  tenderness  in  the  RUQ  is 
common,  as  are  abdominal  distention  and  hypoactive  bowel  sounds 
from  paralytic  ileus,  but  generalized  peritoneal  signs  and  abdominal 
rigidity are usually lacking, in the absence of perforation.

The diagnosis of acute cholecystitis is usually made on the basis 
of  a  characteristic  history  and  physical  examination.  The  triad  of 
sudden  onset  of  RUQ  tenderness,  fever,  and  leukocytosis  is  highly 
suggestive.  Typically,  leukocytosis  in  the  range  of  10,000–15,000 
cells  per  microliter  with  a  left  shift  on  differential  count  is  found. 
The serum bilirubin is mildly elevated (<85.5 μmol/L [5 mg/dL]) in 
fewer than half of patients, whereas about one-fourth have modest 
elevations  in  serum  aminotransferases  (usually  less  than  a  fivefold 
elevation). Ultrasound will demonstrate calculi in 90–95% of cases 
and  is  useful  for  detection  of  signs  of  gallbladder  inflammation 
including thickening of the wall, pericholecystic fluid, and dilatation 
of the bile duct. The radionuclide (e.g., HIDA) biliary scan may be 
confirmatory  if  bile  duct  imaging  is  seen  without  visualization  of 
the gallbladder.

Approximately  75%  of  patients  treated  medically  have  remission 
of acute symptoms within 2–7 days following hospitalization. In 25%, 
however, a complication of acute cholecystitis will occur despite con-
servative treatment (see below). In this setting, prompt surgical inter-
vention is required. Of the 75% of patients with acute cholecystitis who 
undergo remission of symptoms, ~25% will experience a recurrence of 
cholecystitis within 1 year, and 60% will have at least one recurrent bout 
within 6 years. In view of the natural history of the disease, acute chole-
cystitis is best treated by early surgery whenever possible. Mirizzi’s syn-
drome is a rare complication in which a gallstone becomes impacted in 
the cystic duct or neck of the gallbladder causing compression of the 
CBD,  resulting  in  CBD  obstruction  and  jaundice.  Ultrasound  shows 
gallstone(s)  lying  outside  the  hepatic  duct.  Endoscopic  retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) (Fig. 346-2B), percutaneous tran-
shepatic  cholangiography  (PTC),  or  magnetic  resonance  cholangio-
pancreatography  (MRCP)  will  usually  demonstrate  the  characteristic 
extrinsic  compression  of  the  CBD.  Surgery  consists  of  removing  the 
cystic duct, diseased gallbladder, and impacted stone. The preoperative 
diagnosis of Mirizzi’s syndrome is important to avoid CBD injury.

ACALCULOUS CHOLECYSTITIS  In 5–14% of patients with acute chole-
cystitis,  calculi  obstructing  the  cystic  duct  are  not  found  at  surgery. 
In  >50%  of  such  cases,  an  underlying  explanation  for  acalculous 
inflammation is not found. An increased risk for the development of 
acalculous cholecystitis is especially associated with prolonged fasting, 
with serious trauma or burns, in the postpartum period following pro-
longed labor, and with orthopedic and other nonbiliary major surgical 
operations  in  the  postoperative  period.  It  may  possibly  complicate 
periods of prolonged parenteral hyperalimentation. For some of these 
cases, biliary sludge in the cystic duct may be responsible. Other pre-
cipitating  factors  include  vasculitis,  obstructing  adenocarcinoma  of 
the gallbladder, diabetes mellitus, torsion of the gallbladder, “unusual” 
bacterial  infections  of  the  gallbladder  (e.g.,  Leptospira,  Streptococcus, 
Salmonella, or Vibrio cholerae), and parasitic infestation of the gallblad-
der. Acalculous cholecystitis may also be seen with a variety of other 
systemic  disease  processes  (e.g.,  sarcoidosis,  cardiovascular  disease, 
tuberculosis, syphilis, actinomycosis).

Although the clinical manifestations of acalculous cholecystitis are 
indistinguishable  from  those  of  calculous  cholecystitis,  the  setting  of 
acute  gallbladder  inflammation  complicating  severe  underlying  ill-
ness  is  characteristic  of  acalculous  disease.  Ultrasound  or  computed 
tomography  (CT)  examinations  demonstrating  a  large,  tense,  static 
gallbladder  without  stones  and  with  evidence  of  poor  emptying  over 
a  prolonged  period  may  be  diagnostically  useful  in  some  cases.  The 
complication rate for acalculous cholecystitis exceeds that for calculous 
cholecystitis. Successful management of acute acalculous cholecystitis 
appears to depend primarily on early diagnosis and surgical interven-
tion, with meticulous attention to postoperative care.

2647

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

ACALCULOUS  CHOLECYSTOPATHY  Disordered  motility  of  the  gall-
bladder  can  produce  recurrent  biliary  pain  in  patients  without  gall-
stones. Infusion of an octapeptide of CCK can be used to measure the 
gallbladder  ejection  fraction  during  cholescintigraphy.  The  surgical 
findings  have  included  abnormalities  such  as  chronic  cholecystitis, 
gallbladder  muscle  hypertrophy,  and/or  a  markedly  narrowed  cystic 
duct. Some of these patients may well have had antecedent gallbladder 
disease.  The  following  criteria  can  be  used  to  identify  patients  with 
acalculous  cholecystopathy:  (1)  recurrent  episodes  of  typical  RUQ 
pain characteristic of biliary tract pain, (2) abnormal CCK cholescin-
tigraphy  demonstrating  a  gallbladder  ejection  fraction  of  <40%,  and 
(3) infusion of CCK reproducing the patient’s pain. An additional clue 
would be the identification of a large gallbladder on ultrasound exami-
nation. Importantly, it should be noted that SOD dysfunction can also 
give rise to recurrent RUQ pain and CCK-scintigraphic abnormalities.
EMPHYSEMATOUS  CHOLECYSTITIS  So-called 
emphysematous 
cholecystitis is thought to begin with acute cholecystitis (calculous or 
acalculous) followed by ischemia or gangrene of the gallbladder wall 
and infection by gas-producing organisms. Bacteria most frequently 
cultured  in  this  setting  include  anaerobes,  such  as  Clostridium 
welchii or C. perfringens, and aerobes, such as E. coli. This condition 
occurs most frequently in elderly men and in patients with diabetes 
mellitus. The clinical manifestations are essentially indistinguishable 
from  those  of  nongaseous  cholecystitis.  The  diagnosis  is  usually 
made on plain abdominal film by finding gas within the gallbladder 
lumen, dissecting within the gallbladder wall to form a gaseous ring, 
or in the pericholecystic tissues. The morbidity and mortality rates 
with emphysematous cholecystitis are considerable. Prompt surgical 
intervention coupled with appropriate antibiotics is mandatory.

Chronic  Cholecystitis  Chronic  inflammation  of  the  gallbladder 
wall is almost always associated with the presence of gallstones and is 
thought to result from repeated bouts of subacute or acute cholecys-
titis  or  from  persistent  mechanical  irritation  of  the  gallbladder  wall 
by gallstones. The presence of bacteria in the bile occurs in >25% of 
patients with chronic cholecystitis. The presence of infected bile in a 
patient with chronic cholecystitis undergoing elective cholecystectomy 
probably adds little to the operative risk. Chronic cholecystitis may be 
asymptomatic for years, which may progress to symptomatic gallblad-
der disease or to acute cholecystitis or may present with complications 
(see below).

Complications  of  Cholecystitis  •  EMPYEMA  AND  HYDROPS  
Empyema of the gallbladder usually results from progression of acute 
cholecystitis with persistent cystic duct obstruction to superinfection 
of the stagnant bile with a pus-forming bacterial organism. The clin-
ical picture resembles that of cholangitis with high fever; severe RUQ 
pain;  marked  leukocytosis;  and  often,  prostration.  Empyema  of  the 
gallbladder carries a high risk of gram-negative sepsis and/or perfora-
tion. Emergency surgical intervention with proper antibiotic coverage 
is required as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.

Hydrops or mucocele of the gallbladder may also result from pro-
longed obstruction of the cystic duct, usually by a large solitary calcu-
lus. In this instance, the obstructed gallbladder lumen is progressively 
distended,  over  a  period  of  time,  by  mucus  (mucocele)  or  by  a  clear 
transudate  (hydrops)  produced  by  mucosal  epithelial  cells.  A  visible, 
easily palpable, nontender mass sometimes extending from the RUQ 
into the right iliac fossa may be found on physical examination. The 
patient with hydrops of the gallbladder frequently remains asymptom-
atic, although chronic RUQ pain may also occur. Cholecystectomy is 
indicated, because empyema, perforation, or gangrene may complicate 
the condition.
GANGRENE  AND  PERFORATION  Gangrene  of  the  gallbladder  results 
from  ischemia  of  the  wall  and  patchy  or  complete  tissue  necrosis. 
Underlying  conditions  often  include  marked  distention  of  the  gall-
bladder,  vasculitis,  diabetes  mellitus,  empyema,  or  torsion  resulting 
in  arterial  occlusion.  Gangrene  usually  predisposes  to  perforation  of 
the  gallbladder,  but  perforation  may  also  occur  in  chronic  cholecys-
titis  without  premonitory  warning  symptoms.  Localized  perforations 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2647

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2648 are  usually  contained  by  the  omentum  or  by  adhesions  produced  by 
recurrent inflammation of the gallbladder. Bacterial superinfection of 
the walled-off gallbladder contents results in abscess formation. Most 
patients  are  best  treated  with  cholecystectomy,  but  some  seriously  ill 
patients  may  be  managed  with  cholecystostomy  and  drainage  of  the 
abscess. Free perforation is less common but is associated with a mor-
tality rate of ~30%. Such patients may experience a sudden transient 
relief of RUQ pain as the distended gallbladder decompresses; this is 
followed by signs of generalized peritonitis.
FISTULA FORMATION AND GALLSTONE ILEUS  Fistula formation into 
an  adjacent  organ  adherent  to  the  gallbladder  wall  may  result  from 
inflammation and adhesion formation. Fistulas into the duodenum are 
most  common,  followed  in  frequency  by  those  involving  the  hepatic 
flexure  of  the  colon,  stomach  or  jejunum,  abdominal  wall,  and  renal 
pelvis. Clinically “silent” biliary-enteric fistulas occurring as a compli-
cation of acute cholecystitis have been found in up to 5% of patients 
undergoing cholecystectomy. Asymptomatic cholecystoenteric fistulas 
may sometimes be diagnosed by finding gas in the biliary tree on plain 
abdominal  films.  Barium  contrast  studies  or  endoscopy  of  the  upper 
gastrointestinal tract or colon may demonstrate the fistula. Treatment 
in the symptomatic patient usually consists of cholecystectomy, CBD 
exploration, and closure of the fistulous tract.

Gallstone ileus refers to mechanical intestinal obstruction resulting 
from the passage of a large gallstone into the bowel lumen. The stone 
customarily enters the duodenum through a cholecystoenteric fistula at 
that level. The site of obstruction by the impacted gallstone is usually 
at the ileocecal valve, provided that the more proximal small bowel is 
of normal caliber. Most patients do not give a history of either prior 
biliary tract symptoms or complaints suggestive of acute cholecystitis 
or fistula formation. Large stones, >2.5 cm in diameter, are thought to 
predispose  to  fistula  formation  by  gradual  erosion  through  the  gall-
bladder  fundus.  Diagnostic  confirmation  may  occasionally  be  found 
on the plain abdominal film (e.g., small-intestinal obstruction with gas 
in the biliary tree [pneumobilia] and a calcified, ectopic gallstone) or 
following an upper gastrointestinal series (cholecystoduodenal fistula 
with small-bowel obstruction at the ileocecal valve). Laparotomy with 
stone extraction (or propulsion into the colon) remains the procedure 
of choice to relieve obstruction. Evacuation of large stones within the 
gallbladder should also be performed. In general, the gallbladder and 
its attachment to the intestines should be left alone.
LIMEY (MILK OF CALCIUM) BILE AND PORCELAIN GALLBLADDER  Cal-
cium salts in the lumen of the gallbladder in sufficient concentration 
may produce calcium precipitation and diffuse, hazy opacification of 
bile  or  a  layering  effect  on  plain  abdominal  roentgenography.  This 
so-called  limey  bile,  or  milk  of  calcium  bile,  is  usually  clinically 
innocuous, but cholecystectomy is often performed, especially when it 
occurs in a hydropic gallbladder. In the entity called porcelain gallblad-
der, calcium salt deposition within the wall of a chronically inflamed 
gallbladder may be detected on the plain abdominal film. In the past, 
cholecystectomy was advised in all patients with porcelain gallbladder 
because there was felt to be a high incidence of carcinoma of the gall-
bladder associated with this condition, an association challenged by a 
number of studies. Two patterns of gallbladder wall calcification have 
now been appreciated: complete intramural calcification and selective 
mucosal calcification. The incidence of cancer in those with selective 
intramural  calcification  is  higher  than  those  with  complete  mucosal 
wall calcification, but the risk is very small. As such, the need for chole-
cystectomy for porcelain gallbladder is not absolute; close surveillance 
in these patients is also acceptable.

TREATMENT
Acute Cholecystitis

MEDICAL THERAPY
Although  surgical  intervention  remains  the  mainstay  of  therapy 
for acute cholecystitis and its complications, a period of in-hospital 
stabilization may be required before cholecystectomy. Oral intake is 

eliminated, nasogastric suction may be indicated, extracellular vol-
ume depletion and electrolyte abnormalities are repaired, and analge-
sia is provided. Intravenous antibiotic therapy is indicated in patients 
with severe acute cholecystitis, even though bacterial superinfection 
of bile may not have occurred in the early stages of the inflammatory 
process. Antibiotic therapy is guided by the most common organ-
isms  likely  to  be  present  including  E.  coli,  Klebsiella,  Enterococcus, 
Enterobacter, and Streptococcus. Effective antibiotics include piper-
acillin  plus  tazobactam,  imipenem,  meropenem,  ceftriaxone  plus 
metronidazole,  and  levofloxacin  plus  metronidazole  (Chap.  161). 
Postoperative complications of wound infection, abscess formation, 
and sepsis are reduced in antibiotic-treated patients. 
SURGICAL THERAPY
The optimal timing of surgical intervention in patients with acute 
cholecystitis depends on stabilization of the patient. The clear trend 
is toward earlier surgery, and this is due in part to requirements for 
shorter hospital stays. Urgent (emergency) cholecystectomy or per-
cutaneous cholecystostomy is probably appropriate in most patients 
in  whom  a  complication  of  acute  cholecystitis  such  as  empyema, 
emphysematous  cholecystitis,  or  perforation  is  suspected  or  con-
firmed.  Patients  with  uncomplicated  acute  cholecystitis  should 
undergo early elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy, ideally within 
48–72 h after diagnosis. The complication rate is not increased in 
patients  undergoing  early  as  opposed  to  delayed  (>6  weeks  after 
diagnosis) cholecystectomy. Delayed surgical intervention is prob-
ably  best  reserved  for  (1)  patients  in  whom  the  overall  medical 
condition  imposes  an  unacceptable  risk  for  early  surgery  and  (2) 
patients  in  whom  the  diagnosis  of  acute  cholecystitis  is  in  doubt. 
Thus,  early  cholecystectomy  (within  72  h)  is  the  treatment  of 
choice for most patients with acute cholecystitis. Mortality figures 
for  emergency  cholecystectomy  in  most  centers  range  from  1  to 
3%,  whereas  the  mortality  risk  for  early  elective  cholecystectomy 
is  ~0.5%  in  patients  under  age  60.  Of  course,  the  operative  risks 
increase with age-related diseases of other organ systems and with 
the  presence  of  long-  or  short-term  complications  of  gallbladder 
disease.  Seriously  ill  or  debilitated  patients  with  cholecystitis  may 
be managed with percutaneous drainage (a cholecystostomy tube), 
transpapillary  drainage  (an  endoscopically  placed  transpapillary 
drainage catheter via the cystic duct), or transmural drainage (an 
endoscopically  placed  covered,  lumen-apposing  stent).  Elective 
cholecystectomy may then be done at a later date.

Postcholecystectomy  Complications  Early  complications  fol-
lowing  cholecystectomy  include  atelectasis  and  other  pulmonary 
disorders,  abscess  formation  (often  subphrenic),  external  or  internal 
hemorrhage, biliary-enteric fistula, and bile leaks. Jaundice may indi-
cate absorption of bile from an intraabdominal collection following a 
biliary leak or mechanical obstruction of the CBD by retained calculi, 
intraductal blood clots, or extrinsic compression.

Overall,  cholecystectomy  is  a  very  successful  operation  that  pro-
vides total or near-total relief of preoperative symptoms in 75–90% of 
patients.  The  most  common  cause  of  persistent  postcholecystectomy 
symptoms  is  an  overlooked  symptomatic  nonbiliary  disorder  (e.g., 
reflux  esophagitis,  peptic  ulceration,  pancreatitis,  or—most  often—
irritable bowel syndrome). In a small percentage of patients, however, 
a disorder of the extrahepatic bile ducts may result in persistent symp-
tomatology.  These  so-called  postcholecystectomy  syndromes  may  be 
due to (1) biliary strictures, (2) retained biliary calculi, (3) cystic duct 
stump  syndrome,  (4)  stenosis  or  dyskinesia  of  the  SOD,  or  (5)  bile 
salt–induced diarrhea or gastritis.
CYSTIC DUCT STUMP SYNDROME  In the absence of cholangiographi-
cally demonstrable retained stones, symptoms resembling biliary pain 
or  cholecystitis  in  the  postcholecystectomy  patient  have  frequently 
been  attributed  to  disease  in  a  long  (>1  cm)  cystic  duct  remnant 
(cystic  duct  stump  syndrome).  Careful  analysis,  however,  reveals 
that  postcholecystectomy  complaints  are  attributable  to  other  causes 
in  almost  all  patients  in  whom  the  symptom  complex  was  originally 
thought  to  result  from  the  existence  of  a  long  cystic  duct  stump. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2648

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemAccordingly, considerable care should be taken to investigate the pos-
sible  role  of  other  factors  in  the  production  of  postcholecystectomy 
symptoms before attributing them to cystic duct stump syndrome.
SOD  STENOSIS,  SOD  DYSKINESIA,  AND  BILIARY  DYSKINESIA  Symp-
toms  of  biliary  colic  accompanied  by  signs  of  recurrent,  intermittent 
biliary  obstruction  may  be  produced  by  acalculous  cholecystopathy, 
SOD  stenosis,  or  SOD  dyskinesia.  SOD  stenosis  is  thought  to  result 
from  acute  or  chronic  inflammation  of  the  papilla  of  Vater  or  from 
glandular hyperplasia of the papillary segment. Five criteria have been 
used to define SOD stenosis: (1) upper abdominal pain, usually RUQ 
or epigastric; (2) abnormal liver tests; (3) dilatation of the CBD upon 
MRCP or ERCP examination; (4) delayed (>45 min) drainage of con-
trast  material  from  the  duct;  and  (5)  increased  basal  pressure  of  the 
SOD. After exclusion of acalculous cholecystopathy, treatment consists 
of endoscopic or surgical sphincteroplasty to ensure wide patency of 
the distal portions of both the bile and pancreatic ducts. The greater the 
number of the preceding criteria present, the greater is the likelihood 
that a patient does have a degree of SOD sufficient to justify correc-
tion. The factors usually considered as indications for sphincterotomy 
include  (1)  prolonged  duration  of  symptoms,  (2)  lack  of  response  to 
symptomatic  treatment,  (3)  presence  of  severe  disability,  and  (4)  the 
patient’s choice of sphincterotomy over surgery (given a clear under-
standing on his or her part of the risks involved in both procedures).

Biliary SOD disorders are characterized by three criteria: (1) biliary 
pain,  (2)  absence  of  bile  duct  stones  or  other  abnormalities,  and  (3) 
elevated liver enzymes or a dilated CBD, but not both. In this setting, 
either hepatobiliary scintigraphy or SOD manometry can support the 
diagnosis.  Importantly,  the  presence  of  both  elevated  liver  enzymes 
and  a  dilated  CBD  should  raise  the  question  of  obstruction.  Pro-
posed mechanisms to account for SOD dysfunction include spasm of 
the  sphincter,  denervation  sensitivity  resulting  in  hypertonicity,  and 
abnormalities in the sequencing or frequency rates of the sphincteric- 
contraction  waves.  When  thorough  evaluation  has  failed  to  demon-
strate  another  cause  for  the  pain  and  when  cholangiographic  and 
manometric  criteria  suggest  a  diagnosis  of  SOD  dyskinesia,  medical 
treatment  with  nitrites  or  anticholinergics  to  attempt  pharmacologic 
relaxation  of  SOD  has  been  proposed  but  not  evaluated  in  detailed 
studies. Endoscopic biliary sphincterotomy (EBS) or surgical sphinc-
terotomy may be indicated in patients who fail to respond to a 2- to 
3-month trial of medical therapy, especially if SOD pressures are ele-
vated. Approximately 45% of such patients have long-term pain relief 
after EBS. EBS has become the procedure of choice for removing bile 
duct stones and for other biliary and pancreatic problems.
BILE SALT–INDUCED DIARRHEA AND GASTRITIS  Postcholecystectomy 
patients may develop symptoms of dyspepsia, which have been attrib-
uted to duodenogastric reflux of bile. However, firm data linking these 
symptoms to bile gastritis after surgical removal of the gallbladder are 
lacking. Cholecystectomy induces persistent changes in gut transit, and 
these changes effect a noticeable modification of bowel habits. Chole-
cystectomy shortens gut transit time by accelerating passage of the fecal 
bolus through the colon with marked acceleration in the right colon, 
thus causing an increase in colonic bile acid output and a shift in bile 
acid composition toward the more diarrheagenic secondary bile acids, 
that is, deoxycholic acid. Diarrhea that is severe enough, that is, three 
or more watery movements per day, can be classified as postcholecys-
tectomy  diarrhea,  and  this  occurs  in  5–10%  of  patients  undergoing 
elective cholecystectomy. Treatment with bile acid–sequestering agents 
such as cholestyramine or colestipol is often effective in ameliorating 
troublesome diarrhea.

 ■ THE HYPERPLASTIC CHOLECYSTOSES
The  term  hyperplastic  cholecystoses  is  used  to  denote  a  group  of  dis-
orders  of  the  gallbladder  characterized  by  excessive  proliferation  of 
normal tissue components.

Adenomyomatosis  is  characterized  by  a  benign  proliferation  of 
gallbladder  surface  epithelium  with  glandlike  formations,  extramural 
sinuses,  transverse  strictures,  and/or  fundal  nodule  (“adenoma”  or 
“adenomyoma”) formation.

2649

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

Cholesterolosis is characterized by abnormal deposition of lipid, espe-
cially  cholesteryl  esters,  within  macrophages  in  the  lamina  propria  of 
the gallbladder wall. In its diffuse form (“strawberry gallbladder”), the 
gallbladder mucosa is brick red and speckled with bright yellow flecks of 
lipid. The localized form shows solitary or multiple “cholesterol polyps” 
studding the gallbladder wall. Cholesterol stones of the gallbladder are 
found in nearly half the cases. Cholecystectomy is only indicated in ade-
nomyomatosis or cholesterolosis when biliary symptoms are present.

The  prevalence  of  gallbladder  polyps  in  the  adult  population  is 
1–4% with a marked male predominance. Types of gallbladder polyps 
include  cholesterol  polyps,  adenomyomas,  inflammatory  polyps,  and 
adenomas (rare). No significant changes have been found over a 5-year 
period in asymptomatic patients with gallbladder polyps <6 mm and 
few changes in polyps 7–9 mm. Cholecystectomy is recommended in 
symptomatic  patients  as  well  as  in  asymptomatic  patients  >50  years 
whose  polyps  are  >10  mm  or  associated  with  gallstones  or  polyp 
growth on serial ultrasonography.

DISEASES OF THE BILE DUCTS
 ■ CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
Biliary Atresia and Hypoplasia  Atretic and hypoplastic lesions 
of the extrahepatic and large intrahepatic bile ducts are the most com-
mon  biliary  anomalies  of  clinical  relevance  encountered  in  infancy. 
The  clinical  picture  is  one  of  severe  obstructive  jaundice  during  the 
first month of life, with pale stools. When biliary atresia is suspected 
on  the  basis  of  clinical,  laboratory,  and  imaging  findings,  the  diag-
nosis  is  confirmed  by  surgical  exploration  and  operative  cholangi-
ography.  Approximately 10% of cases of biliary atresia are treatable with 
Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy, with the Kasai procedure (hepatic 
portoenterostomy)  being  attempted  in  the  remainder  in  an  effort  to 
restore  some  bile  flow.  Most  patients,  even  those  having  successful 
biliary-enteric  anastomoses,  eventually  develop  chronic  cholangitis, 
extensive hepatic fibrosis, and portal hypertension.

Choledochal Cysts  Cystic dilatation may involve the free portion 
of the CBD, that is, choledochal cyst, or may present as diverticulum 
formation in the intraduodenal segment. In the latter situation, chronic 
reflux of pancreatic juice into the biliary tree can produce inflamma-
tion and stenosis of the extrahepatic bile ducts, leading to cholangitis 
or  biliary  obstruction.  Because  the  process  may  be  gradual,  ~50%  of 
patients  present  with  onset  of  symptoms  after  age  10.  The  diagnosis 
may  be  made  by  ultrasound,  abdominal  CT,  MRCP,  or  cholangiog-
raphy. Only one-third of patients show the classic triad of abdominal 
pain,  jaundice,  and  an  abdominal  mass.  Ultrasonographic  detection 
of  a  cyst  separate  from  the  gallbladder  should  suggest  the  diagnosis 
of  choledochal  cyst,  which  can  be  confirmed  by  demonstrating  the 
entrance  of  extrahepatic  bile  ducts  into  the  cyst.  Surgical  treatment 
involves excision of the “cyst” and biliary-enteric anastomosis. Patients 
with choledochal cysts are at increased risk for the subsequent devel-
opment of cholangiocarcinoma.

Congenital  Biliary  Ectasia  Dilatation  of  intrahepatic  bile  ducts 
may  involve  either  the  major  intrahepatic  radicles  (Caroli’s  disease), 
the inter- and intralobular ducts (congenital hepatic fibrosis), or both. 
In Caroli’s disease, clinical manifestations include recurrent cholangitis, 
abscess formation in and around the affected ducts, and, often, brown 
pigment  gallstone  formation  within  portions  of  ectatic  intrahepatic 
biliary  radicles.  Ultrasound,  MRCP,  and  CT  are  of  great  diagnostic 
value in demonstrating cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts. 
Treatment with ongoing antibiotic therapy is usually undertaken in an 
effort to limit the frequency and severity of recurrent bouts of cholangi-
tis. Progression to secondary biliary cirrhosis with portal hypertension, 
extrahepatic  biliary  obstruction,  cholangiocarcinoma,  or  recurrent 
episodes of sepsis with hepatic abscess formation is common.

 ■ CHOLEDOCHOLITHIASIS
Pathophysiology and Clinical Manifestations  Passage of gall-
stones into the CBD occurs in ~10–15% of patients with cholelithiasis. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2649

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2650 The  incidence  of  common  duct  stones  increases  with  increasing  age 
of  the  patient,  so  up  to  25%  of  elderly  patients  may  have  calculi  in 
the  common  duct  at  the  time  of  cholecystectomy.  Undetected  duct 
stones are left behind in ~1–5% of cholecystectomy patients. The over-
whelming majority of bile duct stones are cholesterol stones formed in 
the  gallbladder,  which  then  migrate  into  the  extrahepatic  biliary  tree 
through the cystic duct. Primary calculi arising de novo in the ducts 
are usually brown pigment stones developing in patients with (1) hepa-
tobiliary  parasitism  or  chronic,  recurrent  cholangitis;  (2)  congenital 
anomalies  of  the  bile  ducts  (especially  Caroli’s  disease);  (3)  dilated, 
sclerosed,  or  strictured  ducts;  or  (4)  an  MDR3  (ABCB4)  gene  defect 
leading to impaired biliary phospholipids secretion (low phospholipid–
associated cholesterol cholelithiasis). Common duct stones may remain 
asymptomatic for years, may pass spontaneously into the duodenum, 
or (most often) may present with biliary colic or a complication.

Complications  •  CHOLANGITIS  Cholangitis  may  be  acute  or 
chronic,  and  symptoms  result  from  inflammation,  which  usually  is 
caused  by  at  least  partial  obstruction  to  the  flow  of  bile.  Bacteria  are 
present on bile culture in ~75% of patients with acute cholangitis early 
in  the  symptomatic  course.  The  characteristic  presentation  of  acute 
cholangitis involves biliary pain, jaundice, and spiking fevers with chills 
(Charcot’s  triad).  Blood  cultures  are  frequently  positive,  and  leukocy-
tosis is typical. Nonsuppurative acute cholangitis is most common and 
may respond relatively rapidly to supportive measures and to treatment 
with antibiotics. In suppurative acute cholangitis, however, the presence 
of  pus  under  pressure  in  a  completely  obstructed  ductal  system  leads 
to  symptoms  of  severe  toxicity—mental  confusion,  bacteremia,  and 
septic  shock.  Response  to  antibiotics  alone  in  this  setting  is  relatively 
poor,  multiple  hepatic  abscesses  are  often  present,  and  the  mortality 
rate approaches 100% unless prompt endoscopic or surgical relief of the 
obstruction  and  drainage  of  infected  bile  are  carried  out.  Endoscopic 
management of bacterial cholangitis is as effective as surgical interven-
tion.  ERCP  with  endoscopic  sphincterotomy  is  safe  and  the  preferred 
initial procedure for both establishing a definitive diagnosis and provid-
ing effective therapy.
OBSTRUCTIVE  JAUNDICE  Gradual  obstruction  of  the  CBD  over  a 
period  of  weeks  or  months  usually  leads  to  initial  manifestations  of 
jaundice  or  pruritus  without  associated  symptoms  of  biliary  colic  or 
cholangitis. Painless jaundice may occur in patients with choledocho-
lithiasis but is much more characteristic of biliary obstruction secondary 
to  malignancy  of  the  head  of  the  pancreas,  bile  ducts,  or  ampulla  of 
Vater.

In  patients  whose  obstruction  is  secondary  to  choledocholithiasis, 
associated  chronic  calculous  cholecystitis  is  very  common,  and  the 
gallbladder  in  this  setting  may  be  unable  to  distend.  The  absence  of 
a palpable gallbladder in most patients with biliary obstruction from 
duct stones is the basis for Courvoisier’s law, that is, that the presence 
of a palpably enlarged gallbladder suggests that the biliary obstruction 
is  secondary  to  an  underlying  malignancy  rather  than  to  calculous 
disease. Biliary obstruction causes progressive dilatation of the intra-
hepatic  bile  ducts  as  intrabiliary  pressures  rise.  Hepatic  bile  flow  is 
suppressed, and reabsorption and regurgitation of conjugated bilirubin 
into the bloodstream lead to jaundice accompanied by dark urine (bil-
irubinuria) and light-colored (acholic) stools.

CBD  stones  should  be  suspected  in  any  patient  with  cholecystitis 
whose serum bilirubin level is >85.5 μmol/L (5 mg/dL). The maximum 
bilirubin level is seldom >256.5 μmol/L (15.0 mg/dL) in patients with 
choledocholithiasis  unless  concomitant  hepatic  or  renal  disease  or 
another  factor  leading  to  marked  hyperbilirubinemia  exists.  Serum 
bilirubin  levels  ≥342.0  μmol/L  (20  mg/dL)  should  suggest  the  possi-
bility of neoplastic obstruction. The serum alkaline phosphatase level 
is  almost  always  elevated  in  biliary  obstruction.  A  rise  in  alkaline 
phosphatase  often  precedes  clinical  jaundice  and  may  be  the  only 
abnormality  in  routine  liver  function  tests.  There  may  be  a  two-  to 
tenfold elevation of serum aminotransferases, especially in association 
with  acute  obstruction.  Following  relief  of  the  obstructing  process, 
serum  aminotransferase  elevations  usually  return  rapidly  to  normal, 
while the serum bilirubin level may take 1–2 weeks to return to normal. 

The alkaline phosphatase level usually falls slowly, lagging behind the 
decrease in serum bilirubin.
PANCREATITIS  The  most  common  associated  entity  discovered  in 
patients  with  nonalcoholic  acute  pancreatitis  is  biliary  tract  disease. 
Biochemical  evidence  of  pancreatic  inflammation  complicates  acute 
cholecystitis in 15% of cases and choledocholithiasis in >30%, and the 
common  factor  appears  to  be  the  passage  of  gallstones  through  the 
common duct. Coexisting pancreatitis should be suspected in patients 
with symptoms of cholecystitis who develop (1) back pain or pain to 
the left of the abdominal midline, (2) prolonged vomiting with para-
lytic ileus, or (3) a pleural effusion, especially on the left side. Surgical 
treatment of gallstone disease is usually associated with resolution of 
the pancreatitis.
SECONDARY  BILIARY  CIRRHOSIS  Secondary  biliary  cirrhosis  may 
complicate  prolonged  or  intermittent  duct  obstruction  with  or  with-
out  recurrent  cholangitis.  Although  this  complication  may  be  seen 
in  patients  with  choledocholithiasis,  it  is  more  common  in  cases  of 
prolonged  obstruction  from  stricture  or  neoplasm.  Once  established, 
secondary biliary cirrhosis may be progressive even after correction of 
the obstructing process, and increasingly severe hepatic cirrhosis may 
lead to portal hypertension or to hepatic failure and death. Prolonged 
biliary obstruction may also be associated with clinically relevant defi-
ciencies of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K.

Diagnosis  and  Treatment  The  diagnosis  of  choledocholithiasis 
is  made  by  cholangiography  (Table  346-3),  either  preoperatively  by 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERC) (Fig. 346-2C) or MRCP 
or intraoperatively at the time of cholecystectomy. As many as 15% of 
patients  undergoing  cholecystectomy  will  prove  to  have  CBD  stones. 
When  CBD  stones  are  suspected  prior  to  laparoscopic  cholecystec-
tomy,  preoperative  ERCP  with  endoscopic  papillotomy  and  stone 
extraction is the preferred approach. It not only provides stone clear-
ance but also defines the anatomy of the biliary tree in relationship to 
the cystic duct. CBD stones should be suspected in gallstone patients 
who have any of the following risk factors: (1) a history of jaundice or 
pancreatitis,  (2)  abnormal  tests  of  liver  function,  and  (3)  ultrasono-
graphic  or  MRCP  evidence  of  a  dilated  CBD  or  stones  in  the  duct. 
Alternatively, if intraoperative cholangiography reveals retained stones, 
postoperative  ERCP  can  be  carried  out.  The  need  for  preoperative 
ERCP  is  expected  to  decrease  further  as  laparoscopic  techniques  for 
bile duct exploration improve.

The  widespread  use  of  laparoscopic  cholecystectomy  and  ERCP 
has  decreased  the  incidence  of  complicated  biliary  tract  disease  and 
the  need  for  choledocholithotomy  and  T-tube  drainage  of  the  bile 
ducts. EBS followed by spontaneous passage or stone extraction is the 
treatment of choice in the management of patients with common duct 
stones, especially in elderly or poor-risk patients.
 ■ TRAUMA, STRICTURES, AND HEMOBILIA
Most benign strictures of the extrahepatic bile ducts result from surgical 
trauma and occur in about 1 in 500 cholecystectomies. Strictures may 
present with bile leak or abscess formation in the immediate postoper-
ative period or with biliary obstruction or cholangitis as long as 2 years 
or more following the inciting trauma. The diagnosis is established by 
percutaneous or endoscopic cholangiography. Endoscopic brushing of 
biliary strictures may be helpful in establishing the nature of the lesion 
and is more accurate than bile cytology alone. When positive exfoliative 
cytology  is  obtained,  the  diagnosis  of  a  neoplastic  stricture  is  estab-
lished. This procedure is especially important in patients with primary 
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) who are predisposed to the development of 
cholangiocarcinomas. Successful operative correction of non-PSC bile 
duct strictures by a skillful surgeon with duct-to-bowel anastomosis is 
usually possible, although mortality rates from surgical complications, 
recurrent cholangitis, or secondary biliary cirrhosis are high.

Hemobilia may follow traumatic or operative injury to the liver or 
bile ducts, intraductal rupture of a hepatic abscess or aneurysm of the 
hepatic  artery,  biliary  or  hepatic  tumor  hemorrhage,  or  mechanical 
complications of choledocholithiasis or hepatobiliary parasitism. Diag-
nostic  procedures  such  as  liver  biopsy,  PTC,  and  transhepatic  biliary 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2650

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 346-3  Diagnostic Evaluation of the Bile Ducts
DIAGNOSTIC ADVANTAGES

DIAGNOSTIC LIMITATIONS

CONTRAINDICATIONS

COMPLICATIONS

COMMENT

2651

None

None

Initial procedure of choice in 
investigating possible biliary tract 
obstruction

Ultrasound

Rapid
Simultaneous scanning of GB, liver, 
bile ducts, pancreas
Accurate identification of dilated 
bile ducts
Not limited by jaundice, pregnancy
Guidance for fine-needle biopsy

Computed Tomography

Simultaneous scanning of GB, liver, 
bile ducts, pancreas
Accurate identification of dilated 
bile ducts, masses
Not limited by jaundice, gas, 
obesity, ascites
High-resolution image
Guidance for fine-needle biopsy

Bowel gas
Massive obesity
Ascites
Barium
Partial bile duct obstruction
Poor visualization of distal CBD

Extreme cachexia
Movement artifact
Ileus
Partial bile duct obstruction

Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography

Pregnancy

Reaction to iodinated contrast, 
if used

Cannot offer therapeutic 
intervention
High cost

Claustrophobia
Certain metals (iron)

None

Noninvasive modality for 
visualizing pancreatic and biliary 
ducts
Has excellent sensitivity for bile 
duct dilatation, biliary stricture, 
and intraductal abnormalities
Can identify pancreatic duct 
dilatation or stricture, pancreatic 
duct stenosis, and pancreas 
divisum

Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography

Simultaneous pancreatography
Best visualization of distal biliary 
tract
Bile or pancreatic cytology
Endoscopic sphincterotomy and 
stone removal
Biliary manometry

Gastroduodenal obstruction
Roux-en-Y biliary-enteric 
anastomosis

Pregnancy
Acute pancreatitis
Severe cardiopulmonary 
disease

Pancreatitis
Cholangitis, sepsis
Infected pancreatic pseudocyst
Perforation (rare)
Hypoxemia, aspiration

Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiogram

Nondilated or sclerosed ducts

Pregnancy
Uncorrectable 
coagulopathy
Massive ascites
Hepatic abscess

Bleeding
Hemobilia
Bile peritonitis
Bacteremia, sepsis

Best when bile ducts dilated
Best visualization of proximal 
biliary tract
May be used to obtain bile 
cytology/culture
Allows for percutaneous 
transhepatic drainage

Endoscopic Ultrasound

Most sensitive method to detect 
ampullary stones and exclude 
pathology in the head of the 
pancreas

Indicated for evaluation of 
hepatic or pancreatic masses or 
for assessing for complications 
related to gallstones 
(pancreatitis)
Procedure of choice in 
investigating possible biliary 
obstruction if diagnostic 
limitations limit US

First choice to assess for 
choledocholithiasis given 
comparable sensitivity and 
specificity to ERCP

Cholangiogram of choice if there 
is believed to be a need for 
intervention:
Diagnosed or high clinical 
probability of choledocholithiasis
Biliary stricture requiring 
sampling and stenting
Need for sphincterotomy such as 
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction

Indicated for the drainage of 
obstructed and infected ducts 
when ERCP is contraindicated 
or failed

Excellent for detecting 
choledocholithiasis

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
6

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
G
a
l
l
b
l
a
d
d
e
r
a
n
d
B

i
l
e
D
u
c
t
s

Abbreviations: CBD, common bile duct; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; GB, gallbladder; US, hepatobiliary ultrasound.

drainage  catheter  placement  may  also  be  complicated  by  hemobilia. 
Patients  often  present  with  a  classic  triad  of  biliary  pain,  obstructive 
jaundice,  and  melena  or  occult  blood  in  the  stools.  The  diagnosis  is 
sometimes  made  by  cholangiographic  evidence  of  blood  clot  in  the 
biliary  tree,  but  selective  angiographic  verification  may  be  required. 
Although minor episodes of hemobilia may resolve without interven-
tion, arteriography and transcatheter embolization or surgical ligation 
of the bleeding vessel may be required.
 ■ EXTRINSIC COMPRESSION OF THE BILE DUCTS
Partial or complete biliary obstruction may be produced by extrinsic 
compression  of  the  ducts.  The  most  common  cause  of  this  form  of 

obstructive jaundice is carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Biliary 
obstruction may also occur as a complication of either acute or chronic 
pancreatitis  or  involvement  of  lymph  nodes  in  the  porta  hepatis  by 
lymphoma or metastatic carcinoma. The latter should be distinguished 
from  cholestasis  resulting  from  massive  replacement  of  the  liver  by 
tumor.
 ■ HEPATOBILIARY PARASITISM
Infestation of the biliary tract by adult helminths or their ova may pro-
duce a chronic, recurrent pyogenic cholangitis with or without multiple 
hepatic abscesses, ductal stones, or biliary obstruction. This condition 
is relatively rare but does occur in inhabitants of southern China and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2651

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2652 elsewhere in Southeast Asia. The organisms most commonly involved 
are  trematodes  or  flukes,  including  Clonorchis  sinensis,  Opisthorchis 
viverrini  or  Opisthorchis  felineus,  and  Fasciola  hepatica.  The  biliary 
tract  also  may  be  involved  by  intraductal  migration  of  adult  Ascaris 
lumbricoides from the duodenum or by intrabiliary rupture of hydatid 
cysts of the liver produced by Echinococcus spp. The diagnosis is made 
by  cholangiography  and  the  presence  of  characteristic  ova  on  stool 
examination. When obstruction is present, the treatment of choice is 
laparotomy under antibiotic coverage, with common duct exploration 
and a biliary drainage procedure.
 ■ SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS
PSC  is  characterized  by  a  progressive,  inflammatory,  sclerosing,  and 
obliterative process affecting the extrahepatic and/or the intrahepatic 
bile ducts. PSC is strongly associated with inflammatory bowel disease, 
especially ulcerative colitis.

Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)–associated cholangitis is a biliary dis-
ease of unknown etiology that presents with biochemical and cholangi-
ographic features indistinguishable from PSC, is often associated with 
autoimmune pancreatitis and other fibrosing conditions, and is charac-
terized by elevated serum IgG4 and infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma 
cells in bile ducts and liver tissue. All patients diagnosed with sclero-
sing  cholangitis  should  have  a  serum  IgG4  level  checked  to  rule  out 
IgG4 disease as a cause of secondary sclerosing cholangitis, particularly 
if  they  do  not  have  inflammatory  bowel  disease.  Glucocorticoids  are 
the initial treatment of choice. Relapse is common after steroid with-
drawal, especially with proximal strictures. Long-term treatment with 
glucocorticoids and/or steroid-sparing agents such as azathioprine may 
be needed after relapse or for inadequate response (Chap. 348).

Patients  with  PSC  often  present  with  signs  and  symptoms  of 
chronic  or  intermittent  biliary  obstruction:  RUQ  abdominal  pain, 
pruritus,  jaundice,  or  acute  cholangitis.  Late  in  the  course,  complete 
biliary  obstruction,  secondary  biliary  cirrhosis,  hepatic  failure,  or 
portal hypertension with bleeding varices may occur. The diagnosis is 
established by finding multifocal, diffusely distributed strictures with 
intervening segments of normal or dilated ducts, producing a beaded 
appearance on cholangiography (Fig. 346-2D). The cholangiographic 
techniques of choice in suspected cases are MRCP and ERCP. When 
a  diagnosis  of  sclerosing  cholangitis  has  been  established,  causes  of 
secondary sclerosing should be considered. Patients with PSC should 
undergo testing for associated diseases, especially inflammatory bowel 
disease, if that diagnosis has not already been established.

Small duct PSC is defined by the presence of chronic cholestasis and 
hepatic histology consistent with PSC in a patient with IBD, but with 
normal findings on cholangiography. Small duct PSC is found in ~5% 
of patients with PSC and may represent an earlier stage of PSC asso-
ciated with a significantly better long-term prognosis. However, such 
patients may progress to classic PSC and/or end-stage liver disease with 
consequent necessity of liver transplantation.

In  patients  with  AIDS,  cholangiopancreatography  may  demon-
strate a broad range of biliary tract changes as well as pancreatic duct 
obstruction and occasionally pancreatitis (Chap. 202). Further, biliary 
tract lesions in AIDS include infection and cholangiopancreatographic 
changes  of  sclerosing  cholangitis.  Changes  noted  include  (1)  diffuse 
involvement of intrahepatic bile ducts alone, (2) involvement of both 
intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts, (3) ampullary stenosis, (4) stricture 
of  the  intrapancreatic  portion  of  the  CBD,  and  (5)  pancreatic  duct 
involvement.  Associated  infectious  organisms  include  Cryptosporid-
ium, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, cytomegalovirus, Microspo-
ridia, and Isospora. ERCP sphincterotomy can provide significant pain 
reduction in patients with AIDS-associated papillary stenosis.

TREATMENT
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
There is no proven medical therapy for PSC. Therapy to treat pru-
ritus  associated  with  PSC  includes  cholestyramine,  rifampin,  and 
naltrexone. Antibiotics are useful when bacterial cholangitis compli-
cates the clinical picture. Vitamin D and calcium supplementation 

may be used as initial therapy to help prevent the loss of bone mass 
frequently seen in patients with chronic cholestasis. In cases where 
high-grade biliary obstruction (dominant strictures) has occurred, 
balloon dilatation is preferred over stenting due to the higher com-
plication  rate  associated  with  stenting  including  pancreatitis  and 
cholangitis. Only rarely is surgical intervention indicated. PSC is a 
progressive disease with a median survival of 12–18 years following 
the  diagnosis,  regardless  of  therapy.  Four  variables  (age,  serum 
bilirubin level, histologic stage, and splenomegaly) predict survival 
in patients with PSC and serve as the basis for a risk score. PSC is a 
common indication for liver transplantation.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Baron  TH  et  al:  Interventional  approaches  to  gallbladder  disease. 

N Engl J Med 373:357, 2015.

Lindor K et al: American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) guide-

lines: Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Hepatology 51:660, 2010.

Ryl JK et al: Clinical features of acute acalculous cholecystitis. J Clin 

Gastroenterol 36:166, 2003.

Strasberg S: Clinical practice. Acute calculous cholecystitis. N Engl J 

Med 358:2804, 2008.

Section 4  Disorders of the Pancreas

347

Approach to the Patient 
with Pancreatic Disease
Somashekar G. Krishna,  
Darwin L. Conwell, Phil A. Hart

 ■ GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Globally, pancreatic disorders, including acute and chronic pancreati-
tis, pancreatic cysts, and pancreatic cancer, are challenging to manage 
and associated with a high burden on health care resources. The rela-
tionships  between  these  diseases  continues  to  be  poorly  understood, 
but there is encouraging progress. Acute pancreatitis is one of the most 
common reasons for hospitalizations in gastroenterology, and there is 
increasing evidence of long-term sequelae including diabetes, exocrine 
pancreas  insufficiency,  and  pancreas  cancer.  Chronic  pancreatitis,  an 
irreversible disease of the pancreas, is associated with poor quality of 
life, largely related to abdominal pain, and associated exocrine insuffi-
ciency. Pancreatic cysts, mostly incidental, are increasingly detected on 
cross-sectional abdominal imaging studies. Although a small number 
and specific types of pancreatic cysts can progress to pancreatic cancer, 
diagnostic  uncertainty  can  introduce  unwanted  anxiety  to  patients 
and  treating  physicians.  Meanwhile,  with  persistently  high  mortality 
rates, the incidence of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is increasing and is 
the seventh leading cause of cancer-related death in the industrialized 
world and the third most common in the United States.

As emphasized in Chap. 348, the etiologies and clinical manifesta-
tions of pancreatitis are quite varied. Although it is well-appreciated 
that acute pancreatitis is frequently secondary to biliary tract disease 
and  alcohol  abuse,  it  can  also  be  caused  by  drugs,  genetic  muta-
tions,  and  trauma.  In  ~30%  of  patients  with  acute  pancreatitis  and 
25–40% of patients with chronic pancreatitis, the etiology is initially 
unexplained.

The  global  pooled  incidence  of  acute  pancreatitis  is  ~33.7  cases 
(95%  confidence  interval  [CI],  23.3–48.8)  with  1.16  deaths  (95% 
CI,  0.85–1.6)  per  100,000  person-years.  The  global  pooled  incidence 
of  chronic  pancreatitis  is  ~9.6  cases  (95%  CI,  7.9–11.8)  with  0.09 
attributable deaths (95% CI, 0.02–0.5) per 100,000 person-years. In the  

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2652

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemUnited  States,  the  number  of  patients  admitted  to  the  hospital  with 
acute pancreatitis is increasing, with estimated rates of almost 300,000 
annually, whereas the number of patients hospitalized for chronic pan-
creatitis is decreasing, with recent estimates of ~13,000 admissions per 
year. Chronic pancreatitis has an annual prevalence of 42–73 cases per 
100,000 adults in the United States, although higher prevalence rates 
(0.04–5%)  have  been  noted  among  adults  at  autopsy.  Together,  acute 
and chronic pancreatic disease costs an estimated $3 billion annually 
in health care expenditures.

The  diagnosis  of  acute  pancreatitis  is  generally  clearly  defined 
based  on  a  combination  of  laboratory,  imaging,  and  clinical  symp-
toms. The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, especially in mild disease, 
is  hampered  by  the  relative  inaccessibility  of  the  pancreas  to  direct 
examination and the nonspecificity of the abdominal pain associated 
with chronic pancreatitis. Many patients with chronic pancreatitis do 
not  have  elevated  blood  amylase  or  lipase  levels.  Some  patients  with 
chronic pancreatitis develop signs and symptoms of exocrine pancre-
atic  insufficiency  (EPI),  and  thus,  objective  evidence  for  pancreatic 
disease can be demonstrated. However, there is a very large reservoir 
of pancreatic exocrine function. More than 90% of the pancreas must 
be  damaged  before  maldigestion  of  fat  and  protein  is  manifested. 
Noninvasive, indirect tests of pancreatic exocrine function (e.g., fecal 
elastase)  are  much  more  likely  to  give  abnormal  results  in  patients 
with obvious advanced pancreatic disease (i.e., pancreatic calcification, 
steatorrhea, or diabetes mellitus) than in patients with occult disease. 
Invasive,  direct  tests  of  pancreatic  secretory  function  (e.g.,  secretin 
stimulation test) are the most sensitive and specific tests to detect early 
chronic pancreatic disease when imaging is equivocal or normal.

The  increasing  utilization  of  cross-sectional  imaging  modalities 
with  their  improved  resolution  has  contributed  to  a  high  prevalence 
(2–5% with computed tomography [CT] scans, 20–30% with magnetic 
resonance  imaging  [MRI])  of  incidentally  detected  pancreatic  cysts. 
The  most  common  cyst  type  encountered  is  an  intraductal  papillary 
mucinous  neoplasm  (IPMN),  which  is  classified  as  a  precancerous 
mucinous  cyst.  In  the  absence  of  high-risk  features,  radiographic 
surveillance  is  typically  recommended  (Fig.  347-1).  Mucinous  cystic 
neoplasms (MCNs) are a less commonly encountered mucinous cyst. 
Among  the  neoplastic  cysts,  serous  cystadenomas  have  a  negligible 
risk  of  progression  to  malignancy.  Other  infrequent  neoplastic  cysts 
include neuroendocrine tumors and solid pseudopapillary neoplasms. 
The most commonly encountered benign cyst is a pseudocyst, which 
can  occur  in  patients  with  a  history  of  acute  or  chronic  pancreatitis. 
It  is  often  difficult  to  accurately  predict  the  risk  of  malignant  trans-
formation of precancerous pancreatic cysts, and there is an increasing 
number  of  patients  on  imaging  surveillance  protocols  burdening  the 
health care systems in the industrialized world.

 ■ TESTS USEFUL IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF 
PANCREATIC DISEASE
Several tests are of value in the evaluation of pancreatic disease. Exam-
ples of specific tests and their usefulness in the diagnosis of acute and 
chronic  pancreatitis  are  summarized  in  Table  347-1  and  Fig.  347-2. 
At  some  institutions,  pancreatic  function  tests  are  available  and  per-
formed  if  the  diagnosis  of  chronic  pancreatitis  remains  a  possibility 
after noninvasive tests (i.e., ultrasound, CT Scan, MRI with magnetic 
resonance  cholangiopancreatography  [MRCP])  or  invasive  tests  (i.e., 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography [ERCP], endoscopic 
ultrasound  [EUS])  have  given  normal  or  inconclusive  results.  In  this 
regard, tests using direct stimulation of the pancreas with secretin are 
the most sensitive.
Pancreatic  Enzymes  in  Body  Fluids  The  serum  amylase  and 
lipase  levels  are  widely  used  as  screening  tests  for  acute  pancreatitis 
in the patient with acute abdominal pain or back pain. Lipase is very 
specific for the pancreas, and values greater than three times the upper 
limit of normal (3× ULN) in combination with epigastric pain strongly 
suggest  the  diagnosis  of  acute  pancreatitis.  In  acute  pancreatitis,  the 
serum amylase and lipase are usually elevated within 24 h of onset and 
remain so for 3–7 days. Levels usually return to normal within 7 days 
unless  there  is  pancreatic  ductal  disruption,  ductal  obstruction,  or 
pseudocyst formation. Approximately 85% of patients with acute pan-
creatitis  have  threefold  or  greater  elevated  serum  lipase  and  amylase 
levels. The values may be normal if (1) there is a delay (2–5 days) before 
blood  samples  are  obtained,  (2)  the  underlying  disorder  is  chronic 
pancreatitis rather than acute pancreatitis, or (3) hypertriglyceridemia 
is  present.  Patients  with  hypertriglyceridemia  and  acute  pancreatitis 
have been found to have spuriously low levels of amylase and perhaps 
lipase activity. In the absence of objective evidence of pancreatitis by 
abdominal ultrasound, contrast-enhanced CT scan, MRI with MRCP, 
or EUS, mild to moderate elevations of amylase and/or lipase are not 
helpful in making a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.

It should be noted that the serum amylase can be elevated in other 
conditions (Table 347-2), in part because the enzyme is found in many 
organs. In addition to the pancreas and salivary glands, small quantities 
of amylase are found in the tissues of the fallopian tubes, lung, thyroid, 
and tonsils and can be produced by various tumors (carcinomas of the 
lung, esophagus, breast, and ovary). Isoamylase determinations do not 
accurately  distinguish  elevated  blood  amylase  levels  from  pancreatic 
or  nonpancreatic  sources.  In  patients  with  unexplained  hyperamy-
lasemia, the measurement of macroamylase can avoid numerous tests 
in patients with this rare disorder.

Elevation of ascitic fluid amylase occurs in acute pancreatitis as well 
as in (1) ascites due to disruption of the main pancreatic duct or a leaking 
pseudocyst and (2) other abdominal disorders that simulate pancreatitis 

2653

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
7

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

A

B

C

FIGURE 347-1  A. Side-branch intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography [MRCP]). 
T2-weighted  MRCP  image  demonstrates  a  dominant,  lobulated,  hyperintense  cystic  structure  (arrow)  within  the  posterior  body  of  the  pancreas.  The  pancreatic  duct 
upstream from the cyst is dilated and irregular. Endoscopic ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration of cyst fluid were consistent with a mucinous cyst. Surgical histopathology 
revealed an infiltrating moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, 0.3 cm, arising in a background of an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). B. Mucinous 
cystic  neoplasm  (computed  tomography  [CT]  scan).  In  the  tail  of  the  pancreas,  there  is  a  well-circumscribed  hypodense  cyst  (arrow)  without  any  nodular  enhancing 
components. Endoscopic ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration of cyst fluid were suggestive of a mucinous cyst. Surgical histopathology revealed a mucinous cystic 
neoplasm (3.4 cm) with low-grade dysplasia. The stroma of the cyst demonstrated diffuse positivity for progesterone receptor and focal positivity for CD10 (ovarian stroma), 
confirming the diagnosis. C. Serous cystadenoma (MRI). A lobulated microcystic cyst (arrow) is observed in the tail of the pancreas. Neither a communication with the main 
pancreatic duct nor intracystic soft tissue enhancing nodular components were observed. However, the cyst continued to increase in size and a distal pancreatectomy 
was performed. Histopathology revealed a serous microcystic adenoma. (Courtesy of Dr. Z.K. Shah, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2653

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2654

TABLE 347-1  Tests Useful in the Diagnosis of Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis and Pancreatic Neoplasms
TEST

COMMENT

PRINCIPLE

Pancreatic Enzymes in Body Fluids
Serum lipase

Pancreatic inflammation leads to increased serum enzyme 
levels

Enzyme measurement of choice for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis; 
increased specificity if the level is more than three times the upper limit 
of normal (3× ULN)

Amylase
1.  Serum

2.  Urine

3.  Ascitic fluid

4.  Pleural fluid

Pancreatic inflammation leads to increased serum enzyme 
levels
Renal clearance of amylase is increased in acute 
pancreatitis
Disruption of gland or main pancreatic duct leads to 
increased amylase concentration
Exudative pleural effusion with pancreatitis

Simple; increased specificity if the level is >3× ULN; may be falsely 
normal in patients with hypertriglyceridemic pancreatitis
Infrequently used

Can help establish source of ascites; false positives occur with intestinal 
obstruction and perforated ulcer; can also measure lipase
False positives occur with carcinoma of the lung and esophageal 
perforation

Studies Pertaining to Pancreatic Structure

Radiologic and radionuclide tests
1.   Plain film of the abdomen or 
upper gastrointestinal x-rays

2.  Ultrasonography (US)

Can demonstrate large calcifications in chronic 
pancreatitis
Can provide limited information on edema, inflammation, 
calcification, pseudocysts, and mass lesions

3.   Computed tomography  

(CT) scan

Permits detailed visualization of pancreas and 
surrounding structures, pancreatic fluid collection, 
pseudocyst; assessment of necrosis or interstitial disease

4.   Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) and 
cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP)

5.   Endoscopic ultrasonography 

(EUS) and fine-needle 
aspiration/biopsy (FNA/B)

6.   Endoscopic retrograde 

cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)

Permits noninvasive detailed evaluation of the pancreatic 
parenchyma, biliary and pancreatic ducts, adjacent soft 
tissues, and vascular structures.

High-frequency transducer used with EUS produces very-
high-resolution images permitting focused evaluation of 
pancreatic parenchyma and biliary and pancreatic ducts, 
and FNA/B provides targeted tissue acquisition
Cannulation of pancreatic and/or common bile duct 
permits visualization of pancreaticobiliary ductal system

Tests of Exocrine Pancreatic Function

3.  EUS-ePFT

Direct stimulation of the pancreas with analysis of duodenal contents
1.  Secretin test

2.   Endoscopic pancreatic 
function test (ePFT)

Secretin leads to increased output of pancreatic juice and 
–; pancreatic secretory response is related to the 
HCO3
functional mass of pancreatic tissue; involves duodenal 
intubation and fluoroscopic placement of gastroduodenal 
tube
Secretin-stimulated collection of pancreatic juice 
performed during upper endoscopy; replaces need for 
tube placement in the duodenum
Combines endosonographic evaluation of the pancreas 
and endoscopic collection of pancreatic juice
Combines imaging evaluation of the pancreas and a 
semiquantitative estimation of pancreatic juice output in 
the duodenum
Measurement of intraluminal digestion products
1.  Stool fat determination

Lack of lipolytic enzymes brings about impaired fat 
digestion; quantitative 72-h stool collection and estimation 
are more reliable than qualitative analysis of a random 
stool sample
Measurement of pancreatic enzymes in feces
1.  Fecal elastase

4.  Secretin-stimulated MRCP

Pancreatic secretion of proteolytic enzymes; not degraded 
in intestine

Infrequently used

Simple, noninvasive; sequential studies quite feasible; useful in diagnosis 
of gallstones; pancreas visualization limited by interference from 
overlying bowel gas
Useful in the diagnosis of pancreatic calcification, dilated pancreatic 
ducts, and pancreatic tumors; may not be able to distinguish between 
inflammatory and neoplastic mass lesions; multiphasic CT scans are the 
preferred imaging modality for staging pancreatic cancer; IV contrast is 
needed for characterization of most features
Has mostly replaced ERCP for diagnostic assessment of the pancreatic 
duct; more sensitive than CT scan for detection of mild pancreatitis, 
necrosis, choledocholithiasis, pancreatic ductal abnormalities, and 
cystic neoplasms; no exposure to ionizing radiation
Can be used to assess gallstones, choledocholithiasis, chronic 
pancreatitis, pancreatic masses, and cystic neoplasms; FNA/B facilitates 
diagnostic and therapeutic management of pancreatic diseases

Primarily a therapeutic procedure; invasive with risks for iatrogenic 
complications

Sensitive to detect occult disease; poorly defined normal enzyme 
response; large secretory reserve capacity of the pancreas; rarely 
performed

Sensitive to detect occult disease; high negative predictive value for 
chronic pancreatitis; requires sedation

Single endoscopic evaluation of pancreatic structure and function

Improved visualization of pancreatic ductal anatomy; functional 
evaluation is less accurate than ePFT; noninvasive

Reliable reference standard for defining severity of fat malabsorption; 
does not distinguish between pancreatic and nonpancreatic cause of 
malabsorption

Diagnostic accuracy is highest when the pretest probability is high 
and the value is <100 μg/g; false positives will occur in patients with 
nonformed stools

(e.g.,  intestinal  obstruction,  intestinal  infarction,  or  perforated  peptic 
ulcer). Elevation of pleural fluid amylase can occur in acute pancreatitis, 
chronic pancreatitis, carcinoma of the lung, and esophageal perforation. 
Lipase is the single best enzyme to measure for the diagnosis of acute 
pancreatitis. It is important to acknowledge that levels are often mildly 

elevated in the setting of renal disease, so determining whether a patient 
with renal failure and abdominal pain has pancreatitis remains a chal-
lenging  clinical  problem.  One  study  found  that  serum  amylase  levels 
were elevated in patients with renal dysfunction only when creatinine 
clearance  was  <0.8  mL/s  (<50  mL/min).  In  such  patients,  the  serum 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2654

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System2655

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
7

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

• Clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of chronic pancreatic disease: abdominal pain,
  nausea, weight loss, steatorrhea, malabsorption, history of alcohol abuse, recurrent
  pancreatitis, fatty-food intolerance
• Perform history, physical examination, review of laboratory studies; consider fecal elastase
  measurement

• Contrast-enhanced CT scan
• CP diagnostic criteria: calcifications in combination with atrophy and/or dilated duct
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to step 2

• MRI and MRCP, with or without secretin enhancement (sMRCP)
• CP diagnostic criteria: Cambridge class III,a dilated duct, atrophy of gland, filling
  defects in duct suggestive of stones
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to step 3

• EUS with quantification of parenchymal and ductal criteria
• CP diagnostic criteria: ≥5 EUS CP criteria
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to step 4

• Pancreas function test (with secretin)—endoscopic (ePFT) collection method
  preferred; consider combining ePFT with EUS
• CP diagnostic criteria: peak [bicarbonate] <80 mEq/L
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results require monitoring of signs and symptoms and repeat 
  testing in 6 months–1 year

FIGURE  347-2  A  stepwise  diagnostic  approach  to  the  patient  with  suspected  chronic  pancreatitis  (CP).  Endoscopic  ultrasonography  (EUS)  and  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  (MRI)  with  secretin-stimulated  magnetic  resonance  cholangiopancreatography  (sMRCP/MRCP)  are  appropriate  diagnostic  alternatives  to  endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). CT, computed tomography; ePFT, endoscopic pancreas function test. aCambridge classification of pancreatic duct findings:  
class 0: normal—visualization of complete normal ductal anatomy; class I: equivocal—normal main duct, 1–3 abnormal side branches; class II: mild—normal main duct, 
>3 abnormal side branches; class III—dilated and irregular main duct, >3 abnormal side branches, small (<10 mm) cysts; class IV—irregular main duct, intraductal calculi, 
strictures, obstruction with dilation, or large (> 10 mm) cysts.

amylase  level  was  invariably  <500  IU/L  in  the  absence  of  objective 
evidence of acute pancreatitis. In that study, serum lipase and trypsin 
levels paralleled serum amylase values. With these limitations in mind, 
the recommended screening test for acute pancreatitis in renal disease 
is serum lipase, but a high index of clinical suspicion is needed based on 
symptoms. Elevations in serum lipase >3× ULN due to nonpancreatic 
etiology can be observed in hepatobiliary or gastrointestinal malignan-
cies,  septicemia,  liver  cirrhosis,  systemic  lupus  erythematosus,  severe 
head  injury,  chronic  alcoholism,  diabetes  mellitus,  and  post-ERCP 
without any associated evidence of pancreatitis.
Studies  Pertaining  to  Pancreatic  Structure  •  RADIOLOGIC 
TESTS  Plain  films  of  the  abdomen  rarely  provide  useful  informa-
tion related to pancreatic disease and have been superseded by more 
detailed imaging studies (ultrasound, EUS, CT, and MRI with MRCP).
Ultrasonography  (US)  can  provide  important  information  in  the 
initial emergency ward evaluation of patients with acute pancreatitis, 
chronic  pancreatitis,  pseudocysts,  and  pancreatic  adenocarcinoma. 
Sonographic  changes  can  indicate  the  presence  of  edema,  inflamma-
tion,  and  calcification  (not  obvious  on  plain  films  of  the  abdomen), 
as well as gallstones, biliary dilation, pseudocysts, and mass lesions. In 
acute pancreatitis, the pancreas is characteristically enlarged. In pan-
creatic pseudocyst, the usual appearance is primarily that of a smooth, 
round  fluid  collection.  Pancreatic  adenocarcinoma  distorts  the  usual 
landmarks, and mass lesions >3.0 cm are usually detected as localized, 
solid lesions. US is often the initial investigation for most patients with 
suspected  pancreatic  disease.  However,  obesity  and  excess  intestinal 
bowel gas can interfere with pancreatic imaging, limiting its sensitivity.
CT  with  intravenous  contrast  is  the  best  imaging  study  for  the 
assessment  of  complications  of  acute  and  chronic  pancreatitis.  It  is 
especially  useful  in  the  detection  of  pancreatic  and  peripancreatic 
acute  fluid  collections,  fluid-containing  lesions  such  as  pseudocysts, 
walled-off  necrosis  (see  Chap.  348,  Figs.  348-1,  348-2,  and  348-4), 
and  pancreatic  neoplasms.  Acute  pancreatitis  is  characterized  by  (1) 
enlargement of the pancreas, (2) distortion of the pancreatic contour 
with  peripancreatic  stranding  of  adjacent  fat  tissue,  and/or  (3)  the 
presence  of  pancreatic  fluid  that  has  a  different  attenuation  coeffi-
cient  than  normal  pancreas.  When  possible,  CT  scans  should  ideally 
be  performed  with  oral  and  intravenous  contrast  to  detect  areas  of 

pancreatic necrosis. The major benefit of CT scan in acute pancreatitis 
is  the  diagnosis  of  pancreatic  necrosis  in  patients  not  responding  to 
conservative management within 72 h. It may take 48–72 h to develop 
perfusion defects indicative of pancreatic necrosis. Therefore, if acute 
pancreatitis is confirmed with serology and physical examination find-
ings, CT scan in the first 3 days is not recommended to minimize risk 
of  contrast-induced  nephropathy  and  unnecessary  health  care  costs. 
Improved imaging technology and increased resolution are facilitated 
by  multiphasic  CT  scans  using  multidetector  technology  (MDCT) 
in which a pancreas protocol consisting of dual-phase scanning with 
intravenous  contrast  is  utilized  for  the  detection  and  staging  of  pan-
creatic  cancers.  While  the  sensitivity  of  MDCT  for  detecting  smaller 
(≤2 cm) lesions is lower, the reported overall sensitivity for pancreatic 
cancers is 76–97%. The contraindications to using intravenous contrast 
include  renal  failure  (serum  creatinine  >2  mg/dL)  and  a  history  of 
severe allergic reaction to iodinated contrast agents. In situations where 
EUS is not available, CT-guided percutaneous aspiration or biopsy of a 
pancreatic mass can be performed. Prior to the major advance of EUS-
guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA), CT-guided biopsy was utilized in 
the preceding decades and is regarded as a safe procedure.

MRI  and  MRCP  provide  excellent  imaging  of  the  bile  duct,  pan-
creatic duct, and pancreas parenchyma in both acute pancreatitis and 
chronic  pancreatitis.  MRI  is  better  than  transabdominal  US  and  CT 
scans and comparable to EUS in the detection of choledocholithiasis. 
Similar to CT, MRI can evaluate for the severity of acute pancreatitis. 
Moreover,  T2-weighted  MRI  of  fluid  collections  can  differentiate 
necrotic  debris  from  fluid  in  suspected  walled-off  necrosis,  and  T1 
imaging  can  diagnose  hemorrhage  in  suspected  pseudoaneurysm 
rupture. In chronic pancreatitis, secretin-enhanced MRCP is a method 
to enhance the evaluation of major and minor ductal changes. While 
imaging  is  comparable  to  CT  for  evaluating  pancreatic  mass  lesions, 
MRI  with  MRCP  is  the  preferred  imaging  modality  for  evaluating 
pancreatic  cystic  lesions.  Nephrogenic  systemic  fibrosis  has  been 
described in patients with chronic renal failure following exposure to 
the  gadolinium  contrast,  but  incidence  rates  are  extraordinarily  low 
with contemporary contrast agents.

EUS  produces  high-resolution  images  of  the  bile  duct,  pancre-
atic  parenchyma,  and  pancreatic  duct  with  a  transducer  fixed  to  an 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2655

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2656

TABLE 347-2  Causes of Hyperamylasemia and Hyperamylasuria
Pancreatic Disease

I.  Pancreatitis
A.  Acute
B.  Chronic: ductal obstruction
C.  Complications of pancreatitis
1.  Pancreatic pseudocyst
2.  Ascites caused by pancreatic duct disruption
3.  Pancreatic necrosis

TABLE 347-3  Endoscopic Ultrasonographic Criteria for Chronic 
Pancreatitis (Total Criteria = 9)
DUCTAL
Stones
Hyperechoic main duct margins
Main duct irregularity
Main duct dilatation
Visible side branches

PARENCHYMAL
Echogenic strands
Echogenic foci
Lobular contour
Cysts

II.  Pancreatic trauma
III.  Pancreatic adenocarcinoma

Nonpancreatic Disorders

I.  Renal insufficiency
II.  Salivary gland lesions

A.  Mumps
B.  Calculus
C.  Irradiation sialadenitis
D.  Maxillofacial surgery
III.  “Tumor” hyperamylasemia

A.  Carcinoma of the lung, esophagus, breast, or ovary

IV.  Macroamylasemia
V.  Burns
VI.  Diabetes mellitus, particularly when ketoacidosis is present
VII.  Pregnancy
VIII.  Renal transplantation
IX.  Cerebral trauma
X.  Drugs: opiates

Other Abdominal Disorders

I.  Biliary tract disease: cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis
II.  Intraabdominal disease

A.  Perforated or penetrating peptic ulcer
B.  Intestinal obstruction or inflammation
C.  Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
D.  Peritonitis
E.  Aortic aneurysm
F.  Postoperative hyperamylasemia

endoscope that can be directed onto the surface of the pancreas through 
the stomach or duodenum. EUS is not beneficial for the evaluation of 
pancreas during acute pancreatitis. It is preferable to perform EUS after 
the  resolution  of  acute  pancreatitis  (~4  weeks)  to  detect  any  predis-
posing  factors,  including  malignancy,  choledocholithiasis,  pancreatic 
divisum, or ampullary lesions. EUS can be combined with ERCP in a 
single session and is increasingly preferred for the diagnosis and man-
agement  of  choledocholithiasis  in  acute  pancreatitis  and  pancreatic 
neoplasm  with  biliary  obstruction.  EUS  has  been  studied  as  a  diag-
nostic modality for chronic pancreatitis. Criteria for abnormalities on 
EUS in severe chronic pancreatic disease have been developed. There is 
general agreement that the presence of five or more of the nine criteria 
listed in Table 347-3 is highly predictive of chronic pancreatitis in the 
correct clinical context. The sensitivity of EUS (81%; 95% CI, 70–89%) 
to diagnose chronic pancreatitis is comparable to that of MRI/MRCP 
(78%; 95% CI, 69–85%) and better than CT (75%; 95% CI, 66–83%); 
however, nonspecific changes are commonly seen in the pancreas that 
may  be  attributable  to  cigarette  smoking,  diabetes,  or  normal  aging. 
EUS  also  facilitates  the  delivery  of  nerve-blocking  agents  via  fine- 
needle  injection  in  patients  suffering  from  pancreatic  pain  from 
chronic  pancreatitis  (celiac  plexus  block)  or  cancer  (celiac  plexus 
neurolysis). When clinically suspected, EUS imaging is more sensitive 
than  MDCT  for  the  detection  of  pancreatic  malignancy  and  permits 
fine-needle aspiration/biopsy (FNA/B). Currently, EUS-guided FNA/B 
is  the  diagnostic  modality  of  choice  for  the  acquisition  of  diagnostic 
tissue  and  cyst  fluid  in  patients  with  pancreatic  masses  and  cystic 
lesions, respectively.

Although  a  pancreatogram  during  ERCP  is  the  most  specific  and 
sensitive test for evaluating the ductal anatomy, EUS and MRI/MRCP 
have largely replaced ERCP in the diagnostic evaluation of pancreatic 
disease to avoid the risk of complications. Therefore, ERCP is primarily 
of therapeutic value after CT, EUS, or MRI and MRCP has detected 
abnormalities  requiring  endoscopic  treatment.  ERCP  is  the  most 
sensitive modality for the detection of bile duct stones. In the manage-
ment of acute biliary pancreatitis, ERCP should not be unduly delayed 
in  patients  with  high  clinical  suspicion  of  biliary  obstruction.  In 
chronic pancreatitis, ERCP abnormalities in the main pancreatic duct 
and side branches have been outlined by the Cambridge classification 
(Fig. 347-2). The presence of ductal stenosis and irregularity can make 
it difficult to distinguish chronic pancreatitis from pancreatic adeno-
carcinoma. It is important to be aware that ERCP changes interpreted 
as  indicating  chronic  pancreatitis  actually  may  be  due  to  the  effects 
of  aging  on  the  pancreatic  duct,  sequelae  of  a  recent  attack  of  acute 
pancreatitis,  or  changes  secondary  to  placement  of  pancreatic  duct 
stent. Although aging may cause impressive ductal alterations, it does 
not  affect  the  results  of  pancreatic  secretin  function  tests.  Pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma  is  characterized  by  stenosis  or  obstruction  of  either 
the pancreatic duct or the common bile duct; both ductal systems are 
often  abnormal  (double-duct  sign).  When  indicated,  ERCP  permits 
acquisition  of  diagnostic  tissue  as  in  biopsy  of  ampullary  lesions  or 
biliary  brushings  for  distal  bile  duct  strictures.  Elevated  serum  amy-
lase levels after ERCP have been reported in the majority of patients, 
and clinical pancreatitis has been reported in 5–10% of patients. Until 
recently, pancreatic duct stents were commonly placed to prevent post-
ERCP  pancreatitis.  However,  recent  data  suggest  that  periprocedural 
administration  of  rectal  indomethacin  can  decrease  the  incidence  of 
post-ERCP  pancreatitis.  Studies  are  currently  underway  comparing 
rectal indomethacin alone versus combination with prophylactic pan-
creatic duct stents to prevent post-ERCP pancreatitis.
 ■ TESTS OF EXOCRINE PANCREATIC FUNCTION
Pancreatic  function  tests  (Table  347-1)  can  be  divided  into  the 
following:

1.  Direct stimulation of the pancreas by IV infusion of secretin followed 
by collection and measurement of duodenal contents: The secretin 
test, used to detect diffuse pancreatic disease, is based on the phys-
iologic  principle  that  the  pancreatic  secretory  response  is  directly 
related to the functional mass of pancreatic tissue. In the standard 
assay, secretin is given IV in a dose of 0.2 μg/kg of synthetic human 
secretin as a bolus. Normal values for the standard secretin test are 
–) concen-
(1) volume output >2 mL/kg per h, (2) bicarbonate (HCO3
– output >10 mmol/L in 1 h. The 
tration >80 mmol/L, and (3) HCO3
most reproducible measurement, giving the highest level of discrim-
ination between normal subjects and patients with chronic pancreas 
dysfunction, appears to be the maximal bicarbonate concentration. 
A cutoff point <80 mmol/L is considered abnormal and suggestive 
of reduced secretory function that is most commonly observed in 
early chronic pancreatitis.

2.  There may be a dissociation between the results of the secretin test 
and  other  tests  of  absorptive  function.  For  example,  patients  with 
– 
chronic  pancreatitis  often  have  abnormally  low  outputs  of  HCO3
after secretin but have normal fecal fat excretion. The secretin test 
directly  measures  the  secretory  capacity  of  ductular  epithelium, 
whereas fecal fat excretion indirectly reflects intraluminal lipolytic 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2656

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemactivity.  Steatorrhea  does  not  occur  until  intraluminal  levels  of 
lipase are markedly reduced, underscoring the fact that only small 
amounts of enzymes are necessary for intraluminal digestive activ-
ities.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  an  abnormal  secretin  test  result 
suggests that pancreatic ductal secretory function is abnormal. This 
is  an  early  abnormality  in  chronic  pancreatitis  but  should  not  be 
considered  diagnostic  and  must  be  interpreted  within  the  proper 
clinical context (for example, a patient with recurrent attacks of pan-
creatitis  and  persistent  abdominal  pain  and  Cambridge  2  changes 
on imaging)

3.  Measurement of fecal pancreatic enzymes such as elastase: Measure-
ment  of  intraluminal  digestion  products  (i.e.,  undigested  muscle 
fibers, stool fat, and fecal nitrogen) is discussed in Chap. 325. The 
amount  of  human  elastase  in  stool  reflects  the  pancreatic  output 
of this proteolytic enzyme. Decreased fecal elastase-1 (FE-1) activ-
ity  in  stool  is  a  test  to  detect  severe  EPI  in  patients  with  chronic 
pancreatitis  and  cystic  fibrosis.  FE-1  levels  >200  μg/g  are  normal, 
levels of 100–200 μg/g are considered mild-moderate EPI, and levels  
<100 μg/g are severe EPI. Although the test is simple and noninva-
sive, it can yield false-positive results if stools are not formed and 
should  not  generally  be  used  for  the  evaluation  of  a  patient  with 
diarrhea. False-positive results have also been observed in diabetes 
and irritable bowel syndrome.

Tests useful in the diagnosis of EPI and the differential diagnosis 

of malabsorption are also discussed in Chaps. 325 and 348.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Conwell DL et al: American Pancreatic Association practice guide-
lines  in  chronic  pancreatitis:  Evidence-based  report  on  diagnostic 
guidelines. Pancreas 43:1143, 2014.

Hart PA et al: Endoscopic pancreas fluid collection: Methods and rel-
evance for clinical care and translational science. Am J Gastroenterol 
111:1258, 2016.

Petrov MS, Yadav D: Global epidemiology and holistic prevention of 

pancreatitis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 16:175, 2019.

Singh VK et al: Diagnosis and management of chronic pancreatitis: A 

review. JAMA 322:2422, 2019.

348 Acute and Chronic 
Pancreatitis
Phil A. Hart, Darwin L. Conwell,  
Somashekar G. Krishna

BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF 
PANCREATIC EXOCRINE SECRETION
 ■ GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The  pancreas  secretes  1500–3000  mL  of  isosmotic  alkaline  (pH  >8) 
fluid  per  day  containing  ~20  enzymes.  Pancreatic  secretions  provide 
the  enzymes  and  bicarbonate  needed  to  perform  the  major  digestive 
activity of the gastrointestinal tract and provide an optimal pH for the 
function of these enzymes.

 ■ REGULATION OF PANCREATIC SECRETION
Secretions from the exocrine pancreas are highly regulated by neuro-
hormonal systems in a phasic manner (cephalic, gastric, and intestinal 
phases). Gastric acid is the stimulus for the release of secretin from the 
duodenal mucosa (S cells), which stimulates the secretion of water and 
electrolytes  from  pancreatic  ductal  cells.  Release  of  cholecystokinin 
(CCK)  from  the  duodenal  and  proximal  jejunal  mucosa  (Ito  cells) 
is  largely  triggered  by  long-chain  fatty  acids,  essential  amino  acids 

2657

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

(tryptophan,  phenylalanine,  valine,  methionine),  and  gastric  acid 
itself.  CCK  evokes  an  enzyme-rich  secretion  from  acinar  cells  in  the 
pancreas.  The  parasympathetic  nervous  system  (via  the  vagus  nerve) 
exerts significant control over pancreatic secretion, particularly during 
the cephalic phase. Secretion evoked by secretin and CCK depends on 
the  permissive  roles  of  vagal  afferent  and  efferent  pathways.  This  is 
particularly true for enzyme secretion, whereas water and bicarbonate 
secretions  are  heavily  dependent  on  the  hormonal  effects  of  secretin 
and to a lesser extent CCK. Also, vagal stimulation affects the release 
of  vasoactive  intestinal  peptide  (VIP),  a  secretin  agonist.  Pancreatic 
exocrine  secretion  is  also  influenced  by  inhibitory  neuropeptides 
including  somatostatin,  pancreatic  polypeptide,  peptide  YY,  neuro-
peptide Y, enkephalin, pancreastatin, calcitonin gene–related peptides, 
glucagon, and galanin. Pancreatic polypeptide and peptide YY may act 
primarily  on  nerves  outside  the  pancreas,  while  somatostatin  acts  at 
multiple sites.

 ■ WATER AND ELECTROLYTE SECRETION
Bicarbonate is the ion of primary physiologic importance within pan-
creatic  secretion.  The  ductal  cells  secrete  bicarbonate  predominantly 
derived from plasma (93%) more than from intracellular metabolism 
(7%).  Bicarbonate  enters  the  duct  lumen  through  the  sodium  bicar-
bonate  cotransporter  with  depolarization  caused  by  chloride  efflux 
through  the  cystic  fibrosis  transmembrane  conductance  regulator 
(CFTR). Secretin and VIP bind at the basolateral surface and cause an 
increase in secondary messenger intracellular cyclic AMP and act on 
the apical surface of the ductal cells opening the CFTR, which promotes 
secretion. CCK, acting as a neuromodulator, markedly potentiates the 
stimulatory  effects  of  secretin.  Acetylcholine  also  plays  an  important 
role in ductal cell secretion. Intraluminal bicarbonate secreted from the 
ductal cells helps neutralize gastric acid, increases the solubility of fatty 
acids and bile acids, maintains an optimal pH for pancreatic and brush 
border enzymes, and prevents intestinal mucosal damage.

 ■ ENZYME SECRETION
The  acinar  cell  is  highly  compartmentalized  for  the  production  and 
secretion  of  pancreatic  enzymes.  Proteins  synthesized  by  the  rough 
endoplasmic  reticulum  are  processed  in  the  Golgi  and  then  targeted 
to  the  appropriate  site:  zymogen  granules,  lysosomes,  or  other  cell 
compartments. The zymogen granules migrate to the apical region of 
the acinar cell awaiting the appropriate neural or hormonal stimulatory 
response.  The  pancreas  secretes  amylolytic,  lipolytic,  and  proteolytic 
enzymes  into  the  duct  lumen.  Amylolytic  enzymes,  such  as  amylase, 
hydrolyze starch to oligosaccharides and to the disaccharide maltose. 
The lipolytic enzymes include lipase, phospholipase A2, and cholesterol 
esterase.  Bile  salts  inhibit  lipase  in  isolation,  but  colipase,  another 
constituent  of  pancreatic  secretion,  binds  to  lipase  and  prevents  this 
inhibition. Bile salts activate phospholipase A and cholesterol esterase. 
Proteolytic  enzymes  include  endopeptidases  (trypsin,  chymotrypsin), 
which  act  on  internal  peptide  bonds  of  proteins  and  polypeptides; 
exopeptidases  (carboxypeptidases,  aminopeptidases),  which  act  on 
the free carboxyl- and amino-terminal ends of peptides, respectively; 
and elastase. The proteolytic enzymes are secreted as inactive zymogen 
precursors. Ribonucleases (deoxyribonucleases, ribonuclease) are also 
secreted.  Enterokinase,  an  enzyme  found  in  the  duodenal  mucosa 
(“brush border”), cleaves the lysine-isoleucine bond of trypsinogen to 
form  trypsin.  Trypsin  then  activates  the  other  proteolytic  zymogens 
and phospholipase A2 in a cascade. The nervous system initiates pan-
creatic  enzyme  secretion.  The  neurologic  stimulation  is  cholinergic, 
involving  extrinsic  innervation  by  the  vagus  nerve  and  subsequent 
innervation  by  intrapancreatic  cholinergic  nerves.  The  stimulatory 
neurotransmitters  are  acetylcholine  and  gastrin-releasing  peptides. 
These  neurotransmitters  activate  calcium-dependent  secondary  mes-
senger systems, resulting in the release of zymogens into the pancreas 
duct.  VIP  is  present  in  intrapancreatic  nerves  and  potentiates  the 
effect of acetylcholine. In contrast to other species, there are no CCK 
receptors  on  acinar  cells  in  humans.  CCK  in  physiologic  concentra-
tions stimulates pancreatic secretion by stimulating afferent vagal and 
intrapancreatic nerves.

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2657

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2658

 ■ AUTOPROTECTION OF THE PANCREAS
Autodigestion  of  the  pancreas  is  prevented  by  (1)  the  packaging  of 
pancreatic proteases in the precursor (proenzyme) form, (2) intracel-
lular calcium homeostasis (low intracellular calcium in the cytosol of 
the  acinar  cell  promotes  the  destruction  of  spontaneously  activated 
trypsin),  (3)  acid-base  balance,  and  (4)  the  synthesis  of  protective 
protease  inhibitors  (pancreatic  secretory  trypsin  inhibitor  [PSTI]  or 
SPINK1), which can bind and inactivate ~20% of intracellular trypsin 
activity.  Chymotrypsin  C  can  also  lyse  and  inactivate  trypsin.  These 
protease inhibitors are found in acinar cells, pancreatic secretions, and 
the α1- and α2-globulin fractions of plasma. Loss of any of these four 
protective mechanisms leads to premature enzyme activation, autodi-
gestion, and ultimately acute pancreatitis.

 ■ ENTEROPANCREATIC AXIS AND  
FEEDBACK INHIBITION
Pancreatic enzyme secretion is controlled, at least in part, by a negative 
feedback mechanism induced by the presence of active serine proteases 
in the duodenum and nutrients in the distal small intestine. For exam-
ple,  perfusion  of  the  duodenal  lumen  with  phenylalanine  (stimulates 
early digestion) causes a prompt increase in plasma CCK levels as well 
as increased secretion of chymotrypsin and other pancreatic enzymes. 
However,  simultaneous  perfusion  with  trypsin  (stimulates  late  diges-
tion)  blunts  both  responses.  Conversely,  perfusion  of  the  duodenal 
lumen  with  protease  inhibitors  actually  leads  to  enzyme  hypersecre-
tion. Available evidence supports the concept that the duodenum con-
tains a peptide called CCK-releasing factor (CCK-RF) that is involved 
in  stimulating  CCK  release.  It  appears  that  serine  proteases  inhibit 
pancreatic  secretion  by  inactivating  a  CCK-releasing  peptide  in  the 
lumen of the small intestine. Thus, the integrative result of both bicar-
bonate and enzyme secretion depends on a feedback process for both 
bicarbonate  and  pancreatic  enzymes.  Acidification  of  the  duodenum 
releases secretin, which stimulates vagal and other neural pathways to 
activate  pancreatic  duct  cells,  which  secrete  bicarbonate.  This  bicar-
bonate  then  neutralizes  the  duodenal  acid,  and  the  feedback  loop  is 
completed.  Dietary  proteins  bind  proteases,  thereby  leading  to  an 
increase in free CCK-RF. CCK is then released into the blood in phys-
iologic concentrations, acting primarily through the neural pathways 
(vagal-vagal). This leads to acetylcholine-mediated pancreatic enzyme 
secretion.  Proteases  continue  to  be  secreted  from  the  pancreas  until 
the protein within the duodenum is digested. At this point, pancreatic 
protease secretion is reduced to basic levels, thus completing this step 
in  the  feedback  process.  Additional  hormonal  feedback  inhibition  of 
pancreatic enzyme secretion occurs via peptide YY and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 following lipid or carbohydrate exposure to the ileum.

ACUTE PANCREATITIS
 ■ GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Recent  U.S.  estimates  indicate  that  acute  pancreatitis  is  the  most 
common  inpatient  principal  gastrointestinal  diagnosis,  responsi-
ble  for  >250,000  hospitalizations  per  year.  The  annual  incidence 
ranges  from  15–45/100,000  persons,  depending  on  the  distribu-
tion  of  etiologies  (e.g.,  alcohol,  gallstones,  metabolic  factors,  drugs 
[Table 348-1]) and country of study. The median length of hospital stay is  
4 days, with a median hospital cost of ~$6000 and a mortality of ~1%. 
The  estimated  cost  annually  approaches  $3  billion.  Hospitalization 
rates  increase  with  age  and  are  higher  among  blacks  and  men.  The 
age-adjusted rate of hospital discharges with an acute pancreatitis diag-
nosis increased by 62% between 1988 and 2004. From 2000 to 2009, 
the  rate  increased  by  30%.  Thus,  the  incidence  of  acute  pancreatitis 
continues to rise and is associated with substantial health care costs.
 ■ ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
There  are  many  causes  of  acute  pancreatitis  (Table  348-1),  and  the 
mechanisms  by  which  each  of  these  conditions  triggers  pancreatic 
inflammation  have  not  been  fully  elucidated.  Gallstones  and  alcohol 
account  for  80–90%  of  identified  cases  of  acute  pancreatitis  in  the 
United  States.  Gallstones  continue  to  be  the  leading  cause  of  acute 

TABLE 348-1  Causes of Acute Pancreatitis
Common Causes

Gallstones (including microlithiasis)
Alcohol (acute and chronic alcoholism)
Hypertriglyceridemia
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), especially after 
biliary manometry
Idiopathic

Uncommon Causes

Drugs (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, sulfonamides, estrogens, tetracycline, 
valproic acid, 5-aminosalicylic acid [5-ASA])
Connective tissue disorders and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
Pancreatic cancer
Hypercalcemia
Periampullary diverticulum
Pancreas divisuma
Hereditary pancreatitis
Cystic fibrosis
Renal failure
Infections (mumps, coxsackievirus, cytomegalovirus, echovirus, parasites)
Autoimmune (e.g., type 1 and type 2)
Trauma (especially blunt abdominal trauma)
Postoperative (abdominal and nonabdominal operations)

Causes to Consider in Patients with Recurrent Bouts of Acute 
Pancreatitis without an Obvious Etiology

Occult disease of the biliary tree or pancreatic ducts, especially microlithiasis, 
biliary sludge
Alcohol abuse
Metabolic: Hypertriglyceridemia, hypercalcemia
Anatomic: Pancreas divisuma
Pancreatic cancer
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN)
Hereditary pancreatitis
Cystic fibrosis
Idiopathic

aPancreas divisum is not believed to cause acute pancreatitis in isolation of another 
disease precipitant.

pancreatitis  in  most  series  (30–60%).  The  risk  of  acute  pancreatitis 
in  patients  with  at  least  one  gallstone  <5  mm  in  diameter  is  four-
fold  greater  than  that  in  patients  with  larger  stones.  Alcohol  is  the 
second  most  common  cause,  responsible  for  15–30%  of  cases  in  the 
United States. The incidence of pancreatitis in alcoholics is surprisingly 
low (5/100,000), indicating that in addition to the amount of alcohol 
ingested,  other  factors  affect  a  person’s  susceptibility  to  pancreatic 
injury,  such  as  cigarette  smoking  and  genetic  predisposition.  Acute 
pancreatitis  occurs  in  5–10%  of  patients  following  endoscopic  retro-
grade  cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP);  however,  this  risk  can  be 
decreased with proper patient selection and the use of a prophylactic 
pancreatic  duct  stent  and/or  rectal  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory 
drugs  (NSAIDs;  indomethacin).  Risk  factors  for  post-ERCP  pancre-
atitis  include  minor  papilla  sphincterotomy,  suspected  sphincter  of 
Oddi  dysfunction,  prior  history  of  post-ERCP  pancreatitis,  age  <60 
years, more than two contrast injections into the pancreatic duct, and 
endoscopist experience.

Hypertriglyceridemia  is  the  cause  of  acute  pancreatitis  in  1–4% 
of  cases;  serum  triglyceride  levels  are  usually  >1000  mg/dL.  Most 
patients  with  hypertriglyceridemic  pancreatitis  have  undiagnosed  or 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. An additional subset has an underlying 
derangement in lipid metabolism, probably unrelated to pancreatitis. 
Such patients are prone to recurrent episodes of pancreatitis. Any factor 
(e.g., alcohol or medications, such as oral contraceptives) that causes an 
abrupt increase in serum triglycerides can potentially precipitate a bout 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2658

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemof acute pancreatitis. Patients with a deficiency of apolipoprotein CII 
have  an  increased  incidence  of  pancreatitis;  apolipoprotein  CII  acti-
vates lipoprotein lipase, which is important in clearing chylomicrons 
from the bloodstream. Although frequently entertained, <2% of cases 
of acute pancreatitis are drug related. Drugs cause pancreatitis either by 
a hypersensitivity reaction or by the generation of a toxic metabolite, 
although in some cases, it is not clear which of these mechanisms is 
operative (Table 348-1).

Pathologically, acute pancreatitis ranges from interstitial pancreatitis 
(pancreas  blood  supply  maintained),  which  is  generally  self-limited, 
to necrotizing pancreatitis (pancreas blood supply interrupted). Auto-
digestion  is  a  currently  accepted  pathogenic  theory  resulting  when 
proteolytic enzymes (e.g., trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, 
and lipolytic enzymes such as phospholipase A2) are activated in the 
pancreas acinar cell compartment rather than the intestinal lumen. A 
number of factors (e.g., endotoxins, exotoxins, viral infections, ische-
mia,  oxidative  stress,  lysosomal  calcium,  direct  trauma)  are  believed 
to  facilitate  premature  activation  of  trypsin.  Activated  proteolytic 
enzymes,  especially  trypsin,  not  only  digest  pancreatic  and  peripan-
creatic tissues but can also activate other enzymes, such as elastase and 
phospholipase  A2.  Spontaneous  activation  of  trypsin  also  can  occur, 
resulting in autodigestion.

 ■ ACTIVATION OF PANCREATIC ENZYMES IN THE 
PATHOGENESIS OF ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Several studies have suggested that pancreatitis is a disease that evolves 
in  three  phases.  The  initial  phase  is  characterized  by  intrapancreatic 
digestive enzyme activation and acinar cell injury. Trypsin activation 
appears  to  be  mediated  by  lysosomal  hydrolases  such  as  cathepsin 
B  that  become  colocalized  with  digestive  enzymes  in  intracellular 
organelles; it is currently believed that acinar cell injury is the conse-
quence of trypsin activation. The second phase of pancreatitis involves 
the  activation,  chemoattraction,  and  sequestration  of  leukocytes  and 
macrophages  in  the  pancreas,  resulting  in  an  enhanced  intrapancre-
atic  inflammatory  reaction.  Neutrophil  depletion  induced  by  prior 
administration of an antineutrophil serum has been shown to reduce 
the severity of experimentally induced pancreatitis. There is also evi-
dence to support the concept that neutrophils can activate trypsinogen. 
Thus, intrapancreatic acinar cell activation of trypsinogen could be a 
two-step process (i.e., an early neutrophil-independent and a later neu-
trophil-dependent phase). The third phase of pancreatitis is due to the 
effects of activated proteolytic enzymes and cytokines, released by the 
inflamed pancreas, on distant organs. Activated proteolytic enzymes, 
especially trypsin, not only digest pancreatic and peripancreatic tissues 
but  also  activate  other  enzymes  such  as  elastase  and  phospholipase 
A2.  The  active  enzymes  and  cytokines  then  digest  cellular  mem-
branes and cause proteolysis, edema, interstitial hemorrhage, vascular 
damage,  coagulation  necrosis,  fat  necrosis,  and  cellular  necrosis  in 
the  parenchyma.  Cellular  injury  and  death  result  in  the  liberation  of 
bradykinin  peptides,  vasoactive  substances,  and  histamine  that  can 
produce vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, and edema with 
profound effects on other organs. The systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), as 
well as multiorgan failure, may occur as a result of this cascade of local 
and distant effects.

A number of genetic factors can increase the susceptibility and/or 
modify the severity of pancreatic injury in acute pancreatitis, recurrent 
acute pancreatitis, and chronic pancreatitis. All the major genetic sus-
ceptibility factors center on the control of trypsin activity within the 
pancreatic acinar cell, in part because they were identified as candidate 
genes  linked  to  intrapancreatic  trypsin  control.  Six  genetic  variants 
have been identified as being associated with susceptibility to pancre-
atitis. The genes that have been identified include (1) cationic trypsino-
gen gene (PRSS1), (2) pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (SPINK1), 
(3)  the  cystic  fibrosis  transmembrane  conductance  regulator  gene 
(CFTR), (4) the chymotrypsin C gene (CTRC), (5) the calcium-sensing 
receptor (CASR), and (6) claudin-2 (CLDN2). Among these variants, 
only PRSS1 mutations are sufficient to precipitate acute pancreatitis in 
the absence of other risk factors, whereas the other variants are disease 

modifiers. Investigations of other genetic variants are currently under-
way, and new genes will be added to this list in the future.

2659

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Abdominal Pain

Abdominal  pain  is  the  major  symptom  of  acute  pancreatitis.  Pain 
may vary from mild discomfort to severe, constant, and incapacitat-
ing distress. Characteristically, the pain, which is steady and boring 
in character, is located in the epigastrium region and may radiate to 
the back, chest, flanks, and lower abdomen. Nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal distention due to gastric and intestinal hypomotility are 
also frequent complaints.

Physical examination frequently reveals a distressed and anxious 
patient.  Low-grade  fever,  tachycardia,  and  hypotension  are  com-
mon.  Shock  is  not  unusual  and  may  result  from  (1)  hypovolemia 
secondary  to  exudation  of  blood  and  plasma  proteins  into  the 
retroperitoneal space; (2) increased formation and release of kinin 
peptides, which cause vasodilation and increased vascular permea-
bility; and (3) systemic effects of proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes 
released  into  the  circulation.  Jaundice  occurs  infrequently;  when 
present, it may be a consequence of extrinsic compression due to 
peripancreatic  edema  or  a  pancreatic  head  mass  or  of  intraductal 
obstruction from a common bile duct stone or sludge. Erythema-
tous skin nodules due to subcutaneous fat necrosis rarely occur. In 
10–20% of patients, there are pulmonary findings, including basilar 
rales,  atelectasis,  and  pleural  effusion,  the  latter  most  frequently 
left-sided.  Abdominal  tenderness  and  muscle  rigidity  are  present 
to  a  variable  degree,  but  compared  with  the  intense  pain,  these 
signs may be less impressive. Bowel sounds are usually diminished 
or  absent.  An  enlarged  pancreas  from  an  acute  fluid  collection, 
walled-off necrosis, or a pseudocyst may be palpable in the upper 
abdomen later in the course of the disease (i.e., 4–6 weeks). A faint 
blue discoloration around the umbilicus (Cullen’s sign) may occur 
as the result of hemoperitoneum, and a blue-red-purple or green-
brown  discoloration  of  the  flanks  (Turner’s  sign)  reflects  tissue 
breakdown  of  hemoglobin  from  severe  necrotizing  pancreatitis 
with  hemorrhage;  both  findings  are  rare  but  reflect  an  increased 
clinical severity.

 ■ LABORATORY DATA
Serum amylase and lipase values threefold or more above normal are 
strongly  supportive  of  the  diagnosis  if  alternate  etiologies,  including 
gut  perforation,  ischemia,  and  infarction,  are  excluded.  However,  it 
should  be  noted  that  there  is  no  correlation  between  the  severity  of 
pancreatitis and the degree of serum lipase and amylase elevations or 
serial  trends.  After  3–7  days,  even  with  continuing  evidence  of  pan-
creatitis,  total  serum  amylase  values  tend  to  return  toward  normal. 
However, pancreatic lipase levels may remain elevated for 7–14 days. 
It  should  be  recognized  that  amylase  elevations  in  serum  and  urine 
occur  in  many  conditions  other  than  pancreatitis  (see  Chap.  347, 
Table 347-2). Importantly, patients with acidemia (arterial pH ≤7.32) 
may have spurious elevations in serum amylase. This finding explains 
why patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may have marked elevations in 
serum amylase without any other evidence of acute pancreatitis. On the 
other hand, serum amylase levels can be spuriously low in the setting of 
severe hypertriglyceridemia. Serum lipase activity increases in parallel 
with amylase activity and is more specific than amylase, making it the 
preferred test. A serum lipase measurement can be instrumental in dif-
ferentiating a pancreatic or nonpancreatic cause for hyperamylasemia. 
Leukocytosis  (15,000–20,000  leukocytes/μL)  occurs  frequently. 
Patients with more severe disease may show hemoconcentration with 
hematocrit  values  >44%  and/or  prerenal  azotemia  with  a  blood  urea 
nitrogen (BUN) level >22 mg/dL resulting from loss of plasma into the 
retroperitoneal space and peritoneal cavity.

Hemoconcentration  may  be  the  harbinger  of  more  severe  dis-
ease,  whereas  azotemia  is  a  significant  risk  factor  for  mortality. 
Hyperglycemia  is  common  and  is  due  to  multiple  factors,  including 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2659

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2660

TABLE 348-2  Revised Atlanta Definitions of Morphologic Features of Acute Pancreatitis

DEFINITION

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FEATURES

Types of Acute Pancreatitis

Interstitial pancreatitis Acute inflammation of the pancreatic parenchyma and 
peripancreatic tissues, but without recognizable tissue 
necrosis
Inflammation associated with pancreatic parenchymal 
and/or peripancreatic necrosis

Necrotizing 
pancreatitis

Morphologic Features

Acute pancreatic fluid 
collection

Pancreatic 
pseudocyst

Peripancreatic fluid associated with interstitial 
edematous pancreatitis with no associated 
peripancreatic necrosis. This term applies only to areas 
of peripancreatic fluid seen within the first 4 weeks after 
onset of interstitial edematous pancreatitis and without 
the features of a pseudocyst.

An encapsulated collection of fluid with a well-defined 
inflammatory wall usually outside the pancreas 
with minimal or no necrosis. This entity usually 
occurs >4 weeks after onset of interstitial edematous 
pancreatitis.

Acute necrotic 
collection (ANC)

A collection containing variable amounts of both fluid 
and necrosis associated with necrotizing pancreatitis; 
the necrosis can involve the pancreatic parenchyma 
and/or the peripancreatic tissues.

Walled-off necrosis 
(WON)

A mature, encapsulated collection of pancreatic and/
or peripancreatic necrosis that has developed a 
well-defined inflammatory wall. WON usually occurs 
>4 weeks after onset of acute necrotizing pancreatitis.

Source: Data from P Banks et al: Gut 62:102, 2013.

Pancreatic parenchyma enhancement by IV contrast agent and without 
peripancreatic necrosis

Lack of pancreatic parenchymal enhancement by IV contrast agent and/or presence 
of findings of peripancreatic necrosis (see below—ANC and WON)

Occurs in the setting of interstitial pancreatitis
Homogeneous collection with fluid density
Confined by normal peripancreatic fascial planes
No definable wall encapsulating the collection
Adjacent to pancreas (no intrapancreatic extension)
Well circumscribed, usually round or oval
Homogeneous fluid density
No solid component
Well-defined wall; that is, completely encapsulated
Maturation usually requires >4 weeks after onset of acute pancreatitis; occurs after 
interstitial pancreatitis
Occurs in the setting of acute necrotizing pancreatitis
Heterogeneous and nonliquid density of varying degrees in different locations (some 
appear homogeneous early in their course)
No definable wall encapsulating the collection
Location—intrapancreatic and/or extrapancreatic
Heterogeneous with liquid and nonliquid density with varying degrees of loculations 
(some may appear homogeneous)
Well-defined wall; that is, completely encapsulated
Location—intrapancreatic and/or extrapancreatic
Maturation usually requires >4 weeks after onset of acute necrotizing pancreatitis

decreased  insulin  release,  increased  glucagon  release,  and  increased 
output  of  adrenal  glucocorticoids  and  catecholamines.  Hypocalcemia 
occurs in ~25% of patients, and its pathogenesis is incompletely under-
stood. Although earlier studies suggested that the response of the para-
thyroid gland to a decrease in serum calcium is impaired, subsequent 
observations have failed to confirm this phenomenon. Intraperitoneal 
saponification of calcium by fatty acids in areas of fat necrosis occurs 
occasionally, with large amounts (up to 6.0 g) dissolved or suspended 
in  ascitic  fluid.  Such  “soap  formation”  may  also  be  significant  in 
patients with pancreatitis, mild hypocalcemia, and little or no obvious 
ascites.  Hyperbilirubinemia  (serum  bilirubin  >4.0  mg/dL)  occurs  in 
~10% of patients. However, jaundice is transient, and serum bilirubin 
levels return to normal in 4–7 days. Serum alkaline phosphatase and 
transaminase levels may also be transiently elevated and parallel serum 
bilirubin values. Elevations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) >3× the 
upper limit of normal are strongly associated with a gallstone etiology 
in  patients  with  acute  pancreatitis.  Approximately  5–10%  of  patients 
have hypoxemia (arterial Po2 ≤60 mmHg), which may herald the onset 
of  ARDS.  Finally,  the  electrocardiogram  is  occasionally  abnormal  in 
acute pancreatitis with ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities simulat-
ing myocardial ischemia.

An abdominal ultrasound is recommended in the emergency ward 
as the initial diagnostic imaging modality and is most useful to evaluate 
for gallstones and common bile duct dilation.

The  Revised  Atlanta  Criteria  have  clearly  outlined  the  morpho-
logic  features  of  acute  pancreatitis  on  computed  tomography  (CT) 
scan  as  follows:  (1)  interstitial  pancreatitis,  (2)  necrotizing  pancre-
atitis, (3) acute pancreatic fluid collection, (4) pancreatic pseudocyst, 
(5)  acute  necrotic  collection  (ANC),  and  (6)  walled-off  necrosis 
(WON) (Table 348-2 and Fig. 348-1). Radiologic studies useful in 
the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis are discussed in Chap. 347 and 
listed in Table 347-1.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
Any severe acute pain in the abdomen or back should suggest the pos-
sibility of acute pancreatitis. The diagnosis is established by two of the 
following three criteria: (1) typical abdominal pain in the epigastrium 
that may radiate to the back, (2) threefold or greater elevation in serum 
lipase and/or amylase, and (3) confirmatory findings of acute pancre-
atitis on cross-sectional abdominal imaging. Although not required for 
diagnosis, markers of severity may include hemoconcentration (hema-
tocrit >44%), admission azotemia (BUN >22 mg/dL), SIRS, and signs 
of organ failure (Table 348-3).

The  differential  diagnosis  should  include  the  following  disorders: 
(1)  perforated  viscus,  especially  peptic  ulcer;  (2)  acute  cholecystitis 
and  biliary  colic;  (3)  acute  intestinal  obstruction;  (4)  mesenteric 
vascular occlusion; (5) renal colic; (6) inferior myocardial infarction; 
(7)  dissecting  aortic  aneurysm;  (8)  connective  tissue  disorders  with 
vasculitis;  (9)  pneumonia;  and  (10)  diabetic  ketoacidosis.  It  may  be 
difficult  to  differentiate  acute  cholecystitis  from  acute  pancreatitis, 
because  an  elevated  serum  amylase  may  be  found  in  both  disorders. 
Pain  of  biliary  tract  origin  is  more  right  sided  or  epigastric  than 
periumbilical or left upper quadrant and can be more severe; ileus is 
usually  absent.  Ultrasound  is  helpful  in  establishing  the  diagnosis  of 
cholelithiasis and cholecystitis. Intestinal obstruction due to mechan-
ical  factors  can  be  differentiated  from  pancreatitis  by  the  history  of 
crescendo-decrescendo  pain,  findings  on  abdominal  examination, 
and CT of the abdomen showing changes characteristic of mechanical 
obstruction. Acute mesenteric vascular occlusion is usually suspected 
in  elderly  debilitated  patients  with  leukocytosis,  abdominal  disten-
tion,  and  bloody  diarrhea,  confirmed  by  CT  or  magnetic  resonance 
angiography. Vasculitides secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus 
and polyarteritis nodosa may be confused with pancreatitis, especially 
because pancreatitis may develop as a complication of these diseases. 
Diabetic  ketoacidosis  is  often  accompanied  by  abdominal  pain  and 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2660

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal SystemTABLE 348-3  Severe Acute Pancreatitis
Risk Factors for Severity

•	 Age >60 years
•	 Obesity, BMI >30 kg/m2
•	 Comorbid disease (based on Charlson comorbidity index)

Markers of Severity at Admission or within 24 h

•	 SIRS—defined by presence of 2 or more criteria:

•	 Core temperature <36° or >38°C
•	 Heart rate >90 beats/min
•	 Respirations >20/min or Pco
•	 White blood cell count >12,000/μL, <4000/μL, or 10% bands

2 <32 mmHg

•	 APACHE II (≥8 at 24 h)
•	 Hemoconcentration (hematocrit >44%)
•	 Admission BUN (>22 mg/dL)
•	 BISAP score (≥3 present)
•	 (B) BUN >25 mg/dL
•	 (I) Impaired mental status
•	 (S) SIRS: ≥2 of 4 present
•	 (A) Age >60 years
•	 (P) Pleural effusion

•	 Organ failure (Modified Marshall score) (≥1 present):

•	 Cardiovascular: systolic BP <90 mmHg, heart rate >130 beats/min
•	 Pulmonary: Pao2 <60 mmHg
•	 Renal: serum creatinine >2.0 mg/dL

Markers of Severity during Hospitalization

•	 Persistent organ failure (≥48 h)
•	 Pancreatic or extrapancreatic necrosis

Abbreviations: APACHE II, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II; BISAP, 
Bedside Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis; BMI, body mass index; BP, blood 
pressure; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.

elevated  total  serum  amylase  levels,  thus  closely  mimicking  acute 
pancreatitis;  however,  the  serum  lipase  level  is  often  not  elevated  in 
diabetic ketoacidosis, and pancreas imaging is normal.
 ■ CLINICAL COURSE, DEFINITIONS,  
AND CLASSIFICATIONS
The  Revised  Atlanta  Criteria  define  (1)  phases  of  acute  pancreatitis, 
(2) severity of acute pancreatitis, and (3) radiographic definitions, as 
outlined below.

Phases  of  Acute  Pancreatitis  Two  phases  of  acute  pancreatitis 
have  been  defined,  early  (<2  weeks)  and  late  (>2  weeks),  which  pri-
marily describe the hospital course of the disease. In the early phase of 
acute pancreatitis, which lasts 1–2 weeks, severity is defined by clinical 
parameters  rather  than  morphologic  findings.  Most  patients  exhibit 
SIRS,  and  if  this  persists,  patients  are  predisposed  to  organ  failure. 
Three organ systems should be assessed to define organ failure: respi-
ratory,  cardiovascular,  and  renal.  Organ  failure  is  defined  as  a  score 
of 2 or more for one of these three organ systems using the modified 
Marshall scoring system. Persistent organ failure (>48 h) is the most 
important clinical finding regarding severity of the acute pancreatitis 
episode. Organ failure that affects more than one organ is considered 
multisystem organ failure. CT imaging is usually not needed or recom-
mended during the first 48 h of admission in acute pancreatitis.

The late phase is characterized by a protracted course of illness and 
may  require  imaging  to  evaluate  for  local  complications.  The  critical 
clinical parameter of severity, as in the early phase, is persistent organ 
failure. These patients may require supportive measures such as renal 
dialysis,  ventilator  support,  or  need  for  supplemental  nutrition  via  a 
nasojejunal  or  parenteral  route.  The  radiographic  feature  of  greatest 
importance to recognize in this phase is the development of necrotiz-
ing pancreatitis on CT imaging. Necrosis is associated with prolonged 
hospitalization and, if infected, may require intervention (percutane-
ous, endoscopic, and/or surgical).

2661

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

Severity  of  Acute  Pancreatitis  Three  classes  of  severity  have 
been defined: mild, moderately severe, and severe. Mild acute pancreatitis 
is  without  local  complications  or  organ  failure.  Most  patients  with 
interstitial acute pancreatitis have mild pancreatitis. In mild acute pan-
creatitis, the disease is self-limited and subsides spontaneously, usually 
within 3–7 days after onset. Oral intake can be resumed if the patient 
is  hungry,  has  normal  bowel  function,  and  is  without  nausea  and 
vomiting. Typically, a clear or full liquid diet has been recommended 
for the initial meal; however, a low-fat solid diet is a reasonable choice 
following recovery from mild acute pancreatitis.

Moderately  severe  acute  pancreatitis  is  characterized  by  transient 
organ failure (i.e., it resolves in <48 h) or local or systemic complica-
tions in the absence of persistent organ failure. These patients may or 
may not have necrosis but may develop a local complication such as 
a  fluid  collection  that  requires  a  prolonged  hospitalization  >1  week. 
As  with  mild  acute  pancreatitis,  the  mortality  rate  for  these  patients 
remains low.

Severe acute pancreatitis is characterized by persistent organ failure 
(>48 h), involving one or more organs. A CT scan or magnetic reso-
nance  imaging  (MRI)  should  be  obtained  to  assess  for  necrosis  and/
or complications. If a local complication is encountered, management 
is  dictated  by  clinical  symptoms,  evidence  of  infection,  the  maturity 
of  fluid  collection,  and  clinical  stability  of  the  patient.  Prophylactic 
antibiotics are no longer recommended for severe acute pancreatitis.
Imaging  in  Acute  Pancreatitis  Two  types  of  pancreatitis  are 
recognized on imaging as interstitial or necrotizing based on pancreatic 
perfusion.  CT  imaging  with  IV  contrast  is  best  evaluated  3–5  days 
into  hospitalization  if  patients  are  not  responding  to  supportive  care 
to  assess  for  local  complications  such  as  necrosis.  Recent  studies 
report  the  overutilization  of  CT  imaging  within  72  h  for  acute  pan-
creatitis, including those with a mild severity of disease. The Revised 
Atlanta  Criteria  also  outline  the  terminology  for  local  complications 
and  fluid  collections  along  with  a  CT  imaging  template  to  guide 
reporting of findings. Local morphologic features are summarized in 
Table  348-2.  Interstitial  pancreatitis  occurs  in  90–95%  of  admissions 
for  acute  pancreatitis  and  is  characterized  by  diffuse  gland  enlarge-
ment,  homogenous  contrast  enhancement,  and  mild  inflammatory 
changes or peripancreatic stranding. Symptoms generally resolve with 
a week of hospitalization. Necrotizing pancreatitis occurs in 5–10% of 
acute  pancreatitis  admissions  and  may  not  evolve  until  several  days 
of  hospitalization.  It  is  characterized  by  lack  of  pancreatic  parenchy-
mal  enhancement  by  intravenous  contrast  agent  and/or  presence  of 
findings of peripancreatic necrosis. The natural history of pancreatic 
and  peripancreatic  necrosis  is  variable  because  it  may  remain  solid 
or liquefy, remain sterile or become infected, and persist or disappear 
over time. Importantly, those with only extrapancreatic necrosis have 
a  more  favorable  prognosis  than  patients  with  pancreatic  necrosis 
(with  or  without  extrapancreatic  necrosis).  CT  identification  of  local 
complications,  particularly  necrosis,  is  critical  in  patients  who  are 
not  responding  to  therapy  because  patients  with  infected  and  sterile 
necrosis are at greatest risk of mortality (Figs. 348-1 and 348-2). The 
median prevalence of organ failure is >50% in necrotizing pancreatitis, 
and is perhaps slightly higher in infected versus sterile necrosis. With 
single-organ  system  failure,  the  mortality  is  3–10%,  but  increases  to 
nearly 50% with multiorgan failure.
 ■ ACUTE PANCREATITIS MANAGEMENT
The  management  of  patients  with  acute  pancreatitis  from  the  time 
of  diagnosis  in  the  emergency  ward  to  hospital  discharge  is  briefly 
reviewed, highlighting salient features based on severity and complica-
tions. It is important to recognize that 85–90% of cases of acute pancre-
atitis are self-limited and subside spontaneously, usually within 3–7 days 
after onset, and do not exhibit organ failure or local complications.

The  management  of  acute  pancreatitis  begins  in  the  emergency 
ward. After a diagnosis has been confirmed, early and aggressive fluid 
resuscitation is critical. Additionally, intravenous analgesics are admin-
istered, severity is assessed, and a search for etiologies that may impact 
acute  care  is  begun.  Patients  who  do  not  respond  to  aggressive  fluid 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2661

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2662

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 348-1  Evolution of changes of acute necrotizing pancreatitis on computed tomography (CT). A. CT scan of the abdomen without IV contrast performed on admission 
for a patient with acute gallstone pancreatitis, showing mild peripancreatic stranding. B. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen performed on the same patient 1 
week after admission shows extensive intrapancreatic necrosis, evidenced by the lack of contrast enhancement in the pancreatic body with very minimal enhancement 
noted at the distal most aspect of the pancreatic tail. C. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen performed on the same patient 2 weeks after admission demonstrates 
a semiorganized, heterogeneous fluid collection, referred to as an acute necrotic collection. On this image, a small area of viable pancreatic parenchyma is seen at the tail 
of the pancreas. D. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen performed on the same patient 5 weeks after admission demonstrates a well-encapsulated fluid collection, 
essentially replacing the pancreas, referred to as walled-off necrosis. 

resuscitation in the emergency ward should be considered for admis-
sion to a step-down or intensive care unit for aggressive fluid resuscita-
tion, hemodynamic monitoring, and management of any organ failure.
Fluid Resuscitation and Monitoring Response to Therapy  The 
most important treatment intervention for acute pancreatitis is early, 
aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation to prevent systemic complica-
tions from the secondary systemic inflammatory response. The patient 
is  initially  made  NPO  to  minimize  nutrient-induced  stimulation  of 

the  pancreas  and  is  given  intravenous  narcotic  analgesics  to  control 
abdominal pain and supplemental oxygen (as needed).

Intravenous fluids of lactated Ringer’s or normal saline are initially 
bolused  at  15–20  mL/kg  (1050–1400  mL),  followed  by  2–3  mL/kg 
per  hour  (200–250  mL/h),  to  maintain  urine  output  >0.5  mL/kg  per 
hour. Serial bedside evaluations are required every 6–8 h to assess vital 
signs, oxygen saturation, and change in physical examination to opti-
mize fluid resuscitation. Lactated Ringer’s solution has been shown to 

A

B

C

FIGURE  348-2  Imaging  features  of  a  pancreaticopleural  fistula  secondary  to  acute  pancreatitis.  A.  Pancreaticopleural  fistula:  pancreatic  duct  leak  on  endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography. Pancreatic duct leak (arrow) demonstrated at the time of retrograde pancreatogram in a patient with exacerbation of alcohol-
induced acute pancreatitis. B. Pancreaticopleural fistula: computed tomography (CT) scan. Contrast-enhanced CT scan (coronal view) with arrows showing fistula tract 
from pancreatic duct disruption in the pancreatic pleural fistula. C. Pancreaticopleural fistula: chest x-ray. Large pleural effusion in the left hemithorax from a disrupted 
pancreatic duct. Analysis of pleural fluid revealed elevated amylase concentration. (Courtesy of Dr. K.J. Mortele, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2662

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemdecrease systemic inflammation (lower C-reactive protein levels from 
admission)  and  may  be  a  better  crystalloid  than  normal  saline.  A 
targeted  resuscitation  strategy  with  measurement  of  hematocrit  and 
BUN every 8–12 h is recommended to ensure adequacy of fluid resus-
citation and monitor response to therapy, noting that a less aggressive 
resuscitation strategy may be needed in milder forms of pancreatitis. 
A rising BUN during hospitalization is not only associated with inade-
quate hydration but also higher in-hospital mortality.

A decrease in hematocrit and BUN during the first 12–24 h is strong 
evidence that sufficient fluids are being administered. Serial measure-
ments  and  bedside  assessment  for  fluid  overload  are  continued,  and 
fluid  rates  are  maintained  at  the  current  rate.  Adjustments  in  fluid 
resuscitation may be required in patients with cardiac, pulmonary, or 
renal disease. A rise in hematocrit or BUN during serial measurement 
should be treated with a repeat volume challenge with a 2-L crystalloid 
bolus followed by increasing the fluid rate by 1.5 mg/kg per hour. If the 
BUN or hematocrit fails to respond (i.e., remains elevated or does not 
decrease) to this bolus challenge and increase in fluid rate, consider-
ation of transfer to an intensive care unit is strongly recommended for 
hemodynamic monitoring.

Assessment of Severity and Hospital Triage  Severity of acute 
pancreatitis should be determined in the emergency ward to assist in 
patient triage to a regular hospital ward or step-down unit or direct 
admission  to  an  intensive  care  unit.  The  Bedside  Index  of  Severity 
in  Acute  Pancreatitis  (BISAP)  incorporates  five  clinical  and  labo-
ratory  parameters  obtained  within  the  first  24  h  of  hospitalization 
(Table  348-3)—BUN  >25  mg/dL,  impaired  mental  status  (Glasgow 
coma  scale  score  <15),  SIRS,  age  >60  years,  and  pleural  effusion  on 
radiography—that  can  be  useful  in  assessing  severity.  The  presence 
of  three  or  more  of  these  factors  was  associated  with  substantially 
increased risk for in-hospital mortality among patients with acute pan-
creatitis. In addition, an elevated hematocrit >44% and admission BUN 
>22  mg/dL  are  also  associated  with  more  severe  acute  pancreatitis. 
Incorporating these indices with the overall patient response to initial 
fluid  resuscitation  in  the  emergency  ward  can  be  useful  at  triaging 
patients to the appropriate hospital acute care setting.

In  general,  patients  with  lower  BISAP  scores,  hematocrits,  and 
admission  BUNs  tend  to  respond  to  initial  management  and  can  be 
safely  triaged  to  a  regular  hospital  ward  for  ongoing  care.  If  SIRS  is 
not present at 24 h, the patient is unlikely to develop organ failure or 
necrosis. Therefore, patients with persistent SIRS at 24 h or underly-
ing  comorbid  illnesses  (e.g.,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease, 
congestive  heart  failure)  should  be  considered  for  a  step-down  unit 
setting  if  available.  Patients  with  higher  BISAP  scores  and  elevations 
in hematocrit and admission BUN who do not respond to initial fluid 
resuscitation and exhibit evidence of respiratory failure, hypotension, 
or organ failure should be considered for direct admission to an inten-
sive care unit.

Special  Considerations  Based  on  Etiology  A  careful  history, 
review of medications, selected laboratory studies (liver profile, serum 
triglycerides,  serum  calcium),  and  an  abdominal  ultrasound  are  rec-
ommended  in  the  emergency  ward  to  assess  for  etiologies  that  may 
impact  acute  management.  An  abdominal  ultrasound  is  the  initial 
imaging modality of choice and will evaluate the gallbladder, common 
bile duct, and pancreatic head.
GALLSTONE  PANCREATITIS  Patients  with  evidence  of  ascending 
cholangitis  (rising  white  blood  cell  count,  increasing  liver  enzymes) 
should undergo ERCP within 24–48 h of admission. Patients with gall-
stone pancreatitis are at increased risk of recurrence, and consideration 
should  be  given  to  performing  a  cholecystectomy  during  the  same 
admission in mild acute pancreatitis. An alternative for patients who 
are not surgical candidates would be to perform an endoscopic biliary 
sphincterotomy before discharge.
HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA  Serum triglycerides >1000 mg/dL are asso-
ciated with acute pancreatitis. Initial therapy should focus on treatment 
of  hyperglycemia  with  intravenous  insulin,  which  often  corrects  the 
hypertriglyceridemia.  Adjunct  therapies  may  also  include  heparin  or 

2663

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

plasmapheresis,  but  there  is  no  compelling  evidence  these  measures 
improve  clinical  outcomes.  Outpatient  therapies  include  control  of 
diabetes if present, administration of lipid-lowering agents, weight loss, 
and avoidance of drugs that elevate lipid levels.

Other  potential  etiologies  that  may  impact  acute  hospital  care 
include hypercalcemia and post-ERCP pancreatitis. Treatment of hyper-
parathyroidism or malignancy is effective at reducing serum calcium. 
Pancreatic  duct  stenting  and  rectal  indomethacin  administration  are 
effective at decreasing pancreatitis after ERCP. Drugs that cause pan-
creatitis should be discontinued. Multiple drugs have been implicated, 
but only about 30 have been rechallenged (Class 1A) and found to be 
causative.

Nutritional Therapy  A low-fat solid diet can be administered to 
subjects with mild acute pancreatitis once they are able to eat. Enteral 
nutrition  should  be  considered  2–3  days  after  admission  in  subjects 
with  more  severe  pancreatitis  instead  of  total  parenteral  nutrition 
(TPN). Enteral feeding maintains gut barrier integrity, limits bacterial 
translocation, is less expensive, and has fewer complications than TPN. 
Gastric feeding is safe; the benefits of nasojejunal enteral feeding over 
gastric feeding remains under investigation.

Management of Local Complications (Table 348-4)  Patients 
exhibiting signs of clinical deterioration despite aggressive fluid resus-
citation  and  hemodynamic  monitoring  should  be  assessed  for  local 
complications,  which  may  include  necrosis,  pseudocyst  formation, 
pancreas  duct  disruption,  peripancreatic  vascular  complications, 
and  extrapancreatic  infections.  A  multidisciplinary  team  approach 
is  recommended,  including  gastroenterology,  surgery,  interventional 
radiology, and intensive care specialists, and consideration should also 
be made for transfer to a tertiary pancreas center of excellence.

NECROSIS  The management of necrosis requires a multidisciplinary 
team  approach.  Percutaneous  fine-needle  aspiration  of  necrosis  with 
Gram  stain  and  culture  was  previously  performed  to  evaluate  for 
infected pancreatic necrosis in those with sustained leukocytosis, fever, 
or  organ  failure.  However,  the  current  use  of  this  technique  varies 
depending  on  institutional  preference,  with  many  abandoning  this 
diagnostic test to avoid potentially contaminating an otherwise sterile 
collection, particularly when culture results will not lead to a clinical 
decision  to  de-escalate  antimicrobial  therapy.  Even  though  there  is 
currently no role for prophylactic antibiotics in necrotizing pancreatitis, 
empiric antibiotics should be considered in those with clinical decom-
pensation.  Prophylactic  antibiotics  do  not  lead  to  improved  survival 
and may promote the development of opportunistic fungal infections. 
Repeated  CT  or  MRI  imaging  should  also  be  considered  with  any 
change in clinical course to monitor for complications (e.g., thrombo-
ses, hemorrhage, abdominal compartment syndrome).

In  general,  sterile  necrosis  is  most  often  managed  conservatively 
unless  complications  arise.  Once  a  diagnosis  of  infected  necrosis  is 
established and an organism identified, targeted antibiotics should be 
instituted.  Pancreatic  drainage  and/or  debridement  (necrosectomy) 
should  be  considered  for  definitive  management  of  infected  necrosis, 
but clinical decisions are ultimately influenced by the clinical response 
since almost two-thirds of patients respond to antibiotic treatment with 
or  without  percutaneous  drainage.  Symptomatic  local  complications 
as outlined in the Revised Atlanta Criteria typically require definitive 
therapy.

A step-up approach (percutaneous or endoscopic transgastric/trans-
duodenal  drainage  followed,  if  necessary,  by  surgical  necrosectomy) 
has been successfully reported by some pancreatic centers. One-third 
of the patients successfully treated with the step-up approach did not 
require major abdominal surgery. A randomized trial reported advan-
tages to an initial endoscopic approach compared to an initial surgical 
necrosectomy  approach  in  select  patients  requiring  intervention  for 
symptomatic WON. Taken together, a more conservative approach to 
the management of infected pancreatic necrosis has evolved under the 
close supervision of a multidisciplinary team. If conservative therapy 
can be safely implemented, it is recommended to do so for 4–6 weeks 
to allow the pancreatic collections to either resolve or evolve to develop 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2663

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2664

TABLE 348-4  Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
Local

Pancreatic/peripancreatic fluid collections:
  Acute necrotic collection (sterile or infected)
  Walled-off necrosis (sterile or infected)
  Pancreatic pseudocyst
Disruption of main pancreatic duct or secondary branches
Pancreatic ascites
Chylous ascites (secondary to disruption of lymphatic ducts)
Involvement of contiguous organs by necrotizing pancreatitis (e.g., colon 
perforation)
Splanchnic thromboses (splenic vein, superior mesenteric vein,  
and/or portal vein)
Bowel infarction/perforation
Gastric outlet obstruction
Biliary obstruction (jaundice)

Systemic

Pulmonary
  Pleural effusion
  Atelectasis
  Mediastinal fluid
  Pneumonitis
  Acute respiratory distress syndrome
  Hypoxemia (unrecognized)
Cardiovascular
  Hypotension
  Hypovolemia

 Nonspecific ST-T changes in electrocardiogram simulating myocardial 
infarction

  Pericardial effusion
Hematologic
  Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
  Peptic ulcer disease
  Erosive gastritis
  Hemorrhagic pancreatic necrosis with erosion into major blood vessels
  Variceal hemorrhage secondary to splanchnic thrombosis
Renal
  Oliguria (<300 mL/d)
  Azotemia
  Renal artery and/or renal vein thrombosis
  Acute tubular necrosis
Metabolic
  Hyperglycemia
  Hypertriglyceridemia
  Hypocalcemia
  Encephalopathy
  Sudden blindness (Purtscher’s retinopathy)
Central nervous system
  Psychosis
  Fat emboli
Fat necrosis
  Subcutaneous tissues (erythematous nodules)
  Bone
  Miscellaneous (mediastinum, pleura, nervous system)

a more organized boundary (i.e., to “wall off ”) so that surgical or endo-
scopic intervention is generally safer and more effective.
PSEUDOCYST  The  incidence  of  pseudocyst  is  low,  and  most  acute 
collections  resolve  over  time.  Less  than  10%  of  patients  have  persis-
tent fluid collections after 4 weeks that would meet the definition of 
a pseudocyst. Only symptomatic collections require intervention with 
endoscopic or surgical drainage.

PANCREATIC  DUCT  DISRUPTION  Pancreatic  duct  disruption  may 
present with symptoms of increasing abdominal pain or shortness of 
breath in the setting of an enlarging fluid collection resulting in pan-
creatic ascites (ascitic fluid has high amylase level). Diagnosis can be 
confirmed on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
or ERCP. Placement of a bridging pancreatic stent for at least 6 weeks 
is >90% effective at resolving the leak with or without parenteral nutri-
tion and octreotide. Nonbridging stents are less effective (25–50%) but 
should be considered with parenteral nutrition and octreotide prior to 
surgical intervention.
PERIVASCULAR  COMPLICATIONS  Perivascular  complications  may 
include  splenic  vein  thrombosis  with  gastric  varices  and  pseudoaneu-
rysms, as well as portal and superior mesenteric vein thromboses. Gastric 
varices rarely bleed but can be life-threatening. Similarly, life-threatening 
bleeding  from  a  ruptured  pseudoaneurysm  can  be  diagnosed  and 
treated with mesenteric angiography and embolization.
EXTRAPANCREATIC INFECTIONS  Hospital-acquired  infections  occur 
in up to 20% of patients with acute pancreatitis. Patients should be con-
tinually  monitored  for  the  development  of  pneumonia,  urinary  tract 
infection, and line infection. Continued culturing of urine, monitoring 
of chest x-rays, and routine changing of intravenous lines are important 
during hospitalization.

Follow-Up Care  Hospitalizations for moderately severe and severe 
acute pancreatitis can be prolonged and last weeks to months and often 
involve periods of intensive care unit admission and outpatient rehabil-
itation or subacute nursing care. Follow-up evaluation should assess for 
development  of  diabetes,  exocrine  pancreatic  insufficiency,  recurrent 
cholangitis,  or  infected  fluid  collections.  As  mentioned  previously, 
cholecystectomy should be performed during the initial hospitalization 
for acute gallstone pancreatitis with mild clinical severity. For patients 
with necrotizing gallstone pancreatitis, the timing of cholecystectomy 
needs to be individualized.

 ■ RECURRENT ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Approximately 25% of patients who have had an attack of acute pan-
creatitis  have  a  recurrence.  The  two  most  common  etiologic  factors 
are  alcohol  and  cholelithiasis.  In  patients  with  recurrent  pancreatitis 
without an obvious cause, the differential diagnosis should encompass 
occult  biliary  tract  disease,  including  microlithiasis,  hypertriglyceri-
demia,  pancreatic  cancer,  and  hereditary  pancreatitis  (Table  348-1). 
In one series of 31 patients diagnosed initially as having idiopathic or 
recurrent acute pancreatitis, 23 were found to have occult gallstone dis-
ease. Thus, approximately two-thirds of patients with recurrent acute 
pancreatitis  without  an  obvious  cause  actually  have  occult  gallstone 
disease due to microlithiasis. Genetic defects as in hereditary pancre-
atitis and cystic fibrosis mutations can result in recurrent pancreatitis. 
Other diseases of the biliary tree and pancreatic ducts that can cause 
acute pancreatitis include choledochocele; ampullary tumors; pancreas 
divisum;  and  pancreatic  duct  stones,  stricture,  and  tumor.  Approx-
imately  2–4%  of  patients  with  pancreatic  cancer  present  with  acute 
pancreatitis.
 ■ PANCREATITIS IN PATIENTS WITH AIDS
The incidence of acute pancreatitis is theoretically increased in patients 
with AIDS for two reasons: (1) the high incidence of infections involv-
ing the pancreas such as infections with cytomegalovirus, Cryptospo-
ridium, and the Mycobacterium avium complex; and (2) the frequent 
use by patients with AIDS of medications such as pentamidine, trime-
thoprim-sulfamethoxazole,  and  protease  inhibitors.  The  incidence 
has been markedly reduced due to advances in therapy, including the 
disuse of didanosine (Chap. 202).

CHRONIC PANCREATITIS AND EXOCRINE 
PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY
 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Chronic pancreatitis is a disease process characterized by irreversible 
damage  to  the  pancreas,  in  contrast  to  the  reversible  changes  noted 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2664

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal System 
in  acute  pancreatitis  (Table  348-4).  The  events  that  initiate  and  then 
perpetuate  the  inflammatory  process  in  the  pancreas  are  becoming 
more  clearly  understood.  Irrespective  of  the  mechanism  of  injury, 
it  is  becoming  apparent  that  stellate  cell  activation  leads  to  cytokine 
expression  and  production  of  extracellular  matrix  proteins  that  con-
tribute to acute and chronic inflammation and collagen deposition in 
the  pancreas.  This  condition  is  defined  by  the  presence  of  histologic 
abnormalities, including chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and progres-
sive  destruction  (atrophy)  of  both  exocrine  and  endocrine  tissue.  A 
number  of  etiologies  have  been  associated  with  chronic  pancreatitis  
resulting in the cardinal manifestations of the disease such as abdominal 
pain,  steatorrhea,  weight  loss,  diabetes  mellitus,  and,  less  commonly, 
pancreatic cancer (Table 348-5).

Even in individuals in whom alcohol is believed to be the primary 
cause of chronic pancreatitis, other factors are likely required for the 
development  and  progression  of  disease,  which  explains  why  not  all 
heavy consumers of alcohol develop pancreatic disease. There is also a 
strong association between smoking and chronic pancreatitis. Cigarette 
smoke leads to an increased susceptibility to pancreatic autodigestion 
and predisposes to dysregulation of duct cell CFTR function. Smoking 
is an independent, dose-dependent risk factor for chronic pancreatitis 
and recurrent acute pancreatitis. Both continued alcohol and smoking 
exposure are associated with disease progression, including pancreatic 
fibrosis and calcifications.

Characterization of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) has added insight 
into the underlying cellular responses behind development of chronic 
pancreatitis. Specifically, PSCs are believed to play a role in maintaining 

TABLE 348-5  Classification of Chronic Pancreatitis: The TIGAR-O 
System
Toxic-metabolic

Alcoholic
Tobacco smoking
Hypercalcemia
Hyperlipidemia (hypertriglyceridemia)
Chronic renal failure

Idiopathic

Early onset
Late onset
Tropical

Genetic

Cationic trypsinogen (PRSS1)
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR)a
Calcium-sensing receptor (CASR)a
Chymotrypsin C gene (CTRC)a
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor gene (SPINK1)a

Autoimmune

Type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis (associated with IgG4-related disease)
Type 2 autoimmune pancreatitis (idiopathic duct-centric chronic pancreatitis)

Recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis

Postnecrotic (severe acute pancreatitis)
Recurrent acute pancreatitis
Vascular diseases/ischemia
Radiation induced

Obstructive

Pancreas divisuma
Duct obstruction (e.g., tumor)
Preampullary duodenal wall cysts
Posttraumatic pancreatic duct strictures

aThese conditions are believed to be disease modifiers that require additional 
factors to cause chronic pancreatitis.
Abbreviations: TIGAR-O, toxic-metabolic, idiopathic, genetic, autoimmune, recurrent 
and severe acute pancreatitis, obstructive.

2665

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

normal pancreatic architecture that shifts toward fibrogenesis in those 
who  develop  chronic  pancreatitis.  It  is  believed  that  alcohol  or  addi-
tional stimuli lead to matrix metalloproteinase–mediated destruction 
of  normal  collagen  in  pancreatic  parenchyma,  which  later  allows  for 
pancreatic  remodeling.  Proinflammatory  cytokines,  tumor  necrosis 
factor α (TNF-α), interleukin 1 (IL-1), and interleukin 6 (IL-6), as well 
as  oxidant  complexes,  can  induce  PSC  activity  with  subsequent  new 
collagen synthesis. In addition to being stimulated by cytokines, oxi-
dants, or growth factors, PSCs also possess transforming growth factor 
β  (TGF-β)–mediated  self-activating  autocrine  pathways  that  may 
explain disease progression in chronic pancreatitis even after removal 
of noxious stimuli.

 ■ ETIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Among  adults  in  the  United  States,  alcoholism  is  the  most  common 
cause of clinically apparent chronic pancreatitis, whereas cystic fibrosis 
is  the  most  frequent  cause  in  children.  As  many  as  25%  of  adults  in 
the  United  States  with  chronic  pancreatitis  have  the  idiopathic  form, 
including  a  subset  of  patients  who  do  not  develop  clinical  manifes-
tations  until  later  in  life  (idiopathic  late-onset  chronic  pancreatitis). 
Recent  investigations  have  indicated  that  up  to  15%  of  patients  with 
chronic pancreatitis previously classified as having idiopathic pancre-
atitis may have an underlying genetic predisposition (Table 348-5).

The  prototypical  genetic  defect  was  identified  in  the  cationic 
trypsinogen  gene  (PRSS1)  by  studying  several  large  families  with 
chronic pancreatitis. Additional pathogenic and nonpathogenic muta-
tions have been identified in this gene. The defect prevents the destruc-
tion of prematurely activated trypsin and allows it to be resistant to the 
intracellular  protective  effect  of  trypsin  inhibitor.  It  is  hypothesized 
that  this  continual  activation  of  digestive  enzymes  within  the  gland 
leads to acute injury and, finally, chronic pancreatitis. Since the initial 
discovery of the PRSS1 mutation defect, other genetic disease modifiers 
have been identified (Table 348-5).

The  CFTR  gene  functions  as  a  cyclic  AMP–regulated  chloride 
channel.  In  patients  with  cystic  fibrosis,  the  high  concentration  of 
macromolecules  can  block  the  pancreatic  ducts.  It  must  be  appreci-
ated, however, that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in relationship 
to  the  CFTR  gene  defect.  More  than  1700  putative  mutations  of  the 
CFTR gene have been identified. Attempts to elucidate the relationship 
between the genotype and pancreatic manifestations have been ham-
pered  by  the  large  number  and  different  classes  of  CFTR  mutations. 
The ability to detect CFTR mutations has led to the recognition that 
the clinical spectrum of the disease is broader than previously thought. 
Two  studies  have  clarified  the  association  between  mutations  of  the 
CFTR gene and another monosymptomatic form of cystic fibrosis (i.e., 
chronic  pancreatitis).  It  is  estimated  that  in  patients  with  idiopathic 
pancreatitis, the frequency of a single CFTR mutation is 11 times the 
expected frequency and the frequency of two mutant alleles is 80 times 
the expected frequency. In these studies, patients were adults when the 
diagnosis of pancreatitis was made; none had any clinical evidence of 
pulmonary disease, and sweat test results were not diagnostic of cystic 
fibrosis. The prevalence of such mutations is unclear, and further stud-
ies are needed. In addition, the therapeutic and prognostic implication 
of these findings with respect to managing pancreatitis remains to be 
determined. CFTR mutations are common in the general population, 
so it is unclear whether the CFTR mutation alone can lead to pancre-
atitis as an autosomal recessive disease. A study evaluated 39 patients 
with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis to assess the risk associated with 
these mutations. Patients with two CFTR mutations (compound hete-
rozygotes)  demonstrated  CFTR  function  at  a  level  between  that  seen 
in typical cystic fibrosis and cystic fibrosis carriers and had a fortyfold 
increased risk of pancreatitis. The presence of a separate genetic muta-
tion (N34S SPINK1) increased the risk twentyfold. A combination of 
two CFTR mutations and an N34S SPINK1 mutation increased the risk 
of pancreatitis 900-fold. Knowledge of the genetic defects and down-
stream alterations in protein expression has led to the development of 
novel therapies in children with cystic fibrosis that potentiate the CFTR 
channel, resulting in improvement in lung function, quality of life, and 
weight  gain.  Some  studies  have  shown  that  use  of  CFTR  modulators 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2665

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2666

TABLE 348-6  Comparison of the Autoimmune Pancreatitis (AIP) 
Subtypes

Age at diagnosis, mean
Male sex
Serum IgG4 elevation
Other organ involvement
Histologic findings:
Lymphoplasmacytic
Infiltration
Periductal inflammation
Storiform fibrosis
Obliterative phlebitis
Granulocytic epithelial
lesion (GEL)
IgG4 tissue staining

Response to steroids
Risk for relapse
Associated with IgG4-RD

TYPE 1 AIP
Seventh decade
75%
~66%
50%

TYPE 2 AIP
Fifth decade
50%
~25%
Noa

++

++
++
++
–

++

++
+
+
+++

Abundant
(≥10 cells/hpf)
~100%
High (20–60%)
Yes

Scant
(<10 cells/hpf)
~100%
Low (<10%)
No

aInflammatory bowel disease is seen in ~10–20% of patients with idiopathic duct-
centric chronic pancreatitis but may also occur in type 1 AIP.
Abbreviation: IgG4-RD, IgG4-related disease.
Source: Reproduced with permission from PA Hart: Reviews in basic and clinical 
gastroenterology and hepatology. Gastroenterology 149:39, 2015.

may reduce the frequency of acute pancreatitis in heterozygous carri-
ers. Table 348-5 lists other recognized causes of chronic pancreatitis.
 ■ AUTOIMMUNE PANCREATITIS (TABLE 348-6)
Autoimmune  pancreatitis  (AIP)  refers  to  a  form  of  chronic  pancre-
atitis  with  distinct  histopathology  and  several  unique  differences  in 
the clinical phenotype. Currently, two subtypes of AIP are recognized, 
type  1  AIP  and  idiopathic  duct-centric  chronic  pancreatitis  (IDCP, 
also referred to as type 2 AIP). Type 1 AIP is identified as the pancre-
atic  manifestation  of  a  multiorgan  syndrome  currently  referred  to  as 
IgG4-related  disease  (Chap.  368).  The  characteristic  histopathologic 
findings of type 1 AIP include lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, storiform 
fibrosis,  and  abundant  IgG4  cells.  IDCP  is  histologically  defined  by 
the  presence  of  granulocytic  infiltration  of  the  duct  wall  (termed  a 
granulocytic  epithelial  lesion  [GEL])  but  without  IgG4-positive  cells. 
Type  1  AIP  is  often  associated  with  involvement  of  other  organs  in 
the setting of IgG4-related disease, including bilateral submandibular 
gland enlargement, characteristic renal lesions, retroperitoneal fibrosis, 
and stricturing of the suprapancreatic biliary tree. In contrast, IDCP is 

a pancreas-specific disorder that is associated with inflammatory bowel 
disease in ~10% of patients. AIP is not a common cause of idiopathic 
recurrent acute pancreatitis.

Jaundice, weight loss, and new-onset diabetes are the most common 
presenting symptoms. Elevated serum IgG4 levels are supportive of the 
diagnosis (elevated in two-thirds of patients with type 1 AIP) but have 
a low positive predictive value when used in isolation of other clinical 
findings.  CT  imaging  demonstrates  abnormalities  in  the  majority  of 
patients with either diffuse or focal enlargement during active disease, 
unless the gland is atrophic due to previous disease (Fig. 348-3). The 
presence  of  an  inflammatory  rim,  termed  a  capsule  sign,  is  highly 
specific (but not sensitive) for AIP. ERCP or MRCP reveals strictures 
in the bile duct in more than one-third of patients with AIP, including 
some  patients  with  isolated  intrahepatic  bile  duct  strictures  (type  1 
AIP  only),  which  can  mimic  primary  sclerosing  cholangitis,  and  is 
referred  to  as  IgG4-related  sclerosing  cholangitis  (previously  termed 
IgG4-associated cholangitis).

The  Mayo  Clinic  HISORt  criteria  provide  a  helpful  mnemonic 
to  remember  the  key  diagnostic  features  of  this  disease,  including 
(1)  histology;  (2) imaging;  (3) serology  (elevated  serum  IgG4  levels); 
(4)  other  organ  involvement;  and  (5)  response  to  glucocorticoid 
therapy.  These  diagnostic  criteria  have  been  harmonized  with  those 
from other countries to develop the International Consensus Diagnos-
tic Criteria for AIP, which are the most widely utilized criteria. Gluco-
corticoids have shown efficacy in alleviating symptoms, decreasing the 
size of the pancreas, and reversing histopathologic features in patients 
with  AIP.  Patients  typically  respond  dramatically  to  glucocorticoid 
therapy within a 2- to 4-week period. Prednisone is usually adminis-
tered at an initial dose of 40 mg/d for 4 weeks followed by a taper of the 
daily dosage by 5 mg per week based on monitoring of clinical param-
eters. Relief of symptoms, liver biochemistries, and abnormal imaging 
of  the  pancreas  and  bile  ducts  are  followed  to  assess  for  treatment 
response.  A  poor  response  to  glucocorticoids  should  raise  suspicion 
of  an  alternate  diagnosis,  such  as  pancreatic  cancer.  A  recent  multi-
center international study examined >1000 patients with AIP. Clinical 
remission was achieved in 99% of type 1 AIP and 92% of type 2 AIP  
patients with steroids. However, disease relapse occurred in 31 and 9% 
of  patients  with  type  1  and  type  2  AIP,  respectively.  Patients  with 
multiple  relapses  may  be  managed  with  an  immunomodulator  (e.g., 
azathioprine,  6-mercaptopurine,  or  mycophenolate  mofetil)  or  B-cell 
depletion therapy (e.g., rituximab). The appearance of interval cancers 
following a diagnosis of AIP is uncommon.

Clinical Features of Chronic Pancreatitis  Patients with chronic 
pancreatitis primarily seek medical attention due to abdominal pain or 
symptoms  of  maldigestion.  The  abdominal  pain  may  be  quite  vari-
able in location, severity, and frequency. The pain can be constant or 

A

B

FIGURE 348-3  Imaging features of the pancreatic parenchyma in a patient with type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis on computed tomography (CT). A. Contrast-enhanced CT 
scan of the abdomen demonstrates diffuse pancreatic enlargement and a hypoechoic rim (capsule sign) in a patient who presented with jaundice. The serum IgG4 level 
was elevated to 942 mg/dL (reference range 4–86 mg/dL), so the patient was diagnosed with definitive type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis. B. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the 
abdomen following a treatment course with high-dose steroids demonstrates return to normal size of the pancreas, reappearance of normal lobulations along the margin, 
and absence of the hypoechoic rim. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2666

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systemintermittent with pain-free intervals. Eating may exacerbate the pain, 
leading to a fear of eating with consequent weight loss. The spectrum of 
abdominal pain ranges from mild to quite severe, with narcotic depen-
dence  as  a  frequent  consequence.  There  is  often  a  disparity  between 
the  reported  severity  of  abdominal  pain  and  the  physical  findings, 
which  primarily  consist  of  nonfocal  abdominal  tenderness.  Patients 
with  chronic  abdominal  pain  may  or  may  not  experience  symptoms 
of maldigestion, such as chronic diarrhea, steatorrhea, and/or weight 
loss.  Fat-soluble  vitamin  deficiencies  are  increasingly  recognized. 
Importantly, there is an exceedingly high prevalence of metabolic bone 
disease  in  chronic  pancreatitis,  with  ~65%  of  patients  having  either 
osteopenia  or  osteoporosis.  Patients  with  chronic  pancreatitis  have 
impaired  quality  of  life  and  develop  significant  morbidity,  requiring 
frequent use of health care resources.

The diagnosis of early or mild chronic pancreatitis can be challeng-
ing because there is no accurate biomarker for the disease. In contrast 
to  acute  pancreatitis,  the  serum  amylase  and  lipase  levels  are  usually 
not strikingly elevated in chronic pancreatitis. Rather, low serum pan-
creatic enzyme levels are moderately specific for a diagnosis of chronic 
pancreatitis but have poor sensitivity. Elevation of serum bilirubin and 
alkaline phosphatase may indicate cholestasis secondary to common 
bile  duct  stricture  caused  by  chronic  inflammation  or  fibrosis.  The 
cumulative  prevalence  of  exocrine  pancreatic  insufficiency  is  >80%. 
The presence of overt steatorrhea in a patient with chronic pancreati-
tis  is  highly  suggestive  of  this  complication.  However,  in  those  with 
milder symptoms, additional testing, such as a random fecal elastase-1 
level  (on  a  formed  stool  specimen)  may  be  needed  to  confirm  the 
diagnosis  of  exocrine  pancreatic  insufficiency.  The  radiographic 
evaluation of a patient with suspected chronic pancreatitis usually pro-
ceeds from a noninvasive to more invasive approach. Abdominal CT 

imaging (Fig. 348-4) is the initial modality of choice, followed by MRI, 
endoscopic ultrasound, and pancreas function testing. In addition to 
excluding a pseudocyst and pancreatic cancer, CT imaging may show 
calcifications, dilated pancreatic or biliary ducts, or an atrophic pan-
creas. Although abdominal CT scanning and MRCP greatly aid in the 
diagnosis of pancreatic disease, the diagnostic test with the best sensi-
tivity is the hormone stimulation test using secretin. The secretin test 
becomes abnormal when ≥60% of the pancreatic exocrine function has 
been lost. This usually correlates well with the onset of chronic abdom-
inal pain. The role of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) in diagnosing 
early  chronic  pancreatitis  is  still  evolving.  A  total  of  nine  endoso-
nographic  features  have  been  described  in  chronic  pancreatitis.  The 
presence  of  five  or  more  features  is  considered  diagnostic  of  chronic 
pancreatitis.  EUS  is  not  a  specific  enough  test  for  detecting  early 
chronic pancreatitis alone (Chap. 347) and may show positive features 
in patients with diabetes, patients with a history of cigarette smoking, 
or even in normal aging individuals. Recent data suggest that EUS can 
be combined with endoscopic pancreatic function testing (EUS-ePFT) 
during a single endoscopy to screen for chronic pancreatitis in patients 
with chronic abdominal pain. Diffuse calcifications noted on plain film 
of the abdomen usually indicate significant damage to the pancreas and 
are  pathognomic  for  chronic  pancreatitis.  Although  alcohol  is  by  far 
the most common cause of pancreatic calcification, such calcification 
may also be noted in hereditary pancreatitis, posttraumatic pancreati-
tis, idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, and tropical pancreatitis.

Complications  of  Chronic  Pancreatitis  There  are  a  number 
of  disease-related  complications  from  chronic  pancreatitis  in  addi-
tion  to  the  aforementioned  abdominal  pain  and  exocrine  pancre-
atic  insufficiency  (Table  348-7).  The  lifetime  prevalence  of  chronic 

2667

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  348-4  Distribution  of  imaging  features  of  chronic  pancreatitis  on  computed  tomography  (CT).  Distinct  features  of  chronic  pancreatitis  are  seen  on  selected 
images from contrast-enhanced CT scans of the abdomen from four unique patients, including the following. A. Numerous punctate calcifications involving the pancreatic 
parenchyma in the head and body. B. A moderate-sized calculus visualized in the pancreatic duct with associated ductal dilation. C. Significant pancreatic duct dilation 
and adjacent parenchymal atrophy secondary to a pancreatic duct stricture (which is not well seen on this scan). D. A large unilocular, encapsulated cyst in the tail of the 
pancreas consistent with a pseudocyst from prior pancreatitis. Note adjacent pancreatic parenchymal atrophy. 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2667

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
2668

TABLE 348-7  Complications of Chronic Pancreatitis
Chronic abdominal pain
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Diabetes mellitus
Splanchnic venous thrombosis
Metabolic bone disease (osteoporosis)

Biliary stricture and/or biliary cirrhosis
Pancreatic duct stricture
Pseudocyst
Pancreatic cancer

pancreatitis–related  diabetes  exceeds  80%.  Although  most  patients 
develop  hyperglycemia  due  to  insulin  deficiency  caused  by  loss  of 
islet  cells,  diabetic  ketoacidosis  and  diabetic  coma  are  uncommon. 
Likewise,  end-organ  damage  (retinopathy,  neuropathy,  nephropathy) 
is also uncommon. Nondiabetic retinopathy may be due to vitamin A 
and/or  zinc  deficiency.  Osteoporosis  and  osteopenia  are  increasingly 
recognized in chronic pancreatitis and likely related to a combination 
of shared risk factors (e.g., alcohol use, cigarette smoking), vitamin D 
deficiency, and detrimental effects on the bone from chronic inflam-
mation.  Gastrointestinal  bleeding  may  occur  from  peptic  ulceration, 
gastritis,  a  pseudocyst  eroding  into  the  duodenum,  arterial  bleeding 
into  the  pancreatic  duct  (hemosuccus  pancreaticus),  or  ruptured 
varices secondary to splenic vein thrombosis. Jaundice, cholestasis, and 
biliary  cirrhosis  may  occur  from  the  chronic  inflammatory  reaction 
around the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct. Twenty 
years after the diagnosis of chronic calcific pancreatitis, the cumulative 
risk of pancreatic cancer is 4%. Patients with hereditary PRSS1 or trop-
ical pancreatitis have an increased risk for pancreatic cancer compared 
to other forms of chronic pancreatitis.

TREATMENT
Chronic Pancreatitis

There  are  currently  no  therapies  to  reverse  or  delay  the  disease 
progression  of  chronic  pancreatitis,  so  management  is  primar-
ily  focused  on  screening  for  and  management  of  disease-related 
complications. 
STEATORRHEA
The treatment of steatorrhea with pancreatic enzyme replacement 
therapy is conceptually straightforward, yet complete correction of 
steatorrhea is uncommon. Enzyme therapy usually brings diarrhea 
under control and restores absorption of fat to an acceptable level 
and affects weight gain. Thus, pancreatic enzyme replacement is the 
cornerstone  of  therapy.  In  treating  steatorrhea,  it  is  important  to 
use a potent pancreatic formulation that will deliver sufficient lipase 
into  the  duodenum  to  correct  maldigestion  and  decrease  steator-
rhea. For adult patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, it is 
generally recommended to start at a dosage of 25,000–50,000 units 
of lipase taken during each meal; however, the dose may need to be 
increased up to 100,000 units of lipase depending on the response 
in  symptoms,  nutritional  parameters,  and/or  pancreas  function 
test results. Additionally, some may require acid suppression with 
proton  pump  inhibitors  to  optimize  the  response  to  pancreatic 
enzymes.  Monitoring  nutritional  parameters  such  as  fat-soluble 
vitamins, zinc levels, body weight, and periodic bone mineral den-
sity measurement should be considered. 
ABDOMINAL PAIN
The  management  of  pain  in  patients  with  chronic  pancreatitis  is 
challenging due to the complex mechanisms of pancreatitis-related 
pain.  Recent  meta-analyses  have  shown  no  consistent  benefit  of 
enzyme therapy at reducing pain in chronic pancreatitis. Pain relief 
experienced  by  patients  treated  with  pancreatic  enzymes  may  be 
due  to  improvements  in  the  dyspepsia  from  maldigestion.  One 
short-term randomized trial showed that pregabalin could decrease 
pain  in  chronic  pancreatitis  and  lower  pain  medication  require-
ment. Other studies using antioxidants have yielded mixed results.
Endoscopic  treatment  of  chronic  pancreatitis  pain  may  involve 
sphincterotomy,  pancreatic  duct  stenting,  stone  extraction,  and 
drainage  of  a  pancreatic  pseudocyst.  Therapy  directed  to  the 

pancreatic duct would seem to be most appropriate in the setting of 
a dominant stricture, especially if there is an obstructing intraduc-
tal stone. The use of endoscopic stenting for patients with chronic 
pain, but without a dominant stricture, has not been subjected to 
controlled  trials.  It  is  now  appreciated  that  significant  complica-
tions can occur from stenting (e.g., stent migration, stent occlusion, 
and  stent-induced  pancreatic  duct  strictures).  Recent  guidelines 
recommend considering celiac plexus block for treatment of pain 
in  chronic  pancreatitis,  but  recommendations  were  conditional 
with very low quality of evidence. Celiac plexus block has not been 
rigorously  studied  for  chronic  pancreatitis  and  does  not  provide 
durable pain relief. It can provide relive in some selected patients, 
but the a priori identification of those who will respond is difficult. 
In  patients  with  pancreatic  duct  dilation,  ductal  decompression 
with surgical therapy has been the therapy of choice. Among such 
patients, 80% seem to obtain immediate relief; however, at the end 
of  3  years,  one-half  of  the  patients  have  recurrence  of  pain.  Two 
randomized  prospective  trials  comparing  endoscopic  to  surgical 
therapy for chronic pancreatitis demonstrated that surgical therapy 
was superior to endoscopy at decreasing pain and improving quality 
of life in selected patients with dilated ducts and abdominal pain. 
This  would  suggest  that  chronic  pancreatitis  patients  with  dilated 
ducts  and  pain  should  be  considered  for  surgical  intervention. 
The role of preoperative stenting prior to surgery as a predictor of 
response has yet to be proven.

Total pancreatectomy with or without autologous islet cell trans-
plantation  has  been  used  in  highly  selected  patients  with  chronic 
pancreatitis and abdominal pain refractory to conventional therapy. 
However, some patients will continue to have pain postoperatively, 
illustrating the complex nature of pain in patients with chronic pan-
creatitis. Patients who benefit most from total pancreatectomy have 
a shorter duration of symptoms and lower pain medication require-
ments. The role of this procedure remains to be fully defined but 
may be an option in lieu of ductal decompression surgery or partial 
pancreatic resection in patients with intractable, painful, small-duct 
disease or hereditary pancreatitis and particularly as the standard 
surgical procedures tend to decrease islet cell yield.

 ■ HEREDITARY PANCREATITIS
Hereditary pancreatitis (PRSS1) is a rare form of pancreatitis with early 
age  of  onset  that  is  typically  associated  with  familial  aggregation  of 
cases. A genome-wide search using genetic linkage analysis identified 
the  hereditary  pancreatitis  gene  on  chromosome  7.  Mutations  in  ion 
codons 29 (exon 2) and 122 (exon 3) of the cationic trypsinogen gene 
(PRSS1) cause an autosomal dominant form of pancreatitis. The codon 
122  mutations  lead  to  a  substitution  of  the  corresponding  arginine 
with another amino acid, usually histidine. This substitution, when it 
occurs, eliminates a fail-safe trypsin self-destruction site necessary to 
eliminate trypsin that is prematurely activated within the acinar cell. 
These patients have recurring episodes of acute pancreatitis. Patients 
frequently  develop  pancreatic  calcification,  diabetes  mellitus,  and 
steatorrhea; in addition, they have an increased incidence of pancreatic 
cancer with a cumulative incidence of ~10%. A previous natural history 
study of hereditary pancreatitis in >200 patients from France reported 
that abdominal pain started in childhood at age 10 years, steatorrhea 
developed at age 29 years, diabetes at age 38 years, and pancreatic can-
cer at age 55 years. Abdominal complaints in relatives of patients with 
hereditary pancreatitis should raise the question of pancreatic disease.

 ■ PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
Pancreatic endocrine tumors are discussed in Chap. 84.

OTHER CONDITIONS
 ■ ANNULAR PANCREAS
When the ventral pancreatic anlage fails to migrate correctly to make 
contact  with  the  dorsal  anlage,  the  result  may  be  a  ring  of  pancre-
atic  tissue  encircling  the  duodenum.  Such  an  annular  pancreas  may 
cause intestinal obstruction in the neonate or the adult. Symptoms of 

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2668

20/01/22   10:05 PM

PART 10Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Systempostprandial  fullness,  epigastric  pain,  nausea,  and  vomiting  may  be 
present for years before the diagnosis is entertained. The radiographic 
findings are symmetric dilation of the proximal duodenum with bulg-
ing of the recesses on either side of the annular band, effacement but 
not destruction of the duodenal mucosa, accentuation of the findings 
in the right anterior oblique position, and lack of change on repeated 
examinations.  The  differential  diagnosis  should  include  duodenal 
webs, tumors of the pancreas or duodenum, duodenal ulcer, regional 
enteritis,  and  adhesions.  Patients  with  annular  pancreas  have  an 
increased incidence of pancreatitis and peptic ulcer. Because of these 
and other potential complications, the treatment is surgical even if the 
condition has been present for years. Retrocolic duodenojejunostomy 
is the procedure of choice, although some surgeons advocate Billroth II 
gastrectomy, gastroenterostomy, and vagotomy.
 ■ PANCREAS DIVISUM
Pancreas  divisum  is  present  in  7–10%  of  the  population  and  occurs 
when  the  embryologic  ventral  and  dorsal  pancreatic  anlagen  fail  to 
fuse,  so  that  pancreatic  drainage  is  accomplished  mainly  through 
the  accessory  minor  papilla.  Pancreas  divisum  is  the  most  common 
congenital anatomic variant of the human pancreas. Current evidence 
indicates  that  this  anomaly  does  not  predispose  to  the  development 
of pancreatitis in the majority of patients who harbor it. However, the 
combination of pancreas divisum and a small accessory orifice could 
result in dorsal duct obstruction. The challenge is to identify this sub-
set  of  patients  with  dorsal  duct  pathology.  Cannulation  of  the  dorsal 
duct  by  ERCP  is  technically  challenging  and  associated  with  a  very 
high risk of post-ERCP pancreatitis, so patients with pancreatitis and 
pancreas divisum should likely be treated with conservative measures. 
In  many  of  these  patients,  pancreatitis  is  idiopathic  and  unrelated  to 
the pancreas divisum. Endoscopic or surgical intervention is indicated 
only if pancreatitis recurs and no other cause can be found. It should 
be stressed that the ERCP/MRCP appearance of pancreas divisum (i.e., 
a small-caliber ventral duct with an arborizing pattern) may be mis-
taken  as  representing  an  obstructed  main  pancreatic  duct  secondary 
to a mass lesion.

 ■ MACROAMYLASEMIA
In  macroamylasemia,  amylase  circulates  in  the  blood  in  a  polymer 
form  too  large  to  be  easily  excreted  by  the  kidney.  Patients  with  this 
condition demonstrate an elevated serum amylase value and a low uri-
nary amylase value. The presence of macroamylase can be documented 
by chromatography of the serum. The prevalence of macroamylasemia 
is 1.5% of the nonalcoholic general adult hospital population. Usually, 
macroamylasemia is an incidental finding and is not related to disease 
of the pancreas or other organs. Macrolipasemia has now been docu-
mented in patients with cirrhosis or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. In these 
patients, the pancreas appeared normal on ultrasound and CT exami-
nation.  Lipase  was  shown  to  be  complexed  with  immunoglobulin  A.  
Thus,  the  possibility  of  both  macroamylasemia  and  macrolipasemia 
should  be  considered  in  patients  with  elevated  blood  levels  of  these 
enzymes.

Acknowledgment
This  chapter  represents  a  revised  version  of  chapters  by  Drs.  Norton  J. 
Greenberger (deceased), Phillip P. Toskes (deceased), Peter A. Banks, and 
Bechien Wu that were in previous editions of Harrison’s.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Crockett SD et al: American Gastroenterological Association Insti-
tute  guideline  on  initial  management  of  acute  pancreatitis.  Gas-
troenterology 154:1096, 2018.

Forsmark CE et al: Acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 375:1972, 2016.
Gardner TB et al: ACG clinical guideline: Chronic pancreatitis. Am J 

Gastroenterol 115:322, 2020.

Hart  PA,  Conwell  DL:  Chronic  pancreatitis:  Managing  a  difficult 

disease. Am J Gastroenterol 115:49, 2020.

Hart  PA  et  al:  Recent  advances  in  autoimmune  pancreatitis.  Gas-

troenterology 149:39, 2015.

Petrov MS, Yadav D: Global epidemiology and holistic prevention of 

pancreatitis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 16:175, 2019.

Yadav D, Lowenfels AB: The epidemiology of pancreatitis and pan-

creatic cancer. Gastroenterology 144:1252, 2013.

2669

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
4
8

A
c
u
t
e
a
n
d
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
P
a
n
c
r
e
a
t
i
t
i
s

HPIM21e_Part10_p2381-p2670.indd   2669

20/01/22   10:05 PM

 
 
 
 
