21st Edition

®

P R I N C I P L E S   O F

I N T E R N A L
M E D I C I N E

HPIM 21e_FM_VOL1_pi-pxl.indd   1

21/01/22   7:01 PM

Robert Lindsay, Blossom Samuels 

Irene Litvan, William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller

xv

412 Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone .............. 3209

Rajesh K. Jain, Tamara J. Vokes

435 Parkinson’s Disease ...................................................... 3386

C. Warren Olanow, Anthony H.V. Schapira

  SECTION 5   Disorders of Intermediary Metabolism

413 Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue ..................... 3217

Joan C. Marini, Fransiska Malfait

414 Hemochromatosis ........................................................ 3230

Lawrie W. Powell, David M. Frazer 

415 Wilson’s Disease .......................................................... 3235

Stephen G. Kaler 

416 The Porphyrias ............................................................ 3237

Robert J. Desnick, Manisha Balwani

417 Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism .......... 3248

John N. Mecchella, Christopher M. Burns

418 Lysosomal Storage Diseases ......................................... 3254

Robert J. Hopkin, Gregory A. Grabowski

419 Glycogen Storage Diseases and Other Inherited  

Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism ........................ 3261
Priya S. Kishnani

420 Inherited Disorders of Amino Acid Metabolism  

in Adults ...................................................................... 3268
Nicola Longo

436 Tremor, Chorea, and Other Movement Disorders .......... 3400

C. Warren Olanow, Christine Klein

437 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor  

Neuron Diseases .......................................................... 3410
Robert H. Brown, Jr.

438 Prion Diseases ............................................................. 3416

Stanley B. Prusiner, Michael Geschwind

439 Ataxic Disorders .......................................................... 3422

Roger N. Rosenberg

440 Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System .................. 3427

Richard J. Barohn, John W. Engstrom

441 Trigeminal Neuralgia, Bell’s Palsy, and Other  

Cranial Nerve Disorders .............................................. 3436
Vanja C. Douglas, Stephen L. Hauser

442 Diseases of the Spinal Cord .......................................... 3445

Stephen L. Hauser

443 Concussion and Other Traumatic Brain Injuries ........... 3456

Geoffrey T. Manley, Benjamin L. Brett, Michael McCrea

444 Multiple Sclerosis ........................................................ 3462

Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser 

421 Inherited Defects of Membrane Transport ................... 3274

Nicola Longo

445 Neuromyelitis Optica ................................................... 3477

Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser

PART 13  Neurologic Disorders

  SECTION 1   Diagnosis of Neurologic Disorders

422 Approach to the Patient with Neurologic Disease ......... 3277
Daniel H. Lowenstein, S. Andrew Josephson, Stephen L. Hauser

423 Neuroimaging in Neurologic Disorders ........................ 3282

William P. Dillon

424 Pathobiology of Neurologic Diseases ............................ 3293

Stephen L. Hauser, Arnold R. Kriegstein, Stanley B. Prusiner

  SECTION 2   Diseases of the Central Nervous System

  SECTION 3   Nerve and Muscle Disorders

446 Peripheral Neuropathy ................................................. 3480

Anthony A. Amato, Richard J. Barohn

447 Guillain-Barré Syndrome and Other  

Immune-Mediated Neuropathies .................................. 3501
Stephen L. Hauser, Anthony A. Amato

448 Myasthenia Gravis and Other Diseases of the  

Neuromuscular Junction .............................................. 3509
Anthony A. Amato

449 Muscular Dystrophies and Other Muscle Diseases ....... 3516

Anthony A. Amato, Robert H. Brown, Jr.

425 Seizures and Epilepsy ................................................... 3305

Vikram R. Rao, Daniel H. Lowenstein

  SECTION 4   Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic  
  Fatigue Syndrome

426 Introduction to Cerebrovascular Diseases ..................... 3324

Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston, J. Claude Hemphill, III

427 Ischemic Stroke ........................................................... 3335

Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston, J. Claude Hemphill, III

428 Intracranial Hemorrhage .............................................. 3348

Wade S. Smith, J. Claude Hemphill, III, S. Claiborne Johnston

429 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage .......................................... 3353

J. Claude Hemphill, III,Wade S. Smith, Daryl R. Gress

430 Migraine and Other Primary Headache  

450 Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue  

Syndrome .................................................................... 3532
Elizabeth R. Unger, Jin-Mann S. Lin, Jeanne Bertolli

  SECTION 5   Psychiatric and Addiction Disorders

451 Biology of Psychiatric Disorders ................................... 3534

Robert O. Messing, Eric J. Nestler, Matthew W. State

452 Psychiatric Disorders ................................................... 3540

Victor I. Reus 

Disorders ..................................................................... 3357
Peter J. Goadsby

453 Alcohol and Alcohol Use Disorders .............................. 3556

Marc A. Schuckit

431 Alzheimer’s Disease ..................................................... 3370

Gil D. Rabinovici, William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller

454 Nicotine Addiction ...................................................... 3563

David M. Burns

432 Frontotemporal Dementia ........................................... 3378

William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller

455 Marijuana and Marijuana Use Disorders ...................... 3567

Nora D. Volkow, Aidan Hampson, Ruben Baler 

433 Vascular Dementia ....................................................... 3381

Steven M. Greenberg, William W. Seeley

456 Opioid-Related Disorders ............................................ 3569

Thomas R. Kosten, Colin N. Haile 

434 Dementia with Lewy Bodies ......................................... 3385

457 Cocaine, Other Psychostimulants, and  

Hallucinogens .............................................................. 3573
Karran A. Phillips, Wilson M. Compton

HPIM 21e_FM_VOL1_pi-pxl.indd   15

21/01/22   7:01 PM

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1  Diagnosis of Neurologic 
Disorders

422 Approach to the Patient 
with Neurologic Disease
Daniel H. Lowenstein, S. Andrew 
Josephson, Stephen L. Hauser

Neurologic  diseases  are  common  and  costly.  According  to  estimates 
by the World Health Organization, neurologic disorders affect more 
than  1  billion  people  worldwide,  constitute  12%  of  the  global  bur-
den of disease, and cause 14% of global deaths (Table 422-1). These 
numbers are only expected to increase as the world’s population ages. 
Because  therapies  now  exist  for  many  neurologic  disorders,  a  skill-
ful  approach  to  diagnosis  is  essential.  Errors  commonly  result  from 
an  overreliance  on  costly  neuroimaging  procedures  and  laboratory 
tests,  which,  while  useful,  do  not  substitute  for  an  adequate  history 
and  examination.  The  proper  approach  begins  with  the  patient  and 
focuses  the  clinical  problem  first  in  anatomic  and  then  in  patho-
physiologic  terms;  only  then  should  a  specific  neurologic  diagnosis 
be  entertained.  This  method  ensures  that  technology  is  judiciously 
applied, a correct diagnosis is established in an efficient manner, and 
treatment is promptly initiated.

THE NEUROLOGIC METHOD
 ■ DEFINE THE ANATOMY
The first priority is to identify the region of the nervous system that is 
likely to be responsible for the symptoms. Can the disorder be mapped 
to one specific location, is it multifocal, or is a diffuse process present? 
Are the symptoms restricted to the nervous system, or do they arise in 
the context of a systemic illness? Is the problem in the central nervous 
system (CNS), the peripheral nervous system (PNS), or both? In the 
CNS,  is  the  cerebral  cortex,  basal  ganglia,  brainstem,  cerebellum,  or 
spinal  cord  responsible?  Are  the  pain-sensitive  meninges  involved? 
In the PNS, could the disorder be located in peripheral nerves and, if 
so, are motor or sensory nerves primarily affected, or is a lesion in the 
neuromuscular junction or muscle more likely?

TABLE 422-1  Global Disability-Adjusted Life-Years (DALYs) and 
Number of Annual Deaths for Selected Neurologic Disorders in 2019
DISORDER
Low-back and neck pain
Cerebrovascular diseases
Meningitis and encephalitis
Migraine
Epilepsy
Dementia
Parkinson’s disease
% of total DALYs or deaths for all 
causes that are neurologic
% change of DALYs or deaths for 
neurologic disorders between 2015 
and 2019

DALYs
85,766,442
143,232,184
21,120,604
42,077,666
13,077,624
25,276,989
6,292,616
13.7%

DEATHS
—
6,552,725
326,117
—
114,010
1,623,256
362,907
16.1%

41.0%

0.0%

Source: Data from Global Burden of Disease Study 2019 (GBD 2019) Data 
Resources http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-2019 and GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries 
Collaborators. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and 
territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2019. Lancet 396:1204, 2020.

Neurologic Disorders

PART 13

The first clues to defining the anatomic area of involvement appear 
in the history, and the examination is then directed to confirm or rule 
out  these  impressions  and  to  clarify  uncertainties.  A  more  detailed 
examination  of  a  particular  region  of  the  CNS  or  PNS  is  often  indi-
cated.  For  example,  the  examination  of  a  patient  who  presents  with 
a  history  of  ascending  paresthesias  and  weakness  should  be  directed 
toward deciding, among other things, if the lesion is in the spinal cord 
or peripheral nerves. Focal back pain, a spinal cord sensory level, and 
incontinence  suggest  a  spinal  cord  origin,  whereas  a  stocking-glove 
pattern  of  sensory  loss  suggests  peripheral  nerve  disease;  areflexia 
usually indicates peripheral neuropathy but may also be present with 
so-called spinal shock in acute spinal cord disorders.

Deciding  “where  the  lesion  is”  accomplishes  the  task  of  limiting 
the  possible  etiologies  to  a  manageable,  finite  number.  In  addition, 
this  strategy  safeguards  against  making  serious  errors.  Symptoms  of 
recurrent vertigo, diplopia, and nystagmus should not trigger “multiple 
sclerosis” as an answer (etiology) but “brainstem” or “pons” (location); 
then a diagnosis of brainstem arteriovenous malformation will not be 
missed  for  lack  of  consideration.  Similarly,  the  combination  of  optic 
neuritis and spastic ataxic paraparesis suggests optic nerve and spinal 
cord  disease;  multiple  sclerosis  (MS),  CNS  syphilis,  and  vitamin  B12 
deficiency  are  treatable  disorders  that  can  produce  this  syndrome. 
Once the question, “Where is the lesion?” is answered, then the ques-
tion “What is the lesion?” can be addressed.

 ■ IDENTIFY THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Clues to the pathophysiology of the disease process may also be present 
in the history. Primary neuronal (gray matter) disorders often present as 
early cognitive disturbances, movement disorders, or seizures, whereas 
white  matter  involvement  produces  “long  tract”  disorders  of  motor, 
sensory,  visual,  and  cerebellar  pathways.  Progressive  and  symmetric 
symptoms often have a metabolic or degenerative origin; in such cases 
lesions  are  usually  not  sharply  circumscribed.  Thus,  a  patient  with 
paraparesis  and  a  clear  spinal  cord  sensory  level  is  unlikely  to  have  
vitamin B12 deficiency as the explanation. A Lhermitte symptom (electric 
shock–like sensations evoked by neck flexion) is due to ectopic impulse 
generation in white matter pathways and occurs with demyelination in 
the cervical spinal cord; among many possible causes, this symptom may 
indicate MS in a young adult or compressive cervical spondylosis in an 
older person. Symptoms that worsen after exposure to heat or exercise 
may indicate conduction block in demyelinated axons, as occurs in MS. 
A patient with recurrent episodes of diplopia and dysarthria associated 
with exercise or fatigue may have a disorder of neuromuscular transmis-
sion  such  as  myasthenia  gravis.  Slowly  advancing  visual  scotoma  with 
luminous edges, termed fortification spectra, indicates spreading cortical 
depression, typically with migraine.

THE NEUROLOGIC HISTORY
Attention  to  the  description  of  the  symptoms  experienced  by  the 
patient and substantiated by family members and others often permits 
an accurate localization and determination of the probable cause, even 
before the neurologic examination is performed. The history also helps 
focus the neurologic examination that follows. Each complaint should 
be pursued as far as possible to identify the location of the lesion, the 
likely underlying pathophysiology, and potential etiologies. For exam-
ple,  a  patient  complains  of  weakness  of  the  right  arm.  What  are  the 
associated features? Does the patient have difficulty with brushing hair 
or reaching upward (proximal) or fastening buttons or opening a plas-
tic bottle (distal)? Negative associations may also be crucial. A right-
handed  patient  with  a  right  hemiparesis  without  a  language  deficit 
likely has a lesion (internal capsule, brainstem, or spinal cord) different 
from that of a patient with a right hemiparesis and aphasia (left hemi-
sphere). Other pertinent features of the history include the following:

1.  Temporal course of the illness. It is important to determine the pre-
cise  time  of  appearance  and  rate  of  progression  of  the  symptoms 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3277

21/01/22   7:49 AM

3278

experienced  by  the  patient.  The  rapid  onset  of  a  neurologic  com-
plaint,  occurring  within  seconds  or  minutes,  usually  indicates  a 
vascular event, a seizure, or migraine. The onset of sensory symp-
toms  located  in  one  extremity  that  spread  over  a  few  seconds  to 
adjacent portions of that extremity and then to the other regions of 
the body suggests a seizure. A similar but slower temporal march of 
symptoms accompanied by headache, nausea, or visual disturbance 
suggests migraine. Less well-localized symptoms that are maximum 
at onset and persist for seconds, minutes, or much less commonly 
hours, point to the possibility of a transient ischemic attack (TIA). 
The presence of “positive” sensory symptoms (e.g., tingling or sensa-
tions that are difficult to describe) or involuntary motor movements 
suggests  a  seizure;  in  contrast,  transient  loss  of  function  (negative 
symptoms)  suggests  a  TIA.  A  stuttering  onset  where  symptoms 
appear, stabilize, and then progress over hours or days also suggests 
cerebrovascular disease; an additional history of transient remission 
or regression indicates that the process is more likely due to ische-
mia rather than hemorrhage. A gradual evolution of symptoms over 
hours or days suggests a toxic, metabolic, infectious, or inflamma-
tory  process.  Progressing  symptoms  associated  with  the  systemic 
manifestations of fever, stiff neck, and altered level of consciousness 
imply  an  infectious  process.  Relapsing  and  remitting  symptoms 
involving  different  levels  of  the  nervous  system  suggest  MS  or 
other inflammatory processes. Slowly progressive symptoms with-
out  remissions  are  characteristic  of  neurodegenerative  disorders, 
chronic infections, gradual intoxications, and neoplasms.

2.  Patients’  descriptions  of  the  complaint.  The  same  words  often 
mean  different  things  to  different  patients.  “Dizziness”  may  imply 
impending  syncope,  a  sense  of  disequilibrium,  or  true  spinning 
vertigo. “Numbness” may mean a complete loss of feeling, a positive 
sensation such as tingling, or even weakness. “Blurred vision” may 
be used to describe unilateral visual loss, as in transient monocular 
blindness, or diplopia. The interpretation of the true meaning of the 
words  used  by  patients  to  describe  symptoms  obviously  becomes 
even more complex when there are differences in primary languages 
and cultures.

3.  Corroboration of the history by others. It is almost always helpful to 
obtain additional information from family, friends, or other observ-
ers to corroborate or expand the patient’s description. Memory loss, 
aphasia, loss of insight, intoxication, and other factors may impair 
the patient’s capacity to communicate normally with the examiner 
or  prevent  openness  about  factors  that  have  contributed  to  the 
illness. Episodes of loss of consciousness necessitate that details be 
sought  from  observers  to  ascertain  precisely  what  has  happened 
during the event.

4.  Family  history.  Many  neurologic  disorders  have  an  underlying 
genetic component. The presence of a Mendelian disorder, such as 
Huntington’s  disease  or  Charcot-Marie-Tooth  neuropathy,  is  often 
obvious if family data are available. More detailed questions about 
family history are often necessary in polygenic disorders such as MS, 
migraine, and many types of epilepsy. It is important to elicit family 
history about all illnesses, in addition to neurologic and psychiatric 
disorders. A familial propensity to hypertension or heart disease is 
relevant in a patient who presents with a stroke. Numerous inherited 
neurologic diseases are associated with multisystem manifestations 
that may provide clues to the correct diagnosis (e.g., neurofibroma-
tosis, Wilson’s disease, mitochondrial disorders).

5.  Medical illnesses. Many neurologic diseases occur in the context of 
systemic disorders. Diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and abnormali-
ties of blood lipids predispose to cerebrovascular disease. A solitary 
mass lesion in the brain may be an abscess in a patient with valvular 
heart disease, a primary hemorrhage in a patient with a coagulop-
athy,  a  lymphoma  or  toxoplasmosis  in  a  patient  with  AIDS,  or  a 
metastasis in a patient with underlying cancer. Patients with malig-
nancy may also present with a neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome 
(Chap.  94)  or  complications  from  chemotherapy  or  radiotherapy. 
Marfan’s  syndrome  and  related  collagen  disorders  predispose  to 
dissection of the cranial arteries and aneurysmal subarachnoid hem-
orrhage;  the  latter  may  also  occur  with  polycystic  kidney  disease 

and  fibromuscular  dysplasia.  Various  neurologic  disorders  occur 
with  dysthyroid  states  or  other  endocrinopathies.  It  is  especially 
important to look for the presence of systemic diseases in patients 
with peripheral neuropathy. Most patients with coma in a hospital 
setting have a metabolic, toxic, or infectious cause.

6.  Drug  use  and  abuse  and  toxin  exposure.  It  is  essential  to  inquire 
about the history of drug use, both prescribed and illicit. Sedatives, 
antidepressants, and other psychoactive medications are frequently 
associated  with  acute  confusional  states,  especially  in  the  elderly. 
Aminoglycoside antibiotics may exacerbate symptoms of weakness 
in patients with disorders of neuromuscular transmission, such as 
myasthenia gravis, and may cause dizziness secondary to ototoxicity. 
Vincristine and other antineoplastic drugs can cause peripheral neu-
ropathy,  and  immunosuppressive  agents  such  as  cyclosporine  can 
produce  encephalopathy.  Excessive  vitamin  ingestion  can  lead  to 
disease; examples include vitamin A and intracranial hypertension 
(“pseudotumor cerebri”) or pyridoxine and peripheral neuropathy. 
Many patients are unaware that over-the-counter sleeping pills, cold 
preparations,  and  diet  pills  are  actually  drugs.  Alcohol,  the  most 
prevalent  neurotoxin,  is  often  not  recognized  as  such  by  patients, 
and other drugs of abuse such as cocaine, methamphetamine, and 
heroin can cause a wide range of neurologic abnormalities. A his-
tory  of  environmental  or  industrial  exposure  to  neurotoxins  may 
provide an essential clue; consultation with the patient’s coworkers 
or employer may be required.

7.  Formulating an impression of the patient. Use the opportunity while 
taking the history to form an impression of the patient. Is the infor-
mation  forthcoming,  or  does  it  take  a  circuitous  course?  Is  there 
evidence of anxiety, depression, or hypochondriasis? Are there any 
clues to problems with language, memory, insight, comportment, or 
behavior? The neurologic assessment begins as soon as the patient 
comes into the room and the first introduction is made.

THE NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
The neurologic examination is challenging and complex; it has many 
components and includes a number of skills that can be mastered only 
through repeated use of the same techniques on a large number of indi-
viduals with and without neurologic disease. Mastery of the complete 
neurologic  examination  is  usually  important  only  for  physicians  in 
neurology and associated specialties. However, knowledge of the basics 
of the examination, especially those components that are effective in 
screening  for  neurologic  dysfunction,  is  essential  for  all  clinicians, 
especially generalists.

There  is  no  single,  universally  accepted  sequence  of  the  examina-
tion that must be followed, but most clinicians begin with assessment 
of  mental  status  followed  by  the  cranial  nerves  (CN),  motor  system, 
reflexes, sensory system, coordination, and gait. Whether the examina-
tion is basic or comprehensive, it is essential that it is performed in an 
orderly and systematic fashion to avoid errors and serious omissions. 
Thus, the best way to learn and gain expertise in the examination is to 
choose one’s own approach and practice it frequently and do it in the 
same exact sequence each time.

The detailed description that follows describes the more commonly 
used parts of the neurologic examination, with a particular emphasis 
on the components that are considered most helpful for the assessment 
of  common  neurologic  problems.  Each  section  also  includes  a  brief 
description of the minimal examination necessary to adequately screen 
for abnormalities in a patient who has no symptoms suggesting neu-
rologic dysfunction. A screening examination done in this way can be 
completed in 3–5 min. Video demonstrations of the neurologic screening 
examination (V6) and the detailed neurologic examination (V7) can be 
found in the Harrison’s Video Collection included in this textbook.

Several additional points about the examination are worth noting. 
First,  in  recording  observations,  it  is  important  to  describe  what  is 
found rather than to apply a poorly defined medical term (e.g., “patient 
groans  to  sternal  rub”  rather  than  “obtunded”).  Second,  subtle  CNS 
abnormalities are best detected by carefully comparing a patient’s per-
formance on tasks that require simultaneous activation of both cerebral 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3278

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3279

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
2

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

hemispheres (e.g., eliciting a pronator drift of an outstretched arm with 
the eyes closed; extinction on one side of bilaterally applied light touch, 
also with eyes closed; or decreased arm swing or a slight asymmetry 
when walking). Third, if the patient’s complaint is brought on by some 
activity, reproduce the activity in the office. If the complaint is of dizzi-
ness when the head is turned in one direction, have the patient do this 
and also look for associated signs on examination (e.g., nystagmus or 
dysmetria).  If  pain  occurs  after  walking  two  blocks,  have  the  patient 
leave  the  office  and  walk  this  distance  and  immediately  return,  and 
repeat  the  relevant  parts  of  the  examination.  Finally,  the  use  of  tests 
that are individually tailored to the patient’s problem can be of value in 
assessing changes over time. Tests of walking a 7.5-m (25-ft) distance 
(normal, 5–6 s; note assistance, if any), repetitive finger or toe tapping 
(normal, 20–25 taps in 5 s), or handwriting are examples.

 ■ MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION
•	 The  bare  minimum:  During  the  interview,  look  for  difficulties  with 
communication  and  determine  whether  the  patient  has  recall  and 
insight into recent and past events.

The mental status examination is underway as soon as the physician 
begins  observing  and  speaking  with  the  patient.  If  the  history  raises 
any concern for abnormalities of higher cortical function or if cognitive 
problems  are  observed  during  the  interview,  then  detailed  testing  of 
the mental status is indicated. The patient’s ability to understand the 
language used for the examination, cultural background, educational 
experience, sensory or motor problems, or comorbid conditions must 
be  factored  into  the  applicability  of  the  tests  and  interpretation  of 
results.

The  Mini-Mental  State  Examination  (MMSE)  is  a  standardized 
screening  examination  of  cognitive  function  that  is  extremely  easy 
to  administer  and  takes  <10  min  to  complete  (Chap.  29).  Using 
age-adjusted values for defining normal performance, the test is ~85% 
sensitive and 85% specific for making the diagnosis of dementia that 
is  moderate  or  severe,  especially  in  educated  patients.  When  there  is 
sufficient  time  available  in  the  outpatient  setting,  the  MMSE  is  one 
of the best methods for documenting the current mental status of the 
patient, and this is especially useful as a baseline assessment to which 
future scores of the MMSE can be compared.

Individual  elements  of  the  mental  status  examination  can  be  sub-
divided into level of consciousness, orientation, speech and language, 
memory, fund of information, insight and judgment, abstract thought, 
and calculations.

Level of consciousness is the patient’s relative state of awareness of the 
self  and  the  environment,  and  ranges  from  fully  awake  to  comatose. 
When  the  patient  is  not  fully  awake,  the  examiner  should  describe 
the responses to the minimum stimulus necessary to elicit a reaction, 
ranging from verbal commands to a brief, painful stimulus such as a 
squeeze  of  the  trapezius  muscle.  Responses  that  are  directed  toward 
the stimulus and signify some degree of intact cerebral function (e.g., 
opening the eyes and looking at the examiner or reaching to push away 
a  painful  stimulus)  must  be  distinguished  from  reflex  responses  of  a 
spinal origin (e.g., triple flexion response—flexion at the ankle, knee, 
and hip in response to a painful stimulus to the foot).

Orientation is tested by asking the person to state his or her name, 
location, and time (day of the week and date); time is usually the first 
to be affected in a variety of conditions.

Speech is assessed by observing articulation, rate, rhythm, and pros-
ody (i.e., the changes in pitch and accentuation of syllables and words).
Language is assessed by observing the content of the patient’s verbal 
and written output, response to spoken commands, and ability to read. 
A  typical  testing  sequence  is  to  ask  the  patient  to  name  successively 
more  detailed  components  of  clothing,  a  watch,  or  a  pen;  repeat  the 
phrase  “No  ifs,  ands,  or  buts”;  follow  a  three-step,  verbal  command; 
write a sentence; and read and respond to a written command.

Memory  should  be  analyzed  according  to  three  main  time  scales: 
(1) immediate memory is assessed by saying a list of three items and 
having the patient repeat the list immediately; (2) short-term memory 
is tested by asking the patient to recall the same three items 5 and 15 min 

later; and (3) long-term memory is evaluated by determining how well 
the patient is able to provide a coherent chronologic history of his or 
her illness or personal events.

Fund  of  information  is  assessed  by  asking  questions  about  major 
historic  or  current  events,  with  special  attention  to  educational  level 
and life experiences.

Abnormalities of insight and judgment are usually detected during 
the patient interview; a more detailed assessment can be elicited by ask-
ing the patient to describe how he or she would respond to situations 
having a variety of potential outcomes (e.g., “What would you do if you 
found a wallet on the sidewalk?”).

Abstract thought can be tested by asking the patient to describe sim-
ilarities  between  various  objects  or  concepts  (e.g.,  apple  and  orange, 
desk and chair, poetry and sculpture) or to list items having the same 
attributes (e.g., a list of four-legged animals).

Calculation  ability  is  assessed  by  having  the  patient  carry  out  a 
computation that is appropriate to the patient’s age and education (e.g., 
serial subtraction of 7 from 100 or 3 from 20; or word problems involv-
ing simple arithmetic).

 ■ CRANIAL NERVE EXAMINATION
•	 The bare minimum: Check the fundi, visual fields, pupil size and reac-

tivity, extraocular movements, and facial movements.

The  CNs  are  best  examined  in  numerical  order,  except  for  grouping 
together CN III, IV, and VI because of their similar function.

CN I (Olfactory)  Testing is often omitted unless there is suspicion 
for inferior frontal lobe disease (e.g., meningioma). With eyes closed, 
ask the patient to sniff a mild stimulus such as toothpaste or coffee and 
identify the odorant.

CN  II  (Optic)  Check  visual  acuity  (with  eyeglasses  or  contact 
lens  correction)  using  a  Snellen  chart  or  similar  tool.  Test  the  visual 
fields by confrontation, i.e., by comparing the patient’s visual fields to 
your  own.  As  a  screening  test,  it  is  usually  sufficient  to  examine  the 
visual fields of both eyes simultaneously; individual eye fields should 
be tested if there is any reason to suspect a problem of vision by the 
history or other elements of the examination, or if the screening test 
reveals  an  abnormality.  Face  the  patient  at  a  distance  of  ~0.6–1.0  m 
(2–3 ft) and place your hands at the periphery of your visual fields in 
the plane that is equidistant between you and the patient. Instruct the 
patient to look directly at the center of your face and to indicate when 
and where he or she sees one of your fingers moving. Beginning with 
the two inferior quadrants and then the two superior quadrants, move 
your index finger of the right hand, left hand, or both hands simultane-
ously and observe whether the patient detects the movements. A single 
small-amplitude  movement  of  the  finger  is  sufficient  for  a  normal 
response. Focal perimetry and tangent screen examinations should be 
used to map out visual field defects fully or to search for subtle abnor-
malities.  Optic  fundi  should  be  examined  with  an  ophthalmoscope, 
and the color, size, and degree of swelling or elevation of the optic disc 
noted, as well as the color and texture of the retina. The retinal vessels 
should be checked for size, regularity, arteriovenous nicking at crossing 
points, hemorrhage, and exudates.

CN III, IV, VI (Oculomotor, Trochlear, Abducens)  Describe 
the size and shape of the pupils and reaction to light and accommo-
dation (i.e., as the eyes converge while following your finger as it moves 
toward the bridge of the nose). To check extraocular movements, ask 
the patient to keep his or her head still while tracking the movement 
of the tip of your finger. Move the target slowly in the horizontal and 
vertical  planes;  observe  any  paresis,  nystagmus,  or  abnormalities  of 
smooth  pursuit  (saccades,  oculomotor  ataxia,  etc.).  If  necessary,  the 
relative position of the two eyes, both in primary and multidirectional 
gaze,  can  be  assessed  by  comparing  the  reflections  of  a  bright  light 
off  both  pupils.  However,  in  practice  it  is  typically  more  useful  to 
determine  whether  the  patient  describes  diplopia  in  any  direction  of 
gaze; true diplopia should almost always resolve with one eye closed. 
Horizontal nystagmus is best assessed at 45° and not at extreme lateral 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3279

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3280 gaze  (which  is  uncomfortable  for  the  patient);  the  target  must  often 
be  held  at  the  lateral  position  for  at  least  a  few  seconds  to  detect  an 
abnormality.

CN V (Trigeminal)  Examine sensation within the three territories 
of  the  branches  of  the  trigeminal  nerve  (ophthalmic,  maxillary,  and 
mandibular) on each side of the face. As with other parts of the sensory 
examination, testing of two sensory modalities derived from different 
anatomic pathways (e.g., light touch and temperature) is sufficient for a 
screening examination. Testing of other modalities, the corneal reflex, 
and the motor component of CN V (jaw clench—masseter muscle) is 
indicated when suggested by the history.

CN VII (Facial)  Look for facial asymmetry at rest and with spon-
taneous  movements.  Test  eyebrow  elevation,  forehead  wrinkling,  eye 
closure, smiling, and cheek puff. Look in particular for differences in 
the lower versus upper facial muscles; weakness of the lower two-thirds 
of  the  face  with  preservation  of  the  upper  third  suggests  an  upper 
motor  neuron  lesion,  whereas  weakness  of  an  entire  side  suggests  a 
lower motor neuron lesion.

CN  VIII  (Vestibulocochlear)  Check  the  patient’s  ability  to 
hear a finger rub or whispered voice with each ear. Further testing for 
air  versus  mastoid  bone  conduction  (Rinne)  and  lateralization  of  a  
512-Hz tuning fork placed at the center of the forehead (Weber) should 
be done if an abnormality is detected by history or examination. Any 
suspected  problem  should  be  followed  up  with  formal  audiometry. 
For further discussion of assessing vestibular nerve function in the 
setting of dizziness, coma, or hearing loss, see Chaps. 22, 28, and 34, 
respectively.

CN IX, X (Glossopharyngeal, Vagus)  Observe the position and 
symmetry of the palate and uvula at rest and with phonation (“aah”). 
The pharyngeal (“gag”) reflex is evaluated by stimulating the posterior 
pharyngeal wall on each side with a sterile, blunt object (e.g., tongue 
blade), but the reflex may be absent in normal individuals.

CN  XI  (Spinal  Accessory)  Check  shoulder  shrug  (trapezius 
muscle) and head rotation to each side (sternocleidomastoid) against 
resistance.

CN XII (Hypoglossal) 
Inspect the tongue for atrophy or fascicu-
lations, position with protrusion, and strength when extended against 
the inner surface of the cheeks on each side.
 ■ MOTOR EXAMINATION
•	 The  bare  minimum:  Look  for  muscle  atrophy  and  check  extremity 
tone.  Assess  upper  extremity  strength  by  checking  for  pronator  drift 
and  strength  of  wrist  or  finger  extensors.  Assess  lower  extremity 
strength by checking strength of the toe extensors.

The  motor  examination  includes  observations  of  muscle  appearance, 
tone, and strength. Although gait is in part a test of motor function, it 
is usually evaluated separately at the end of the examination.

Appearance 
Inspect  and  palpate  muscle  groups  under  good  light 
and with the patient in a comfortable and symmetric position. Check 
for  muscle  fasciculations,  tenderness,  and  atrophy  or  hypertrophy. 
Involuntary movements may be present at rest (e.g., tics, myoclonus, 
choreoathetosis,  pill-rolling  tremor  of  Parkinson’s  disease),  during 
maintained posture (essential tremor), or with voluntary movements 
(intention tremor of cerebellar disease or familial tremor).

Tone  Muscle  tone  is  tested  by  measuring  the  resistance  to  passive 
movement  of  a  relaxed  limb.  Patients  often  have  difficulty  relaxing 
during  this  procedure,  so  it  is  useful  to  distract  the  patient  to  mini-
mize active movements. In the upper limbs, tone is assessed by rapid 
pronation and supination of the forearm and flexion and extension at 
the wrist. In the lower limbs, while the patient is supine the examiner’s 
hands  are  placed  behind  the  knees  and  rapidly  raised;  with  normal 
tone,  the  ankles  drag  along  the  table  surface  for  a  variable  distance 
before rising, whereas increased tone results in an immediate lift of the 
heel  off  the  surface.  Decreased  tone  is  most  commonly  due  to  lower 

motor  neuron  or  peripheral  nerve  disorders.  Increased  tone  may  be 
evident as spasticity (resistance determined by the angle and velocity 
of  motion;  corticospinal  tract  disease),  rigidity  (similar  resistance  in 
all  angles  of  motion;  extrapyramidal  disease),  or  paratonia  (fluctuat-
ing changes in resistance; frontal lobe pathways; or normal difficulty 
in  relaxing).  Cogwheel  rigidity,  in  which  passive  motion  elicits  jerky 
interruptions in resistance, is seen in parkinsonism.

Strength  Testing for pronator drift is an extremely useful method 
for screening upper limb weakness. The patient is asked to hold both 
arms fully extended and parallel to the ground with eyes closed. This 
position should be maintained for ~10 s; any flexion at the elbow or 
fingers or pronation of the forearm, especially if asymmetric, is a sign 
of potential weakness. Patients with shoulder pain or a limited range 
of motion may have an apparent pronator drift that is not due to true 
weakness.  Muscle  strength  is  further  assessed  by  having  the  patient 
exert maximal effort for the particular muscle or muscle group being 
tested. It is important to isolate the muscles as much as possible, i.e., 
hold the limb so that only the muscles of interest are active. It is also 
helpful to palpate accessible muscles as they contract. Grading muscle 
strength and evaluating the patient’s effort is an art that takes time and 
practice.  Muscle  strength  is  traditionally  graded  using  the  following 
scale:

0 = no movement
1 =  flicker or trace of contraction but no associated movement at 

a joint

2 = movement with gravity eliminated
3 = movement against gravity but not against resistance
4– = movement against a mild degree of resistance
4 = movement against moderate resistance

4+ = movement against strong resistance
5 = full power

However, in many cases, it is more practical to use the following terms:

Paralysis = no movement

Severe weakness = movement with gravity eliminated

Moderate weakness =  movement  against  gravity  but  not  against 

Mild weakness = movement against moderate resistance

mild resistance

Full strength

Noting the pattern of weakness is as important as assessing the mag-
nitude  of  weakness.  Unilateral  or  bilateral  weakness  of  the  upper  limb 
extensors and lower limb flexors (“pyramidal weakness”) suggests a lesion 
of the pyramidal tract, bilateral proximal weakness suggests myopathy, and 
bilateral distal weakness suggests peripheral neuropathy.

 ■ REFLEX EXAMINATION
•	 The bare minimum: Check the biceps, patellar, and Achilles reflexes.

Muscle Stretch Reflexes  Those that are typically assessed include 
the  biceps  (C5,  C6),  brachioradialis  (C5,  C6),  triceps  (C6,  C7),  and 
sometimes  finger  flexor  (C8,  T1)  reflexes  in  the  upper  limbs  and 
the  patellar  or  quadriceps  (L3,  L4)  and  Achilles  (S1,  S2)  reflexes 
in  the  lower  limbs.  The  patient  should  be  relaxed  and  the  muscle 
positioned  midway  between  full  contraction  and  extension.  Reflexes 
may be enhanced by asking the patient to voluntarily contract other, 
distant  muscle  groups  (Jendrassik  maneuver).  For  example,  upper 
limb reflexes may be reinforced by voluntary teeth-clenching, and the 
Achilles reflex by hooking the flexed fingers of the two hands together 
and attempting to pull them apart. For each reflex tested, the two sides 
should  be  tested  sequentially,  and  it  is  important  to  determine  the 
smallest stimulus required to elicit a reflex rather than the maximum 
response. Reflexes are graded according to the following scale:

0 = absent
1 = present but diminished
2 = normoactive
3 = exaggerated
4 = clonus

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3280

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3281

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
2

A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
t
o
t
h
e
P
a
t
i
e
n
t

w

i
t
h
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Cutaneous Reflexes  The plantar reflex is elicited by stroking, with 
a  noxious  stimulus  such  as  a  tongue  blade,  the  lateral  surface  of  the 
sole of the foot beginning near the heel and moving across the ball of 
the foot to the great toe. The normal reflex consists of plantar flexion 
of the toes. With upper motor neuron lesions above the S1 level of the 
spinal cord, a paradoxical extension of the toe is observed, associated 
with  fanning  and  extension  of  the  other  toes  (termed  an  extensor 
plantar response, or Babinski sign). However, despite its popularity, the 
reliability and validity of the Babinski sign for identifying upper motor 
neuron  weakness  is  limited—it  is  far  more  useful  to  rely  on  tests  of 
tone, strength, stretch reflexes, and coordination. Superficial abdom-
inal  reflexes  are  elicited  by  gently  stroking  the  abdominal  surface 
near the umbilicus in a diagonal fashion with a sharp object (e.g., the 
wooden end of a cotton-tipped swab) and observing the movement of 
the umbilicus. Normally, the umbilicus will pull toward the stimulated 
quadrant. With upper motor neuron lesions, these reflexes are absent. 
They are most helpful when there is preservation of the upper (spinal 
cord  level  T9)  but  not  lower  (T12)  abdominal  reflexes,  indicating  a 
spinal lesion between T9 and T12, or when the response is asymmetric. 
Other useful cutaneous reflexes include the cremasteric (ipsilateral ele-
vation of the testicle following stroking of the medial thigh; mediated 
by  L1  and  L2)  and  anal  (contraction  of  the  anal  sphincter  when  the 
perianal skin is scratched; mediated by S2, S3, S4) reflexes. It is partic-
ularly important to test for these reflexes in any patient with suspected 
injury to the spinal cord or lumbosacral roots.

Primitive  Reflexes  With  disease  of  the  frontal  lobe  pathways, 
several primitive reflexes not normally present in the adult may appear. 
The suck response is elicited by lightly touching with a tongue blade the 
center  of  the  lips,  and  the  root  response  the  corner  of  the  lips;  the 
patient will move the lips to suck or root in the direction of the stim-
ulus.  The  grasp  reflex  is  elicited  by  touching  the  palm  between  the 
thumb and index finger with the examiner’s fingers; a positive response 
is a forced grasp of the examiner’s hand. In many instances, stroking 
the back of the hand will lead to its release. The palmomental response 
is  contraction  of  the  mentalis  muscle  (chin)  ipsilateral  to  a  scratch 
stimulus diagonally applied to the palm.
 ■ SENSORY EXAMINATION
•	 The bare minimum: Ask whether the patient can feel light touch and 
the temperature of a cool object in each distal extremity. Check double 
simultaneous stimulation using light touch on the hands. Perform the 
Romberg maneuver.

Evaluating sensation is usually the most unreliable part of the examina-
tion because it is subjective and is difficult to quantify. In the compliant 
and  discerning  patient,  the  sensory  examination  can  be  extremely 
helpful for the precise localization of a lesion. With patients who are 
uncooperative or lack an understanding of the tests, it may be useless. 
The examination should be focused on the suspected lesion. For exam-
ple, in spinal cord, spinal root, or peripheral nerve abnormalities, all 
major sensory modalities should be tested while looking for a pattern 
consistent with a spinal level and dermatomal or nerve distribution. In 
patients with lesions at or above the brainstem, screening the primary 
sensory modalities in the distal extremities along with tests of “cortical” 
sensation is usually sufficient.

The  five  primary  sensory  modalities—light  touch,  pain,  tempera-
ture, vibration, and joint position—are tested in each limb. Light touch 
is assessed by stimulating the skin with single, very gentle touches of 
the examiner’s finger or a wisp of cotton. Pain is tested using a new pin, 
and temperature is assessed using a metal object (e.g., tuning fork) that 
has been immersed in cold and warm water. Vibration is tested using 
a 128-Hz tuning fork applied to the distal phalanx of the great toe or 
index finger just below the nail bed. By placing a finger on the oppo-
site side of the joint being tested, the examiner compares the patient’s 
threshold of vibration perception with his or her own. For joint posi-
tion testing, the examiner grasps the digit or limb laterally and distal 
to the joint being assessed; small 1- to 2-mm excursions can usually be 
sensed. The Romberg maneuver is primarily a test of proprioception. 
The patient is asked to stand with the feet as close together as necessary 

to  maintain  balance  while  the  eyes  are  open,  and  the  eyes  are  then 
closed. A loss of balance with the eyes closed is an abnormal response.
“Cortical” sensation is mediated by the parietal lobes and represents 
an integration of the primary sensory modalities; testing cortical sen-
sation  is  only  meaningful  when  primary  sensation  is  intact.  Double 
simultaneous  stimulation  is  especially  useful  as  a  screening  test  for 
cortical  function;  with  the  patient’s  eyes  closed,  the  examiner  lightly 
touches one or both hands and asks the patient to identify the stimuli. 
With a parietal lobe lesion, the patient may be unable to identify the 
stimulus on the contralateral side when both hands are touched. Other 
modalities relying on the parietal cortex include the discrimination of 
two closely placed stimuli as separate (two-point discrimination), iden-
tification of an object by touch and manipulation alone (stereognosis), 
and the identification of numbers or letters written on the skin surface 
(graphesthesia).
 ■ COORDINATION EXAMINATION
•	 The bare minimum: Observe the patient at rest and during spontane-
ous movements. Test rapid alternating movements of the hands and 
feet and finger to nose.

Coordination  refers  to  the  orchestration  and  fluidity  of  movements. 
Even simple acts require cooperation of agonist and antagonist mus-
cles, maintenance of posture, and complex servomechanisms to control 
the  rate  and  range  of  movements.  Part  of  this  integration  relies  on 
normal function of the cerebellar and basal ganglia systems. However, 
coordination also requires intact muscle strength and kinesthetic and 
proprioceptive  information.  Thus,  if  the  examination  has  disclosed 
abnormalities of the motor or sensory systems, the patient’s coordina-
tion should be assessed with these limitations in mind.

Rapid  alternating  movements  in  the  upper  limbs  are  tested  sepa-
rately on each side by having the patient make a fist, partially extend 
the  index  finger,  and  then  tap  the  index  finger  on  the  distal  thumb 
as quickly as possible. In the lower limb, the patient rapidly taps the 
foot against the floor or the examiner’s hand. If these rapid alternating 
movements are imprecise or vary in amplitude or rhythm, a cerebellar 
lesion is suspected; if however they are slow compared with the other 
side,  a  lesion  of  the  pyramidal  tract  is  most  likely.  Finger-to-nose 
testing is primarily a test of cerebellar function; the patient is asked to 
touch his or her index finger repetitively to the nose and then to the 
examiner’s  outstretched  finger,  which  moves  with  each  repetition.  A 
similar test in the lower extremity is to have the patient raise the leg and 
touch the examiner’s finger with the great toe. Another coordination 
test in the lower limbs is the heel-knee-shin maneuver; in the supine 
position the patient is asked to slide the heel of each foot from the knee 
down the shin of the other leg. For all these movements, the accuracy, 
speed, and rhythm are noted.

 ■ GAIT EXAMINATION
•	 The bare minimum: Observe the patient while walking normally, on 

the heels and toes, and along a straight line.

Watching the patient walk is the most important part of the neurologic 
examination.  Normal  gait  requires  that  multiple  systems—including 
strength, sensation, and coordination—function in a highly integrated 
fashion.  Unexpected  abnormalities  may  be  detected  that  prompt  the 
examiner to return in more detail to other aspects of the examination. 
The patient should be observed while walking and turning normally, 
walking  on  the  heels,  walking  on  the  toes,  and  walking  heel-to-toe 
along a straight line. The examination may reveal decreased arm swing 
on one side (corticospinal tract disease), a stooped posture and short-
stepped gait (parkinsonism), a broad-based unstable gait (ataxia), scis-
soring (spasticity), or a high-stepped, slapping gait (posterior column 
or peripheral nerve disease), or the patient may appear to be stuck in 
place (apraxia with frontal lobe disease).

NEUROLOGIC DIAGNOSIS
The clinical data obtained from the history and examination are inter-
preted to arrive at an anatomic localization that best explains the clini-
cal findings (Table 422-2), to narrow the list of diagnostic possibilities, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3281

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3282 TABLE 422-2  Findings Helpful for Localizations within the Nervous 

System

Cerebrum

Brainstem

Spinal cord

Spinal roots

SIGNS
Abnormal mental status or cognitive impairment
Seizures
Unilateral weaknessa and sensory abnormalities including 
head and limbs
Visual field abnormalities
Movement abnormalities (e.g., diffuse incoordination, 
tremor, chorea)
Isolated cranial nerve abnormalities (single or multiple)
“Crossed” weaknessa and sensory abnormalities of head 
and limbs, e.g., weakness of right face and left arm and leg
Back pain or tenderness
Weaknessa and sensory abnormalities sparing the head
Mixed upper and lower motor neuron findings
Sensory level
Sphincter dysfunction
Radiating limb pain
Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities following root 
distribution (see Figs. 25-2 and 25-3)
Loss of reflexes

Peripheral nerve Mid or distal limb pain

Weaknessb or sensory abnormalities following nerve 
distribution (see Figs. 25-2 and 25-3)
“Stocking or glove” distribution of sensory loss
Loss of reflexes
Bilateral weakness including face (ptosis, diplopia, 
dysphagia) and proximal limbs
Increasing weakness with exertion
Sparing of sensation
Bilateral proximal or distal weakness
Sparing of sensation

Neuromuscular 
junction

Muscle

aWeakness along with other abnormalities having an “upper motor neuron” pattern, 
i.e., spasticity, weakness of extensors > flexors in the upper extremity and flexors > 
extensors in the lower extremity, and hyperreflexia.
bWeakness along with other abnormalities having a “lower motor neuron” pattern, 
i.e., flaccidity and hyporeflexia.

and  to  select  the  laboratory  tests  most  likely  to  be  informative.  The 
laboratory  assessment  may  include  (1)  serum  electrolytes;  complete 
blood  count;  and  renal,  hepatic,  endocrine,  and  immune  studies;  (2) 
cerebrospinal  fluid  examination;  (3)  focused  neuroimaging  studies 
(Chap. 423); or (4) electrophysiologic studies. The anatomic localiza-
tion, mode of onset and course of illness, other medical data, and lab-
oratory findings are then integrated to establish an etiologic diagnosis.
The neurologic examination may be normal even in patients with 
a serious neurologic disease, such as seizures, chronic meningitis, or a 
TIA. A comatose patient may arrive with no available history, and in 
such cases, the approach is as described in Chap. 28. In other patients, 
an inadequate history may be overcome by a succession of examina-
tions from which the course of the illness can be inferred. In perplex-
ing  cases  it  is  useful  to  remember  that  uncommon  presentations  of 
common  diseases  are  more  likely  than  rare  etiologies.  Thus,  even  in 
tertiary care settings, multiple strokes are usually due to emboli and not 
vasculitis, and dementia with myoclonus is usually Alzheimer’s disease 
and not a prion disorder or a paraneoplastic illness. Finally, the most 
important task of a primary care physician faced with a patient who has 
a new neurologic complaint is to assess the urgency of referral to a spe-
cialist. Here, the imperative is to rapidly identify patients likely to have 
nervous system infections, acute strokes, and spinal cord compression 
or other treatable mass lesions and arrange for immediate care.

Acknowledgment
The editors acknowledge the contributions of Joseph B. Martin to earlier 
editions of this chapter.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Brazis P et al: Localization in Clinical Neurology, 7th ed. Philadelphia, 

Lippincott William & Wilkins, 2016.

Campbell WW, Barohn RJ: DeJong’s The Neurological Examination, 

8th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott William & Wilkins, 2019.

GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators: Global burden of 
369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: 
A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. 
Lancet. 396:1204, 2020.

O’Brien M: Aids to the Examination of the Peripheral Nervous System, 

5th ed. Edinburgh, WB Saunders, 2010.

423 Neuroimaging in  

Neurologic Disorders
William P. Dillon

Numerous  noninvasive  imaging  options  are  available  to  clinicians 
evaluating patients with neurologic disorders. These include computed 
tomography  (CT)  and  magnetic  resonance  (MR)  imaging  (MRI), 
plus  their  variations,  including:  CT  angiography  (CTA);  perfusion 
CT (pCT); dual-energy CT; MR angiography (MRA); MR vessel wall 
imaging; functional MRI (fMRI); MR spectroscopy (MRS); MR neu-
rography  (MRN);  diffusion-weighted  MR  imaging  (DWI);  diffusion 
tensor MR imaging (DTI); susceptibility-weighted MR imaging (SWI); 
arterial  spin  label  imaging  (ASL);  and  perfusion  MRI  (pMRI).  Fur-
thermore, a number of interventional neuroradiologic techniques have 
matured  including  catheter  embolization,  stent  retrieval  thrombec-
tomy, aneurysm coiling and stenting, as well as numerous techniques 
for  spine  disorders,  including  CT  myelography,  fluoroscopy  and 
CT-guided  spine  interventional  procedures  for  pain  and  oncology, 
including  radiofrequency  and  cold  ablation  and  image-guided  blood 
patches.  Multidetector  CTA  (MDCTA)  and  gadolinium-enhanced 
MRA techniques have reduced the need for catheter-based angiogra-
phy, which is now reserved for patients in whom small-vessel detail is 
essential for diagnosis or for whom concurrent interventional therapy 
is planned (Table 423-1).

In  general,  MRI  is  more  sensitive  than  CT  for  the  detection  of 
lesions  affecting  the  peripheral  and  central  nervous  system  (CNS). 
Diffusion  MR,  a  sequence  sensitive  to  the  microscopic  motion  of 
water,  is  the  most  sensitive  technique  for  detecting  acute  ischemic 
stroke of the brain or spinal cord, and is also useful in the detection 
and  characterization  of  encephalitis,  abscess,  Creutzfeldt-Jacob  dis-
ease, cerebral tumors, and acute demyelinating lesions. CT, however, is 
acquired more quickly, making it a pragmatic choice for uncooperative 
patients, or those with suspected acute stroke, hemorrhage, and acute 
intracranial or spinal trauma. CT is also more sensitive than MRI for 
visualizing  fine  osseous  detail  and  thus  is  appropriate  for  the  initial 
imaging evaluation of conductive hearing loss, and lesions affecting the 
osseous skull and spine. MR may, however, add important diagnostic 
information regarding bone marrow infiltrative processes that can be 
difficult to detect on CT.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 ■ TECHNIQUE
The CT image is a cross-sectional representation of anatomy created 
by  a  computer-generated  analysis  of  the  attenuation  of  x-ray  beams 
passed  through  a  section  of  the  body.  As  the  x-ray  beam,  collimated 
to the desired slice width, rotates around the patient, it passes through 
selected  regions  in  the  body.  X-rays  that  are  not  attenuated  by  body 
structures are detected by sensitive x-ray detectors aligned 180° from 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3282

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 423-1  Guidelines for the Use of CT, Ultrasound, and MRI
CONDITION
Hemorrhage
  Acute parenchymal
  Subacute/chronic
  Subarachnoid hemorrhage

RECOMMENDED TECHNIQUE

CT, MR
MRI
CT, CTA, lumbar puncture → angiography
Angiography > CTA, MRA
MR with SWI

  Chronic subarachnoid blood
Aneurysm
Ischemic infarction
  Hemorrhagic infarction
  Bland infarction
  Carotid or vertebral dissection
  Vertebral basilar insufficiency
  Carotid stenosis
Suspected mass lesion
  Neoplasm, primary or metastatic MRI + contrast
MRI + contrast
MRI + contrast

Infection/abscess
 Immunosuppressed with focal 
findings

CT or MRI
MRI with diffusion > CT, CTA, angiography
MRI/MRA
CTA, MRI/MRA
CTA, MRA > US

MRI ± angiography
MRI
MRI ± contrast
MRI > CT

Vascular malformation
White matter disorders
  Demyelinating disease
Dementia
Trauma
  Acute trauma
  Shear injury/chronic hemorrhage MRI + susceptibility-weighted imaging
Headache/migraine
Seizure

CT/MRI

CT

 First time, no focal neurologic 
deficits

MRI > CT

 With neurologic deficit, or 
immunocompromised or cancer 

CT, followed by MR

  Partial complex/refractory
Cranial neuropathy
Meningeal disease

MRI
MRI with contrast
MRI with contrast

Spine

Low-back pain
  No neurologic deficits
  With focal deficits
Spinal stenosis
Cervical spondylosis
Infection
Myelopathy
Arteriovenous malformation

MRI or CT after >6 weeks
MRI > CT
MRI or CT
MRI, CT, CT myelography
MRI + contrast, CT
MRI + contrast
MRI + contrast, angiography

Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; CTA, CT angiography; MRA, magnetic 
resonance angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SWI, susceptibility-
weighted imaging.

the x-ray tube. A computer calculates a “back projection” image from 
the  360°  x-ray  attenuation  profile.  Greater  x-ray  attenuation  (e.g.,  as 
caused by bone), results in areas of high “density” (whiter) on the scan, 
whereas  soft-tissue  structures  that  have  poor  attenuation  of  x-rays, 
such  as  organs  and  air-filled  cavities,  are  lower  (blacker)  in  density. 
The resolution of an image depends on the radiation dose, the detector 
size, collimation (slice thickness), the field of view, and the matrix size 
of the display. A modern CT scanner is capable of obtaining sections as 
thin as 0.5–1 mm with 0.4-mm in-plane resolution at a speed of 0.3 s 
per rotation; complete studies of the brain can be completed in 1–10 s.
Multidetector CT (MDCT) is now standard. Single or multiple (from 
4 to 320) solid-state detectors positioned opposite to the x-ray source 
result in multiple slices per revolution of the beam around the patient. 
In  helical  mode,  the  table  moves  continuously  through  the  rotating 
x-ray  beam,  generating  a  continuous  “helix”  of  information  that  can 

3283

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
3

N
e
u
r
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
g
i
n
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

be  reformatted  into  various  slice  thicknesses  and  planes.  Advantages 
of  MDCT  include  shorter  scan  times  and  thus  reduced  patient  and 
organ  motion,  and  the  ability  to  acquire  images  dynamically  during 
the  infusion  of  intravenous  (IV)  contrast,  the  basis  of  CTA  and  CT 
perfusion  (Figs.  423-1B  and  C).  CTA  is  displayed  in  three  dimen-
sions  to  yield  angiogram-like  images  (Figs.  423-1C,  423-2E  and  F,  
and see Fig. 420-3).

IV  iodinated  contrast  is  used  to  identify  vascular  structures  and 
to detect defects in the blood-brain barrier (BBB) that are caused by 
tumors, infarcts, and infections. In the normal CNS, only vessels and 
structures  lacking  a  BBB  (e.g.,  the  pituitary  gland,  choroid  plexus, 
and  dura)  enhance  after  contrast  administration.  While  helpful  in 
characterizing  mass  lesions  as  well  as  essential  for  the  acquisition  of 
CTA  studies,  the  decision  to  use  contrast  material  should  always  be 
considered  carefully  as  it  carries  a  small  risk  of  allergic  reaction  and 
adds additional expense.

 ■ INDICATIONS
CT is the primary study of choice in the evaluation of an acute change 
in mental status, focal neurologic findings, acute trauma to the brain and 
spine,  suspected  subarachnoid  hemorrhage,  and  conductive  hearing 
loss  (Table  423-1).  CT  often  is  complementary  to  MR  in  the  evalua-
tion of the skull base, orbit, and osseous structures of the spine. In the 
spine, CT is useful in evaluating patients with osseous spinal stenosis 
and spondylosis, but MRI is often preferred in those with neurologic 
deficits. CT is often acquired following intrathecal contrast injection to 
evaluate for spinal and intracranial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula, as 
well as the spinal subarachnoid space (CT myelography) in failed back 
surgery syndromes.

 ■ COMPLICATIONS
CT is safe, fast, and reliable. Radiation exposure depends on the dose 
used  but  is  normally  2–5  mSv  (millisievert)  for  a  routine  brain  CT 
study. For all patients, especially children, it is important to use as low a 
radiation dose as possible for diagnostic purposes. Where feasible, MR 
or ultrasound is preferred. With the advent of MDCT, CTA, and CT 
perfusion, the benefit must be weighed against the increased radiation 
doses  associated  with  these  techniques.  Advances  in  postprocessing 
software now permit acceptable diagnostic CT scans at 30–40% lower 
radiation doses.

The  most  frequent  complications  are  those  associated  with  use  of 
IV contrast agents. While two broad categories of contrast media, ionic 
and  nonionic,  are  in  use,  ionic  agents  have  been  largely  replaced  by 
safer nonionic compounds.

Contrast  nephropathy  is  rare.  It  may  result  from  hemodynamic 
changes,  renal  tubular  obstruction  and  cell  damage,  or  immunologic 
reactions  to  contrast  agents.  A  rise  in  serum  creatinine  of  at  least  
44 μmol/L (0.5 mg/dL) within 48 h of contrast administration is often 
used  as  a  definition  of  contrast  nephropathy,  although  there  is  no 
accepted  definition  and  other  causes  of  acute  renal  failure  must  be 
excluded.  The  prognosis  is  usually  favorable,  with  serum  creatinine 
levels returning to baseline within 1–2 weeks. Risk factors for contrast 
nephropathy include age (>80 years), preexisting renal disease (serum 
creatinine exceeding 2 mg/dL), solitary kidney, diabetes mellitus, dehy-
dration,  paraproteinemia,  concurrent  use  of  nephrotoxic  medication 
or  chemotherapeutic  agents,  and  high  contrast  dose.  Patients  with 
diabetes and those with mild renal failure should be well hydrated prior 
to the administration of contrast agents; careful consideration should 
be given to alternative imaging techniques such as MRI, noncontrast 
CT, or ultrasound (US). Nonionic, low-osmolar media produce fewer 
abnormalities in renal blood flow and less endothelial cell damage but 
should  still  be  used  carefully  in  patients  at  risk  for  allergic  reaction. 
Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is a more reliable indicator 
of  renal  function  compared  to  creatinine  alone  because  it  takes  into 
account age and sex. In one study, 15% of outpatients with a normal 
serum  creatinine  had  an  estimated  creatinine  clearance  of  ≤50  mL/min 
per  1.73  m2  (normal  is  ≥90  mL/min  per  1.73  m2).  The  exact  eGFR 
threshold,  below  which  withholding  IV  contrast  should  be  consid-
ered, is controversial. The risk of contrast nephropathy is minimal in 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3283

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3284

A

B

C

FIGURE 423-1  Computed tomography (CT) angiography (CTA) of ruptured anterior cerebral artery aneurysm in a patient presenting with acute headache. A. Noncontrast 
CT  demonstrates  subarachnoid  and  intraventricular  hemorrhage  and  mild  obstructive  hydrocephalus.  B.  Axial  maximum-intensity  projection  from  CTA  demonstrates 
enlargement  of  the  anterior  cerebral  artery  (arrow).  C.  Three-dimensional  surface  reconstruction  using  a  workstation  confirms  the  anterior  cerebral  aneurysm  and 
demonstrates its orientation and relationship to nearby vessels (arrow). CTA image is produced by 0.5- to 1-mm helical CT scans performed during a rapid bolus infusion of 
IV contrast medium.

patients with eGFR >30 mL/min per 1.73 m2; however, the majority of 
these patients will have only a temporary rise in creatinine. The risk of 
dialysis after receiving contrast significantly increases in patients with 
eGFR <30 mL/min per 1.73 m2. At the current time, there is very little 
evidence  that  IV  iodinated  contrast  material  is  an  independent  risk 
factor for acute kidney injury in patients with eGFR ≥30 mL/min per 
1.73 m2. The American College of Radiology suggests, if a threshold for 
risk is used at all, an eGFR of 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 seems to have the 
greatest level of evidence.

If contrast must be administered to a patient with an eGFR <30 mL/min 
per  1.73  m2,  the  patient  should  be  well  hydrated,  and  a  reduction  in 
the dose of contrast should be considered. Use of other agents such as 
bicarbonate  and  acetylcysteine  may  reduce  the  incidence  of  contrast 
nephropathy.

Below are suggested guidelines for creatinine testing prior to con-
trast  administration.  If  serum  creatinine  is  not  available,  creatinine 
testing should be performed IF the patient has ANY of the following 
risk factors:

•	 Age >60 years
•	 History of “kidney disease” as an adult, including tumor and transplant
•	 Family history of kidney failure
•	 Diabetes mellitus treated with insulin or other prescribed medications
•	 Hypertension
•	 Paraproteinemia syndromes or diseases (e.g., myeloma)
•	 Collagen vascular disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], 

scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis)

•	 Solid-organ transplant recipient

If creatinine testing is required, a creatinine level within the prior  

6 weeks is sufficient in most clinical settings.

Allergy 
Immediate  reactions  following  IV  contrast  media  occur 
through  several  mechanisms.  The  most  severe  reactions  are  related 
to  allergic  hypersensitivity  (anaphylaxis)  and  range  from  mild  hives 
to  bronchospasm  and  death.  The  pathogenesis  of  allergic  hypersen-
sitivity  reactions  is  thought  to  include  the  release  of  mediators  such 
as histamine, antibody-antigen reactions, and complement activation. 
Severe allergic reactions occur in ~0.04% of patients receiving nonionic 
media,  sixfold  lower  than  with  ionic  media.  Risk  factors  include  a 
history of prior contrast reaction (fivefold increased likelihood), food 
and or drug allergies, and atopy (asthma and hay fever). The predic-
tive value of specific allergies, such as those to shellfish, once thought 
important, actually is now recognized to be unreliable. Nonetheless, in 
patients with a history worrisome for potential allergic reaction, a non-
contrast CT or MRI procedure should be considered as an alternative 
to contrast administration. If iodinated contrast is absolutely required, 

a  nonionic  agent  should  be  used  in  conjunction  with  pretreatment 
with glucocorticoids and antihistamines (Table 423-2); however, pre-
treatment does not guarantee safety. Patients with allergic reactions to 
iodinated contrast material do not usually react to gadolinium-based 
MR contrast material, although such reactions can occur. It would be 
wise  to  pretreat  patients  with  a  prior  allergic  history  to  MR  contrast 
administration  in  a  similar  fashion.  Subacute  (>1  h  after  injection) 
reactions are frequent and probably related to T cell–mediated immune 
reactions. These are typically urticarial but can occasionally be more 
severe.  Drug  provocation  and  skin  testing  may  be  required  to  deter-
mine both the culprit agent involved and a safe alternative.

Other  side  effects  of  CT  contrast  include  a  sensation  of  warmth 
throughout  the  body  and  a  metallic  taste  during  IV  administration. 
Extravasation of contrast media, although rare, can be painful and lead 
to  compartment  syndrome.  When  this  occurs,  immediate  consulta-
tion with plastic surgery is indicated. Patients with significant cardiac 
disease  may  be  at  increased  risk  for  contrast  reactions,  and  in  these 
patients,  limits  to  the  volume  and  osmolality  of  the  contrast  media 
should be considered. Patients who may undergo systemic radioactive 
iodine  therapy  for  thyroid  disease  or  cancer  should  not  receive  iodi-
nated contrast media, if possible, because this will decrease the uptake 
of the radioisotope into the tumor or thyroid (see the American College 
of  Radiology  Manual  on  Contrast  Media,  2021;  https://www.acr.org/-/
media/ACR/Files/Clinical-Resources/Contrast_Media.pdf).

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
 ■ TECHNIQUE
MRI  is  a  complex  interaction  between  hydrogen  protons  in  biologic 
tissues, a static magnetic field (the magnet), and energy in the form of 
radiofrequency (Rf) waves of a specific frequency introduced by coils 
placed next to the body part of interest. Images are made by computer-
ized processing of resonance information received from protons (typ-
ically hydrogen) in the body. Field strength of the magnet is directly 
related to signal-to-noise ratio. While 1.5 Tesla (T) and 3-T magnets 
are now widely available and have distinct advantages in the brain and 
musculoskeletal systems, even higher field magnets (7-T) and positron 
emission tomography (PET)-MR machines promise increased resolu-
tion  and  anatomic-functional  information  on  a  variety  of  disorders. 
Spatial localization is achieved by magnetic gradients surrounding the 
main magnet, which impart slight changes in magnetic field through-
out  the  imaging  volume.  Rf  pulses  transiently  excite  the  energy  state 
of the hydrogen protons in the body. Rf is administered at a frequency 
specific for the field strength of the magnet. The subsequent return to 
equilibrium  energy  state  (relaxation)  of  the  hydrogen  protons  results 
in a release of Rf energy (the echo), which is detected by the coils that 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3284

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3285

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
3

N
e
u
r
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
g
i
n
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

FIGURE 423-2  Acute left hemiparesis due to right middle cerebral artery occlusion. A. Axial noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrates high density within 
the right middle cerebral artery (arrow) associated with subtle low density involving the right putamen (arrowheads). B. Mean transit time CT perfusion parametric map 
indicating prolonged mean transit time involving the right middle cerebral territory (arrows). C. Cerebral blood volume (CBV) map shows reduced CBV involving an area within 
the defect shown in B, indicating a high likelihood of infarction (arrows). D. Axial maximum-intensity projection from a CT angiography (CTA) study through the circle of Willis 
demonstrates an abrupt occlusion of the proximal right middle cerebral artery (arrow). E. Sagittal reformation through the right internal carotid artery demonstrates a low-
density lipid-laden plaque (arrowheads) narrowing the lumen (black arrow). F. Three-dimensional surface-rendered CTA image demonstrates calcification and narrowing 
of the right internal carotid artery (arrow), consistent with atherosclerotic disease. G. Coronal maximum-intensity projection from magnetic resonance angiography shows 
right middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion (arrow). H. and I. Axial diffusion-weighted image (H) and apparent diffusion-coefficient image (I) document the presence of a 
right middle cerebral artery infarction.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3285

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3286

TABLE 423-2  Guidelines for Premedication of Patients with Prior 
Contrast Allergy
12 h prior to examination:
  Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO
2 h prior to examination:

 Prednisone, 50 mg PO or methylprednisolone, 32 mg PO and cimetidine,  
300 mg PO or ranitidine, 150 mg PO

Immediately prior to examination:
  Benadryl, 50 mg IV (alternatively, can be given PO 2 h prior to exam)

delivered the Rf pulses. Fourier analysis is used to transform the echo 
into the information used to form an MR image. The MR image thus 
consists of a map of the distribution of hydrogen protons, with signal 
intensity imparted by both density of hydrogen protons and differences 
in  the  relaxation  times  (see  below)  of  hydrogen  protons  on  different 
molecules. Although clinical MRI currently makes use of the ubiqui-
tous hydrogen proton, sodium and carbon imaging and spectroscopy 
are also possible but have yet to be integrated into mainstream practice.

T1 and T2 Relaxation Times  The rate of return to equilibrium 
of perturbed protons is called the relaxation rate. The relaxation rate 
varies among normal and pathologic tissues. The relaxation rate of a 
hydrogen  proton  in  a  tissue  is  influenced  by  local  interactions  with 
surrounding molecules and atomic neighbors. Two relaxation rates, T1 
and T2, influence the signal intensity of the image. The T1 relaxation 
time  is  the  time,  measured  in  milliseconds,  for  63%  of  the  hydrogen 
protons  to  return  to  their  normal  equilibrium  state,  whereas  the  T2 
relaxation  is  the  time  for  63%  of  the  protons  to  become  dephased 
owing to interactions among nearby protons. The intensity and image 
contrast  of  the  signal  within  various  tissues  can  be  modulated  by 
altering acquisition parameters such as the interval between Rf pulses 
(TR) and the time between the Rf pulse and the signal reception (TE). 
T1-weighted  (T1W)  images  are  produced  by  keeping  the  TR  and 
TE relatively short, whereas using longer TR and TE times produces 
T2-weighted  (T2W)  images.  Fat  and  subacute  hemorrhage  have  rel-
atively  shorter  T1  relaxation  rates  and  thus  higher  signal  intensity 
than  brain  on  T1W  images.  Structures  containing  more  water,  such 
as  CSF  and  edema,  have  long  T1  and  T2  relaxation  rates,  resulting 
in  relatively  lower  signal  intensity  on  T1W  images  and  higher  signal 
intensity on T2W images (Table 423-3). Gray matter contains 10–15% 
more water than white matter, which accounts for much of the intrin-
sic contrast between the two on MRI (Fig. 423-4A). T2W images are 
more sensitive than T1W images to edema, demyelination, infarction, 
and chronic hemorrhage, whereas T1W imaging is more sensitive to 
subacute hemorrhage and fat-containing structures.

Many different MR pulse sequences exist, and each can be obtained 
in  various  planes  (Figs.  423-2,  423-3,  and  423-4).  The  selection  of 
a  proper  protocol  that  will  best  answer  a  clinical  question  depends 
on  an  accurate  clinical  history  and  indication  for  the  examination. 
Fluid-attenuated  inversion  recovery  (FLAIR)  is  a  very  useful  pulse 
sequence  that  produces  T2W  images  in  which  the  normally  high 
signal intensity of CSF is suppressed (Fig. 423-4B). FLAIR images are 
more  sensitive  than  standard  spin  echo  images  for  water-containing 

TABLE 423-3  Some Common Intensities on T1- and T2-Weighted MRI 
Sequences

SIGNAL INTENSITY

IMAGE
T1W
T2W
FLAIR (T2)

TR
Short
Long
Long

TE
Short
Long
Long

CSF
Low
High
Low

FAT
High
High
High

EDEMA
BRAIN
Low
Low
Medium High
Medium High

Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; 
TE, interval between radiofrequency pulse and signal reception; TR, interval 
between radiofrequency pulses; T1W and T2W, T1- and T2-weighted.

A

B

FIGURE 423-3  Cerebral abscess in a patient with fever and a right hemiparesis. 
A. Coronal postcontrast T1-weighted image demonstrates a ring-enhancing mass 
in the left frontal lobe. B. Axial diffusion-weighted image demonstrates restricted 
diffusion  (high  signal  intensity)  within  the  lesion,  which  in  this  setting  is  highly 
suggestive of cerebral abscess.

lesions or edema, especially those close to CSF-filled cisterns and sulci. 
Diffusion-weighted  imaging  is  also  routinely  obtained  in  most  brain 
protocols. This sequence interrogates the microscopic motion of water, 
which  is  restricted  in  areas  of  infarction,  abscess,  and  some  tumors. 
SWI is a gradient echo sequence that is very sensitive to alterations in 
local magnetic field generated by blood, calcium, and air. SWI is also 
now  routinely  obtained  and  helps  detect  microhemorrhages,  such  as 
is typical of amyloid angiopathy, hypertension, hemorrhagic metasta-
ses, traumatic brain injury, and thrombotic states (Fig. 423-5C). MR 
images  can  be  generated  in  any  plane  without  changing  the  patient’s 
position. Each sequence, however, is currently obtained separately and 
takes 1–10 min on average to complete. Three-dimensional volumetric 
imaging is also possible with MRI, resulting in a volume of data that 
can be reformatted in any orientation to highlight certain disease pro-
cesses. Perfusion techniques such as arterial spin labeling also provide 
quantitative imaging information regarding cerebral blood flow.

MR  Contrast  Material  The  heavy-metal  element  gadolinium 
forms the basis of all currently approved IV MR contrast agents. Gadol-
inium reduces the T1 and T2 relaxation times of nearby water protons 
in the presence of a magnetic field, resulting in a high signal on T1W 
images and a low signal on T2W images (the latter requires a sufficient 
local concentration, usually in the form of an IV bolus). Unlike iodi-
nated contrast agents, the effect of MR contrast agents depends on the 
presence of local hydrogen protons on which it must act to achieve the 
desired  effect.  There  are  nine  different  gadolinium  agents  approved 
in  the  United  States  for  use  with  MRI.  These  differ  according  to  the 
attached chelated moiety, which also affects the strength of chelation 
of the otherwise toxic gadolinium element. The chelating carrier mol-
ecule for gadolinium can be classified by whether it is macrocyclic or 
has linear geometry and whether it is ionic or nonionic. Macrocyclic 
ligands (Group 2 agents) are considered more stable as the gadolinium 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3286

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
3287

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
3

N
e
u
r
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
g
i
n
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

deposits  are  associated  with  histologic  changes  that  would  suggest 
neurotoxicity, even among agents with the highest rates of deposition.
ALLERGIC  HYPERSENSITIVITY  Gadolinium-DTPA  (diethylenetri-
aminepentaacetic acid) does not normally cross the intact BBB imme-
diately  but  will  enhance  lesions  lacking  a  BBB  (Fig.  423-3A)  as  well 
as  areas  of  the  brain  that  normally  are  devoid  of  the  BBB  (pituitary, 
dura,  choroid  plexus).  However,  gadolinium  contrast  slowly  crosses 
an intact BBB over time and especially in the setting of reduced renal 
clearance  or  inflamed  meninges.  The  agents  are  generally  well  toler-
ated; overall adverse events after injection range from 0.07–2.4%. True 
allergic reactions are rare (0.004–0.7%) but have been reported. Severe 
life-threatening  reactions  are  exceedingly  rare;  in  one  report,  only 
55  reactions  out  of  20  million  doses  occurred.  However,  the  adverse 
reaction rate in patients with a prior history of reaction to gadolinium 
is eight times higher than normal. Other risk factors include atopy or 
asthma (3.7%). There is no cross reactivity between different classes of 
contrast media; a prior reaction to gadolinium-based contrast does not 
predict a future reaction to iodinated contrast medium, or vice versa, 
more than any other unrelated allergy. Gadolinium contrast material 
can be administered safely to children as well as adults, although these 
agents are generally avoided in those aged <6 months.
NEPHROTOXICITY  Contrast-induced  renal  failure  does  not  occur 
with  gadolinium  agents.  A  rare  complication,  nephrogenic  systemic 
fibrosis (NSF), has occurred in patients with severe renal insufficiency 
who have been exposed to linear (Group 1 and 3) gadolinium contrast 
agents.  The  onset  of  NSF  has  been  reported  between  5  and  75  days 
following exposure; histologic features include thickened collagen bun-
dles with surrounding clefts, mucin deposition, and increased numbers 
of  fibrocytes  and  elastic  fibers  in  skin.  In  addition  to  dermatologic 
symptoms,  other  manifestations  include  widespread  fibrosis  of  the 
skeletal muscle, bone, lungs, pleura, pericardium, myocardium, kidney, 
muscle,  bone,  testes,  and  dura.  The  American  College  of  Radiology 
recommends  that  a  glomerular  filtration  rate  (GFR)  assessment  be 
obtained within 6 weeks prior to elective gadolinium-based MR con-
trast agent administration in patients with:

1.  A  history  of  renal  disease  (including  solitary  kidney,  renal  trans-

plant, renal tumor)

2.  Age >60 years
3.  History of hypertension
4.  History of diabetes
5.  History of severe hepatic disease, liver transplantation, or pending 
liver transplantation; for these patients, it is recommended that the 
patient’s GFR assessment be nearly contemporaneous with the MR 
examination.

The  incidence  of  NSF  in  patients  with  severe  renal  dysfunction 
(GFR  <30)  varies  from  0.19–4%.  Other  risk  factors  for  NSF  include 
acute  kidney  injury,  the  use  of  nonmacrocyclic  agents,  and  repeated 
or  high-dose  exposure  to  gadolinium.  The  American  College  of 
Radiology  Committee  on  Drugs  and  Contrast  Media  considers  the 
risk  of  NSF  among  patients  exposed  to  standard  or  lower  doses  of 
Group 2 gadolinium agents (macrocyclic agents) to be sufficiently low 
or  possibly  nonexistent  such  that  the  assessment  of  renal  function  is 
optional prior to administration. Group 2 agents are strongly preferred 
in patients at risk for NSF. Renal function, dialysis status, or informed 
consent  are  not  recommended  prior  to  injection  of  Group  2  agents, 
but deference is made to local practice preferences. Patients receiving 
any Group 1 (linear) or 3 gadolinium-containing agent should be con-
sidered at risk of NSF if they are on dialysis (of any form); have severe 
or  end-stage  chronic  renal  disease  (eGFR  <30  mL/min  per  1.73  m2) 
without dialysis; eGFR of 30–40 mL/min per 1.73 m2 without dialysis 
(as the GFR may fluctuate); or have acute renal insufficiency. The use 
of gadolinium in young children and infants is discouraged due to the 
unknown risks and their immature renal systems.

 ■ COMPLICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
From the patient’s perspective, an MRI examination can be intimidat-
ing,  and  a  higher  level  of  cooperation  is  required  than  with  CT.  The 

A

B

C

FIGURE  423-4  Herpes  simplex  encephalitis  in  a  patient  presenting  with  altered 
mental  status  and  fever.  A.  and  B.  Coronal  (A)  and  axial  (B)  T2-weighted  fluid-
attenuated  inversion  recovery  images  demonstrate  expansion  and  high  signal 
intensity  involving  the  right  medial  temporal  lobe  and  insular  cortex  (arrows).  C. 
Coronal  diffusion-weighted  image  demonstrates  high  signal  intensity  indicating 
restricted  diffusion  involving  the  right  medial  temporal  lobe  and  hippocampus 
(arrows) as well as subtle involvement of the left inferior temporal lobe (arrowhead). 
This is most consistent with neuronal death and can be seen in acute infarction as 
well as encephalitis and other inflammatory conditions. The suspected diagnosis 
of  herpes  simplex  encephalitis  was  confirmed  by  cerebrospinal  fluid  polymerase 
chain reaction analysis.

ion  is  “caged”  in  the  cavity  of  the  ligand,  and  thus  the  rate  of  disso-
ciation  of  gadolinium  is  slower  compared  to  linear  ligands  (Group  1 
agents). Most agents are excreted by the renal system.
BRAIN  ACCUMULATION  OF  GADOLINIUM  It  recently  has  become 
evident that gadolinium accumulates in the dentate nuclei and globus 
pallidus of the brain after serial administration of some linear Group 1 
gadolinium agents. This has not been demonstrated for Group 2 mac-
rocyclic agents. Gadolinium deposition in the brain appears to be dose 
dependent and occurs in patients with no clinical evidence of kidney 
or liver disease. To date, there have been no reports to suggest these 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3287

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3288

A

B

C

FIGURE 423-5  Susceptibility-weighted imaging in a patient with familial cavernous malformations. A. Noncontrast computed tomography scan shows one hyperdense 
lesion in the right hemisphere (arrow). B. T2-weighted fast-spin echo image shows subtle low-intensity lesions (arrows). C. Susceptibility-weighted image shows numerous 
low-intensity lesions consistent with hemosiderin-laden cavernous malformations (arrow).

patient  lies  on  a  table  that  is  moved  into  a  long,  narrow  gap  within 
the  magnet.  Approximately  5%  of  the  population  experiences  severe 
claustrophobia in the MR environment. This can be reduced by mild 
sedation  but  remains  a  problem  for  some.  Movement  of  the  patient 
during an MR examination may distort all of the images in sequence; 
therefore, uncooperative patients should either be sedated for the MR 
study  or  scanned  with  CT.  Generally,  children  aged  <8  years  usually 
require conscious sedation in order to complete the MR examination 
without motion degradation.

MRI is considered safe for patients, even at very high field strengths. 
Serious injuries have been caused, however, by attraction of ferromag-
netic objects into the magnet, which act as missiles if brought too close 
to  the  magnet.  Likewise,  ferromagnetic  implants,  such  as  aneurysm 
clips,  may  torque  within  the  magnet,  causing  damage  to  vessels  and 
even death. Metallic foreign bodies in the eye have moved and caused 
intraocular  hemorrhage;  screening  for  ocular  metallic  fragments  is 
indicated  in  those  with  a  history  of  metal  work  or  ocular  metallic 
foreign bodies. Implanted cardiac pacemakers are generally a contrain-
dication  to  MRI  owing  to  the  risk  of  induced  arrhythmias;  however, 
some newer pacemakers have been shown to be safe and if necessary 
MR may be performed if the pacemaker can be safely turned off during 
the scan. All health care personnel and patients must be screened and 
educated thoroughly to prevent such disasters because the magnet is 
always “on.” Table 423-4 lists common contraindications for MRI.

TABLE 423-4  Common Contraindications to Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging
Cardiac pacemaker or permanent pacemaker leads
Internal defibrillatory device
Cochlear prostheses
Bone growth stimulators
Spinal cord stimulators
Electronic infusion devices
Intracranial aneurysm clips (some but not all)
Ocular implants (some) or ocular metallic foreign body
McGee stapedectomy piston prosthesis
DuraPhase penile implant
Swan-Ganz catheter
Magnetic stoma plugs
Magnetic dental implants
Magnetic sphincters
Ferromagnetic inferior vena cava filters, coils, stents—safe 6 weeks after 
implantation
Tattooed eyeliner (contains ferromagnetic material and may irritate eyes)

Note: See also http://www.mrisafety.com.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ANGIOGRAPHY
On  routine  spin  echo  MR  sequences,  moving  protons  (e.g.,  flowing 
blood,  CSF)  exhibit  complex  MR  signals  that  range  from  high-  to 
low-signal intensity relative to background stationary tissue. Fast-flowing 
blood returns no signal (flow void) on routine T1W or T2W spin echo 
MR images. Slower-flowing blood, as occurs in veins or distal to arte-
rial stenosis, may appear high in signal. MR angiography makes use of 
pulse sequences called gradient echo sequences that increase the signal 
intensity of moving protons in contrast to suppressed low signal back-
ground intensity of stationary tissue. This results in a stack of images, 
which can be reformatted in any plane to highlight vascular anatomy 
and relationships.

Several types of MRA techniques exist. Time-of-flight (TOF) MRA is 
normally done without contrast administration and relies on the sup-
pression  of  nonmoving  tissue  to  provide  a  low-intensity  background 
for  the  high  signal  intensity  of  flowing  blood  entering  the  section. 
A  typical  TOF  MRA  sequence  results  in  a  series  of  contiguous,  thin 
MR sections (0.6–0.9 mm thick), which can be viewed as a stack and 
manipulated to create an angiographic image data set that can be refor-
matted and viewed in various planes and angles, much like that seen 
with conventional angiography (Fig. 423-2G).

Phase-contrast MRA has a longer acquisition time than TOF MRA, 
but  in  addition  to  providing  anatomic  information  similar  to  that  of 
TOF  imaging,  it  can  be  used  to  reveal  the  velocity  and  direction  of 
blood flow in a given vessel.

MRA  is  also  often  acquired  during  infusion  of  IV  gadolinium 
contrast material. Advantages include faster imaging times (1–2 min 
vs  10  min),  fewer  flow-related  artifacts,  and  4D  temporal  imaging 
resulting  in  arterial  and  venous  phases.  Recently,  contrast-enhanced 
MRA has become the standard for assessment of the extracranial vas-
cular  structures.  This  technique  entails  rapid  imaging  using  coronal 
three-dimensional TOF sequences during a bolus infusion of gadolin-
ium contrast agent.

MRA has lower spatial resolution compared with conventional film-
based angiography, and therefore the detection of small-vessel abnor-
malities, such as vasculitis and distal vasospasm, is problematic. MRA 
is also less sensitive to slowly flowing blood and thus may not reliably 
differentiate complete from near-complete occlusions. Motion, either 
by the patient or by anatomic structures, may distort the MRA images, 
creating artifacts. These limitations notwithstanding, MRA has proved 
useful in evaluation of the extracranial carotid and vertebral circulation 
as well as of larger-caliber intracranial arteries and dural sinuses. It has 
also  proved  useful  in  the  noninvasive  detection  of  intracranial  aneu-
rysms and vascular malformations.

Vessel wall MR imaging (VWI) is an MR technique that relies on sup-
pression of all moving protons within vessels and CSF, combined with 
IV contrast administration (Fig. 423-6). Unlike MRA, VWI is a high 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3288

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3289

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
3

N
e
u
r
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
g
i
n
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

A

B

C

D

E

F

FIGURE 423-6  Arterial spin label and vessel wall imaging in a 25-year-old woman with focal cerebral arteriopathy. The patient had an 8-month history of intermittent 
weakness of the right side with spasms. Imaging shows evidence of cerebral ischemia. CSF was transiently inflammatory. A. Diffusion-weighted image shows focal region 
of reduced diffusion in left parietal lobe. B. T2 FLAIR images show several foci of high signal in left deep subcortical white matter. C. Arterial spin label image demonstrates 
reduced cerebral blood flow in left parietal lobe (arrows). D. 3D T1 image without contrast administration. E. 3D T1-weighted Cube vessel wall image following gadolinium 
contrast shows focal enhancement of the left proximal middle cerebral artery (arrow). (F): 3D TOF MRA shows focal narrowing of the left supraclinoid internal carotid artery 
and proximal middle cerebral artery (arrow).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3289

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3290 spatial resolution, 3D, T1-weighted technique used to assess pathology 
of the vessel wall itself. This technique can be used to detect, charac-
terize, and differentiate such pathologies as atherosclerosis, vasculitis 
(such as primary angiitis of the central nervous system [PACNS]), and 
vasculopathies such as reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome 
(RCVS), and has been used to assess the wall of aneurysms.

ECHO-PLANAR MRI
Echo planar MRI (EPI) forms the basis of several important MR imag-
ing sequences. EPI uses fast gradients that are switched on and off at 
high  speeds  to  create  the  information  used  to  form  an  image.  With 
EPI, all of the information required for processing an image is accumu-
lated in milliseconds, and the information for the entire brain can be 
obtained in <1–2 min, depending on the degree of resolution required 
or desired. Fast MRI reduces patient and organ motion and is the basis 
of perfusion imaging during contrast infusion and kinematic motion 
studies.  EPI  is  also  the  sequence  used  to  obtain  diffusion-weighted 
imaging  (DWI)  and  tractography  (DTI),  as  well  as  functional  MRI 
(fMRI) and arterial spin-labeled (ASL) perfusion studies (Figs. 423-2H, 
423-3, 423-4C, and 423-6; and Fig. 426-13).

Perfusion and diffusion imaging are EPI techniques that are useful 
in  early  detection  of  ischemic  injury  of  the  brain  and  may  be  useful 
together to demonstrate infarcted tissue as well as ischemic but poten-
tially viable tissue at risk of infarction (e.g., the ischemic penumbra). 
DWI assesses microscopic motion of water; water protons that move 
reduce  signal  intensity  on  diffusion-weighted  images.  Pathology  that 
reduces  microscopic  water  motion  results  in  relatively  higher  signal. 

Infarcted  tissue  reduces  the  water  motion  within  cells  and  in  the 
interstitial tissues, resulting in high signal on DWI. DWI is the most 
sensitive technique for detection of acute cerebral infarction of <7 days 
in duration (Fig. 423-2H). It is also quite sensitive for detecting dying 
or dead brain tissue secondary to encephalitis, as well as abscess and 
purulent formations (Fig. 423-3B).

Perfusion  MRI  can  be  performed  by  the  acquisition  of  fast  EPI 
during a rapid IV bolus of gadolinium contrast material or by noncon-
trast arterial spin labeling (ASL) techniques. With contrast perfusion 
imaging,  parametric  maps  of  relative  cerebral  blood  volume,  mean 
transit  time  (MTT),  time  to  maximum  (tMAX),  and  cerebral  blood 
flow  can  be  derived.  Prolonged  MTT  and  tMAX  and  reduction  in 
cerebral blood volume and cerebral blood flow are typical of infarction. 
In the setting of reduced blood flow, a prolonged MTT of contrast but 
normal or elevated cerebral blood volume may indicate tissue supplied 
by  slower  collateral  flow  that  is  at  risk  of  infarction.  Perfusion  MRI 
imaging can also be used in the assessment of brain tumors to differ-
entiate intraaxial primary tumors, whose BBB is relatively intact, from 
extraaxial tumors or metastases, which demonstrate a relatively more 
permeable BBB.

Diffusion  tensor  imaging  (DTI)  is  derived  from  diffusion  MRI 
sequences. This technique assesses the direction and integrity of pro-
tons flowing within white matter architecture. It has proven valuable 
in  the  assessment  of  subcortical  white  matter  tract  anatomy  prior  to 
brain  tumor  surgery,  as  well  as  determining  normal  and  abnormal 
white matter architecture in congenital and acquired pathologies such 
as traumatic brain injury as well as assessing the integrity of peripheral 
nerves (Fig. 423-7).

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 423-7  Diffusion tractography in cerebral glioma. Associative and descending pathways in a healthy subject (A) and in a patient with parietal lobe glioblastoma 
(B) presenting with a language deficit: the mass causes a disruption of the arcuate-SLF complex, in particular of its anterior portion (SLF III). Also shown are bilateral optic 
tract and left optic radiation pathways in a healthy subject (C) and in a patient with left occipital grade II oligoastrocytoma (D): the mass causes a disruption of the left optic 
radiation. Shown in neurologic orientation, i.e., the left brain appears on the left side of the image. AF, long segment of the arcuate fascicle; CST, corticospinal tract; IFOF: 
inferior fronto-occipital fascicle; ILF, inferior longitudinal fascicle; SLF III, superior longitudinal fascicle III or anterior segment of the arcuate fascicle; SLF-tp, temporo-
parietal portion of the superior longitudinal fascicle or posterior segment of the arcuate fascicle; T, tumor; UF, uncinated fascicle. (Part D used with permission from Eduardo 
Caverzasi and Roland Henry.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3290

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3291

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
3

N
e
u
r
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
g
i
n
N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

fMRI  is  an  EPI  technique  that  localizes  regions  of  activity  in  the 
brain following task activation or at rest (so-called resting state fMRI). 
Neuronal activity elicits a slight increase in the delivery of oxygenated 
blood  flow  to  a  specific  region  of  activated  brain.  This  results  in  an 
alteration  in  the  balance  of  oxyhemoglobin  and  deoxyhemoglobin, 
which yields a 2–3% increase in signal intensity within veins and local 
capillaries. Currently, preoperative somatosensory and auditory cortex 
localization  is  possible,  and  methods  to  assess  motor  and  language 
function  are  in  development.  This  technique  has  proved  useful  to 
neuroscientists  interested  in  interrogating  the  localization  of  certain 
brain functions.

ARTERIAL SPIN LABELING
ASL is a quantitative noninvasive MR technique that measures cerebral 
blood flow (Fig. 423-6). Blood traversing in the neck is labeled by an 
MR pulse and then imaged in the brain after a short (2 s) delay. The sig-
nal is reflective of blood flow. ASL is an especially important technique 
for  patients  in  whom  the  use  of  contrast  agents  is  contraindicated. 
ASL has become almost standard in many MR protocols because it is 
relatively fast to acquire and does not require contrast administration. 
Increased cerebral flow is more easily identified than slow flow, which 
can  be  sometimes  difficult  to  quantify.  This  technique  has  also  been 
useful in detecting shunting in arteriovenous malformations and fistu-
las, as well as increased blood flow in brain tumors, and patients post 
TIA, post seizure, or post migraine.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE NEUROGRAPHY
MRN is an MR technique that shows promise in detecting increased 
signal  in  irritated,  inflamed,  or  infiltrated  peripheral  nerves.  T1W 
and  T2W  imaging  are  obtained  with  fat-suppressed  fast-spin  echo 
imaging  or  short  inversion  recovery  sequences.  Inflamed  peripheral 
nerves  will  demonstrate  high  signal  on  T2W  imaging.  MRN  is  indi-
cated  in  patients  with  radiculopathy  whose  conventional  MR  studies 
of the spine (cervical or lumbar) are normal, or in those suspected of 
peripheral  nerve  entrapment  or  trauma.  This  technique  is  now  also 
being  used  to  assess  peripheral  nerve  damage  after  trauma  or  from 
compressive neuropathies.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
PET relies on the detection of positrons emitted during the decay of a 
radionuclide that has been injected into a patient. The most frequently 
used  moiety  is  2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose  (FDG),  which  is  an 
analogue  of  glucose  and  is  taken  up  by  cells  competitively  with 
2-deoxyglucose.  Many  other  radioisotopes  are  used  in  other  indica-
tions. With FDG, multiple images of glucose uptake activity are formed 
45–60 min after IV administration of FDG. Images reveal differences 
in regional glucose activity among normal and pathologic brain struc-
tures.  FDG-PET  is  used  primarily  for  the  detection  of  extracranial 
metastatic  disease;  however,  a  lower  activity  of  FDG  in  the  parietal 
lobes is associated with Alzheimer’s disease, a finding that may simply 
reflect atrophy that occurs in the later stages of the disease. Combina-
tion PET-CT scanners, in which both CT and PET are obtained at one 
sitting, have largely replaced PET scans alone. MR-PET scanners have 
also been developed and may prove useful for imaging the brain and 
other  organs  without  the  radiation  exposure  of  CT.  More  recent 
PET  ligand  developments  include  beta-amyloid  and  tau  PET  tracers 
(Chap.  29).  Studies  have  shown  an  increased  percentage  of  amyloid 
deposition  in  patients  with  Alzheimer’s  disease  compared  with  mild 
cognitive impairment and healthy controls; however, up to 25% of cog-
nitively “normal” patients show abnormalities on amyloid PET imag-
ing (Chap. 431). This may either reflect subclinical disease processes or 
variation of normal. Tau imaging may be more specific for Alzheimer’s 
disease, and clinical studies are in progress.

or  cervical  subarachnoid  space.  CT  scanning  is  typically  performed 
after  myelography  to  better  demonstrate  the  spinal  cord  and  roots, 
which  appear  as  filling  defects  in  the  opacified  subarachnoid  space. 
CT  myelography,  in  which  CT  is  performed  after  the  subarachnoid 
injection of a small amount of contrast material, has replaced conven-
tional  myelography  for  many  indications,  thereby  reducing  exposure 
to radiation and contrast media. CT is obtained at a slice thickness of  
~2.5  mm  and  reconstructed  at  0.625-mm  thick  slices,  which  can 
quickly  be  reformatted  in  sagittal  and  coronal  planes,  equivalent  to 
traditional myelography projections.
 ■ INDICATIONS
CT myelography and MRI have largely replaced conventional myelog-
raphy for the diagnosis of diseases of the spinal canal and cord (Table 
423-1).  Remaining  indications  for  conventional  plain-film  myelogra-
phy include the evaluation of suspected meningeal or arachnoid cysts 
and  the  localization  of  CSF  fistulas.  Conventional  myelography  and 
CT myelography provide the most precise information in patients with 
failed back syndrome following spinal fusion procedures.
 ■ CONTRAINDICATIONS
Myelography  is  relatively  safe;  however,  it  should  be  performed  with 
caution in any patient with elevated intracranial pressure, evidence of 
a spinal block, or a history of allergic reaction to intrathecal contrast 
media. In patients with a suspected spinal block, MR is the preferred 
imaging technique. If myelography is necessary, only a small amount 
of  contrast  medium  should  be  instilled  below  the  block  in  order  to 
minimize the risk of neurologic deterioration. Lumbar puncture (LP) 
is  to  be  avoided  in  patients  with  bleeding  disorders,  and  those  with 
infections of the overlying soft tissues. Anticoagulant therapy should 
be withheld prior to elective LP to avoid epidural or intradural hemor-
rhage, unless required in emergent situations (Chap. S9).
 ■ COMPLICATIONS
Headache  is  the  most  frequent  complication  of  myelography  and  is 
reported  to  occur  in  5–30%  of  patients.  Nausea  and  vomiting  may 
also  occur  rarely.  Postural  headache  (post-LP  headache)  is  generally 
due  to  continued  epidural  leakage  of  CSF  from  the  dural  puncture 
site.  A  higher  incidence  is  noted  among  younger  women  and  with  
the use of larger gauge cutting-type spinal needles. If significant head-
ache persists for >48 h, placement of an epidural blood patch should be 
considered. Management of LP headache is discussed in Chap. 16. Vaso-
vagal  syncope  may  occur  during  LP;  it  is  accentuated  by  the  upright 
position  used  during  conventional  lumbar  myelography.  Adequate 
hydration  before  and  after  myelography  will  reduce  the  incidence  of 
this complication.

Hearing  loss  is  a  rare  complication  of  myelography.  It  may  result 
from a direct toxic effect of the contrast medium or from an alteration 
of the pressure equilibrium between CSF and perilymph in the inner 
ear. Puncture of the spinal cord is a rare but serious complication of 
cervical  (C1–2)  or  high  LP.  The  risk  of  cord  puncture  is  greatest  in 
patients with spinal stenosis, Chiari malformations, or conditions that 
reduce CSF volume. CT myelography following a lumbar injection and 
MRI are safer alternatives to cervical puncture. Reactions to intrathecal 
contrast administration are rare; aseptic meningitis and encephalopa-
thy are reported rare complications. The latter is usually dose related 
and  associated  with  contrast  entering  the  intracranial  subarach-
noid  space.  Seizures  rarely  occur  following  myelography,  historically 
reported  in  0.1–0.3%  of  patients.  Risk  factors  include  a  preexisting 
seizure disorder and the use of a total iodine dose of >4500 mg. Other 
reported complications include hyperthermia, hallucinations, depres-
sion,  and  anxiety  states.  These  side  effects  have  been  reduced  by  the 
development  of  nonionic,  water-soluble  contrast  agents  as  well  as  by 
head elevation and generous hydration following myelography.

MYELOGRAPHY
 ■ TECHNIQUE
Myelography  involves  the  intrathecal  instillation  of  specially  for-
mulated  water-soluble  iodinated  contrast  medium  into  the  lumbar 

SPINE INTERVENTIONS
 ■ DISKOGRAPHY
The evaluation of back pain and radiculopathy (Chap. 15) may require 
diagnostic  procedures  that  attempt  either  to  reproduce  the  patient’s 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3291

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3292 pain or relieve it, indicating its correct source prior to lumbar fusion. 
Diskography  is  now  rarely  indicated.  It  is  performed  by  fluoroscopic 
placement of a 22- to 25-gauge needle into the intervertebral disk and 
subsequent  injection  of  1–3  mL  of  contrast  media.  The  intradiskal 
pressure is recorded, as is an assessment of the patient’s response to the 
injection of contrast material. Little or no pain is felt during injection of 
a normal disk, which does not accept much more than 1 mL of contrast 
material, even at pressures as high as 415–690 kPa (60–100 lb/in2). CT 
and plain films are obtained following the procedure. Concerns have 
been raised that diskography may contribute to an accelerated rate of 
disk  degeneration;  furthermore,  patients  who  suffer  from  depression 
or  anxiety  are  more  likely  to  find  diskography  painful  and  in  some 
cases the procedure-associated pain became persistent, lasting a year or 
longer. Thus, it is rarely used as a reliable biomarker of pain generation.
 ■ SELECTIVE NERVE ROOT AND EPIDURAL SPINAL 
INJECTIONS
Percutaneous  selective  nerve  root  and  epidural  administration  of 
glucocorticoid  and  anesthetic  mixtures  may  be  both  therapeutic  and 
diagnostic.  Typically,  1–2  mL  of  an  equal  mixture  of  a  long-acting 
glucocorticoid  such  as  betamethasone  or  decadron  combined  with  a 
long-acting anesthetic such as bupivacaine 0.75% is instilled under CT 
or fluoroscopic guidance in the intraspinal epidural space or adjacent 
to an existing nerve root in question as a pain source. This can also be 
performed into the facet joints, or around the medial nerve branches 
that supply innervation to the facet joints.

ANGIOGRAPHY
Catheter  angiography  is  indicated  for  evaluating  intracranial 
small-vessel  pathology  (such  as  vasculitis),  for  assessing  vascular 
malformations and aneurysms, and in endovascular therapeutic pro-
cedures (Table 423-1). As noted above, angiography has been replaced 
for many indications by CT/CTA or MRI/MRA.

Angiography carries the greatest risk of morbidity of all diagnostic 
imaging procedures, owing to the necessity of inserting a catheter into 
a blood vessel, directing the catheter to the required location, injecting 
contrast  material  to  visualize  the  vessel,  and  removing  the  catheter 
while  maintaining  hemostasis.  Therapeutic  transcatheter  procedures 
(see below) have become important options for the treatment of some 
cerebrovascular  diseases.  The  decision  to  undertake  a  diagnostic  or 
therapeutic angiographic procedure requires careful assessment of the 
goals of the investigation and its attendant risks.

Patients  undergoing  angiography  should  be  well  hydrated  before 
and after the procedure. Because the femoral route is used most com-
monly, the femoral artery must be compressed after the procedure to 
prevent  a  hematoma  from  developing.  The  puncture  site  and  distal 
pulses should be evaluated carefully after the procedure; complications 
can include thigh hematoma or lower-extremity emboli.
 ■ COMPLICATIONS
A common femoral arterial puncture provides retrograde access via the 
aorta to the aortic arch and great vessels. The most feared complication 
of cerebral angiography is stroke. Thrombus can form on or inside the 
tip of the catheter, rarely arterial dissection or perforation can occur, 
and atherosclerotic thrombus or plaque can be dislodged by the cathe-
ter or guide wire or by the force of injection and can embolize distally 
in  the  cerebral  circulation.  Risk  factors  for  ischemic  complications 
include  limited  experience  on  the  part  of  the  angiographer,  athero-
sclerosis,  vasospasm,  low  cardiac  output,  decreased  oxygen-carrying 
capacity,  advanced  age,  and  prior  history  of  migraine.  The  risk  of  a 
neurologic complication varies but is ~4% for transient ischemic attack 
and stroke, 1% for permanent deficit, and <0.1% for death.

Nonionic  contrast  material  is  used  exclusively  in  cerebral  angiog-
raphy. Nonionic contrast injected into the cerebral vasculature can be 

neurotoxic if the BBB is breached, either by an underlying disease or by 
the injection of hyperosmolar contrast agent. Patients with dolichoec-
tasia of the basilar artery can suffer reversible brainstem dysfunction 
and acute short-term memory loss during angiography, owing to the 
slow percolation of the contrast material and the consequent prolonged 
exposure of the brain. Rarely, an intracranial aneurysm ruptures during 
an angiographic contrast injection, causing subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
perhaps as a result of injection under high pressure.

 ■ SPINAL ANGIOGRAPHY
Spinal  angiography  is  indicated  to  evaluate  the  location  of  vascular 
malformations and to identify the artery of Adamkiewicz (Chap. 442) 
prior to aortic aneurysm repair. The procedure is lengthy and requires 
the use of relatively large volumes of contrast; the incidence of serious 
complications,  including  paraparesis,  subjective  visual  blurring,  and 
altered speech, is less than 1%. Gadolinium-enhanced MRA has been 
used successfully in this setting, as has iodinated contrast CTA, which 
has  promise  for  replacing  diagnostic  spinal  angiography  for  some 
indications.

INTERVENTIONAL NEURORADIOLOGY
This rapidly developing field is providing new therapeutic options for 
patients  with  challenging  neurovascular  problems.  Available  proce-
dures  include  detachable  coil  therapy  for  aneurysms,  particulate  or 
liquid  adhesive  embolization  of  arteriovenous  malformations,  stent 
retrieval systems for embolectomy in acute stroke, balloon angioplasty 
and  stenting  of  arterial  stenosis  or  vasospasm,  transarterial  or  trans-
venous embolization of dural arteriovenous fistulas, balloon occlusion 
of carotid-cavernous and vertebral fistulas, endovascular treatment of 
vein-of-Galen  malformations,  preoperative  embolization  of  tumors, 
and thrombolysis of acute arterial or venous thrombosis. Many of these 
disorders place the patient at high risk of cerebral hemorrhage, stroke, 
or death.

The highest complication rates are found with the therapies designed 
to treat the highest risk diseases. The advent of electrolytically detach-
able coils ushered in a new era in the treatment of cerebral aneurysms 
(Chap. 429). Two randomized trials found reductions of morbidity and 
mortality at 1 year among those treated for aneurysm with detachable 
coils  compared  with  neurosurgical  clipping.  In  many  centers,  coil-
ing  has  become  standard  therapy  for  many  proximal  circle  of  Willis 
aneurysms.

Finally,  recent  studies  of  stent  retrieval  systems  used  to  withdraw 
emboli have shown improved clinical outcomes in patients presenting 
with large vessel occlusions and signs of acute stroke (Chap. 427).

 ■ FURTHER READING
Bambach  S et al: Arterial spin labeling applications in pediatric and 

adult neurologic disorders. J Magn Reson Imaging 2020.

Choi  JW,  Moon  WJ:  Gadolinium  deposition  in  the  brain:  Current 

updates. Korean J Radiol 20:134, 2019.

Mandell DM et al: Intracranial vessel wall MRI: Principles and expert 
consensus  recommendations  of  the  American  Society  of  Neurora-
diology. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 38:218, 2017.

Pelz DM et al: Interventional neuroradiology: A review. Can J Neurol 

Sci 16:1, 2020.

Schönmann  C,  Brockow  K:  Adverse  reactions  during  procedures: 
Hypersensitivity  to  contrast  agents  and  dyes.  Ann  Allergy  Asthma 
Immunol 124:156, 2020.

Tournier JD: Diffusion MRI in the brain—theory and concepts. Prog 

Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc 112-113:1, 2019.

Watson  RE  et  al:  MR  imaging  safety  events:  Analysis  and  improve-

ment. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 28:593, 2020.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3292

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 424

Pathobiology of  
Neurologic Diseases
Stephen L. Hauser, Arnold R. Kriegstein, 
Stanley B. Prusiner

The human nervous system is the organ of consciousness, cognition, 
ethics, and behavior; as such, it is the most intricate structure known to 
exist. More than one-third of the 23,000 genes encoded in the human 
genome  are  expressed  in  the  nervous  system.  Each  mature  brain  is 
composed of 100 billion neurons, several million miles of axons and 
dendrites,  and  >1015  synapses.  Neurons  exist  within  a  dense  par-
enchyma of multifunctional glial cells that synthesize myelin, preserve 
homeostasis,  and  regulate  immune  responses.  Measured  against  this 
background  of  complexity,  the  achievements  of  molecular  neurosci-
ence have been extraordinary. Advances have occurred in parallel with 
the development of new enabling technologies—in bioengineering and 
computational  sciences;  imaging;  and  cell,  molecular,  and  chemical 
biology—and moving forward it is likely that the pace of new discov-
eries  will  only  increase.  This  chapter  reviews  a  number  of  the  most 
dynamic  areas  in  neuroscience,  specifically  highlighting  advances  in 
immunology  and  inflammation,  neurodegeneration,  and  stem  cell 
biology. In each of these areas, recent discoveries are providing context 
for  an  understanding  of  the  triggers  and  mechanisms  of  disease  and 
offering  new  hope  for  prevention,  treatment,  and  repair  of  nervous 
system injuries. Discussions of the neurogenetics of behavior, advances 
in addiction science, and diseases caused by network dysfunction can 
be  found  in  Chap.  451  (Biology  of  Psychiatric  Disorders);  and  new 
approaches  to  rehabilitation  via  harnessing  of  neuroplasticity,  neuro-
stimulation, and computer-brain interfaces are presented in Chap. 487 
(Emerging Neurotherapeutic Technologies).

NEUROIMMUNOLOGY AND 
NEUROINFLAMMATION
 ■ OLIGODENDROCYTES AND MYELIN
Myelin is the multilayered insulating substance that surrounds axons 
and  speeds  impulse  conduction  by  permitting  action  potentials  to 
jump between naked regions of axons (nodes of Ranvier) and across 
myelinated  segments.  Oligodendrocytes  contact  axons  at  paranodes, 
where  sodium  and  potassium  channels  essential  for  saltatory  con-
duction  are  clustered.  Molecular  interactions  between  the  myelin 
membrane  and  axon  are  required  to  maintain  the  stability,  function, 
and normal life span of both structures. The process of myelination is 
directed both by axon-derived cues as well as the physical properties of 
the axon-membrane curvature. Importantly, ongoing neuronal activity 
influences both the differentiation of oligodendrocytes as well as the 
extent of myelination, a process referred to as adaptive myelination. A 
single oligodendrocyte usually ensheaths multiple axons in the central 
nervous  system  (CNS),  whereas  in  the  peripheral  nervous  system 
(PNS),  each  Schwann  cell  typically  myelinates  a  single  axon.  Myelin 
is a lipid-rich material formed by a spiraling process of the membrane 
of the myelinating cell around the axon, creating multiple membrane 
bilayers that are tightly apposed (compact myelin) by charged protein 
interactions.  A  number  of  clinically  important  neurologic  disorders 
are caused by inherited mutations in myelin proteins (Chap. 446), and 
constituents of myelin also have a propensity to be targeted as autoan-
tigens in autoimmune demyelinating disorders (Chap. 447).

Premyelinating  oligodendrocyte  precursor  cells  (OPCs)  are  highly 
motile  cells  that  migrate  extensively  during  development  and  in  the 
adult brain following injuries to the myelin sheath. OPCs migrate along 
the inner (or abluminal) surface of endothelial cells, a process regulated 
by Wnt pathway signaling and upregulation of the chemokine receptor 
Cxcr4 that drives their attachment and retention to the vasculature. In 
the normal adult brain, large numbers of OPCs are widely distributed. 
Following demyelination, remyelination is largely dependent on OPCs 

3293

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

that differentiate into myelin-producing oligodendrocytes and produce 
characteristic thinly remyelinated fibers. In some situations, a second 
population of regenerating oligodendrocytes derived from neural stem 
cells  can  mediate  more  effective  remyelination,  with  thicker  lamellae 
and  greater  functional  preservation  of  axons.  A  recent  C14  labeling 
study from human multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions indicated that a third 
population of nonmitotic preexisting oligodendrocytes may represent 
an additional source of remyelinating cells.

Both acquired demyelinating disorders, such as MS, and inherited 
ones, such as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (duplication or deletion of 
CNS proteolipid protein) and adrenoleukodystrophy (mutations in the 
ABCD1  gene  responsible  for  transport  of  very  long  chain  fatty  acids 
into the peroxisome for degradation), are associated with progressive 
axonal  loss.  It  is  now  increasingly  recognized  that  oligodendrocyte 
dysfunction can contribute to neuronal and axonal loss in a wide vari-
ety of CNS disorders including Alzheimer’s disease (AD; Chap. 431), 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; Chap. 437), traumatic brain injury 
(Chap. 443), and stroke (Chap. 426), among other conditions.

Loss  of  oligodendrocyte  support  can  produce  axonal  damage 
through a variety of mechanisms, including reductions in the supply 
of glucose and other essential nutrients; an increased axonal workload; 
impaired glutamate and calcium buffering; mitochondrial damage; loss 
of  neurotrophins;  enhanced  susceptibility  to  reactive  oxygen  species 
including nitric oxide; as well as failure to maintain normal synapses.
A  number  of  molecules  have  been  identified  that  regulate  oli-
godendrocyte  differentiation  and  myelination,  including  LINGO-1, 
hyaluronan, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, the Wnt pathway, Notch 
(and its receptor Jagged), fibrinogen, and the M1 muscarinic receptor 
Chrm1, all of which are inhibitory. Other targets are the retinoic acid 
receptor RXRγ, vitamin D, and thyroid hormone, all of which promote 
oligodendrocyte  maturation.  All  are  also  potential  targets  for  myelin 
repair  therapies.  In  the  preclinical  model  of  autoimmune  demyeli-
nation,  experimental  allergic  encephalomyelitis  (EAE;  Fig.  424-1), 
oligodendrocyte-specific knockout of Chrm1 improved remyelination, 
protected  axons,  and  restored  function,  directly  demonstrating  that 
remyelination can be neuroprotective following injury. A pivotal trial 
of a monoclonal antibody against LINGO-1 in patients with acute optic 
neuritis  failed  to  improve  clinical  outcomes,  a  disappointing  result 
given that the antibody appeared to have promising clinical effects in 
an earlier phase 2 trial. More recently, in a preliminary trial of chronic 
optic neuritis, a promising result was reported with clemastine, an anti-
histamine  and  M1  muscarinic  receptor  antagonist,  raising  hope  that 
clinically effective remyelination might be achievable even in a chronic 
demyelinating condition.

 ■ MICROGLIA AND MACROPHAGES
These represent the major cell types in the nervous system responsible 
for antigen presentation and innate immunity. Brain microglia migrate 
from the yolk sac early in embryogenesis before the blood-brain barrier 
is formed, and are believed to maintain their cell numbers through cell 
division within the nervous system and not via repopulation from the 
circulation.  In  mice,  most  microglia  require  signaling  through  col-
ony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (Csf1r), via its natural ligands Csf1r 
and IL-34, for survival. Depletion of microglia by administration of a 
selective inhibitor of Csf1r (PLX5622) was followed by rapid repopu-
lation, which led to identification of a second population of ramified 
microglial precursor cells that do not require Csf1r signaling. Single-
cell transcriptome sequencing approaches are now producing evidence 
for substantial microglial cell diversity in the CNS.

Microglia  play  critical  roles  in  sculpting  neuronal  populations 
during  development  and  across  the  life  span,  through  secretion  of 
brain-derived  neurotrophic  factor  (BDNF)  and  other  trophic  factors 
that  promote  neuronal  survival,  and  also  via  production  of  reactive 
oxygen  species  (ROS)  and  other  molecules  that  mediate  cell  death. 
Microglia  regulate  development  and  maintenance  of  neural  circuits 
through pruning of excitatory synapses and control of dendritic spine 
densities (Fig. 424-2). Mice depleted of microglia during development 
exhibit a variety of cognitive, learning, and behavioral deficits, includ-
ing  abnormal  social  behaviors.  These  processes  are  dependent  on 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3293

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3294

Rolling

Triggering

Strong adhesion

Extravasation

Flow

B cell

Activated
lymphocyte

Blood-brain
barrier
endothelium

Astrocytes

CD 31

LFA-1
ICAM

Gelatinases

α4 Integrin
VCAM

Chemokines
and cytokines

Basal lamina

Microglia/macrophages

Activated
Microglia/
macrophages

Fc receptor

Brain tissue

Heat shock
proteins?

T cell
activation

IFN-γ
IL-2

Chemokines
IL-1, IL-12

TNF, IFN, free radicals,
vasoactive amines,
complement, proteases,
cytokines, eicosanoids

Myelin damage

T cell

B cell

Antigen
presentation

B cell

TNFα, LT, and
GM-CSF

Antibody
complement

FIGURE 424-1  A model for experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE). Crucial steps for disease initiation and progression include peripheral activation of preexisting 
autoreactive T cells; homing to the central nervous system (CNS) and extravasation across the blood-brain barrier; reactivation of T cells by exposed autoantigens; secretion 
of cytokines; activation of microglia and astrocytes and recruitment of a secondary inflammatory wave; and immune-mediated myelin destruction. ICAM, intercellular 
adhesion molecule; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; LFA-1, leukocyte function-associated antigen-1; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule.

Promote learning and memory

Pruning or elimination of synapses

BDNF

Phagocytosis of debris

Proinflammatory (A1) astrocyte

IL-1α  |  TNF  |  C1q

Uptake of aggregated proteins

FIGURE 424-2  The multifunctional microglial cell. Microglia have diverse functions that can support healthy development and maintain homeostasis, or contribute to tissue 
damage in pathologic conditions. Homeostatic functions include promotion of learning and memory through secretion of soluble proteins such as brain derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF); participation in normal synaptic pruning; and clearing cellular debris and protein aggregates via phagocytosis. However, in pathologic states activated 
microglia also contribute to tissue damage, by targeting normal healthy neurons and synapses; by promoting formation of β-amyloid or other misfolded proteins deposited 
in neurodegenerative diseases; and secreting cytokines (such as IL-1α, TNF, and the complement component C1q) incriminated in induction of neurotoxic A1 astrocytes. 
In addition, microglia have diverse functions in adaptive immunity, including roles in antigen presentation and immune regulation (Fig. 417-2). (Reproduced with permission 
from J Herz et al: Myeloid cells in the central nervous system. Immunity 46:943, 2017.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3294

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3295

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

classical complement pathway molecules, including C1q, complement 
receptor 3 (CR3), and CR5.

Microglia  are  located  throughout  the  brain  parenchyma,  whereas 
brain macrophages occur primarily in perivascular regions, including 
the meninges and choroid plexus. Brain macrophages are believed to 
be derived from yolk sac precursors that appear to enter the brain at 
an  early  developmental  stage  and  propagate  locally,  although  some 
choroid  plexus  macrophages  may  also  be  replenished  at  low  levels 
from  the  bloodstream  on  a  continuing  basis.  Under  inflammatory 
conditions, large numbers of hematogenously derived monocytes enter 
the  brain  parenchyma.  In  the  EAE  model  (Fig.  424-1),  macrophages 
derived  from  bone  marrow  monocytes,  but  not  microglia,  are  the 
critical population that initiates inflammatory demyelination at parax-
onal regions near nodes of Ranvier. Brain macrophages have multiple 
proinflammatory functions, including promoting adhesion, attraction, 
and  activation  of  B  and  T  lymphocytes;  providing  antigen-specific 
activation of T cells via antigen presentation of specific immunogenic 
peptides, including autoantigens, complexed to surface class II major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC II) molecules; and contributing to 
cell injury through generation of oxidative stress and cytotoxicity. By 
contrast,  microglia  have  been  traditionally  thought  to  downregulate 
inflammatory responses and promote tissue repair in EAE. This model 
of the relative roles of macrophage and microglial cells is certainly an 
oversimplification, and more nuanced functions of these cell types can 
be revealed by single-cell sequencing methods, depending on the spe-
cific context and environmental cues.

Evidence  also  supports  a  primary  role  for  microglia  and  brain 
macrophages  in  neurodegenerative  diseases,  in  contrast  to  earlier 
views in which their role was seen as largely secondary and involving 
phagocytosis of cell debris. Approximately half of all genes implicated 
in  genome-wide  association  studies  in  AD  implicate  innate  immune 
processes  and  microglia.  Under  different  experimental  conditions, 
these cells can be either protective or pathogenic. As examples of the 
former,  macrophages  could  promote  spatial  memory  in  mice  when 
activated  by  interleukin  (IL)-4  produced  by  invading  lymphocytes. 
Also, secretion of BDNF by microglia promoted synaptic plasticity and 
improved learning and memory. Microglia and brain macrophages also 
promoted clearance of pathogenic β-amyloid aggregates in AD-prone 
mice; also, disruption of brain macrophages by knockout of CCR2, a 
chemokine required for entry of bloodstream monocytes into the CNS, 
exacerbated AD pathology.

On the other hand, disease-worsening effects of microglia and mac-
rophages are likely to predominate in other situations. A direct role for 
microglia in human AD was suggested by genetic evidence implicating 
the phagocytosis-associated gene TREM2 in AD susceptibility. TREM2 
is  a  microglial  receptor  that  can  bind  amyloid,  induce  proliferation 
and migration of microglia, and possibly limit the spread of disease- 
associated  AD  aggregates.  Loss-of-function  mutations  in  TREM2 
increase AD risk threefold. In a mouse model of AD, overexpression 
of  TREM2  blocked  AD  pathology  and  rescued  performance  on  tests 
of learning and memory. A clinical trial testing the value of an agonist 
monoclonal antibody against TREM2 is underway.

Other immune system genes implicated in susceptibility to AD and 
other  late-life  dementias  also  represent  promising  targets  for  future 
therapy. Activation of the classical complement cascade, noted above, 
is assuming an increased role in concepts of pathogenesis, as follows; 
synapses  targeted  for  elimination  express  the  complement  proteins 
C1q  and  C3,  the  levels  of  which  increase  in  the  presence  of  excess 
β-amyloid;  C3-bearing  synapses  are  then  targeted  for  elimination  by 
microglia that express the complement 3 receptor (CR3); and knockout 
of C3 can rescue the clinical and pathologic abnormalities associated 
with neurodegeneration in AD-prone mice.

In  familial  frontotemporal  degeneration  (FTD)  due  to  mutations 
of progranulin (Chap. 432), a prominent immune pathology has also 
been  identified,  with  activated  microglia  expressing  high  levels  of 
proinflammatory cytokines. When progranulin is deleted in mice, an 
age-dependent microglial activation phenotype results, associated with 
upregulation  of  complement  and  other  genes  associated  with  innate 
immunity,  enhanced  pruning  of  inhibitory  synapses,  and  behavioral 

manifestations  reminiscent  of  human  FTD.  Moreover,  inhibition  of 
complement  activation  can  rescue  all  of  these  deficits.  These  data 
indicate  a  primary  role  for  microglial  activation  in  FTD  caused  by 
mutations in progranulin, likely mediated through enhanced lysosomal 
trafficking,  increased  production  of  C3  complement,  and  excessive 
synaptic pruning in brain regions affected in FTD. Although it is likely 
that the specific mechanisms of complement-dependent neurodegen-
eration will differ in distinct neurodegenerative conditions, these data 
provide hope that complement-pathway interventions could represent 
an approach to control of neurodegenerative pathologies mediated at 
least in part through the innate immune system.

ASTROCYTES
Astrocytes represent half or more of all cells in the CNS. Traditionally 
thought  to  function  as  simple  interstitial  supporting  cells  that  pro-
vide  scaffolds  for  neuronal  migration  and  contribute  to  homeostasis, 
emerging data indicate far more pleiotropic functions for this cell type. 
Astrocytes, like microglia, play profound roles in the life of synapses 
by secreting factors (such as apolipoprotein E, thrombospondins, and 
glypicans)  that  regulate  development,  maintenance,  and  pruning  of 
presynaptic and postsynaptic structures. Influenced by local neuronal 
activity, astrocytes actively phagocytose synapses. Pruning of synapses 
and  clearance  of  apoptotic  cells  by  astrocytes  are  mediated  through 
the  scavenger  receptor  multiple  EGF-like  domains  10  (Megf10),  a 
high-affinity receptor for C1Q. Astrocytes also participate in dynamic 
regulation  of  vascular  tone,  in  part  through  astrocyte-astrocyte  
communication  mediated  through  gap  junctions  and  calcium  waves 
modulated  by  neuronal  activity;  support  blood-brain  barrier  and 
glymphatic  (see  below)  integrity  through  extension  of  foot  processes 
to vascular structures and expression of aquaporin-4 water channels; 
and carry out additional metabolic functions essential for maintenance 
of neuron health.

One characteristic of the response to many types of brain injury is 
reactive astrocytosis, or the formation of a glial scar. Recent work has 
highlighted the transcriptional and functional heterogeneity of reactive 
astrocytes that, depending on the context, could promote neurotoxicity 
or aid in protection and repair. In a model of brain ischemia, reactive 
astrocytes  promoted  tissue  repair  after  injury.  By  contrast,  in  other 
inflammatory  and  degenerative  states,  reactive  astrocytes  appear  to 
actively contribute to the injury process. Secreted products of activated 
microglia,  specifically  IL-1a,  TNF,  and  C1q,  can  induce  astrocytes 
to  transform  to  a  disease-promoting  phenotype.  Such  cells  lose  the 
capacity  to  phagocytose  synapses  and  myelin  debris,  and  become 
toxic  in  vitro  to  neurons  and  mature  oligodendrocytes,  possibly  via  
complement-mediated  damage.  Interestingly,  OPCs,  abundant  in 
active  lesions  of  MS  (Chap.  444)  despite  the  inflammatory  milieu, 
are  resistant  to  astrocyte-mediated  killing.  Reactive  astrocytes  could 
promote damage in disorders as varied as AD (Chap. 431), Parkinson’s 
disease (PD) (Chap. 435), and ALS (Chap. 437), despite the distinct 
etiologies and pathologies of these conditions.

LYMPHATICS OF THE CENTRAL  
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Two recently identified lymphatic structures of the CNS are the glym-
phatic and deep dural lymphoid systems, responsible for clearance of 
debris  in  the  CNS,  and  likely  also  serving  roles  in  immune  surveil-
lance.  The  brain  has  traditionally  been  considered  to  lack  a  classical 
lymphatic  system,  and  immune  responses  against  antigens  are  less 
effectively generated in the CNS than in other organ systems, a concept 
termed immune privilege. However, the immune privilege status of the 
brain is only relative and not absolute. Also, given the high metabolic 
demands of the brain, some mechanism for efficient removal of solute 
and debris must be present. One well-established pathway involves the 
passive flow of solutes from the brain parenchyma into the cerebrospi-
nal fluid (CSF), and their exit via the arachnoid granulations, as well as 
along cranial and spinal nerve roots to a series of lymphoid structures 
located in the cribriform plate, nasal mucosa, and elsewhere.

The  glymphatic  system  derives  its  name  from  a  distinctive 
architecture  involving  lymphoid-like  structures  and  astroglial  cells.  

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3295

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3296 CSF  synthesized  in  the  arachnoid  villi  circulates  through  the  ventri-
cles and subarachnoid space surrounding the convexities of the brain 
and  spinal  cord,  and  exits  through  conduits  surrounding  arterioles 
penetrating  into  the  brain  parenchyma.  These  spaces  are  lined  by 
endothelial cells internally, and by astrocyte foot processes that form 
the  external  walls.  Aided  by  arterial  propulsion,  CSF  moves  out  of 
these specialized conduits and into astrocytes via foot processes rich in 
aquaporin-4 water channels, and then in the interstitium of brain par-
enchyma picks up solutes and particulate debris that are then carried 
to  perivenous  spaces  where  they  passage  to  exit  the  brain  and  drain 
into the lymphatic system. In mice, knockout of aquaporin-4 markedly 
reduced  the  flow  of  interstitial  fluids  in  the  brain,  underscoring  the 
critical role of astrocyte uptake of CSF in this process. Interstitial flow 
in the CNS is also impaired with aging, possibly related to changes in 
astrocytic  aquaporin-4  expression.  A  fascinating  aspect  of  the  glym-
phatic  system  is  that  the  transport  of  fluids  and  solutes  accelerates 
with sleep, arguing for a critical role for sleep in promoting clearance 
of debris needed to meet the high metabolic demands of the nervous 
system. Furthermore, in disease models, aggregated proteins associated 
with neurodegenerative disease, such as β-amyloid associated with AD 
(Chap. 431), were also more efficiently cleared during sleep. Indeed, in 
mice genetically engineered to produce excess β-amyloid and develop 
AD-like cognitive decline, sleep deprivation increased accumulation of 
amyloid plaques. Glymphatic pathways are also likely to represent an 
important egress pathway for lymphocytes in the CNS and a route for 
lymphocyte  encounters  with  CNS  antigens  in  cervical  lymph  nodes. 
In  this  regard,  deep  cervical  lymph  nodes  may  be  a  site  for  antigen- 
specific stimulation of B cells in MS (Chap. 444).

A second recently identified pathway consists of a plexus of small 
lymphatic-like  vessels  located  on  the  external  surface  of  meningeal 
arteries and deep dural sinuses (including the sagittal and transverse 
sinuses), structures that exit the brain along the surface of veins and 
arteries and drain to the deep cervical lymph nodes. These conduits are 
comprised of cells that appear to represent a lymphoid drainage system 
distinct from vascular endothelium. These sinus-associated lymphoid 
structures may be most important in clearing solutes from the CSF, in 
contrast to the glymphatic system that likely functions to remove waste 
products from the brain interstitium; however, the exact functions of 
these two systems and their interrelationships are only beginning to be 
understood.

MICROBIOTA AND NEUROLOGIC DISEASE
The  human  microbiome  (Chap.  471)  represents  the  collective  set  of 
genes  from  the  1014  organisms  living  in  our  gut,  skin,  mucosa,  and 
other sites. For each gene encoded in the human genome, 1000 micro-
bial genes exist within our bodies, and these can encode a wide variety 
of molecules that directly or indirectly affect nervous system develop-
ment, maintenance, and function. Different microbial communities are 
associated  with  different  genetic  backgrounds,  ethnicities,  diets,  and 
environments. In any individual, the predominant gut microbiota can 
be remarkably stable over decades, but also can be altered by exposure 
to certain microbial species, for example by ingestion of probiotics.

Gut microbes can shape immune responses through the interaction 
of their metabolism with that of humans. These gut–brain interactions 
are likely to be important in understanding the pathogenesis of many 
autoimmune  neurologic  diseases.  For  example,  mice  treated  with 
broad-spectrum  antibiotics  are  resistant  to  EAE,  an  effect  associated 
with decreases in production of proinflammatory cytokines and con-
versely  more  production  of  the  immunosuppressive  cytokines  IL-10 
and  IL-13  as  well  as  an  increase  in  regulatory  T  and  B  lymphocytes. 
Oral  administration  of  polysaccharide  A  (PSA)  from  Bacillus  fragilis 
also protects mice from EAE, via increases in IL-10. Intestinal micro-
biota from patients with MS were found to promote EAE when trans-
ferred to germ-free mice, possibly due to imbalances between bacterial 
species that promote inflammation (such as Akkermansia muciniphila 
and  Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus)  and  those  that  induce  regulatory 
immune responses (such as Parabacteroides distasonis).

In addition to nonspecific effects on immune homeostasis mediated 
by  cytokines  and  regulatory  lymphocytes,  some  microbial  proteins 

might  trigger  a  cross-reactive  immune  response  against  a  homolo-
gous  protein  in  the  nervous  system,  a  mechanism  termed  molecular 
mimicry.  Examples  include  cross-reactivity  between  the  astrocyte 
water  channel  aquaporin-4  and  an  ABC  transporter  permease  from 
Clostridia perfringens in neuromyelitis optica (Chap. 445); HLA mol-
ecules  with  A.  muciniphila  peptides  in  MS  (Chap.  444);  the  neural 
ganglioside  Gm1  and  similar  sialic  acid–containing  structures  from 
Campylobacter jejuni in Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 447); and the 
sleep-promoting protein hypocretin and hemagglutinin from an H1N1 
influenza virus in narcolepsy (Chap. 31).

Microbial  genes  also  encode  molecules  that  can  affect  develop-
ment  of  neurons  and  glia,  and  influence  myelination  and  plasticity. 
Bacterial-derived  short-chain  fatty  acids,  for  example,  regulate  pro-
duction  of  brain-derived  neurotrophic  factor  (BDNF).  Bacteria  also 
produce  a  variety  of  neurotransmitters  including  γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) and serotonin, and other neuroactive peptides that can 
modulate the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Gut microbiota also influ-
ence  development  and  activity  of  the  enteric  nervous  system,  which 
communicates  bidirectionally  with  the  CNS  via  the  vagus  nerve  that 
innervates the upper gut and proximal colon. As these gut–brain rela-
tionships become better defined, a role for the microbial environment 
in the pathogenesis of a much wider spectrum of neurologic conditions 
and  behaviors  seems  likely,  extending  well  beyond  the  traditional 
boundaries  of  immune-mediated  pathologies.  In  this  regard,  it  has 
long been known that gut bacteria can influence brain function, based 
mostly on classic studies demonstrating that products of gut microbes 
can  worsen  hepatic  encephalopathy,  forming  the  basis  of  treatment 
with antibiotics for this condition.

Mice that develop in a germ-free environment display less anxiety, 
lower  responses  to  stressful  situations,  more  exploratory  locomotive 
behaviors,  and  impaired  memory  formation  compared  with  non-
germ-free  counterparts.  These  behaviors  were  related  to  changes 
in  gene  expression  in  pathways  related  to  neural  signaling,  synaptic 
function, and modulation of neurotransmitters. Moreover, this behav-
ior could be reversed when the germ-free mice were co-housed with 
non-germ-free  mice.  Intestinal  microbiota  were  also  found  to  be 
required for the normal development and function of brain microglia, 
potentially linking these behavioral effects to specific cellular targets in 
the CNS. Remarkably, the actions of gut microbial species on microglia 
appear to be sex- and age-specific.

The  vagus  nerve  has  been  implicated  in  anxiety-  and  depression-
like  behaviors  in  mice.  Ingestion  of Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  induced 
changes in expression of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA1b 
in neurons of the limbic cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala, associ-
ated  with  reduced  levels  of  corticosteroids  and  reduced  anxiety-  and 
depression-like behaviors. Remarkably, these changes could be blocked 
by vagotomy.

A related area of emerging interest is in a possible contribution of 
the  gut  microbiome  to  autism  and  related  disorders.  Children  with 
autistic  spectrum  disorders  (ASD)  have  long  been  known  to  have 
gastrointestinal  disturbances,  and  the  severity  of  dysbiosis  appears 
to  correlate  with  the  severity  of  autism.  In  several  murine  models  of 
autism,  manipulation  of  the  gut  microbiome  ameliorated  the  behav-
ioral  abnormalities.  A  role  for  the  proinflammatory  cytokine  IL-17 
was  implicated  as  a  possible  mediator  in  producing  the  ASD-like 
changes. In mice, an ASD-like disorder could be induced in offspring 
after injecting the pregnant mother with the viral RNA mimic, poly-
inosinic:polycytidylic  acid  (poly  I:C);  remarkably,  oral  treatment  of 
offspring with B. fragilis corrected a range of autistic behaviors in these 
mice and also improved GI dysfunction. These preclinical data led to 
a small uncontrolled study of fecal gut transplantation in children with 
ASD that reported encouraging results, but will need to be confirmed 
in rigorous controlled trials.

There  has  been  considerable  interest  in  the  possible  role  of  the 
microbiome in a variety of vascular, traumatic, and neurodegenerative 
diseases, possibly mediated in part through actions on innate immu-
nity and microglia. In SOD1 transgenic ALS-prone mice, a germ-free 
environment exacerbated disease progression, and symptoms could be 
ameliorated by increasing levels of A. muciniphila or its nicotinamide 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3296

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders (vitamin B3) metabolite; a small preliminary clinical trial of nicotin-
amide supplementation subsequently reported encouraging results in 
ALS patients.

In  a  PD  model,  injection  of  misfolded  α-synuclein  into  the  gut 
triggered  deposition  of  α-synuclein  in  the  brain,  an  effect  that  was 
blocked  when  the  vagus  nerve  was  severed.  This  supported  a  prion 
mechanism (see below) for PD pathogenesis, in which vagal transport 
of  aggregated  α-synuclein  might  seed  the  CNS  via  the  vagus  nerve. 
The concept of a gut origin of PD is also consistent with clinical and 
pathologic studies, and is further strengthened by epidemiologic data 
indicating  that  vagotomy  may  be  protective  against  PD.  In  related 
work,  a  protein  of  Escherichia  coli,  named  Curli,  has  been  shown  to 
misfold and potentially serve as a template for subsequent propagation 
of misfolded α-synuclein. The possibility that a bacterial protein could 
initiate the cascade of events leading to PD is an extraordinary, but still 
unproven, hypothesis.

PATHOLOGIC PROTEINS, PRIONS, AND 
NEURODEGENERATION (FIG. 424-3)
 ■ PROTEIN AGGREGATION AND CELL DEATH
The term protein aggregation has become widely used to describe easily 
recognizable hallmarks of neurodegeneration. While such neuropatho-
logic hallmarks including plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and 
inclusion  bodies  are  often  thought  to  cause  neurologic  dysfunction, 
numerous new discoveries over the past several decades have rendered 
this  view  increasingly  unlikely.  Instead,  protein  aggregates  represent 
accumulations  of  toxic  proteins  that  may  become  less  harmful  when 
they are sequestered into plaques, NFTs, and inclusion bodies.

Most  mutations  in  the  amyloid  precursor  protein  (APP)  gene 
causing familial AD are concentrated within the Aβ peptide. Many of 

these mutations increase production of the Aβ42 peptide composed of 
β-amyloid with 42 amino acids, which has an increased propensity to 
adopt a prion conformation, as compared to β-amyloid with 40 amino 
acids. In contrast, mutations in the APP that reduce the production of 
β-amyloid protect against the development of AD and are associated 
with  preserved  cognition  in  the  elderly.  The  most  common  cause  of 
NFTs is AD, but the precise molecular events that produce tangles is 
unknown. Mutations in the MAPT gene encoding tau stimulate NFT 
formation  in  familial  frontotemporal  dementia,  inherited  progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and other familial tauopathies. Like AD, the major-
ity of most tauopathies as well as PD are sporadic.

The  second  most  common  neurodegenerative  disease  is  PD.  The 
saga of α-synuclein and PD begins in 1996 with the identification of 
a mutation in a family of Greek descent. With this family and others, 
there were sufficient patients to establish genetic linkage. Soon there-
after,  immunostaining  showed  that  α-synuclein  was  present  in  Lewy 
bodies, and the following year staining of glial cytoplasmic inclusions 
(GCIs)  was  identified  in  the  brains  of  deceased  multiple-system 
atrophy  (MSA)  patients.  Subsequently,  brains  from  deceased  MSA 
patients  transmitted  the  disease  to  transgenic  mice,  establishing  that 
the  α-synucleinopathies  are  prion  diseases.  Before  the  α-synuclein 
(SCNA) gene was found to cause familial PD, other genes such as the 
leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) were found to modify the onset 
of  PD;  other  similar  PD  modifier  genes  include  parkin,  PINK1,  and  
DJ-1. PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase (see below), and DJ-1 is a pro-
tein involved in protection from oxidative stress. Parkin, which causes 
autosomal  recessive  early-onset  PD-like  illness,  is  a  ubiquitin  ligase. 
The characteristic histopathologic feature of PD is the Lewy body, an 
eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion that contains both neurofilaments 
and  α-synuclein.  Huntington’s  disease  (HD)  and  cerebellar  degen-
erations  are  associated  with  expansions  of  polyglutamine  repeats  in 

3297

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Sporadic NDs

Prions causing neurodegradation

1

Wt
precursor

3

Wt prion
form

2

+

Inherited NDs

Age-dependent
mutant prion formation

Amyloid
fibrils

i

Mutant
precursor

Mutant
prion
form

ii

+

A

A

B

Aβ plaque

Tau tangle

α-Synuclein
Lewy body

FIGURE 424-3  Neurodegeneration caused by prions. A. In sporadic neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), wild-type (Wt) prions multiply through self-propagating cycles of 
posttranslational modification, during which the precursor protein (green circle) is converted into the prion form (red square), which generally is high in β-sheet content. 
Pathogenic prions are most toxic as oligomers and less toxic after polymerization into amyloid fibrils. The small polygons (blue) represent proteolytic cleavage products 
of the prion. Depending on the protein, the fibrils coalesce into Aβ amyloid plaques in AD, neurofibrillary tangles in AD and other tauopathies, or Lewy bodies in PD and 
Dementia with Lewy bodies. Drug targets for the development of therapeutics include: (1) lowering the precursor protein, (2) inhibiting prion formation, and (3) enhancing 
prion clearance. B. Late-onset heritable neurodegeneration argues for two discrete events: The (i) first event is the synthesis of mutant precursor protein (green circle), 
and the (ii) second event is the age-dependent formation of mutant prions (red square). The highlighted yellow bar in the DNA structure represents mutation of a base pair 
within an exon, and the small yellow circles signify the corresponding mutant amino acid substitution. Green arrows represent a normal process; red arrows, a pathogenic 
process; and blue arrows, a process that is known to occur but unknown whether it is normal or pathogenic. (Reproduced with permission from SB Prusiner: Biology and 
genetics of prions causing neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Genet 47:601, 2013.) 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3297

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3298 proteins, which aggregate to produce neuronal intranuclear inclusions. 
Familial  ALS  is  associated  with  superoxide  dismutase  (SOD1)  muta-
tions  and  cytoplasmic  inclusions  containing  superoxide  dismutase. 
An important finding was the discovery that ubiquitinated inclusions 
observed in most cases of ALS and the most common form of fron-
totemporal dementia are composed of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 
(TDP-43).  Subsequently,  mutations  in  the  TDP-43  gene,  and  in  the 
fused  in  sarcoma  gene  (FUS),  were  found  in  familial  ALS.  Both  of 
these proteins are involved in transcription regulation as well as RNA 
metabolism.

Another  key  mechanism  linked  to  cell  death  is  mitochondrial 
dynamics,  which  refers  to  the  processes  involved  in  movement  of 
mitochondria,  as  well  as  in  mitochondrial  fission  and  fusion,  which 
play a critical role in mitochondrial turnover and in replenishment of 
damaged mitochondria. Mitochondrial dysfunction is strongly linked 
to  the  pathogenesis  of  a  number  of  neurodegenerative  diseases  such 
as Friedreich’s ataxia, which is caused by mutations in an iron-binding 
protein that plays an important role in transferring iron to iron-sulfur 
clusters  in  aconitase  and  complex  I  and  II  of  the  electron  transport 
chain. Mitochondrial fission is dependent on the dynamin-related pro-
teins (Drp1), which bind to its receptor Fis, whereas mitofusins 1 and 
2 (MFN 1/2) and optic atrophy protein 1 (OPA1) are responsible for 
fusion of the outer and inner mitochondrial membrane, respectively. 
Mutations in MFN2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A, 
and mutations in OPA1 cause autosomal dominant optic atrophy. Both 
β-amyloid and mutant huntingtin protein induce mitochondrial frag-
mentation  and  neuronal  cell  death  associated  with  increased  activity 
of Drp1. In addition, mutations in genes causing autosomal recessive 
PD,  parkin  and  PINK1,  cause  abnormal  mitochondrial  morphology 
and result in impairment of the ability of the cell to remove damaged 
mitochondria by autophagy.

As  noted  above,  one  major  scientific  question  is  whether  protein 
aggregates  directly  contribute  to  neuronal  death  or  whether  they  are 
merely  secondary  bystanders.  A  focus  in  all  the  neurodegenerative 
diseases  is  on  small-protein  aggregates  termed  oligomers.  How  many 
monomers polymerize into a particular disease-specific oligomer has 
been  elusive.  Whether  oligomers  are  the  toxic  species  of  β-amyloid, 
α-synuclein, or proteins with expanded polyglutamines such as the one 
causing HD remains to be established. Protein aggregates are usually 
ubiquitinated,  which  targets  them  for  degradation  by  the  26S  com-
ponent of the proteasome. An inability to degrade protein aggregates 
could lead to cellular dysfunction, impaired axonal transport, and cell 
death by apoptotic mechanisms.

Autophagy is the degradation of cystolic components in lysosomes. 
There is increasing evidence that autophagy plays an important role in 
degradation  of  protein  aggregates  in  the  neurodegenerative  diseases, 
and it is impaired in AD, PD, FTD, and HD. Autophagy is particularly 
important to the health of neurons, and failure of autophagy contrib-
utes to cell death. In HD, a failure of cargo recognition occurs, contrib-
uting to protein aggregates and cell death.

There  is  other  evidence  for  lysosomal  dysfunction  and  impaired 
autophagy in PD. Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA) are associ-
ated with 5% of all PD cases as well as 8–9% of patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies. Notably, glucocerebrosidase and enzymatic activity 
are reduced in the substantia nigra of sporadic PD patients. α-Synuclein is 
degraded by chaperone-mediated and macro autophagy. The degrada-
tion of α-synuclein has been shown to be impaired in transgenic mice 
deficient  in  glucocerebrosidase  and  α-synuclein  inhibits  the  activity 
of glucocerebrosidase; thus, there appears to be bidirectional feedback 
between α-synuclein and glucocerebrosidase.

The retromer complex is a conserved membrane-associated protein 
complex that functions in the endosome-to-Golgi complex. The retro-
mer complex contains a cargo selective complex consisting of VPS35, 
VPS26,  and  VPS29,  along  with  a  sorting  nexin  dimer.  Mutations  in 
VPS35  were  shown  to  be  a  cause  of  late-onset  autosomal  dominant 
PD. The retromer also traffics APP away from endosomes, where it is 
cleaved to generate β-amyloid. Deficiencies of VPS35 and VPS26 were 
also identified in hippocampal brain tissue from AD. A potential thera-
peutic approach to these diseases might therefore be to use chaperones 

to stabilize the retromer and reduce the generation of β-amyloid and 
α-synuclein.
PRIONS AND NEURODEGENERATIVE 
DISEASES
As we have learned more about the etiology and pathogenesis of the 
neurodegenerative  diseases,  it  has  become  clear  that  the  histologic 
abnormalities that were once curiosities, in fact, are likely to reflect the 
etiologies. For example, the amyloid plaques in kuru and Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (CJD) are filled with the PrPSc prions that have assembled 
into fibrils. The past three decades have witnessed an explosion of new 
knowledge  about  prions.  For  many  years,  kuru,  CJD,  and  scrapie  of 
sheep  were  thought  to  be  caused  by  slow-acting  viruses,  but  a  large 
body  of  experimental  evidence  argues  that  the  infectious  pathogens 
causing these diseases are devoid of nucleic acid. Such pathogens are 
called prions, which are composed of host-encoded proteins that adopt 
alternative conformations that undergo self-propagation (Chap. 430). 
Prions impose their conformations on the normal, precursor proteins, 
which in turn become self-templating resulting in faithful copies; most 
prions are enriched for β-sheet and can assemble into amyloid fibrils.
Similar to the plaques in kuru and CJD that are composed of PrP 
prions, the amyloid plaques in AD are filled with Aβ prions that have 
polymerized  into  fibrils.  This  relationship  between  the  neuropatho-
logic findings and the etiologic prion was strengthened by the genetic 
linkage between familial CJD and mutations in the PrP gene, as well 
as  (as  noted  above)  between  familial  AD  and  mutations  in  the  APP 
gene. Moreover, a mutation in the APP gene that prevents Aβ peptide 
formation was correlated with a decreased incidence of AD in Iceland.
The heritable neurodegenerative diseases offer an important insight 
into the pathogenesis of the more common, sporadic ones. Although 
the  mutant  proteins  that  cause  these  disorders  are  expressed  in  the 
brains  of  people  early  in  life,  the  diseases  do  not  occur  for  many 
decades. Many explanations for the late onset of familial neurodegen-
erative diseases have been offered, but none is supported by substantial 
experimental evidence. The late onset might be due to a second event 
in which a mutant protein, after its conversion into a prion, begins to 
accumulate  at  some  rather  advanced  age.  Such  a  formulation  is  also 
consistent with data showing that the protein quality-control mecha-
nisms diminish in efficiency with age. Thus, the prion forms of both 
wild-type and mutant proteins are likely to be efficiently degraded in 
younger  people  but  are  less  well  handled  in  older  individuals.  This 
explanation is consistent with the view that neurodegenerative diseases 
are disorders of the aging nervous system.

A new classification for neurodegenerative diseases can be proposed 
based  on  not  only  the  traditional  phenotypic  presentation  and  neu-
ropathology, but also the prion etiology (Table 424-1). Over the past 
decade, an expanding body of experimental data has accumulated con-
necting prions in each of these illnesses. In addition to kuru and CJD, 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker  disease  (GSS)  and  fatal  insomnia 
in humans are caused by PrPSc prions. In animals, PrPSc prions cause 
scrapie of sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), 
chronic  wasting  disease  (CWD)  of  deer  and  elk,  feline  spongiform 
encephalopathy, and transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME). Sim-
ilar to PrP, Aβ, tau, α-synuclein, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), and 
possibly  huntingtin  all  adopt  alternative  conformations  that  become 
self-propagating,  and  thus,  each  protein  can  become  a  prion  and  be 
transferred to synaptically connected neurons. Moreover, each of these 
prions causes a distinct constellation of neurodegenerative diseases.

Evidence for a prion etiology of AD comes from a series of transmis-
sion experiments initially performed in marmosets and subsequently 
in  transgenic  mice  expressing  the  mutant  APP  from  which  the  Aβ 
peptide is derived (Table 424-1). Synthetic mutant Aβ peptides folded 
into a β-sheet-rich conformation exhibited prion infectivity in cultured 
cells. Studies of the tau protein have shown that it not only features in 
the pathogenesis of AD, but also causes the frontotemporal dementias 
including chronic traumatic encephalopathy, which has been reported 
in both contact sport athletes and military personnel who have suffered 
traumatic  brain  injuries.  A  series  of  incisive  studies  using  cultured 
cells and Tg mice have demonstrated that both tau and Aβ prions are 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3298

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 424-1  Prion-Based Classification of  
Neurodegenerative Diseases

NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
Kuru
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS)
Fatal insomnia
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
Scrapie
Chronic wasting disease (CWD)
Feline spongiform encephalopathy
Transmissible mink encephalopathy
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Down syndrome
ALS-PDC of Guam
Parkinson’s disease (PD)
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Multiple-system atrophy
Frontotemporal dementias (FTDs)
Posttraumatic FTD
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)

Huntington’s disease (HD)

CAUSATIVE PRION 
PROTEINS
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
PrPSc
Aβ → tau
Aβ → tau
Aβ → tau
α-Synuclein
α-Synuclein
α-Synuclein
Tau, TDP43, FUS 
(C9orf72, progranulin)
Tau

SOD1, TDP43, FUS 
(C9orf72)
Huntingtin

found  together  in  the  brains  of  AD  patients.  These  findings  indicated 
that AD is a double-prion disease (Table 424-1); unexpectedly, two more  
double-prion diseases have been identified recently. Patients with Down 
syndrome, from 6–72 years of age, all had both Aβ and tau prions in 
their brains with the frequent diagnosis of AD. The third double-prion 
disease  has  been  found  in  the  Chamorro  people  on  Guam  as  well  as 
Japanese  living  on  the  Kii  peninsula:  both  groups  of  people  develop 
ALS with dementia and both have Aβ and tau prions in their brains.

In contrast to Aβ and tau prions, α-synuclein prions cause very dif-
ferent illnesses, i.e., PD, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and MSA. 
Brains from MSA patients inoculated into Tg(SCNA*A53T) mice died 
~90 days after intracerebral inoculation, whereas mutant α-synuclein 
(A53T)  prions  formed  spontaneously  in  Tg  mouse  brains  that  killed 
recipient Tg mice in ~200 days (Table 424-1).

For many years, the most frequently cited argument against prions 
was the existence of strains that produced distinct clinical presentations 
and  different  patterns  of  neuropathologic  lesions.  Some  investigators 
argued that the biologic information carried in different prion strains 
could  be  encoded  only  within  a  nucleic  acid.  Subsequently,  many 
studies  demonstrated  that  strain-specified  variation  is  enciphered  in 
the conformation of PrPSc, but the molecular mechanisms responsible 
for  the  storage  of  this  biologic  information  remains  enigmatic.  The 
neuroanatomical patterns of prion deposition have been shown to be 
dependent  on  the  particular  strain  of  prion.  Convincing  evidence  in 
support of this proposition has been accumulated for PrP, Aβ, tau, and 
α-synuclein prions. The most persuasive information on prion strains 
comes from studies in yeast where the tools of yeast genetics allowed 
inciteful  investigations  to  be  performed  in  ways  that  could  not  be 
accomplished in mammals.

Although  the  number  of  prions  identified  in  mammals  and  in 
fungi continues to expand, the existence of prions in other phylogeny 
remains undetermined. Some mammalian prions perform vital func-
tions  and  do  not  cause  disease;  such  nonpathogenic  prions  include 
the  cytoplasmic  polyadenylation  element-binding  (CPEB)  protein, 
the  mitochondrial  antiviral-signaling  (MAVS)  protein,  and  T  cell–
restricted intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1).

Many  but  not  all  prion  proteins  adopt  a  β-sheet-rich  conforma-
tion  and  appear  to  readily  oligomerize  as  this  process  becomes  self- 
propagating. Control of the self-propagating state of benign mammalian 

3299

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

prions is less well understood than that of pathogenic mammalian pri-
ons, which appear to multiply exponentially. We do not know if prions 
multiply as monomers or as oligomers; notably, the ionizing radiation 
target size of PrPSc prions suggests it is a trimer. The oligomeric states 
of pathogenic mammalian prions are thought to be toxic; larger poly-
mers, such as amyloid fibrils, seem to be a mechanism for minimizing 
toxicity.

To date, there is no medication that halts or even slows one human 
neurodegenerative  disease.  The  development  of  drugs  designed  to 
inhibit the conversion of the normal precursor proteins into prions or 
to enhance the degradation of prions focuses on the initial step in prion 
accumulation. Although a dozen drugs that cross the blood-brain bar-
rier have been identified that prolong the lives of mice infected with 
scrapie  prions,  none  has  been  identified  that  extends  the  lives  of  Tg 
mice  that  replicate  human  CJD  prions.  Despite  doubling  or  tripling 
the length of incubation times in mice inoculated with scrapie prions, 
all of the mice eventually succumb to illness. Because all of the treated 
mice develop neurologic dysfunction at the same time, the mutation 
rate as judged by drug resistance is likely to approach 100%, which is 
much  higher  than  mutation  rates  recorded  for  bacteria  and  viruses. 
Mutations in prions seem likely to represent conformational variants 
that  are  selected  for  in  mammals  where  survival  becomes  limited  by 
the fastest-replicating prions. The results of these studies make it likely 
that cocktails of drugs that attack a variety of prion conformers will be 
required for the development of effective therapeutics.

NEURAL STEM CELL BIOLOGY
Normal  and  genetically  modified  (“transgenic”)  mice  are  the  most 
widely used model systems to study features of human nervous system 
diseases. However, modeling genetic diseases in rodents is limited to 
the relatively small number of monogenic human diseases where the 
specific  gene  mutations  are  known,  and  is  further  limited  by  species 
differences.  The  latter  can  be  particularly  important  in  brain  regions 
such as the cerebral cortex that have undergone significant evolution-
ary expansion in humans. These shortcomings, which likely contribute 
to the low probability that therapeutic efficacy translates from animal 
models  to  humans,  can  potentially  be  overcome  through  stem  cell 
models that enable the use of human cells and tissues to model human 
diseases.  The  advent  of  new  stem  cell  technologies  is  transforming 
our understanding of the pathobiology of human neurologic diseases. 
Stem cell platforms are being used to screen for therapeutic agents, to 
uncover adverse drug effects, and to discover novel therapeutic targets.
Among the most exciting recent advances in stem cell technology is 
the ability to convert somatic cells, either skin fibroblasts or blood cells, 
into  pluripotent  stem  cells  known  as  induced  pluripotent  stem  cells 
(iPSCs). This technology has introduced an entirely new and powerful 
approach to study the pathobiology of heritable diseases. Pluripotent 
stem  cells  can  be  easily  obtained  through  minimally  invasive  proce-
dures such as a skin biopsy or blood sample, and converted to pluripo-
tency  through  application  of  a  cocktail  of  reprogramming  factors  to 
create iPSCs. Initially, a set of four programming factors, Oct3/4, Klf-4, 
Sox2,  and  c-Myc,  was  delivered  to  cells  using  lentiviruses  that  stably 
integrated  the  reprogramming  factor  genes  into  the  iPSC  genome, 
potentially altering disease phenotypes and also abrogating expression 
of native genes at the DNA sites where the factors integrated. Newer 
techniques  have  been  developed  that  use  nonintegrating  approaches 
such as through the use of Sendai virus, messenger RNA (mRNA), or 
episomal vectors that circumvent these problems. Once created, iPSC 
lines can be expanded indefinitely to produce a limitless supply of stem 
cells. These cells are the starting material for the derivation of specific 
cell  types  based  on  protocols  that  use  small  molecules,  proteins,  or 
direct  gene  induction  to  recapitulate  developmental  programs.  Most 
current  protocols  derive  neuronal  progenitor  through  dual-SMAD 
inhibition,  a  step  that  involves  the  use  of  small-molecule  inhibitors 
to  block  endoderm  and  mesodermal  cell  fates,  thereby  creating  neu-
ral  cells  by  default.  Multiple  protocols  have  been  developed  over  the 
last  decade  for  creating  large  numbers  of  human  neuron  progenitor 
cell  types  and  directing  them  toward  specific  nervous  system  cell 
fates,  including  neuron  subtypes  from  multiple  regions  of  brain  and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3299

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3300 spinal cord as well as retinal cells, glial cells including astrocytes and 

oligodendrocytes, immune cells, and peripheral nervous system cells.

The primary medical benefit of iPSC technology is that it enables 
the  creation  of  patient-specific  cells  or  tissues  that  are  genetically 
matched to individual patients. This approach enables the study of not 
only  monogenetic  disorders  but  also  sporadic  forms  of  disease  and 
complex  polygenic  disorders  including  those  with  unidentified  risk 
loci. Furthermore, by deriving iPSC cell lines from multiple patients, it 
would be possible to explore how disease phenotypes may vary accord-
ing  to  genetic  background.  Another  approach  that  has  been  used  to 
generate specific neuron and glial cell types from somatic cells such as 
fibroblasts is through direct reprogramming. This approach relies on 
a cocktail of specific transcription factors to directly convert somatic 
cells  into  the  alternate  desired  cell  type.  This  approach  bypasses  the 
epigenetic  reset  that  accompanies  cells  as  they  are  reprogrammed  to 
a pluripotent state. The advantage of this approach is that age-related 
epigenetic signatures are not erased, so that derived neurons may more 
readily reflect diseases that manifest in older cells.

Despite the advantages of using in vitro models of nervous system 
diseases  derived  from  patient-specific  iPSCs,  several  potential  road-
blocks  remain.  There  are  no  standard  reprogramming  or  derivation 
protocols,  and  the  different  methods  can  result  in  considerable  vari-
ability  in  the  disease  phenotypes  reported  by  different  laboratories. 
Confidence  in  the  specificity  of  a  particular  phenotype  is  therefore 
increased if it has been validated across multiple laboratories. There is 
also the problem of inherent variability between patient lines that may 
result from their different genetic backgrounds. One solution, available 
only  in  the  case  of  monogenic  disorders,  is  to  use  isogenic  controls 
generated using gene editing, such as with CRISPR-Cas9 technology, 
to create disease and control lines on an identical genetic background. 
However, because differences in genetic background can influence the 
penetrance of a particular trait, it will still be necessary to compare dis-
ease lines from multiple patients to discern a true disease phenotype. 
For polygenic disorders where the causative mutations are unknown, it 
will not be possible to create isogenic controls, and in these situations 
the best strategy for improving reliability and sensitivity is to compare 
lines from multiple patients.

 ■ ORGANOIDS
Most  nervous  system  disorders,  including  autism  spectrum  disorder, 
schizophrenia,  PD,  AD,  and  ALS  are  complex  disorders,  resulting 
from  an  unknown  combination  of  gene  mutations,  and  manifest  not 
only  in  specific  cell  types,  but  also  in  alterations  of  the  local  tissue 
environment.  These  disorders  are  difficult  to  model  in  animals,  but 
they  are  approachable  using  three-dimensional  human  iPSC  stem 
cell  models,  often  referred  to  as  “organoids.”  Organoids  are  derived 
from  pluripotent  stem  cells  that  are  directed  along  a  tissue-specific 
lineage  through  the  timed  application  of  growth  factors,  genes,  or 
small-molecule activators or inhibitors, and allowed to aggregate into 
three-dimensional  structures.  With  time,  cell  intrinsic  programs  are 
spontaneously engaged and the cellular aggregates begin to self-organize 
and develop into structures that recapitulate the complex topographical 
and cellular diversity of normal organ development. In this way it has 
been  possible  to  create,  at  least  in  part,  in  vitro  brainlike  organoids 
that  resemble  the  human  forebrain  at  early  stages  of  development. 
When  allowed  to  develop  from  an  anterior  neural  tube  stage,  these 
structures  can  become  heterogeneous,  containing  regions  with  fore-
brain,  midbrain,  and/or  hindbrain  identity,  and  can  often  include 
retina-like  structures.  The  high  degree  of  variability  in  such  “whole-
brain  organoids”  can  be  a  liability  for  controlled  studies,  and  can  be 
reduced by the use of more directed protocols that restrict outcomes 
to more defined brain regions, such as forebrain, cortex, or ganglionic 
eminence. A variety of protocols have now been developed to gener-
ate organoids with specific regional identity, and fusing organoids of 
different regional identity with each other has been used to reproduce 
cellular interactions such as neuronal migration across regions. Many 
protocols are focused on modeling cortical development, and they can 
reproduce  developmental  features  including  a  diversity  of  progenitor 
and neuronal cell types topographically distributed within ventricular 

and subventricular progenitor regions and rudimentary cortical layers. 
However, the organoids follow a human developmental timetable and 
still  remain  at  stages  roughly  comparable  to  late  fetal  development 
even  after  6–9  months  of  culture.  Moreover  they  lack  key  cell  types 
such as endothelial cells, pericytes, and microglia, and have few if any 
astrocytes or oligodendrocytes. Nonetheless, while still only reflecting 
rudimentary  organizational  and  compositional  features,  organoids 
have become attractive models to study human brain development and 
the pathophysiology of human nervous system diseases in the context 
of a partially organized brainlike structure.

 ■ BRAIN DEVELOPMENT AND DEVELOPMENTAL 
DISORDERS: MICROCEPHALY AND LISSENCEPHALY
Transcriptional  analysis  has  suggested  that  the  neurons  produced  by 
most  stem  cell  protocols  resemble  early-  to  mid-gestational  stages 
of  human  brain  development.  The  immaturity  of  stem  cell–derived 
human neurons may limit their utility for modeling adult diseases but 
it  does  make  them  ideally  suited  for  the  study  of  brain  development 
and the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders.

Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare neu-
rodevelopmental  disorder  producing  severe  microcephaly  with  sim-
plified cortical gyration and intellectual disability. MCPH was one of 
the first disorders to be studied using cerebral organoids. Mutations in 
genes encoding microtubule spindle components and spindle-associated 
proteins  are  the  most  frequent  causes  of  congenital  microcephaly. 
Among  them  is  cyclin-dependent  kinase  5  related  activator  protein 
2 (CDK5RAP2). Skin fibroblasts derived from a single microcephalic 
patient carrying a mutation in CDK5RAP2 were used to generate four 
iPSC lines. Cerebral organoids grown from these cell lines contained 
fewer  proliferating  progenitor  cells  and  showed  premature  neural 
differentiation compared to wild-type controls. Introducing functional 
CDK5RAP2  by  electroporation  partially  rescued  the  disease  pheno-
type, supporting the notion that failure of the founder population of 
neural  progenitors  to  properly  expand  underlies  the  smaller  brain. 
This  study  demonstrated  that  brain  organoids  derived  from  patients 
with microcephaly can be used to reproduce features of the disease, but 
did not reveal new insights or disease features of CDK5RAP2 micro-
cephaly that had not already been described in mouse models.

In a study using cortical organoids to model Miller-Dieker syndrome 
(MDS),  a  severe  congenital  form  of  lissencephaly  or  “smooth-brain,” 
features of the human disease were observed that had not been noted in 
murine models. Classical lissencephaly is a genetic neurologic disorder 
associated with mental retardation and intractable epilepsy, and MDS 
is  a  severe  form  of  the  disorder.  Cortical  folding  in  humans  begins 
toward the end of the second trimester, a stage of development that has 
not  yet  been  modeled  in  organoids,  but  gyrencephaly  depends  upon 
earlier events such as neural progenitor cell proliferation and neuronal 
migration, which can be modeled in organoids. The human organoid 
model of MDS exhibited several neural progenitor cell phenotypes that 
had already been reported in mouse models, including altered mitotic 
spindle orientation and neuronal migration defects. But the organoids 
also displayed a mitotic defect in a specific neural stem cell subtype, 
the outer radial glia cell (oRG), that had not been observed in mice. 
oRG cells are enriched in the outer subventricular zone, a proliferative 
region that is large in primates and not present in rodents. These cells 
are  particularly  numerous  in  the  developing  human  cortex  and  are 
thought to underlie the developmental and evolutionary expansion of 
the human cortex. oRG cells from MDS patients behaved abnormally 
and  had  arrested  or  delayed  mitoses.  MDS  organoids  also  identified 
noncell autonomous defects in Wnt signaling as an underlying mech-
anism. These insights into mechanistic and cell type specific features 
of human disease highlight how organoid technology can provide new 
and  valuable  perspectives  on  the  pathophysiology  of  disorders  of  in 
utero development.

 ■ ACQUIRED NEURODEVELOPMENTAL 
DISORDERS: ZIKA
The recent outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) and associated microcephaly 
cases  in  the  Americas  provided  a  test  case  for  the  utility  of  brain 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3300

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3301

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

organoids  to  model  acquired  human  microcephaly.  Despite  a  cor-
relation between Zika infection rates and the incidence of congenital 
microcephaly,  compelling  evidence  that  ZIKV  caused  microcephaly 
was  lacking  in  the  early  phases  of  the  epidemic.  The  causal  link 
between  ZIKV  and  congenital  microcephaly  was  buttressed  by  two 
studies in 2016 that used human iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells 
and  organoids  to  demonstrate  ZIKV  tropism  for  human  neural  pro-
genitor cells. Neural progenitor cells (radial glia) were readily infected 
in  vitro  with  subsequent  progenitor  cell  death  and  involution  of 
organoid size. Forebrain organoids were further used to highlight the 
role of the flavivirus entry factor, AXL, in determining viral tropism, 
and were also used to explore the disease mechanism by demonstrating 
upregulation of the innate immune receptor toll-like receptor 3 (TLR) 
in  response  to  ZIKV  infection.  Stem  cell–derived  models  of  human 
brain  development  have  also  demonstrated  centrosomal  abnormali-
ties in radial glia and alteration in the cleavage plane of mitotic radial 
glia  associated  with  premature  neural  differentiation.  Mouse  models 
are also being used to study the pathophysiology of congenital ZIKV 
syndrome, but the availability of unlimited numbers of human neural 
cells produced using stem cell technology has enabled high-throughput 
screening  assays  to  test  libraries  of  clinically  approved  compounds 
for potential therapeutic agents. This strategy has already highlighted 
several  compounds  that  could  potentially  help  protect  against  ZIKV 
microcephaly.

 ■ NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS:  
AUTISM AND SCHIZOPHRENIA
Autism  spectrum  disorders  (ASDs)  are  complex  and  heterogeneous 
neurodevelopmental disorders usually manifesting in childhood with 
difficulties in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication, 
and  repetitive  behaviors.  The  cellular  and  molecular  mechanisms 
underlying ASD are thought to arise at stages of fetal brain develop-
ment,  making  them  well-suited  for  exploration  using  human  iPSC- 
derived disease models. iPSC-derived neurons have been used to study 
the pathophysiology of disorders associated with ASD that are caused 
by  monogenic  mutations,  including  Fragile  X,  Rett,  and  Timothy 
syndromes.

Fragile  X  is  the  most  common  heritable  cause  of  intellectual 
disability,  affecting  1  in  4000  males  and  1  in  8000  females,  and  is  a 
leading genetic cause of ASD. Patients also have speech delay, growth 
and  motor  abnormalities,  hyperactivity,  and  anxiety.  The  causative 
mutation  lies  in  the  FMR1  gene  and  produces  a  CGG  triplet  repeat 
expansion  from  a  normal  number  of  5–20  to  >200,  leading  to  epi-
genetic  silencing  of  the  FMR1  gene  and  loss  of  the  fragile  X  mental 
retardation  protein.  The  epigenetic  mechanism  means  that  unlike  a 
simple gene deletion that would lead to ubiquitous loss of expression, 
the FMR1 locus becomes hypermethylated and epigenetically silenced 
during  differentiation;  thus  FMR1  protein  is  expressed  by  the  early 
embryo and becomes absent only around the beginning of the second 
trimester. Interestingly, this expression pattern is recapitulated during 
cellular differentiation in stem cell models. Pluripotent Fragile X stem 
cell  lines  have  been  derived  from  embryos  identified  through  pre- 
implantation genetic diagnosis and by reprogramming skin fibroblasts 
from Fragile X patients to create iPSC lines. In both cases FMR1 was 
expressed by the pluripotent stem cells but underwent transcriptional 
silencing following differentiation. Fragile X stem cell lines can there-
fore be used to study the mechanism of FMR1 silencing, an effort that 
is ongoing. Neurons generated from Fragile X iPSC cells reproduce fea-
tures observed in neurons from transgenic FMR1 mouse models and 
patients, including stunted neurites with decreased branching, increas-
ing  confidence  in  the  iPSC  model.  In  addition  to  providing  a  model 
that can be used to study disease pathogenesis, Fragile X iPSC-derived 
neurons  could  be  used  to  screen  for  potential  therapeutic  agents  or 
gene-editing  strategies  that  could  be  able  to  remove  the  repressive 
epigenetic marks induced by the mutation and rescue the phenotype.

Rett  syndrome  is  an  X-linked  neurodevelopmental  disorder  with 
dominant  inheritance  caused  by  a  mutation  in  the  MECP2  gene. 
Because  males  carrying  one  copy  of  the  defect  gene  usually  die 
in  infancy,  most  patients  are  girls.  Random  inactivation  of  the  X 

chromosome in girls results in mosaic cellular expression of the muta-
tion  that  circumvents  fatality  and  produces  a  variable  phenotype.  The 
symptoms  are  present  in  early  childhood  and  include  microcephaly 
associated  with  developmental  delay,  autistic-like  behaviors  and  cog-
nitive  dysfunction,  seizures  and  repetitive  motor  actions;  these  then 
progress  to  include  difficulties  with  gait,  swallowing,  and  breathing 
before  usually  stabilizing  with  patients  surviving  to  adulthood.  The 
pathophysiology  of  Rett  syndrome  is  presumed  to  involve  abnormal 
epigenetic regulation leading to decreased transcriptional repression of 
genes whose overexpression produces the disease phenotype, although 
this  concept  has  been  contested.  In  one  of  the  first  studies  to  use 
iPSC  modeling  to  study  Rett  syndrome,  it  was  discovered  that  when 
fibroblasts from patients were reprogrammed to pluripotent stem cells, 
X  inactivation  was  erased.  In  apparent  recapitulation  of  endogenous 
events,  X  chromosome  inactivation  re-occurred  during  neuronal 
differentiation, producing a mosaic of cells carrying the mutant gene 
intermingled  with  normal  cells.  Rett  neurons  had  fewer  dendritic 
spines and synapses, smaller cell bodies, and reduced network activity. 
Another iPSC model of Rett syndrome highlighted the potential role of 
altered inhibitory function. Rett neurons were found to have a deficit 
of  potassium/chloride  cotransporter  (KCC2)  that  is  developmentally 
regulated and normally leads to a switch in GABA signaling from exci-
tatory at embryonic ages to inhibitory by birth. In Rett neurons, KCC2 
expression  level  was  low,  and  the  functional  switch  in  GABA  effects 
was delayed, contributing to some of the disease features and possibly 
accounting  for  the  developmental  onset  of  the  disease.  One  curious 
feature of some iPSC Rett lines was that despite the mosaic expression 
of the mutation, disease phenotypes were observed in all cells. Possibly, 
this could reflect a noncell autonomous effect, but as in all iPSC disease 
models, confidence in disease-specific features will be increased when 
similar phenotypes are seen across multiple independent studies.

Timothy  syndrome,  another  severe  neurodevelopmental  disease 
associated with ASD, has been modeled using iPSC-derived organoids. 
Timothy syndrome is caused by a mutation in the CACNA1C gene cod-
ing for a voltage-gated calcium channel, and neuron defects in Timothy 
syndrome organoids were rescued by selectively altering calcium chan-
nel activity. In one study two separate organoids were produced with 
different regional identity, one represented neocortex and one a more 
ventral structure known as the medial ganglionic eminence, which is 
the source of most cortical interneurons. The two organoids were then 
fused  together  to  allow  the  interneurons  to  migrate  into  the  cortex, 
mimicking their endogenous behavior. The ability to model interneu-
ron  migration  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  cell-autonomous  migration 
defect in the disease-carrying neurons.

The  majority  of  nervous  system  diseases,  including  ASD,  are 
polygenic and cannot be modeled in animals but can be modeled using 
patient-derived  iPSCs.  For  example,  a  subset  of  patients  with  ASD 
have large head size, and a cohort of patients with this phenotype was 
used to generate iPSCs that were converted to neural progenitor cells 
and  forebrain  neurons.  The  progenitors  had  an  accelerated  cell  cycle 
and produced an excess of inhibitory interneurons and had exuberant 
cellular  overgrowth  of  neurites  and  synapses.  This  last  feature  is  in 
contrast to the decrease in spines and synapses observed in other iPSC 
models of ASD such as Fragile X and Rett syndrome and underscores 
the  need  for  replication  and  validation  of  purported  disease  pheno-
types  given  the  high  variability  based  on  differences  between  stem 
cell  lines,  protocols,  patient  genetic  background,  and  other  factors. 
Moreover, the clinical features of most neuropsychiatric diseases reflect 
disorders  in  processes  such  as  circuit  formation  and  refinement  that 
occur  after  birth  and  may  be  difficult  to  capture  at  the  fetal  stage  of 
development reflected in stem cell models.

Patient stem cells have also been used by multiple groups to study 
the  pathophysiology  of  schizophrenia,  producing  a  variety  of  diverse 
and  sometimes  contradictory  results.  Reports  claim  obvious  pheno-
types such as disruptions in the adherens junctions of forebrain radial 
glia or aberrant neuronal migration, although such gross abnormalities 
observed at the equivalent of in utero stages of development seem very 
unlikely  to  underlie  a  disease  that  usually  manifests  at  adolescence 
or  young  adulthood.  Other  studies  report  abnormalities  related  to 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3301

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3302 abnormal microRNA expression, disordered cyclic AMP and Wnt sig-
naling,  abnormal  stress  responses,  diminished  neuronal  connectivity, 
fewer neuronal processes, problems with neuronal differentiation, and 
mitochondrial abnormalities, among others. While the pathophysiol-
ogy  of  as  complex  a  neurodevelopmental  disorder  as  schizophrenia 
may be multidimensional, it is unclear which, if any, of the reported 
findings  in  iPSC  models  reflect  the  true  pathology  of  schizophrenia. 
Progress  will  likely  depend  on  the  adoption  of  more  standard  and 
reproducible  protocols,  more  rigorous  identification  of  cell  types, 
markers of regional identity, and indicators of maturity.

 ■ ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
As  noted  above,  the  leading  concept  of  AD  pathogenesis,  the  amy-
loid  hypothesis,  suggests  that  an  imbalance  between  production  and 
clearance of β-amyloid leads to excessive accumulation of β-amyloid 
peptide  and  the  formation  of  NFTs  within  neurons,  composed  of 
aggregated hyperphosphorylated tau proteins. Additionally, aggregates 
of amyloid fibrils are deposited outside neurons in the form of neuritic 
plaques. Recent failures of anti-β-amyloid therapies, which were highly 
effective in mouse models, have led to a search for alternative models 
that might be more predictive of therapeutic effectiveness in humans. 
Among the causes of familial AD are mutations in genes involved in 
β-amyloid production, including amyloid precursor protein (APP) and 
presenilin 1 and 2. Shortly after the introduction of iPSC technology, 
human  stem  cell–derived  neurons  were  generated  from  patients  car-
rying  mutations  in  AD-causative  genes  as  well  as  from  sporadic  AD 
cases. The disease neurons developed hallmarks of AD including intra-
cellular accumulation of β-amyloid and phosphorylated tau, as well as 
secretion of APP cleavage products, features that could be reduced by 
adding  β-  or  γ-secretase  inhibitors  or  β-amyloid-specific  antibodies. 
The  neurons  also  demonstrated  other  disease  features  observed  in 
postmortem AD tissues. However, extracellular β-amyloid aggregation 
and  NFTs  were  not  robustly  modeled  in  these  two-dimensional  sys-
tems, presumably because secreted factors were able to readily diffuse 
away. The use of three-dimensional organoids to model AD overcame 
this limitation, presumably by recreating a more faithful extracellular 
matrix. Organoid models promoted the aggregation of β-amyloid, and 
more readily recapitulated the pathologic features of AD, including the 
formation of NFTs and neuritic plaques.

It  is  hoped  that  the  new  stem  cell  models,  particularly  organoid 
models, will accelerate our understanding of AD by enabling the study 
of human disease-carrying cells in a quasi in situ setting. These new 
models may lead to discovery of novel druggable targets and new diag-
nostic and prognostic biomarkers. One concern is that the pathogenic 
features  of  AD  usually  appear  in  the  sixth  or  seventh  decade  of  life 
and  progress  slowly  over  years,  while  most  protocols  for  the  deriva-
tion  of  human  cortical  neurons  generate  cells  over  weeks  or  months 
and  most  remain  comparable  to  immature  neurons  at  fetal  stages  of 
development. Nonetheless, these young cells have been used to model 
neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and HD that strike patients in 
middle  to  late  adulthood.  Possibly  the  onset  of  disease  phenotype  is 
accelerated in stem cell models due to increased cellular stress, which 
appears  to  be  a  feature  of  stem  cell  culture,  or  disease  features  may 
actually have a subtle onset at earlier stages than generally suspected. 
Indeed,  3-year-old  children  at  genetic  risk  of  developing  early-onset 
AD  appear  to  have  smaller  hippocampal  size  and  lower  scores  on 
memory  tests  than  children  in  a  nonrisk  group.  The  phenotypes  of 
adult neurodegenerative diseases that are visible at fetal stages may or 
may  not  correspond  to  those  manifest  at  later,  adult  stages,  but  they 
may offer the possibility of devising preventative strategies effective at 
very early stages of the disease.

 ■ CELL TYPE DISORDERS: ALS AND  
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
In diseases such as ALS, PD, and HD, that mostly target specific neuron 
subtypes,  stem  cells  provide  an  ideal  means  to  study  the  vulnerable 
human cell populations. By enabling the production of unlimited num-
bers of normal and diseased human midbrain dopaminergic neurons 
for the study of PD, medium spiny striatal neurons for HD, and spinal 

and cortical motor neurons for ALS, iPSC approaches have the poten-
tial to transform our understanding and management of these diseases. 
Stem cell–derived neurons serve as platforms to explore mechanisms of 
cell vulnerability, to screen drugs for neural protection, and potentially 
to derive neurons for replacement therapy.

 ■ AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
One of the first protocols for producing neurons of a specific subtype 
from  embryonic  stem  cells  recapitulated  normal  developmental  pro-
grams  to  generate  mouse  spinal  motor  neurons.  Pluripotent  mouse 
stem cells underwent neural induction and adopted a caudal identity 
through  the  application  of  retinoic  acid,  and  subsequently  adopted 
motor neuron fate through the action of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a ven-
tralizing factor. Generating human motor neurons proved more com-
plex, requiring additional steps, such as early exposure to the growth 
factor, FGF2. The first application of stem cell–derived motor neurons 
to study ALS involved the use of mouse motor neurons generated from 
transgenic  mice  expressing  a  mutation  in  the  superoxide  dismutase 
1  (SOD1)  gene,  the  most  common  mutation  responsible  for  familial 
ALS. Only 5–10% of ALS cases are familial, but the known mutations 
provide a useful entry point to tease apart the causative pathophysiol-
ogy. Mutations in SOD1 produce ALS through a toxic gain of function 
for which the mechanism remains unclear, despite the use of multiple 
transgenic  animal  and  iPSC  models.  The  use  of  mouse  ESC-derived 
motor neurons, however, demonstrated that toxic factors secreted by 
SOD1  astrocytes  contribute  to  the  death  of  motor  neurons.  Interest-
ingly, stem cell–derived interneurons were spared, indicating a specific 
vulnerability  of  motor  neurons.  These  findings  helped  establish  the 
notion that a noncell autonomous toxic mechanism contributes to ALS 
pathogenesis  and  may  ultimately  lead  to  novel  treatment  strategies. 
These findings also highlight that modeling the full pathophysiology of 
ALS may require the reproduction of a complex environment includ-
ing motor neurons, astrocytes, and possibly additional cell types such 
as microglia. A variety of approaches including co-culture of specific 
cell types, three-dimensional spinal cord organoids, and microfluidic 
organ-on-chip models are being explored to achieve a more complete 
facsimile of spinal cord organization. Similar to other neurologic dis-
orders where a clearly defined phenotype has been observed in human 
stem  cell–derived  models,  there  is  hope  that  drug  screening  using 
human  disease-expressing  cells  will  identify  a  potential  therapeutic 
compound.

 ■ HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
HD is caused by an expansion in CAG triplet repeats in the huntingtin 
gene, which leads to an expanded polyglutamine tract in the hunting-
tin protein. HD is dominantly inherited, with symptoms of cognitive 
decline  and  uncontrollable  gait  and  limb  motions  beginning  in  the 
third  to  fifth  decade  of  life  with  progression  to  dementia  and  death 
approximately 20 years later. Mutant huntingtin causes a toxic gain-of-
function,  with  the  degree  of  effect  related  to  the  CAG  repeat  length. 
For  example,  a  CAG  length  of  40–60  repeats  produces  adult-onset 
HD,  whereas  repeats  of  60  or  more  produce  juvenile-onset  disease. 
Although  it  has  been  25  years  since  the  discovery  of  this  causative 
mutation, the disease mechanism remains poorly understood. Excess 
huntingtin  protein  and  protein  fragments  accumulate  in  specific 
subtypes of neurons where they misfold and form aggregates that are 
visible  as  cellular  inclusions.  Affected  cells  eventually  die,  possibly 
as  a  result  of  metabolic  toxicity.  The  medium  spiny  neurons  of  the 
striatum are the most vulnerable neurons, spurring ongoing attempts 
to produce replacement cells derived from stem cells, but neuron loss 
is widespread including in the cortex, complicating a cell replacement 
approach for this disease. HD iPSCs have been generated from patients 
with  various  CAG  repeat  lengths,  but  those  from  juvenile-onset  dis-
ease with the longest repeat lengths have been favored as being most 
likely  to  express  robust  disease  phenotypes  at  an  early  stage.  This  is 
particularly important given the immature stage of maturation of stem 
cell–derived human neurons. This approach has been able to produce 
disease phenotypes observed in patients including huntingtin protein 
aggregation,  decreased  metabolic  capacity,  increased  oxidative  stress 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3302

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3303

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
4

P
a
t
h
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
l
o
g
i
c
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

with  mitochondrial  fragmentation,  and  apoptosis  enhanced  by  with-
drawal of growth factor support. However, many of these phenotypes 
were observed in pluripotent cells prior to neural differentiation and 
in neural progenitors and a broad array of CNS neurons in contrast to 
the cell type–specific features of the disease. Nonetheless, neurons that 
assumed striatal fate appear to be more vulnerable to stress and apopto-
sis than other cell types. As with other iPSC models of nervous system 
diseases, there have so far been few efforts to validate results in multiple 
iPSC lines having different genetic backgrounds but with similar CAG 
repeat  lengths.  An  HD  consortium  has  been  formed  to  address  this 
problem by generating a series of iPSC lines from multiple patients. An 
alternative strategy to validate disease phenotypes has been to use gene 
editing to create isogenic iPSC lines that are corrected to produce wild-
type control and HD iPSC lines against the same genetic background.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Despite  early  successes,  it  may  prove  difficult  to  reconstitute  neu-
rodegenerative disease conditions in human cells in vitro over a short 
course of time because the pathogenic changes of degenerative diseases 
progress slowly and commence in the later stages of life. The differen-
tiation and maturation of human neurons from stem cell lines occur 
over a span of months, which may not be long enough to establish the 
aged-brain conditions under which patients develop robust neurode-
generative  pathology.  Possible  manipulation  through  gene  editing  or 
by  application  of  aging-associated  stresses,  such  as  DNA-damaging 
agents  or  proteasome  inhibitors,  may  accelerate  the  expression  of 
degenerative phenotypes in human iPSC-derived cellular models. Stem 
cell–derived  organoid  models  are  also  ideal  platforms  to  apply  meth-
ods  for  cellular-level  visualization  such  as  clarity  and  multi-electrode 
recording  techniques  to  better  evaluate  three-dimensional  organoid 
structures  and  explore  early-forming  circuits.  These  applications  are 
only just beginning.

Two-dimensional cell cultures are ideal for production and evalua-
tion of large numbers of specific cells of a particular identity, but may 
not provide the complex extracellular environment necessary to model 
certain  disease  processes,  such  as  extracellular  protein  aggregation. 
These features can be best modeled using three-dimensional organoids, 
but current methods do not reproduce all the relevant features of brain 
tissue.  Optimization  will  be  needed  to  better  reproduce  the  cellular 
composition of brain, including endothelial cells, astrocytes, microglia, 
and  oligodendrocytes.  It  may  also  be  necessary  to  combine  different 
brain  regions  generated  separately,  possibly  by  fusion  of  tissues  such 
as  dorsal  cortex,  subpallium,  thalamus,  retina,  and  others.  However, 
currently there is a limited ability to recreate tissues or neurons with 
regional brain identity, such as hippocampus, thalamus, or cerebellum. 
More faithful organoid models could also emerge through the appli-
cation of bioengineered scaffolds, matrices, or perfusion systems that 
might allow the growth of larger structures. Of course, not all aspects of 
mature brain architecture and function will be modeled by these tissue 
structures,  particularly  as  they  represent  fetal  stages  of  development, 
but perhaps the most precocious events in disease etiology can be cap-
tured and investigated and these may share mechanistic pathways with 
disease features that manifest at later stages.

The current excitement surrounding human stem cells has more to 
do  with  their  promise  to  improve  on  animal  models  of  disease  than 
their potential as a source for cell-based therapies. Even without new 
insights into disease pathogenesis, there is promise that iPSC models 
such  as  brain  organoids  will  act  as  drug-screening  platforms  for  dis-
covery of novel therapeutics and for detection of off-target and toxic 
effects. The failure of many neurotherapeutic approaches to translate 
from animal models to clinical practice underscores the need for better 
predictive models, and stem cell models and brain organoids based on 
human cells may be ideally suited to bridge this divide.

A CURRENT PERSPECTIVE ON NEURAL 
STEM CELLS IN THE CLINIC
The prospect of stem cell therapies to treat diseases or injuries of the 
nervous  system  has  captured  the  attention  of  researchers,  clinicians, 
and the public. The pace of research is usually slow and deliberate, but 

in the stem cell arena there has been enormous pressure to accelerate 
the pace of progress in order to bring cell-based therapies to the clinic. 
Expectations have been raised, and clinics have already begun offering 
unproven or dangerous treatments to a public that is ill-informed and 
vulnerable to exploitation. Nonetheless, there is cautious optimism that 
stem  cells  will  eventually  realize  the  promise  of  regenerative  therapy 
for  at  least  some  currently  untreatable  or  incurable  nervous  system 
diseases.

Pursuit of a cell-based therapy for PD has been ongoing for many 
decades.  Following  anecdotal  success  in  a  handful  of  patients  who 
appeared  to  improve  following  striatal  grafts  of  fetal  midbrain  dopa-
minergic cells, two National Institutes of Health funded, double-blind 
control  studies  were  launched  in  the  1990s.  However,  only  a  small 
number of younger patients showed some benefit, and several patients 
developed  spontaneous  dyskinetic  movements  related  to  the  therapy. 
These efforts constituted a failed trial as the treated patients who did 
not  experience  side  effects  failed  to  improve  significantly.  However, 
techniques  to  extract  dopaminergic  cells  from  fetal  tissue  have  been 
improved, and on the basis of encouraging results in individual trans-
planted patients, some of whom have managed to go off their Parkin-
son’s  medication,  a  new  trial  of  fetal  cell  transplantation  for  PD  has 
started in Europe. This is a very consequential trial, as a poor clinical 
outcome could dampen enthusiasm for the planned follow-up stem cell 
trials in PD and possibly in other disorders as well.

Meanwhile, the dyskinesias that curtailed the NIH trials in the 1990s 
were  eventually  ascribed  to  an  abundance  of  serotonergic  neurons 
that were inadvertently included in some of the cell grafts. Protocols 
for  deriving  dopaminergic  neurons  from  stem  cells  could  potentially 
avoid this complication by providing a more purified cell population, 
and several groups around the world have been aggressively pursuing 
a  stem  cell–based  approach  to  PD.  In  2018,  researchers  from  Kyoto 
University in Japan started a phase 1/2 clinical trial to treat PD using 
stem cells. The investigators chose to use iPSCs derived from a healthy 
person who had the most common HLA haplotype in Japan. The iPSCs 
were  used  to  make  dopamine-secreting  neurons.  Seven  patients  will 
have the reprogrammed stem cells surgically delivered into the brain 
and  be  followed  for  2  years  postinjection  to  assess  safety  and  possi-
ble efficacy. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently 
approved the first clinical trial of a stem cell–derived dopamine neuron 
for the treatment of PD in the United States. These cells, derived from 
an embryonic stem cell line, will be delivered to 10 patients in a phase 
1 clinical trial to assess safety, tolerability, and preliminary efficacy. A 
European trial led by scientists in Sweden and the UK is expected to 
begin  soon  and  will  also  use  dopamine-secreting  midbrain-like  neu-
rons derived from embryonic stem cells.

One of the first cell-based clinical trials for a neurologic disease tar-
geted patients suffering from an untreatable childhood disorder, Batten 
disease.  Batten  disease  is  an  autosomal  recessive  metabolic  disorder 
resulting  from  an  inability  to  synthesize  a  lysosomal  enzyme  critical 
to brain function. The phase 1 trial involved six patients with infantile 
and late-infantile forms of the disease who received neural stem cells 
rather than any specific postmitotic cell type. Neural stem cells derived 
from donated fetal tissue were expanded in vitro prior to surgical graft-
ing into the brain. This approach was not without risk, as the neural 
stem cells were proliferating and could potentially form an abnormal 
growth. The rationale was that the cells would be capable of synthesiz-
ing and secreting the missing lysosomal enzyme and would therefore 
serve  as  a  delivery  device.  Animal  studies  using  a  transgenic  mouse 
model of Batten disease demonstrated rescue, and this promising result 
led to a small phase 1 trial. The phase 1 study was considered a success 
as no adverse events were reported and the cells appeared to be safe, 
though  there  was  no  clinical  improvement  and  no  clear  evidence  of 
whether the cells had dispersed, transformed into neurons or glia, or 
indeed survived at all. Despite clearing the phase 1 trial, the company 
did  not  pursue  further  trials  for  Batten  disease,  but  instead  initiated 
clinical  trials  using  the  same  cell  product  for  several  other  indica-
tions,  including  an  inherited  fatal  dysmyelination  syndrome  known 
as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD). The human neural stem cells 
have both neurogenic and gliogenic potential, and when delivered to 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3303

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3304 white matter regions in experimental animals, most persisting cells had 
become oligodendrocytes. This supported use of the cells to promote 
myelin formation in conditions such as PMD. The company also initi-
ated trials in spinal cord injury. However, the spinal cord trial failed to 
achieve sufficient benefit in phase 2 and the company ceased its work 
on stem cell therapies.

Spinal cord injury is an attractive target for novel therapies because 
there  are  more  than  1  million  patients  suffering  from  spinal  cord 
injuries worldwide, with no effective treatment options. Not surpris-
ingly, there has been intense interest in achieving a stem cell treatment 
for  this  condition  and  dozens  of  early-stage  clinical  trials,  and  anec-
dotal treatment results have been reported by investigators around the 
globe.  The  vast  majority  have  not  been  blinded  controlled  trials,  but 
rather individual reports treating a handful of patients and somewhat 
surprisingly,  most  are  using  mesenchymal  (MSC)  or  hematopoetic 
stem  cells  that  normally  generate  either  bone,  cartilage,  fat,  or  blood 
cells. As described below, the rationale for the use of MSCs for neuro-
logic conditions is based on vague and poorly understood mechanisms 
of action.

A  series  of  stem  cell  trials  designed  to  treat  subacute  spinal  cord 
injury  is  underway  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  that  are  using 
neural  stem  cells  or  their  derivatives  as  potential  therapeutic  agents. 
The  first  to  enter  clinical  trials  in  the  United  States  was  based  on  a 
protocol  designed  to  generate  oligodendrocytes  from  pluripotent 
embryonic  stem  cells.  Evidence  of  efficacy  was  obtained  in  animal 
models following surgical grafting of cells to sites of spinal cord injury. 
However,  evidence  of  myelination  of  host  axons  was  minimal,  and 
other  mechanisms  were  invoked  for  improvement  in  gait,  including 
trophic support and immune modulation. Regulatory permission for 
a phase 1 trial for subacute midthoracic injury was initially stalled by 
concern over abnormal growths at sites of cell deposit in some animals, 
but  this  was  satisfactorily  addressed  and  patient  trials  commenced. 
However, following a change in leadership, the stem cell program was 
terminated. The program was acquired by another company that has 
resumed the spinal cord injury trial and received regulatory approval 
to  advance  to  include  cervical-level  injuries.  The  current  phase  1/2a 
multicenter clinical trial is an open-label, single-arm trial testing three 
sequential escalating doses administered 21–42 days postinjury in 25 
patients with subacute severe cervical spinal cord injuries. No adverse 
events have been reported for 21 patients at 2 years posttreatment. A 
later stage comparative clinical trial is now planned to probe for pos-
sible efficacy.

A  team  from  Yale  University  working  with  Japanese  scientists 
treated 13 patients with intravenous infusions of stem cells extracted 
from the patients’ own bone marrow. The patients were treated around 
40 days after their injury. They reported no adverse events and some 
improvement in sensation and movement. The paper reporting these 
results was published in 2021, but in 2018, on the basis of the results, 
unpublished  at  the  time,  Japan’s  health  ministry  gave  conditional 
approval for the treatment, called Stemirac. This became the first stem 
cell  therapy  for  spinal  cord  injury  to  receive  government  approval 
for sale to patients. But the approval of a therapy that may carry risk 
following  a  small,  unblinded,  and  uncontrolled  study  without  actual 
proof of efficacy raised considerable concern among scientists in the 
stem cell community. Charging patients for such an unproven therapy 
raises  even  more  ethical  concerns.  Patients  can  now  be  charged  for 
their treatment while trials to test efficacy are proceeding.

The  possibility  of  treating  ALS  by  replacing  dying  motor  neurons 
with  stem  cell–derived  substitutes  has  excited  interest,  but  this  pros-
pect  seems  very  remote.  Even  if  new  neurons  are  able  to  integrate 
into spinal cord circuits and become properly innervated, they would 
have  to  grow  long  axons  that  would  take  many  months  to  years  to 
project  to  appropriate  targets  and  attract  myelinating  Schwann  cells. 
Furthermore,  cells  would  need  to  be  grafted  at  multiple  spinal  cord 
and brainstem levels, and the upper motor neuron deficit would need 
to be treated by replacing projecting neurons in the motor cortex. An 
additional complication is the recent finding that spinal motor neurons 
have unique segmental identity, and replacement cells might need to 
be generated with a range of molecular identities in order to integrate 

at multiple spinal levels. This would still leave unaddressed the toxic 
effects  recently  shown  to  be  produced  in  ALS  by  diseased  astrocytes 
and microglia that could attack the replacement cells. A more tractable 
near-term  solution  would  be  to  graft  support  cells  that  could  rescue 
or  protect  endogenous  motor  neurons  from  damage.  This  approach 
was tried in a mouse model of ALS. Human stem cell–derived neural 
progenitor cells engineered to express GDNF, a growth factor known 
to provide trophic support for neurons, were grafted to the spinal cord 
of young ALS mice. The cells dispersed and were able to rescue motor 
neurons,  a  very  promising  result,  but  disappointingly,  the  animals 
became weak and died at the same rate as untreated control animals. 
However,  ALS  is  a  deadly  disease  with  no  known  treatment.  In  the 
hope  that  patients  will  respond  differently  from  mice,  a  phase  1/2a 
clinical trial based on this approach was approved by the FDA in 2016 
and completed in 2019.

Among  the  many  MSC-based  clinical  trials  for  ALS,  two  are  par-
ticularly  notable.  Corestem,  a  stem  cell  company  in  South  Korea, 
launched  a  phase  1  open-label  study  demonstrating  the  safety  and 
feasibility of intrathecal injections of autologous bone marrow–derived 
MSCs in seven patients with ALS. This was followed by a phase 2 trial 
that demonstrated safety and efficacy for slowing disease progression. 
On the basis of these results, Corestem received conditional approval 
in South Korea in 2014 to market the first stem cell therapy for ALS. 
By  2021,  more  than  300  patients  had  received  this  cell  treatment. 
However,  full  approval  is  contingent  on  the  results  of  a  randomized,  
double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  multicenter  phase  3  study,  which 
has yet to occur. The importance of conducting proper phase 3 clinical 
trials to determine therapeutic efficacy in ALS is underscored by the 
recent experience of BrainStorm Cell Therapeutics. In 2016, the com-
pany  reported  preliminary  positive  results  for  its  bone  marrow  MSC 
cell therapy in an uncontrolled study of nearly 50 ALS patients. Based 
on  those  results,  the  company  launched  a  multicenter,  placebo-con-
trolled, randomized, double-blind trial of 189 ALS patients. In a press 
release on November 27, 2020, the company reported that there was no 
significant clinical improvement in the treatment group. Interestingly, 
despite the failed clinical trial, a public campaign led by ALS patients 
and advocates called on the FDA to approve the stem cell treatment. 
The social media response prompted the FDA to take the unusual step 
of releasing a public statement underscoring the lack of efficacy.

Following  Shinya  Yamanaka’s  discovery  of  iPSCs,  the  Japanese 
government has invested in bringing iPSC-derived cell therapy to the 
clinic.  Banks  of  iPSC  lines  selected  to  capture  the  diversity  of  HLA 
haplotypes found in the Japanese population are being produced in the 
hope  that  these  will  allow  cell  therapies  to  be  matched  to  individual 
patient  haplotypes  in  order  to  avoid  immune  rejection.  While  these 
stem cell banks were still being produced, the first Japanese study to 
use  stem  cells  was  approved  in  August,  2013,  and  involved  patients 
who were to receive customized therapy using cells derived from their 
own  skin  fibroblasts.  The  targeted  disease  was  age-related  macular 
degeneration, a common cause of blindness in the elderly that results 
from loss of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. RPE cells are rela-
tively easy to generate from pluripotent stem cells, making replacement 
therapy an attractive target in this condition. A challenge is to coax the 
replacement cells to recreate an epithelium in the subretinal space. The 
Japanese approach involves surgical insertion of a biofilm seeded with 
RPE  cells  into  the  retina.  One  patient  was  treated  with  his/her  own 
stem cell–derived RPE cells, but prior to treating a second patient, the 
genome of the RPE cell line was sequenced, and a mutation was discov-
ered in a known oncogene. The trial was halted and a decision made to 
discontinue the effort for customized cell therapy in favor of using RPE 
cells derived from the national repository of banked iPSC lines, which 
undergo extensive gene sequencing and quality controls. This outcome 
serves as a caution for the challenges involved in bringing a customized 
cell therapy to the clinic.

By  far  the  largest  number  of  human  trials  have  been  performed 
using  MSCs  sourced  from  a  variety  of  sites  including  bone  marrow, 
peripheral  blood,  adipose  tissue,  umbilical  cord,  etc.  Interest  in  the 
potential  utility  of  MSCs  for  regenerative  therapy  began  with  the 
optimistic  report  that  bone  marrow  stem  cells  were  pluripotent  and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3304

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders capable  of  generating  nerve  and  heart  muscle  as  well  as  blood  cells. 
The possibility that easily obtainable MSCs could be used to regenerate 
injured or diseased cells or organs to treat diseases ranging from stroke, 
neurodegenerative  disease,  myocardial  infarct,  and  even  diabetes, 
generated  enormous  enthusiasm.  The  enthusiasm  proved  irresistible 
to  many,  and  even  after  the  initial  reports  were  discredited—MSCs 
turned  out  not  to  be  pluripotent  stem  cells  as  initially  thought—a 
veritable flood of papers began to appear claiming disease-modifying 
activity of MSCs in mouse models of almost every degenerative disease 
and injury model. But when it became clear that the MSCs were not 
transforming  into  or  generating  new  neurons  or  cardiac  myocytes, 
alternative mechanisms of action were invoked, including the release 
of  trophic  factors,  cytokines,  or  inflammatory  modulators  that  were 
credited with producing their remarkable restorative effects. The rel-
ative ease with which blood or adipose tissue can be harvested from 
patients or donors and MSCs extracted has led to a rapidly expanding 
number of clinical trials for conditions ranging from stroke and MS to 
AD,  ALS,  and  PD.  Furthermore,  a  loophole  in  the  regulatory  frame-
work  of  the  FDA  allows  autologous  cell  therapy  to  escape  regulation 
provided that the cells have not been significantly processed. This lax 
regulation has spawned a veritable industry of stem cell clinics making 
unsubstantiated claims of success in treating nervous system diseases. 
Patients  have  died  from  treatments  in  unregulated  clinics  operating 
in  countries  around  the  world  and  three  patients  became  blind  in  a 
well-publicized incident following stem cell treatments delivered by a 
Florida clinic. The “stem cells” were derived from the patients’ own fat 
tissue and blood. These activities represent the dark side of the stem 
cell revolution perpetrated by practitioners who exploit the desperation 
of patients and their families. Legitimate and effective stem cell ther-
apies will emerge over time, but given the prevalence and abundance 
of  misleading  information  available  on  the  Internet  and  elsewhere, 
a trusted and well-informed physician can play a key role in helping 
patients navigate the current cell therapy minefield.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Ayers JI et al: Expanding spectrum of prion diseases. Emerg Top Life 

Sci 4:155, 2020.

Bhaduri A et al: Are organoids ready for prime time? Cell Stem Cell 

27:361, 2020.

Duncan  GJ  et  al:  Neuron-oligodendrocyte  interactions  in  the  struc-

ture and integrity of axons. Front Cell Dev Biol 9:653101, 2021.

Hickman  S  et  al:  Microglia  in  neurodegeneration.  Nat  Neurosci 

21:1359, 2018.

Hong S et al: Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in 

Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352:712, 2016.

Kandel ER et al (eds): Principles  of  Neural  Science, 6th ed. McGraw 

Hill, New York, 2021.

Li  Q,  Barres  BA:  Microglia  and  macrophages  in  brain  homeostasis 

and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 18:225, 2018.

Lubetzki C et al: Remyelination in multiple sclerosis: From basic sci-

ence to clinical translation. Lancet Neurol 19:678, 2020.

Morais LH et al: The gut microbiota-brain axis in behaviour and brain 

disorders. Nat Rev Microbiol 19:241, 2021.

Nikolakopoulou P et al: Recent progress in translational engineered 
in vitro models of the central nervous system. Brain 143:3181, 2020.
Pease-Raissi  SE,  Chan  JR:  Building  a  (w)rapport  between  neurons 
and  oligodendroglia:  Reciprocal  interactions  underlying  adaptive 
myelination. Neuron 109:1258, 2021.

Prusiner SB et al: Evidence for α-synuclein prions causing multiple 
system  atrophy  in  humans  with  parkinsonism.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci 
USA 112:E5308, 2015.

Sipp D et al: Clear up this stem-cell mess. Nature 561:455, 2018.
Turner  L:  The  US  Direct-to-Consumer  Marketplace  for  Autologous 

Stem Cell Interventions. Perspect Biol Med 61:7, 2018.

Yamanaka  S:  Pluripotent  stem  cell-based  cell  therapy-promise  and 

challenges. Cell Stem Cell 27:523, 2020.

Section 2  Diseases of the Central Nervous 
System
425 Seizures and Epilepsy

Vikram R. Rao, Daniel H. Lowenstein

3305

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

A seizure (from the Latin sacire, “to take possession of ”) is a transient 
occurrence  of  signs  or  symptoms  due  to  abnormal  excessive  or  syn-
chronous neuronal activity in the brain. Depending on the distribution 
of discharges, this abnormal brain activity can have various manifesta-
tions,  ranging  from  dramatic  convulsive  activity  to  experiential  phe-
nomena not readily discernible by an observer. Although a variety of 
factors influence the incidence and prevalence of seizures, ~5–10% of 
the population will have at least one seizure, with the highest incidence 
occurring in early childhood and late adulthood.

The meaning of the term seizure needs to be carefully distinguished 
from that of epilepsy. Epilepsy describes a condition in which a person 
has  a  risk  of  recurrent  seizures  due  to  a  chronic,  underlying  process. 
This definition implies that a person with a single seizure, or recurrent 
seizures due to correctable or avoidable circumstances, does not neces-
sarily have epilepsy (although a single seizure associated with clinical 
or electroencephalographic features portending high risk of recurrence 
may  establish  the  diagnosis  of  epilepsy).  Epilepsy  refers  to  a  clinical 
phenomenon rather than a single disease entity, because many forms 
and causes exist. However, among the many causes of epilepsy, there are 
various epilepsy syndromes in which the clinical and pathologic charac-
teristics are distinctive and suggest a specific underlying etiology.

Using  the  definition  of  epilepsy  as  two  or  more  unprovoked  sei-
zures, the incidence of epilepsy is ~0.3–0.5% in different populations 
throughout  the  world,  and  the  prevalence  of  epilepsy  has  been  esti-
mated at 5–30 persons per 1000.

CLASSIFICATION OF SEIZURES
Determining  the  type  of  seizure  that  has  occurred  is  essential  for 
focusing  the  diagnostic  approach  on  particular  etiologies,  selecting 
appropriate  therapy,  and  providing  information  regarding  prognosis. 
The  International  League  Against  Epilepsy  (ILAE)  Commission  on 
Classification  and  Terminology  updated  their  approach  to  classifica-
tion  of  seizures  in  2017  (Table  425-1).  This  system  is  based  on  the 
clinical  features  of  seizures  and  associated  electroencephalographic 
findings. Other potentially distinctive features such as etiology or cel-
lular substrate are not considered in this classification system, although 
this  will  undoubtedly  change  in  the  future  as  more  is  learned  about 
the pathophysiologic mechanisms that underlie specific seizure types.
A fundamental principle is that seizures may be either focal or gen-
eralized. Focal seizures originate within networks limited to one brain 
region (note that the term  partial seizures is no longer used).  Gener-
alized  seizures  arise  within  and  rapidly  engage  networks  distributed 

TABLE 425-1  Classification of Seizuresa
1.  Focal Onset

(Can be further described as having intact or impaired awareness, motor or 
nonmotor onset, or evolve from focal to bilateral tonic clonic)

2.  Generalized Onset

a.  Motor
  Tonic-clonic
  Other motor (e.g., atonic, myoclonic)
b.  Nonmotor (absence)

3.  Unknown Onset

a.  Motor, nonmotor, or unclassified

aBased on the 2017 International League Against Epilepsy classification of seizure 
types (Data from RS Fisher et al: Operational classification of seizure types by the 
International League Against Epilepsy: Position Paper of the ILAE Commission for 
Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia 58:522, 2017.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3305

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3306 across  both  cerebral  hemispheres.  Focal  seizures  are  often  associated 
with structural abnormalities of the brain. In contrast, generalized sei-
zures may result from cellular, biochemical, or structural abnormalities 
that have a more widespread distribution. There are clear exceptions in 
both cases, however.
 ■ FOCAL ONSET SEIZURES
Focal seizures arise from a neuronal network either discretely localized 
within one brain region or more broadly distributed but still within a 
cerebral hemisphere. With the new classification system, the subcate-
gories of “simple focal seizures” and “complex focal seizures” have been 
eliminated. Instead, the classification emphasizes the effect on aware-
ness (intact or impaired) and nature of the onset (motor or nonmotor). 
Focal seizures can also evolve into generalized seizures. In the past, this 
was referred to as focal seizures with secondary generalization, but the 
new  system  relies  on  descriptions  of  the  type  of  generalized  seizures 
that evolve from the focal seizure.

The routine interictal (i.e., between seizures) electroencephalogram 
(EEG) in patients with focal seizures is often normal or may show brief 
discharges  termed  epileptiform  spikes,  or  sharp  waves.  Because  focal 
seizures  can  arise  from  the  medial  temporal  lobe  or  inferior  frontal 
lobe (i.e., regions distant from the scalp), the EEG recorded during the 
seizure may be nonlocalizing. However, the region of seizure onset may 
be detected using surgically placed intracranial electrodes.

Focal Seizures with Intact Awareness  Focal seizures can have 
motor manifestations (such as tonic, clonic, or myoclonic movements) 
or nonmotor manifestations (such as sensory, autonomic, or emotional 
symptoms) without impairment of awareness. For example, a patient 
having  a  focal  motor  seizure  arising  from  the  right  primary  motor 
cortex  near  the  area  controlling  hand  movement  will  note  the  onset 
of  involuntary  movements  of  the  contralateral  left  hand.  Since  the 
cortical region controlling hand movement is immediately adjacent to 
the region for facial expression, the seizure may also cause abnormal 
movements of the face synchronous with the movements of the hand. 
The  EEG  recorded  with  scalp  electrodes  during  the  seizure  (i.e.,  an 
ictal EEG) may show abnormal discharges in a very limited region over 
the appropriate area of cerebral cortex if the seizure focus involves the 
cerebral convexity.

Three additional features of focal motor seizures are worth noting. 
First, in some patients, the abnormal motor movements may begin in a 
very restricted region, such as the fingers, and gradually progress (over 
seconds to minutes) to include a larger portion of the extremity. This 
phenomenon, described by Hughlings Jackson and known as a “Jack-
sonian march,” represents the spread of seizure activity over a progres-
sively larger region of motor cortex. Second, patients may experience 
a localized paresis (Todd’s paralysis) for minutes to many hours in the 
involved region following the seizure. Third, in rare instances, the sei-
zure may continue for hours or days. This condition, termed epilepsia 
partialis continua, is often refractory to medical therapy.

Focal  seizures  may  also  manifest  as  changes  in  somatic  sensation 
(e.g.,  paresthesias),  vision  (flashing  lights  or  formed  hallucinations), 
equilibrium  (sensation  of  falling  or  vertigo),  or  autonomic  function 
(flushing, sweating, piloerection). Focal seizures arising from the tem-
poral or frontal cortex may also cause alterations in hearing, olfaction, 
or  emotional  state.  This  includes  the  sensation  of  unusual,  intense 
odors  (e.g.,  burning  rubber  or  kerosene)  or  sounds  (crude  or  highly 
complex sounds), or an epigastric sensation that rises from the stom-
ach or chest to the head. Some patients describe odd, internal feelings 
such as fear, a sense of impending change, detachment, depersonaliza-
tion, déjá vu, or illusions that objects are growing smaller (micropsia) 
or larger (macropsia). These subjective, “internal” events that are not 
directly observable by someone else are referred to as auras.

Focal  Seizures  with  Impaired  Awareness  Focal  seizures  may 
also  be  accompanied  by  a  transient  impairment  of  the  patient’s  abil-
ity  to  maintain  normal  contact  with  the  environment.  The  patient  is 
unable to respond appropriately to visual or verbal commands during 
the  seizure  and  has  impaired  recollection  or  awareness  of  the  ictal 
phase. The seizures frequently begin with an aura (i.e., a focal seizure 

without cognitive disturbance) that is stereotypic for the patient. The 
start  of  the  ictal  phase  is  often  a  motionless  stare,  which  marks  the 
onset  of  the  period  of  impaired  awareness.  The  impaired  awareness 
is usually accompanied by automatisms, which are involuntary, auto-
matic behaviors that have a wide range of manifestations. Automatisms 
may  consist  of  very  basic  behaviors,  such  as  chewing,  lip  smacking, 
swallowing, or “picking” movements of the hands, or more elaborate 
behaviors,  such  as  a  display  of  emotion  or  running.  The  patient  is 
typically  confused  following  the  seizure,  and  the  transition  to  full 
recovery of consciousness may range from seconds up to an hour or 
longer.  Examination  immediately  following  the  seizure  may  show  an 
anterograde amnesia or transient neurologic deficits (such as aphasia, 
hemi-neglect, or visual loss) caused by postictal inhibition of the corti-
cal regions most involved in the seizure.

The range of potential clinical behaviors linked to focal seizures is 
so  broad  that  extreme  caution  is  advised  before  concluding  that  ste-
reotypic episodes of bizarre or atypical behavior are not due to seizure 
activity. In such cases, additional detailed EEG studies may be helpful.
 ■ EVOLUTION OF FOCAL SEIZURES TO 
GENERALIZED SEIZURES
Focal  seizures  can  spread  to  involve  both  cerebral  hemispheres  and 
produce  a  generalized  seizure,  usually  of  the  tonic-clonic  variety 
(discussed  below).  This  evolution  is  observed  frequently  following 
focal  seizures  arising  from  a  region  in  the  frontal  lobe,  but  may  also 
be associated with focal seizures occurring elsewhere in the brain. A 
focal  seizure  that  evolves  into  a  generalized  seizure  is  often  difficult 
to  distinguish  from  a  primary  generalized  onset  tonic-clonic  seizure, 
because bystanders tend to emphasize the more dramatic, generalized 
convulsive  phase  of  the  seizure  and  overlook  the  more  subtle,  focal 
symptoms present at onset. In some cases, the focal onset of the seizure 
becomes  apparent  only  when  a  careful  history  identifies  a  preceding 
aura. Often, however, the focal onset is not clinically evident and may 
be established only through careful EEG analysis. Nonetheless, distin-
guishing  between  these  two  entities  is  extremely  important,  because 
there  may  be  substantial  differences  in  the  evaluation  and  treatment 
of epilepsies characterized by focal versus generalized onset seizures.
 ■ GENERALIZED ONSET SEIZURES
Generalized seizures arise at some point in the brain but immediately 
and  rapidly  engage  neuronal  networks  in  both  cerebral  hemispheres. 
Several types of generalized seizures have features that place them in 
distinctive categories and facilitate clinical diagnosis.

Typical Absence Seizures  Typical absence seizures are character-
ized by sudden, brief lapses of consciousness without loss of postural 
control.  The  seizure  usually  lasts  for  only  seconds,  consciousness 
returns as suddenly as it was lost, and there is no postictal confusion. 
Although the brief loss of consciousness may be clinically inapparent 
or  the  sole  manifestation  of  the  seizure  discharge,  absence  seizures 
are usually accompanied by subtle, bilateral motor signs such as rapid 
blinking of the eyelids, chewing movements, or small-amplitude, clonic 
movements of the hands.

Typical absence seizures are associated with a group of genetically 
determined epilepsies with onset usually in childhood (ages 4–10 years) 
or early adolescence and are the main seizure type in 15–20% of chil-
dren with epilepsy. The seizures can occur hundreds of times per day, 
but the child may be unaware of or unable to convey their existence. 
Because the clinical signs of the seizures are subtle, especially to par-
ents who may not have had previous experience with seizures, it is not 
surprising that the first clue to absence epilepsy is often unexplained 
“daydreaming”  and  a  decline  in  school  performance  recognized  by  a 
teacher. Indeed, absence epilepsy is often misdiagnosed as an attention 
deficit disorder.

The  electrophysiologic  hallmark  of  typical  absence  seizures  is  a 
burst of generalized, symmetric, 3-Hz, spike-and-slow-wave discharges 
that begins and ends suddenly, superimposed on a normal EEG back-
ground. Periods of spike-and-slow-wave discharges lasting more than 
a few seconds usually correlate with clinical signs, but the EEG often 
shows many more brief bursts of abnormal cortical activity than were 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3306

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders suspected clinically. Hyperventilation tends to provoke these electro-
graphic  discharges  and  even  the  seizures  themselves  and  is  routinely 
used when recording the EEG.

Atypical  Absence  Seizures  Atypical  absence  seizures  have  fea-
tures that deviate both clinically and electrophysiologically from typi-
cal absence seizures. For example, the lapse of consciousness is usually 
of  longer  duration  and  less  abrupt  in  onset  and  cessation,  and  the 
seizure is accompanied by more obvious motor signs that may include 
focal or lateralizing features. The EEG shows a generalized, slow spike-
and-slow-wave pattern with a frequency of ≤2.5 per second, as well as 
other abnormal activity. Atypical absence seizures are usually associ-
ated with diffuse or multifocal structural abnormalities of the brain and 
therefore may accompany other signs of neurologic dysfunction such 
as mental retardation. Furthermore, the seizures are less responsive to 
anticonvulsants compared to typical absence seizures.

Generalized,  Tonic-Clonic  Seizures  Generalized  onset  tonic-
clonic seizures are the main seizure type in ~10% of all persons with 
epilepsy. They are also the most common seizure type resulting from 
metabolic  derangements  and  are  therefore  frequently  encountered  in 
many  different  clinical  settings.  The  seizure  usually  begins  abruptly 
without warning, although some patients describe vague premonitory 
symptoms  in  the  hours  leading  up  to  the  seizure.  This  prodrome  is 
distinct from the stereotypic auras associated with focal seizures that 
generalize. The initial phase of the seizure is usually tonic contraction 
of muscles throughout the body, accounting for a number of the classic 
features  of  the  event.  Tonic  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  expiration 
and  the  larynx  at  the  onset  will  produce  a  loud  moan  or  “ictal  cry.” 
Respirations are impaired, secretions pool in the oropharynx, and cya-
nosis develops. Contraction of the jaw muscles may cause biting of the 
tongue. A marked enhancement of sympathetic tone leads to increases 
in heart rate, blood pressure, and pupillary size. After 10–20 s, the tonic 
phase of the seizure typically evolves into the clonic phase, produced by 
the superimposition of periods of muscle relaxation on the tonic mus-
cle contraction. The periods of relaxation progressively increase until 
the end of the ictal phase, which usually lasts no more than 1 min. The 
postictal  phase  is  characterized  by  unresponsiveness,  muscular  flac-
cidity, and excessive salivation that can cause stridorous breathing and 
partial airway obstruction. Bladder or bowel incontinence may occur 
at this point. Patients gradually regain consciousness over minutes to 
hours, and during this transition, there is typically a period of postictal 
confusion.  Patients  subsequently  complain  of  headache,  fatigue,  and 
muscle  ache  that  can  last  for  many  hours.  The  duration  of  impaired 
consciousness in the postictal phase can be extremely long (i.e., many 
hours) in patients with prolonged seizures or underlying central ner-
vous system (CNS) diseases such as alcoholic cerebral atrophy.

The EEG during the tonic phase of the seizure shows a progressive 
increase  in  generalized  low-voltage  fast  activity,  followed  by  gener-
alized  high-amplitude,  polyspike  discharges.  In  the  clonic  phase,  the 
high-amplitude activity is typically interrupted by slow waves to create 
a spike-and-slow-wave pattern. Generalized seizures tend to terminate 
synchronously  over  widespread  brain  regions.  The  postictal  EEG 
shows  diffuse  suppression  of  all  cerebral  activity,  then  slowing  that 
gradually recovers as the patient awakens.

There  are  a  number  of  variants  of  generalized  motor  seizures, 
including pure tonic and pure clonic seizures. Brief tonic seizures last-
ing only a few seconds are especially noteworthy since they are usually 
associated  with  specific  epilepsy  syndromes  having  mixed  seizure 
phenotypes, such as the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (discussed below).

Atonic  Seizures  Atonic  seizures  are  characterized  by  sudden 
loss  of  postural  muscle  tone  lasting  1–2  s.  Consciousness  is  briefly 
impaired, but there is usually no postictal confusion. A very brief sei-
zure may cause only a quick head drop or nodding movement, whereas 
a longer seizure will cause the patient to collapse (hence, the less formal 
term, drop attacks). This can be extremely dangerous, because there is 
a substantial risk of direct head injury with the fall. The EEG shows 
brief, generalized spike-and-wave discharges followed immediately by 
diffuse slow waves that correlate with the loss of muscle tone. Similar to 

pure tonic seizures, atonic seizures are usually seen in association with 
known epilepsy syndromes.

3307

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

Myoclonic  Seizures  Myoclonus  is  a  sudden  and  brief  muscle 
contraction that may involve one part of the body or the entire body. A 
normal, common physiologic form of myoclonus is the sudden jerking 
movement observed while falling asleep. Pathologic myoclonus is most 
commonly seen in association with metabolic disorders, degenerative 
CNS diseases, or anoxic brain injury (Chap. 307). Although the dis-
tinction  from  other  forms  of  myoclonus  is  imprecise,  myoclonic  sei-
zures are considered to be true epileptic events because they are caused 
by  cortical  (vs  subcortical  or  spinal)  dysfunction.  The  EEG  shows 
bilaterally  synchronous  spike-and-slow-wave  discharges  immediately 
prior to the movement and muscle artifact associated with the myoclo-
nus. Myoclonic seizures usually coexist with other forms of generalized 
seizures but are the predominant feature of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy 
(JME) (discussed below).

Epileptic Spasms  Epileptic  spasms  are  characterized  by  a  briefly 
sustained  flexion  or  extension  of  predominantly  proximal  muscles, 
including  truncal  muscles.  The  EEG  usually  shows  hypsarrhythmia, 
which consist of diffuse, giant slow waves with a chaotic background of 
irregular, multifocal spikes and sharp waves. During the clinical spasm, 
there  is  a  marked  suppression  of  the  EEG  background  (the  “electro-
decremental  response”).  The  electromyogram  (EMG)  also  reveals  a 
characteristic rhomboid pattern that may help distinguish spasms from 
brief  tonic  and  myoclonic  seizures.  Epileptic  spasms  occur  predomi-
nantly in infants and likely result from differences in neuronal function 
and connectivity in the immature versus mature CNS.

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES
Epilepsy syndromes are disorders in which epilepsy is a predominant 
feature,  and  there  is  sufficient  evidence  (e.g.,  through  clinical,  EEG, 
radiologic,  or  genetic  observations)  to  suggest  a  common  underlying 
mechanism. Three important epilepsy syndromes are listed below; addi-
tional examples with a known genetic basis are shown in Table 425-2.

 ■ JUVENILE MYOCLONIC EPILEPSY
JME is a generalized seizure disorder of unknown cause that appears 
in early adolescence and is usually characterized by bilateral myoclo-
nic jerks that may be single or repetitive. The myoclonic seizures are 
most  frequent  in  the  morning  after  awakening  and  can  be  provoked 
by sleep deprivation. Consciousness is preserved unless the myoclonus 
is especially severe. Many patients also experience generalized tonic-
clonic seizures, and up to one-third have absence seizures. Although 
complete remission is uncommon, the seizures usually respond well to 
appropriate anticonvulsant medication. There is often a family history 
of epilepsy, and genetic studies suggest a polygenic cause.

 ■ LENNOX-GASTAUT SYNDROME
Lennox-Gastaut  syndrome  occurs  in  children  and  is  defined  by  the 
following triad: (1) multiple seizure types (usually including general-
ized  tonic-clonic,  atonic,  and  atypical  absence  seizures);  (2)  an  EEG 
showing  slow  (<3  Hz)  spike-and-wave  discharges  and  a  variety  of 
other abnormalities; and (3) impaired cognitive function in most but 
not all cases. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is associated with CNS disease 
or dysfunction from a variety of causes, including de novo mutations, 
developmental  abnormalities,  perinatal  hypoxia/ischemia,  trauma, 
infection,  and  other  acquired  lesions.  The  multifactorial  nature  of 
this  syndrome  suggests  that  it  is  a  nonspecific  response  of  the  brain 
to diffuse neuronal dysfunction. Unfortunately, many patients have a 
poor  prognosis  due  to  the  underlying  CNS  disease  and  the  physical 
and psychosocial consequences of severe, poorly controlled epilepsy.

 ■ MESIAL TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY SYNDROME
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common syndrome 
associated  with  focal  seizures  with  impairment  of  consciousness  and 
is an example of an epilepsy syndrome with distinctive clinical, EEG, 
and  pathologic  features  (Table  425-3).  High-resolution  magnetic 
resonance  imaging  (MRI)  can  detect  the  characteristic  hippocampal 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3307

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3308

TABLE 425-2  Examples of Genes Associated with Epilepsy Syndromesa
GENE (LOCUS)
CHRNA4 (20q13.2)

KCNQ2 (20q13.3)

SCN1A (2q24.3)

FUNCTION OF GENE
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
subunit; mutations cause alterations 
in Ca2+ flux through the receptor; this 
may reduce the amount of GABA 
release in presynaptic terminals
Voltage-gated potassium channel 
subunits; mutation in pore regions 
may cause a 20–40% reduction of 
potassium currents, which will lead to 
impaired repolarization
α-Subunit of a voltage-gated sodium 
channel; numerous mutations 
affecting sodium currents that cause 
either gain or loss of function; network 
effects appear related to expression in 
excitatory or inhibitory cells

LGI1 (10q24)

DEPDC5 (22q12.2)

Leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 
gene; previous evidence for role in 
glial tumor progression; recent studies 
suggest an influence in the postnatal 
development of glutamatergic circuits 
in the hippocampus
Disheveled, Egl-10, and pleckstrin 
domain containing protein 5; exerts 
an inhibitory effect on mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR)–mediated 
processes, such as cell growth and 
proliferation

SLC2A1 (1p34.2)

Glucose transporter protein type 1 
(GLUT1); transports glucose across 
the blood-brain barrier

CSTB (21q22.3)

EPM2A (6q24)

Cystatin B, a noncaspase cysteine 
protease inhibitor; normal protein may 
block neuronal apoptosis by inhibiting 
caspases directly or indirectly (via 
cathepsins), or controlling proteolysis
Laforin, a protein tyrosine 
phosphatase (PTP); involved in 
glycogen metabolism and may have 
antiapoptotic activity

Doublecortin 
(Xq21-24)

Doublecortin, expressed primarily 
in frontal lobes; directly regulates 
microtubule polymerization and 
bundling

CLINICAL SYNDROME
Sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy (SHE); childhood 
onset; brief, nighttime seizures with prominent motor 
movements; often misdiagnosed as primary sleep 
disorder

Self-limited familial neonatal epilepsy; autosomal 
dominant inheritance; onset in first week of life 
in infants who are otherwise normal; remission 
usually within weeks to months; long-term epilepsy 
in 10–15%
Very common cause of Dravet syndrome (severe 
myoclonic epilepsy of infancy) and some cases 
of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Also found in other 
syndromes, including genetic epilepsy with 
febrile seizures plus (GEFS+); autosomal dominant 
inheritance; presents with febrile seizures at median 
1 year, which may persist >6 years, then variable 
seizure types not associated with fever

Autosomal dominant epilepsy with auditory features 
(ADEAF); a form of lateral temporal lobe epilepsy 
with auditory symptoms or aphasia as a major focal 
seizure manifestation; age of onset usually between 
10 and 25 years

Autosomal dominant familial focal epilepsy 
with variable foci (FFEVF); family members 
have seizures originating from different cortical 
regions; neuroimaging usually normal but may 
harbor subtle malformations; recent studies also 
suggest association with benign epilepsy with 
centrotemporal spikes
Loss of function of one allele leads to GLUT1 
deficiency, a severe metabolic encephalopathy 
including intractable epilepsy, complex motor 
dysfunction, and intellectual disability. Milder GLUT1 
deficiency causes a combination of movement 
disorder (paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia) and 
epilepsy with prominent absence seizures, though 
intellect is often normal
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) (Unverricht-
Lundborg disease); autosomal recessive inheritance; 
age of onset between 6 and 15 years, myoclonic 
seizures, ataxia, and progressive cognitive decline; 
brain shows neuronal degeneration
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (Lafora’s disease); 
autosomal recessive inheritance; age of onset  
6–19 years, death within 10 years; brain 
degeneration associated with polyglucosan 
intracellular inclusion bodies in numerous organs
Classic lissencephaly associated with severe mental 
retardation and seizures in males; subcortical band 
heterotopia with more subtle findings in females 
(presumably due to random X inactivation); X-linked 
dominant

COMMENTS
Rare; first identified in a large Australian family; 
other families found to have mutations in CHRNA2 
or CHRNB2, and some families appear to have 
mutations at other loci

Rare; other families found to have mutations 
in KCNQ3; sequence and functional homology 
to KCNQ1, mutations of which cause long QT 
syndrome and a cardiac-auditory syndrome

Incidence of Dravet syndrome is 1 in 20,000 births, 
and de novo SCN1A mutation is found in ~80% of 
cases. Incidence in GEFS+ uncertain; identified 
in other families with mutations in other sodium 
channel subunits (SCN2B and SCN2A) and 
GABAA receptor subunit (GABRG2 and GABRA1); 
significant phenotypic heterogeneity within same 
family, including members with febrile seizures 
only. Avoid sodium channel–blocking antiseizure 
medications
Mutations found in up to 50% of families 
containing two or more subjects with focal 
epilepsy with ictal auditory symptoms, suggesting 
that at least one other gene may underlie this 
syndrome

Study of families with the limited number of 
affected members revealed mutations in ~12% of 
families; thus, may be a relatively common cause 
of lesion-negative focal epilepsies with suspected 
genetic basis. Also associated with mutations in 
the GATOR1 genes NPRL2 and NPRL3

Milder forms of epilepsy due to GLUT1 deficiency 
may respond to standard antiseizure medications, 
but the gold standard treatment for refractory 
forms is the ketogenic diet, which bypasses 
defective glucose transport to provide an 
alternative energy supply to the brain

Overall rare, but relatively common in Finland and 
western Mediterranean (>1 in 20,000); precise role 
of cystatin B in human disease unknown, although 
mice with null mutations of cystatin B have similar 
syndrome
Most common PME in southern Europe, Middle 
East, northern Africa, and Indian subcontinent; 
genetic heterogeneity; unknown whether seizure 
phenotype due to degeneration or direct effects of 
abnormal laforin expression
Relatively rare but of uncertain incidence; recent 
increased ascertainment due to improved imaging 
techniques; relationship between migration defect 
and seizure phenotype unknown

aThe first five syndromes listed in the table (SHE, benign familial neonatal convulsions, GEFS+, ADEAF, and FFEVF) are examples of genetic epilepsies associated with 
identified gene mutations. The last three syndromes are examples of the numerous Mendelian disorders in which seizures are one part of the phenotype.
Abbreviations: GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; PME, progressive myoclonus epilepsy.

sclerosis that appears to be essential in the pathophysiology of MTLE 
for many patients (Fig. 425-1). Recognition of this syndrome is espe-
cially  important  because  it  tends  to  be  refractory  to  treatment  with 
anticonvulsants but responds well to surgical intervention. Advances in 
the understanding of basic mechanisms of epilepsy have come through 
studies of experimental models of MTLE, discussed below.
THE CAUSES OF SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY
Seizures  are  a  result  of  a  shift  in  the  normal  balance  of  excitation 
and  inhibition  within  the  CNS.  Given  the  numerous  properties  that 
control  neuronal  excitability,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  are  many 

different ways to perturb this normal balance and, therefore, many dif-
ferent causes of both seizures and epilepsy. Three clinical observations 
emphasize how a variety of factors determine why certain conditions 
may cause seizures or epilepsy in a given patient.

1.  The normal brain is capable of having a seizure under the appropriate 
circumstances,  and  there  are  differences  between  individuals  in  the 
susceptibility or threshold for seizures. For example, seizures may be 
induced by high fevers in children who are otherwise normal and 
who  never  develop  other  neurologic  problems,  including  epilepsy. 
However, febrile seizures occur only in a relatively small proportion 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3308

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 425-3  Characteristics of the Mesial Temporal Lobe  
Epilepsy Syndrome
History

History of febrile seizures
Family history of epilepsy
Early onset

Clinical Observations

Aura common
Behavioral arrest/stare
Complex automatisms
Unilateral posturing

Laboratory Studies

Rare generalized seizures
Seizures may remit and reappear
Seizures often intractable

Postictal disorientation
Memory loss
Dysphasia (with focus in dominant hemisphere)

Unilateral or bilateral anterior temporal spikes on EEG
Hypometabolism on interictal PET
Hyperperfusion on ictal SPECT
Material-specific memory deficits on intracranial amobarbital (Wada) test

MRI Findings

Small hippocampus with increased signal on T2-weighted sequences and loss of 
trilaminar hippocampal internal architecture
Small temporal lobe
Enlarged temporal horn

Pathologic Findings

Highly selective loss of specific cell populations within hippocampus in most 
cases, granule cell layer dispersion, gliosis

Abbreviations: EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 
PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed 
tomography.

of  children.  This  implies  there  are  various  underlying  endogenous 
factors  that  influence  the  threshold  for  having  a  seizure.  Some  of 
these factors are genetic, as a family history of epilepsy has a clear 
influence on the likelihood of seizures occurring in otherwise nor-
mal individuals. Normal development also plays an important role, 
because  the  brain  appears  to  have  different  seizure  thresholds  at 
different maturational stages.

FIGURE  425-1  Mesial  temporal  lobe  epilepsy.  The  electroencephalogram  and 
seizure  semiology  were  consistent  with  a  left  temporal  lobe  focus.  This  coronal 
high-resolution T2-weighted fast spin echo magnetic resonance image obtained at 
3 Tesla is at the level of the hippocampal bodies and shows abnormal high signal 
intensity,  blurring  of  internal  laminar  architecture,  and  reduced  size  of  the  left 
hippocampus (arrow) relative to the right. This triad of imaging findings is consistent 
with hippocampal sclerosis.

3309

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

2.  There are a variety of conditions that have an extremely high likeli-
hood of resulting in a chronic seizure disorder. One of the best exam-
ples of this is severe, penetrating head trauma, which is associated 
with up to a 45% risk of subsequent epilepsy. The high propensity 
for severe traumatic brain injury to lead to epilepsy suggests that the 
injury  results  in  a  long-lasting  pathologic  change  in  the  CNS  that 
transforms a presumably normal neuronal network into one that is 
abnormally hyperexcitable. This process is known as epileptogenesis, 
and the specific changes that result in a lowered seizure threshold 
can be considered epileptogenic factors. Other processes associated 
with  epileptogenesis  include  stroke,  infections,  and  abnormalities 
of CNS development. Likewise, the genetic abnormalities associated 
with epilepsy likely involve processes that trigger the appearance of 
specific sets of epileptogenic factors.

3.  Seizures are episodic. Seizures occur intermittently, and, depending 
on the underlying cause, people with epilepsy may feel completely 
normal  for  months  or  even  years  between  seizures.  This  implies 
there are important provocative or precipitating factors that induce 
seizures  in  people  with  epilepsy.  Similarly,  precipitating  factors 
are  responsible  for  causing  the  single  seizure  in  someone  without 
epilepsy.  Precipitants  include  those  due  to  intrinsic  physiologic 
processes, such as psychological or physical stress, sleep deprivation, 
or hormonal changes. They also include exogenous factors such as 
exposure to toxic substances, certain medications, and intermittent 
photic stimulation from strobe lights or some video games.

These observations emphasize the concept that the many causes of 
seizures and epilepsy result from a dynamic interplay between endoge-
nous  factors,  epileptogenic  factors,  and  precipitating  factors.  The 
potential role of each needs to be considered when determining the 
appropriate management of a patient with seizures. For example, the 
identification of predisposing factors (e.g., family history of epilepsy) 
in a patient with febrile seizures may increase the necessity for closer 
follow-up and a more aggressive diagnostic evaluation. Finding an epi-
leptogenic lesion may help in the estimation of seizure recurrence and 
duration of therapy. Removal or modification of a precipitating factor 
may be an effective and safer method for preventing further seizures 
than the prophylactic use of anticonvulsant drugs. An emerging con-
cept holds that underlying seizure risk itself fluctuates cyclically, poten-
tially explaining why the same precipitating factor (e.g., a missed dose 
of antiseizure medication) can be well tolerated on some occasions but 
result in a seizure on others.

 ■ CAUSES ACCORDING TO AGE
In practice, it is useful to consider the etiologies of seizures based on 
the age of the patient, because age is one of the most important factors 
determining  both  the  incidence  and  the  likely  causes  of  seizures  or 
epilepsy (Table 425-4). During the neonatal period and early infancy, 
potential  causes  include  hypoxic-ischemic  encephalopathy,  trauma, 
CNS  infection,  congenital  CNS  abnormalities,  and  metabolic  disor-
ders. Babies born to mothers using neurotoxic drugs such as cocaine, 
heroin, or ethanol are susceptible to drug-withdrawal seizures in the 
first  few  days  after  delivery.  Hypoglycemia  and  hypocalcemia,  which 
can  occur  as  secondary  complications  of  perinatal  injury,  are  also 
causes of seizures early after delivery. Seizures due to inborn errors of 
metabolism usually present once regular feeding begins, typically 2–3 
days after birth. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) deficiency, an important cause 
of neonatal seizures, can be effectively treated with pyridoxine replace-
ment. The idiopathic or inherited forms of benign neonatal seizures are 
also seen during this time period.

The most common seizures arising in late infancy and early child-
hood are febrile seizures, which are seizures associated with fevers but 
without evidence of CNS infection or other defined causes. The overall 
prevalence is 3–5% and even higher in some parts of the world such as 
Asia. Patients often have a family history of febrile seizures or epilepsy. 
Febrile seizures usually occur between 3 months and 5 years of age and 
have a peak incidence between 18 and 24 months. The typical scenario 
is a child who has a generalized, tonic-clonic seizure during a febrile 
illness  in  the  setting  of  a  common  childhood  infection  such  as  otitis 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3309

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3310

TABLE 425-4  Causes of Seizures
Neonates (<1 month)

Infants and children (>1 
month and <12 years)

Adolescents (12–18 years)

Young adults (18–35 years)

Older adults (>35 years)

Perinatal hypoxia and ischemia
Intracranial hemorrhage and trauma
CNS infection
Metabolic disturbances (hypoglycemia, 
hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, pyridoxine 
deficiency)
Drug withdrawal
Developmental disorders
Genetic disorders
Febrile seizures
Genetic disorders (metabolic, degenerative, 
primary epilepsy syndromes)
CNS infection
Developmental disorders
Trauma
Trauma
Genetic disorders
Infection
Illicit drug use
Brain tumor
Trauma
Alcohol withdrawal
Illicit drug use
Brain tumor
Autoantibodies
Cerebrovascular disease
Brain tumor
Alcohol withdrawal
Metabolic disorders (uremia, hepatic failure, 
electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia)
Alzheimer’s disease and other degenerative CNS 
diseases
Autoantibodies

Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.

media, respiratory infection, or gastroenteritis. The seizure is likely to 
occur during the rising phase of the temperature curve (i.e., during the 
first day) rather than well into the course of the illness. A simple febrile 
seizure is a single, isolated event, brief, and symmetric in appearance. 
Complex febrile seizures are characterized by repeated seizure activity, 
a duration >15 minutes, or by focal features. Approximately one-third 
of patients with febrile seizures will have a recurrence, but <10% have 
three or more episodes. Recurrences are much more likely when the 
febrile seizure occurs in the first year of life. Simple febrile seizures 
are not associated with an increase in the risk of developing epilepsy, 
while complex febrile seizures have a risk of 2–5%; other risk factors 
include  the  presence  of  preexisting  neurologic  deficits  and  a  family 
history of nonfebrile seizures.

Childhood marks the age at which many of the well-defined epilepsy 
syndromes present. Some children who are otherwise normal develop 
idiopathic, generalized tonic-clonic seizures without other features that 
fit into specific syndromes. Temporal lobe epilepsy usually presents in 
childhood and may be related to mesial temporal lobe sclerosis (as part 
of the MTLE syndrome) or other focal abnormalities such as cortical 
dysgenesis.  Other  types  of  focal  seizures,  including  those  that  evolve 
into generalized seizures, may be the relatively late manifestation of a 
developmental disorder, an acquired lesion such as head trauma, CNS 
infection (especially viral encephalitis), or very rarely, a CNS tumor.

The period of adolescence and early adulthood is one of transition 
during which the idiopathic or genetically based epilepsy syndromes, 
including  JME  and  juvenile  absence  epilepsy,  become  less  common, 
while epilepsies secondary to acquired CNS lesions begin to predomi-
nate. Seizures that arise in patients in this age range may be associated 

with head trauma, CNS infections (including parasitic infections such 
as  cysticercosis),  brain  tumors,  congenital  CNS  abnormalities,  illicit 
drug use, or alcohol withdrawal. Autoantibodies directed against CNS 
antigens such as potassium channels or glutamate receptors are a cause 
of epilepsy that also begins to appear in this age group (although cases 
of autoimmunity are being increasingly described in the pediatric pop-
ulation), including patients without an identifiable cancer. This etiol-
ogy should be suspected when a previously normal individual presents 
with  a  particularly  aggressive  seizure  pattern  developing  over  weeks 
to  months  and  characterized  by  increasingly  frequent  and  prolonged 
seizures,  especially  when  combined  with  psychiatric  symptoms  and 
changes in cognitive function (Chap. 94).

Head  trauma  is  a  common  cause  of  epilepsy  in  adolescents  and 
adults.  The  head  injury  can  be  caused  by  a  variety  of  mechanisms, 
and  the  likelihood  of  developing  epilepsy  is  strongly  correlated  with 
the  severity  of  the  injury.  A  patient  with  a  penetrating  head  wound, 
depressed skull fracture, intracranial hemorrhage, or prolonged post-
traumatic coma or amnesia has a 30–50% risk of developing epilepsy, 
whereas a patient with a closed head injury and cerebral contusion has 
a  5–25%  risk.  Recurrent  seizures  usually  develop  within  1  year  after 
head trauma, although intervals of >10 years are well known. In con-
trolled studies, mild head injury, defined as a concussion with amnesia 
or loss of consciousness of <30 min, was found to be associated with 
only a slightly increased likelihood of epilepsy. Nonetheless, most epi-
leptologists know of patients who have focal seizures within hours or 
days of a mild head injury and subsequently develop chronic seizures 
of the same type; such cases may represent rare examples of chronic 
epilepsy resulting from mild head injury.

The  causes  of  seizures  in  older  adults  include  cerebrovascular  dis-
ease, trauma (including subdural hematoma), CNS tumors, and degen-
erative diseases. Cerebrovascular disease may account for ~50% of new 
cases of epilepsy in patients >65 years. Acute seizures (i.e., occurring 
at the time of the stroke) are seen more often with embolic rather than 
hemorrhagic  or  thrombotic  stroke.  Chronic  seizures  typically  appear 
months to years after the initial event and are associated with all forms 
of stroke.

Metabolic  disturbances  such  as  electrolyte  imbalance,  hypo-  or 
hyperglycemia,  renal  failure,  and  hepatic  failure  may  cause  seizures 
at any age. Similarly, endocrine disorders, hematologic disorders, vas-
culitides, and many other systemic diseases may cause seizures over a 
broad age range. A wide variety of medications and abused substances 
are known to precipitate seizures as well (Table 425-5).

BASIC MECHANISMS
 ■ MECHANISMS OF SEIZURE INITIATION  
AND PROPAGATION
Focal  seizure  activity  can  begin  in  a  very  discrete  region  of  cortex 
and then slowly invade the surrounding regions. The hallmark of an 
established seizure is typically an electrographic “spike” due to intense 
near-simultaneous  firing  of  a  large  number  of  local  excitatory  neu-
rons, resulting in an apparent hypersynchronization of the excitatory 
bursts across a relatively large cortical region. The bursting activity in 
individual  neurons  (the  “paroxysmal  depolarization  shift”)  is  caused 
by a relatively long-lasting depolarization of the neuronal membrane 
due to influx of extracellular calcium (Ca2+), which leads to the open-
ing  of  voltage-dependent  sodium  (Na+)  channels,  influx  of  Na+,  and 
generation of repetitive action potentials. This is followed by a hyper-
polarizing  afterpotential  mediated  by  γ-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA) 
receptors or potassium (K+) channels, depending on the cell type. The 
synchronized  bursts  from  a  sufficient  number  of  neurons  result  in 
summation of field potentials producing a so-called spike discharge on  
the EEG.

The spreading seizure wavefront is thought to slow and ultimately 
halt  by  intact  hyperpolarization  and  a  “surround”  inhibition  created 
by feedforward activation of inhibitory neurons. With sufficient acti-
vation,  there  is  a  recruitment  of  surrounding  neurons  via  a  number 
of  synaptic  and  nonsynaptic  mechanisms,  including  (1)  an  increase 
in  extracellular  K+,  which  blunts  hyperpolarization  and  depolarizes 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3310

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 425-5  Drugs and Other Substances That Can Cause Seizures
Alkylating agents (e.g., busulfan, chlorambucil)
Antimalarials (chloroquine, mefloquine)
Antimicrobials/antivirals
  β-Lactam and related compounds
  Quinolones
  Acyclovir
Isoniazid
  Ganciclovir
Anesthetics and analgesics
  Meperidine
  Fentanyl
  Tramadol
  Local anesthetics
Dietary supplements
  Ephedra (ma huang)
  Gingko
Immunomodulatory drugs
  Cyclosporine
  OKT3 (monoclonal antibodies to T cells)
  Tacrolimus
Interferons
Psychotropics
  Antidepressants (e.g., bupropion)
  Antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine)
  Lithium
Radiographic contrast agents
Drug withdrawal
  Alcohol
  Baclofen
  Barbiturates (short-acting)
  Benzodiazepines (short-acting)
  Zolpidem
Drugs of abuse
  Amphetamine
  Cocaine
  Phencyclidine
  Methylphenidate
Flumazenila

aIn benzodiazepine-dependent patients.

neighboring neurons; (2) accumulation of Ca2+ in presynaptic termi-
nals, leading to enhanced neurotransmitter release; (3) depolarization- 
induced  activation  of  the  N-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA)  subtype 
of  the  excitatory  amino  acid  receptor,  which  causes  additional  Ca2+ 
influx  and  neuronal  activation;  and  (4)  ephaptic  interactions  related 
to changes in tissue osmolarity and cell swelling. The recruitment of 
a sufficient number of neurons leads to the propagation of excitatory 
currents  into  contiguous  areas  via  local  cortical  connections  and  to 
more distant areas via long commissural pathways such as the corpus 
callosum.

Many factors control neuronal excitability, and thus, there are many 
potential mechanisms for altering a neuron’s propensity to have burst-
ing activity. Mechanisms intrinsic to the neuron include changes in the 
conductance  of  ion  channels,  response  characteristics  of  membrane 
receptors, cytoplasmic buffering, second-messenger systems, and pro-
tein expression as determined by gene transcription, translation, and 
posttranslational  modification.  Mechanisms  extrinsic  to  the  neuron 
include  changes  in  the  amount  or  type  of  neurotransmitters  present 
at  the  synapse,  modulation  of  receptors  by  extracellular  ions  and 
other molecules, and temporal and spatial properties of synaptic and 

3311

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

nonsynaptic input. Nonneural cells, such as astrocytes and oligoden-
drocytes, have an important role in many of these mechanisms as well.
Certain recognized causes of seizures are explained by these mech-
anisms. For example, accidental ingestion of domoic acid, an analogue 
of  glutamate  (the  principal  excitatory  neurotransmitter  in  the  brain) 
produced by naturally occurring microscopic algae, causes profound 
seizures  via  direct  activation  of  excitatory  amino  acid  receptors 
throughout the CNS. Penicillin, which can lower the seizure threshold 
in humans and is a potent convulsant in experimental models, reduces 
inhibition  by  antagonizing  the  effects  of  GABA  at  its  receptor.  The 
basic  mechanisms  of  other  precipitating  factors  of  seizures,  such  as 
sleep  deprivation,  fever,  alcohol  withdrawal,  hypoxia,  and  infection, 
are  not  as  well  understood  but  presumably  involve  analogous  per-
turbations  in  neuronal  excitability.  Similarly,  the  endogenous  factors 
that  determine  an  individual’s  seizure  threshold  may  relate  to  these 
properties as well.

Knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for initiation and prop-
agation of most generalized seizures (including tonic-clonic, myoclo-
nic,  and  atonic  types)  remains  rudimentary  and  reflects  the  limited 
understanding of the connectivity of the brain at a systems level. Much 
more  is  understood  about  the  origin  of  generalized  spike-and-wave 
discharges in absence seizures. These appear to be related to oscillatory 
rhythms  normally  generated  during  sleep  by  circuits  connecting  the 
thalamus and cortex. This oscillatory behavior involves an interaction 
between  GABAB  receptors,  T-type  Ca2+  channels,  and  K+  channels 
located within the thalamus. Pharmacologic studies indicate that mod-
ulation of these receptors and channels can induce absence seizures, 
and there is good evidence that the genetic forms of absence epilepsy 
may be associated with mutations of components of this system.

 ■ MECHANISMS OF EPILEPTOGENESIS
Epileptogenesis  refers  to  the  transformation  of  a  normal  neuronal 
network  into  one  that  is  chronically  hyperexcitable.  There  is  often  a 
delay of months to years between an initial CNS injury such as trauma, 
stroke, or infection and the first clinically evident seizure. The injury 
appears to initiate a process that gradually lowers the seizure threshold 
in  the  affected  region  until  a  spontaneous  seizure  occurs.  In  many 
genetic and idiopathic forms of epilepsy, epileptogenesis is presumably 
determined by developmentally regulated events.

Pathologic studies of the hippocampus from patients with temporal 
lobe epilepsy suggest that some forms of epileptogenesis are related to 
structural  changes  in  neuronal  networks.  For  example,  many  patients 
with  MTLE  have  a  highly  selective  loss  of  neurons  that  normally 
contribute  to  inhibition  of  the  main  excitatory  neurons  within  the 
dentate  gyrus.  There  is  also  evidence  that,  in  response  to  the  loss  of 
neurons,  there  is  reorganization  of  surviving  neurons  in  a  way  that 
affects the excitability of the network. Some of these changes can be 
seen in experimental models of prolonged electrical seizures or trau-
matic brain injury. Thus, an initial injury such as head injury may lead 
to a very focal, confined region of structural change that causes local 
hyperexcitability. The local hyperexcitability leads to further structural 
changes that evolve over time until the focal lesion produces clinically 
evident  seizures.  Similar  models  have  provided  strong  evidence  for 
long-term alterations in intrinsic, biochemical properties of cells within 
the network such as chronic changes in glutamate or GABA receptor 
function. Induction of inflammatory cascades may be a critical factor 
in these processes as well.

 ■ GENETIC CAUSES OF EPILEPSY
The  most  important  recent  progress  in  epilepsy  research  has  been 
the  identification  of  genetic  mutations  associated  with  a  variety  of 
epilepsy  syndromes  (Table  425-2).  Although  most  of  the  mutations 
identified to date cause rare forms of epilepsy, their discovery has led 
to extremely important conceptual advances. For example, it appears 
that  many  of  the  inherited  epilepsies  are  due  to  mutations  affecting 
ion channel function. These syndromes are therefore part of the larger 
group of channelopathies causing paroxysmal disorders such as cardiac 
arrhythmias,  episodic  ataxia,  periodic  weakness,  and  familial  hemi-
plegic  migraine.  Other  gene  mutations  are  proving  to  be  associated 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3311

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3312 with pathways influencing CNS development, synaptic physiology, or 
neuronal  homeostasis.  De  novo  mutations  may  explain  a  significant 
proportion  of  these  syndromes,  especially  those  with  onset  in  early 
childhood. A current challenge is to identify the multiple susceptibility 
genes that underlie the more common forms of idiopathic epilepsies. 
Ion  channel  mutations  and  copy  number  variants  may  contribute  to 
causation in a subset of these patients.
 ■ MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF  
ANTISEIZURE DRUGS
Antiseizure  drugs  appear  to  act  primarily  by  blocking  the  initiation 
or  spread  of  seizures.  This  occurs  through  a  variety  of  mechanisms 
that  modify  the  activity  of  ion  channels  or  neurotransmitters,  and 
in  most  cases,  the  drugs  have  pleiotropic  effects.  The  mechanisms 
include  inhibition  of  Na+-dependent  action  potentials  in  a  frequency- 
dependent manner (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, topi-
ramate, zonisamide, lacosamide, rufinamide, cenobamate), inhibition 
of  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  (phenytoin,  gabapentin,  pregabalin), 
facilitating  the  opening  of  potassium  channels  (ezogabine),  attenu-
ation  of  glutamate  activity  (lamotrigine,  topiramate,  felbamate,  per-
ampanel),  potentiation  of  GABA  receptor  function  (benzodiazepines 
and barbiturates), increase in the availability of GABA (valproic acid, 
gabapentin, tiagabine), and modulation of release of synaptic vesicles 
(levetiracetam,  brivaracetam).  Two  of  the  effective  drugs  for  absence 
seizures,  ethosuximide  and  valproic  acid,  probably  act  by  inhibiting 
T-type Ca2+ channels in thalamic neurons. Cannabidiol (CBD), a deriv-
ative  of  cannabis  plants,  is  effective  for  reducing  seizures  in  children 
with  Dravet  syndrome  and  Lennox-Gastaut  syndrome  but  does  not 
act  through  endogenous  cannabinoid  receptors.  Rather,  CBD  has  a 
multimodal mechanism of action involving modulation of intracellular 
calcium via G protein–coupled receptor 55, extracellular calcium influx 
via transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) channels, and 
adenosine-mediated signaling.

In contrast to the relatively large number of antiseizure drugs that 
can  attenuate  seizure  activity,  there  are  currently  no  drugs  known  to 
prevent  the  formation  of  a  seizure  focus  following  CNS  injury.  The 
eventual  development  of  such  “antiepileptogenic”  drugs  will  provide 
an important means of preventing the emergence of epilepsy following 
injuries such as head trauma, stroke, and CNS infection.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
SEIZURE
When a patient presents shortly after a seizure, the first priorities 
are attention to vital signs, respiratory and cardiovascular support, 
and treatment of seizures if they resume (see “Treatment: Seizures 
and Epilepsy”). Life-threatening conditions such as CNS infection, 
metabolic  derangement,  or  drug  toxicity  must  be  recognized  and 
managed appropriately.

When  the  patient  is  not  acutely  ill,  the  evaluation  will  initially 
focus on whether there is a history of earlier seizures (Fig. 425-2). 
If this is the first seizure, then the emphasis will be to (1) establish 
whether  the  reported  episode  was  a  seizure  rather  than  another 
paroxysmal event, (2) determine the cause of the seizure by identi-
fying risk factors and precipitating events, and (3) decide whether 
antiseizure drug therapy is required in addition to treatment for any 
underlying illness.

In the patient with prior seizures or a known history of epilepsy, 
the evaluation is directed toward (1) identification of the underly-
ing  cause  and  precipitating  factors,  and  (2)  determination  of  the 
adequacy of the patient’s current therapy.

 ■ HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
The first goal is to determine whether the event was truly a seizure. An 
in-depth history is essential, because in many cases the diagnosis of a 
seizure is based solely on clinical grounds—the examination and labora-
tory studies are often normal. Questions should focus on the symptoms 
before, during, and after the episode in order to differentiate a seizure 

from other paroxysmal events (see “Differential Diagnosis of Seizures” 
below). Seizures frequently occur out-of-hospital, and the patient may 
be unaware of the ictal and immediate postictal phases; thus, witnesses 
to the event should be interviewed carefully.

The  history  should  also  focus  on  risk  factors  and  predisposing 
events. Clues for a predisposition to seizures include a history of febrile 
seizures,  a  family  history  of  seizures,  and,  of  particular  importance, 
earlier  auras  or  brief  seizures  not  recognized  as  such.  Epileptogenic 
factors  such  as  prior  head  trauma,  stroke,  tumor,  or  CNS  infection 
should be identified. In children, a careful assessment of developmental 
milestones may provide evidence for underlying CNS disease. Precipi-
tating factors such as sleep deprivation, systemic diseases, electrolyte or 
metabolic derangements, acute infection, drugs that lower the seizure 
threshold  (Table  425-5),  or  alcohol  or  illicit  drug  use  should  also  be 
identified.

The  general  physical  examination  includes  a  search  for  signs  of 
infection  or  systemic  illness.  Careful  examination  of  the  skin  may 
reveal  signs  of  neurocutaneous  disorders,  such  as  tuberous  sclerosis 
or  neurofibromatosis,  or  chronic  liver  or  renal  disease.  A  finding  of 
organomegaly  may  indicate  a  metabolic  storage  disease,  and  limb 
asymmetry may provide a clue to brain injury early in development. 
Signs  of  head  trauma  and  use  of  alcohol  or  illicit  drugs  should  be 
sought. Auscultation of the heart and carotid arteries may identify an 
abnormality that predisposes to cerebrovascular disease.

All  patients  require  a  complete  neurologic  examination,  with 
particular  emphasis  on  eliciting  signs  of  cerebral  hemispheric  disease 
(Chap. 422). Careful assessment of mental status (including memory, 
language  function,  and  abstract  thinking)  may  suggest  lesions  in  the 
anterior  frontal,  parietal,  or  temporal  lobes.  Testing  of  visual  fields 
will help screen for lesions in the optic pathways and occipital lobes. 
Screening tests of motor function such as pronator drift, deep tendon 
reflexes, gait, and coordination may suggest lesions in motor (frontal) 
cortex, and cortical sensory testing (e.g., double simultaneous stimula-
tion) may detect lesions in the parietal cortex.

 ■ LABORATORY STUDIES
Routine blood studies are indicated to identify the more common met-
abolic causes of seizures such as abnormalities in electrolytes, glucose, 
calcium,  or  magnesium,  and  hepatic  or  renal  disease.  A  screen  for 
toxins in blood and urine should also be obtained from all patients in 
appropriate risk groups, especially when no clear precipitating factor 
has been identified. A lumbar puncture is indicated if there is any sus-
picion of meningitis or encephalitis, and it is mandatory in all patients 
infected with HIV, even in the absence of symptoms or signs suggesting 
infection.  Testing  for  autoantibodies  in  the  serum  and  cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) should be considered in patients presenting with fulminant 
onset of epilepsy associated with other abnormalities such as psychiat-
ric symptoms or cognitive disturbances.

 ■ ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC STUDIES
The electrical activity of the brain (the EEG) is easily recorded from 
electrodes placed on the scalp. The potential difference between pairs 
of  electrodes  on  the  scalp  (bipolar  derivation)  or  between  individual 
scalp electrodes and a relatively inactive common reference point (ref-
erential derivation) is amplified and displayed on a computer monitor, 
oscilloscope,  or  paper.  Digital  systems  allow  the  EEG  to  be  recon-
structed and displayed with any desired format and to be manipulated 
for more detailed analysis and also permit computerized techniques to 
be used to detect certain abnormalities. The characteristics of the nor-
mal EEG depend on the patient’s age and level of arousal. The rhythmic 
activity  normally  recorded  represents  the  postsynaptic  potentials  of 
vertically oriented pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex and is charac-
terized by its frequency. In normal awake adults lying quietly with the 
eyes closed, an 8- to 13-Hz alpha rhythm is seen posteriorly in the EEG, 
intermixed with a variable amount of generalized faster (beta) activity 
(>13  Hz);  the  alpha  rhythm  is  attenuated  when  the  eyes  are  opened 
(Fig. 425-3). During drowsiness, the alpha rhythm is also attenuated; 
with light sleep, slower activity in the theta (4–7 Hz) and delta (<4 Hz) 
ranges becomes more conspicuous.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3312

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3313

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

Adult Patient with a Seizure

History
Physical examination
Exclude

Syncope
Transient ischemic attack
Migraine
Acute psychosis
Other causes of episodic cerebral dysfunction

History of epilepsy; currently treated
  with antiseizure drugs

No history of epilepsy

Assess: adequacy of antiseizure drug therapy
  Side effects
  Serum levels

Consider
  CBC
  Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
  Serum glucose
  Liver and renal function tests
  Urinalysis
  Toxicology screen

Normal

Abnormal or change in
neurologic examination

Subtherapeutic
antiseizure
drug levels

Therapeutic
antiseizure
drug levels

  Treat identifiable
  metabolic abnormalities
Assess cause of
  neurologic change

Appropriate
increase or
resumption
of dose

Increase antiseizure
  drug therapy to
  maximum tolerated
  dose; consider
  alternative antiepileptic
  drugs

Laboratory studies
  CBC
  Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
  Serum glucose
  Liver and renal function tests
  Urinalysis
  Toxicology screen

Positive metabolic screen
or symptoms/signs
suggesting a metabolic
or infectious disorder

Further workup
  Lumbar puncture
  Cultures
  Endocrine studies
  CT
  MRI if focal
   features present

Treat underlying
metabolic abnormality

Negative
metabolic screen

MRI scan
  and EEG

Focal features of 
seizures
Focal abnormalities
on clinical or lab
examination
Other evidence of
neurologic
dysfunction

Consider: Antiseizure drug therapy

Yes

No

Consider: Mass lesion; stroke; CNS infection;
  trauma; degenerative disease

Idiopathic seizures

Treat underlying disorder

Consider: Antiseizure drug therapy

Consider: Antiseizure drug therapy

FIGURE 425-2  Evaluation of the adult patient with a seizure. CBC, complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

All patients who have a possible seizure disorder should be evalu-
ated with an EEG as soon as possible. In the evaluation of a patient with 
suspected epilepsy, the presence of electrographic seizure activity during 
the clinically evident event (i.e., abnormal, repetitive, rhythmic activity 

having a discrete onset and termination) clearly establishes the diagno-
sis. The EEG is always abnormal during generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zures. The absence of electrographic seizure activity does not exclude 
a seizure disorder, however, because focal seizures may originate from 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3313

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3314

Eyes open

Fp1-F3

F3-C3

C3-P3

P3-O1

Fp2-F4

F4-C4

C4-P4

P4-O2

A

F3-A1

C3-A1

P3-A1

O1-A1

F4-A2

C4-A2

P4-A2

O2-A2

C

F3-C3

C3-P3

P3-O1

F4-C4

C4-P4

P4-O2

T3-CZ

CZ-T4

B

Fp1-F3

F3-C3

C3-P3

P3-O1

Fp2-F4

F4-C4

C4-P4

P4-O2

D

The  routine  scalp-recorded  EEG  may 
also  be  used  to  assess  the  prognosis  of 
seizure  disorders;  in  general,  a  normal 
EEG implies a better prognosis, whereas 
an  abnormal  background  or  frequent 
epileptiform  activity  suggests  a  worse 
outcome.  Unfortunately,  the  EEG  has 
not  proved  to  be  useful  in  predicting 
which patients with predisposing condi-
tions such as head injury or brain tumor 
will go on to develop epilepsy, because in 
such  circumstances  epileptiform  activity 
is  commonly  encountered  regardless  of 
whether seizures occur.

Magnetoencephalography 

(MEG) 
provides  another  way  of  looking  non-
invasively  at  cortical  activity.  Instead  of 
measuring electrical activity of the brain, 
it measures the small magnetic fields that 
are generated by this activity. The epilep-
tiform activity seen on MEG can be ana-
lyzed, and its source in the brain can be 
estimated using a variety of mathematical 
techniques.  These  source  estimates  can 
then  be  plotted  on  an  anatomic  image 
of  the  brain  such  as  an  MRI  (discussed 
below)  to  generate  a  magnetic  source 
image (MSI). MSI can be useful to local-
ize potential seizure foci.

FIGURE 425-3  Electroencephalograms. A. Normal electroencephalogram (EEG) showing a posteriorly situated 9-Hz alpha 
rhythm that attenuates with eye opening. B. Abnormal EEG showing irregular diffuse slow activity in an obtunded patient 
with encephalitis. C. Irregular slow activity in the right central region, on a diffusely slowed background, in a patient with 
a right parietal glioma. D. Periodic complexes occurring once every second in a patient with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. 
Horizontal calibration: 1 s; vertical calibration: 200 μV in A, 300 μV in other panels. In this and the following figure, electrode 
placements are indicated at the left of each panel and accord with the international 10–20 system. A, earlobe; C, central; 
F, frontal; Fp, frontal polar; O, occipital; P, parietal; T, temporal. Right-sided placements are indicated by even numbers, left-
sided placements by odd numbers, and midline placements by Z. (Reproduced with permission from MJ Aminoff: Aminoff’s 
Electrodiagnosis in Clinical Neurology, 6th ed. Oxford: Elsevier Saunders, 2012.)

a region of the cortex that cannot be detected by standard scalp elec-
trodes.  Because  seizures  are  typically  infrequent  and  unpredictable, 
it  is  often  not  possible  to  obtain  the  EEG  during  a  clinical  event.  In 
such situations, activating procedures are generally undertaken while 
the  EEG  is  recorded  in  an  attempt  to  provoke  abnormalities.  These 
procedures  commonly  include  hyperventilation  (for  3  or  4  min), 
photic stimulation, sleep, and sleep deprivation on the night prior to 
the recording. Continuous monitoring for prolonged periods in video- 
EEG  telemetry  units  for  hospitalized  patients  or  the  use  of  portable 
equipment  to  record  the  EEG  continuously  for  ≥24  h  in  ambu-
latory  patients  has  made  it  easier  to  capture  the  electrophysiologic 
correlates of clinical events. In particular, video-EEG telemetry is now 
a  routine  approach  for  the  accurate  diagnosis  of  epilepsy  in  patients 
with  poorly  characterized  events  or  seizures  that  are  difficult  to  
control.

The  EEG  may  also  be  helpful  in  the  interictal  period  by  showing 
certain  abnormalities  that  are  highly  supportive  of  the  diagnosis  of 
epilepsy. Such epileptiform activity consists of bursts of abnormal dis-
charges containing spikes or sharp waves. The presence of epileptiform 
activity is not entirely specific for epilepsy, but it has a much greater 
prevalence  in  patients  with  epilepsy  than  in  other  individuals.  How-
ever, even in an individual who is known to have epilepsy, the initial 
routine interictal EEG may be normal 50–80% of the time. Thus, the 
EEG has limited sensitivity and cannot establish the diagnosis of epi-
lepsy in many cases.

The EEG is also used for classifying seizure disorders and aiding in 
the selection of anticonvulsant medications (Fig. 425-4). For example, 
episodic  generalized  spike-wave  activity  is  usually  seen  in  patients 
with typical absence epilepsy and may be seen with other generalized 
epilepsy  syndromes.  Focal  interictal  epileptiform  discharges  would 
support the diagnosis of a focal seizure disorder such as temporal lobe 
epilepsy  or  frontal  lobe  seizures,  depending  on  the  location  of  the 
discharges.

 ■ BRAIN IMAGING
Almost  all  patients  with  new-onset 
seizures  should  have  a  brain  imaging 
study  to  determine  whether  there  is  an 
underlying  structural  abnormality  that 
is  responsible.  The  only  potential  exception  to  this  rule  is  children 
who  have  an  unambiguous  history  and  examination  suggestive  of  a 
benign,  generalized  seizure  disorder  such  as  absence  epilepsy.  MRI 
has been shown to be superior to computed tomography (CT) for the 
detection  of  cerebral  lesions  associated  with  epilepsy.  In  some  cases, 
MRI will identify lesions such as tumors, vascular malformations, or 
other pathologies that need urgent therapy. The availability of newer 
MRI  methods,  such  as  three-dimensional  structural  imaging  at  sub-
millimeter  resolution,  has  increased  the  sensitivity  for  detection  of 
abnormalities of cortical architecture, including hippocampal atrophy 
associated  with  mesial  temporal  sclerosis,  as  well  as  abnormalities  of 
neuronal migration. In such cases, the findings provide an explanation 
for the patient’s seizures and point to the need for chronic antiseizure 
drug therapy or possible surgical resection.

In  the  patient  with  a  suspected  CNS  infection  or  mass  lesion,  CT 
scanning should be performed emergently when MRI is not immedi-
ately  available.  Otherwise,  it  is  usually  appropriate  to  obtain  an  MRI 
study within a few days of the initial evaluation. Functional imaging 
procedures such as positron emission tomography (PET) and single-
photon  emission  computed  tomography  (SPECT)  are  also  used  to 
evaluate certain patients with medically refractory seizures (discussed 
below).

 ■ GENETIC TESTING
With  the  increasing  recognition  of  specific  gene  mutations  causing 
epilepsy, genetic testing is beginning to emerge as part of the diagnostic 
evaluation of patients with epilepsy. In addition to providing a defini-
tive diagnosis (which may be of great benefit to the patient and family 
members and curtail the pursuit of additional, unrevealing laboratory 
testing), genetic testing may offer a guide for therapeutic options (see 
section  “Selection  of  Antiseizure  Drugs”  below).  Genetic  testing  is 
currently being done mainly in infants and children with epilepsy syn-
dromes thought to have a genetic cause but should also be considered 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3314

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders F3-C3

C3-P3

P3-O1

F4-C4

C4-P4

P4-O2

T3-CZ

CZ-T4
A

Fp1-F7

F7-T3

T3-T5

T5-O1

Fp2-F8

F8-T4

T4-T6

T6-O2
B

Fp1-A1

F7-A1

T3-A1

T5-A1

Fp2-A2

F8-A2

T4-A2

T6-A2
C

3315

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

TABLE 425-6  Differential Diagnosis of Seizures
Syncope
Vasovagal syncope
Cardiac arrhythmia
Valvular heart disease
Cardiac failure
Orthostatic hypotension
Psychological disorders
Psychogenic seizure
Hyperventilation
Panic attack
Metabolic disturbances
Alcoholic blackouts
Delirium tremens
Hypoglycemia
Hypoxia
Psychoactive drugs (e.g., 
hallucinogens)
Migraine
Confusional migraine
Basilar migraine

Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Basilar artery TIA
Sleep disorders
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
Benign sleep myoclonus
Movement disorders
Tics
Nonepileptic myoclonus
Paroxysmal choreoathetosis
Special considerations in children
Breath-holding spells
Migraine with recurrent abdominal 
pain and cyclic vomiting
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Apnea
Night terrors
Sleepwalking

between the two are listed in Table 425-7. Characteristics of a seizure 
include  the  presence  of  an  aura,  cyanosis,  unconsciousness,  motor 
manifestations lasting >15 s, postictal disorientation, muscle soreness, 
and  sleepiness.  In  contrast,  a  syncopal  episode  is  more  likely  if  the 
event  was  provoked  by  acute  pain  or  emotional  stress  or  occurred 
immediately  after  arising  from  the  lying  or  sitting  position.  Patients 
with syncope often describe a stereotyped transition from conscious-
ness  to  unconsciousness  that  includes  tiredness,  sweating,  nausea, 
and tunneling of vision, and they experience a relatively brief loss of 
consciousness. Headache or incontinence usually suggests a seizure but 
may on occasion also occur with syncope. A brief period (i.e., 1–10 s) 
of convulsive motor activity is frequently seen immediately at the onset 
of a syncopal episode, especially if the patient remains in an upright 
posture after fainting (e.g., in a dentist’s chair) and therefore has a sus-
tained  decrease  in  cerebral  perfusion.  Rarely,  a  syncopal  episode  can 

FIGURE  425-4  Electrographic  seizures.  A.  Onset  of  a  tonic  seizure  showing 
generalized  repetitive  sharp  activity  with  synchronous  onset  over  both 
hemispheres.  B.  Burst  of  repetitive  spikes  occurring  with  sudden  onset  in  the 
right temporal region during a clinical spell characterized by transient impairment 
of awareness. C. Generalized 3-Hz spike-wave activity occurring synchronously 
over  both  hemispheres  during  an  absence  seizure.  Horizontal  calibration:  1  s; 
vertical calibration: 400 μV in A, 200 μV in B, and 750 μV in C. (Reproduced with 
permission  from  MJ  Aminoff:  Aminoff’s  Electrodiagnosis  in  Clinical  Neurology,  
6th ed. Oxford: Elsevier Saunders, 2012.)

in  older  patients  with  a  history  suggesting  an  undiagnosed  genetic 
epilepsy syndrome that began early in life.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SEIZURES
Disorders that may mimic seizures are listed in Table 425-6. In most 
cases, seizures can be distinguished from other conditions by meticu-
lous attention to the history and relevant laboratory studies. On occa-
sion, additional studies such as video-EEG monitoring, sleep studies, 
tilt-table  analysis,  or  cardiac  electrophysiology  may  be  required  to 
reach a correct diagnosis. Two of the more common nonepileptic syn-
dromes in the differential diagnosis are discussed below.
 ■ SYNCOPE
(See  also  Chap.  21)  The  diagnostic  dilemma  encountered  most  fre-
quently is the distinction between a generalized seizure and syncope. 
Observations by the patient and bystanders that can help differentiate 

SYNCOPE
Emotional stress, 
Valsalva, orthostatic 
hypotension, cardiac 
etiologies
Tiredness, nausea, 
diaphoresis, tunneling 
of vision
Usually erect
Gradual over secondsa

Seconds

Never >15 s

TABLE 425-7  Features That Distinguish Generalized Tonic-Clonic 
Seizure from Syncope
FEATURES
Immediate precipitating 
factors

SEIZURE
Usually none

Premonitory symptoms

None or aura (e.g., odd 
odor)

Posture at onset
Transition to 
unconsciousness
Duration of 
unconsciousness
Duration of tonic or clonic 
movements
Facial appearance during 
event
Disorientation and 
sleepiness after event
Aching of muscles after 
event
Biting of tongue
Incontinence
Headache

Variable
Often immediate

Minutes

30–60 s

Cyanosis, frothing at 
mouth
Many minutes to hours

Pallor

<5 min

Often

Sometimes
Sometimes
Sometimes

Sometimes

Rarely
Sometimes
Rarely

aMay be sudden with certain cardiac arrhythmias.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3315

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3316 induce  a  full  tonic-clonic  seizure.  In  such  cases,  the  evaluation  must 
focus on both the cause of the syncopal event as well as the possibil-
ity  that  the  patient  has  a  propensity  for  recurrent  seizures.  Postictal 
symptoms can be very helpful when differentiating convulsive syncope 
from seizure, as confusion and disorientation are typically much less 
prominent following syncope.
 ■ PSYCHOGENIC SEIZURES
Psychogenic seizures are nonepileptic behaviors that resemble seizures. 
They are often part of a conversion reaction precipitated by underlying 
psychological distress. Certain behaviors such as side-to-side turning 
of the head, ictal eye closure, asymmetric and large-amplitude shaking 
movements of the limbs, twitching of all four extremities without loss 
of consciousness, and pelvic thrusting are more commonly associated 
with psychogenic rather than epileptic seizures. Psychogenic seizures 
often last longer than epileptic seizures and may wax and wane over 
minutes  to  hours.  However,  the  distinction  is  sometimes  difficult  on 
clinical  grounds  alone,  and  there  are  many  examples  of  diagnostic 
errors made by experienced epileptologists. This is especially true for 
psychogenic seizures that resemble focal seizures, because the behav-
ioral manifestations of focal seizures (especially of frontal lobe origin) 
can be extremely unusual, and in both cases, the routine surface EEG 
may  be  normal.  Video-EEG  monitoring  is  very  useful  when  historic 
features  are  nondiagnostic.  Generalized  tonic-clonic  seizures  always 
produce marked EEG abnormalities during and after the seizure. For 
suspected focal seizures, the use of additional electrodes may help to 
localize  a  seizure  focus.  Measurement  of  serum  prolactin  levels  may 
also  help  to  distinguish  between  epileptic  and  psychogenic  seizures. 
Most  generalized  seizures  and  some  focal  seizures  are  accompanied 
by  a  rise  in  serum  prolactin  during  the  immediate  30-min  postictal 
period, whereas psychogenic seizures are not, though this is not always 
reliable because baseline prolactin levels are rarely available and certain 
medications can elevate prolactin levels. The diagnosis of psychogenic 
seizures  also  does  not  exclude  a  concurrent  diagnosis  of  epilepsy, 
because the two may coexist.

TREATMENT
Seizures and Epilepsy

Therapy  for  a  patient  with  a  seizure  disorder  is  almost  always 
multimodal  and  includes  treatment  of  underlying  conditions  that 
cause  or  contribute  to  the  seizures,  avoidance  of  precipitating 
factors,  suppression  of  recurrent  seizures  by  prophylactic  therapy 
with antiseizure medications or surgery, and addressing a variety of 
psychological and social issues. Treatment plans must be individu-
alized, given the many different types and causes of seizures as well 
as the differences in efficacy and toxicity of antiseizure medications 
for each patient. In almost all cases, a neurologist with experience 
in the treatment of epilepsy should design and oversee implementa-
tion of the treatment strategy. Furthermore, patients with refractory 
epilepsy or those who require polypharmacy with antiseizure drugs 
should remain under the regular care of a neurologist. 
TREATMENT OF UNDERLYING CONDITIONS
If  the  sole  cause  of  a  seizure  is  a  metabolic  disturbance  such  as 
an  abnormality  of  serum  electrolytes  or  glucose,  then  treatment 
is  aimed  at  reversing  the  metabolic  problem  and  preventing  its 
recurrence. Therapy with antiseizure drugs is usually unnecessary 
unless the metabolic disorder cannot be corrected promptly and the 
patient is at risk of having further seizures. If the apparent cause of a 
seizure was a medication (e.g., theophylline) or illicit drug use (e.g., 
cocaine), then appropriate therapy is avoidance of the drug; there 
is  usually  no  need  for  antiseizure  medications  unless  subsequent 
seizures occur in the absence of these precipitants.

Seizures caused by a structural CNS lesion such as a brain tumor, 
vascular malformation, or brain abscess may not recur after appro-
priate treatment of the underlying lesion. However, despite removal 
of  the  structural  lesion,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  seizure  focus  will 
remain in the surrounding tissue or develop de novo as a result of 

gliosis and other processes induced by surgery, radiation, or other 
therapies. Most patients are therefore maintained on an antiseizure 
medication for at least 1 year, and an attempt is made to withdraw 
medications only if the patient has been completely seizure free. 
If  seizures  are  refractory  to  medication,  the  patient  may  benefit 
from  surgical  removal  of  the  seizure-producing  brain  tissue 
(see below). 
AVOIDANCE OF PRECIPITATING FACTORS
Unfortunately, little is known about the specific factors that deter-
mine precisely when a seizure will occur in a patient with epilepsy. 
An almost universal precipitating factor for seizures is sleep depri-
vation, so patients should do everything possible to optimize their 
sleep quality. Many patients can identify other particular situations 
that appear to lower their seizure threshold; these situations should 
be avoided. For example, patients may note an association between 
alcohol intake and seizures, and they should be encouraged to mod-
ify their drinking habits accordingly. There are also relatively rare 
cases  of  patients  with  seizures  that  are  induced  by  highly  specific 
stimuli  such  as  a  video  game  monitor,  music,  or  an  individual’s 
voice  (“reflex  epilepsy”).  Because  there  is  often  an  association 
between  stress  and  seizures,  stress  reduction  techniques  such  as 
physical exercise, meditation, or counseling may be helpful. 
ANTISEIZURE DRUG THERAPY
Antiseizure drug therapy is the mainstay of treatment for most peo-
ple with epilepsy. The overall goal is to completely prevent seizures 
without causing any untoward side effects, preferably with a single 
medication  and  a  dosing  schedule  that  is  easy  for  the  patient  to 
follow. Seizure classification is an important element in designing 
the treatment plan, because some antiseizure drugs have different 
activities against various seizure types. However, there is consider-
able overlap between many antiseizure drugs such that the choice 
of  therapy  is  often  determined  more  by  anticipated  side  effects, 
drug-drug  interactions,  medical  comorbidities,  dosing  frequency, 
and cost. 
When  to  Initiate  Antiseizure  Drug  Therapy  Antiseizure  drug 
therapy  should  be  started  in  any  patient  with  recurrent  seizures 
of  unknown  etiology  or  a  known  cause  that  cannot  be  reversed. 
Whether to initiate therapy in a patient with a single seizure is con-
troversial. Patients with a single seizure due to an identified lesion 
such as a CNS tumor, infection, or trauma, in which there is strong 
evidence that the lesion is epileptogenic, should be treated. The risk 
of seizure recurrence in a patient with an apparently unprovoked or 
idiopathic seizure is uncertain, with estimates ranging from 31 to 
71% in the first 12 months after the initial seizure. This uncertainty 
arises from differences in the underlying seizure types and etiolo-
gies in various published epidemiologic studies. Generally accepted 
risk factors associated with recurrent seizures include the following: 
(1) prior brain insult such as a stroke or trauma, (2) an EEG with 
epileptiform abnormalities, (3) a significant brain imaging abnor-
mality, or (4) a nocturnal seizure. Most patients with one or more 
of these risk factors should be treated. Issues such as employment 
or  driving  may  influence  the  decision  regarding  whether  to  start 
medications as well. For example, a patient with a single, idiopathic 
seizure  whose  job  depends  on  driving  may  prefer  taking  an  anti-
seizure drug rather than risk a seizure recurrence and the potential 
loss of driving privileges. 
Selection  of  Antiseizure  Drugs  Antiseizure  drugs  available  in 
the  United  States  are  shown  in  Table  425-8,  and  the  main  phar-
macologic  characteristics  of  commonly  used  drugs  are  listed  in 
Table  425-9.  Worldwide,  older  medications  such  as  phenytoin, 
valproic  acid,  carbamazepine,  phenobarbital,  and  ethosuximide 
are  generally  used  as  first-line  therapy  for  most  seizure  disorders 
because,  overall,  they  are  as  effective  as  recently  marketed  drugs 
and  significantly  less  expensive  overall.  Most  of  the  new  drugs 
that have become available in the past decade are used as add-on 
or  alternative  therapy,  although  many  are  now  also  being  used  as 
first-line monotherapy.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3316

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 425-8  Selection of Antiepileptic Drugs

ATYPICAL 
ABSENCE, 
MYOCLONIC, 
ATONIC

TYPICAL ABSENCE

Valproic acid
Ethosuximide
Lamotrigine

Valproic acid
Lamotrigine
Topiramate

Clonazepam
Zonisamide
Levetiracetam

Clonazepam
Felbamate
Clobazam
Rufinamide

GENERALIZED-
ONSET 
TONIC-CLONIC FOCAL

First-Line

Lamotrigine
Valproic acid

Alternatives

Zonisamidea
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Topiramate
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Perampanel

Lamotrigine
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Eslicarbazepine
Phenytoin
Levetiracetam

Zonisamidea
Brivaracetam
Topiramate
Valproic acid
Tiagabinea
Gabapentina
Lacosamidea
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Perampanel

aAs adjunctive therapy.

In addition to efficacy, factors influencing the choice of an initial 
medication  include  the  convenience  of  dosing  (e.g.,  once  daily  vs 
three or four times daily) and potential side effects. In this regard, 
a number of the newer drugs have the advantage of reduced drug-
drug  interactions  and  easier  dosing.  Almost  all  of  the  commonly 
used  antiseizure  drugs  can  cause  similar,  dose-related  side  effects 
such  as  sedation,  ataxia,  and  diplopia.  Long-term  use  of  some 
agents  in  adults,  especially  the  elderly,  can  lead  to  osteoporosis. 
Close follow-up is required to ensure these side effects are promptly 
recognized and reversed. Most of the older drugs and some of the 
newer ones can also cause idiosyncratic toxicity such as rash, bone 
marrow  suppression,  or  hepatotoxicity.  Although  rare,  these  side 
effects  should  be  considered  during  drug  selection,  and  patients 
must  be  instructed  about  symptoms  or  signs  that  should  signal 
the  need  to  alert  their  health  care  provider.  For  some  drugs,  lab-
oratory  tests  (e.g.,  complete  blood  count  and  liver  function  tests) 
are  recommended  prior  to  the  institution  of  therapy  (to  establish 
baseline values) and during initial dosing and titration of the agent. 
Monitoring  serum  concentrations  of  antiseizure  medications  can 
help determine when a therapeutic dose has been reached, though 
clinical response is paramount (see below).

An  important  advance  in  the  care  of  people  with  epilepsy  has 
been the application of genetic testing to help guide the choice of 
therapy (as well as establishing the underlying cause of a patient’s 
syndrome).  For  example,  the  identification  of  a  mutation  in  the 
SLC2A1 gene, which encodes the glucose type 1 transporter (GLUT-1) 
and  is  a  cause  of  GLUT-1  deficiency,  should  prompt  immediate 
treatment  with  the  ketogenic  diet.  Mutations  of  the  ALDH7A1 
gene, which encodes antiquitin, can cause alterations in pyridoxine 
metabolism that are reversed by treatment with pyridoxine. There 
is also mounting evidence that certain gene mutations may indicate 
better or worse response to specific antiseizure drugs. For example, 
patients  with  mutations  in  the  sodium  channel  subunit  SCN1A 
should  generally  avoid  taking  phenytoin  or  lamotrigine,  whereas 
patients with mutations in the SCN2A or SCN8A sodium channel 
subunits  appear  to  respond  favorably  to  high-dose  phenytoin. 
Genetic  testing  may  also  help  predict  antiseizure  drug  toxicity. 
Studies  have  shown  that  Asian  individuals  carrying  the  human 
leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  allele  HLA-B*1502  are  at  particularly 

high risk of developing serious skin reactions from carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, oxcarbazepine, and lamotrigine. HLA-A*31:01 has also 
been  found  to  be  associated  with  carbamazepine-induced  hyper-
sensitivity  reactions  in  patients  of  European  or  Japanese  ancestry. 
As a result, racial background and genotype are additional factors 
to consider in drug selection. 

3317

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

Antiseizure  Drug  Selection  for  Focal  Seizures  Carbam-
azepine  (or  related  drugs,  oxcarbazepine  and  eslicarbazepine), 
lamotrigine,  phenytoin,  and  levetiracetam  are  currently  the  drugs 
of  choice  approved  for  the  initial  treatment  of  focal  seizures, 
including those that evolve into generalized seizures. Overall, they 
have very similar efficacy, but differences in pharmacokinetics and 
toxicity are the main determinants for use in a given patient. For 
example, an advantage of carbamazepine (which is also available in 
an extended-release form) is that its metabolism follows first-order 
pharmacokinetics,  which  allows  for  a  linear  relationship  between 
drug dose, serum levels, and toxicity. Carbamazepine can cause leu-
kopenia, aplastic anemia, or hepatotoxicity and would therefore be 
contraindicated in patients with predispositions to these problems. 
Oxcarbazepine  has  the  advantage  of  being  metabolized  in  a  way 
that avoids an intermediate metabolite associated with some of the 
side effects of carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine also has fewer drug 
interactions than carbamazepine. Eslicarbazepine has a long serum 
half-life and is dosed once daily.

Lamotrigine tends to be well tolerated in terms of side effects and 
has  mood-stabilizing  properties  that  can  be  beneficial.  However, 
patients  need  to  be  particularly  vigilant  about  the  possibility  of  a 
skin  rash  during  the  initiation  of  therapy.  This  can  be  extremely 
severe and lead to Stevens-Johnson syndrome if unrecognized and 
if the medication is not discontinued immediately. This risk can be 
reduced by the use of low initial doses and slow titration. Lamotrig-
ine must be started at even lower initial doses when used as add-on 
therapy with valproic acid, because valproic acid inhibits lamotrig-
ine metabolism and results in a substantially prolonged half-life.

Phenytoin has a relatively long half-life and offers the advantage 
of  once-  or  twice-daily  dosing  compared  to  twice-  or  thrice-daily 
dosing  for  many  of  the  other  drugs.  However,  phenytoin  shows 
properties of nonlinear kinetics, such that small increases in phe-
nytoin  doses  above  a  standard  maintenance  dose  can  precipitate 
marked side effects. This is one of the main causes of acute pheny-
toin toxicity (dizziness, diplopia, ataxia). Long-term use of pheny-
toin  is  associated  with  untoward  cosmetic  effects  (e.g.,  hirsutism, 
coarsening of facial features, gingival hypertrophy) and effects on 
bone  metabolism.  Due  to  these  side  effects,  phenytoin  is  often 
avoided  in  young  patients  who  are  likely  to  require  the  drug  for 
many years.

Levetiracetam has the advantage of having no known clinically 
relevant drug-drug interactions, making it especially useful in the 
elderly  and  patients  on  other  medications.  However,  a  significant 
number  of  patients  taking  levetiracetam  complain  of  irritability, 
anxiety, and other psychiatric symptoms.

Topiramate can be used for both focal and generalized seizures. 
Similar to some of the other antiseizure drugs, topiramate can cause 
significant  psychomotor  slowing  and  other  cognitive  problems. 
Additionally, it should not be used in patients at risk for the devel-
opment of glaucoma or renal stones.

Valproic  acid  is  an  effective  alternative  for  some  patients  with 
focal seizures, especially when the seizures generalize. Gastrointes-
tinal side effects are fewer when using the delayed-release formula-
tion (Depakote). Laboratory testing is required to monitor toxicity 
because valproic acid can rarely cause reversible bone marrow sup-
pression and hepatotoxicity. This drug should generally be avoided 
in patients with preexisting bone marrow or liver disease. Valproic 
acid  also  has  relatively  high  risks  of  unacceptable  adverse  effects 
for women of childbearing age, including hyperandrogenism, that 
may  affect  fertility  and  teratogenesis  (e.g.,  neural  tube  defects)  in 
offspring.  Irreversible,  fatal  hepatic  failure  appearing  as  an  idio-
syncratic  rather  than  dose-related  side  effect  is  a  relatively  rare 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3317

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3318 TABLE 425-9  Dosage and Adverse Effects of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs

ADVERSE EFFECTS

GENERIC NAME
Brivaracetam

TRADE 
NAME
Briviact

PRINCIPAL USES
Focal onset

TYPICAL DOSE; 
DOSE INTERVAL HALF-LIFE
100–200 mg/d; 
bid

7–10 h

THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
Not established Fatigue

NEUROLOGIC

Dizziness
Weakness
Ataxia
Mood changes

Cannabidiol

Epidiolex

Carbamazepine

Tegretolc

Dravet and 
Lennox-Gastaut 
syndromes
Tuberous sclerosis 
complex-
associated seizures
Tonic-clonic
Focal onset

Clobazam

Onfi

Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome

Clonazepam

Klonopin

Eslicarbazepine

Aptiom

Absence
Atypical absence
Myoclonic
Focal onset

10–20 mg/kg per 
d; bid

18–32 h

Not established Sedation

600–1800 mg/d 
(15–35 mg/
kg, child); bid 
(capsules 
or tablets), 
tid-qid (oral 
suspension)

10–17 h 
(variable 
due to 
autoinduction: 
complete 
3–5 wk after 
initiation)

10–40 mg/d  
(5–20 mg/d for 
patients <30 kg 
body weight); bid

36–42 h 
(71–82 h for 
less active 
metabolite)

4–12 μg/mL

Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo

Not established Fatigue

1–12 mg/d; qd-tid 24–48 h

10–70 ng/mL

400–1600 mg/d; 
qd

20–24 h

10–35 μg/mL (as 
oxcarbazepine 
mono-hydroxy 
derivative)

40–100 μg/mL

Ethosuximide

Zarontin

Absence

750–1250 mg/d 
(20–40 mg/kg); 
qd-bid

60 h, adult
30 h, child

Felbamate

Felbatol

Focal onset
Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome
Tonic-clonic

2400–3600 mg/d, 
tid-qid

16–22 h

30–60 μg/mL

Gabapentin

Neurontin

Focal onset

900–2400 mg/d; 
tid-qid

5–9 h

2–20 μg/mL

Sedation
Ataxia
Aggression
Insomnia
Ataxia
Sedation
Lethargy
Sedation
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Ataxia
Lethargy
Headache

Insomnia
Dizziness
Sedation
Headache

Sedation
Dizziness
Ataxia
Fatigue

Lacosamide

Vimpat

Focal onset

Lamotrigine

Lamictalc

Focal onset
Tonic-clonic
Atypical absence
Myoclonic
Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome

13 h

Not established Dizziness

Ataxia
Diplopia
Vertigo

Dizziness
Diplopia
Sedation
Ataxia
Headache

2.5–20 μg/mL

25 h
14 h (with 
enzyme 
inducers), 59 h 
(with valproic 
acid)

200–400 mg/d; 
bid

150–500 mg/d; 
bid (immediate 
release), daily 
(extended 
release) (lower 
daily dose 
for regimens 
with valproic 
acid; higher 
daily dose for 
regimens with 
an enzyme 
inducer)

SYSTEMIC
Gastrointestinal 
irritation

Elevated 
transaminases
Anorexia
Weight loss
Diarrhea

Aplastic anemia
Leukopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Hepatotoxicity
Hyponatremia
Rash
Constipation
Anorexia
Skin rash

Anorexia

DRUG 
INTERACTIONSa
May increase 
carbamazepine-
epoxide causing 
decreased 
tolerability
May increase 
phenytoin
Increases 
clobazam causing 
somnolence

Level decreased by 
enzyme-inducing 
drugsb
Level increased 
by erythromycin, 
propoxyphene, 
isoniazid, cimetidine, 
fluoxetine
Level increased by 
CYP2C19 inhibitors

Level decreased by 
enzyme-inducing 
drugsb

See carbamazepine Level decreased by 

enzyme-inducing 
drugsb

Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Skin rash
Bone marrow 
suppression
Aplastic anemia
Hepatic failure
Weight loss
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Edema

Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Cardiac conduction 
(PR interval 
prolongation)
Skin rash
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome

Level decreased by 
enzyme-inducing 
drugsb
Level increased by 
valproic acid

Increases 
phenytoin, valproic 
acid, active 
carbamazepine 
metabolite

No known 
significant 
interactions

Level decreased by 
enzyme-inducing 
drugsb

Level decreased by 
enzyme-inducing 
drugsb and oral 
contraceptives
Level increased by 
valproic acid

(Continued)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3318

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3319

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

TABLE 425-9  Dosage and Adverse Effects of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs

(Continued)

GENERIC NAME
Levetiracetam

TRADE 
NAME
Keppra

PRINCIPAL USES
Focal onset

Oxcarbazepinec

Trileptal

Focal onset
Tonic-clonic

6–8 h

TYPICAL DOSE; 
DOSE INTERVAL HALF-LIFE
1000–3000 mg/d; 
bid (immediate 
release), daily 
(extended 
release)
900–2400 mg/d 
(30–45 mg/kg, 
child); bid

10–17 h 
(for active 
metabolite)

Perampanel

Fycompa

Focal onset
Tonic-clonic

4–12 mg; qd

105 h

10–35 μg/mL

Fatigue
Ataxia
Dizziness
Diplopia
Vertigo
Headache
Not established Dizziness

THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE
5–45 μg/mL

ADVERSE EFFECTS

SYSTEMIC
Anemia
Leukopenia

NEUROLOGIC
Sedation
Fatigue
Incoordination
Mood changes

DRUG 
INTERACTIONSa
No known 
significant 
interactions

Phenobarbital

Luminal

Tonic-clonic
Focal onset

60–180 mg/d; 
qd-tid

90 h

10–40 μg/mL

Phenytoinc 
(diphenylhydantoin)

Dilantin

Tonic-clonic
Focal onset

300–400 mg/d 
(3–6 mg/kg, 
adult; 4–8 mg/kg, 
child); qd-tid

24 h (wide 
variation, 
dose-
dependent)

10–20 μg/mL

Primidone

Mysoline

Tonic-clonic
Focal onset

750–1000 mg/d; 
bid-tid

Primidone, 
8–15 h
Phenobarbital, 
90 h

Primidone, 
4–12 μg/mL
Phenobarbital, 
10–40 μg/mL

Same as 
phenobarbital

Rufinamide

Banzel

Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome

3200 mg/d  
(45 mg/kg, child); 
bid

6–10 h

Not established Sedation

Tiagabine

Gabitril

Focal onset

32–56 mg/d; bid-
qid (as adjunct 
to enzyme-
inducing 
antiepileptic 
drug regimen)

2–5 h (with 
enzyme 
inducer),  
7–9 h (without 
enzyme 
inducer)

Topiramatec

Topamax

Focal onset
Tonic-clonic
Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome

200–400 mg/d; 
bid (immediate 
release), daily 
(extended 
release)

20 h 
(immediate 
release), 30 
h (extended 
release)

See carbamazepine Level decreased 

by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
May increase 
phenytoin

Headache
Nausea

Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb

Skin rash

Level increased 
by valproic acid, 
phenytoin

Gingival 
hyperplasia
Lymphadenopathy
Hirsutism
Osteomalacia
Facial coarsening
Skin rash

Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Leukopenia
Cardiac conduction 
(QT interval 
shortening)

Gastrointestinal 
irritation

Level increased 
by isoniazid, 
sulfonamides, 
fluoxetine
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Altered folate 
metabolism
Level increased by 
valproic acid
Level decreased 
by phenytoin 
(increased 
conversion to 
phenobarbital)
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb
Level increased by 
valproic acid
May increase 
phenytoin
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb

Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb

Renal stones (avoid 
use with other 
carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors)
Glaucoma
Weight loss
Hypohidrosis

(Continued)

Somnolence
Aggression
Ataxia
Anxiety
Paranoia
Sedation
Ataxia
Confusion
Dizziness
Decreased 
libido
Depression
Dizziness
Diplopia
Ataxia
Incoordination
Confusion

Fatigue
Dizziness
Ataxia
Headache
Diplopia

Not established Confusion
Sedation
Depression
Dizziness
Speech or 
language 
problems
Paresthesias
Psychosis
Psychomotor 
slowing
Sedation
Speech or 
language 
problems
Fatigue
Paresthesias

2–20 μg/mL

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3319

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3320

TABLE 425-9  Dosage and Adverse Effects of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs

(Continued)

TYPICAL DOSE; 
DOSE INTERVAL HALF-LIFE

15 h

THERAPEUTIC 
RANGE

50–125 μg/mL

GENERIC NAME

Valproic acid 
(valproate sodium, 
divalproex sodium)

TRADE 
NAME

Depakene
Depakote

Zonisamide

Zonegran

PRINCIPAL USES

Tonic-clonic
Absence
Atypical absence
Myoclonic
Focal onset
Atonic

Focal onset
Tonic-clonic

750–2000 mg/d 
(20–60 mg/
kg); bid-qid 
(immediate 
and delayed 
release), daily 
(extended 
release)

200–400 mg/d; 
qd-bid

50–68 h

10–40 μg/mL

ADVERSE EFFECTS

NEUROLOGIC

SYSTEMIC

Hepatotoxicity
Thrombocytopenia
Gastrointestinal 
irritation
Weight gain
Transient alopecia
Hyperammonemia
Anorexia
Renal stones
Hypohidrosis

Ataxia
Sedation
Tremor

Sedation
Dizziness
Confusion
Headache
Psychosis

DRUG 
INTERACTIONSa
Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb

Level decreased 
by enzyme-
inducing drugsb

aExamples only; please refer to other sources for comprehensive listings of all potential drug-drug interactions. bPhenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital. cExtended-
release product available.

complication; its risk is highest in children <2 years old, especially 
those  taking  other  antiseizure  drugs  or  with  inborn  errors  of 
metabolism.

Zonisamide,  brivaracetam,  tiagabine,  gabapentin,  perampanel, 
and lacosamide are additional drugs currently used for the treat-
ment of focal seizures with or without evolution into generalized 
seizures.  Phenobarbital  and  other  barbiturate  compounds  were 
commonly  used  in  the  past  as  first-line  therapy  for  many  forms 
of epilepsy. However, the barbiturates frequently cause sedation in 
adults,  hyperactivity  in  children,  and  other  more  subtle  cognitive 
changes; thus, their use should be limited to situations in which no 
other suitable treatment alternatives exist. 

Antiseizure  Drug  Selection  for  Generalized  Seizures   
Lamotrigine, valproic acid, and levetiracetam are currently consid-
ered the best initial choice for the treatment of primary generalized, 
tonic-clonic seizures. Topiramate, zonisamide, perampanel, pheny-
toin,  carbamazepine,  and  oxcarbazepine  are  suitable  alternatives, 
although carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin can worsen 
certain  types  of  generalized  seizures.  Valproic  acid  is  particularly 
effective in absence, myoclonic, and atonic seizures. It is therefore 
commonly  used  in  patients  with  generalized  epilepsy  syndromes 
having  mixed  seizure  types.  However,  levetiracetam,  rather  than 
valproic  acid,  is  increasingly  considered  the  initial  drug  of  choice 
for  women  with  epilepsies  having  mixed  seizure  types  given  the 
adverse  effects  of  valproic  acid  for  women  of  childbearing  age. 
Lamotrigine is also an alternative to valproate, especially for absence 
epilepsies.  Ethosuximide  is  a  particularly  effective  drug  for  the 
treatment  of  uncomplicated  absence  seizures,  but  it  is  not  useful 
for tonic-clonic or focal seizures. Periodic monitoring of blood cell 
counts  is  required  since  ethosuximide  rarely  causes  bone  marrow 
suppression. 

INITIATION AND MONITORING OF THERAPY
Because  the  response  to  any  antiseizure  drug  is  unpredictable, 
patients should be carefully educated about the approach to ther-
apy. The goal is to prevent seizures and minimize the side effects 
of  treatment;  determination  of  the  optimal  medication  and  the 
optimal  dose  typically  involves  trial  and  error.  This  process  may 
take months or longer if the baseline seizure frequency is low. Most 
antiseizure drugs need to be introduced relatively slowly to mini-
mize side effects. Patients should expect that minor side effects such 
as mild sedation, slight changes in cognition, or imbalance will typi-
cally resolve within a few days. Starting doses are usually the lowest 
value  listed  under  the  dosage  column  in  Table  425-9.  Subsequent 
increases should be made only after achieving a steady state with 
the previous dose (i.e., after an interval of five or more half-lives).

Monitoring of serum antiseizure drug levels can be very useful 
for  establishing  the  initial  dosing  schedule.  However,  the  pub-
lished  therapeutic  ranges  of  serum  drug  concentrations  are  only 
an approximate guide for determining the proper dose for a given 
patient. The key determinants are the clinical measures of seizure 
frequency  and  presence  of  side  effects,  not  the  laboratory  values. 
Conventional  assays  of  serum  drug  levels  measure  the  total  drug 
(i.e.,  both  free  and  protein  bound).  However,  it  is  the  concentra-
tion of free drug that reflects extracellular levels in the brain and 
correlates  best  with  efficacy.  Thus,  patients  with  decreased  levels 
of serum proteins (e.g., decreased serum albumin due to impaired 
liver or renal function) may have an increased ratio of free to bound 
drug, yet the concentration of free drug may be adequate for seizure 
control. These patients may have a “subtherapeutic” drug level, but 
the dose should be changed only if seizures remain uncontrolled, 
not just to achieve a “therapeutic” level. It is also useful to monitor 
free drug levels in such patients. In practice, other than during the 
initiation  or  modification  of  therapy,  monitoring  of  antiseizure 
drug  levels  is  most  useful  for  documenting  adherence,  assessing 
clinical  suspicion  of  toxicity,  or  establishing  baseline  serum  con-
centrations prior to pregnancy, when clearance of many antiseizure 
drugs increases significantly.

If  seizures  continue  despite  gradual  increases  to  the  maximum 
tolerated dose and documented compliance, then it becomes nec-
essary to switch to another antiseizure drug. This is usually done 
by maintaining the patient on the first drug while a second drug is 
added. The dose of the second drug should be adjusted to decrease 
seizure  frequency  without  causing  toxicity.  Once  this  is  achieved, 
the  first  drug  can  be  gradually  withdrawn  (usually  over  weeks 
unless there is significant toxicity). The dose of the second drug is 
then further optimized based on seizure response and side effects. 
Monotherapy should be the goal whenever possible. 
WHEN TO DISCONTINUE THERAPY
Overall,  ~50–60%  of  patients  who  have  their  seizures  completely 
controlled  with  antiseizure  drugs  can  eventually  discontinue  ther-
apy.  The  following  patient  profile  yields  the  greatest  chance  of 
remaining  seizure  free  after  drug  withdrawal:  (1)  complete  med-
ical  control  of  seizures  for  1–5  years;  (2)  single  seizure  type,  with 
generalized  seizures  having  a  better  prognosis  than  focal  seizures; 
(3)  normal  neurologic  examination,  including  intelligence;  (4)  no 
family  history  of  epilepsy;  and  (5)  normal  EEG.  The  appropriate 
seizure-free interval is unknown and undoubtedly depends on the 
form of epilepsy and whether or not the causal factor is still present 
(e.g., resection of a brain tumor causing seizures). However, it seems 
reasonable to attempt withdrawal of therapy after 2 years in a patient 
who meets all of the above criteria, is motivated to discontinue the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3320

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders medication, and clearly understands the potential risks and benefits. 
In most cases, it is preferable to reduce the dose of the drug gradu-
ally over 2–3 months. Most recurrences occur in the first 3 months 
after discontinuing therapy, and patients should be advised to avoid 
potentially dangerous situations such as driving or swimming dur-
ing this period. Up to 20% of seizure-free patients who discontinue 
antiseizure medications but then have a recurrent seizure may not 
regain full control when these medications are resumed. 

TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY EPILEPSY
Approximately one-third of patients with epilepsy do not respond 
to  treatment  with  a  single  antiseizure  drug,  and  it  becomes  nec-
essary  to  try  a  combination  of  drugs  to  control  seizures.  Patients 
who have focal epilepsy related to an underlying structural lesion 
or  those  with  multiple  seizure  types  and  developmental  delay  are 
particularly likely to require multiple drugs. There are currently no 
clear  guidelines  for  rational  polypharmacy,  although  in  theory,  a 
combination of drugs with different mechanisms of action may be 
most  useful.  In  most  cases,  the  initial  combination  therapy  com-
bines first-line drugs (i.e., carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrig-
ine, valproic acid, levetiracetam, and phenytoin). If these drugs are 
unsuccessful, then the addition of other drugs such as zonisamide, 
brivaracetam,  topiramate,  lacosamide,  or  tiagabine  is  indicated. 
Patients with myoclonic seizures resistant to valproic acid may ben-
efit from the addition of levetiracetam, zonisamide, clonazepam, or 
clobazam, and those with absence seizures may respond to a combi-
nation of valproic acid and ethosuximide. The same principles con-
cerning the monitoring of therapeutic response, toxicity, and serum 
levels for monotherapy apply to polypharmacy, and potential drug 
interactions  need  to  be  recognized.  If  there  is  no  improvement,  a 
third drug can be added while the first two are maintained. If there 
is a response, the less effective or less well tolerated of the first two 
drugs should be gradually withdrawn. 

SURGICAL TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY EPILEPSY
Approximately  20–30%  of  patients  with  epilepsy  continue  to  have 
seizures  despite  efforts  to  find  an  effective  combination  of  antisei-
zure  drugs.  For  some  patients  with  focal  epilepsy,  surgery  can  be 
extremely  effective  in  substantially  reducing  seizure  frequency  and 
even providing complete seizure control. Understanding the potential 
value of surgery is especially important when a patient’s seizures are 
not  controlled  with  initial  treatment,  as  such  patients  often  do  not 
respond to subsequent medication trials. Rather than submitting the 
patient to years of unsuccessful medical therapy and the psychosocial 
trauma and increased mortality associated with ongoing seizures, the 
patient should have an efficient but relatively brief attempt at medical 
therapy and then be referred for surgical evaluation.

The most common surgical procedure for patients with temporal 
lobe  epilepsy  involves  resection  of  the  anteromedial  temporal  lobe 
(temporal lobectomy) or a more limited removal of the underlying 
hippocampus  and  amygdala  (amygdalohippocampectomy).  Focal 
seizures  arising  from  extratemporal  regions  may  be  abolished  by 
a  focal  neocortical  resection  with  precise  removal  of  an  identified 
lesion (lesionectomy). Localized neocortical resection without a clear 
lesion identified on MRI is also possible when other tests (e.g., MEG, 
PET,  SPECT)  implicate  a  focal  cortical  region  as  a  seizure  onset 
zone. When the cortical region cannot be removed, multiple subpial 
transection, which disrupts intracortical connections, is sometimes 
used  to  prevent  seizure  spread.  Hemispherectomy  or  multilobar 
resection is useful for some patients with severe seizures due to hemi-
spheric  abnormalities  such  as  hemimegalencephaly  or  other  dys-
plastic abnormalities, and corpus callosotomy has been shown to be 
effective for disabling tonic or atonic seizures, usually when they are 
part of a mixed-seizure syndrome (e.g., Lennox-Gastaut syndrome).
Presurgical  evaluation  is  designed  to  identify  the  functional 
and  structural  basis  of  the  patient’s  seizure  disorder.  Inpatient 
video-EEG  monitoring  is  used  to  define  the  anatomic  location  of 
the seizure focus and to correlate the abnormal electrophysiologic 
activity with behavioral manifestations of the seizure. Routine scalp 

3321

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

or  scalp-sphenoidal  recordings  and  a  high-resolution  MRI  scan 
are  usually  sufficient  for  localization  of  the  epileptogenic  focus, 
especially  when  the  findings  are  concordant.  Functional  imaging 
studies such as SPECT, PET, and MEG are adjunctive tests that may 
help to reveal or verify the localization of an apparent epileptogenic 
region. Once the presumed location of the seizure onset is identi-
fied,  additional  studies,  including  neuropsychological  testing,  the 
intracarotid amobarbital test (Wada test), and functional MRI may 
be  used  to  assess  language  and  memory  localization  and  to  deter-
mine the possible functional consequences of surgical removal of the 
epileptogenic region. In some cases, standard noninvasive evaluation 
is not sufficient to localize the seizure onset zone, and invasive elec-
trophysiologic monitoring, such as implanted depth or subdural elec-
trodes, is required for more definitive localization. The exact extent of 
the resection to be undertaken can also be determined by performing 
cortical mapping at the time of the surgical procedure, allowing for 
a  tailored  resection.  This  involves  electrocorticographic  recordings 
made with electrodes on the surface of the brain to identify the extent 
of  epileptiform  disturbances.  If  the  region  to  be  resected  is  within 
or near brain regions suspected of having sensorimotor or language 
function,  electrical  cortical  stimulation  mapping  is  performed  on 
the  awake  patient  to  determine  the  function  of  cortical  regions  in 
question in order to avoid resection of so-called eloquent cortex and 
thereby minimize postsurgical deficits.

Advances in presurgical evaluation and microsurgical techniques 
have led to a steady increase in the success of epilepsy surgery. Clin-
ically  significant  complications  of  surgery  are  <5%,  and  the  use  of 
functional mapping procedures has markedly reduced the neurologic 
sequelae due to removal or sectioning of brain tissue. For example, 
~70% of well-selected patients treated with temporal lobectomy will 
become  seizure  free,  and  another  15–25%  will  have  at  least  a  90% 
reduction  in  seizure  frequency.  Marked  improvement  is  also  usu-
ally seen in patients treated with hemispherectomy for catastrophic 
seizure disorders due to large hemispheric abnormalities. Postopera-
tively, patients generally need to remain on antiseizure drug therapy, 
but the marked reduction of seizures following resective surgery can 
have a very beneficial effect on quality of life. Recently, catheter-based 
stereotactic laser thermal ablation has been developed as a less inva-
sive means for destroying the seizure focus in select patients.

Not all medically refractory patients are suitable candidates for 
resective surgery or laser ablation. For example, some patients have 
seizures arising from more than one brain region or from a single 
“eloquent”  region  that  mediates  a  critical  function  (e.g.,  vision, 
movement, language), such that the potential harm from removal 
is unacceptably high. In these patients, implanted neurostimulation 
devices that deliver electrical energy to the brain to reduce seizures 
represent  palliative  treatment  options.  Vagus  nerve  stimulation 
(VNS)  involves  an  extracranial  device  that  works  through  sched-
uled intermittent (“open loop”) stimulation of the left vagus nerve. 
Efficacy  of  VNS  is  limited,  and  side  effects  related  to  recurrent 
laryngeal  nerve  activation  (e.g.,  hoarseness,  throat  pain,  dysp-
nea)  can  be  significant  and  dose-limiting.  By  contrast,  responsive 
neurostimulation  (RNS)  involves  an  implanted  device  connected 
to two lead wires that are placed intracranially at the site(s) from 
where  seizures  arise.  The  neurostimulator  detects  the  onset  of  a 
seizure (often before the seizure becomes clinically apparent) and 
delivers  electrical  stimulation—typically  imperceptible—directly 
to the brain to reduce seizures over time, a form of “closed loop” 
neurostimulation.  RNS  is  the  only  device  that  provides  chronic 
EEG, which has a growing number of clinical applications, such as 
quantifying the lateralization of seizures arising from both sides of 
the  brain,  characterizing  clinical  spells,  assessing  effects  of  medi-
cations and other therapeutic interventions, and revealing cyclical 
patterns  of  epileptic  brain  activity  that  may  help  anticipate  future 
events.  A  third  modality,  thalamic  deep  brain  stimulation  (DBS), 
involves open loop stimulation of deep, bilateral cerebral structures, 
the anterior thalamic nuclei, which are key nodes in limbic circuits 
mediating certain types of seizures. Whereas precise seizure local-
ization is necessary for RNS, it is not required for VNS or DBS.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3321

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3322

Long-term  clinical  trials  of  all  three  neurostimulation  devices 
demonstrate  significant  reductions  in  frequency  with  outcomes 
improving over time, but only a minority of patients treated with 
these devices achieve seizure freedom (e.g., ~15% with RNS). Fur-
thermore,  no  head-to-head  device  trials  exist  to  establish  relative 
superiority, so choice of a device is guided by patient-specific fac-
tors and by the strengths and limitations of each technology.

 ■ STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Status  epilepticus  refers  to  continuous  seizures  or  repetitive,  discrete 
seizures with impaired consciousness in the interictal period. Status epi-
lepticus has numerous subtypes, including generalized convulsive status 
epilepticus (GCSE) (e.g., persistent, generalized electrographic seizures, 
coma, and tonic-clonic movements) and nonconvulsive status epilepti-
cus (e.g., persistent absence seizures or focal seizures with confusion or 
partially  impaired  consciousness,  and  minimal  motor  abnormalities). 
The duration of seizure activity sufficient to meet the definition of status 
epilepticus  has  traditionally  been  specified  as  15–30  min.  However,  a 
more practical definition is to consider status epilepticus as a situation in 
which the duration of seizures prompts the acute use of anticonvulsant 
therapy. For GCSE, this is typically when seizures last beyond 5 min.

GCSE  is  an  emergency  and  must  be  treated  immediately,  because 
cardiorespiratory dysfunction, hyperthermia, and metabolic derange-
ments can develop as a consequence of prolonged seizures, and these 
can lead to irreversible neuronal injury. Furthermore, CNS injury can 
occur even when the patient is paralyzed with neuromuscular block-
ade but continues to have electrographic seizures. The most common 
causes  of  GCSE  are  anticonvulsant  withdrawal  or  noncompliance, 
metabolic  disturbances,  drug  toxicity,  CNS  infection,  CNS  tumors, 
refractory epilepsy, and head trauma.

GCSE  is  obvious  when  the  patient  is  having  overt  seizures.  How-
ever, after 30–45 min of uninterrupted seizures, the signs may become 
increasingly subtle. Patients may have mild clonic movements of only the 
fingers or fine, rapid movements of the eyes. There may be paroxysmal 
episodes  of  tachycardia,  hypertension,  and  pupillary  dilation.  In  such 
cases,  the  EEG  may  be  the  only  method  of  establishing  the  diagnosis. 
Thus, if the patient stops having overt seizures, yet remains comatose, 
an EEG should be performed to rule out ongoing status epilepticus. This 
is obviously also essential when a patient with GCSE has been paralyzed 
with neuromuscular blockade in the process of protecting the airway.

The first steps in the management of a patient in GCSE are to attend 
to  any  acute  cardiorespiratory  problems  or  hyperthermia,  perform  a 
brief  medical  and  neurologic  examination,  establish  venous  access, 
and send samples for laboratory studies to identify metabolic abnor-
malities.  Anticonvulsant  therapy  should  then  begin  without  delay;  a 
treatment approach is shown in Fig. 425-5.

The treatment of nonconvulsive status epilepticus is thought to be 
less urgent than GCSE, because the ongoing seizures are not accompa-
nied by the severe metabolic disturbances seen with GCSE. However, 
evidence suggests that nonconvulsive status epilepticus, especially that 
caused  by  ongoing,  focal  seizure  activity,  is  associated  with  cellular 
injury  in  the  region  of  the  seizure  focus;  therefore,  this  condition 
should be treated as promptly as possible using the general approach 
described for GCSE.
BEYOND SEIZURES: OTHER  
MANAGEMENT ISSUES
 ■ EPILEPSY COMORBIDITIES
The adverse effects of epilepsy often go beyond clinical seizures. Many 
people with epilepsy feel completely normal between seizures and live 

IV benzodiazepine
LZP 0.1 mg/kg, or MDZ 0.2 mg/kg,
or
CLZ 0.015 mg/kg

IV antiseizure drug
PHT 20 mg/kg, or VPA 20–30 mg/kg,
or
LEV 20–30 mg/kg

Generalized
convulsive or
“subtle” SE

Focal-complex,
myoclonic or
absence SE

IV MDZ 0.2 mg/kg → 0.2–0.6 mg/kg/h
and/or
IV PRO 2 mg/kg → 2–10 mg/kg/h 

Further IV/PO antiseizure drug
VPA, LEV, LCM, TPM, PGB, or other

PTB (THP)
5 mg/kg (1 mg/kg) → 1–5 mg/kg/h

Impending and early SE
(5–30 min)

Established and
early refractory SE
(30 min to 48 h)

Late refractory SE
(>48 h)

Other medications
Lidocaine, verapamil,
magnesium, ketogenic diet,
immunomodulation

Other anesthetics
Isoflurane, desflurane,
ketamine

Other approaches
Surgery, VNS, RNS, rTMS,
ECT, hypothermia

FIGURE  425-5  Pharmacologic  treatment  of  generalized  tonic-clonic  status  epilepticus  (SE)  in  adults.  CLZ,  clonazepam;  ECT,  electroconvulsive  therapy;  LCM, 
lacosamide; LEV, levetiracetam; LZP, lorazepam; MDZ, midazolam; PGB, pregabalin; PHT, phenytoin or fosphenytoin; PRO, propofol; PTB, pentobarbital; RNS, responsive 
neurostimulation; rTMS, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation; THP, thiopental; TPM, topiramate; VNS, vagus nerve stimulation; VPA, valproic acid. (Data from AO 
Rossetti, DH Lowenstein: Management of refractory status epilepticus in adults: still more questions than answers. Lancet Neurol 10:922, 2011.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3322

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders highly successful and productive lives. However, a significant proportion 
of patients suffer from varying degrees of cognitive dysfunction, includ-
ing  psychiatric  disease,  and  it  has  become  increasingly  clear  that  the 
network dysfunction underlying epilepsy can have effects well beyond 
the occurrence of seizures. For example, patients with seizures second-
ary to developmental abnormalities or acquired brain injury may have 
impaired cognitive function and other neurologic deficits due to abnor-
mal brain structure. Frequent interictal EEG abnormalities are associated 
with  subtle  dysfunction  of  memory  and  attention.  Patients  with  many 
seizures, especially those emanating from the temporal lobe, often note 
an impairment of short-term memory that may progress over time.

The  psychiatric  problems  associated  with  epilepsy  include  depres-
sion,  anxiety,  and  psychosis.  This  risk  varies  considerably  depending 
on  many  factors,  including  the  etiology,  frequency,  and  severity  of 
seizures and the patient’s age and previous personal or family history 
of psychiatric disorder. Depression occurs in ~20% of patients, and the 
incidence of suicide is higher in people with epilepsy than in the gen-
eral population. Depression should be treated through counseling and/
or medication. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) typ-
ically have minimal effect on seizures, whereas tricyclic antidepressants 
may  lower  the  seizure  threshold.  Anxiety  can  be  a  seizure  symptom, 
and anxious or psychotic behavior can occur during a postictal delir-
ium.  Postictal  psychosis  is  a  rare  phenomenon  that  typically  occurs 
after a period of increased seizure frequency. There is usually a brief 
lucid interval lasting up to a week, followed by days to weeks of agi-
tated, psychotic behavior. The psychosis usually resolves spontaneously 
but frequently will require short-term treatment with antipsychotic or 
anxiolytic medications.

 ■ MORTALITY OF EPILEPSY
People with epilepsy have a risk of death that is roughly two to three 
times greater than expected in a matched population without epilepsy. 
Most  of  the  increased  mortality  is  due  to  the  underlying  etiology  of 
epilepsy  (e.g.,  tumors  or  strokes  in  older  adults).  However,  a  signifi-
cant  number  of  patients  die  from  accidents,  status  epilepticus,  and  a 
syndrome  known  as  sudden  unexpected  death  in  epilepsy  (SUDEP), 
which usually affects young people with convulsive seizures and tends 
to occur at night. The cause of SUDEP is unknown; it may result from 
brainstem-mediated  effects  of  seizures  on  pulmonary,  cardiac,  and 
arousal functions. Recent studies suggest that, in some cases, a genetic 
mutation may be the cause of both epilepsy and a cardiac conduction 
defect that gives rise to sudden death.

 ■ PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES
There continues to be a cultural stigma about epilepsy, although it is 
slowly declining in societies with effective health education programs. 
Many people with epilepsy harbor fear of progressive cognitive decline 
or dying during a seizure. These issues need to be carefully addressed 
by  educating  the  patient  about  epilepsy  and  by  ensuring  that  family 
members, teachers, fellow employees, and other associates are equally 
well informed. A useful source of educational material is the website 
www.epilepsy.com.

 ■ EMPLOYMENT, DRIVING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES
Many patients with epilepsy face difficulty in obtaining or maintaining 
employment, even when their seizures are well controlled. Federal and 
state legislation is designed to prevent employers from discriminating 
against  people  with  epilepsy,  and  patients  should  be  encouraged  to 
understand and claim their legal rights. Patients in these circumstances 
also benefit greatly from the assistance of health providers who act as 
strong patient advocates.

Loss of driving privileges is one of the most disruptive social con-
sequences  of  epilepsy.  Physicians  should  be  very  clear  about  local 
regulations  concerning  driving  and  epilepsy,  because  the  laws  vary 
considerably among states and countries. In all cases, it is the physi-
cian’s responsibility to warn patients of the danger imposed on them-
selves and others while driving if their seizures are uncontrolled (unless 
the  seizures  are  not  associated  with  impairment  of  consciousness  or 
motor control). In general, most states allow patients to drive after a 

seizure-free interval (on or off medications) of between 3 months and 
2 years.

Patients  with  incompletely  controlled  seizures  must  also  contend 
with the risk of being in other situations where an impairment of con-
sciousness or loss of motor control could lead to major injury or death. 
Thus, depending on the type and frequency of seizures, many patients 
need to be instructed to avoid working at heights or with machinery or 
to have someone close by for activities such as bathing and swimming.

3323

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
5

S
e
i
z
u
r
e
s
a
n
d
E
p
i
l
e
p
s
y

SPECIAL ISSUES RELATED TO WOMEN  
AND EPILEPSY
 ■ CATAMENIAL EPILEPSY
Some  women  experience  a  marked  increase  in  seizure  frequency 
around the time of menses. This is believed to be mediated by either 
the  effects  of  estrogen  and  progesterone  on  neuronal  excitability  or 
changes  in  antiseizure  drug  levels  due  to  altered  protein  binding  or 
metabolism.  Some  women  with  epilepsy  may  benefit  from  increases 
in  antiseizure  drug  dosages  during  menses.  Natural  progestins  or 
intramuscular  medroxyprogesterone  may  be  of  benefit  to  a  subset  of 
women.

 ■ PREGNANCY
Most women with epilepsy who become pregnant will have an uncom-
plicated gestation and deliver a normal baby. However, epilepsy poses 
some important risks to a pregnancy. Seizure frequency during preg-
nancy will remain unchanged in ~50% of women, increase in ~30%, 
and decrease in ~20%. Changes in seizure frequency are attributed to 
endocrine effects on the CNS, variations in antiseizure drug pharma-
cokinetics (such as acceleration of hepatic drug metabolism or effects 
on  plasma  protein  binding),  and  changes  in  medication  compliance. 
It is useful to see patients at frequent intervals during pregnancy and 
monitor serum antiseizure drug levels. Measurement of the unbound 
drug  concentrations  may  be  useful  if  there  is  an  increase  in  seizure 
frequency or worsening of side effects of antiseizure drugs.

The  overall  incidence  of  fetal  abnormalities  in  children  born  to 
mothers with epilepsy is 5–6%, compared to 2–3% in healthy women. 
Part of the higher incidence is due to teratogenic effects of antiseizure 
drugs,  and  the  risk  increases  with  the  number  of  medications  used 
(e.g.,  10–20%  risk  of  malformations  with  three  drugs)  and  possibly 
with higher doses. A meta-analysis of published pregnancy registries 
and cohorts found that the most common malformations were defects 
in the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal system (1.4–1.8%). Valproic 
acid is strongly associated with an increased risk of adverse fetal out-
comes (7–20%). Findings from a large pregnancy registry suggest that, 
other than topiramate, the newer antiseizure drugs are far safer than 
valproic acid.

Because the potential harm of uncontrolled convulsive seizures on 
the mother and fetus is considered greater than the teratogenic effects 
of antiseizure drugs, it is currently recommended that pregnant women 
be  maintained  on  effective  drug  therapy.  When  possible,  it  seems 
prudent  to  have  the  patient  on  monotherapy  at  the  lowest  effective 
dose, especially during the first trimester. For some women, however, 
the type and frequency of their seizures may allow for them to safely 
wean  off  antiseizure  drugs  prior  to  conception.  Patients  should  also 
take folate (1–4 mg/d), because the antifolate effects of anticonvulsants 
are thought to play a role in the development of neural tube defects, 
although the benefits of this treatment remain unproved in this setting.
Enzyme-inducing drugs such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcar-
bazepine, topiramate, phenobarbital, and primidone cause a transient 
and  reversible  deficiency  of  vitamin  K–dependent  clotting  factors  in 
~50% of newborn infants. Although neonatal hemorrhage is uncom-
mon,  the  mother  should  be  treated  with  oral  vitamin  K  (20  mg/d, 
phylloquinone) in the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, and the infant should 
receive intramuscular vitamin K (1 mg) at birth.

 ■ CONTRACEPTION
Special care should be taken when prescribing antiseizure medications 
for  women  who  are  taking  oral  contraceptive  agents.  Drugs  such  as 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3323

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
3324

carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and topiramate can signifi-
cantly decrease the efficacy of oral contraceptives via enzyme induc-
tion  and  other  mechanisms.  Patients  should  be  advised  to  consider 
alternative forms of contraception, including intrauterine devices and 
other long-acting reversible contraceptives, or their oral contraceptive 
medications should be modified to offset the effects of the antiseizure 
medications.

426 Introduction to 

Cerebrovascular Diseases
Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston,  
J. Claude Hemphill, III

 ■ BREAST-FEEDING
Antiseizure  medications  are  excreted  into  breast  milk  to  a  variable 
degree. The ratio of drug concentration in breast milk relative to serum 
ranges  from  ~5%  (valproic  acid)  to  300%  (levetiracetam).  Given  the 
overall benefits of breast-feeding and the lack of evidence for long-term 
harm to the infant by being exposed to antiseizure drugs, mothers with 
epilepsy  can  be  encouraged  to  breast-feed.  This  should  be  reconsid-
ered, however, if there is any evidence of drug effects on the infant such 
as lethargy or poor feeding.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Chen  DK  et  al:  Psychogenic  non-epileptic  seizures.  Curr  Neurol 

Neurosci Rep 17:71, 2017.

Cornes SB, Shih T: Evaluation of the patient with spells. Continuum 

(Minneap Minn) 17:984, 2011.

Crepeau  AZ,  Sirven  JI:  Management  of  adult  onset  seizures.  Mayo 

Clin Proc 92:306, 2017.

Ellis  CA  et  al:  Epilepsy  genetics:  Clinical  impacts  and  biological 

insights. Lancet Neurol 19:93, 2020.

Epi PM Consortium: A roadmap for precision medicine in the epilepsies. 

Lancet Neurol 14:1219, 2015.

Fisher  RS  et  al:  Operational  classification  of  seizure  types  by  the 
International  League  Against  Epilepsy:  Position  paper  of  the  ILAE 
Commission  for  Classification  and  Terminology.  Epilepsia  58:522,  
2017.

Gavvala  JR,  Schuele  SU:  New-onset  seizure  in  adults  and  adoles-

cents: A review. JAMA 316:2657, 2016.

Golyala A, Kwan P: Drug development for refractory epilepsy: The 

past 25 years and beyond. Seizure 44:147, 2017.

Jetté  N  et  al:  Surgical  treatment  for  epilepsy:  The  potential  gap 

between evidence and practice. Lancet Neurol 15:982, 2016.

Kanner AM: Management of psychiatric and neurological comorbid-

ities in epilepsy. Nat Rev Neurol 12:106, 2016.

Keezer  MR  et  al:  Comorbidities  of  epilepsy:  Current  concepts  and 

future perspectives. Lancet Neurol 15:106, 2016.

Krumholz  A  et  al:  Evidence-based  guideline:  Management  of  an 
unprovoked first seizure in adults: Report of the Guideline Develop-
ment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the 
American Epilepsy Society. Neurology 84:1705, 2015.

Kwan P, Brodie MJ: Early identification of refractory epilepsy. N Engl 

J Med 342:314, 2000.

Lamberink HJ et al: Individualised prediction model of seizure recur-
rence and long-term outcomes after withdrawal of antiepileptic drugs 
in seizure-free patients: A systematic review and individual partici-
pant data meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 16:523, 2017.

Markert MS, Fisher RS: Neuromodulation: Science and practice in 
epilepsy:  Vagus  nerve  simulation,  thalamic  deep  brain  stimulation, 
and responsive neurostimulation. Expert Rev Neurother 19:17, 2019.
McGovern RA et al: New techniques and progress in epilepsy surgery. 

Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16:65, 2016.

Patel SI, Pennell PB: Management of epilepsy during pregnancy: An 

update. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 9:118, 2016.

Pitkänen  A  et  al:  Advances  in  the  development  of  biomarkers  for 

epilepsy. Lancet Neurol 15:843, 2016.

Rao  VR  et  al:  Cues  for  seizure  timing.  Epilepsia  62(Suppl  1):S15,  

2021.

Cerebrovascular diseases include some of the most common and dev-
astating disorders: ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. Stroke is 
the  second  leading  cause  of  death  worldwide,  with  6.2  million  dying 
from  stroke  in  2015,  an  increase  of  830,000  since  the  year  2000.  In 
2016, the lifetime global risk of stroke from age 25 years onward was 
25%, an increase of 8.9% from 1990. Nearly 7 million Americans age 
20 or older report having had a stroke, and the prevalence is estimated 
to rise by 3.4 million adults in the next decade, representing 4% of the 
entire  adult  population.  Conversely,  case-specific  disability-adjusted 
life-years due to stroke are falling, likely due to better prevention and 
treatment, but overall disease burden will continue to climb as the pop-
ulation ages, and stroke is likely to remain the second most common 
disabling condition in individuals aged 50 or older worldwide.

A stroke, or cerebrovascular accident, is defined as an abrupt onset 
of  a  neurologic  deficit  that  is  attributable  to  a  focal  vascular  cause. 
Thus, the definition of stroke is clinical, and laboratory studies includ-
ing brain imaging are used to support the diagnosis. The clinical mani-
festations of stroke are highly variable because of the complex anatomy 
of the brain and its vasculature. Cerebral ischemia is caused by a reduc-
tion  in  blood  flow  that  lasts  longer  than  several  seconds.  Neurologic 
symptoms are manifest within seconds because neurons lack glycogen, 
so energy failure is rapid. If the cessation of flow lasts for more than 
a few minutes, infarction or death of brain tissue results. When blood 
flow is quickly restored, brain tissue can recover fully and the patient’s 
symptoms are only transient: this is called a transient ischemic attack 
(TIA).  The  definition  of  TIA  requires  that  all  neurologic  signs  and 
symptoms resolve within 24 h without evidence of brain infarction on 
brain imaging. Stroke has occurred if the neurologic signs and symp-
toms last for >24 h or brain infarction is demonstrated. A generalized 
reduction in cerebral blood flow due to systemic hypotension (e.g., car-
diac arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, or hemorrhagic shock) usually 
produces syncope (Chap. 21). If low cerebral blood flow persists for a 
longer duration, then infarction in the border zones between the major 
cerebral  artery  distributions  may  develop.  In  more  severe  instances, 
global  hypoxia-ischemia  causes  widespread  brain  injury;  the  constel-
lation  of  cognitive  sequelae  that  ensues  is  called  hypoxic-ischemic 
encephalopathy (Chap. 307). Focal ischemia or infarction, conversely, is 
usually caused by thrombosis of the cerebral vessels themselves or by 
emboli from a proximal arterial source or the heart (Chap. 427). Intra-
cranial  hemorrhage  is  caused  by  bleeding  directly  into  or  around  the 
brain; it produces neurologic symptoms by producing a mass effect on 
neural structures, from the toxic effects of blood itself, or by increasing 
intracranial pressure (Chap. 428).

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Cerebrovascular Disease

Rapid  evaluation  is  essential  for  use  of  acute  treatments  such  as 
thrombolysis or thrombectomy. However, patients with acute stroke 
often do not seek medical assistance on their own because they may 
lose the appreciation that something is wrong (anosognosia) or lack 
the knowledge that acute treatment is beneficial; it is often a fam-
ily  member  or  a  bystander  who  calls  for  help.  Therefore,  patients 
and their family members should be counseled to call emergency 
medical  services  immediately  if  they  experience  or  witness  the 
sudden onset of any of the following: loss of sensory and/or motor 
function  on  one  side  of  the  body  (nearly  85%  of  ischemic  stroke 
patients have hemiparesis); change in vision, gait, or ability to speak 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3324

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders or understand; or a sudden, severe headache. The acronym FAST 
(facial  weakness,  arm  weakness,  speech  abnormality,  and  time)  is 
simple  and  helpful  to  teach  to  the  lay  public  about  the  common 
physical symptoms of stroke and to underscore that treatments are 
highly time sensitive.

Other  causes  of  sudden-onset  neurologic  symptoms  that  may 
mimic  stroke  include  seizure,  intracranial  tumor,  migraine,  and 
metabolic  encephalopathy.  An  adequate  history  from  an  observer 
that  no  convulsive  activity  occurred  at  the  onset  usually  excludes 
seizure  (Chap.  425),  although  ongoing  complex  partial  seizures 
without  tonic-clonic  activity  can  on  occasion  mimic  stroke. 
Tumors  (Chap.  90)  may  present  with  acute  neurologic  symp-
toms  due  to  hemorrhage,  seizure,  or  hydrocephalus.  Surprisingly, 
migraine  (Chap.  430)  can  mimic  stroke,  even  in  patients  without 
a  significant  migraine  history.  When  migraine  develops  without 
head  pain  (acephalgic  migraine),  the  diagnosis  can  be  especially 
difficult. Patients without any prior history of migraine may develop 
acephalgic migraine even after age 65. A sensory disturbance is often 
prominent,  and  the  sensory  deficit,  as  well  as  any  motor  deficits, 
tends to migrate slowly across a limb, over minutes rather than sec-
onds as with stroke. The diagnosis of migraine becomes more secure 
as the cortical disturbance begins to cross vascular boundaries or if 
classic visual symptoms are present such as scintillating scotomata. 
At  times,  it  may  be  impossible  to  make  the  diagnosis  of  migraine 
until there have been multiple episodes with no residual symptoms or 
signs and no changes on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
Metabolic encephalopathies typically produce fluctuating mental sta-
tus changes without focal neurologic findings. However, in the setting 
of prior stroke or brain injury, a patient with fever or sepsis may man-
ifest a recurrent hemiparesis, which clears rapidly when the infection 
is treated. The metabolic process serves to “unmask” a prior deficit.
Once  the  diagnosis  of  stroke  is  made,  a  brain  imaging  study  is 
necessary  to  determine  if  the  cause  of  stroke  is  ischemia  or  hem-
orrhage (Fig. 426-1). Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the 
brain  is  the  standard  imaging  modality  to  detect  the  presence  or 

Stroke or TIA

ABCs, glucose

Ischemic stroke/ 
TIA, 85%

Obtain brain 
imaging

Hemorrhage 
15%

Consider thrombolysis/ 
thrombectomy

Consider BP 
lowering

Establish cause

Establish cause

Atrial 
fibrillation, 
17%

Carotid 
disease, 
4%

Other, 
64%

Aneurysmal 
SAH, 4%

Hyperten-
sive ICH, 7%

Other, 
4%

Consider
oral
anticoagulant

Consider 
CEA or 
stent

Treat 
specific 
cause

Clip or coil 
(Chap. 429)

Consider 
surgery

Treat 
specific 
cause

Deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis
Physical, occupational, speech therapy
Evaluate for rehab, discharge planning
Secondary prevention based on disease

FIGURE  426-1  Medical  management  of  stroke  and  TIA.  Rounded  boxes  are 
diagnoses;  rectangles  are  interventions.  Numbers  are  percentages  of  stroke 
overall.  ABCs,  airway,  breathing,  circulation;  BP,  blood  pressure;  CEA,  carotid 
endarterectomy; ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; 
TIA, transient ischemic attack.

3325

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
6

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
t
o
C
e
r
e
b
r
o
v
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

absence of intracranial hemorrhage (see “Imaging Studies,” below). 
If the stroke is ischemic, administration of recombinant tissue plas-
minogen  activator  (rtPA)  or  endovascular  mechanical  thrombec-
tomy may be beneficial in restoring cerebral perfusion (Chap. 427). 
Medical management to reduce the risk of complications becomes 
the next priority, followed by plans for secondary prevention. For 
ischemic stroke, several strategies can reduce the risk of subsequent 
stroke in all patients, while other strategies are effective for patients 
with specific causes of stroke such as cardiac embolus and carotid 
atherosclerosis. For hemorrhagic stroke, aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage (SAH) and hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage are 
two important causes. The treatment and prevention of hyperten-
sive intracerebral hemorrhage are discussed in Chap. 428. SAH 
is discussed in Chap. 429.

 ■ STROKE SYNDROMES
A  careful  history  and  neurologic  examination  can  often  localize  the 
region  of  brain  dysfunction;  if  this  region  corresponds  to  an  arterial 
distribution, the possible causes responsible for the syndrome can be 
narrowed. This is of particular importance when the patient presents 
with a TIA and a normal examination. For example, if a patient devel-
ops language loss and a right homonymous hemianopia, a search for 
causes of left middle cerebral emboli should be performed. A finding 
of an isolated stenosis of the right internal carotid artery in that patient, 
for example, suggests an asymptomatic carotid stenosis, and the search 
for  other  causes  of  stroke  should  continue.  The  following  sections 
describe the clinical findings of cerebral ischemia associated with cere-
bral vascular territories depicted in Figs. 426-2 through 426-11. Stroke 
syndromes are divided into (1) large-vessel stroke within the anterior 
circulation, (2) large-vessel stroke within the posterior circulation, and 
(3) small-vessel disease of either vascular bed.

Stroke  within  the  Anterior  Circulation  The  internal  carotid 
artery and its branches compose the anterior circulation of the brain. 
These  vessels  can  be  occluded  by  intrinsic  disease  of  the  vessel  (e.g., 
atherosclerosis or dissection) or by embolic occlusion from a proximal 
source as discussed above. Occlusion of each major intracranial vessel 
has distinct clinical manifestations.
MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY  Occlusion of the proximal middle cere-
bral artery (MCA) or one of its major branches is most often due to 
an  embolus  (artery-to-artery,  cardiac,  or  of  unknown  source)  rather 
than  intracranial  atherothrombosis.  Atherosclerosis  of  the  proximal 
MCA  may  cause  distal  emboli  to  the  middle  cerebral  territory  or, 
less commonly, may produce low-flow TIAs. Collateral formation via 
leptomeningeal  vessels  often  prevents  MCA  stenosis  from  becoming 
symptomatic.

The  cortical  branches  of  the  MCA  supply  the  lateral  surface  of 
the  hemisphere  except  for  (1)  the  frontal  pole  and  a  strip  along  the 
superomedial border of the frontal and parietal lobes supplied by the 
anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and (2) the lower temporal and occipital  
pole  convolutions  supplied  by  the  posterior  cerebral  artery  (PCA) 
(Figs. 426-2–426-5).

The proximal MCA (M1 segment) gives rise to penetrating branches 
(termed lenticulostriate arteries) that supply the putamen, outer globus 
pallidus, posterior limb of the internal capsule, adjacent corona radiata, 
and most of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 426-2). In the sylvian fissure, the 
MCA in most patients divides into superior and inferior divisions (M2 
branches). Branches of the inferior division supply the inferior parietal 
and temporal cortex, and those from the superior division supply the 
frontal and superior parietal cortex (Fig. 426-3).

If the entire MCA is occluded at its origin (blocking both its pen-
etrating  and  cortical  branches)  and  the  distal  collaterals  are  limited, 
the  clinical  findings  are  contralateral  hemiplegia,  hemianesthesia, 
homonymous  hemianopia,  and  a  day  or  two  of  gaze  preference  to 
the ipsilateral side. Dysarthria is common because of facial weakness. 
When the dominant hemisphere is involved, global aphasia is present 
also, and when the nondominant hemisphere is affected, anosognosia, 
constructional apraxia, and neglect are found (Chap. 30).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3325

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
3326

Caudate

Anterior
cerebral a. (A2)

Anterior
cerebral a. (A1)

Internal 
capsule

Claustrum

Middle cerebral
a. (M2)

Putamen

Lenticulostriate as.

Internal carotid a.

Uncus

Middle cerebral a. (M1)

KEY

Ant. cerebral a.

Middle cerebral a.

Deep branches of middle cerebral a.

Post cerebral a.

Deep branches of ant. cerebral a.

FIGURE  426-2  Diagram  of  a  cerebral  hemisphere  in  coronal  section  showing  the 
territories of the major cerebral vessels that branch from the internal carotid arteries.

Ant. parietal a.

Rolandic a.

Complete MCA syndromes occur most often when an embolus 
occludes the stem of the artery. Cortical collateral blood flow and 
differing arterial configurations are probably responsible for the 
development of many partial syndromes. Partial syndromes may 
also be due to emboli that enter the proximal MCA without com-
plete  occlusion,  occlude  distal  MCA  branches,  or  fragment  and 
move distally.

Partial syndromes due to embolic occlusion of a single branch 
include  hand,  or  arm  and  hand,  weakness  alone  (brachial  syn-
drome) or facial weakness with nonfluent (Broca) aphasia (Chap. 
30), with or without arm weakness (frontal opercular syndrome). 
A combination of sensory disturbance, motor weakness, and non-
fluent aphasia suggests that an embolus has occluded the proxi-
mal superior division and infarcted large portions of the frontal 
and parietal cortices (Fig. 426-3). If a fluent (Wernicke’s) aphasia 
occurs  without  weakness,  the  inferior  division  of  the  MCA 
supplying  the  posterior  part  (temporal  cortex)  of  the  dominant 
hemisphere  is  probably  involved.  Jargon  speech  and  an  inabil-
ity  to  comprehend  written  and  spoken  language  are  prominent 
features,  often  accompanied  by  a  contralateral,  homonymous 
superior quadrantanopia. Hemineglect or spatial agnosia without 
weakness indicates that the inferior division of the MCA in the 
nondominant hemisphere is involved.

Occlusion  of  a  lenticulostriate  vessel  produces  small-vessel 
(lacunar)  stroke  within  the  internal  capsule  (Fig.  426-2).  This 
produces  pure  motor  stroke  or  sensory-motor  stroke  contralat-
eral to the lesion. Ischemia within the genu of the internal capsule 
causes  primarily  facial  weakness  followed  by  arm  and  then  leg 

Prerolandic a.

Lateral 
orbitofrontal a.

Sup. division
middle cerebral a.

Temporopolar a.

Post. parietal a.

Angular a.

Post. temporal a.

Inf. division
middle cerebral a.

Visual radiation

Ant. temporal a.

KEY

Broca's area

Sensory cortex

Auditory area

Motor cortex

Contraversive
eye center

Wernicke's
aphasia area

Visual cortex

FIGURE 426-3  Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, lateral aspect, showing the branches and distribution of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the principal regions of 
cerebral localization. Note the bifurcation of the MCA into a superior and inferior division.

Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
Paralysis of the contralateral face, arm, and leg; sensory impairment over the same area (pinprick, cotton touch, vibration, position, two-point discrimination, stereog-
nosis, tactile localization, barognosis, cutaneographia): Somatic motor area for face and arm and the fibers descending from the leg area to enter the corona radiata and 
corresponding somatic sensory system

Motor aphasia: Motor speech area of the dominant hemisphere
Central aphasia, word deafness, anomia, jargon speech, sensory agraphia, acalculia, alexia, finger agnosia, right-left confusion (the last four comprise the Gerstmann 

syndrome): Central, suprasylvian speech area and parietooccipital cortex of the dominant hemisphere

Conduction aphasia: Central speech area (parietal operculum)
Apractagnosia of the nondominant hemisphere, anosognosia, hemiasomatognosia, unilateral neglect, agnosia for the left half of external space, dressing “apraxia,” 
constructional “apraxia,” distortion of visual coordinates, inaccurate localization in the half field, impaired ability to judge distance, upside-down reading, visual illusions 
(e.g., it may appear that another person walks through a table): Nondominant parietal lobe (area corresponding to speech area in dominant hemisphere); loss of topo-
graphic memory is usually due to a nondominant lesion, occasionally to a dominant one

Homonymous hemianopia (often homonymous inferior quadrantanopia): Optic radiation deep to second temporal convolution
Paralysis of conjugate gaze to the opposite side: Frontal contraversive eye field or projecting fibers

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3326

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3327

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
6

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
t
o
C
e
r
e
b
r
o
v
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Motor
cortex

Medial 
rolandic a.

Secondary
motor area

Pericallosal a.

Sensory
cortex

Medial
prerolandic a.

Callosomarginal a.

Frontopolar a.

Ant. cerebral a.

Medial orbitofrontal a.

Post. communicating a.

Penetrating
thalamosubthalamic
paramedian As.

Post. 
parietal a.

Splenial a.

Lateral posterior
choroidal a.

Post. thalamic a.

Parietooccipital a. 

Visual
cortex

Striate area 
along calcarine
sulcus

Calcarine a.

Post. temporal a.

Medial posterior choroidal a.

Post. 
cerebral 
stem

Hippocampal As.

Ant.
temporal a.

FIGURE 426-4  Diagram of a cerebral hemisphere, medial aspect, showing the branches and distribution of the anterior cerebral artery and the principal regions of cerebral 
localization.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    Paralysis of opposite foot and leg: Motor leg area
    A lesser degree of paresis of opposite arm: Arm area of cortex or fibers descending to corona radiata
    Cortical sensory loss over toes, foot, and leg: Sensory area for foot and leg
    Urinary incontinence: Sensorimotor area in paracentral lobule
    Contralateral grasp reflex, sucking reflex, gegenhalten (paratonic rigidity): Medial surface of the posterior frontal lobe; likely supplemental motor area
     Abulia (akinetic mutism), slowness, delay, intermittent interruption, lack of spontaneity, whispering, reflex distraction to sights and sounds: Uncertain localization—

probably cingulate gyrus and medial inferior portion of frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes

    Impairment of gait and stance (gait apraxia): Frontal cortex near leg motor area
    Dyspraxia of left limbs, tactile aphasia in left limbs: Corpus callosum

weakness  as  the  ischemia  moves  posterior  within  the  capsule.  Alter-
natively, the contralateral hand may become ataxic, and dysarthria will 
be  prominent  (clumsy  hand,  dysarthria  lacunar  syndrome).  Lacunar 
infarction affecting the globus pallidus and putamen often has few clin-
ical signs, but parkinsonism and hemiballismus have been reported.

ANTERIOR  CEREBRAL  ARTERY  The  ACA  is  divided  into  two  seg-
ments: the precommunal (A1) circle of Willis, or stem, which connects 
the internal carotid artery to the anterior communicating artery, and 
the postcommunal (A2) segment distal to the anterior communicating 
artery  (Figs.  426-2  and  426-4).  The  A1  segment  gives  rise  to  several 
deep penetrating branches that supply the anterior limb of the internal 
capsule, the anterior perforate substance, amygdala, anterior hypothal-
amus, and the inferior part of the head of the caudate nucleus.

Occlusion of the proximal ACA is usually well tolerated because of 
collateral flow through the anterior communicating artery and collat-
erals  through  the  MCA  and  PCA.  Occlusion  of  a  single  A2  segment 
results in the contralateral symptoms noted in Fig. 426-4. If both A2 
segments arise from a single anterior cerebral stem (contralateral A1 
segment atresia), the occlusion may affect both hemispheres. Profound 
abulia (a delay in verbal and motor response) and bilateral pyramidal 
signs  with  paraparesis  or  quadriparesis  and  urinary  incontinence 
result.

ANTERIOR CHOROIDAL ARTERY  This artery arises from the internal 
carotid artery and supplies the posterior limb of the internal capsule 
and  the  white  matter  posterolateral  to  it,  through  which  pass  some 
of  the  geniculocalcarine  fibers  (Fig.  426-5).  The  complete  syndrome 
of  anterior  choroidal  artery  occlusion  consists  of  contralateral  hemi-
plegia,  hemianesthesia  (hypesthesia),  and  homonymous  hemianopia. 
However, because this territory is also supplied by penetrating vessels 

of the proximal MCA and the posterior communicating and posterior 
choroidal arteries, minimal deficits may occur, and patients frequently 
recover substantially. Anterior choroidal strokes are usually the result 
of in situ thrombosis of the vessel, and the vessel is particularly vul-
nerable to iatrogenic occlusion during surgical clipping of aneurysms 
arising from the internal carotid artery.

INTERNAL CAROTID ARTERY  The  clinical  picture  of  internal  carotid 
occlusion  varies  depending  on  whether  the  cause  of  ischemia  is 
propagated thrombus, embolism, or low flow. The cortex supplied by 
the MCA territory is affected most often. With a competent circle of 
Willis, occlusion may go unnoticed. If the thrombus propagates up the 
internal  carotid  artery  into  the  MCA  or  embolizes  it,  symptoms  are 
identical to proximal MCA occlusion (see above). Sometimes there is 
massive infarction of the entire deep white matter and cortical surface. 
When the origins of both the ACA and MCA are occluded at the top 
of the carotid artery, abulia or stupor occurs with hemiplegia, hemian-
esthesia, and aphasia or anosognosia. When the PCA arises from the 
internal carotid artery (a configuration called a fetal PCA), it may also 
become occluded and give rise to symptoms referable to its peripheral 
territory (Figs. 426-4 and 426-5).

In  addition  to  supplying  the  ipsilateral  brain,  the  internal  carotid 
artery  perfuses  the  optic  nerve  and  retina  via  the  ophthalmic  artery. 
In  ~25%  of  symptomatic  internal  carotid  disease,  recurrent  transient 
monocular  blindness  (amaurosis  fugax)  warns  of  the  lesion.  Patients 
typically describe a horizontal shade that sweeps down or up across the 
field of vision. They may also complain that their vision was blurred in 
that eye or that the upper or lower half of vision disappeared. In most 
cases,  these  symptoms  last  only  a  few  minutes.  Rarely,  ischemia  or 
infarction of the ophthalmic artery or central retinal arteries occurs at 
the time of cerebral TIA or infarction.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3327

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
3328

Internal 
carotid a.

Ant. 
choroidal a.

Mesencephalic
paramedian As.

Splenial a.

Parietooccipital a.

Calcarine a.

Ant. cerebral a.

Superior cerebellar a.

Post. 
communicating a.

Post. cerebral a.

Medial posterior
choroidal a.

Ant. temporal a.

Posterior cerebral a.

Middle cerebral a.

Basilar a.

Vertebral a.

Posterior Inferior
cerebellar a.

Deep branches
of the basilar a.

Anterior Inferior
cerebellar a.

Hippocampal a.

Post. temporal a.

FIGURE  426-6  Diagram  of  the  posterior  circulation,  showing  the  intracranial 
vertebral  arteries  forming  the  basilar  artery  that  gives  off  the  anterior  inferior 
cerebellar,  superior  cerebellar,  and  posterior  cerebral  arteries.  The  posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery arises from each of the vertebral segments. The majority 
of brainstem blood flow arises from numerous deep branches of the basilar artery 
that penetrate directly into the brainstem.

Visual
cortex

Post. thalamic a.

Lateral posterior 
choroidal a. 

FIGURE 426-5  Inferior aspect of the brain with the branches and distribution of the 
posterior cerebral artery and the principal anatomic structures shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    Peripheral territory (see also Fig. 426-9). Homonymous hemianopia (often upper 
quadrantic):  Calcarine  cortex  or  optic  radiation  nearby.  Bilateral  homonymous 
hemianopia, cortical blindness, awareness or denial of blindness; tactile naming, 
achromatopia  (color  blindness),  failure  to  see  to-and-fro  movements,  inability  to 
perceive  objects  not  centrally  located,  apraxia  of  ocular  movements,  inability  to 
count or enumerate objects, tendency to run into things that the patient sees and 
tries to avoid: Bilateral occipital lobe with possibly the parietal lobe involved. Verbal 
dyslexia without agraphia, color anomia: Dominant calcarine lesion and posterior 
part of corpus callosum. Memory defect: Hippocampal lesion bilaterally or on the 
dominant  side  only.  Topographic  disorientation  and  prosopagnosia:  Usually  with 
lesions of nondominant, calcarine, and lingual gyrus. Simultanagnosia, hemivisual 
neglect:  Dominant  visual  cortex,  contralateral  hemisphere.  Unformed  visual 
hallucinations, peduncular hallucinosis, metamorphopsia, teleopsia, illusory visual 
spread,  palinopsia,  distortion  of  outlines,  central  photophobia:  Calcarine  cortex. 
Complex hallucinations: Usually nondominant hemisphere.
    Central territory. Thalamic syndrome: sensory loss (all modalities), spontaneous 
intention  tremor,  spasms  of  hand, 
pain  and  dysesthesias,  choreoathetosis, 
mild  hemiparesis:  Posteroventral  nucleus  of  thalamus; 
involvement  of  the 
adjacent  subthalamus  body  or  its  afferent  tracts.  Thalamoperforate  syndrome: 
crossed  cerebellar  ataxia  with  ipsilateral  third  nerve  palsy  (Claude’s  syndrome): 
Dentatothalamic tract and issuing third nerve. Weber’s syndrome: third nerve palsy 
and  contralateral  hemiplegia:  Third  nerve  and  cerebral  peduncle.  Contralateral 
hemiplegia: Cerebral peduncle. Paralysis or paresis of vertical eye movement, skew 
deviation, sluggish pupillary responses to light, slight miosis and ptosis (retraction 
nystagmus and “tucking” of the eyelids may be associated): Supranuclear fibers to 
third nerve, interstitial nucleus of Cajal, nucleus of Darkschewitsch, and posterior 
commissure.  Contralateral  rhythmic,  ataxic  action  tremor;  rhythmic  postural  or 
“holding” tremor (rubral tremor): Dentatothalamic tract.

A high-pitched prolonged carotid bruit fading into diastole is often 
associated  with  tightly  stenotic  lesions.  As  the  stenosis  grows  tighter 
and  flow  distal  to  the  stenosis  becomes  reduced,  the  bruit  becomes 
fainter and may disappear when occlusion is imminent.
COMMON  CAROTID  ARTERY  All  symptoms  and  signs  of  internal 
carotid occlusion may also be present with occlusion of the common 
carotid artery. Jaw claudication may result from low flow in the exter-
nal  carotid  branches.  Bilateral  common  carotid  artery  occlusions  at 
their origin may occur in Takayasu’s arteritis (Chap. 363).

Stroke within the Posterior Circulation  The posterior circula-
tion is composed of the paired vertebral arteries, the basilar artery, and 
the paired PCAs. The vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery at 
the pontomedullary junction. The basilar artery divides into two PCAs 

in the interpeduncular fossa (Figs. 426-4–426-6). These major arteries 
give  rise  to  long  and  short  circumferential  branches  and  to  smaller 
deep penetrating branches that supply the cerebellum, medulla, pons, 
midbrain, subthalamus, thalamus, hippocampus, and medial temporal 
and occipital lobes. Occlusion of each vessel produces its own distinc-
tive syndrome.
POSTERIOR  CEREBRAL  ARTERY  In  75%  of  cases,  both  PCAs  arise 
from  the  bifurcation  of  the  basilar  artery;  in  20%,  one  has  its  origin 
from  the  ipsilateral  internal  carotid  artery  via  the  posterior  commu-
nicating  artery;  in  5%,  both  originate  from  the  respective  ipsilateral 
internal carotid arteries (Figs. 426-4–426-6). The precommunal, or P1, 
segment of the true PCA is atretic in such cases.

PCA syndromes usually result from atheroma formation or emboli 
that lodge at the top of the basilar artery; posterior circulation disease 
may also be caused by dissection of either vertebral artery or fibromus-
cular dysplasia.

Two clinical syndromes are commonly observed with occlusion of 
the PCA: (1) P1 syndrome: midbrain, subthalamic, and thalamic signs, 
which  are  due  to  disease  of  the  proximal  P1  segment  of  the  PCA  or 
its penetrating branches (thalamogeniculate, Percheron, and posterior 
choroidal arteries); and (2) P2 syndrome: cortical temporal and occipi-
tal lobe signs, due to occlusion of the P2 segment distal to the junction 
of the PCA with the posterior communicating artery.

P1  SYNDROMES  Infarction  usually  occurs  in  the  ipsilateral  subthal-
amus  and  medial  thalamus  and  in  the  ipsilateral  cerebral  peduncle 
and midbrain (Figs. 426-5 and 426-11). A third nerve palsy with con-
tralateral ataxia (Claude’s syndrome) or with contralateral hemiplegia 
(Weber’s syndrome) may result. The ataxia indicates involvement of the 
red nucleus or dentatorubrothalamic tract; the hemiplegia is localized 
to  the  cerebral  peduncle  (Fig.  426-11).  If  the  subthalamic  nucleus  is 
involved,  contralateral  hemiballismus  may  occur.  Occlusion  of  the 
artery of Percheron produces paresis of upward gaze and drowsiness 
and often abulia. Extensive infarction in the midbrain and subthalamus 
occurring  with  bilateral  proximal  PCA  occlusion  presents  as  coma, 
unreactive pupils, bilateral pyramidal signs, and decerebrate rigidity.

Occlusion  of  the  penetrating  branches  of  thalamic  and  thalamo-
geniculate  arteries  produces  less  extensive  thalamic  and  thalamocap-
sular  lacunar  syndromes.  The  thalamic  Déjérine-Roussy  syndrome 
consists  of  contralateral  hemisensory  loss  followed  later  by  an  ago-
nizing,  searing,  or  burning  pain  in  the  affected  areas.  It  is  persistent 
and responds poorly to analgesics. Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine or 
gabapentin) or tricyclic antidepressants may be beneficial.

P2 SYNDROMES  (Figs. 426-4 and 426-5) Occlusion of the distal PCA 
causes infarction of the medial temporal and occipital lobes. Contralat-
eral  homonymous  hemianopia  without  macula  sparing  is  the  usual 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3328

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3329

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
6

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
t
o
C
e
r
e
b
r
o
v
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Medial lemniscus

Pyramid

Spinothalamic tract

Ventral
spinocerebellar tract

Dorsal 
spinocerebellar tract

Nucleus ambiguus
– motor 9 +10

Descending nucleus
and tract - 5th n.

Tractus solitarius
with nucleus

12th n.

Inferior olive

10th n.

Medulla

Descending 
sympathetic
tract

Restiform
body

Olivocerebellar
fibers

Cerebellum

Vestibular
nucleus

12th n. 
nucleus

Medial longitudinal fasciculus

Medullary syndrome:

Lateral

Medial

FIGURE 426-7  Axial section at the level of the medulla, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Note that in 
Figs. 426-7 through 426-11, all drawings are oriented with the dorsal surface at the bottom, matching the orientation of the brainstem that is commonly seen in all modern 
neuroimaging studies. Approximate regions involved in medial and lateral medullary stroke syndromes are shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    1. Medial medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery or of branch of vertebral or lower basilar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Paralysis with atrophy of one-half half the tongue: Ipsilateral twelfth nerve
    On side opposite lesion
    Paralysis of arm and leg, sparing face; impaired tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-half the body: Contralateral pyramidal tract and medial lemniscus
    2 . Lateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of any of five vessels may be responsible—vertebral, posterior inferior cerebellar, superior, middle, or inferior lateral medullary 

arteries)

    On side of lesion
    Pain, numbness, impaired sensation over one-half the face: Descending tract and nucleus fifth nerve
    Ataxia of limbs, falling to side of lesion: Uncertain—restiform body, cerebellar hemisphere, cerebellar fibers, spinocerebellar tract (?)
    Nystagmus, diplopia, oscillopsia, vertigo, nausea, vomiting: Vestibular nucleus
    Horner’s syndrome (miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating): Descending sympathetic tract
    Dysphagia, hoarseness, paralysis of palate, paralysis of vocal cord, diminished gag reflex: Issuing fibers ninth and tenth nerves
    Loss of taste: Nucleus and tractus solitarius
    Numbness of ipsilateral arm, trunk, or leg: Cuneate and gracile nuclei
    Weakness of lower face: Genuflected upper motor neuron fibers to ipsilateral facial nucleus
    On side opposite lesion
    Impaired pain and thermal sense over half the body, sometimes face: Spinothalamic tract
    3. Total unilateral medullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery): Combination of medial and lateral syndromes
    4. Lateral pontomedullary syndrome (occlusion of vertebral artery): Combination of lateral medullary and lateral inferior pontine syndrome
     5. Basilar artery syndrome (the syndrome of the lone vertebral artery is equivalent): A combination of the various brainstem syndromes plus those arising in the posterior 

cerebral artery distribution.

    Bilateral long tract signs (sensory and motor; cerebellar and peripheral cranial nerve abnormalities): Bilateral long tract; cerebellar and peripheral cranial nerves
    Paralysis or weakness of all extremities, plus all bulbar musculature: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts bilaterally

manifestation. (MCA strokes often produce hemianopia but typically 
spare the macula as calcarine cortex is perfused by the P2 segment). 
Occasionally,  only  the  upper  quadrant  of  visual  field  is  involved  or 
the macula vision is spared. If the visual association areas are spared 
and only the calcarine cortex is involved, the patient may be aware of 
visual  defects.  Medial  temporal  lobe  and  hippocampal  involvement 
may cause an acute disturbance in memory, particularly if it occurs in 
the dominant hemisphere. The defect usually clears because memory 
has  bilateral  representation.  If  the  dominant  hemisphere  is  affected 
and the infarct extends to involve the splenium of the corpus callosum, 
the  patient  may  demonstrate  alexia  without  agraphia.  Visual  agnosia 
for faces, objects, mathematical symbols, and colors and anomia with 
paraphasic errors (amnestic aphasia) may also occur, even without cal-
losal involvement. Occlusion of the PCA can produce peduncular hal-
lucinosis (visual hallucinations of brightly colored scenes and objects).
Bilateral  infarction  in  the  distal  PCAs  produces  cortical  blindness 
(blindness with preserved pupillary light reaction). The patient is often 
unaware of the blindness or may even deny it (Anton’s syndrome). Tiny 

islands  of  vision  may  persist,  and  the  patient  may  report  that  vision 
fluctuates  as  images  are  captured  in  the  preserved  portions.  Rarely, 
only  peripheral  vision  is  lost  and  central  vision  is  spared,  resulting 
in  “gun-barrel”  vision.  Bilateral  visual  association  area  lesions  may 
result  in  Balint’s  syndrome,  a  disorder  of  the  orderly  visual  scanning 
of  the  environment  (Chap.  30),  usually  resulting  from  infarctions 
secondary to low flow in the “watershed” between the distal PCA and 
MCA  territories,  as  occurs  after  cardiac  arrest.  Patients  may  experi-
ence  persistence  of  a  visual  image  for  several  minutes  despite  gazing 
at  another  scene  (palinopsia)  or  an  inability  to  synthesize  the  whole 
of  an  image  (asimultanagnosia).  Embolic  occlusion  of  the  top  of  the 
basilar  artery  can  produce  any  or  all  the  central  or  peripheral  terri-
tory  symptoms.  The  hallmark  is  the  sudden  onset  of  bilateral  signs, 
including ptosis, pupillary asymmetry or lack of reaction to light, and 
somnolence. Patients will often have posturing and myoclonic jerking 
that  simulates  seizure.  Interrogation  of  the  noncontrast  CT  scan  for 
a  hyperdense  basilar  artery  sign  (indicating  thrombus  in  the  basilar 
artery) or CT angiography (CTA) establishes this diagnosis. Physicians 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3329

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
Corticospinal and
corticobulbar tract

6th n.

Medial lemniscus

Middle cerebellar
peduncle

Inferior pons

7th and 8th
cranial
nerves

3330

Spinothalamic
tract

Descending tract
and nucleus of
5th n.

7th n.

8th n.

Dorsal
cochlear 
nucleus

7th n. nucleus

Restiform body

Vestibular nucleus

Inferior pontine syndrome:

Lateral

Medial

Medial longitudinal
fasciculus

Cerebellum

6th n. nucleus
complex

FIGURE 426-8  Axial section at the level of the inferior pons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral inferior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    1. Medial inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of paramedian branch of basilar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion (preservation of convergence): Center for conjugate lateral gaze
    Nystagmus: Vestibular nucleus
    Ataxia of limbs and gait: Likely middle cerebellar peduncle
    Diplopia on lateral gaze: Abducens nerve
    On side opposite lesion
    Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract in lower pons
    Impaired tactile and proprioceptive sense over one-half of the body: Medial lemniscus
    2. Lateral inferior pontine syndrome (occlusion of anterior inferior cerebellar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Horizontal and vertical nystagmus, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, oscillopsia: Vestibular nerve or nucleus
    Facial paralysis: Seventh nerve
    Paralysis of conjugate gaze to side of lesion: Center for conjugate lateral gaze
    Deafness, tinnitus: Auditory nerve or cochlear nucleus
    Ataxia: Middle cerebellar peduncle and cerebellar hemisphere
    Impaired sensation over face: Descending tract and nucleus fifth nerve
    On side opposite lesion
    Impaired pain and thermal sense over one-half the body (may include face): Spinothalamic tract

should be suspicious of this rare but potentially treatable stroke syn-
drome in the setting of presumed new-onset seizure and cranial nerve  
deficits.

VERTEBRAL  AND  POSTERIOR  INFERIOR  CEREBELLAR  ARTERIES  The 
vertebral artery, which arises from the innominate artery on the right 
and  the  subclavian  artery  on  the  left,  consists  of  four  segments.  The 
first (V1) extends from its origin to its entrance into the sixth or fifth 
transverse vertebral foramen. The second segment (V2) traverses the 
vertebral foramina from C6 to C2. The third (V3) passes through the 
transverse  foramen  and  circles  around  the  arch  of  the  atlas  to  pierce 
the  dura  at  the  foramen  magnum.  The  fourth  (V4)  segment  courses 
upward  to  join  the  other  vertebral  artery  to  form  the  basilar  artery 
(Fig. 426-6); only the fourth segment gives rise to branches that supply 
the brainstem and cerebellum. The posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(PICA) in its proximal segment supplies the lateral medulla and, in its 
distal branches, the inferior surface of the cerebellum.

Atherothrombotic  lesions  have  a  predilection  for  V1  and  V4  seg-
ments of the vertebral artery. The first segment may become diseased at 
the origin of the vessel and may produce posterior circulation emboli; 

collateral flow from the contralateral vertebral artery or the ascending 
cervical,  thyrocervical,  or  occipital  arteries  is  usually  sufficient  to 
prevent low-flow TIAs or stroke. When one vertebral artery is atretic 
and an atherothrombotic lesion threatens the origin of the other, the 
collateral  circulation,  which  may  also  include  retrograde  flow  down 
the basilar artery, is often insufficient (Figs. 426-5 and 426-6). In this 
setting, low-flow TIAs may occur, consisting of syncope, vertigo, and 
alternating  hemiplegia;  this  state  also  sets  the  stage  for  thrombosis. 
Disease of the distal fourth segment of the vertebral artery can promote 
thrombus  formation  manifest  as  embolism  or  with  propagation  as 
basilar artery thrombosis. Stenosis proximal to the origin of the PICA 
can  threaten  the  lateral  medulla  and  posterior  inferior  surface  of  the 
cerebellum.

If  the  subclavian  artery  is  occluded  proximal  to  the  origin  of  the 
vertebral artery, there is a reversal in the direction of blood flow in the 
ipsilateral vertebral artery. Exercise of the ipsilateral arm may increase 
demand  on  vertebral  flow,  producing  posterior  circulation  TIAs,  or 
“subclavian steal.”

Although atheromatous disease rarely narrows the second and third 
segments  of  the  vertebral  artery,  this  region  is  subject  to  dissection, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3330

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3331

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
6

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
t
o
C
e
r
e
b
r
o
v
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Corticospinal and
corticopontine tracts

Temporal lobe

Mid-pons

5th cranial
nerve

Cerebellum

Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus

Medial
lemniscus

5th n. 

Lateral
lemniscus

Middle
cerebellar
peduncle

Spinothalamic
tract

5th n. motor nucleus

5th n. sensory nucleus

Superior cerebellar
peduncle

Midpontine syndrome:

Lateral

Medial

FIGURE 426-9  Axial section at the level of the midpons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral midpontine stroke syndromes are shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    1. Medial midpontine syndrome (paramedian branch of midbasilar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Ataxia of limbs and gait (more prominent in bilateral involvement): Pontine nuclei
    On side opposite lesion
    Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract
    Variable impaired touch and proprioception when lesion extends posteriorly: Medial lemniscus
    2. Lateral midpontine syndrome (short circumferential artery)
    On side of lesion
    Ataxia of limbs: Middle cerebellar peduncle
    Paralysis of muscles of mastication: Motor fibers or nucleus of fifth nerve
    Impaired sensation over side of face: Sensory fibers or nucleus of fifth nerve
    On side opposite lesion
    Impaired pain and thermal sense on limbs and trunk: Spinothalamic tract

fibromuscular  dysplasia,  and,  rarely,  encroachment  by  osteophytic 
spurs within the vertebral foramina.

Embolic occlusion or thrombosis of a V4 segment causes ischemia 
of  the  lateral  medulla.  The  constellation  of  vertigo,  numbness  of  the 
ipsilateral  face  and  contralateral  limbs,  diplopia,  hoarseness,  dys-
arthria, dysphagia, and ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome is called the lat-
eral medullary (or Wallenberg’s) syndrome (Fig. 426-7). Ipsilateral upper 
motor neuron facial weakness can also occur. Most cases result from 
ipsilateral vertebral artery occlusion; in the remainder, PICA occlusion 
is responsible. Occlusion of the medullary penetrating branches of the 
vertebral  artery  or  PICA  results  in  partial  syndromes.  Hemiparesis  is 
not a typical feature of vertebral artery occlusion; however, quadriparesis 
may result from occlusion of the anterior spinal artery.

Rarely, a medial medullary syndrome occurs with infarction of the 
pyramid  and  contralateral  hemiparesis  of  the  arm  and  leg,  sparing 
the face. If the medial lemniscus and emerging hypoglossal nerve fibers 
are  involved,  contralateral  loss  of  joint  position  sense  and  ipsilateral 
tongue weakness occur.

Cerebellar infarction can lead to respiratory arrest due to brainstem 
herniation from cerebellar swelling, closure of the aqueduct of Silvius 
or fourth ventricle, followed by hydrocephalus and central herniation. 
This  added  downward  displacement  of  the  brainstem  from  hydro-
cephalus  will  exacerbate  respiratory  and  hemodynamic  instability. 
Drowsiness, Babinski signs, dysarthria, and bifacial weakness may be 

absent,  or  present  only  briefly,  before  respiratory  arrest  ensues.  Gait 
unsteadiness,  headache,  dizziness,  nausea,  and  vomiting  may  be  the 
only  early  symptoms  and  signs  and  should  arouse  suspicion  of  this 
impending  complication,  which  may  require  neurosurgical  decom-
pression, often with an excellent outcome. Separating these symptoms 
from those of viral labyrinthitis can be a challenge, but headache, neck 
stiffness, and unilateral dysmetria favor stroke.

BASILAR  ARTERY  Branches  of  the  basilar  artery  (Fig.  426-6)  supply 
the base of the pons and superior cerebellum and fall into three groups: 
(1)  paramedian,  7–10  in  number,  which  supply  a  wedge  of  pons  on 
either  side  of  the  midline;  (2)  short  circumferential,  5–7  in  number, 
that supply the lateral two-thirds of the pons and middle and superior 
cerebellar  peduncles;  and  (3)  bilateral  long  circumferential  (superior 
cerebellar  and  anterior  inferior  cerebellar  arteries),  which  course 
around the pons to supply the cerebellar hemispheres.

Atheromatous  lesions  can  occur  anywhere  along  the  basilar  trunk 
but are most frequent in the proximal basilar and distal vertebral seg-
ments.  Typically,  lesions  occlude  either  the  proximal  basilar  and  one 
or both vertebral arteries. The clinical picture varies depending on the 
availability of retrograde collateral flow from the posterior communi-
cating arteries. Rarely, dissection of a vertebral artery may involve the 
basilar artery and, depending on the location of true and false lumen, 
may produce multiple penetrating artery strokes.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3331

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
3332

Pontine nuclei and
pontocerebellar fibers

Corticospinal tract

Temporal lobe

Basilar artery

Medial
lemniscus

Central
tegmental
bundle

Lateral
lemniscus

Spinothalamic 
tract

Superior
pons

Medial longitudinal
fasciculus

Superior cerebellar 
peduncle

Superior pontine syndrome:

Lateral

Medial

FIGURE 426-10  Axial section at the level of the superior pons, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral superior pontine stroke syndromes are shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    1. Medial superior pontine syndrome (paramedian branches of upper basilar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Cerebellar ataxia (probably): Superior and/or middle cerebellar peduncle
    Internuclear ophthalmoplegia: Medial longitudinal fasciculus
     Myoclonic syndrome, palate, pharynx, vocal cords, respiratory apparatus, face, oculomotor apparatus, etc.: Localization uncertain—central tegmental bundle, dentate 

projection, inferior olivary nucleus

    On side opposite lesion
    Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract
    Rarely touch, vibration, and position are affected: Medial lemniscus
    2. Lateral superior pontine syndrome (syndrome of superior cerebellar artery)
    On side of lesion
    Ataxia of limbs and gait, falling to side of lesion: Middle and superior cerebellar peduncles, superior surface of cerebellum, dentate nucleus
    Dizziness, nausea, vomiting; horizontal nystagmus: Vestibular nucleus
    Paresis of conjugate gaze (ipsilateral): Pontine contralateral gaze
    Skew deviation: Uncertain
    Miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating over face (Horner’s syndrome): Descending sympathetic fibers
    Tremor: Localization unclear—Dentate nucleus, superior cerebellar peduncle
    On side opposite lesion
    Impaired pain and thermal sense on face, limbs, and trunk: Spinothalamic tract
    Impaired touch, vibration, and position sense, more in leg than arm (there is a tendency to incongruity of pain and touch deficits): Medial lemniscus (lateral portion)

Although atherothrombosis occasionally occludes the distal portion 
of  the  basilar  artery,  emboli  from  the  heart  or  proximal  vertebral  or 
basilar segments are more commonly responsible for “top of the basilar” 
syndromes.

Because the brainstem contains many structures in close apposition, 
a diversity of clinical syndromes may emerge with ischemia, reflect-
ing involvement of the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, ascend-
ing sensory tracts, and cranial nerve nuclei (Figs. 426-7–426-11).

The  symptoms  of  transient  ischemia  or  infarction  in  the  territory 
of  the  basilar  artery  often  do  not  indicate  whether  the  basilar  artery 
itself or one of its branches is diseased, yet this distinction has impor-
tant implications for therapy. The picture of complete basilar occlusion, 
however,  is  easy  to  recognize  as  a  constellation  of  bilateral  long  tract 
signs  (sensory  and  motor)  with  signs  of  cranial  nerve  and  cerebellar 
dysfunction.  Patients  may  have  spontaneous  posturing  movements 
that  are  myoclonic  in  nature  and  simulate  seizure  activity.  These 
movements  are  brief,  repetitive,  and  multifocal  and  often  confused 
with  status  epilepticus.  CT  or  magnetic  resonance  angiography  can 
rapidly detect basilar thrombosis, and rapid treatment (thrombectomy) 
can be lifesaving. A “locked-in” state of preserved consciousness with 

quadriplegia  and  cranial  nerve  signs  suggests  complete  pontine  and 
lower midbrain infarction. The therapeutic goal is to identify impend-
ing basilar occlusion before devastating infarction occurs. A series of 
TIAs and a slowly progressive, fluctuating stroke are extremely signifi-
cant, because they often herald an atherothrombotic occlusion of the 
distal vertebral or proximal basilar artery.

TIAs  in  the  proximal  basilar  distribution  may  produce  vertigo 
(often  described  by  patients  as  “swimming,”  “swaying,”  “moving,” 
“unsteadiness,”  or  “light-headedness”).  Other  symptoms  that  warn 
of  basilar  thrombosis  include  diplopia,  dysarthria,  facial  or  circu-
moral numbness, and hemisensory symptoms. In general, symptoms 
of  basilar  branch  TIAs  affect  one  side  of  the  brainstem,  whereas 
symptoms of basilar artery TIAs usually affect both sides, although 
a “herald” hemiparesis has been emphasized as an initial symptom 
of  basilar  occlusion.  Most  often,  TIAs,  whether  due  to  impending 
occlusion  of  the  basilar  artery  or  a  basilar  branch,  are  short  lived 
(5–30  min)  and  repetitive,  occurring  several  times  a  day.  The  pat-
tern  suggests  intermittent  reduction  of  flow.  Although  treatment 
with  intravenous  heparin  or  various  combinations  of  antiplatelet 
agents has been used to prevent clot propagation, there is no specific 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3332

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Crus cerebri

Substantia
nigra

3rd nerve
nucleus

3rd n.

3333

Red nucleus

Basilar artery

Internal
carotid
artery

Medial
lemniscus

Spinothalamic
tract

Midbrain

Periaqueductal
gray matter

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
6

I
n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
t
o
C
e
r
e
b
r
o
v
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Cerebral aqueduct

Superior colliculus

Midbrain syndrome:

Lateral

Medial

FIGURE 426-11  Axial section at the level of the midbrain, depicted schematically on the left, with a corresponding magnetic resonance image on the right. Approximate 
regions involved in medial and lateral midbrain stroke syndromes are shown.
    Signs and symptoms: Structures involved
    1. Medial midbrain syndrome (paramedian branches of upper basilar and proximal posterior cerebral arteries)
    On side of lesion
    Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve fibers
    On side opposite lesion
    Paralysis of face, arm, and leg: Corticobulbar and corticospinal tract descending in crus cerebri
    2. Lateral midbrain syndrome (syndrome of small penetrating arteries arising from posterior cerebral artery)
    On side of lesion
    Eye “down and out” secondary to unopposed action of fourth and sixth cranial nerves, with dilated and unresponsive pupil: Third nerve fibers and/or third nerve nucleus
    On side opposite lesion
    Hemiataxia, hyperkinesias, tremor: Red nucleus, dentatorubrothalamic pathway

evidence to support any one approach, and endovascular interven-
tion is also an option.

Atherothrombotic  occlusion  of  the  basilar  artery  with  infarction 
usually  causes  bilateral  brainstem  signs.  A  gaze  paresis  or  internu-
clear ophthalmoplegia associated with ipsilateral hemiparesis may be 
the  only  manifestation  of  bilateral  brainstem  ischemia.  More  often, 
unequivocal  signs  of  bilateral  pontine  disease  are  present.  Complete 
basilar thrombosis carries a high mortality.

Occlusion of a branch of the basilar artery usually causes unilateral 
symptoms  and  signs  involving  motor,  sensory,  and  cranial  nerves.  If 
symptoms  remain  unilateral,  concern  over  pending  basilar  occlusion 
should be reduced.

Occlusion of the superior cerebellar artery results in severe ipsilat-
eral cerebellar ataxia, nausea and vomiting, dysarthria, and contralat-
eral loss of pain and temperature sensation over the extremities, body, 
and face (spino- and trigeminothalamic tract). Partial deafness, ataxic 
tremor of the ipsilateral upper extremity, Horner’s syndrome, and pal-
atal myoclonus may occur rarely. Partial syndromes occur frequently 
(Fig. 426-10). With large strokes, swelling and mass effects may com-
press  the  midbrain  or  produce  hydrocephalus;  these  symptoms  may 
evolve  rapidly.  Neurosurgical  intervention  may  be  lifesaving  in  such 
cases.

Occlusion of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery produces variable 
degrees of infarction because the size of this artery and the territory it 
supplies  vary  inversely  with  those  of  the  PICA.  The  principal  symp-
toms  include  (1)  ipsilateral  deafness,  facial  weakness,  vertigo,  nausea 
and  vomiting,  nystagmus,  tinnitus,  cerebellar  ataxia,  Horner’s  syn-
drome, and paresis of conjugate lateral gaze; and (2) contralateral loss 
of pain and temperature sensation. An occlusion close to the origin of 
the artery may cause corticospinal tract signs (Fig. 426-8).

Occlusion of one of the short circumferential branches of the basilar 
artery  affects  the  lateral  two-thirds  of  the  pons  and  middle  or  supe-
rior cerebellar peduncle, whereas occlusion of one of the paramedian 
branches affects a wedge-shaped area on either side of the medial pons 
(Figs. 426-8–426-10).

 ■ IMAGING STUDIES
See also Chap. 423.

CT Scans  CT radiographic images identify or exclude hemorrhage 
as  the  cause  of  stroke,  and  they  identify  extraparenchymal  hemor-
rhages,  neoplasms,  abscesses,  and  other  conditions  masquerading 
as stroke. Brain CT scans obtained in the first several hours after an 
infarction generally show no abnormality, and the infarct may not be 
seen reliably for 24–48 h. CT may fail to show small ischemic strokes 
in  the  posterior  fossa  because  of  bone  artifact;  small  infarcts  on  the 
cortical surface may also be missed.

Contrast-enhanced  CT  scans  add  specificity  by  showing  contrast 
enhancement  of  subacute  infarcts  and  allow  visualization  of  venous 
structures. Coupled with multidetector scanners, CT angiography can 
be  performed  with  administration  of  IV  iodinated  contrast  allowing 
visualization of the cervical and intracranial arteries, intracranial veins, 
aortic  arch,  and  even  the  coronary  arteries  in  one  imaging  session. 
Carotid disease and intracranial vascular occlusions are readily iden-
tified with this method (see Fig. 427-2). After an IV bolus of contrast, 
deficits in brain perfusion produced by vascular occlusion can also be 
demonstrated (Fig. 426-12) and used to predict the region of infarcted 
brain  and  the  brain  at  risk  of  further  infarction  (i.e.,  the  ischemic 
penumbra,  see  “Pathophysiology  of  Ischemic  Stroke”  in  Chap.  427). 
CT imaging is also sensitive for detecting SAH (although by itself does 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3333

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
 
 
3334

A

C

D

B

E

FIGURE 426-12  Acute left middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke with right hemiplegia but preserved language. A. Computed tomography (CT) perfusion mean-transit time 
map showing delayed perfusion of the left MCA distribution (blue). B. Predicted region of infarct (red) and penumbra (green) based on CT perfusion data. C. Conventional 
angiogram showing occlusion of the left internal carotid–MCA bifurcation (left panel), and revascularization of the vessels following successful thrombectomy 8 h after 
stroke symptom onset (right panel). D. The clot removed with a thrombectomy device (L5, Concentric Medical, Inc.). E. CT scan of the brain 2 days later; note infarction in 
the region predicted in B but preservation of the penumbral region by successful revascularization.

not rule it out), and CTA can readily identify intracranial aneurysms 
(Chap.  429).  Because  of  its  speed  and  wide  availability,  noncontrast 
head CT is the imaging modality of choice in patients with acute stroke 
(Fig. 426-1), and CTA and CT perfusion imaging may also be useful 
and convenient adjuncts.

 ■ MRI
MRI reliably documents the extent and location of infarction in all areas 
of the brain, including the posterior fossa and cortical surface. It also 
identifies intracranial hemorrhage and other abnormalities and, using 
special sequences, can be as sensitive as CT for detecting acute intrace-
rebral hemorrhage. MRI scanners with magnets of higher field strength 
produce more reliable and precise images. Diffusion-weighted imaging 
is more sensitive for early brain infarction than standard MR sequences 
or CT (Fig. 426-13), as is fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) 
imaging (Chap. 423). Using IV administration of gadolinium contrast, 
magnetic resonance (MR) perfusion studies can be performed. Brain 
regions  showing  poor  perfusion  but  no  abnormality  on  diffusion 
provide, compared to CT, an equivalent measure of the ischemic pen-
umbra. MR angiography is highly sensitive for stenosis of extracranial 
internal carotid arteries and of large intracranial vessels. With higher 
degrees of stenosis, MR angiography tends to overestimate the degree 
of  stenosis  when  compared  to  conventional  x-ray  angiography.  MRI 
with fat saturation is an imaging sequence used to visualize extra- or 
intracranial arterial dissection. This sensitive technique images clotted 
blood within the dissected vessel wall. Iron-sensitive imaging (ISI) is 
helpful to detect cerebral microbleeds that may be present in cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy and other hemorrhagic disorders.

MRI is more expensive and time consuming than CT and less read-
ily available. Claustrophobia and the logistics of imaging acutely criti-
cally ill patients also limit its application. Most acute stroke protocols 
use  CT  because  of  these  limitations.  However,  MRI  is  useful  outside 
the  acute  period  by  more  clearly  defining  the  extent  of  tissue  injury 
and discriminating new from old regions of brain infarction. MRI may 
have utility in patients with TIA, because it is also more likely to iden-
tify new infarction, which is a strong predictor of subsequent stroke.

Cerebral Angiography  Conventional x-ray cerebral angiography 
is  the  gold  standard  for  identifying  and  quantifying  atherosclerotic 
stenoses  of  the  cerebral  arteries  and  for  identifying  and  characteriz-
ing other pathologies, including aneurysms, vasospasm, intraluminal 
thrombi,  fibromuscular  dysplasia,  arteriovenous  fistulae,  vasculitis, 
and collateral channels of blood flow. Conventional angiography car-
ries  risks  of  arterial  damage,  groin  hemorrhage,  embolic  stroke,  and 
renal  failure  from  contrast  nephropathy,  so  it  should  be  reserved  for 
situations  where  less  invasive  means  are  inadequate.  Acute  stroke 
treatment  with  endovascular  thrombectomy  has  proven  effective  in 
ischemic strokes caused by internal carotid terminus or MCA occlu-
sions and has now part of routine clinical practice at centers that have 
this capability (see Chap. 427).

Ultrasound  Techniques  Stenosis  at  the  origin  of  the  internal 
carotid artery can be identified and quantified reliably by ultrasonog-
raphy  that  combines  a  B-mode  ultrasound  image  with  a  Doppler 
ultrasound  assessment  of  flow  velocity  (“duplex”  ultrasound).  Tran-
scranial Doppler (TCD) assessment of MCA, ACA, and PCA flow and 
of vertebrobasilar flow is also useful. This latter technique can detect 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3334

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Blumenfeld  H:  Neuroanatomy  Through  Clinical  Cases,  2nd  ed. 

3335

Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2010.

Tamutzer AA et al: ED misdiagnosis of cerebrovascular events in the era 
of modern neuroimaging: A meta-analysis. Neurology 88:1468, 2017.

427 Ischemic Stroke

Wade S. Smith, S. Claiborne Johnston,  
J. Claude Hemphill, III

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

The clinical diagnosis of stroke is discussed in Chap. 426. Once this 
diagnosis  is  made  and  either  a  noncontrast  computed  tomography 
(CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan has been per-
formed,  rapid  reversal  of  ischemia  is  paramount.  This  chapter  will 
focus  on  the  stroke  treatment  timeline  and  subsequent  secondary 
stroke prevention.
 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
Acute  occlusion  of  an  intracranial  vessel  causes  reduction  in  blood 
flow to the brain region it supplies. The magnitude of flow reduction 
is a function of collateral blood flow, and this depends on individual 
vascular anatomy (which may be altered by disease), the site of occlusion, 
and systemic blood pressure. A decrease in cerebral blood flow to zero 
causes death of brain tissue within 4–10 min; values <16–18 mL/100 g tis-
sue per minute cause infarction within an hour; and values <20 mL/100 g  
tissue per minute cause ischemia without infarction unless prolonged 
for several hours or days. If blood flow is restored to ischemic tissue 
before significant infarction develops, the patient may experience only 
transient  symptoms,  and  the  clinical  syndrome  is  called  a  transient 
ischemic  attack  (TIA).  Another  important  concept  is  the  ischemic 
penumbra, defined as the ischemic but reversibly dysfunctional tissue 
surrounding a core area of infarction. The penumbra can be imaged by 
perfusion imaging using MRI or CT (see below and Figs. 426-12 and 
426-13). The ischemic penumbra will eventually progress to infarction 
if no change in flow occurs, and hence, saving the ischemic penumbra 
is the goal of revascularization therapies.

Focal  cerebral  infarction  occurs  via  two  distinct  pathways  
(Fig. 427-1): (1) a necrotic pathway in which cellular cytoskeletal 
breakdown is rapid, due principally to energy failure of the cell; and 
(2)  an  apoptotic  pathway  in  which  cells  become  programmed  to  die. 
Ischemia produces necrosis by starving neurons of glucose and oxygen, 
which in turn results in failure of mitochondria to produce ATP. With-
out ATP, membrane ion pumps stop functioning and neurons depolar-
ize,  allowing  intracellular  calcium  to  rise.  Cellular  depolarization  also 
causes  glutamate  release  from  synaptic  terminals;  excess  extracellular 
glutamate produces neurotoxicity by activating postsynaptic glutamate 
receptors  that  increase  neuronal  calcium  influx.  Ischemia  also  injures 
or destroys axons, dendrites, and glia within brain tissue. Free radicals 
are  produced  by  degradation  of  membrane  lipids  and  mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Free radicals cause catalytic destruction of membranes and 
likely damage other vital functions of cells. Lesser degrees of ischemia, as 
are seen within the ischemic penumbra, favor apoptotic cellular death, 
causing cells to die days to weeks later. Fever dramatically worsens brain 
injury during ischemia, as does hyperglycemia (glucose >11.1 mmol/L 
[200 mg/dL]), so it is reasonable to suppress fever and prevent hypergly-
cemia as much as possible. The value of induced mild hypothermia to 
improve stroke outcomes is the subject of continuing clinical research.

TREATMENT
Acute Ischemic Stroke (Fig. 427-2)

After the clinical diagnosis of stroke is made (Chap. 426), an orderly 
process  of  evaluation  and  treatment  should  follow.  The  first  goal 

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  426-13  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  (MRI)  of  acute  stroke.  A.  MRI 
diffusion-weighted  image  (DWI)  of  an  82-year-old  woman  2.5  h  after  onset  of 
right-sided weakness and aphasia reveals restricted diffusion within the left basal 
ganglia and internal capsule (colored regions). B. Perfusion defect within the left 
hemisphere (colored signal) imaged after administration of an IV bolus of gadolinium 
contrast. The discrepancy between the region of poor perfusion shown in B and 
the diffusion deficit shown in A is called diffusion-perfusion mismatch and provides 
an  estimate  of  the  ischemic  penumbra.  Without  specific  therapy,  the  region  of 
infarction will expand into much or all the perfusion deficit. C. Cerebral angiogram of 
the left internal carotid artery in this patient before (left) and after (right) successful 
endovascular embolectomy. The occlusion is within the carotid terminus. D. Fluid-
attenuated  inversion  recovery  image  obtained  3  days  later  showing  a  region  of 
infarction (coded as white) that corresponds to the initial DWI image in A, but not 
the entire area at risk shown in B, suggesting that successful embolectomy saved 
a large region of brain tissue from infarction. (Used with permission from Gregory 
Albers, MD, Stanford University.)

stenotic lesions in the large intracranial arteries because such lesions 
increase systolic flow velocity. TCD can also detect microemboli from 
otherwise  asymptomatic  carotid  plaques.  In  many  cases,  MR  angi-
ography  combined  with  carotid  and  transcranial  ultrasound  studies 
eliminates the need for conventional x-ray angiography in evaluating 
vascular stenosis. Alternatively, CTA of the entire head and neck can 
be performed during the initial imaging of acute stroke. Because this 
images the entire arterial system relevant to stroke, with the exception 
of the heart, much of the clinician’s stroke workup can be completed 
with this single imaging study.
Perfusion Techniques  Both xenon techniques (principally xenon
-CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) can quantify cerebral 
blood  flow.  These  tools  are  generally  used  for  research  (Chap.  423) 
but can be useful for determining the significance of arterial stenosis 
and  planning  for  revascularization  surgery.  Single-photon  emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) and MR perfusion techniques report 
relative cerebral blood flow. As noted above, CT imaging is used as the 
initial  imaging  modality  for  acute  stroke,  and  some  centers  combine 
both  CTA  and  CT  perfusion  imaging  together  with  the  noncontrast 
CT scan. CT perfusion imaging increases the sensitivity for detecting 
ischemia and can measure the ischemic penumbra (Fig. 426-12). Alter-
natively, MR perfusion can be combined with MR diffusion imaging 
to identify the ischemic penumbra as the mismatch between these two 
imaging sequences (Fig. 426-13).
 ■ FURTHER READING
Benjamin EJ et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics-2019 update: A 
report  from  the  American  Heart  Association.  Circulation  139:e56, 
2019.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3335

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
3336

Arterial Occlusion

Ischemia

Thrombolysis
Thrombectomy

Reperfusion

Glutamate
release

Glutamate
receptors

Energy failure

PARP

Mitochondrial
damage

Ca2+/Na+ influx

Apoptosis

Inflammatory
response

Leukocyte
adhesion

Arachidonic acid
production

Proteolysis

iNOS

Free radical
formation

Lipolysis

Membrane and
cytoskeletal breakdown

Cell Death

Phospholipase

FIGURE 427-1  Major steps in the cascade of cerebral ischemia. See text for details. iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; PARP, poly-A ribose polymerase.

Suspected acute
stroke

Prehospital call
ahead

Code stroke
activation

Onset <6 h

Onset 6–24 h

CT no
hemorrhage

Give IV PA

Yes

No

IV PA eligible?

CT no
hemorrhage
CTA/CTP

Favorable
perfusion?

Yes

No

Perform CTA

ICA/M1-2 or BA
occlusion?

Yes

Thrombectomy

Inpatient
management

No

FIGURE 427-2  Management of acute stroke (pathway followed by the authors). For suspected stroke identified by prehospital professionals, we encourage calling ahead to 
the destination hospital. This allows early “stroke code” activation to prepare for an emergent computed tomography (CT) on arrival. For patients with onset <6 h from last 
time seen normal, we expedite a noncontrast head CT scan, and if free of hemorrhage and the patient is IV plasminogen activator (PA) eligible, this is administered in the 
CT scanner. (For IV tissue PA [tPA], the bolus is given and infusion initiated; for tenecteplase, the full dose is given as a bolus). Then CT angiography (CTA) from left atrium to 
skull vertex is performed to identify an eligible target lesion for thrombectomy. For a patient presenting in the 6- to 24-h time window, PA is not considered, and the decision 
to perform thrombectomy is based on perfusion imaging.
     Priorities of Acute Stroke Consultation: Once stroke is suspected, the first priorities are to assess airway and blood pressure, followed by establishing the time last seen 
normal. Patients with disabling neurologic deficits (particularly with National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale >5) may be eligible for thrombolytic or endovascular therapy. 
Based on the onset time, we follow the protocol shown in the figure. Following acute treatments, if any, we proceed with establishing the cause of the ischemic stroke. If 
atrial fibrillation is established or newly discovered, we favor use of apixaban 5 mg twice daily (or a reduced dose of 2.5 mg twice daily for impaired glomerular filtration 
rate) lifelong. If atrial fibrillation is not detected, we obtain a transthoracic echocardiogram to assess left atrial size and/or any valvular lesions. With large left atria and 
a clear embolic stroke, we favor use of an oral anticoagulant while obtaining ambulatory 30-day electrocardiogram monitoring. If we identify significant internal carotid 
stenosis, we refer for carotid endarterectomy during the same hospitalization regardless of infarct size. For all else, we use the dual antiplatelet agents aspirin (81 mg) and 
ticagrelor (180-mg load, followed by 90 mg twice daily) daily for 30 days then discontinue ticagrelor and continue aspirin at 81 mg daily. We prefer ticagrelor to clopidogrel, 
which is also proven in these settings, because it is not affected by common polymorphisms of CYP2C19 that limit efficacy of clopidogrel in significant proportions of 
patients, particularly those of Asian descent. If the CTA revealed significant intracranial atherosclerosis or other precranial vessel stenosis within the vascular territory of 
the infarct (lumen caliber reduced by >50%) we continue dual antiplatelet agents for at least 3 months, then convert to a single agent. Unless contraindicated, all patients 
receive atorvastatin 80 mg, with goal low-density lipoprotein level of <70 mg/dL unless the stroke has a nonatherothrombotic cause. Patients who are statin intolerant can 
receive PSK9 inhibitors. Blood pressure control should target systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg long term, but we allow permissive hypertension for the first few weeks 
to help with collateral flow to the brain. BA, basilar artery; CTP, computed tomography perfusion; ICA, internal carotid artery; IV, intravenous; M1, middle cerebral artery first 
division; M2, middle cerebral artery second division; PA, plasminogen activator.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3336

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3337

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

is  to  prevent  or  reverse  brain  injury.  Attend  to  the  patient’s  air-
way,  breathing,  and  circulation  (ABCs),  and  treat  hypoglycemia 
or  hyperglycemia  if  identified  by  finger  stick  testing.  Perform  an 
emergency  noncontrast  head  CT  scan  to  differentiate  between 
ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke (Chap. 428); there are no 
reliable  clinical  findings  that  conclusively  separate  ischemia  from 
hemorrhage,  although  a  more  depressed  level  of  consciousness, 
higher  initial  blood  pressure,  or  worsening  of  symptoms  after 
onset favor hemorrhage, and a deficit that is maximal at onset, or 
remits, suggests ischemia. Treatments designed to reverse or lessen 
the amount of tissue infarction and improve clinical outcome fall 
within  six  categories:  (1)  medical  support,  (2)  IV  thrombolysis,   
(3)  endovascular  revascularization,  (4)  antithrombotic  treatment, 
(5) neuroprotection, and (6) stroke centers and rehabilitation.

MEDICAL SUPPORT
When  ischemic  stroke  occurs,  the  immediate  goal  is  to  optimize 
cerebral perfusion in the surrounding ischemic penumbra. Atten-
tion is also directed toward preventing the common complications 
of bedridden patients—infections (pneumonia, urinary, and skin) 
and  deep-venous  thrombosis  (DVT)  with  pulmonary  embolism. 
Subcutaneous heparin (unfractionated and low-molecular-weight) 
is safe and can be used concomitantly. Use of pneumatic compres-
sion stockings is of proven benefit in reducing risk of DVT and is a 
safe alternative to heparin.

Because  collateral  blood  flow  within  the  ischemic  brain  may 
be  blood  pressure  dependent,  there  is  controversy  about  whether 
blood  pressure  should  be  lowered  acutely.  Blood  pressure  should 
be  reduced  if  it  exceeds  220/120  mmHg,  if  there  is  malignant 
hypertension  (Chap.  277)  or  concomitant  myocardial  ischemia, 
or if blood pressure is >185/110 mmHg and thrombolytic therapy 
is  anticipated.  When  faced  with  the  competing  demands  of  myo-
cardium  and  brain,  lowering  the  heart  rate  with  a  β1-adrenergic 
blocker  (such  as  esmolol)  can  be  a  first  step  to  decrease  cardiac 
work  and  maintain  blood  pressure.  Routine  lowering  of  blood 
pressure below the limits listed above has the potential to worsen 
outcomes. Fever is detrimental and should be treated with antipy-
retics and surface cooling. Serum glucose should be monitored and 
kept  <10.0  mmol/L  (180  mg/dL),  and  above  at  least  3.3  mmol/L   
(60  mg/dL);  a  more  intensive  glucose  control  strategy  does  not 
improve outcome.

Between 5 and 10% of patients develop enough cerebral edema 
to  cause  obtundation  and  brain  herniation.  Edema  peaks  on  the 
second  or  third  day  but  can  cause  mass  effect  for  ~10  days.  The 
larger the infarct, the greater the likelihood that clinically signifi-
cant  edema  will  develop.  Water  restriction  and  IV  mannitol  may 
be used to raise the serum osmolarity, but hypovolemia should be 
avoided because this may contribute to hypotension and worsening 
infarction. Combined analysis of three randomized European trials 
of hemicraniectomy (craniotomy and temporary removal of part of 
the skull) shows that hemicraniectomy reduces mortality by 50%, 
and the clinical outcomes of survivors are significantly improved. 
Older patients (age >60 years) benefit less but still significantly. The 
size of the diffusion-weighted imaging volume of brain infarction 
during the acute stroke is a predictor of future deterioration requir-
ing hemicraniectomy.

Special vigilance is warranted for patients with cerebellar infarc-
tion. These strokes may mimic labyrinthitis because of prominent 
vertigo and vomiting; the presence of head or neck pain should alert 
the physician to consider cerebellar stroke due to vertebral artery 
dissection.  Even  small  amounts  of  cerebellar  edema  can  acutely 
increase  intracranial  pressure  (ICP)  by  obstructing  cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) flow leading to hydrocephalus or by directly compress-
ing the brainstem. The resulting brainstem compression can mani-
fest as coma and respiratory arrest and require emergency surgical 
decompression.  Suboccipital  decompression  is  recommended  in 
patients with cerebellar infarcts who demonstrate neurologic dete-
rioration  and  should  be  performed  before  significant  brainstem 
compression occurs. 

INTRAVENOUS THROMBOLYSIS
The  National  Institute  of  Neurological  Disorders  and  Stroke 
(NINDS) Recombinant Tissue Plasminogen Activator (rtPA) Stroke 
Study showed a clear benefit for IV rtPA in selected patients with 
acute  stroke.  The  NINDS  study  used  IV  rtPA  (0.9  mg/kg  to  a 
90-mg maximum; 10% as a bolus, then the remainder over 60 min) 
versus placebo in ischemic stroke within 3 h of onset. One-half of 
the patients were treated within 90 min. Symptomatic intracranial 
hemorrhage  occurred  in  6.4%  of  patients  on  rtPA  and  0.6%  on 
placebo.  In  the  rtPA  group,  there  was  a  significant  12%  absolute 
increase  in  the  number  of  patients  with  only  minimal  disability 
(32% on placebo and 44% on rtPA) and a nonsignificant 4% reduc-
tion in mortality (21% on placebo and 17% on rtPA). Thus, despite 
an  increased  incidence  of  symptomatic  intracranial  hemorrhage, 
treatment with IV rtPA within 3 h of the onset of ischemic stroke 
improved clinical outcome.

Three subsequent trials of IV rtPA did not confirm this benefit, 
perhaps because of the dose of rtPA used, the timing of its delivery, 
and  small  sample  size.  When  data  from  all  randomized  IV  rtPA 
trials were combined, however, efficacy was confirmed in the <3-h 
time window, and efficacy likely extended to 4.5 h and possibly to 
6  h.  Based  on  these  combined  results,  the  European  Cooperative 
Acute  Stroke  Study  (ECASS)  III  explored  the  safety  and  efficacy 
of rtPA in the 3- to 4.5-h time window. Unlike the NINDS study, 
patients aged >80 years and diabetic patients with a previous stroke 
were excluded. In this 821-patient randomized study, efficacy was 
again confirmed, although the treatment effect was less robust than 
in the 0- to 3-h time window. In the rtPA group, 52.4% of patients 
achieved  a  good  outcome  at  90  days,  compared  to  45.2%  of  the 
placebo  group  (odds  ratio  [OR]  1.34,  p  =  .04).  The  symptomatic 
intracranial hemorrhage rate was 2.4% in the rtPA group and 0.2% 
in the placebo group (p = .008).

Based on these data, rtPA is approved in the 3- to 4.5-h window 
in  Europe  and  Canada  but  is  still  only  approved  for  0–3  h  in  the 
United  States.  A  dose  of  0.6  mg/kg  is  typically  used  in  Japan  and 
other Asian countries based on observation of >600 patients given 
this lower dose and observing similar outcomes to historical con-
trols  and  a  lower  rate  of  intracranial  hemorrhage.  This  dose  also 
mitigates  concerns  that  patients  of  Asian  descent  have  a  higher 
propensity  to  bleed  from  most  antithrombotic  and  thrombolytic 
medications.  Use  of  IV  rtPA  is  a  central  component  of  primary 
stroke centers (see below). It represents the first treatment proven 
to improve clinical outcomes in ischemic stroke and is cost-effective 
and cost-saving. The time of stroke onset is defined as the time the 
patient’s symptoms were witnessed to begin or the time the patient 
was last seen as normal. Patients who awaken with stroke have the 
onset defined as when they went to bed. Advanced neuroimaging 
techniques (see Chap. 426) may help to select patients beyond the 
4.5-h window who will benefit from thrombolysis. Two trials using 
MRI  selection  beyond  4.5  h  have  shown  clinical  benefit  from  IV 
rtPA. Patients with minor stroke (nondisabling deficit and National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS] 0–5) appear to respond to 
acute aspirin as well as IV rtPA. Table 427-1 summarizes eligibility 
criteria and instructions for administration of IV rtPA.

The  plasminogen  activator  tenecteplase  (0.25  mg/kg  IV  bolus 
over 5 s), although not directly tested against IV rtPA, is being used 
by some centers because it is given without need for a 1-h infusion. 
This may improve the efficiency of transferring patients from pri-
mary  to  comprehensive  stroke  centers  for  thrombectomy  because 
the IV infusion required for IV rtPA is not required for tenecteplase, 
thus obviating need for critical care transport. Several trials using 
tenecteplase prior to endovascular therapy have found it to be safe. 
ENDOVASCULAR REVASCULARIZATION
Ischemic  stroke  from  large-vessel  intracranial  occlusion  results  in 
high  rates  of  mortality  and  morbidity.  Occlusions  in  such  large 
vessels (middle cerebral artery [MCA], intracranial internal carotid 
artery, and the basilar artery) generally involve a large clot volume 
and often fail to open with IV rtPA alone.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3337

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
3338

TABLE 427-1  Administration of Intravenous Recombinant Tissue 
Plasminogen Activator (rtPA) for Acute Ischemic Stroke (AIS)a
INDICATION
Clinical diagnosis of stroke
Onset of symptoms to time of drug 
administration ≤4.5 hb
CT scan showing no hemorrhage or 
edema of >1/3 of the MCA territory
Age ≥18 years

CONTRAINDICATION
Sustained BP >185/110 mmHg despite 
treatment
Bleeding diathesis
Recent head injury or intracerebral 
hemorrhage
Major surgery in preceding 14 days
Gastrointestinal bleeding in preceding 
21 days
Recent myocardial infarction

Administration of rtPA

IV access with two peripheral IV lines (avoid arterial or central line placement)
Review eligibility for rtPA
Administer 0.9 mg/kg IV (maximum 90 mg) IV as 10% of total dose by bolus, 
followed by remainder of total dose over 1 hc
Frequent cuff BP monitoring
No other antithrombotic treatment for 24 h
For decline in neurologic status or uncontrolled BP, stop infusion, give 
cryoprecipitate, and reimage brain emergently
Avoid urethral catheterization for ≥2 h

aSee Activase (tissue plasminogen activator) package insert for complete list of 
contraindications and dosing. bDepending on the country, IV rtPA may be approved 
for up to 4.5 h with additional restrictions. cA dose of 0.6 mg/kg is commonly used in 
Asia (Japan and China) based on randomized data indicating less hemorrhage and 
similar efficacy using this lower dose.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CT, computed tomography; MCA, middle cerebral 
artery.

Endovascular  mechanical  thrombectomy  has  been  studied  as 
an  alternative  or  adjunctive  treatment  of  acute  stroke  in  patients 
who are ineligible for, or have contraindications to, thrombolytics 
or  in  those  who  failed  to  achieve  vascular  recanalization  with  IV 
thrombolytics  (see  Fig.  426-12).  In  2015,  the  results  of  six  ran-
domized trials were published, all demonstrating that endovascular 
therapy improved clinical outcomes for internal carotid and MCA 
occlusions proven by CT angiography (CTA), under 6 h from stroke 
onset,  with  or  without  pretreatment  with  IV  tissue  plasminogen 
activator  (tPA).  One  study  concluded  that  patients  were  home 
nearly  2  months  earlier  if  they  received  endovascular  therapy.  A 
combined  meta-analysis  of  all  patients  in  these  trials  confirmed 
a  large  benefit  with  endovascular  therapy  (odds  ratio  [OR],  2.49; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 1.76–3.53; p <.001). The percentage 
of  patients  who  achieved  modified  Rankin  scores  of  0–2  (normal 
or  symptomatic  but  independent)  was  46%  in  the  endovascular 
group and 26.5% in the medical arm. A more recent meta-analysis 
reveals a mortality benefit as well with thrombectomy. As with IV 
rtPA treatment, clinical outcome is dependent on time to effective 
therapy.  The  odds  of  a  good  outcome  exceed  3  if  groin  puncture 
occurs within 2 h of symptom onset but is only 2 if 8 h elapse. Over 
80% of patients who had vessel opening within 1 h of arrival to the 
emergency  department  had  a  good  outcome,  whereas  only  one-
third had a good outcome if 6 h elapsed.

The  outcomes  from  endovascular  therapy  are  likely  improved 
with  IV  rtPA  treatment  prior  to  thrombectomy  if  the  patient  is 
eligible  for  rtPA  and  it  is  safe  to  administer.  Recent  data  support 
replacing  IV  rtPA  with  IV  tenecteplase  because  its  simple  bolus 
administration makes transporting the patient to an endovascular 
center less cumbersome.

Extending the time window beyond 6 h appears to be effective 
if  the  patient  has  specific  imaging  findings  demonstrating  good 
vascular collaterals (CT perfusion or magnetic resonance [MR] per-
fusion techniques, see Chap. 426) and can be treated within 24 h. 
The Clinical Mismatch in the Triage of Wake Up and Late Present-
ing  Strokes  Undergoing  Neurointervention  with  Trevo  (DAWN) 
trial  reported  good  outcomes  more  frequently  with  endovascular 

therapy  than  with  medical  care  alone  (47  vs  13%,  p  <.0001).  The 
Endovascular Therapy Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic 
Stroke  3  (DEFUSE-3)  trial  confirmed  these  results  (45  vs  17%,   
p <.001) if treated up to 16 h from stroke onset. Nonrandomized 
data of thrombectomy for basilar occlusion have found this treat-
ment to be safe up to 24 h from symptom onset and associated with 
lower 3-month Rankin scores.

Now that endovascular stroke therapy is proven to be effective, 
the  creation  of  comprehensive  stroke  centers  designed  to  rapidly 
identify  and  treat  patients  with  large-vessel  cerebral  ischemia  is  a 
major  focus  internationally.  Creating  geographic  systems  of  care 
whereby stroke patients are first evaluated at primary stroke centers 
(which can administer IV rtPA or tenecteplase) then transferred to 
comprehensive centers if needed, or directly triaged to comprehen-
sive  centers  based  on  field  assessment,  appears  to  be  an  effective 
strategy to improve outcomes. 

ANTITHROMBOTIC TREATMENT
Platelet Inhibition  Aspirin is the only antiplatelet agent that has 
been  proven  to  be  effective  for  the  acute  treatment  of  ischemic 
stroke; there are several antiplatelet agents proven for the secondary 
prevention of stroke (see below). Two large trials, the International 
Stroke  Trial  (IST)  and  the  Chinese  Acute  Stroke  Trial  (CAST), 
found that the use of aspirin within 48 h of stroke onset reduced 
both  stroke  recurrence  risk  and  mortality  minimally.  Among 
19,435  patients  in  IST,  those  allocated  to  aspirin,  300  mg/d,  had 
slightly  fewer  deaths  within  14  days  (9.0  vs  9.4%),  significantly 
fewer recurrent ischemic strokes (2.8 vs 3.9%), no excess of hem-
orrhagic  strokes  (0.9  vs  0.8%),  and  a  trend  toward  a  reduction  in 
death or dependence at 6 months (61.2 vs 63.5%). In CAST, 21,106 
patients  with  ischemic  stroke  received  160  mg/d  of  aspirin  or  a 
placebo for up to 4 weeks. There were very small reductions in the 
aspirin  group  in  early  mortality  (3.3  vs  3.9%),  recurrent  ischemic 
strokes (1.6 vs 2.1%), and dependency at discharge or death (30.5 
vs  31.6%).  These  trials  demonstrate  that  the  use  of  aspirin  in  the 
treatment of AIS is safe and produces a small net benefit. For every 
1000 acute strokes treated with aspirin, ~9 deaths or nonfatal stroke 
recurrences will be prevented in the first few weeks and ~13 fewer 
patients will be dead or dependent at 6 months. Combining aspirin 
with clopidogrel or with ticagrelor following minor stroke or TIA is 
effective at preventing second stroke (see below). 
Anticoagulation  Numerous  clinical  trials  have  failed  to  demon-
strate any benefit of routine anticoagulation in the primary treat-
ment of atherothrombotic cerebral ischemia and have also shown 
an increase in the risk of brain and systemic hemorrhage. Therefore, 
the  routine  use  of  heparin  or  other  anticoagulants  for  patients 
with  atherothrombotic  stroke  is  not  warranted.  Heparin  and  oral 
anticoagulation are likely no more effective than aspirin for stroke 
associated with arterial dissection. However, there may be benefit of 
anticoagulation for halting progression of dural sinus thrombosis. 
NEUROPROTECTION
Neuroprotection is the concept of providing a treatment that pro-
longs the brain’s tolerance to ischemia. Drugs that block the excita-
tory amino acid pathways have been shown to protect neurons and 
glia in animals, but despite multiple human trials, they have not yet 
been proven to be beneficial. Hypothermia is a powerful neuropro-
tective treatment in patients with cardiac arrest (Chap. 307) and is 
neuroprotective in animal models of stroke, but it has not been ade-
quately  studied  in  patients  with  ischemic  stroke  and  is  associated 
with  an  increase  in  pneumonia  rates  that  could  adversely  impact 
stroke outcomes. Hypothermia combined with hemicraniectomy is 
no more effective than hemicraniectomy with euthermia. 
STROKE CENTERS AND REHABILITATION
Patient  care  in  stroke  units  followed  by  rehabilitation  services 
improves neurologic outcomes and reduces mortality. Use of clinical 
pathways and staff dedicated to the stroke patient can improve care. 
This  includes  use  of  standardized  stroke  order  sets.  Stroke  teams 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3338

21/01/22   7:49 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders that provide emergency 24-h evaluation of acute stroke patients for 
acute  medical  management  and  consideration  of  thrombolysis  or 
endovascular treatments are essential components of primary and 
comprehensive stroke centers, respectively.

Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient includes early physical, 
occupational,  and  speech  therapy.  It  is  directed  toward  educating 
the  patient  and  family  about  the  patient’s  neurologic  deficit,  pre-
venting  the  complications  of  immobility  (e.g.,  pneumonia,  DVT 
and  pulmonary  embolism,  pressure  sores  of  the  skin,  and  muscle 
contractures),  and  providing  encouragement  and  instruction  in 
overcoming the deficit. Use of pneumatic compression stockings is 
of proven benefit in reducing risk of DVT and is a safe alternative 
to heparin. The goal of rehabilitation is to return the patient home 
and to maximize recovery by providing a safe, progressive regimen 
suited to the individual patient. Additionally, the use of constrained 
movement  therapy  (immobilizing  the  unaffected  side)  has  been 
shown  to  improve  hemiparesis  following  stroke,  even  years  after 
the  stroke,  suggesting  that  physical  therapy  can  recruit  unused 
neural  pathways.  Controversy  exists  regarding  whether  selective 
serotonin uptake inhibitors improve motor recovery but they may 
be helpful in preventing poststroke depression. Newer robotic ther-
apies appear promising as well. The human nervous system is more 
adaptable  than  previously  thought,  and  developing  physical  and 
pharmacologic strategies to enhance long-term neural recovery is 
an active area of research.

 ■ ETIOLOGY OF ISCHEMIC STROKE
(Fig.  427-3  and  Table  427-2)  Although  the  initial  management  of 
AIS  often  does  not  depend  on  the  etiology,  establishing  a  cause  is 
essential  to  reduce  the  risk  of  recurrence.  Focus  should  be  on  atrial 
fibrillation  and  carotid  atherosclerosis,  because  these  etiologies  have 
proven secondary prevention strategies. The clinical presentation and 
examination findings often establish the cause of stroke or narrow the 
possibilities to a few. Judicious use of laboratory testing and imaging 
studies  completes  the  initial  evaluation.  Nevertheless,  nearly  30%  of 
strokes remain unexplained despite extensive evaluation.

3339

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

Clinical  examination  should  focus  on  the  peripheral  and  cervical 
vascular system (measuring blood pressure), the heart (dysrhythmia, 
murmurs),  extremities  (peripheral  emboli),  and  retina  (effects  of 
hypertension  and  cholesterol  emboli  [Hollenhorst  plaques]).  A  com-
plete  neurologic  examination  is  performed  to  localize  the  anatomic 
site  of  stroke  (Chap.  426).  An  imaging  study  of  the  brain  is  nearly 
always  indicated  and  is  required  for  patients  being  considered  for 
thrombolysis; it may be combined with CT- or MRI-based angiogra-
phy  to  visualize  the  vasculature  of  the  neck  and  intracranial  vessels 
(see “Imaging Studies,” Chap. 426). A chest x-ray, electrocardiogram 
(ECG),  urinalysis,  complete  blood  count,  erythrocyte  sedimentation 
rate  (ESR),  serum  electrolytes,  blood  urea  nitrogen  (BUN),  creatin-
ine,  blood  glucose,  serum  lipid  profile,  prothrombin  time  (PT),  and 
partial  thromboplastin  time  (PTT)  are  often  useful  and  should  be 
considered in all patients. An ECG, and subsequent cardiac telemetry, 
may demonstrate arrhythmias or reveal evidence of recent myocardial 
infarction  (MI). Of all these studies, only brain imaging is necessary 
prior to IV rtPA; the results of other studies should not delay the rapid 
administration of IV rtPA if the patient is eligible.

Cardioembolic Stroke  Cardioembolism is responsible for ~20% 
of  all  ischemic  strokes.  Stroke  caused  by  heart  disease  is  primarily 
due  to  embolism  of  thrombotic  material  forming  on  the  atrial  or 
ventricular wall or the left heart valves. These thrombi then detach 
and  embolize  into  the  arterial  circulation.  The  thrombus  may  frag-
ment or lyse quickly, producing only a TIA. Alternatively, the arterial 
occlusion may last longer, producing stroke. Embolic strokes tend to 
occur  suddenly  with  maximum  neurologic  deficit  present  at  onset. 
With reperfusion following more prolonged ischemia, petechial hem-
orrhages  can  occur  within  the  ischemic  territory.  These  are  usually 
of  no  clinical  significance  and  should  be  distinguished  from  frank 
intracranial hemorrhage into a region of ischemic stroke where the 
mass  effect  from  the  hemorrhage  can  cause  a  significant  decline  in 
neurologic function.

Emboli from the heart most often lodge in the intracranial internal 
carotid  artery,  the  MCA,  the  posterior  cerebral  artery  (PCA),  or  one 
of  their  branches;  infrequently,  the  anterior  cerebral  artery  (ACA)  is 

Intracranial
atherosclerosis

Penetrating
artery disease

Carotid
plaque with
arteriogenic
emboli

Cardiogenic
emboli

Flow-
reducing
carotid
stenosis

Atrial fibrillation

Valve disease

Internal
carotid

External
carotid

Common
carotid

A

B

C

Left ventricular
thrombi

FIGURE 427-3  Pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. A. Diagram illustrating the three major mechanisms that underlie ischemic stroke: (1) occlusion of an intracranial vessel 
by an embolus (e.g., cardiogenic sources such as atrial fibrillation or artery-to-artery emboli from carotid atherosclerotic plaque), often affecting the large intracranial 
vessels; (2) in situ thrombosis of an intracranial vessel, typically affecting the small penetrating arteries that arise from the major intracranial arteries; (3) hypoperfusion 
caused  by  flow-limiting  stenosis  of  a  major  extracranial  (e.g.,  internal  carotid)  or  intracranial  vessel,  often  producing  “watershed”  ischemia.  B.  and  C.  Diagram  and 
reformatted computed tomography angiogram of the common, internal, and external carotid arteries. High-grade stenosis of the internal carotid artery, which may be 
associated with either cerebral emboli or flow-limiting ischemia, was identified in this patient.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3339

21/01/22   7:49 AM

 
 
3340

TABLE 427-2  Causes of Ischemic Stroke
COMMON CAUSES
Thrombosis
  Lacunar stroke (small vessel)
  Large-vessel thrombosis
  Dehydration
Embolic occlusion
  Artery-to-artery

  Carotid bifurcation
  Aortic arch
  Arterial dissection

  Cardioembolic

  Atrial fibrillation
  Mural thrombus
  Myocardial infarction
  Dilated cardiomyopathy
  Valvular lesions
  Mitral stenosis
  Mechanical valve
  Bacterial endocarditis

  Paradoxical embolus
  Atrial septal defect
  Patent foramen ovale

  Atrial septal aneurysm
  Spontaneous echo contrast
 Stimulant drugs: cocaine,  
amphetamine

UNCOMMON CAUSES
Hypercoagulable disorders
  Protein C deficiencya
  Protein S deficiencya
  Antithrombin III deficiencya
  Antiphospholipid syndrome
  Factor V Leiden mutationa
  Prothrombin G20210 mutationa
  Systemic malignancy
  Sickle cell anemia
  β Thalassemia
  Polycythemia vera
  Systemic lupus erythematosus
  Homocysteinemia
  Thrombotic thrombocytopenic  
  purpura
  Disseminated intravascular  
  coagulation
  Dysproteinemiasa
  Nephrotic syndromea

Inflammatory bowel diseasea

  Oral contraceptives
  COVID-19 infection
Venous sinus thrombosisb
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Vasculitis

 Systemic vasculitis (PAN,  

 granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
[Wegener’s], Takayasu’s, giant cell 
arteritis)

  Primary CNS vasculitis
  Meningitis (syphilis, tuberculosis,  

fungal, bacterial, zoster)
Noninflammatory vasculopathy
  Reversible vasoconstriction  
  syndrome
  Fabry’s disease
  Angiocentric lymphoma
Cardiogenic
  Mitral valve calcification
  Atrial myxoma

Intracardiac tumor
  Marantic endocarditis
  Libman-Sacks endocarditis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage vasospasm
Moyamoya disease
Eclampsia

aChiefly cause venous sinus thrombosis. bMay be associated with any 
hypercoagulable disorder.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; PAN, polyarteritis nodosa.

involved.  Emboli  large  enough  to  occlude  the  stem  of  the  MCA  (3–4 
mm)  or  internal  carotid  terminus  lead  to  large  infarcts  that  involve 
both deep gray and white matter and some portions of the cortical sur-
face and its underlying white matter. A smaller embolus may occlude 
a  small  cortical  or  penetrating  arterial  branch.  The  location  and  size 
of  an  infarct  within  a  vascular  territory  depend  on  the  extent  of  the 
collateral circulation.

The most significant cause of cardioembolic stroke in most of the 
world is nonrheumatic (often called nonvalvular) atrial fibrillation. MI, 
prosthetic valves, rheumatic heart disease, and ischemic cardiomyop-
athy are other considerations (Table 427-2). Cardiac disorders causing 
brain embolism are discussed in the chapters on heart diseases, but a 
few pertinent aspects are highlighted here.

Nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation is the most common cause of cere-
bral embolism overall. The presumed stroke mechanism is thrombus 
formation  in  the  fibrillating  atrium  or  atrial  appendage,  with  subse-
quent  embolization.  Patients  with  atrial  fibrillation  have  an  average 
annual  risk  of  stroke  of  ~5%.  The  risk  of  stroke  can  be  estimated 
by  calculating  the  CHA2DS2-VASc  score  (Table  427-3).  Left  atrial 
enlargement is an additional risk factor for formation of atrial thrombi. 
Rheumatic  heart  disease  usually  causes  ischemic  stroke  when  there 
is  prominent  mitral  stenosis  or  atrial  fibrillation.  Recent  MI  may  be 
a  source  of  emboli,  especially  when  transmural  and  involving  the 
anteroapical  ventricular  wall,  and  prophylactic  anticoagulation  fol-
lowing  MI  with  left  ventricular  thrombus  has  been  shown  to  reduce 
ischemic  stroke  risk.  Mitral  valve  prolapse  is  not  usually  a  source  of 
emboli unless the prolapse is severe.

Paradoxical embolization occurs when venous thrombi migrate to 
the  arterial  circulation,  usually  via  a  patent  foramen  ovale  (PFO)  or 
atrial  septal  defect.  Bubble-contrast  echocardiography  (IV  injection 
of  agitated  saline  coupled  with  either  transthoracic  or  transesopha-
geal echocardiography) can demonstrate a right-to-left cardiac shunt, 
revealing  the  conduit  for  paradoxical  embolization.  Alternatively,  a 
right-to-left shunt is implied if immediately following IV injection of 
agitated saline, the ultrasound signature of bubbles is observed during 
transcranial  Doppler  insonation  of  the  MCA;  pulmonary  arterio-
venous malformations should be considered if this test is positive yet 
an  echocardiogram  fails  to  reveal  an  intracardiac  shunt.  Both  tech-
niques are highly sensitive for detection of right-to-left shunts. Besides 
venous clot, fat and tumor emboli, bacterial endocarditis, IV air, and 
amniotic  fluid  emboli  at  childbirth  may  occasionally  be  responsible 
for  paradoxical  embolization.  The  importance  of  a  PFO  as  a  cause 
of stroke is debated, particularly because they are present in ~15% of 
the general population. The presence of a venous source of embolus, 
most commonly a deep-venous thrombus, may provide confirmation 
of the importance of a PFO with an accompanying right-to-left shunt 
in  a  particular  case.  Meta-analysis  of  three  recent  randomized  trials 
reported a hazard ratio of 0.41 for recurrent stroke (about a 1% per year 
absolute  reduction)  using  percutaneous  occlusion  devices  in  patients 
with  no  other  explanation  for  their  stroke.  Guidelines  now  endorse 
PFO closure with percutaneous devices after consultation with a neu-
rologist and a cardiologist. This is the practice followed by the authors.
Bacterial  endocarditis  can  be  a  source  of  valvular  vegetations  that 
give  rise  to  septic  emboli.  The  appearance  of  multifocal  symptoms 
and signs in a patient with stroke makes bacterial endocarditis more 
likely. Infarcts of microscopic size occur, and large septic infarcts may 
evolve into brain abscesses or cause hemorrhage into the infarct, which 
generally  precludes  use  of  anticoagulation  or  thrombolytics.  Mycotic 
aneurysms caused by septic emboli may also present as subarachnoid 
hemorrhage (SAH) or intracerebral hemorrhage.

Artery-to-Artery Embolic Stroke  Thrombus formation on ath-
erosclerotic  plaques  may  embolize  to  intracranial  arteries  producing 
an  artery-to-artery  embolic  stroke.  Less  commonly,  a  diseased  vessel 
may acutely thrombose. Unlike the myocardial vessels, artery-to-artery 
embolism,  rather  than  local  thrombosis,  appears  to  be  the  dominant 
vascular mechanism causing large-vessel brain ischemia. Any diseased 
vessel may be an embolic source, including the aortic arch, common 
carotid, internal carotid, vertebral, and basilar arteries.
CAROTID  ATHEROSCLEROSIS  Atherosclerosis  within  the  carotid 
artery occurs most frequently within the common carotid bifurcation 
and  proximal  internal  carotid  artery;  the  carotid  siphon  (portion 
within the cavernous sinus) is also vulnerable to atherosclerosis. Male 
gender, older age, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and hypercholes-
terolemia are risk factors for carotid disease, as they are for stroke in 
general (Table 427-4). Carotid atherosclerosis produces an estimated 
10% of ischemic stroke. For further discussion of the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis, see Chap. 237.

Carotid  disease  can  be  classified  by  whether  the  stenosis  is  symp-
tomatic or asymptomatic and by the degree of stenosis (percent nar-
rowing of the narrowest segment compared to a nondiseased segment). 
Symptomatic carotid disease implies that the patient has experienced 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3340

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 427-3  Recommendations on Chronic Use of Antithrombotics 
for Various Cardiac Conditions
CONDITION
Nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
•	 CHA2DS2-VASc score of 0
•	 CHA2DS2-VASc score of 1
•	 CHA2DS2-VASc score of ≥2
Rheumatic mitral valve disease
•	 With atrial fibrillation, previous 

RECOMMENDATION
Calculate CHA2DS2-VASc scorea
Aspirin or no antithrombotic
Aspirin or OAC
OAC

OAC

embolization, or atrial appendage thrombus, 
or left atrial diameter >55 mm

•	 Embolization or appendage clot despite OAC OAC plus aspirin
Mitral valve prolapse
•	 Asymptomatic
•	 With otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
•	 Atrial fibrillation
Mitral annular calcification
•	 Without atrial fibrillation but systemic 

No therapy
Aspirin
OAC

Aspirin

embolization, or otherwise cryptogenic 
stroke or TIA

•	 Recurrent embolization despite aspirin
•	 With atrial fibrillation
Aortic valve calcification
•	 Asymptomatic
•	 Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Aortic arch mobile atheroma
•	 Otherwise cryptogenic stroke or TIA
Patent foramen ovale
•	 Otherwise cryptogenic ischemic stroke  

or TIA

OAC
OAC

No therapy
Aspirin

Aspirin or OAC

Aspirin or closure with device

•	 Indication for OAC (deep-venous 

thrombosis or hypercoagulable state)

OAC

Mechanical heart value
•	 Aortic position, bileaflet or Medtronic Hall 
tilting disk with normal left atrial size and 
sinus rhythm

•	 Mitral position tilting disk or bileaflet valve
•	 Mitral or aortic position, anterior-apical 

myocardial infarct or left atrial enlargement

•	 Mitral or aortic position, with atrial 

fibrillation, or hypercoagulable state, or 
low ejection fraction, or atherosclerotic 
vascular disease

•	 Systemic embolization despite target INR

Bioprosthetic valve
•	 No other indication for VKA therapy
Infective endocarditis
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis
•	 With systemic embolization

VKA INR 2.5, range 2–3

VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5
VKA INR 3.0, range 2.5–3.5

Aspirin plus VKA INR 3.0,  
range 2.5–3.5

Add aspirin and/or increase 
INR: prior target was 2.5, 
increase to 3.0, range 2.5–3.5; 
prior target was 3.0, increase to 
3.5, range 3–4

Aspirin
Avoid antithrombotic agents

Full-dose, unfractionated 
heparin or SC LMWH, or Xa 
inhibitor

aCHA2DS2-VASc score is calculated as follows: 1 point for congestive heart failure,  
1 point for hypertension, 2 points for age ≥75 years, 1 point for diabetes mellitus,  
2 points for stroke or TIA, 1 point for vascular disease (prior myocardial infarction, 
peripheral vascular disease, or aortic plaque), 1 point for age 65–74 years, 1 point 
for female sex category; sum of points is the total CHA2DS2-VASc score.
Note: Dose of aspirin is 50–325 mg/d; target INR for VKA is between 2 and 3 unless 
otherwise specified.
Abbreviations: INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, low-molecular-weight 
heparin; OAC, oral anticoagulant (VKA, thrombin inhibitor, or oral factor Xa 
inhibitors); TIA, transient ischemic attack; VKA, vitamin K antagonist.
Sources: Data from DE Singer et al: Chest 133:546S, 2008; DN Salem et al: Chest 
133:593S, 2008; CT January et al: JACC 64:2246, 2014.

a stroke or TIA within the vascular distribution of the artery, and it is 
associated  with  a  greater  risk  of  subsequent  stroke  than  asymptom-
atic stenosis, in which the patient is symptom free and the stenosis is 
detected through screening. Greater degrees of arterial narrowing are 
generally associated with a higher risk of stroke, except that those with 
near occlusions are at lower risk of stroke.

3341

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

OTHER CAUSES OF ARTERY-TO-ARTERY EMBOLIC STROKE  Intracranial 
atherosclerosis produces stroke either by an embolic mechanism or by 
in situ thrombosis of a diseased vessel. It is more common in patients 
of Asian and African-American descent. Recurrent stroke risk is ~15% 
per year, similar to untreated symptomatic carotid atherosclerosis.

Dissection of the internal carotid or vertebral arteries or even vessels 
beyond  the  circle  of  Willis  is  a  common  source  of  embolic  stroke  in 
young (age <60 years) patients. The dissection is usually painful and 
precedes the stroke by several hours or days. Extracranial dissections 
do not cause hemorrhage, presumably because of the tough adventitia 
of  these  vessels.  Intracranial  dissections,  conversely,  may  produce 
SAH  because  the  adventitia  of  intracranial  vessels  is  thin  and  pseu-
doaneurysms may form, requiring urgent treatment to prevent rerup-
ture. Treating asymptomatic pseudoaneurysms following extracranial 
dissection  is  likely  not  necessary.  The  cause  of  dissection  is  usually 
unknown,  and  recurrence  is  rare.  Ehlers-Danlos  type  IV,  Marfan’s 
disease, cystic medial necrosis, and fibromuscular dysplasia are asso-
ciated with dissections. Trauma (usually a motor vehicle accident or a 
sports injury) can cause carotid and vertebral artery dissections. Spinal 
manipulative  therapy  is  associated  with  vertebral  artery  dissection 
and stroke. Most dissections heal spontaneously, and stroke or TIA is 
uncommon beyond 2 weeks. One trial showed no difference in stroke 
prevention with aspirin compared to anticoagulation, with a low recur-
rent stroke rate of 2%.

 ■ SMALL-VESSEL STROKE
The  term  lacunar  infarction  refers  to  infarction  following  atheroth-
rombotic or lipohyalinotic occlusion of a small artery in the brain. The 
term small-vessel stroke denotes occlusion of such a small penetrating 
artery and is now the preferred term. Small-vessel strokes account for 
~20% of all strokes.

Pathophysiology  The  MCA  stem,  the  arteries  comprising  the 
circle  of  Willis  (A1  segment,  anterior  and  posterior  communicating 
arteries, and P1 segment), and the basilar and vertebral arteries all give 
rise to 30- to 300-μm branches that penetrate the deep gray and white 
matter of the cerebrum or brainstem (Fig. 427-4). Each of these small 
branches can occlude either by atherothrombotic disease at its origin or 
by the development of lipohyalinotic thickening. Thrombosis of these 
vessels  causes  small  infarcts  that  are  referred  to  as  lacunes  (Latin  for 
“lake” of fluid noted at autopsy). These infarcts range in size from 3 mm 
to 2 cm in diameter. Hypertension and age are the principal risk factors.

Clinical  Manifestations  The  most  common  small-vessel  stroke 
syndromes  are  the  following:  (1)  pure  motor  hemiparesis  from  an 
infarct  in  the  posterior  limb  of  the  internal  capsule  or  the  pons;  the 
face, arm, and leg are almost always involved; (2) pure sensory stroke 
from an infarct in the ventral thalamus; (3) ataxic hemiparesis from an 
infarct in the ventral pons or internal capsule; (4) and dysarthria and a 
clumsy hand or arm due to infarction in the ventral pons or in the genu 
of the internal capsule.

Transient symptoms (small-vessel TIAs) may herald a small-vessel 
infarct; they may occur several times a day and last only a few minutes. 
Recovery from small-vessel strokes tends to be more rapid and com-
plete than recovery from large-vessel strokes; in some cases, however, 
there is severe permanent disability.

A large-vessel source (either thrombosis or embolism) may manifest 
initially as a small-vessel infarction. Therefore, the search for embolic 
sources  (carotid  and  heart)  should  not  be  completely  abandoned  in 
the evaluation of these patients. Secondary prevention of small-vessel 
stroke involves risk factor modification, specifically reduction in blood 
pressure (see “Treatment: Primary and Secondary Prevention of Stroke 
and TIA,” below).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3341

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3342 TABLE 427-4  Risk Factors for Stroke

RISK FACTOR
Hypertension
Atrial fibrillation
Diabetes
Smoking

Hyperlipidemia
Asymptomatic carotid stenosis
Symptomatic carotid stenosis 
(70–99%)
Symptomatic carotid stenosis 
(50–69%)

RELATIVE RISK
2–5
1.8–2.9
1.8–6
1.8

1.8–2.6
2.0

RELATIVE RISK REDUCTION WITH TREATMENT
38%
68% warfarin, 21% aspirin
No proven effect
50% at 1 year, baseline risk at 5 years 
postcessation
16–30%
53%
65% at 2 years

29% at 5 years

NUMBER NEEDED TO TREATa

PRIMARY PREVENTION
100–300
20–83

SECONDARY PREVENTION
50–100
13

560
85
N/A

N/A

230
N/A
12

77

aNumber needed to treat to prevent one stroke annually. Prevention of other cardiovascular outcomes is not considered here.
Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.

 ■ LESS COMMON CAUSES OF STROKE
(Table 427-2) Hypercoagulable disorders (Chap. 65) primarily increase 
the risk of cortical vein or cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. Systemic 
lupus  erythematosus  with  Libman-Sacks  endocarditis  can  be  a  cause 

Anterior cerebral a.

Deep branches of the
middle cerebral a.

of embolic stroke. These conditions overlap with the antiphospholipid 
syndrome (Chap. 357), which probably requires long-term anticoagu-
lation to prevent further stroke. Homocysteinemia may cause arterial 
thromboses as well; this disorder is caused by various mutations in the 
homocysteine pathways and responds to dif-
ferent forms of cobalamin depending on the 
mutation.  Disseminated  intravascular  coag-
ulopathy can cause both venous and arterial 
occlusive  events;  COVID-19  infection  may 
predispose  for  acute  ischemic  stroke  due  to 
large-vessel occlusion.

Anterior cerebral a.

Internal
carotid a.

Internal carotid a.

Middle cerebral a.

Middle cerebral a.

Basilar a.

Vertebral a.

Basilar a.

Vertebral a.

Deep branches
of the basilar a.

FIGURE 427-4  Diagrams and reformatted computed tomography (CT) angiograms in the coronal section illustrating 
the  deep  penetrating  arteries  involved  in  small-vessel  strokes.  In  the  anterior  circulation,  small  penetrating 
arteries called lenticulostriates arise from the proximal portion of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries and 
supply deep subcortical structures (upper panels). In the posterior circulation, similar arteries arise directly from 
the vertebral and basilar arteries to supply the brainstem (lower panels). Occlusion of a single penetrating artery 
gives rise to a discrete area of infarct (pathologically termed a “lacune,” or lake). Note that these vessels are too 
small to be visualized on CT angiography.

Venous  sinus  thrombosis  of  the  lateral  or 
sagittal sinus or of small cortical veins (corti-
cal vein thrombosis) occurs as a complication 
of  oral  contraceptive  use,  pregnancy  and  the 
postpartum  period,  inflammatory  bowel  dis-
ease, intracranial infections (meningitis), and 
dehydration.  It  is  also  seen  in  patients  with 
laboratory-confirmed  thrombophilia  includ-
ing  antiphospholipid  syndrome,  polycythe-
mia, sickle cell anemia, deficiencies of proteins 
C  and  S,  factor  V  Leiden  mutation  (resis-
tance to activated protein C), antithrombin III 
deficiency,  homocysteinemia,  and  the  proth-
rombin  G20210  mutation.  Women  who  take 
oral contraceptives and have the prothrombin 
G20210 mutation may be at particularly high 
risk  for  sinus  thrombosis.  Patients  present 
with  headache  and  may  also  have  focal  neu-
rologic signs (especially paraparesis) and sei-
zures. Often, CT imaging is normal unless an 
intracranial venous hemorrhage has occurred, 
but the venous sinus occlusion is readily visu-
alized using MR or CT venography or conven-
tional x-ray angiography. With greater degrees 
of sinus thrombosis, the patient may develop 
signs of increased ICP and coma. Intravenous 
heparin,  regardless  of  the  presence  of  intra-
cranial  hemorrhage,  reduces  morbidity  and 
mortality, and the long-term outcome is gen-
erally good. Heparin prevents further throm-
bosis  and  reduces  venous  hypertension  and 
ischemia.  If  an  underlying  hypercoagulable 
state is not found, many physicians treat with 
oral anticoagulants for 3–6 months and then 
convert  to  aspirin,  depending  on  the  degree 
of  resolution  of  the  venous  sinus  thrombus. 
Anticoagulation  is  often  continued  indefi-
nitely if thrombophilia is diagnosed.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3342

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Sickle cell anemia (SS disease) is a common cause of stroke in chil-
dren.  A  subset  of  homozygous  carriers  of  this  hemoglobin  mutation 
develop stroke in childhood, and this may be predicted by document-
ing  high-velocity  blood  flow  within  the  MCAs  using  transcranial 
Doppler ultrasonography. In children who are identified to have high 
velocities, treatment with aggressive exchange transfusion dramatically 
reduces  risk  of  stroke,  and  if  exchange  transfusion  is  ceased,  their 
stroke rate increases again along with MCA velocities.

Fibromuscular  dysplasia  (Chap.  281)  affects  the  cervical  arteries 
and  occurs  mainly  in  women.  The  carotid  or  vertebral  arteries  show 
multiple  rings  of  segmental  narrowing  alternating  with  dilatation. 
Vascular occlusion is usually incomplete. The process is often asymp-
tomatic but occasionally is associated with an audible bruit, TIAs, or 
stroke.  Involvement  of  the  renal  arteries  is  common  and  may  cause 
hypertension. The cause and natural history of fibromuscular dysplasia 
are unknown. TIA or stroke generally occurs only when the artery is 
severely narrowed or dissects. Anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy 
may be helpful.

Temporal  (giant  cell)  arteritis  (Chap.  363)  is  a  relatively  common 
affliction  of  elderly  individuals  in  which  the  external  carotid  system, 
particularly the temporal arteries, undergoes subacute granulomatous 
inflammation  with  giant  cells.  Occlusion  of  posterior  ciliary  arteries 
derived from the ophthalmic artery results in blindness in one or both 
eyes and can be prevented with glucocorticoids. It rarely causes stroke 
because the internal carotid artery is usually not inflamed. Idiopathic 
giant  cell  arteritis  involving  the  great  vessels  arising  from  the  aortic 
arch (Takayasu’s arteritis) may cause carotid or vertebral thrombosis; it 
is rare in the Western Hemisphere.

Necrotizing  (or  granulomatous)  arteritis  (Chap.  363),  occurring 
alone or in association with generalized polyarteritis nodosa or gran-
ulomatosis  with  polyangiitis  (Wegener’s),  involves  the  distal  small 
branches  (<2  mm  diameter)  of  the  main  intracranial  arteries  and 
produces small ischemic infarcts in the brain, optic nerve, and spinal 
cord. The CSF often shows pleocytosis, and the protein level is elevated. 
Primary  central  nervous  system  vasculitis  is  rare;  small  or  medium-
sized vessels are usually affected, without apparent systemic vasculitis. 
The differential diagnosis includes other inflammatory vasculopathies 
including  infection  (tuberculous,  fungal),  sarcoidosis,  angiocentric 
lymphoma,  carcinomatous  meningitis,  and  noninflammatory  causes 
such as atherosclerosis, emboli, connective tissue disease, vasospasm, 
migraine-associated  vasculopathy,  and  drug-associated  causes.  Some 
cases develop in the postpartum period and are self-limited.

Patients with any form of vasculopathy may present with insidious 
progression of combined white and gray matter infarctions, prominent 
headache, and cognitive decline. Brain biopsy or high-resolution con-
ventional x-ray angiography is usually required to make the diagnosis 
(Fig. 427-5). A lumbar puncture (elevated white blood cells, elevated 

FIGURE 427-5  Cerebral angiogram from a 32-year-old male with central nervous 
system vasculopathy. Dramatic beading (arrows) typical of vasculopathy is seen.

3343

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

IgG  index,  bands  on  electrophoresis)  can  provide  support  for  an 
inflammatory etiology of a neurovascular problem. When inflamma-
tion is confirmed, aggressive immunosuppression with glucocorticoids, 
and often cyclophosphamide, is usually necessary to prevent progres-
sion; a diligent investigation for infectious causes such as tuberculosis 
is essential prior to immunosuppression. With prompt recognition and 
treatment, many patients can make an excellent recovery.

Drugs, in particular amphetamines and perhaps cocaine, may cause 
stroke on the basis of acute hypertension or drug-induced vasculopa-
thy. This vasculopathy is commonly due to vasospasm or atheroscle-
rosis, but cases of inflammatory vasculitis have also been reported. No 
data  exist  on  the  value  of  any  treatment,  but  cessation  of  stimulants 
is  prudent.  Phenylpropanolamine  has  been  linked  with  intracranial 
hemorrhage,  as  has  cocaine  and  methamphetamine,  perhaps  related 
to a drug-induced vasculopathy. Moyamoya disease is a poorly under-
stood occlusive disease involving large intracranial arteries, especially 
the distal internal carotid artery and the stem of the MCA and ACA. 
Vascular inflammation is absent. The lenticulostriate arteries develop 
a  rich  collateral  circulation  around  the  occlusive  lesion,  which  gives 
the  impression  of  a  “puff  of  smoke”  (moyamoya  in  Japanese)  on 
conventional  x-ray  angiography.  Other  collaterals  include  transdural 
anastomoses  between  the  cortical  surface  branches  of  the  meningeal 
and  scalp  arteries.  The  disease  occurs  mainly  in  Asian  children  or 
young adults, but the appearance may be identical in adults who have 
atherosclerosis,  particularly  in  association  with  diabetes.  Intracranial 
hemorrhage  may  result  from  rupture  of  the  moyamoya  collaterals; 
thus,  anticoagulation  is  risky.  Progressive  occlusion  of  large  surface 
arteries can occur, producing large-artery distribution strokes. Surgical 
bypass of extracranial carotid arteries to the dura or MCAs may pre-
vent stroke and hemorrhage.

Posterior  reversible  encephalopathy  syndrome  (PRES)  can  occur 
with  head  injury,  seizure,  migraine,  sympathomimetic  drug  use, 
and  eclampsia  and  in  the  postpartum  period.  The  pathophysiology 
is  uncertain  but  likely  involves  a  hyperperfusion  state  where  blood 
pressure  exceeds  the  upper  limit  of  cerebral  autoregulation  resulting 
in  cerebral  edema  (Chap.  307).  Patients  complain  of  headache  and 
manifest fluctuating neurologic symptoms and signs, especially visual 
symptoms.  Sometimes  cerebral  infarction  ensues,  but  typically,  the 
clinical  and  imaging  findings  reverse  completely.  MRI  findings  are 
characteristic  with  the  edema  present  within  the  occipital  lobes  but 
can be generalized and do not respect any single vascular territory. A 
closely  related  reversible  cerebral  vasoconstriction  syndrome  (RCVS) 
typically  presents  with  sudden,  severe  headache  closely  mimicking 
SAH.  Patients  may  experience  ischemic  infarction  and  intracerebral 
hemorrhage and typically have new-onset, severe hypertension. Con-
ventional  x-ray  angiography  reveals  changes  in  the  vascular  caliber 
throughout  the  hemispheres  resembling  vasculitis,  but  the  process  is 
noninflammatory. Oral calcium channel blockers may be effective in 
producing remission, and recurrence is rare.

Leukoaraiosis,  or  periventricular  white  matter  disease,  is  the  result 
of  multiple  small-vessel  infarcts  within  the  subcortical  white  matter. 
It is readily seen on CT or MRI scans as areas of white matter injury 
surrounding the ventricles and within the corona radiata. The patho-
physiologic  basis  of  the  disease  is  lipohyalinosis  of  small  penetrating 
arteries within the white matter, likely produced by chronic hyperten-
sion.  Patients  with  periventricular  white  matter  disease  may  develop 
a  subcortical  dementia  syndrome,  and  it  is  likely  that  this  common 
form of dementia may be delayed or prevented with antihypertensive 
medications (Chap. 433).

CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcor-
tical  infarcts  and  leukoencephalopathy)  is  an  inherited  disorder  that 
presents  as  small-vessel  strokes,  progressive  dementia,  and  extensive 
symmetric white matter changes often including the anterior temporal 
lobes visualized by MRI. Approximately 40% of patients have migraine 
with aura, often manifest as transient motor or sensory deficits. Onset 
is usually in the fourth or fifth decade of life. This autosomal dominant 
condition is caused by one of several mutations in Notch-3, a member 
of a highly conserved gene family characterized by epidermal growth 
factor repeats in its extracellular domain. Other monogenic ischemic 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3343

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3344 stroke  syndromes  include  cerebral  autosomal  recessive  arteriopathy 
with  subcortical  infarcts  and  leukoencephalopathy  (CARASIL)  and 
hereditary  endotheliopathy,  retinopathy,  nephropathy,  and  stroke 
(HERNS).  Fabry’s  disease  also  produces  both  a  large-vessel  arterio-
pathy and small-vessel infarctions. The COL4A1 mutation is associated 
with multiple small-vessel strokes with hemorrhagic transformation.

 ■ TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACKS
TIAs are episodes of stroke symptoms that last only briefly; the stan-
dard definition of duration is <24 h, but most TIAs last <1 h. If a rele-
vant brain infarction is identified on brain imaging, the clinical entity is 
now classified as stroke regardless of the duration of symptoms. A nor-
mal brain imaging study following a TIA does not rule out TIA; rather, 
the clinical syndrome is diagnostic. The causes of TIA are similar to 
the  causes  of  ischemic  stroke,  but  because  TIAs  may  herald  stroke, 
they are an important risk factor that should be considered separately 
and urgently. TIAs may arise from emboli to the brain or from in situ 
thrombosis of an intracranial vessel. With a TIA, the occluded blood 
vessel reopens and neurologic function is restored.

The risk of stroke after a TIA is ~10–15% in the first 3 months, with 
most events occurring in the first 2 days. This risk can be directly esti-
mated using the well-validated ABCD2 score (Table 427-5). Therefore, 
urgent  evaluation  and  treatment  are  justified.  Because  etiologies  for 
stroke  and  TIA  are  identical,  evaluation  for  TIA  should  parallel  that 
of stroke.

TREATMENT
Transient Ischemic Attack

The  improvement  characteristic  of  TIA  is  a  contraindication  to 
thrombolysis.  However,  because  the  risk  of  subsequent  stroke  in 
the first few hours and days following TIA is high, some physicians 
admit  the  patient  to  the  hospital  so  a  plasminogen  activator  can 
be  rapidly  administered  if  symptoms  return.  The  combination  of 
aspirin and clopidogrel was found to prevent stroke following TIA 
better than aspirin alone in a large Chinese randomized trial and 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)–sponsored  trial  (POINT 

SCORE
1
1

TABLE 427-5  Risk of Stroke Following Transient Ischemic Attack:  
The ABCD2 Score
CLINICAL FACTOR
A: Age ≥60 years
B: SBP >140 mmHg or DBP >90 mmHg
C: Clinical symptoms
  Unilateral weakness
  Speech disturbance without weakness
D: Duration
  >60 min
  10–59 min
D: Diabetes (oral medications or insulin)

2
1
1

2
1

TOTAL SCORE
ABCD2 Score Total
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

SUM EACH CATEGORY
3-Month Rate of Stroke (%)a
0
2
3
3
8
12
17
22

aData ranges are from five cohorts.
Abbreviations: DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Source: Data from SC Johnston et al: Validation and refinement of scores to predict 
very early stroke risk after transient ischaemic attack. Lancet 369:283, 2007.

study). Failure to respond to the combination of aspirin and clopi-
dogrel is linked to carriage of a common CYP2C19 polymorphism 
that  leads  to  poor  metabolism  of  clopidogrel  into  its  active  form. 
This mutation is common, particularly in Asians. Recently, ticagre-
lor, 180-mg loading dose and then 90 mg twice daily, was tested in 
combination with aspirin compared to aspirin alone, and this also 
showed benefit in preventing stroke; this dual antiplatelet regimen 
may  be  favored  because  of  the  lack  of  genetic  heterogeneity  in 
platelet inhibition.

Primary and Secondary Prevention of  
Stroke and TIA

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Many medical and surgical interventions, as well as lifestyle modi-
fications, are available for preventing stroke. Some of these can be 
widely applied because of their low cost and minimal risk; others 
are  expensive  and  carry  substantial  risk  but  may  be  valuable  for 
selected high-risk patients. Identification and control of modifiable 
risk  factors,  and  especially  hypertension,  is  the  best  strategy  to 
reduce the burden of stroke, and the total number of strokes could 
be reduced substantially by these means (Table 427-4). 
ATHEROSCLEROSIS RISK FACTORS
The  relationship  of  various  factors  to  the  risk  of  atherosclerosis 
is  described  in  Chaps.  237  and  238.  Older  age,  diabetes  melli-
tus,  hypertension,  tobacco  smoking,  abnormal  blood  cholesterol 
(particularly,  low  high-density  lipoprotein  [HDL]  and/or  elevated 
low-density  lipoprotein  [LDL]),  lipoprotein  (a)  excess,  and  other 
factors  are  either  proven  or  probable  risk  factors  for  ischemic 
stroke, largely by their link to atherosclerosis. Risk of stroke is much 
greater in those with prior stroke or TIA. Many cardiac conditions 
predispose  to  stroke,  including  atrial  fibrillation  and  recent  MI. 
Oral  contraceptives  and  hormone  replacement  therapy  increase 
stroke  risk,  and  although  rare,  certain  inherited  and  acquired 
hypercoagulable states predispose to stroke.

Hypertension is the most significant of the risk factors; in general, 
all  hypertension  should  be  treated  to  a  target  of  <130/80  mmHg. 
Recent  data  (the  Systolic  Blood  Pressure  Intervention  Trial—
SPRINT) suggest that lowering systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg 
reduces stroke and heart attack by 43% compared to systolic blood 
pressure <140 mmHg, without an increased risk of syncope or falls. 
The presence of known cerebrovascular disease is not a contrain-
dication  to  treatment  aimed  at  achieving  normotension.  Data  are 
particularly strong in support of thiazide diuretics and angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors.

Several  trials  have  confirmed  that  statin  drugs  reduce  the  risk 
of stroke even in patients without elevated LDL or low HDL. The 
Stroke  Prevention  by  Aggressive  Reduction  in  Cholesterol  Levels 
(SPARCL)  trial  showed  benefit  in  secondary  stroke  reduction  for 
patients with recent stroke or TIA who were prescribed atorvastatin, 
80 mg/d. The primary prevention trial, Justification for the Use of 
Statins  in  Prevention:  An  Intervention  Trial  Evaluating  Rosuvas-
tatin (JUPITER), found that patients with low LDL (<130 mg/dL) 
caused  by  elevated  C-reactive  protein  benefitted  by  daily  use  of 
this statin. Primary stroke occurrence was reduced by 51% (hazard 
ratio, 0.49; p = .004), and there was no increase in the rates of intra-
cranial  hemorrhage.  Meta-analysis  has  also  supported  a  primary 
treatment  effect  for  statins  given  acutely  for  ischemic  stroke.  A 
serum LDL <70 mg/dL lowers recurrent stroke risk better than an 
LDL of 90–110 mg/dL. Therefore, a statin should be considered in 
all  patients  with  prior  ischemic  stroke.  Tobacco  smoking  should 
be discouraged in all patients (Chap. 454). The use of pioglitazone 
(an  agonist  of  peroxisome  proliferator-activated  receptor  gamma) 
in patients with type 2 diabetes and previous stroke does not lower 
stroke, MI, or vascular death rates but is effective in lowering vas-
cular events in patients with stroke and prediabetes or insulin resis-
tance alone. Diabetes prevention is likely the most effective strategy 
for primary and secondary stroke prevention. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3344

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders ANTIPLATELET AGENTS FOR STROKE PREVENTION
Platelet antiaggregation agents can prevent atherothrombotic events, 
including  TIA  and  stroke,  by  inhibiting  the  formation  of  intraar-
terial  platelet  aggregates.  These  can  form  on  diseased  arteries, 
induce thrombus formation, and occlude or embolize into the distal 
circulation.  Aspirin,  clopidogrel,  the  combination  of  aspirin  plus   
extended-release dipyridamole, and recently ticagrelor are the anti-
platelet  agents  most  commonly  used  for  this  purpose.  Ticagrelor 
has not been found to be better than aspirin for stroke prevention 
except in combination with aspirin following TIA.

Aspirin  is  the  most  widely  studied  antiplatelet  agent.  Aspirin 
acetylates  platelet  cyclooxygenase,  which  irreversibly  inhibits  the 
formation in platelets of thromboxane A2, a platelet aggregating and 
vasoconstricting prostaglandin. This effect is permanent and lasts 
for  the  usual  8-day  life  of  the  platelet.  Paradoxically,  aspirin  also 
inhibits the formation in endothelial cells of prostacyclin, an antiag-
gregating and vasodilating prostaglandin. This effect is transient. As 
soon as aspirin is cleared from the blood, the nucleated endothelial 
cells  again  produce  prostacyclin.  Aspirin  in  low  doses  given  once 
daily inhibits the production of thromboxane A2 in platelets with-
out substantially inhibiting prostacyclin formation. Higher doses of 
aspirin have not been proven to be more effective than lower doses.
Clopidogrel  and  ticagrelor  block  the  adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP)  receptor  on  platelets  and  thus  prevent  the  cascade  result-
ing in activation of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor that leads to 
fibrinogen binding to the platelet and consequent platelet aggrega-
tion. Clopidogrel can cause rash and, in rare instances, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic  purpura.  The  Clopidogrel  versus  Aspirin  in 
Patients  at  Risk  of  Ischemic  Events  (CAPRIE)  trial,  which  led  to 
U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  approval,  found  that 
it was only marginally more effective than aspirin in reducing risk 
of  stroke.  The  Management  of  Atherothrombosis  with  Clopido-
grel  in  High-Risk  Patients  (MATCH)  trial  was  a  large  multicen-
ter, randomized, double-blind study that compared clopidogrel in 
combination  with  aspirin  to  clopidogrel  alone  in  the  secondary 
prevention of TIA or stroke. The MATCH trial found no difference 
in  TIA  or  stroke  prevention  with  this  combination  but  did  show 
a  small  but  significant  increase  in  major  bleeding  complications   
(3 vs 1%). In the Clopidogrel for High Atherothrombotic Risk and 
Ischemic Stabilization, Management, and Avoidance (CHARISMA) 
trial,  which  included  a  subgroup  of  patients  with  prior  stroke  or 
TIA along with other groups at high risk of cardiovascular events, 
there  was  no  benefit  of  clopidogrel  combined  with  aspirin  com-
pared to aspirin alone. Lastly, the SPS3 trial looked at the long-term 
combination of clopidogrel and aspirin versus clopidogrel alone in 
small-vessel stroke and found no improvement in stroke prevention 
and a significant increase in both hemorrhage and death. Thus, the 
long-term  use  of  clopidogrel  in  combination  with  aspirin  is  not 
recommended for stroke prevention.

The  short-term  combination  of  clopidogrel  with  aspirin  may 
be effective in preventing second stroke, however. A large trial of 
Chinese  patients  enrolled  within  24  h  of  TIA  or  minor  ischemic 
stroke  found  that  a  clopidogrel-aspirin  regimen  (clopidogrel 
300 mg load then 75 mg/d with aspirin 75 mg for the first 21 days) 
was  superior  to  aspirin  (75  mg/d)  alone,  with  90-day  stroke  risk 
decreased  from  11.7  to  8.2%  (p  <.001)  and  no  increase  in  major 
hemorrhage.  This  benefit  was  limited  to  those  not  carrying  the 
CYP2C19  polymorphism  associated  with  clopidogrel  hypometab-
olism. An international NIH-sponsored trial demonstrated similar 
results; therefore, the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel should 
be  administered  for  TIA  or  minor  ischemic  stroke  for  the  first 
21–90 days before switching to monotherapy.

A recent study of oral ticagrelor plus aspirin versus aspirin alone 
has shown similar benefits in secondary stroke reduction and car-
ries  the  likely  advantage  that  ticagrelor’s  antiplatelet  effect  is  not 
genetically variable, as is the case with clopidogrel.

Dipyridamole  is  an  antiplatelet  agent  that  inhibits  the  uptake 
of  adenosine  by  a  variety  of  cells,  including  those  of  the  vascu-
lar  endothelium.  The  accumulated  adenosine  is  an  inhibitor  of 

3345

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

aggregation.  At  least  in  part  through  its  effects  on  platelet  and 
vessel  wall  phosphodiesterases,  dipyridamole  also  potentiates  the 
antiaggregatory  effects  of  prostacyclin  and  nitric  oxide  produced 
by  the  endothelium  and  acts  by  inhibiting  platelet  phosphodi-
esterase, which is responsible for the breakdown of cyclic AMP.  
The resulting elevation in cyclic AMP inhibits aggregation of plate-
lets.  Dipyridamole  is  erratically  absorbed  depending  on  stomach 
pH, but a newer formulation combines timed-release dipyridamole, 
200  mg,  with  aspirin,  25  mg,  and  has  better  oral  bioavailability. 
This  combination  drug  was  studied  in  three  trials.  The  European 
Stroke  Prevention  Study  (ESPS)  II  showed  efficacy  of  both   
50  mg/d  of  aspirin  and  extended-release  dipyridamole  in  pre-
venting  stroke  and  a  significantly  better  risk  reduction  when  the 
two  agents  were  combined.  The  open-label  ESPRIT  (European/
Australasian Stroke Prevention in Reversible Ischaemia Trial) trial 
confirmed  the  ESPS-II  results.  After  3.5  years  of  follow-up,  13% 
of patients on aspirin and dipyridamole and 16% on aspirin alone 
(hazard ratio, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.66–0.98) met the primary outcome of 
death from all vascular causes. In the Prevention Regimen for Effec-
tively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) trial, the combination of 
extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin was compared directly 
with clopidogrel with and without the angiotensin receptor blocker 
telmisartan; there were no differences in the rates of second stroke 
(9% each) or degree of disability in patients with median follow-up 
of 2.4 years. Telmisartan also had no effect on these outcomes. This 
suggests that these antiplatelet regimens are similar and raises ques-
tions about default prescription of agents to block the angiotensin 
pathway in all stroke patients. The principal side effect of dipyrida-
mole  is  headache.  The  combination  capsule  of  extended-release 
dipyridamole and aspirin is approved for prevention of stroke.

Many  large  clinical  trials  have  demonstrated  clearly  that  most 
antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of all important vascular atheroth-
rombotic events (i.e., ischemic stroke, MI, and death due to all vas-
cular causes) in patients at risk for these events. The overall relative 
reduction in risk of nonfatal stroke is ~25–30% and of all vascular 
events is ~25%. The absolute reduction varies considerably, depend-
ing on the patient’s risk. Individuals at very low risk for stroke seem 
to experience the same relative reduction, but their risks may be so 
low that the “benefit” is meaningless. Conversely, individuals with 
a  10–15%  risk  of  vascular  events  per  year  experience  a  reduction 
to ~7.5–11%.

Aspirin  is  inexpensive,  can  be  given  in  low  doses,  and  could 
be  recommended  for  all  adults  to  prevent  both  stroke  and  MI. 
However,  it  causes  epigastric  discomfort,  gastric  ulceration,  and 
gastrointestinal  hemorrhage,  which  may  be  asymptomatic  or  life 
threatening.  Consequently,  not  every  40-  or  50-year-old  should 
be  advised  to  take  aspirin  regularly  because  the  risk  of  atheroth-
rombotic stroke is extremely low and is outweighed by the risk of 
adverse side effects. Conversely, every patient who has experienced 
an atherothrombotic stroke or TIA and has no contraindication to 
antiplatelet  therapy  (or  indication  for  anticoagulation)  should  be 
taking  an  antiplatelet  agent  regularly  because  the  average  annual 
risk of another stroke is 8–10%; another few percent will experience 
an MI or vascular death. Clearly, the likelihood of benefit far out-
weighs the risks of treatment.

The choice of antiplatelet agent and dose must balance the risk of 
stroke, the expected benefit, and the risk and cost of treatment. How-
ever, there are no definitive data, and opinions vary. Many authori-
ties believe low-dose (30–75 mg/d) and high-dose (650–1300 mg/d) 
aspirin are about equally effective. Some advocate very low doses to 
avoid adverse effects, and still others advocate very high doses to 
be sure the benefit is maximal. Most physicians in North America 
recommend  81–325  mg/d,  whereas  most  Europeans  recommend 
50–100  mg.  Clopidogrel  and  extended-release  dipyridamole  plus 
aspirin are being increasingly recommended as first-line drugs for 
secondary prevention. Similarly, the choice of aspirin, clopidogrel, 
or dipyridamole plus aspirin must balance the fact that the latter are 
more effective than aspirin but the cost is higher, and this is likely to 
affect long-term patient adherence. The use of platelet aggregation 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3345

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3346

studies in individual patients taking aspirin is controversial because 
of limited data.

In  our  practices,  when  considering  antithrombotic  therapy  for 
secondary  stroke  prevention  for  noncardioembolic  strokes  and 
TIAs, we prescribe aspirin 81 mg/d in aspirin-naive patients after an 
initial load of 325 mg. We add either clopidogrel (600-mg load, then 
75  mg  daily)  or  ticagrelor  (180-mg  load,  then  90  mg  twice  daily) 
for  TIA  or  minor  stroke  (NIHSS  <5)  for  21–30  days,  followed  by 
monotherapy with aspirin alone at 81 mg daily. We treat stroke due 
to intracranial atherosclerosis with aspirin 81 mg plus clopidogrel 
75 mg daily for 3 months, after which time treatment is continued 
with aspirin alone. 

ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND EMBOLIC  
STROKE PREVENTION
Several  trials  have  shown  that  anticoagulation  (international  nor-
malized  ratio  [INR]  range,  2–3)  in  patients  with  chronic  nonval-
vular  (nonrheumatic)  atrial  fibrillation  (NVAF)  prevents  cerebral 
embolism  and  stroke  and  is  safe.  For  primary  prevention  and  for 
patients who have experienced stroke or TIA, anticoagulation with 
a  vitamin  K  antagonist  (VKA)  reduces  the  risk  by  ~67%,  which 
clearly outweighs the 1–3% risk per year of a major bleeding com-
plication. VKAs are difficult to dose, their effects vary with dietary 
intake  of  vitamin  K,  and  they  require  frequent  blood  monitoring 
of  the  PTT/INR.  Several  newer  oral  anticoagulants  (OACs)  have 
recently  been  shown  to  be  more  convenient  and  efficacious  for 
stroke prevention in NVAF. A randomized trial compared the oral 
thrombin inhibitor dabigatran to VKAs in a noninferiority trial to 
prevent  stroke  or  systemic  embolization  in  NVAF.  Two  doses  of 
dabigatran were used: 110 mg/d and 150 mg/d. Both dose tiers of 
dabigatran were noninferior to VKAs in preventing second stroke 
and  systemic  embolization,  and  the  higher  dose  tier  was  supe-
rior  (relative  risk,  0.66;  95%  CI,  0.53–0.82;  p  <.001)  and  the  rate 
of  major  bleeding  was  lower  in  the  lower  dose  tier  of  dabigatran 
compared  to  VKAs.  Dabigatran  requires  no  blood  monitoring 
to  titrate  the  dose,  and  its  effect  is  independent  of  oral  intake  of 
vitamin  K.  Newer  oral  factor  Xa  inhibitors  have  also  been  found 
to be equivalent or safer and more effective than VKAs in NVAF 
stroke  prevention.  In  the  Apixaban  for  Reduction  in  Stroke  and 
Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) 
trial, patients were randomized between apixaban, 5 mg twice daily, 
and dose-adjusted warfarin (INR 2–3). The combined endpoint of 
ischemic  or  hemorrhagic  stroke  or  system  embolism  occurred  in 
1.27% of patients in the apixaban group and in 1.6% in the warfarin 
group (p <.001 for noninferiority and p <.01 for superiority). Major 
bleeding was 1% less, favoring apixaban (p <.001). Similar results 
were obtained in the Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa 
Inhibition Compared with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention 
of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation (ROCKET-AF). 
In this trial, patients with NVAF were randomized to rivaroxaban 
versus warfarin: 1.7% of the factor Xa group and 2.2% of the war-
farin group reached the endpoint of stroke and systemic embolism  
(p <.001 for noninferiority); intracranial hemorrhage was also lower 
with rivaroxaban. Finally, the factor Xa inhibitor edoxaban was also 
found to be noninferior to warfarin. Thus, oral factor Xa inhibitors 
are  at  least  a  suitable  alternative  to  VKAs,  for  both  primary  and 
secondary prevention, and likely are superior both in efficacy and 
perhaps  compliance.  Recent  FDA  approval  of  a  reversal  agent  for 
the  Xa  inhibitors  apixaban  and  rivaroxaban  (andexanet  alfa)  pro-
vides an antidote in the case of major bleeding. Idarucizumab has 
been  available  for  reversal  of  dabigatran.  Randomized  trials  have 
not demonstrated the superiority of anticoagulants over antiplatelet 
medications for strokes that appear embolic without a clear source. 
However, subgroup analyses of these patients who also have mod-
erate or severe left atrial enlargement do show benefit of OACs over 
aspirin,  and  a  randomized  trial  to  address  this  strategy  further  is 
underway.

For  patients  who  cannot  take  anticoagulant  medications,  clop-
idogrel  plus  aspirin  was  compared  to  aspirin  alone  in  the  Atrial 

Fibrillation  Clopidogrel  Trial  with  Irbesartan  for  Prevention  of 
Vascular Events (ACTIVE-A). Clopidogrel combined with aspirin 
was more effective than aspirin alone in preventing vascular events, 
principally stroke, but increased the risk of major bleeding (relative 
risk,  1.57;  p  <.001).  Left  atrial  appendage  occlusion  followed  by 
antiplatelet therapy was found to be noninferior to oral Xa inhibi-
tors in patients at moderate to high risk of bleeding in a single trial. 
If  confirmed,  this  may  be  a  safer  strategy  than  management  with 
aspirin  alone  for  these  patients  at  high  risk  of  atrial  fibrillation–
related stroke.

The  decision  to  use  anticoagulation  for  primary  prevention  is 
based primarily on risk factors (Table 427-3). The history of a TIA 
or stroke tips the balance in favor of anticoagulation regardless of 
other  risk  factors.  Intermittent  atrial  fibrillation  carries  the  same 
risk of stroke as chronic atrial fibrillation, and several ambulatory 
studies  of  seemingly  “cryptogenic”  stroke  have  found  evidence 
of  intermittent  atrial  fibrillation  in  nearly  20%  of  patients  moni-
tored for a few weeks. Interrogation of implanted pacemakers also 
confirms  an  association  between  subclinical  atrial  fibrillation  and 
stroke  risk.  Therefore,  for  patients  with  otherwise  cryptogenic 
embolic stroke (no evidence of any other cause for stroke), ambula-
tory monitoring for 3–4 weeks is a reasonable strategy to determine 
the best prophylactic therapy.

Because  of  the  high  annual  stroke  risk  in  untreated  rheu-
matic  heart  disease  with  atrial  fibrillation,  primary  prophylaxis 
against  stroke  has  not  been  studied  in  a  double-blind  fashion. 
These patients generally should receive long-term anticoagulation. 
Dabigatran and the oral Xa inhibitors have not been studied in this 
population.

Anticoagulation also reduces the risk of embolism in acute MI. 
Most  clinicians  recommend  a  3-month  course  of  anticoagulation 
when there is anterior Q-wave infarction, substantial left ventricu-
lar dysfunction, congestive heart failure, mural thrombosis, or atrial 
fibrillation. OACs are recommended long term if atrial fibrillation 
persists.

Stroke secondary to thromboembolism is one of the most serious 
complications of prosthetic heart valve implantation. The intensity 
of anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet therapy is dictated by the type 
of prosthetic valve and its location. Dabigatran may be less effective 
than warfarin, and the oral Xa inhibitors have not been studied in 
this population.

If  the  embolic  source  cannot  be  eliminated,  anticoagulation 
should in most cases be continued indefinitely. Many neurologists 
recommend combining antiplatelet agents with anticoagulants for 
patients  who  “fail”  anticoagulation  (i.e.,  have  another  stroke  or 
TIA), but the evidence basis for this is lacking.

It is our practice to prescribe apixaban 5 mg twice daily for non-
valvular atrial fibrillation with CHA2DS2-VASc score of ≥2, aspirin 
81  mg  plus  clopidogrel  75  mg  daily  for  patients  who  cannot  take 
oral  anticoagulation,  and  VKAs  for  valvular  atrial  fibrillation  or 
mechanical heart valve. 

ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY AND  
NONCARDIOGENIC STROKE
Data  do  not  support  the  use  of  long-term  VKAs  for  preventing 
atherothrombotic stroke for either intracranial or extracranial cer-
ebrovascular disease. The Warfarin-Aspirin Recurrent Stroke Study 
(WARSS) found no benefit of warfarin sodium (INR 1.4–2.8) over 
aspirin,  325  mg,  for  secondary  prevention  of  stroke  but  did  find 
a  slightly  higher  bleeding  rate  in  the  warfarin  group;  a  European 
study confirmed this finding. The Warfarin and Aspirin for Symp-
tomatic  Intracranial  Disease  (WASID)  study  (see  below)  demon-
strated  no  benefit  of  warfarin  (INR  2–3)  over  aspirin  in  patients 
with  symptomatic  intracranial  atherosclerosis  and  found  a  higher 
rate  of  bleeding  complications.  The  first  of  several  trials  testing 
factor Xa medications for prevention of embolic stroke of unknown 
source failed to show benefit compared to treatment with antiplate-
let medications. The oral factor Xa inhibitor apixaban was found to 
be noninferior to subcutaneous dalteparin for patients with cancer 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3346

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders and  venous  thromboembolism;  many  oncologists  are  using  Xa 
inhibitors to prevent second stroke in patients with malignancy.

It is our practice to prescribe aspirin for secondary stroke pre-
vention  in  noncardiogenic  cerebral  embolism  except  for  stroke 
associated  with  cancer  (apixaban  5  mg  twice  daily)  and  the  anti-
phospholipid syndrome (warfarin with target INR 2–3).

TREATMENT
Carotid Atherosclerosis

Carotid atherosclerosis can be removed surgically (endarterectomy) 
or  mitigated  with  endovascular  stenting  with  or  without  balloon 
angioplasty. Anticoagulation has not been directly compared with 
antiplatelet therapy for carotid disease. 
SURGICAL THERAPY
Symptomatic  carotid  stenosis  was  studied  in  the  North  American 
Symptomatic  Carotid  Endarterectomy  Trial  (NASCET)  and  the 
European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). Both showed a substantial 
benefit for surgery in patients with stenosis of ≥70%. In NASCET, 
the  average  cumulative  ipsilateral  stroke  risk  at  2  years  was  26% 
for patients treated medically and 9% for those receiving the same 
medical  treatment  plus  a  carotid  endarterectomy.  This  17%  abso-
lute reduction in the surgical group is a 65% relative risk reduction 
favoring surgery (Table 427-4). NASCET also showed a significant, 
although  less  robust,  benefit  for  patients  with  50–70%  stenosis. 
ECST found harm for patients with stenosis <30% treated surgically.
A patient’s risk of stroke and possible benefit from surgery are 
related  to  the  presence  of  retinal  versus  hemispheric  symptoms, 
degree of arterial stenosis, extent of associated medical conditions 
(of note, NASCET and ECST excluded “high-risk” patients with sig-
nificant cardiac, pulmonary, or renal disease), institutional surgical 
morbidity  and  mortality,  timing  of  surgery  relative  to  symptoms, 
and other factors. A recent meta-analysis of the NASCET and ECST 
trials  demonstrated  that  endarterectomy  is  most  beneficial  when 
performed within 2 weeks of symptom onset. In addition, benefit is 
more pronounced in patients >75 years, and men appear to benefit 
more than women.

In  summary,  a  patient  with  recent  symptomatic  hemispheric 
ischemia,  high-grade  stenosis  in  the  appropriate  internal  carotid 
artery,  and  an  institutional  perioperative  morbidity  and  mortality 
rate  of  ≤6%  generally  should  undergo  carotid  endarterectomy.  If 
the  perioperative  stroke  rate  is  >6%  for  any  particular  surgeon, 
however, the benefits of carotid endarterectomy are questionable.

The  indications  for  surgical  treatment  of  asymptomatic  carotid 
disease  have  been  clarified  by  the  results  of  the  Asymptomatic 
Carotid  Atherosclerosis  Study  (ACAS)  and  the  Asymptomatic 
Carotid  Surgery  Trial  (ACST).  ACAS  randomized  asymptomatic 
patients  with  ≥60%  stenosis  to  medical  treatment  with  aspirin 
or  the  same  medical  treatment  plus  carotid  endarterectomy.  The 
surgical group had a risk over 5 years for ipsilateral stroke (and any 
perioperative  stroke  or  death)  of  5.1%,  compared  to  a  risk  in  the 
medical group of 11%. Although this demonstrates a 53% relative 
risk reduction, the absolute risk reduction is only 5.9% over 5 years, 
or  1.2%  annually  (Table  427-4).  Nearly  one-half  of  the  strokes  in 
the surgery group were caused by preoperative angiograms. ACST 
randomized  asymptomatic  patients  with  >60%  carotid  stenosis  to 
endarterectomy or medical therapy. The 5-year risk of stroke in the 
surgical group (including perioperative stroke or death) was 6.4%, 
compared to 11.8% in the medically treated group (46% relative risk 
reduction and 5.4% absolute risk reduction).

In  both  ACAS  and  ACST,  the  perioperative  complication  rate 
was higher in women, perhaps negating any benefit in the reduction 
of stroke risk within 5 years. It is possible that with longer follow-up, 
a clear benefit in women will emerge. At present, carotid endarter-
ectomy in asymptomatic women remains particularly controversial.
In summary, the natural history of asymptomatic stenosis is an 
~2% per year stroke rate, whereas symptomatic patients experience 

3347

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
7

I
s
c
h
e
m
i
c
S
t
r
o
k
e

a  13%  per  year  risk  of  stroke.  Whether  to  recommend  carotid 
revascularization for an asymptomatic patient is somewhat contro-
versial and depends on many factors, including patient preference, 
degree of stenosis, age, gender, and comorbidities. Medical therapy 
for reduction of atherosclerosis risk factors, including cholesterol- 
lowering  agents  and  antiplatelet  medications,  is  generally  recom-
mended  for  patients  with  asymptomatic  carotid  stenosis.  As  with 
atrial fibrillation, it is imperative to counsel the patient about TIAs 
so that therapy can be revised if symptoms develop. 
ENDOVASCULAR THERAPY
Balloon  angioplasty  coupled  with  stenting  is  being  used  with 
increasing frequency to open stenotic carotid arteries and maintain 
their patency. These techniques can treat carotid stenosis not only 
at the bifurcation but also near the skull base and in the intracranial 
segments. The Stenting and Angioplasty with Protection in Patients 
at  High  Risk  for  Endarterectomy  (SAPPHIRE)  trial  randomized 
high-risk  patients  (defined  as  patients  with  clinically  significant 
coronary  or  pulmonary  disease,  contralateral  carotid  occlusion, 
restenosis after endarterectomy, contralateral laryngeal-nerve palsy, 
prior  radical  neck  surgery  or  radiation,  or  age  >80)  with  symp-
tomatic  carotid  stenosis  >50%  or  asymptomatic  stenosis  >80%  to 
either stenting combined with a distal emboli-protection device or 
endarterectomy. The risk of death, stroke, or MI within 30 days and 
ipsilateral stroke or death within 1 year was 12.2% in the stenting 
group and 20.1% in the endarterectomy group (p = .055), suggest-
ing that stenting is at the very least comparable to endarterectomy 
as a treatment option for this patient group at high risk of surgery. 
However, the outcomes with both interventions may not have been 
better than leaving the carotid stenoses untreated, particularly for 
the  asymptomatic  patients,  and  much  of  the  benefit  seen  in  the 
stenting  group  was  due  to  a  reduction  in  periprocedure  MI.  Two 
randomized  trials  comparing  stents  to  endarterectomy  in  low-
er-risk patients have been published. The Carotid Revascularization 
Endarterectomy  versus  Stenting  Trial  (CREST)  enrolled  patients 
with  either  asymptomatic  or  symptomatic  stenosis.  The  30-day 
risk of stroke was 4.1% in the stent group and 2.3% in the surgical 
group, but the 30-day risk of MI was 1.1% in the stent group and 
2.3%  in  the  surgery  group,  suggesting  relative  equivalence  of  risk 
between  the  procedures.  At  median  follow-up  of  2.5  years,  the 
combined  endpoint  of  stroke,  MI,  and  death  was  the  same  (7.2% 
stent vs 6.8% surgery) and remained so at 10-year follow-up. The 
rate  of  restenosis  at  2  years  was  also  similar  in  both  groups.  The 
International Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS) randomized symptom-
atic patients to stents versus endarterectomy and found a different 
result: at 120 days, the incidence of stroke, MI, or death was 8.5% 
in  the  stenting  group  versus  5.2%  in  the  endarterectomy  group   
(p = .006). At median follow-up of 5 years, these differences were 
no longer significant except a small increase in nondisabling stroke 
in  the  stenting  group  but  no  change  in  the  average  disability.  In 
meta-analysis,  carotid  endarterectomy  (CEA)  is  less  morbid  in 
older patients (aged ≥70) than is stenting. Investigation is ongoing 
in  asymptomatic  patients  to  compare  medical  therapy  to  stenting 
and  CEA.  This  will  likely  answer  how  well  medical  patients  do 
with  more  modern  medical  therapy  (statins,  close  blood  pressure 
control, and lifestyle modification). 
BYPASS SURGERY
Extracranial-to-intracranial  (EC-IC)  bypass  surgery  has  been 
proven ineffective for atherosclerotic stenoses that are inaccessible 
to conventional CEA. In patients with recent stroke, an associated 
carotid occlusion, and evidence of inadequate perfusion of the brain 
as measured with positron emission tomography, no benefit from 
EC-IC bypass was found in a trial stopped for futility. 
PATENT FORAMEN OVALE (PFO)
In patients with PFO and/or atrial septal aneurysm with an embolic 
stroke  and  no  other  cause  identified,  three  randomized  trials 
using  various  endovascular  closure  devices  individually  and  in 
meta-analysis report a significant (1% per year) reduction in second 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3347

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3348

stroke compared to antiplatelet agents. If the neurological opinion 
is that no other source of stroke is identified and consultation with a 
cardiologist knowledgeable about PFO closure supports intervention, 
we recommend endovascular PFO closure. 
INTRACRANIAL ATHEROSCLEROSIS
The  WASID  trial  randomized  patients  with  symptomatic  stenosis 
(50–99%) of a major intracranial vessel to either high-dose aspirin 
(1300  mg/d)  or  warfarin  (target  INR,  2.0–3.0),  with  a  combined 
primary endpoint of ischemic stroke, brain hemorrhage, or death 
from  vascular  cause  other  than  stroke.  The  trial  was  terminated 
early  because  of  an  increased  risk  of  adverse  events  related  to 
warfarin anticoagulation. With a mean follow-up of 1.8 years, the 
primary endpoint was seen in 22.1% of patients in the aspirin group 
and 21.8% of the warfarin group. Death from any cause was seen in 
4.3% of the aspirin group and 9.7% of the warfarin group; 3.2% of 
patients  on  aspirin  experienced  major  hemorrhage,  compared  to 
8.3% of patients taking warfarin.

Intracranial stenting of intracranial atherosclerosis was found to 
be  dramatically  harmful  compared  to  aspirin  in  the  Stenting  and 
Aggressive  Medical  Management  for  Preventing  Recurrent  Stroke 
in Intracranial Stenosis (SAMMPRIS) trial. This trial enrolled newly 
symptomatic TIA or minor stroke patients with associated 70–99% 
intracranial stenosis to primary stenting with a self-expanding stent 
or to medical management. Both groups received clopidogrel, aspi-
rin, statin, and aggressive control of blood pressure. The endpoint 
of stroke or death occurred in 14.7% of the stented group and 5.8% 
of the medically treated groups (p = .002). This low rate of second 
stroke was significantly lower than in the WASID trial and suggests 
that  aggressive  medical  management  had  a  marked  influence  on 
secondary stroke risk. A concomitant study of balloon-expandable 
stenting  was  halted  early  at  125  patients  because  of  the  negative 
SAMMPRIS  results  and  due  to  harm.  Therefore,  routine  use  of 
intracranial stenting is harmful, and medical therapy is superior for 
intracranial atherosclerosis.

Dural  Sinus  Thrombosis  Limited  evidence  exists  to  support 
short-term  use  of  anticoagulants,  regardless  of  the  presence  of 
intracranial  hemorrhage,  for  venous  infarction  following  sinus 
thrombosis. The long-term outcome for most patients, even those 
with intracerebral hemorrhage, is excellent.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Goyal  M  et  al:  Endovascular  thrombectomy  after  large-vessel 
ischaemic  stroke:  A  meta-analysis  of  individual  patient  data  from 
five randomised trials. Lancet 387:1723, 2016.

Grotta  JC  et  al:  Prospective,  multicenter,  controlled  trial  of  mobile 

stroke units. N Engl J Med 385:971, 2021.

January CT et al: 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014 
AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients with atrial 
fibrillation: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the 
Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 74:104, 2019.

Larsson SC et al: Prognosis of carotid dissecting aneurysms: Results 

from CADISS and a systematic review. Neurology 88:646, 2017.

Osmancik  P  et  al:  Left  atrial  appendage  closure  versus  direct  oral 
anticoagulants in high-risk patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 75:3122, 2020.

Powers WJ et al: Guidelines for the early management of patients with 
acute ischemic stroke: 2019 update to the 2018 guidelines for the early 
management  of  acute  ischemic  stroke:  A  guideline  for  healthcare 
professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke 
Association. Stroke 50:e344, 2019.

Saver  JL  et  al:  Time  to  treatment  with  endovascular  thrombec-
tomy  and  outcomes  from  ischemic  stroke:  A  meta-analysis.  JAMA 
316:1279, 2016.

Sprint Research Group et al: A randomized trial of intensive versus 

standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med 373:2103, 2015.

Torbey  MT  et  al:  Evidence-based  guidelines  for  the  management  of 
large hemispheric infarction: A statement for health care professionals 

from the Neurocritical Care Society and the German Society for Neu-
ro-intensive Care and Emergency Medicine. Neurocrit Care 22:146, 
2015.

428 Intracranial Hemorrhage

Wade S. Smith, J. Claude  Hemphill, III, 
S. Claiborne Johnston

Intracranial  hemorrhage  is  a  form  of  stroke  (see  Chap.  426).  Com-
pared  to  ischemic  stroke,  patients  with  intracranial  hemorrhage  are 
more  likely  to  present  with  headache;  however,  brain  imaging  is 
required to distinguish these entities. CT imaging of the head is highly 
sensitive and specific for intracranial hemorrhage and determines the 
location(s)  of  bleeding.  Hemorrhages  are  classified  by  their  location 
and the underlying vascular pathology. Hemorrhage directly into the 
brain parenchyma, also known as intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), and 
arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) of the brain will be considered 
here. Other categories of hemorrhage include bleeding into subdural 
and epidural spaces, usually caused by trauma (Chap 443), and sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage due to trauma or the rupture of an intracranial 
aneurysm (Chap. 429).
 ■ DIAGNOSIS
Intracranial hemorrhage is often identified on noncontrast CT imag-
ing of the brain during the acute evaluation of stroke. Because CT is 
more widely available and may be logistically easier to perform than 
MRI,  CT  imaging  is  generally  the  preferred  method  for  acute  stroke 
evaluation (Fig. 428-1). The location of the hemorrhage narrows the 
differential diagnosis to a few entities. Table 428-1 lists the causes and 
anatomic spaces involved in hemorrhages.
 ■ EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Close attention should be paid to airway management because a reduc-
tion  in  the  level  of  consciousness  is  common  and  often  progressive. 
The initial blood pressure should be maintained until the results of the 

FIGURE  428-1  Hypertensive  hemorrhage.  Transaxial  noncontrast  computed 
tomography  scan  through  the  region  of  the  basal  ganglia  reveals  a  hematoma 
involving  the  left  putamen  in  a  patient  with  rapidly  progressive  onset  of  right 
hemiparesis.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3348

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 428-1  Causes of Intracranial Hemorrhage
LOCATION
CAUSE
Intraparenchymal: frontal 
Head trauma
lobes, anterior temporal 
lobes; subarachnoid; 
extra-axial (subdural, 
epidural)
Putamen, globus pallidus, 
thalamus, cerebellar 
hemisphere, pons

Hypertensive 
hemorrhage

Transformation 
of prior ischemic 
infarction
Metastatic brain 
tumor

Basal ganglion, 
subcortical regions, lobar

Lobar

Coagulopathy

Any

Drug
Arteriovenous 
malformation

Aneurysm

Amyloid angiopathy

Any, lobar, subarachnoid
Lobar, intraventricular, 
subarachnoid

Subarachnoid, 
intraparenchymal, rarely 
subdural
Lobar

Cavernous angioma

Intraparenchymal

Dural arteriovenous 
fistula
Dural sinus 
thrombosis

Lobar, subarachnoid

Along sagittal sinus, 
posterior temporal/
inferior parietal

Capillary 
telangiectasias

Usually brainstem

COMMENTS
Coup and contrecoup injury 
during brain deceleration

Chronic hypertension 
produces hemorrhage from 
small (~30–100 μm) vessels in 
these regions
Occurs in 1–6% of ischemic 
strokes with predilection for 
large hemispheric infarctions
Lung, choriocarcinoma, 
melanoma, renal cell 
carcinoma, thyroid, atrial 
myxoma
Risk for ongoing hematoma 
expansion
Cocaine, amphetamine
Risk is ~2–3% per year 
for bleeding if previously 
unruptured
Mycotic and nonmycotic 
forms of aneurysms

Degenerative disease 
of intracranial vessels; 
associated with dementia, 
rare in patients <60 years
Multiple cavernous angiomas 
linked to mutations in KRIT1, 
CCM2, and PDCD10 genes
Produces bleeding by venous 
hypertension
Sagittal sinus thrombosis 
can cause hemispheric 
parasagittal hemorrhage 
with edema; vein of Labbé 
occlusion from transverse 
sinus occlusion produces 
posterior temporal/inferior 
parietal hemorrhage
Rare cause of hemorrhage

CT scan are reviewed and demonstrate ICH. In theory, a higher blood 
pressure should promote hematoma expansion, but it remains unclear 
if lowering of blood pressure reduces hematoma growth. Recent clin-
ical trials have shown that systolic blood pressure (SBP) can be safely 
lowered  acutely  and  rapidly  to  <140  mmHg  in  patients  with  sponta-
neous ICH whose initial SBP was 150–220 mmHg. The INTERACT2 
trial  was  a  large  phase  3  clinical  trial  to  address  the  effect  of  acute 
blood  pressure  lowering  on  ICH  functional  outcome.  INTERACT2 
randomized patients with spontaneous ICH within 6 h of onset and a 
baseline SBP of 150–220 mmHg to two different SBP targets (<140 and 
<180 mmHg). In those with the target SBP <140 mmHg, 52% had an 
outcome of death or major disability at 90 days compared with 55.6% of 
those with a target SBP <180 mmHg (p = .06). There was a significant 
shift to improved outcomes in the lower blood pressure arm, whereas 
both groups had a similar mortality. ATACH2 was a similarly designed 
clinical trial that assessed the same blood pressure targets but demon-
strated  no  difference  in  outcome  between  groups.  Current  U.S.  and 
European guidelines emphasize that blood pressure lowering to a target 
SBP  is  likely  safe  and  possibly  beneficial.  However,  these  guidelines 
were completed prior to publication of the ATACH2 results; thus, the 
specific optimal target remains a point of debate. It is unclear whether 
these  clinical  trial  results  apply  to  patients  who  have  higher  SBP  on 

3349

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
8

I
n
t
r
a
c
r
a
n
i
a
l

H
e
m
o
r
r
h
a
g
e

presentation or who are deeply comatose with possible elevated intra-
cranial  pressure  (ICP).  In  patients  who  have  ICP  monitors  in  place, 
current recommendations are that maintaining the cerebral perfusion 
pressure (mean arterial pressure [MAP] minus ICP) at 50–70 mmHg 
is reasonable, depending on the individual patient’s cerebral autoreg-
ulation  status  (Chap.  307).  Blood  pressure  should  be  lowered  with 
nonvasodilating  IV  drugs  such  as  nicardipine,  labetalol,  or  esmolol. 
Patients with cerebellar hemorrhages with depressed mental status or 
radiographic evidence of hydrocephalus should undergo urgent neu-
rosurgical evaluation; these patients require close monitoring because 
they can deteriorate rapidly. Based on the clinical examination and CT 
findings, further imaging studies may be necessary, including MRI or 
conventional x-ray angiography. Stuporous or comatose patients with 
clinical and imaging signs of herniation are generally treated presump-
tively for elevated ICP with tracheal intubation and sedation, adminis-
tration of osmotic diuretics such as mannitol or hypertonic saline, and 
elevation of the head of the bed while surgical consultation is obtained 
(Chap.  307).  Reversal  of  coagulopathy  and  consideration  of  surgical 
evacuation of the hematoma (detailed below) are two other principal 
aspects of initial emergency management.

 ■ INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE
ICH  accounts  for  ~10%  of  all  strokes,  and  ~35–45%  of  patients  die 
within the first month. Incidence rates are particularly high in Asians 
and  blacks.  Hypertension,  coagulopathy,  sympathomimetic  drugs 
(cocaine, methamphetamine), and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) 
cause  most  of  these  hemorrhages.  Advanced  age,  heavy  alcohol,  and 
low-dose  aspirin  use  in  those  without  symptomatic  cardiovascular 
disease increase the risk, and cocaine or methamphetamine use is one 
of the most important causes in the young.

Hypertensive  ICH  •  PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  Hypertensive  ICH 
usually results from spontaneous rupture of a small penetrating artery 
deep in the brain. The most common sites are the basal ganglia (espe-
cially the putamen), thalamus, cerebellum, and pons. The small arter-
ies in these areas seem most prone to hypertension-induced vascular 
injury. When hemorrhages occur in other brain areas or in nonhyper-
tensive patients, greater consideration should be given to other causes 
such  as  hemorrhagic  disorders,  neoplasms,  vascular  malformations, 
vasculitis,  and  CAA.  The  hemorrhage  may  be  small,  or  a  large  clot 
may form and compress adjacent tissue, causing herniation and death. 
Blood may also dissect into the ventricular space, which substantially 
increases morbidity and may cause hydrocephalus.

Most hypertensive ICHs initially develop over 30–90 min, whereas 
those  associated  with  anticoagulant  therapy  may  evolve  for  as  long 
as  24–48  h.  It  is  now  recognized  that  about  a  third  of  patients  even 
with  no  coagulopathy  may  have  significant  hematoma  expansion 
with the first day. Within 48 h, macrophages begin to phagocytize the 
hemorrhage  at  its  outer  surface.  After  1–6  months,  the  hemorrhage 
is  generally  resolved  to  a  slitlike  cavity  lined  with  a  glial  scar  and 
hemosiderin-laden macrophages.
CLINICAL  MANIFESTATIONS  ICH  generally  presents  as  the  abrupt 
onset of a focal neurologic deficit. Seizures are uncommon. Although 
clinical symptoms may be maximal at onset, more commonly, the focal 
deficit worsens over 30–90 min and is associated with a diminishing 
level  of  consciousness  and  signs  of  increased  ICP  such  as  headache 
and vomiting.

The putamen is the most common site for hypertensive hemorrhage, 
and  the  adjacent  internal  capsule  is  usually  damaged  (Fig.  428-1). 
Contralateral  hemiparesis  is  therefore  the  sentinel  sign.  When  mild, 
the face sags on one side over 5–30 min, speech becomes slurred, the 
arm and leg gradually weaken, and the eyes deviate away from the side 
of the hemiparesis. The paralysis may worsen until the affected limbs 
become flaccid or extend rigidly. When hemorrhages are large, drows-
iness  gives  way  to  stupor  as  signs  of  upper  brainstem  compression 
appear. Coma ensues, accompanied by deep, irregular, or intermittent 
respiration, a dilated and fixed ipsilateral pupil, and decerebrate rigid-
ity. In milder cases, edema in adjacent brain tissue may cause progres-
sive deterioration over 12–72 h.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3349

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3350

Thalamic  hemorrhages  also  produce  a  contralateral  hemiplegia  or 
hemiparesis from pressure on, or dissection into, the adjacent internal 
capsule. A prominent sensory deficit involving all modalities is usually 
present.  Aphasia,  often  with  preserved  verbal  repetition,  may  occur 
after  hemorrhage  into  the  dominant  thalamus,  and  constructional 
apraxia  or  mutism  occurs  in  some  cases  of  nondominant  hemor-
rhage. There may also be a homonymous visual field defect. Thalamic 
hemorrhages  cause  several  typical  ocular  disturbances  by  extension 
inferiorly into the upper midbrain. These include deviation of the eyes 
downward and inward so that they appear to be looking at the nose, 
unequal pupils with absence of light reaction, skew deviation with the 
eye opposite the hemorrhage displaced downward and medially, ipsi-
lateral Horner’s syndrome, absence of convergence, paralysis of vertical 
gaze, and retraction nystagmus. Patients may later develop a chronic, 
contralateral pain syndrome (Déjérine-Roussy syndrome).

In pontine hemorrhages, deep coma with quadriplegia often occurs 
over a few minutes. Typically, there is prominent decerebrate rigidity 
and “pinpoint” (1 mm) pupils that react to light. There is impairment 
of  reflex  horizontal  eye  movements  evoked  by  head  turning  (doll’s-
head or oculocephalic maneuver) or by irrigation of the ears with ice 
water (Chap. 28). Hyperpnea, severe hypertension, and hyperhidrosis 
are common. Most patients with deep coma from pontine hemorrhage 
ultimately die or develop a locked-in state, but small hemorrhages are 
compatible with survival and significant recovery.

Cerebellar hemorrhages usually develop over several hours and are 
characterized by occipital headache, repeated vomiting, and ataxia of 
gait. In mild cases, there may be no other neurologic signs except for 
gait ataxia. Dizziness or vertigo may be prominent. There is often pare-
sis of conjugate lateral gaze toward the side of the hemorrhage, forced 
deviation of the eyes to the opposite side, or an ipsilateral sixth nerve 
palsy.  Less  frequent  ocular  signs  include  blepharospasm,  involuntary 
closure of one eye, ocular bobbing, and skew deviation. Dysarthria and 
dysphagia may occur. As the hours pass, the patient often becomes stu-
porous and then comatose from brainstem compression or obstructive 
hydrocephalus; immediate surgical evacuation before severe brainstem 
compression  occurs  may  be  lifesaving.  Hydrocephalus  from  fourth 
ventricle compression can be relieved by external ventricular drainage; 
however,  in  this  situation,  definitive  hematoma  evacuation  is  recom-
mended rather than treatment with ventricular drainage alone. If the 
deep cerebellar nuclei are spared, full recovery is common.

Lobar Hemorrhage  The major neurologic deficit with an occip-
ital  hemorrhage  is  hemianopsia;  with  a  left  temporal  hemorrhage, 
aphasia  and  delirium;  with  a  parietal  hemorrhage,  hemisensory  loss; 
and with frontal hemorrhage, arm weakness. Large hemorrhages may 
be  associated  with  stupor  or  coma  if  they  compress  the  thalamus  or 
midbrain. Most patients with lobar hemorrhages have focal headaches, 
and  more  than  one-half  vomit  or  are  drowsy.  Stiff  neck  and  seizures 
are uncommon.

Other  Causes  of  ICH  CAA  is  a  disease  of  the  elderly  in  which 
arteriolar  degeneration  occurs  and  amyloid  is  deposited  in  the  walls 
of  the  cerebral  arteries.  Amyloid  angiopathy  causes  both  single  and 
recurrent lobar hemorrhages and is probably the most common cause 
of  lobar  hemorrhage  in  the  elderly.  It  accounts  for  some  intracranial 
hemorrhages  associated  with  IV  thrombolysis  given  for  myocardial 
infarction. This disorder can be suspected in patients who present with 
multiple hemorrhages (and infarcts) over several months or years or in 
patients with “microbleeds” in the cortex, seen on brain MRI sequences 
sensitive  for  hemosiderin  (iron-sensitive  imaging),  but  it  is  defini-
tively  diagnosed  by  pathologic  demonstration  of  Congo  red  staining 
of  amyloid  in  cerebral  vessels.  The  ε2  and  ε4  allelic  variations  of  the 
apolipoprotein E gene are associated with increased risk of recurrent 
lobar  hemorrhage  and  may  therefore  be  markers  of  amyloid  angio-
pathy. Positron emission tomography imaging can image amyloid-beta 
deposits in CAA using specific antibody labels and may be helpful in 
diagnosing CAA noninvasively. Although cerebral biopsy is the most 
definitive  method  of  diagnosis,  evidence  of  inflammation  on  lumbar 
puncture  should  prompt  consideration  of  CAA-associated  vasculitis 

as  an  underlying  cause,  and  oral  glucocorticoids  may  be  beneficial. 
Noninflammatory CAA has no specific treatment. Oral anticoagulants 
are typically avoided.

Cocaine  and  methamphetamine  are  frequent  causes  of  stroke  in 
young  (age  <45  years)  patients.  ICH,  ischemic  stroke,  and  subarach-
noid hemorrhage (SAH) are all associated with stimulant use. Angio-
graphic findings vary from completely normal arteries to large-vessel 
occlusion or stenosis, vasospasm, or changes consistent with vasculop-
athy. The mechanism of sympathomimetic-related stroke is not known, 
but  cocaine  enhances  sympathetic  activity  causing  acute,  sometimes 
severe,  hypertension,  and  this  may  lead  to  hemorrhage.  Slightly 
more than one-half of stimulant-related intracranial hemorrhages are 
intracerebral and the rest are subarachnoid. In cases of SAH, a saccular 
aneurysm is usually identified. Presumably, acute hypertension causes 
aneurysmal rupture.

Head  injury  often  causes  intracranial  bleeding.  The  common  sites 
are  intraparenchymal  (especially  temporal  and  inferior  frontal  lobes) 
and  into  the  subarachnoid,  subdural,  and  epidural  spaces.  Trauma 
must  be  considered  in  any  patient  with  an  unexplained  acute  neu-
rologic  deficit  (hemiparesis,  stupor,  or  confusion),  particularly  if  the 
deficit occurred in the context of a fall (Chap. 443).

Intracranial  hemorrhages  associated  with  anticoagulant  therapy 
can occur at any location; they are often lobar or subdural. Anticoag-
ulant-related ICHs may continue to evolve over 24–48 h, especially if 
coagulopathy is insufficiently reversed. Coagulopathy and thrombocy-
topenia should be reversed rapidly, as discussed below. ICH associated 
with  hematologic  disorders  (leukemia,  aplastic  anemia,  thrombocy-
topenic  purpura)  can  occur  at  any  site  and  may  present  as  multiple 
ICHs. Skin and mucous membrane bleeding may be evident and offers 
a diagnostic clue.

Hemorrhage  into  a  brain  tumor  may  be  the  first  manifestation  of 
neoplasm.  Choriocarcinoma,  malignant  melanoma,  renal  cell  carci-
noma,  and  bronchogenic  carcinoma  are  among  the  most  common 
metastatic  tumors  associated  with  ICH.  Glioblastoma  multiforme  in 
adults and medulloblastoma in children may also have areas of ICH.

Hypertensive encephalopathy is a complication of malignant hyper-
tension. In this acute syndrome, severe hypertension is associated with 
headache, nausea, vomiting, convulsions, confusion, stupor, and coma. 
Focal or lateralizing neurologic signs, either transitory or permanent, 
may  occur  but  are  infrequent  and  therefore  suggest  some  other  vas-
cular disease (hemorrhage, embolism, or atherosclerotic thrombosis). 
There  are  retinal  hemorrhages,  exudates,  papilledema  (hypertensive 
retinopathy), and evidence of renal and cardiac disease. In most cases, 
ICP and CSF protein levels are elevated. MRI brain imaging shows a 
pattern of typically posterior (occipital > frontal) brain edema that is 
reversible  and  termed  reversible  posterior  leukoencephalopathy.  The 
hypertension  may  be  essential  or  due  to  chronic  renal  disease,  acute 
glomerulonephritis, acute toxemia of pregnancy, pheochromocytoma, 
or other causes. Lowering the blood pressure reverses the process, but 
stroke  can  occur,  especially  if  blood  pressure  is  lowered  too  rapidly. 
Neuropathologic  examination  reveals  multifocal  to  diffuse  cerebral 
edema  and  hemorrhages  of  various  sizes  from  petechial  to  massive. 
Microscopically, there is necrosis of arterioles, minute cerebral infarcts, 
and  hemorrhages.  The  term  hypertensive  encephalopathy  should  be 
reserved for this syndrome and not for chronic recurrent headaches, 
dizziness,  recurrent  transient  ischemic  attacks,  or  small  strokes  that 
often  occur  in  association  with  high  blood  pressure.  Distinguishing 
hypertensive  encephalopathy  with  ICH  from  hypertensive  ICH  is 
important since aggressive lowering of SBP to 140–180 mmHg acutely 
is usually considered in hypertensive ICH, but less aggressive measures 
should be used in hypertensive encephalopathy. Having no alteration 
in mental status or other prodrome prior to the ICH favors hyperten-
sive ICH as the disease.

Primary  intraventricular  hemorrhage  is  rare  and  should  prompt 
investigation for an underlying vascular anomaly. Sometimes bleed-
ing  begins  within  the  periventricular  substance  of  the  brain  and 
dissects  into  the  ventricular  system  without  leaving  signs  of  intra-
parenchymal  hemorrhage.  Alternatively,  bleeding  can  arise  from 
periependymal veins. Vasculitis, usually polyarteritis nodosa or lupus 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3350

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders erythematosus, can produce hemorrhage in any region of the central 
nervous system; most hemorrhages are associated with hypertension, 
but  the  arteritis  itself  may  cause  bleeding  by  disrupting  the  vessel 
wall. Nearly one-half of patients with primary intraventricular hem-
orrhage  have  identifiable  bleeding  sources  seen  using  conventional 
angiography.

Venous  sinus  thrombosis  (Chap.  427)  causes  cortical  vein  hyper-
tension, cerebral edema, and venous infarction. This may progress to 
cause  ICH  surrounding  the  region  of  the  occluded  cerebral  venous 
sinus or within the drainage region of the vein of Labbé, producing a 
posterior temporal inferior parietal hematoma. Despite the presence of 
hemorrhage, IV anticoagulation is helpful to reduce the venous hyper-
tension and limit venous ischemia and further ICH.

Sepsis can cause small petechial hemorrhages throughout the cere-
bral white matter. Moyamoya disease (Chap. 427), mainly an occlusive 
arterial  disease  that  causes  ischemic  symptoms,  may  on  occasion 
produce ICH, particularly in the young. Hemorrhages into the spinal 
cord  are  usually  the  result  of  an  AVM,  cavernous  malformation,  or 
metastatic tumor. Epidural spinal hemorrhage produces a rapidly evolv-
ing syndrome of spinal cord or nerve root compression (Chap. 442). 
Spinal hemorrhages usually present with sudden back pain and some 
manifestation of myelopathy.

Laboratory and Imaging Evaluation  Patients should have rou-
tine  blood  chemistries  and  hematologic  studies.  Specific  attention  to 
the platelet count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and 
international  normalized  ratio  is  important  to  identify  coagulopathy. 
CT imaging reliably detects acute focal hemorrhages in the supraten-
torial space. Rarely, very small pontine or medullary hemorrhages may 
not  be  well  delineated  because  of  motion  and  bone-induced  artifact 
that obscure structures in the posterior fossa. After the first 2 weeks, 
x-ray attenuation values of clotted blood diminish until they become 
isodense with surrounding brain. Mass effect and edema may remain. 
In  some  cases,  a  surrounding  rim  of  contrast  enhancement  appears 
after 2–4 weeks and may persist for months. MRI, although more sensi-
tive for delineating posterior fossa lesions, is generally not necessary for 
primary diagnosis. Images of flowing blood on MRI scan may identify 
AVMs as the cause of the hemorrhage. MRI, CT angiography (CTA), 
and conventional x-ray angiography are used when the cause of intra-
cranial  hemorrhage  is  uncertain,  particularly  if  the  patient  is  young 
or not hypertensive and the hematoma is not in one of the usual sites 
for  hypertensive  hemorrhage.  CTA  or  postcontrast  CT  imaging  may 
reveal  one  or  more  small  areas  of  enhancement  within  a  hematoma; 
this “spot sign” is thought to represent ongoing bleeding. The presence 
of a spot sign is associated with an increased risk of hematoma expan-
sion, increased mortality, and lower likelihood of favorable functional 
outcome.  Because  patients  typically  have  focal  neurologic  signs  and 
obtundation and often show signs of increased ICP, a lumbar puncture 
is generally unnecessary and should usually be avoided because it may 
induce cerebral herniation.

TREATMENT
Intracerebral Hemorrhage

ACUTE MANAGEMENT
After immediate attention to blood pressure and airway protection 
(see above), focus can switch to medical and surgical management. 
Approximately  40%  of  patients  with  a  hypertensive  ICH  die,  but 
survivors  can  have  a  good  to  complete  recovery.  The  ICH  Score   
(Table 428-2) is a validated clinical grading scale that is useful for 
stratification of mortality risk and clinical outcome. However, a spe-
cific ICH clinical grading scale should not be used to precisely prog-
nosticate outcome because of the concern of creating a self-fulfilling 
prophecy of poor outcome if early aggressive care is withheld. Any 
identified coagulopathy should be corrected as soon as possible. For 
patients  taking  vitamin  K  antagonists  (VKAs),  rapid  correction  of 
coagulopathy can be achieved by infusing prothrombin complex con-
centrates (PCCs), which can be administered quickly, with vitamin 

TABLE 428-2  The ICH Score
CLINICAL OR IMAGING FACTOR

POINT SCORE

3351

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
8

I
n
t
r
a
c
r
a
n
i
a
l

H
e
m
o
r
r
h
a
g
e

Age

<80 years
≥80 years

Hematoma Volume

<30 cc
≥30 cc

Intraventricular Hemorrhage Present

No
Yes

Infratentorial Origin of Hemorrhage

No
Yes

Glasgow Coma Scale Score

0
1

0
1

0
1

0
1

13–15
5–12
3–4
Total Score

0
1
2
0–6 Sum of each category above

Source: Reproduced with permission from JC Hemphill 3rd et al: The ICH score:  
A simple, reliable grading scale for intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke 32:891,  
2001.

K administered concurrently. Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is an alter-
native, but since it requires larger fluid volumes and longer time to 
achieve adequate reversal than PCC, it is not recommended if PCC 
is available. Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody to dabigatran, 
and  the  administration  of  two  doses  reverses  the  anticoagulation 
effect  of  dabigatran  quickly.  The  oral  Xa  inhibitors  apixaban  and 
rivaroxaban can be reversed with andexanet alfa. PCC may partially 
reverse the effects of oral factor Xa inhibitors and are reasonable to 
administer if andexanet alfa is not available. When ICH is associated 
with  thrombocytopenia  (platelet  count  <50,000/μL),  transfusion  of 
fresh platelets is indicated. A clinical trial of platelet transfusions in 
patients with ICH and without thrombocytopenia who were taking 
antiplatelet drugs showed no benefit and possible harm.

Hematomas may expand for several hours following the initial 
hemorrhage,  even  in  patients  without  coagulopathy.  The  precise 
mechanism is unclear. A phase 3 trial of treatment with recombi-
nant  factor  VIIa  reduced  hematoma  expansion;  however,  clinical 
outcomes  were  not  improved,  so  use  of  this  drug  is  not  recom-
mended. Blood pressure lowering has been considered due to the 
theoretical  risk  of  acutely  elevated  blood  pressure  on  hematoma 
expansion,  although  clinical  trials  did  not  find  a  difference  in 
hematoma expansion between the SBP targets of 140–180 mmHg. 
In deep hemorrhages that involve the basal ganglia, more intensive 
blood pressure lowering reduced hematoma expansion but had no 
effect on functional outcome.

Evacuation  of  supratentorial  hematomas  does  not  appear  to 
improve  outcome  for  most  patients.  The  International  Surgical 
Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH) randomized patients 
with  supratentorial  ICH  to  either  early  surgical  evacuation  or 
initial  medical  management.  No  benefit  was  found  in  the  early 
surgery  arm,  although  analysis  was  complicated  by  the  fact  that 
26% of patients in the initial medical management group ultimately 
had  surgery  for  neurologic  deterioration.  The  follow-up  study, 
STICH-II,  found  that  surgery  within  24  h  of  lobar  supratentorial 
hemorrhage did not improve overall outcome but might have a role 
in select severely affected patients. Therefore, existing data do not 
support routine surgical evacuation of supratentorial hemorrhages 
in stable patients. However, many centers still consider surgery for 
patients deemed salvageable and who are experiencing progressive 
neurologic  deterioration  due  to  herniation.  Surgical  techniques 
continue  to  evolve.  A  minimally  invasive  endoscopic  hematoma 
evacuation followed by thrombolysis with the aim of decreasing clot 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3351

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3352

size has not been shown to improve outcome in clinical trials. The 
administration of tranexamic acid was not found to alter outcome 
in a large randomized trial.

For cerebellar hemorrhages, a neurosurgeon should be consulted 
immediately  to  assist  with  the  evaluation;  most  cerebellar  hema-
tomas  >3  cm  in  diameter  will  require  surgical  evacuation.  If  the 
patient is alert without focal brainstem signs and if the hematoma is 
<1 cm in diameter, surgical removal is usually unnecessary. Patients 
with  hematomas  between  1  and  3  cm  require  careful  observation 
for  signs  of  impaired  consciousness,  progressive  hydrocephalus, 
and precipitous respiratory failure. Hydrocephalus due to cerebellar 
hematoma requires surgical evacuation and should not be treated 
solely with ventricular drainage.

Tissue surrounding hematomas is displaced and compressed but 
not necessarily infarcted. Hence, in survivors, major improvement 
commonly occurs as the hematoma is reabsorbed and the adjacent 
tissue  regains  its  function.  Careful  management  of  the  patient 
during the acute phase of the hemorrhage can lead to considerable 
recovery.

Surprisingly, ICP is often normal even with large ICHs. However, 
if  the  hematoma  causes  marked  midline  shift  of  structures  with 
consequent  obtundation,  coma,  or  hydrocephalus,  osmotic  agents 
can be instituted in preparation for placement of a ventriculostomy 
or parenchymal ICP monitor (Chap. 307). Once ICP is recorded, 
CSF  drainage  (if  available),  osmotic  therapy,  and  blood  pressure 
management  can  be  tailored  to  maintain  cerebral  perfusion  pres-
sure (MAP minus ICP) at least 50–70 mmHg. For example, if ICP 
is found to be high, CSF can be drained from the ventricular space 
and osmotic therapy continued; persistent or progressive elevation 
in  ICP  may  prompt  surgical  evacuation  of  the  clot.  Alternately, 
if  ICP  is  normal  or  only  mildly  elevated,  interventions  such  as 
osmotic  therapy  may  be  tapered.  Because  hyperventilation  may 
actually  produce  ischemia  by  cerebral  vasoconstriction,  induced 
hyperventilation  should  be  limited  to  acute  resuscitation  of  the 
patient  with  presumptive  high  ICP  and  eliminated  once  other 
treatments  (osmotic  therapy  or  surgical  treatments)  have  been 
instituted.  Glucocorticoids  are  not  helpful  for  the  edema  from 
intracerebral hematoma. 

PREVENTION
Hypertension  is  the  leading  cause  of  primary  ICH.  Prevention  is 
aimed  at  reducing  chronic  hypertension,  eliminating  excessive 
alcohol use, and discontinuing use of illicit drugs such as cocaine 
and  amphetamines.  Current  guidelines  recommend  that  patients 
with  CAA  should  generally  avoid  oral  anticoagulant  medications, 
but antiplatelet agents may be administered if there is an indication 
based on atherothrombotic vascular disease.

VASCULAR ANOMALIES
Vascular anomalies can be divided into congenital vascular malforma-
tions and acquired vascular lesions.

 ■ CONGENITAL VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
True AVMs, venous anomalies, and capillary telangiectasias are lesions 
that  usually  remain  clinically  silent  through  life.  AVMs  are  probably 
congenital, but cases of acquired lesions have been reported.

True AVMs are congenital shunts between the arterial and venous 
systems  that  may  present  with  headache,  seizures,  and  intracranial 
hemorrhage. AVMs consist of a tangle of abnormal vessels across the 
cortical surface or deep within the brain substance. AVMs vary in size 
from  a  small  blemish  a  few  millimeters  in  diameter  to  a  large  mass 
of  tortuous  channels  composing  an  arteriovenous  shunt  of  sufficient 
magnitude to raise cardiac output and precipitate heart failure. Blood 
vessels  forming  the  tangle  interposed  between  arteries  and  veins  are 
usually abnormally thin and histologically resemble both arteries and 
veins. AVMs occur in all parts of the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem, 

and spinal cord, but the largest ones are most frequently located in the 
posterior half of the hemispheres, commonly forming a wedge-shaped 
lesion extending from the cortex to the ventricle.

Bleeding,  headache,  and  seizures  are  most  common  between  the 
ages  of  10  and  30,  occasionally  as  late  as  the  fifties.  AVMs  are  more 
frequent in men, and rare familial cases have been described. Familial 
AVM may be a part of the autosomal dominant syndrome of heredi-
tary  hemorrhagic  telangiectasia  (Osler-Rendu-Weber)  syndrome  due 
to  mutations  in  either  endoglin  or  activin  receptor-like  kinase  1, 
both  involved  in  transforming  growth  factor  (TGF)  signaling  and 
angiogenesis.

Headache  (without  bleeding)  may  be  hemicranial  and  throbbing, 
like  migraine,  or  diffuse.  Focal  seizures,  with  or  without  general-
ization,  occur  in  ~30%  of  cases.  One-half  of  AVMs  become  evident 
as  ICHs.  In  most,  the  hemorrhage  is  mainly  intraparenchymal  with 
extension  into  the  subarachnoid  space  in  some  cases.  Unlike  pri-
mary SAHs (Chap. 429), blood from a ruptured AVM is usually not 
deposited in the basal cisterns, and symptomatic cerebral vasospasm 
is rare. The risk of AVM rupture is strongly influenced by a history of 
prior rupture. Although unruptured AVMs have a hemorrhage rate of 
~2–4%  per  year,  previously  ruptured  AVMs  may  have  a  rate  as  high 
as 17% a year, at least for the first year. Hemorrhages may be massive, 
leading to death, or may be as small as 1 cm in diameter, leading to 
minor focal symptoms or no deficit. The AVM may be large enough 
to steal blood away from adjacent normal brain tissue or to increase 
venous pressure significantly to produce venous ischemia locally and 
in remote areas of the brain. This is seen most often with large AVMs 
in the territory of the middle cerebral artery.

Large AVMs of the anterior circulation may be associated with a sys-
tolic and diastolic bruit (sometimes self-audible) over the eye, forehead, 
or neck and a bounding carotid pulse. Headache at the onset of AVM 
rupture is generally not as explosive as with aneurysmal rupture. MRI 
is  better  than  CT  for  diagnosis,  although  noncontrast  CT  scanning 
sometimes detects calcification of the AVM and contrast may demon-
strate the abnormal blood vessels. Once identified, conventional x-ray 
angiography is the gold standard for evaluating the precise anatomy of 
the AVM.

Surgical  treatment  of  AVMs  presenting  with  hemorrhage,  often 
done  in  conjunction  with  preoperative  embolization  to  reduce  oper-
ative  bleeding,  is  usually  indicated  for  accessible  lesions.  Stereotactic 
radiosurgery,  an  alternative  to  conventional  surgery,  can  produce  a 
slow sclerosis of the AVM over 2–3 years.

Several  angiographic  features  can  be  used  to  help  predict  future 
bleeding  risk.  Paradoxically,  smaller  lesions  seem  to  have  a  higher 
hemorrhage rate. The presence of deep venous drainage, venous out-
flow  stenosis,  and  intranidal  aneurysms  may  increase  rupture  risk. 
Because of the relatively low annual rate of hemorrhage and the risk 
of complications due to surgical or endovascular treatment, the indi-
cations for surgery in asymptomatic AVMs are uncertain. The ARUBA  
(A  Randomized  Trial  of  Unruptured  Brain  Arteriovenous  Malfor-
mations)  trial  randomized  patients  to  medical  management  ver-
sus  intervention  (surgery,  endovascular  embolization,  combination 
embolization  and  surgery,  or  gamma-knife).  The  trial  was  stopped 
prematurely for harm, with the medical arm achieving the combined 
endpoint  of  death  or  symptomatic  stroke  in  10%  of  patients  com-
pared  to  31%  in  the  intervention  group  at  a  mean  follow-up  time  of  
33 months. This highly significant finding argues against routine inter-
vention for patients presenting without hemorrhage, although debate 
ensues regarding the generalizability of these results.

Venous anomalies are the result of development of anomalous cere-
bral, cerebellar, or brainstem venous drainage. These structures, unlike 
AVMs, are functional venous channels. They are of little clinical signif-
icance and should be ignored if found incidentally on brain imaging 
studies.  Surgical  resection  of  these  anomalies  may  result  in  venous 
infarction and hemorrhage. Venous anomalies may be associated with 
cavernous malformations (see below), which do carry some bleeding 
risk.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3352

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Capillary telangiectasias are true capillary malformations that often 
form  extensive  vascular  networks  through  an  otherwise  normal 
brain  structure.  The  pons  and  deep cerebral  white  matter are  typical 
locations,  and  these  capillary  malformations  can  be  seen  in  patients 
with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber) syn-
drome. If bleeding does occur, it rarely produces mass effect or signifi-
cant symptoms. No treatment options exist.

 ■ ACQUIRED VASCULAR LESIONS
Cavernous angiomas (cavernous malformations) are tufts of capillary 
sinusoids  that  form  within  the  deep  hemispheric  white  matter  and 
brainstem  with  no  normal  intervening  neural  structures.  The  patho-
genesis is unclear. Familial cavernous angiomas have been mapped to 
several different genes: KRIT1, CCM2, and PDCD10. Both KRIT1 and 
CCM2  have  roles  in  blood  vessel  formation,  whereas  PDCD10  is  an 
apoptotic gene. Cavernous angiomas are typically <1 cm in diameter 
and are often associated with a venous anomaly. Bleeding is usually of 
small volume, causing slight mass effect only. The bleeding risk for sin-
gle cavernous malformations is 0.7–1.5% per year and may be higher 
for patients with prior clinical hemorrhage or multiple malformations. 
Seizures  may  occur  if  the  malformation  is  located  near  the  cerebral 
cortex. Surgical resection eliminates bleeding risk and may reduce sei-
zure risk, but it is usually reserved for those malformations that form 
near the brain surface. Radiation treatment has not been shown to be 
of benefit. Recent retrospective data show that intracranial hemorrhage 
from cavernous malformations is likely not increased with administra-
tion of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications prescribed for other 
medical conditions.

Dural  arteriovenous  fistulas  are  acquired  connections  usually 
from  a  dural  artery  to  a  dural  sinus.  Patients  may  complain  of  a 
pulse-synchronous cephalic bruit (“pulsatile tinnitus”) and headache. 
Depending on the magnitude of the shunt, venous pressures may rise 
high  enough  to  cause  cortical  ischemia  or  venous  hypertension  and 
hemorrhage, particularly SAH. Surgical and endovascular techniques 
are  usually  curative.  These  fistulas  may  form  because  of  trauma,  but 
most are idiopathic. There is an association between fistulas and dural 
sinus  thrombosis.  Fistulas  have  been  observed  to  appear  months  to 
years following venous sinus thrombosis, suggesting that angiogenesis 
factors elaborated from the thrombotic process may cause these anom-
alous  connections  to  form.  Alternatively,  dural  arteriovenous  fistulas 
can produce venous sinus occlusion over time, perhaps from the high 
pressure and high flow through a venous structure.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Anderson  CS  et  al:  Rapid  blood-pressure  lowering  in  patients  with 

acute intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 368:2355, 2013.

Christensen  H  et  al:  European  stroke  organization  guideline  on 
reversal  of  oral  anticoagulants  in  acute  intracerebral  hemorrhage. 
Euro Stroke J 4:294, 2019.

Frontera  J  et  al:  Guideline  for  reversal  of  antithrombotics  in  intra-
cranial  hemorrhage.  A  statement  for  healthcare  professionals  from 
the Neurocritical Care Society and Society of Critical Care Medicine. 
Neurocrit Care 24:6, 2016.

Hemphill  JC  et  al:  Guidelines  for  the  management  of  spontaneous 
intracerebral  hemorrhage:  A  guideline  for  healthcare  professionals 
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke 46:2032, 2015.

Mohr  JP  et  al:  Medical  management  with  or  without  interven-
tional  therapy  for  unruptured  brain  arteriovenous  malformations 
(ARUBA):  A  multicentre,  non-blinded,  randomised  trial.  Lancet 
383:614, 2014.

Steiner  T  et  al:  European  Stroke  Organisation  (ESO)  guidelines  for 
the  management  of  spontaneous  intracerebral  hemorrhage.  Int  J 
Stroke 9:840, 2014.

3353

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
9

S
u
b
a
r
a
c
h
n
o
i
d
H
e
m
o
r
r
h
a
g
e

429 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage

J. Claude Hemphill, III, 
Wade S. Smith, Daryl R. Gress

Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) renders the brain critically ill from 
both primary and secondary brain insults. Excluding head trauma, the 
most common cause of SAH is rupture of a saccular aneurysm. Other 
causes include bleeding from a vascular malformation (arteriovenous 
malformation  or  dural  arteriovenous  fistula)  and  extension  into  the 
subarachnoid  space  from  a  primary  intracerebral  hemorrhage.  Some 
idiopathic  SAHs  are  localized  to  the  perimesencephalic  cisterns  and 
are benign; they probably have a venous or capillary source, and angi-
ography is unrevealing.
 ■ SACCULAR (“BERRY”) ANEURYSM
Autopsy and angiography studies have found that ~2% of adults harbor 
intracranial  aneurysms,  for  a  prevalence  of  4  million  persons  in  the 
United States; the aneurysm will rupture, producing SAH, in 25,000–
30,000 cases per year. The overall mortality rate for aneurysmal SAH is 
~35%, with around one-third of these patients dying immediately and 
prior to hospital admission. Of those who survive, more than half are 
left with clinically significant neurologic deficits as a result of the initial 
hemorrhage,  cerebral  vasospasm  with  infarction,  or  hydrocephalus. 
If the patient survives but the aneurysm is not obliterated, the rate of 
rebleeding  is  ~20%  in  the  first  2  weeks,  30%  in  the  first  month,  and 
~3% per year afterward. Given these alarming figures, the major ther-
apeutic emphasis is on preventing the predictable early complications 
of the SAH.

Unruptured,  asymptomatic  aneurysms  are  much  less  dangerous 
than  a  recently  ruptured  aneurysm.  The  annual  risk  of  rupture  for 
aneurysms <10 mm in size is ~0.1%, and for aneurysms ≥10 mm in size 
is ~0.5–1%; the surgical morbidity rate far exceeds these percentages. 
Aneurysm  location  may  also  factor  into  risk,  with  basilar  bifurcation 
aneurysms appearing to have a somewhat higher rupture risk. Because 
of the longer length of exposure to risk of rupture, younger patients with 
aneurysms >10 mm in size may benefit from prophylactic treatment. As 
with  the  treatment  of  asymptomatic  carotid  stenosis,  this  risk-benefit 
ratio strongly depends on the complication rate of treatment.

Giant  aneurysms,  those  >2.5  cm  in  diameter,  occur  at  the  same 
sites (see below) as small aneurysms, and account for 5% of cases. The 
three most common locations are the terminal internal carotid artery, 
middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation, and top of the basilar artery. 
Their  risk  of  rupture  is  ~6%  in  the  first  year  after  identification  and 
may  remain  high  indefinitely.  They  often  cause  symptoms  by  com-
pressing the adjacent brain or cranial nerves.

Mycotic  aneurysms  are  usually  located  distal  to  the  first  bifurca-
tion of major arteries of the circle of Willis. Most result from infected 
emboli  due  to  bacterial  endocarditis  causing  septic  degeneration  of 
arteries  and  subsequent  dilation  and  rupture.  Whether  these  lesions 
should be sought and repaired prior to rupture or left to heal sponta-
neously with antibiotic treatment remains controversial.

Pathophysiology  Saccular  aneurysms  occur  at  the  bifurcations 
of  the  large-  to  medium-sized  intracranial  arteries;  rupture  is  into 
the  subarachnoid  space  in  the  basal  cisterns  and  sometimes  into  the 
parenchyma  of  the  adjacent  brain.  Approximately  85%  of  aneurysms 
occur in the anterior circulation, mostly on the circle of Willis. About 
20% of patients have multiple aneurysms, many at mirror sites bilater-
ally. As an aneurysm develops, it typically forms a neck with a dome. 
The length of the neck and the size of the dome vary greatly and are 
important  factors  in  planning  neurosurgical  obliteration  or  endovas-
cular  embolization.  The  arterial  internal  elastic  lamina  disappears  at 
the base of the neck. The media thins, and connective tissue replaces 
smooth-muscle cells. At the site of rupture (most often the dome), the 
wall  thins,  and  the  tear  that  allows  bleeding  is  often  ≤0.5  mm  long. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3353

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3354 Aneurysm  size  and  site  are  important  in  predicting  risk  of  rupture. 
Those  >7  mm  in  diameter  and  those  at  the  top  of  the  basilar  artery 
and at the origin of the posterior communicating artery are at greater 
risk of rupture.

Clinical  Manifestations  Most  unruptured  intracranial  aneu-
rysms  are  completely  asymptomatic.  Symptoms  are  usually  due  to 
rupture  and  resultant  SAH,  although  some  unruptured  aneurysms 
present  with  mass  effect  on  cranial  nerves  or  brain  parenchyma.  At 
the  moment  of  aneurysmal  rupture  with  major  SAH,  the  intracra-
nial pressure (ICP) suddenly rises. This may account for the sudden 
transient  loss  of  consciousness  that  occurs  in  nearly  half  of  patients. 
Sudden loss of consciousness may be preceded by a brief moment of 
excruciating  headache,  but  most  patients  first  complain  of  headache 
upon regaining consciousness. In 10% of cases, aneurysmal bleeding is 
severe enough to cause loss of consciousness for several days. In ~45% 
of  cases,  severe  headache  associated  with  exertion  is  the  presenting 
complaint. The patient often calls the headache “the worst headache of 
my life”; however, the most important characteristic is sudden onset. 
Occasionally, these ruptures may present as headache of only moderate 
intensity  or  as  a  change  in  the  patient’s  usual  headache  pattern.  The 
headache is usually generalized, often with neck stiffness, and vomiting 
is common.

Although sudden headache in the absence of focal neurologic symp-
toms is the hallmark of aneurysmal rupture, focal neurologic deficits 
may occur. Anterior communicating artery or MCA bifurcation aneu-
rysms may rupture into the adjacent brain or subdural space and form 
a  hematoma  large  enough  to  produce  mass  effect.  The  deficits  that 
result can include hemiparesis, aphasia, and mental slowness (abulia).
Occasionally,  prodromal  symptoms  suggest  the  location  of  a  pro-
gressively enlarging unruptured aneurysm. A third cranial nerve palsy, 
particularly when associated with pupillary dilation, loss of ipsilateral 
(but retained contralateral) light reflex, and focal pain above or behind 
the  eye,  may  occur  with  an  expanding  aneurysm  at  the  junction  of 
the posterior communicating artery and the internal carotid artery. A 
sixth nerve palsy may indicate an aneurysm in the cavernous sinus, and 
visual field defects can occur with an expanding supraclinoid carotid or 
anterior cerebral artery (ACA) aneurysm. Occipital and posterior cer-
vical pain may signal a posterior inferior cerebellar artery or anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery aneurysm (Chap. 426). Pain in or behind the 
eye and in the low temple can occur with an expanding MCA aneu-
rysm. Thunderclap headache is a variant of migraine that simulates an 
SAH. Before concluding that a patient with sudden, severe headache 
has thunderclap migraine, a definitive workup for aneurysm or other 
intracranial pathology is required.

Aneurysms  can  undergo  small  ruptures  and  leaks  of  blood  into 
the subarachnoid space, so-called sentinel bleeds. Sudden unexplained 
headache at any location should raise suspicion of SAH and be investi-
gated because a major hemorrhage may be imminent.

The initial clinical manifestations of SAH can be graded using the 
Hunt-Hess or World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies classifica-
tion  schemes  (Table  429-1).  For  ruptured  aneurysms,  prognosis  for 
good outcomes falls as the grade increases. For example, it is unusual 
for a Hunt-Hess grade 1 patient to die if the aneurysm is treated, but 
the mortality rate for grade 4 and 5 patients may be as high as 60%.

Delayed  Neurologic  Deficits  There  are  four  major  causes  of 
delayed neurologic deficits: rerupture, hydrocephalus, delayed cerebral 
ischemia (DCI), and hyponatremia.

1.  Rerupture. The incidence of rerupture of an untreated aneurysm in 
the first month following SAH is ~30%, with the peak in the first 
7 days. Rerupture is associated with a 50% mortality rate and poor 
outcome. Early treatment eliminates this risk.

2.  Hydrocephalus.  Acute  hydrocephalus  can  cause  stupor  and  coma 
and can be mitigated by placement of an external ventricular drain. 
More  often,  subacute  hydrocephalus  may  develop  over  a  few  days 
or  weeks  and  causes  progressive  drowsiness  or  slowed  mentation 
with  incontinence.  Hydrocephalus  is  differentiated  from  cerebral 

TABLE 429-1  Grading Scales for Subarachnoid Hemorrhage

GRADE
1

2

3

4

5

HUNT-HESS SCALE
Mild headache, normal mental 
status, no cranial nerve or motor 
findings
Severe headache, normal mental 
status, may have cranial nerve 
deficit
Somnolent, confused, may have 
cranial nerve or mild motor deficit
Stupor, moderate to severe motor 
deficit, may have intermittent 
reflex posturing
Coma, reflex posturing or flaccid

aGlasgow Coma Scale; see Table 443-1.

WORLD FEDERATION OF 
NEUROSURGICAL SOCIETIES 
(WFNS) SCALE
GCSa score 15, no motor 
deficits

GCS score 13–14, no motor 
deficits

GCS score 13–14, with motor 
deficits
GCS score 7–12, with or 
without motor deficits

GCS score 3–6, with or 
without motor deficits

vasospasm  with  a  CT  scan,  CT  angiogram,  transcranial  Doppler 
(TCD)  ultrasound,  or  conventional  x-ray  angiography.  Hydro-
cephalus may clear spontaneously or require temporary ventricular 
drainage.  Chronic  hydrocephalus  may  develop  weeks  to  months 
after SAH and manifest as gait difficulty, incontinence, or impaired 
mentation. Subtle signs may be a lack of initiative in conversation or 
a failure to recover independence.

3.  Delayed cerebral ischemia. Vasospasm is the narrowing of the arteries 
at the base of the brain following SAH. This may cause symptomatic 
ischemia and infarction in ~30% of patients and is the major cause 
of  delayed  morbidity  and  death.  Signs  of  DCI  appear  4–14  days  
after the hemorrhage, most often at 7 days. The severity and distri-
bution of vasospasm determine whether infarction will occur.
a.   Vasospasm  is  believed  to  result  from  direct  effects  of  clotted 
blood  and  its  breakdown  products  on  the  arteries  within  the 
subarachnoid space. In general, the more blood that surrounds 
the arteries, the greater is the chance of symptomatic vasospasm. 
Spasm  of  major  arteries  produces  symptoms  referable  to  the 
appropriate  vascular  territory  (Chap.  426).  All  of  these  focal 
symptoms  may  present  abruptly,  fluctuate,  or  develop  over  a 
few days. In most cases, focal spasm is preceded by a decline in 
mental status.

b.   Vasospasm  of  the  large  arteries  can  be  detected  reliably  with 
conventional  x-ray  angiography,  but  this  procedure  is  invasive 
and  carries  the  risk  of  stroke  and  other  complications.  TCD 
ultrasound  is  based  on  the  principle  that  the  velocity  of  blood 
flow within an artery will rise as the lumen diameter is narrowed. 
By  directing  the  probe  along  the  MCA  and  proximal  ACA, 
carotid terminus, and vertebral and basilar arteries on a daily or 
every-other-day  basis,  vasospasm  can  be  reliably  detected  and 
treatments initiated to prevent cerebral ischemia (see below). CT 
angiography is another method that can detect vasospasm. The 
addition  of  CT  perfusion  imaging  may  help  identify  reversible 
ischemic deficits.

c.   Severe cerebral edema in patients with infarction from vasospasm 
may increase the ICP enough to reduce cerebral perfusion pressure. 
Treatment may include cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage, mannitol 
or  hypertonic  saline,  and,  for  intractable  cases,  hemicraniectomy; 
moderate hypothermia may have a role as well.

4.  Hyponatremia.  Hyponatremia  may  be  profound  and  can  develop 
quickly in the first 2 weeks following SAH. There is both natriure-
sis and volume depletion with SAH, so that patients become both 
hyponatremic and hypovolemic. Both atrial natriuretic peptide and 
brain  natriuretic  peptide  have  a  role  in  producing  this  “cerebral 
salt-wasting syndrome.” Typically, it clears over the course of 1–2 weeks 
and,  in  the  setting  of  SAH,  should  not  be  treated  with  free-water 
restriction as this may increase the risk of stroke (see below).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3354

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3355

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
2
9

S
u
b
a
r
a
c
h
n
o
i
d
H
e
m
o
r
r
h
a
g
e

Close monitoring (daily or twice daily) of electrolytes is important 
because hyponatremia can occur precipitously during the first 2 weeks 
following SAH (see above).

The  electrocardiogram  (ECG)  frequently  shows  ST-segment  and 
T-wave  changes  similar  to  those  associated  with  cardiac  ischemia. 
A  prolonged  QRS  complex,  increased  QT  interval,  and  prominent 
“peaked” or deeply inverted symmetric T waves are usually secondary 
to the intracranial hemorrhage. There is evidence that structural myo-
cardial  lesions  produced  by  circulating  catecholamines  and  excessive 
discharge of sympathetic neurons may occur after SAH, causing these 
ECG  changes  and  a  reversible  cardiomyopathy  sufficient  to  cause 
shock or congestive heart failure. Echocardiography reveals a pattern 
of  regional  wall  motion  abnormalities  that  follow  the  distribution 
of  sympathetic  nerves  rather  than  the  major  coronary  arteries,  with 
relative  sparing  of  the  ventricular  wall  apex.  The  sympathetic  nerves 
themselves  appear  to  be  injured  by  direct  toxicity  from  the  exces-
sive  catecholamine  release.  An  asymptomatic  troponin  elevation  is 
common.  Serious  ventricular  dysrhythmias  occurring  in-hospital  are 
unusual.

TREATMENT
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage

Early  aneurysm  repair  prevents  rerupture  and  allows  the  safe 
application  of  techniques  to  improve  blood  flow  (e.g.,  induced 
hypertension)  should  vasospasm  and  DCI  develop.  At  many  cen-
ters,  definitive  repair  is  carried  out  within  24  h  of  the  bleed  in 
all  patients  who  are  stable  enough  to  tolerate  the  procedure.  An 
aneurysm  can  be  “clipped”  by  a  neurosurgeon  or  “coiled”  by  an 
endovascular surgeon. Surgical repair involves placing a metal clip 
across  the  aneurysm  neck,  thereby  immediately  eliminating  the 
risk  of  rebleeding.  This  approach  requires  craniotomy  and  brain 
retraction, which is associated with neurologic morbidity. Endovas-
cular  techniques  involve  placing  platinum  coils,  or  other  embolic 
material, within the aneurysm via a catheter that is passed from the 
femoral artery. The aneurysm is packed tightly to enhance throm-
bosis and over time is walled off from the circulation (Fig. 429-1D). 
There have been two prospective randomized trials of surgery ver-
sus  endovascular  treatment  for  ruptured  aneurysms:  the  first  was 
the International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT), which was 
terminated  early  when  24%  of  patients  treated  with  endovascular 
therapy were dead or dependent at 1 year compared to 31% treated 
with surgery, a significant 23% relative reduction. After 5 years, risk 
of  death  was  lower  in  the  coiling  group,  although  the  proportion 
of survivors who were independent was the same in both groups. 
Risk of rebleeding was low but more common in the coiling group. 
These results favoring coiling at 1 year were confirmed in a second 
trial, although the differences in functional outcome were no longer 
significant at 3 years. Because some aneurysms have a morphology 
that  is  not  amenable  to  endovascular  treatment,  surgery  remains 
an  important  treatment  option.  Newer  endovascular  techniques 
using balloon-assisted coiling or placement of flow-diverting stents 
are  increasing  the  types  of  aneurysms  amenable  to  endovascular 
intervention. Centers that combine both endovascular and neuro-
surgical  expertise  likely  offer  the  best  outcomes  for  patients,  and 
there are reliable data showing that specialized aneurysm treatment 
centers can improve mortality rates.

The medical management of SAH focuses on protecting the air-
way, managing blood pressure before and after aneurysm treatment, 
preventing  rebleeding  prior  to  treatment,  managing  vasospasm 
and  DCI,  treating  hydrocephalus,  treating  hyponatremia,  limiting 
secondary brain insults, and preventing pulmonary embolus (PE).

Intracranial hypertension following aneurysmal rupture occurs 
secondary  to  subarachnoid  blood,  parenchymal  hematoma,  acute 
hydrocephalus, or loss of vascular autoregulation. Patients who are 
stuporous  should  undergo  emergent  ventriculostomy  to  measure 
ICP  and  to  treat  high  ICP  in  order  to  prevent  cerebral  ischemia. 

A

C

B

D

FIGURE  429-1  Subarachnoid  hemorrhage.  A.  Computed 
(CT) 
angiography revealing an aneurysm of the left superior cerebellar artery. B. Noncontrast 
CT  scan  at  the  level  of  the  third  ventricle  revealing  subarachnoid  blood  (bright) 
in  the  left  sylvian  fissure  and  within  the  left  lateral  ventricle.  C.  Conventional 
anteroposterior x-ray angiogram of the right vertebral and basilar artery showing 
the  large  aneurysm.  D.  Conventional  angiogram  following  coil  embolization  of 
the aneurysm, whereby the aneurysm body is filled with platinum coils delivered 
through a microcatheter navigated from the femoral artery into the aneurysm neck.

tomography 

Laboratory  Evaluation  and  Imaging  (Fig.  429-1)  The  hall-
mark  of  aneurysmal  rupture  is  blood  in  the  CSF.  More  than  95%  of 
cases have enough blood to be visualized on a high-quality noncontrast 
CT scan obtained within 72 h. If the scan fails to establish the diagno-
sis of SAH and no mass lesion or obstructive hydrocephalus is found, 
a  lumbar  puncture  should  be  performed  to  establish  the  presence  of 
subarachnoid blood. Lysis of the red blood cells and subsequent con-
version of hemoglobin to bilirubin stains the spinal fluid yellow within 
6–12 h. This xanthochromic spinal fluid peaks in intensity at 48 h and 
lasts for 1–4 weeks, depending on the amount of subarachnoid blood.
The  extent  and  location  of  subarachnoid  blood  on  a  noncontrast 
CT scan help locate the underlying aneurysm, identify the cause of any 
neurologic  deficit,  and  predict  the  occurrence  of  vasospasm.  A  high 
incidence of symptomatic vasospasm in the MCA and ACA has been 
found when early CT scans show subarachnoid clots >5 × 3 mm in the 
basal cisterns or layers of blood >1 mm thick in the cerebral fissures. 
CT  scans  less  reliably  predict  vasospasm  in  the  vertebral,  basilar,  or 
posterior cerebral arteries.

Lumbar puncture prior to an imaging procedure is indicated only 
if  a  CT  scan  is  not  available  at  the  time  of  the  suspected  SAH.  Once 
the  diagnosis  of  hemorrhage  from  a  ruptured  saccular  aneurysm  is 
suspected,  four-vessel  conventional  x-ray  angiography  (both  carotids 
and  both  vertebrals)  is  generally  performed  to  localize  and  define  the 
anatomic details of the aneurysm and to determine if other unruptured 
aneurysms exist (Fig. 429-1C). At some centers, the ruptured aneurysm 
can be treated using endovascular techniques at the time of the initial 
angiogram  as  a  way  to  expedite  treatment  and  minimize  the  number 
of  invasive  procedures.  CT  angiography  is  an  alternative  method  for 
locating the aneurysm and may be sufficient to plan definitive therapy.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3355

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3356

Medical  therapies  designed  to  combat  raised  ICP  (e.g.,  osmotic 
therapy and sedation) can also be used as needed. High ICP refrac-
tory to treatment is a poor prognostic sign.

Prior  to  definitive  treatment  of  the  ruptured  aneurysm,  care  is 
required  to  maintain  adequate  cerebral  perfusion  pressure  while 
avoiding  excessive  elevation  of  arterial  pressure.  If  the  patient  is 
alert, it is reasonable to lower the systolic blood pressure to below 
160  mmHg  using  nicardipine,  labetalol,  or  esmolol.  If  the  patient 
has  a  depressed  level  of  consciousness,  ICP  should  be  measured 
and  the  cerebral  perfusion  pressure  targeted  to  60–70  mmHg.  If 
headache  or  neck  pain  is  severe,  mild  sedation  and  analgesia  are 
prescribed. Extreme sedation is avoided if possible because it can 
obscure the ability to clinically detect changes in neurologic status. 
Adequate hydration is necessary to avoid a decrease in blood vol-
ume predisposing to brain ischemia.

Seizures are uncommon at the onset of aneurysmal rupture. The 
quivering,  jerking,  and  extensor  posturing  that  often  accompany 
loss  of  consciousness  with  SAH  are  probably  related  to  the  sharp 
rise  in  ICP  rather  than  seizures.  However,  anticonvulsants  are 
sometimes  given  as  prophylactic  therapy  because  a  seizure  could 
theoretically promote rebleeding.

Glucocorticoids may help reduce the head and neck ache caused 
by the irritative effect of the subarachnoid blood. There is no good 
evidence  that  they  reduce  cerebral  edema,  are  neuroprotective, 
or  reduce  vascular  injury,  and  their  routine  use  therefore  is  not 
recommended.

Antifibrinolytic agents are not routinely prescribed but may be 
considered  in  patients  in  whom  aneurysm  treatment  cannot  pro-
ceed immediately. They are associated with a reduced incidence of 
aneurysmal  rerupture  but  may  also  increase  the  risk  of  DCI  and 
deep-vein  thrombosis  (DVT).  Several  recent  studies  suggest  that 
a shorter duration of use (until the aneurysm is secured or for the 
first  3  days)  may  decrease  rerupture  and  be  safer  than  found  in 
earlier studies of longer duration treatment.

DCI  remains  the  leading  cause  of  morbidity  and  mortality 
following  aneurysmal  SAH.  Treatment  with  the  calcium  channel 
antagonist  nimodipine  (60  mg  PO  every  4  h)  improves  outcome, 
perhaps  by  preventing  ischemic  injury  rather  than  reducing  the 
risk  of  vasospasm.  Nimodipine  can  cause  significant  hypotension 
in some patients, which may worsen cerebral ischemia in patients 
with  vasospasm.  Symptomatic  cerebral  vasospasm  can  also  be 
treated  by  increasing  the  cerebral  perfusion  pressure  by  raising 
mean arterial pressure through plasma volume expansion and the 
judicious  use  of  IV  vasopressor  agents,  usually  phenylephrine  or 
norepinephrine. Raised perfusion pressure has been associated with 
clinical  improvement  in  many  patients,  but  high  arterial  pressure 
may promote rebleeding in unprotected aneurysms. Treatment with 
induced  hypertension  and  intravenous  fluids  generally  requires 
monitoring  of  arterial  and  central  venous  pressures;  it  is  best  to 
infuse  pressors  through  a  central  venous  line  as  well.  Euvolemia 
should be targeted as significant hypervolemia may lead to cardio-
pulmonary complications. Hypovolemia should be strictly avoided.
If  DCI  due  to  vasospasm  persists  despite  optimal  medical 
therapy,  intraarterial  vasodilators  and  percutaneous  transluminal 
angioplasty  are  considered  (Fig.  429-2).  Vasodilatation  by  direct 
angioplasty appears to be permanent, allowing hypertensive therapy 
to  be  tapered  sooner.  The  pharmacologic  vasodilators  (verapamil 
and nicardipine) do not last more than about 24 h, and therefore, 
multiple treatments may be required until the subarachnoid blood 
is  reabsorbed.  Although  intraarterial  papaverine  is  an  effective 
vasodilator, there is evidence that papaverine may be neurotoxic, so 
its use should generally be avoided.

DCI  may  occur  in  the  absence  of  significant  large-vessel  vaso-
spasm. Potential mechanisms include microthrombosis, activation 
of  the  inflammatory  cascade,  microvascular  dysregulation  and 
constriction, and cortical spreading depolarization. Targeted treat-
ments for these mechanisms are under investigation.

A

B

FIGURE  429-2  Vasospasm  of  the  right  middle  cerebral  artery.  A.  Catheter 
angiography  demonstrates  significant  narrowing  of  the  right  middle  cerebral 
artery (MCA). B. Because of symptomatic delayed cerebral ischemia, soft-balloon 
angioplasty was used to dilate the proximal portion of the main MCA stem.

Acute  hydrocephalus  can  cause  stupor  or  coma.  It  may  clear 
spontaneously  or  require  temporary  ventricular  drainage.  When 
chronic hydrocephalus develops, ventricular shunting is the treat-
ment of choice.

Free-water restriction is contraindicated in patients with SAH at 
risk for DCI because hypovolemia and hypotension may occur and 
precipitate cerebral ischemia. Many patients continue to experience 
a decline in serum sodium despite receiving parenteral fluids con-
taining  normal  saline.  Frequently,  supplemental  oral  salt  coupled 
with  normal  saline  will  mitigate  hyponatremia,  but  often  patients 
also  require  intravenous  hypertonic  saline.  Care  must  be  taken 
not to correct serum sodium too quickly in patients with marked 
hyponatremia of several days’ duration, as the osmotic demyelina-
tion syndrome (Chap. 307) may occur.

All  patients  should  have  pneumatic  compression  stockings 
applied to prevent PE. Unfractionated heparin administered subcu-
taneously for DVT prophylaxis can be initiated within 1–2 days fol-
lowing endovascular treatment or craniotomy with surgical clipping 
and is a useful adjunct to pneumatic compression stockings. Treat-
ment of PE depends on whether the aneurysm has been treated and 
whether or not the patient has had a craniotomy. Systemic antico-
agulation with heparin is contraindicated in patients with ruptured 
and untreated aneurysms. It is a relative contraindication following 
craniotomy for several days, and it may delay thrombosis of a coiled 
aneurysm.  If  DVT  or  PE  occurs  within  the  first  days  following 
craniotomy,  use  of  an  inferior  vena  cava  filter  may  be  considered 
to  prevent  additional  PEs,  whereas  systemic  anticoagulation  with 
heparin is preferred following successful endovascular treatment.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Diringer  MN  et  al:  Critical  care  management  of  patients  following 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: Recommendations from the 
Neurocritical  Care  Society’s  Multidisciplinary  Consensus  Confer-
ence. Neurocrit Care 15:211, 2011.

Molyneux AJ et al: The durability of endovascular coiling versus neu-
rosurgical clipping of ruptured cerebral aneurysms: 18 year follow-up 
of the UK cohort of the International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial 
(ISAT). Lancet 385:691, 2015.

Tawk  RG  et  al:  Diagnosis  and  treatment  of  unruptured  intracranial 
aneurysms  and  aneurysmal  subarachnoid  hemorrhage.  Mayo  Clin 
Proc 96:1970, 2021.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3356

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 430 Migraine and Other  
Primary Headache  
Disorders
Peter J. Goadsby

The  general  approach  to  headache  as  a  cardinal  symptom  is  cov-
ered  elsewhere  (Chap.  16);  here,  disorders  in  which  headache  and 
associated  features  occur  in  the  absence  of  any  exogenous  cause  are 
discussed.  The  most  common  are  migraine,  tension-type  headache 
(TTH),  and  the  trigeminal  autonomic  cephalalgias  (TACs),  notably 
cluster headache; the complete list is summarized in Table 430-1.
 ■ MIGRAINE
Migraine, the second most common cause of headache, and the most 
common headache-related, and indeed neurologic, cause of disability 
in  the  world,  afflicts  ~15%  of  women  and  6%  of  men  over  a  1-year 
period. It is usually an episodic headache associated with certain fea-
tures such as sensitivity to light, sound, or movement; nausea and vom-
iting often accompany the headache. A useful description of migraine 
is a recurring syndrome of headache associated with other symptoms 
of  neurologic  dysfunction  in  varying  admixtures  (Table  430-2).  
A  migraine  attack  has  three  phases:  premonitory  (prodrome),  head-
ache phase, and postdrome; each has distinct and sometimes disabling 
symptoms,  which  may  overlap.  About  20–25%  of  migraine  patients 
have  a  fourth,  aura,  phase.  Migraine  can  often  be  recognized  by  its 
activators, referred to as triggers.

Migraineurs are particularly sensitive to environmental and sensory 
stimuli;  migraine-prone  patients  do  not  habituate  easily  to  sensory 
stimuli.  This  sensitivity  is  amplified  in  women  during  the  menstrual 
cycle.  Headache  can  be  initiated  or  amplified  by  various  triggers, 
including glare, bright lights, sounds, or other types of afferent stimu-
lation; hunger; let-down from stress; physical exertion; stormy weather 
or barometric pressure changes; hormonal fluctuations during menses; 
lack  of  or  excess  sleep;  and  alcohol  or  other  chemical  stimulation, 
such as with nitrates. Knowledge of a patient’s susceptibility to specific 
triggers  can  be  useful  in  management  strategies  involving  lifestyle 
adjustments,  although  it  is  becoming  recognized  that  some  apparent 
triggers may in fact be part of the initial phase of the attack; i.e., the 
premonitory phase or prodrome.

Pathogenesis  The  sensory  sensitivity  that  is  characteristic  of 
migraine  is  probably  due  to  dysfunction  of  monoaminergic  sensory 
control systems located in the brainstem and hypothalamus (Fig. 430-1).
Activation of cells in the trigeminal nucleus results in the release of 
vasoactive neuropeptides, particularly calcitonin gene–related peptide 
(CGRP), at vascular terminals of the trigeminal nerve and within the 
trigeminal  nucleus.  CGRP  receptor  antagonists,  gepants,  have  now 
been  shown  to  be  effective  in  the  acute  and  preventive  treatment  of 
migraine,  and  four  monoclonal  antibodies  to  CGRP,  or  its  receptor, 
have  been  shown  to  be  effective  in  migraine  prevention.  Centrally, 
the second-order trigeminal neurons cross the midline and project to 
ventrobasal and posterior nuclei of the thalamus for further processing. 
Additionally, there are projections to the periaqueductal gray and hypo-
thalamus, from which reciprocal descending systems have established 
antinociceptive effects. Other brainstem regions likely to be involved 
in descending modulation of trigeminal pain include the nucleus locus 
coeruleus in the pons and the rostroventromedial medulla.

Pharmacologic and other data point to the involvement of the neu-
rotransmitter  5-hydroxytryptamine  (5-HT;  also  known  as  serotonin) 
in migraine. In the late 1950s, methysergide was found to antagonize 
certain  peripheral  actions  of  5-HT  and  was  introduced,  based  on  its 
anti-inflammation  properties,  as  a  migraine  preventive.  The  triptans 
were designed to stimulate selectively subpopulations of 5-HT recep-
tors; at least 14 different 5-HT receptors exist in humans. The triptans 
are  potent  agonists  of  5-HT1B  and  5-HT1D  receptors,  and  some  are 

3357

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

active at the 5-HT1F receptor; the latter’s exclusive agonists are called 
ditans.  Triptans  arrest  nerve  signaling  in  the  nociceptive  pathways 
of  the  trigeminovascular  system,  at  least  in  the  trigeminal  nucleus 
caudalis  and  trigeminal  sensory  thalamus,  in  addition  to  promoting 
cranial vasoconstriction, whereas ditans, now shown conclusively to be 
effective in acute migraine, act only at neural and not vascular targets. 
A range of other neural targets are currently under investigation for the 
acute and preventive management of migraine.

Data  also  support  a  role  for  dopamine  in  the  pathophysiology  of 
migraine. Most migraine symptoms can be induced by dopaminergic 
stimulation. Moreover, there is dopamine receptor hypersensitivity in 
migraineurs,  as  demonstrated  by  the  induction  of  yawning,  nausea, 
vomiting,  hypotension,  and  other  symptoms  of  a  migraine  attack  by 
dopaminergic  agonists  at  doses  that  do  not  affect  nonmigraineurs. 
Dopamine  receptor  antagonists  are  effective  therapeutic  agents  in 
migraine,  especially  when  given  parenterally  or  concurrently  with 
other antimigraine agents. Moreover, hypothalamic activation, anterior 
to that seen in cluster headache, has now been shown in the premoni-
tory (prodromal) phase of migraine using functional imaging, and this 
may hold a key to understanding some part of the role of dopamine in 
the disorder.

Migraine genes identified by studying families with familial hemi-
plegic migraine (FHM) reveal involvement of ion channels, suggesting 
that alterations in membrane excitability can predispose to migraine. 
Mutations  involving  the  Cav2.1  (P/Q)–type  voltage-gated  calcium 
channel CACNA1A gene are now known to cause FHM 1; this muta-
tion  is  responsible  for  about  50%  of  FHM  cases.  Mutations  in  the 
Na+-K+ATPase  ATP1A2  gene,  designated  FHM  2,  are  responsible  for 
about 20% of FHMs. Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium 
channel SCN1A cause FHM 3. Functional neuroimaging has suggested 
that brainstem regions in migraine (Fig. 430-2) and the posterior hypo-
thalamic gray matter region close to the human circadian pacemaker 
cells of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in cluster headache (Fig. 430-3) are 
good candidates for specific involvement in these primary headaches.

Diagnosis  and  Clinical  Features  Classic  diagnostic  criteria  for 
migraine headache are listed in Table 430-3 and should be considered 
together  with  the  extended  features  in  Table  430-2.  A  high  index  of 
suspicion is required to diagnose migraine: the migraine aura, consist-
ing of visual disturbances with flashing lights or zigzag lines moving 
across the visual field or of other neurologic symptoms, is reported in 
only 20–25% of patients. It should be distinguished from the pan-field 
television  static-like  disturbance  now  recognized  as  the  visual  snow 
syndrome. The first phase of a migraine attack for most patients is the 
premonitory (prodromal) phase consisting of some or all of the follow-
ing: yawning, tiredness, cognitive dysfunction, mood change, neck dis-
comfort, polyuria, and food cravings; this can last from a few hours to 
days. Typically, the headache phase follows with its associated features, 
such  as  nausea,  photophobia,  and  phonophobia  as  well  as  allodynia. 
When questioned, these typical migraine symptoms also emerge in the 
premonitory phase, and typical premonitory symptoms also continue 
into the headache phase. As the headache lessens, many patients enter 
a  postdrome,  most  commonly  feeling  tired/weary,  having  problems 
concentrating, and experiencing mild neck discomfort that can last for 
hours and sometimes up to a day. A headache diary can often be helpful 
in making the diagnosis; this is also helpful in assessing disability and 
the frequency of acute attacks. Patients with episodes of migraine on  
8 or more days per month and with at least 15 total days of headache 
per  month  are  considered  to  have  chronic  migraine  (see  “Chronic 
Daily Headache” in Chap. 16). Migraine must be differentiated from 
TTH (discussed below), which is reported to be the most common pri-
mary headache syndrome. Migraine has several forms that have been 
defined  (Table  430-1):  migraine  with  and  without  aura  and  chronic 
migraine  are  the  most  important.  Migraine  at  its  most  basic  level  is 
headache with associated features, and TTH is headache that is feature-
less. Most patients with disabling headache probably have migraine.

Patients  with  acephalgic  migraine  (typical  aura  without  headache, 
1.2.1.2  in  Table  430-1)  experience  recurrent  neurologic  symptoms, 
often with nausea or vomiting, but with little or no headache. Vertigo 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3357

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3358 TABLE 430-1  Primary Headache Disorders, Modified from International Classification of Headache Disorders-III-Beta (Headache Classification 

Committee of the International Headache Society, 2018)
1. Migraine

1.1  Migraine without aura
1.2  Migraine with aura

1.2.1  Migraine with typical aura

1.2.1.1  Typical aura with headache
1.2.1.2  Typical aura without headache

1.2.2  Migraine with brainstem aura
1.2.3  Hemiplegic migraine

1.2.3.1  Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM)

1.2.3.1.1  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1
1.2.3.1.2  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 2
1.2.3.1.3  Familial hemiplegic migraine type 3
1.2.3.1.4  Familial hemiplegic migraine, other loci

1.2.3.2  Sporadic hemiplegic migraine

1.2.4  Retinal migraine

1.3  Chronic migraine
1.4  Complications of migraine
1.4.1  Status migrainosus
1.4.2  Persistent aura without infarction
1.4.3  Migrainous infarction
1.4.4  Migraine aura-triggered seizure

1.5  Probable migraine

1.5.1  Probable migraine without aura
1.5.2  Probable migraine with aura

1.6  Episodic syndromes that may be associated with migraine

1.6.1  Recurrent gastrointestinal disturbance
1.6.1.1  Cyclical vomiting syndrome
1.6.1.2  Abdominal migraine
1.6.2  Benign paroxysmal vertigo
1.6.3  Benign paroxysmal torticollis

2.1  Infrequent episodic tension-type headache
2.2  Frequent episodic tension-type headache
2.3  Chronic tension-type headache
2.4  Probable tension-type headache
3.1  Cluster headache

3.1.1  Episodic cluster headache
3.1.2  Chronic cluster headache

3.2  Paroxysmal hemicrania

3.2.1  Episodic paroxysmal hemicrania
3.2.2  Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania

3.3  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks

3.3.1  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT)

3.3.1.1  Episodic SUNCT
3.3.1.2  Chronic SUNCT

3.3.2  Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA)

3.3.2.1  Episodic SUNA
3.3.2.2  Chronic SUNA

3.4  Hemicrania continua
3.5  Probable trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia
4.1  Primary cough headache
4.2  Primary exercise headache
4.3  Primary headache associated with sexual activity
4.4  Primary thunderclap headache
4.5  Cold-stimulus headache

4.5.1  Headache attributed to external application of a cold stimulus
4.5.2  Headache attributed to ingestion or inhalation of a cold stimulus

4.6  External-pressure headache

4.6.1  External-compression headache
4.6.2  External-traction headache

4.7  Primary stabbing headache
4.8  Nummular headache
4.9  Hypnic headache
4.10  New daily persistent headache (NDPH)

2. Tension-type headache

3. Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias

4. Other primary headache disorders

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3358

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 430-2  Migraine Symptoms by Attack Phase
Premonitory (prodromal)
- Neck discomfort
- Higher center

•	 Cognitive impairment (brain “fog”)
•	 Mood change
•	 Fatigue
- Homeostatic

•	 Yawning/sleepiness
•	 Polyuria/polydipsia
•	 Food cravings

Aura
- Neurologic disturbance, such as scintillating scotoma
Headache Phase
- Pain
- Nausea/vomiting
- Sensory sensitivity
•	 Photophobia
•	 Phonophobia
•	 Osmophobia
•	 Allodynia
•	 Vertigo
Postdrome
- Tiredness
- Weariness
- Concentration impairment

Source: Adapted from PJ Goadsby et al: Pathophysiology of migraine: A disorder of 
sensory processing. Physiol Rev 97:553, 2017.

Cortex
Cortex

Thalamus
Thalamus

Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus

Dura

can  be  prominent;  it  has  been  estimated  that  one-third  of  patients 
referred for vertigo or dizziness have a primary diagnosis of migraine. 
Migraine aura can have prominent brainstem symptoms, and the terms 
basilar  artery  and  basilar-type  migraine  have  now  been  replaced  by 
migraine with brainstem aura (Table 430-1).

3359

TREATMENT
Migraine Headache

Once a diagnosis of migraine has been established, it is important to 
assess the extent of a patient’s disease and disability. The Migraine 
Disability Assessment Score (MIDAS) is a well-validated, easy-to-
use tool (Fig. 430-4).

Patient  education  is  an  important  aspect  of  migraine  manage-
ment.  Information  for  patients  is  available  at  websites  such  as  the 
American Migraine Foundation (www.americanmigrainefoundation.
org)  and  the  Migraine  Trust  (www.migrainetrust.org).  It  is  helpful 
for patients to understand that migraine is an inherited tendency to 
headache; that migraine can be modified and controlled by lifestyle 
adjustments and medications, but it cannot be eradicated; and that, 
except on some occasions in women on oral estrogens or contra-
ceptives, migraine is not associated with serious or life-threatening 
illnesses. 
NONPHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT
Migraine  can  often  be  managed  to  some  degree  by  a  variety  of 
nonpharmacologic  approaches.  When  patients  can  identify  reli-
able  triggers,  their  avoidance  can  be  useful.  A  regulated  lifestyle 
is  helpful,  including  a  healthy  diet,  regular  exercise,  regular  sleep 
patterns,  avoidance  of  excess  caffeine  and  alcohol,  and  avoidance 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Quintothalamic
Quintothalamic
tract
tract

Dorsal raphe
Dorsal raphe
nucleus
nucleus

Locus
Locus
coeruleus
coeruleus

Superior
Superior
salivatory nucleus
salivatory nucleus

Magnus raphe
Magnus raphe
nucleus
nucleus

TCC

Trigeminal
ganglion

Sphenopalatine
ganglion

FIGURE 430-1  Brainstem pathways that modulate sensory input. The key pathway for pain in migraine is the trigeminovascular input from the meningeal vessels, which 
passes through the trigeminal ganglion and synapses on second-order neurons in the trigeminocervical complex (TCC). These neurons in turn project in the quintothalamic 
tract and, after decussating in the brainstem, synapse on neurons in the thalamus. Important modulation of the trigeminovascular nociceptive input comes from the dorsal 
raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, and nucleus raphe magnus.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3359

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3360

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 430-2  Positron emission tomography (PET) activation in migraine. Hypothalamic, dorsal midbrain, and dorsolateral pontine activation are seen in triggered attacks 
in the premonitory phase before pain, whereas in migraine attacks, dorsolateral pontine activation persists, as it does in chronic migraine (not shown). The dorsolateral 
pontine area, which includes the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, is fundamental to the expression of migraine. Moreover, lateralization of changes in this region of the 
brainstem correlates with lateralization of the head pain in hemicranial migraine; the scans shown in panels C and D are of patients with acute migraine headache on the right 
and left side, respectively. (Panel A from FH Maniyar et al: Brain activations in the premonitory phase of nitroglycerin-triggered migraine attacks. Brain 137:232, 2014; panel B 
reproduced with permission from SK Afridi et al: A positron emission tomographic study in spontaneous migraine. Arch Neurol 62:1270, 2005.; Panels C and D from SK Afridi  
et al: A PET study exploring the laterality of brainstem activation in migraine using glyceryl trinitrate. Brain 128:932, 2005.)

A

B

FIGURE 430-3  A. Posterior hypothalamic gray matter region activation demonstrated by positron emission tomography in a patient with acute cluster headache. B. High-
resolution T1-weighted magnetic resonance image obtained using voxel-based morphometry demonstrates increased gray matter activity, lateralized to the side of pain in 
a patient with cluster headache. (Panel A from A May et al: Hypothalamic activation in cluster headache attacks. Lancet 352:275, 1998. Panel B from A May et al: Correlation 
between structural and functional changes in brain in an idiopathic headache syndrome. Nat Med 5:836, 1999.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3360

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 430-3  Simplified Diagnostic Criteria for Migraine

REPEATED ATTACKS OF HEADACHE LASTING 4–72 H IN PATIENTS WITH A 
NORMAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION, NO OTHER REASONABLE CAUSE FOR THE 
HEADACHE, AND:

AT LEAST 2 OF THE FOLLOWING 
FEATURES:
Unilateral pain
Throbbing pain
Aggravation by movement
Moderate or severe intensity

PLUS AT LEAST 1 OF THE FOLLOWING 
FEATURES:
Nausea/vomiting
Photophobia and phonophobia

Source: Adapted from the International Headache Society Classification (Headache 
Classification Committee of the International Headache Society, Cephalalgia 38:1, 
2018).

of acute changes in stress levels, being particularly wary of the let-
down effect.

The  measures  that  benefit  a  given  individual  should  be  used 
routinely because they provide a simple, cost-effective approach to 
migraine  management.  Patients  with  migraine  do  not  encounter 
more  stress  than  headache-free  individuals;  overresponsiveness 
to  changes  in  stress  appears  to  be  the  issue.  Because  the  stresses 
of  everyday  living  cannot  be  eliminated,  lessening  one’s  response 
to stress by various techniques is helpful for many patients. These 
may  include  yoga,  transcendental  meditation,  hypnosis,  and  con-
ditioning  techniques  such  as  biofeedback.  For  most  patients  seen 
in clinical practice, this approach is, at best, an adjunct to pharma-
cotherapy. Nonpharmacologic measures are unlikely to prevent all 
migraine attacks, and pharmacologic approaches are often needed. 
ACUTE ATTACK THERAPIES FOR MIGRAINE
The  mainstay  of  pharmacologic  therapy  is  the  judicious  use  of 
one or more of the many medicines that are effective in migraine 
(Table  430-4).  The  selection  of  the  optimal  regimen  for  a  given 

patient  depends  on  a  number  of  factors,  the  most  important  of 
which is the severity of the attack. Mild migraine attacks can usu-
ally be managed by oral agents; the average efficacy rate is 50–70%. 
Severe migraine attacks may require parenteral therapy. Most drugs 
effective  in  the  treatment  of  migraine  are  members  of  one  of 
five  major  pharmacologic  classes:  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory 
drugs; 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists—triptans; CGRP receptor antag-
onists—gepants;  5-HT1F  receptor  agonists—ditans;  and  dopamine 
receptor antagonists.

In general, an adequate dose of whichever agent is chosen should 
be used as soon as possible after the onset of an attack. If additional 
medication is required within 60 min because symptoms return or 
have not abated, the initial dose should be increased for subsequent 
attacks  or  a  different  class  of  drug  tried  as  first-line  treatment. 
Repeat dosing of the same medicine at 2 hours while safe, has been 
established to be ineffective for triptans. An exception to this rule 
may be gepants, for which there are data to show that retreatment 
with  the  same  dose  is  helpful.  Migraine  therapy  must  be  indi-
vidualized;  a  standard  approach  for  all  patients  is  not  possible.  A 
therapeutic regimen may need to be constantly refined until one is 
identified that provides the patient with rapid, complete, and consis-
tent relief with minimal side effects (Table 430-5). 
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)  Both the sever-
ity and duration of a migraine attack can be reduced significantly 
by NSAIDs (Table 430-4). Indeed, many undiagnosed migraineurs 
self-treat with nonprescription NSAIDs. A general consensus is that 
NSAIDs are most effective when taken early in the migraine attack. 
However,  the  effectiveness  of  these  agents  in  migraine  is  usually 
less  than  optimal  in  moderate  or  severe  migraine  attacks.  The 
combination of acetaminophen (paracetamol), aspirin, and caffeine 
has been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion  (FDA)  for  the  treatment  of  mild  to  moderate  migraine.  The 
combination  of  aspirin  and  metoclopramide  has  been  shown  to 

3361

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

INSTRUCTIONS: Please answer the following questions about ALL headaches you have had 
over the last 3 months. Write zero if you did not do the activity in the last 3 months.

*MIDAS Questionnaire

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

A.

B.

On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss work or school because 
of your headaches?

...............................................................................................

How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity at work or school 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 1 where you missed work or school)?

............................

On how many days in the last 3 months did you not do household work 
because of your headaches?

................................................................................

How many days in the last 3 months was your productivity in household work 
reduced by half or more because of your headaches (do not include days 
you counted in question 3 where you did not do household work)?

.....................

On how many days in the last 3 months did you miss family, social, or leisure 
activities because of your headaches?

.................................................................

On how many days in the last 3 months did you have a headache? (If a 
headache lasted more than one day, count each day.)

.........................................

On a scale of 0–10, on average how painful were these headaches? (Where 
0 = no pain at all, and 10 = pain as bad as it can be.)

..........................................

days

days

days

days

days

days

*Migraine Disability Assessment Score
(Questions 1−5 are used to calculate the MIDAS score.)
Grade I—Minimal or Infrequent Disability: 0–5
Grade II—Mild or Infrequent Disability: 6–10
Grade III—Moderate Disability: 11–20
Grade IV—Severe Disability: > 20

© Innovative Medical Research 1997

FIGURE 430-4  The Migraine Disability Assessment Score (MIDAS) Questionnaire.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3361

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3362 TABLE 430-4  Treatment of Acute Migraine

DRUG

Simple Analgesics

TRADE NAME

DOSAGE

Acetaminophen, aspirin, caffeine

Excedrin Migraine

Two tablets or caplets q6h (max 8 per day)

NSAIDs

Naproxen
Ibuprofen
Tolfenamic acid
Diclofenac K
5-HT1B/1D Receptor Agonists—Triptans
Oral
Ergotamine 1 mg, caffeine 100 mg
Naratriptan
Rizatriptan

Sumatriptan
Frovatriptan
Almotriptan
Eletriptan
Zolmitriptan

Nasal
Dihydroergotamine

Sumatriptan
Zolmitriptan
Parenteral
Dihydroergotamine
Sumatriptan

CGRP Receptor Antagonists—Gepants
Oral
Rimegepant
Ubrogepant
5-HT1F Receptor Agonist—Ditans
Oral
Lasmiditan

Dopamine Receptor Antagonists

Oral
Metoclopramide
Prochlorperazine
Parenteral
Chlorpromazine
Metoclopramide
Prochlorperazine

Other

Oral
Acetaminophen, 325 mg, plus dichloralphenazone,  
100 mg, plus isometheptene, 65 mg
Parenteral
Opioids
Other
Neuromodulation
Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (sTMS)
Noninvasive vagus nerve stimulation (nVNS)
Remote electrical neuromodulation
Transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation

Aleve, Anaprox, generic
Advil, Motrin, Nuprin, generic
Clotam Rapid
Cambia

220–550 mg po bid
400 mg po q3–4h
200 mg po; may repeat ×1 after 1–2 h
50 mg po with water

Cafergot
Amerge
Maxalt
Maxalt-MLT
Imitrex
Frova
Axert
Relpax
Zomig
Zomig Rapimelt

Migranal Nasal Spray

Trudhesa Nasal Spray
Imitrex Nasal Spray
Zomig

DHE-45
Imitrex Injection
Alsuma
Sumavel DosePro

Nurtec
Ubrelvy

Reyvow

One or two tablets at onset, then one tablet q½h (max 6 per day, 10 per week)
2.5-mg tablet at onset
5–10-mg tablet at onset

50–100-mg tablet at onset
2.5-mg tablet at onset
12.5-mg tablet at onset
40 or 80 mg at onset
2.5-mg tablet at onset

Prior to nasal spray, the pump must be primed 4 times; 1 spray (0.5 mg) is 
administered, followed in 15 min by a second spray
One spray into each nostril
5–20 mg intranasal spray as 4 sprays of 5 mg or a single 20 mg spray
5 mg intranasal spray as one spray

1 mg IV, IM, or SC at onset and q1h (max 3 mg/d, 6 mg per week)
6 mg SC at onset (may repeat once after 1 h for max of 2 doses in 24 h)

75 mg ODT po
50 or 100 mg po; a second dose may be taken 2 hours after the first, if needed.

50, 100, or 200 mg po

Reglan,a generica
Compazine,a generica

5–10 mg/d
1–25 mg/d

Generica
Reglan,a generic
Compazine,a generica

0.1 mg/kg IV at 2 mg/min; max 35 mg/d
10 mg IV
10 mg IV

Midrin, generic

Two capsules at onset followed by 1 capsule q1h (max 5 capsules)

Generica

Multiple preparations and dosages; see Table 13-1

sTMSmini
gammaCore
Nerivio
Cefaly

Two pulses at onset followed by two further pulses
Two doses each of 120 s
30- to 45-min stimulation to the upper arm
60-min stimulation

aNot all drugs are specifically indicated by the FDA for migraine. Local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.
Note: Antiemetics (e.g., domperidone 10 mg or ondansetron 4 or 8 mg) or prokinetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg) are sometimes useful adjuncts.
Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; ODT, orally disintegrating tablets.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3362

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 430-5  Clinical Stratification of Acute Specific Migraine 
Treatments
CLINICAL SITUATION
Failed NSAIDs/analgesics

TREATMENT OPTIONS
First tier
Sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg PO
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
Rizatriptan 10 mg PO
Eletriptan 40 mg PO
Zolmitriptan 2.5 mg PO
Rimegepant 75 mg
Ubrogepant 50 or 100 mg
Lasmiditan 50, 100, or 200 mg
Slower effect/better tolerability
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
Frovatriptan 2.5 mg PO
Infrequent headache
Ergotamine/caffeine 1–2/100 mg PO
Dihydroergotamine nasal spray 2 mg
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 20 mg nasal spray
Rizatriptan 10 mg MLT wafer
Ergotamine 2 mg (most effective PR/usually with 
caffeine)
Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
Eletriptan 40 mg
Rimegepant 75 mg
Ubrogepant 50 or 100 mg
Naratriptan 2.5 mg

Almotriptan 12.5 mg
Rimegepant 75 mg
Ubrogepant 50, 100 mg
Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation
Noninvasive vagus nerve stimulation
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 25 mg PR
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
Prevention
Ergotamine po at night
Estrogen patches
Rimegepant 75 mg po taken during the menses
Treatment
Triptans
Dihydroergotamine nasal spray
Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
Dihydroergotamine 1 mg IM

Early nausea or difficulties 
taking tablets

Headache recurrence

Tolerating acute treatments 
poorly

Early vomiting

Menses-related headache

Very rapidly developing 
symptoms

Abbreviation: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

be comparable to a single dose of oral sumatriptan. Important side 
effects of NSAIDs include dyspepsia and gastrointestinal irritation. 

5-HT1B/1D RECEPTOR AGONISTS—TRIPTANS 
Oral  Stimulation of 5-HT1B/1D receptors can stop an acute migraine 
attack. Ergotamine and dihydroergotamine are nonselective recep-
tor  agonists,  whereas  the  triptans  are  selective  5-HT1B/1D  receptor 
agonists.  A  variety  of  triptans—sumatriptan,  almotriptan,  elet-
riptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, and zolmitriptan—are 
available for the treatment of migraine.

3363

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Each drug in the triptan class has similar pharmacologic prop-
erties, varying slightly in terms of clinical efficacy. Rizatriptan and 
eletriptan  are,  on  a  population  basis,  the  most  efficacious  of  the 
triptans.  Sumatriptan  and  zolmitriptan  have  similar  rates  of  effi-
cacy as well as time to onset, with an advantage of having multiple 
formulations, whereas almotriptan has a similar rate of efficacy to 
sumatriptan  and  is  better  tolerated,  and  frovatriptan  and  narat-
riptan  are  somewhat  slower  in  onset  and  are  also  well  tolerated. 
Clinical efficacy appears to be related more to the tmax (time to peak 
plasma level) than to the potency, half-life, or bioavailability. This 
observation is consistent with a large body of data indicating that 
faster-acting analgesics are more effective than slower-acting ones.
Unfortunately,  monotherapy  with  a  selective  oral  5-HT1B/1D 
receptor agonist does not result in rapid, consistent, and complete 
relief of migraine in all patients. Triptans are generally not effective 
in  migraine  with  aura  unless  given  after  the  aura  is  completed 
and  the  headache  initiated.  Side  effects  are  common,  although 
often mild and transient. Moreover, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists are 
contraindicated  in  individuals  with  a  history,  symptoms,  or  signs 
of  ischemic  cardiac,  cerebrovascular,  or  peripheral  vascular  syn-
dromes.  Recurrence  of  headache,  within  the  usual  time  course  of 
an attack, is another important limitation of triptan use and occurs 
at  least  occasionally  in  most  patients.  Evidence  from  randomized 
controlled  trials  shows  that  coadministration  of  a  longer-acting 
NSAID, naproxen 500 mg, with sumatriptan will augment the ini-
tial effect of sumatriptan and, importantly, reduce rates of headache 
recurrence.

Ergotamine preparations offer a nonselective means of stimulat-
ing 5-HT1 receptors. A nonnauseating dose of ergotamine should 
be sought because a dose that provokes nausea is too high and may 
intensify  head  pain.  Oral  (excluding  sublingual)  formulations  of 
ergotamine also contain 100 mg caffeine (theoretically to enhance 
ergotamine  absorption  and  possibly  to  add  additional  analgesic 
activity).  The  average  oral  ergotamine  dose  for  a  migraine  attack 
is 2 mg. Because the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of 
ergotamine  in  migraine  predated  the  clinical  trial  methodologies 
used  with  the  triptans,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  comparative 
efficacy  of  ergotamine  versus  the  triptans.  In  general,  with  use  of 
ergotamine there appears to be a much higher incidence of nausea 
than with triptans but less headache recurrence. 

Nasal  Nasal formulations of dihydroergotamine, zolmitriptan, or 
sumatriptan can be useful in patients requiring a nonoral route of 
administration. The nasal sprays result in substantial blood levels 
within 30–60 min. Although in theory nasal sprays might provide 
faster and more effective relief of a migraine attack than oral for-
mulations, their reported efficacy is only ~50–60%. Studies with a 
new  inhalational  formulation  of  dihydroergotamine  indicate  that 
its absorption problems can be overcome to produce rapid onset of 
action with good tolerability. 

Parenteral  Administration of drugs by injection, such as dihydro-
ergotamine and sumatriptan, is approved by the FDA for the rapid 
relief of a migraine attack. Peak plasma levels of dihydroergotamine 
are achieved 3 min after IV dosing, 30 min after intramuscular (IM) 
dosing, and 45 min after subcutaneous (SC) dosing. If an attack has 
not already peaked, SC or IM administration of 1 mg of dihydro-
ergotamine is adequate for about 80–90% of patients. Sumatriptan, 
4–6  mg  SC,  is  effective  in  ~50–80%  of  patients  and  can  now  be 
administered by a needle-free device. 

CALCITONIN GENE-RELATED PEPTIDE (CGRP) RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS—GEPANTS
Oral  gepants  are  small-molecule  CGRP  receptor  antagonists  that 
are effective in the acute treatment of migraine. Two are currently 
approved by the FDA: rimegepant and ubrogepant. Both were more 
likely to render patients pain-free at 2 hours and most bothersome 
symptom–free when compared with placebo in large phase 3 clin-
ical  trials.  The  most  bothersome  symptom  is  derived  by  asking 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3363

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3364

patients to identify which symptom—of nausea, photophobia and  
phonophobia—was  most  bothersome  during  the  treated  attack; 
success required that this symptom was eliminated at 2 hours. Gep-
ants are extremely well tolerated with only a few percent of patients 
reporting troublesome side effects, such as mild nausea. 
5-HT1F RECEPTOR AGONISTS—DITANS
Lasmiditan,  a  highly  selective,  orally  available,  5-HT1F  receptor 
agonist,  has  been  approved  by  the  FDA  for  the  acute  treatment 
of  migraine  based  on  large  phase  3  studies  where  it  was  superior 
to  placebo.  Ditans  have  no  vascular  effects  because  the  5-HT1F 
receptor is located in the central and peripheral nervous system but 
not vasculature; the class thus unequivocally fills a gap in therapy 
for  patients  with  cardiovascular  and  cerebrovascular  disease.  The 
major  side  effect  is  dizziness,  occurring  in  about  15%  of  patients 
in clinical trials, and somnolence in 6%. Patients are advised not to 
drive for 8 hours after treatment. 

DOPAMINE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
Oral  Oral  dopamine  receptor  antagonists  can  be  considered  as 
adjunctive  therapy  in  migraine.  Drug  absorption  is  impaired  dur-
ing  migraine  because  of  reduced  gastrointestinal  motility.  Delayed 
absorption  occurs  even  in  the  absence  of  nausea  and  is  related  to 
the  severity  of  the  attack  and  not  its  duration.  Therefore,  when 
oral NSAIDs and/or triptan agents fail, the addition of a dopamine 
receptor antagonist, such as metoclopramide 10 mg or domperidone 
10 mg (not available in the United States), should be considered to 
enhance  gastric  absorption.  In  addition,  dopamine  receptor  antag-
onists decrease nausea/vomiting and restore normal gastric motility. 
Parenteral  Dopamine receptor antagonists (e.g., chlorpromazine, 
prochlorperazine,  metoclopramide)  by  injection  can  also  provide 
significant acute relief of migraine; they can be used in combination 
with parenteral 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists. A common IV protocol 
used  for  the  treatment  of  severe  migraine  is  the  administration 
over 2 min of a mixture of 5 mg of prochlorperazine and 0.5 mg of 
dihydroergotamine. 

OTHER OPTIONS FOR ACUTE MIGRAINE 
Oral  The  combination  of  acetaminophen,  dichloralphenazone, 
and isometheptene, one to two capsules, has been classified by the 
FDA as “possibly” effective in the treatment of migraine. Because 
the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of this combination 
analgesic in migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies used 
with the triptans, it is difficult to compare the efficacy of this sym-
pathomimetic compound with other agents. 
Parenteral  Opioids are modestly effective in the acute treatment 
of migraine. For example, IV meperidine (50–100 mg) is given fre-
quently in the emergency department (ED). This regimen “works” 
in  the  sense  that  the  pain  of  migraine  is  eliminated.  Importantly, 
it is clear from a recent randomized controlled trial that prochlor-
perazine is superior to hydromorphone in the ED setting. However, 
opioids are clearly suboptimal for patients with recurrent headache. 
Opioids do not treat the underlying headache mechanism; rather, 
they act to alter the pain sensation, and there is evidence their use 
may decrease the likelihood of a response to triptans in the future. 
Moreover,  in  patients  taking  oral  opioids,  such  as  oxycodone  or 
hydrocodone,  habituation  or  addiction  can  greatly  confuse  the 
treatment  of  migraine.  Opioid  craving  and/or  withdrawal  can 
aggravate  and  accentuate  migraine.  Therefore,  it  is  recommended 
that opioid use in migraine be limited to patients with severe, but 
infrequent,  headaches  that  are  unresponsive  to  other  pharmaco-
logic approaches or who have contraindications to other therapies. 
Neuromodulation  Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(sTMS) is FDA approved for the acute treatment of migraine. Two 
pulses  can  be  applied  at  the  onset  of  an  attack,  and  this  can  be 
repeated. The use of sTMS is safe where there is no cranial metal 
implant, and offers an option to patients seeking nonpharmaceuti-
cal  approaches  to  treatment.  Similarly,  a  noninvasive  vagus  nerve 

stimulator (nVNS) is FDA approved for the treatment of migraine 
attacks in adults. One to two 120-s doses may be applied for attack 
treatment. Remote electrical neuromodulation using a smartphone 
app that stimulates the upper arm for 30–45 min is also effective for 
treatment of acute migraine, as is transcutaneous supraorbital nerve 
stimulation for 60 min; both are FDA approved. 
MEDICATION-OVERUSE HEADACHE
Acute  attack  medications,  particularly  opioid  or  barbiturate- 
containing  compound  analgesics,  have  a  propensity  to  aggravate 
headache frequency and induce a state of refractory daily or near-
daily headache called medication-overuse headache. This condition 
is likely not a separate headache entity but a reaction of the patient’s 
underlying  migraine  biology  to  a  particular  medicine.  Migraine 
patients  who  have  two  or  more  headache  days  a  week  should  be 
cautioned  about  frequent  analgesic  use  (see  “Chronic  Daily 
Headache” in Chap. 16). 
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS FOR MIGRAINE
Patients with an increasing frequency of migraine attacks or with 
attacks that are either unresponsive or poorly responsive to abortive 
treatments are good candidates for preventive agents. In general, a 
preventive medication should be considered in patients with four 
or more attacks a month. Significant side effects are associated with 
the use of many of these agents; furthermore, determination of dose 
can be difficult because the recommended doses have been derived 
for  conditions  other  than  migraine.  The  mechanism  of  action  of 
these drugs is unclear; it seems likely that the brain sensitivity that 
underlies migraine is modified. Patients are usually started on a low 
dose of a chosen treatment; the dose is then gradually increased, up 
to a reasonable maximum, to achieve clinical benefit.

Treatments that have the capacity to stabilize migraine are listed 
in Table 430-6. Most treatments must be taken daily, and there is 
usually a lag of 2–12 weeks before an effect is seen. The drugs that 
have  been  approved  by  the  FDA  for  the  preventive  treatment  of 
migraine  include  propranolol,  timolol,  rimegepant,  sodium  val-
proate,  topiramate,  eptinezumab,  erenumab,  fremanezumab,  and 
galcanezumab.  In  addition,  a  number  of  other  drugs  appear  to 
display preventive efficacy. This group includes amitriptyline, can-
desartan, nortriptyline, flunarizine, phenelzine, and cyproheptadine. 
Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum toxin type A in episodic 
migraine were negative, whereas, overall, placebo-controlled trials in 
chronic migraine were positive. The FDA has approved sTMS for the 
preventive treatment of migraine. It offers a well-tolerated, effective 
option  for  patients.  Phenelzine  is  a  monoamine  oxidase  inhibitor 
(MAOI);  therefore,  tyramine-containing  foods,  decongestants,  and 
meperidine  are  contraindicated,  and  it  is  reserved  for  only  very 
recalcitrant  cases.  Methysergide  is  now  of  historical  interest  only 
because it is no longer manufactured. Melatonin has been reported 
to  be  useful,  with  controlled  trial  evidence,  but  is  not  approved  in 
the  United  States.  Monoclonal  antibodies  to  the  CGRP  receptor 
(erenumab) or to the peptide (eptinezumab, fremanezumab, and gal-
canezumab) have all proven effective and well tolerated in migraine 
and are now available as novel, migraine-specific preventative agents.
The probability of success with any one of the antimigraine drugs 
is ~50%. Many patients are managed adequately with well-tolerated 
doses  of  candesartan,  propranolol,  amitriptyline,  topiramate,  or 
valproate. If these agents fail or produce unacceptable side effects, 
neuromodulation approaches, such as sTMS, or related agents from 
the above classes, can be used (Table 430-6). Once effective stabi-
lization is achieved, the drug is continued for ~6 months and then 
slowly tapered, assuming the patient agrees, to assess the continued 
need. Many patients are able to discontinue medication and expe-
rience  fewer  and  milder  attacks  for  long  periods,  suggesting  that 
these drugs may alter the natural history of migraine. The advent of 
CGRP monoclonal antibodies and CGRP receptor antagonists has 
significantly  changed  the  landscape  of  preventive  treatment;  with 
the combination of efficacy that is often within the first month and 
excellent tolerability, expectations of outcomes are changing.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3364

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 430-6  Preventive Treatments in Migrainea
DOSE
DRUG
Beta blocker
  Propranolol
  Metoprolol

40–120 mg bid
25–100 mg bid

SELECTED SIDE EFFECTS

Reduced energy
Tiredness
Postural symptoms
Contraindicated in asthma

Antidepressants
  Amitriptyline
  Dosulepin
  Nortriptyline

10–75 mg at night
25–75 mg at night
25–75 mg at night

  Venlafaxine
Anticonvulsants
  Topiramate

75–150 mg/d

25–200 mg/d

  Valproate

400–600 mg bid

Drowsiness

Note: Some patients may only 
need a total dose of 10 mg, 
although generally 1–1.5 mg/kg  
body weight is required.

Paresthesias
Cognitive symptoms
Weight loss
Glaucoma
Caution with nephrolithiasis
Drowsiness
Weight gain
Tremor
Hair loss
Fetal abnormalities
Hematologic or liver 
abnormalities
Weight gain

Serotonergic drugs  
  Pizotifenb
CGRP antagonists
  Eptinezumab

  Erenumab
  Fremanezumab

  Galcanezumab

  Rimegepant

Other classes
  Flunarizineb

  Candesartan
  Memantine
  Melatonin
Neuromodulation
 Single-pulse 
transcranial 
magnetic 
stimulation (sTMS)

Chronic migraine

0.5–2 mg qd

100 or 300 mg IV every 
12 weeks
70 or 140 mg SC monthly
225 mg monthly or  
675 mg q3 months, SC
240 mg loading then  
120 mg monthly, SC
75 mg every other day

Nasopharyngitis

Nasopharyngitis, constipation
Injection site reactions

Nasopharyngitis

Nausea abdominal pain/
dyspepsia

5–15 mg qd

4–24 mg daily
5–20 mg daily
3–12 mg nightly

4–24 pulses per day

Drowsiness
Weight gain
Depression
Parkinsonism
Dizziness
Dizziness, tiredness
Drowsiness

Lightheadedness
Tingling
Tinnitus

Loss of brow furrow

 Onabotulinum toxin 
type A

155 U

No convincing evidence from controlled trials
  Verapamil
Controlled trials demonstrate no effect
  Nimodipine
  Clonidine

 Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors: 
fluoxetine

aCommonly used preventives are listed with typical doses and common side effects. 
Not all listed medicines are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.
bNot available in the United States.

 ■ TENSION-TYPE HEADACHE
Clinical  Features  The  term  tension-type  headache  is  commonly 
used  to  describe  a  chronic  head-pain  syndrome  characterized  by 
bilateral  tight,  bandlike  discomfort.  The  pain  typically  builds  slowly, 
fluctuates  in  severity,  and  may  persist  more  or  less  continuously 
for  many  days.  The  headache  may  be  episodic  or  chronic  (present  
>15 days per month).

A  useful  clinical  approach  is  to  diagnose  TTH  in  patients  whose 
headaches  are  completely  without  accompanying  features  such  as 
nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, throbbing, 
and  aggravation  with  movement.  Such  an  approach  neatly  separates 
migraine,  which  has  one  or  more  of  these  features  and  is  the  main 
differential diagnosis, from TTH. The International Headache Society’s 
main definition of TTH allows an admixture of nausea, photophobia, 
or phonophobia in various combinations, although the appendix defi-
nition does not; this illustrates the difficulty in distinguishing these two 
clinical  entities.  In  clinical  practice,  using  the  appendix  definition  to 
dichotomize patients on the basis of the presence of associated features 
(migraine) and the absence of associated features (TTH) is highly rec-
ommended. Indeed, patients whose headaches fit the TTH phenotype 
and  who  have  migraine  at  other  times,  along  with  a  family  history 
of  migraine,  migrainous  illnesses  of  childhood,  or  typical  migraine 
triggers  to  their  migraine  attacks,  may  be  biologically  different  from 
those who have TTH headache with none of the features. TTH may be 
infrequent (episodic) or occur on 15 days or more a month (chronic).

Pathophysiology  The  pathophysiology  of  TTH  is  incompletely 
understood. It seems likely that TTH is due to a primary disorder of 
central nervous system pain modulation alone, unlike migraine, which 
involves a more generalized disturbance of sensory modulation. Data 
suggest  a  genetic  contribution  to  TTH,  but  this  may  not  be  a  valid 
finding: given the current diagnostic criteria, the studies undoubtedly 
included  many  migraine  patients.  The  name  tension-type  headache 
implies that pain is a product of nervous tension, but there is no clear 
evidence for tension as an etiology. Muscle contraction has been con-
sidered to be a feature that distinguishes TTH from migraine, but there 
appear to be no differences in contraction between the two headache 
types.

3365

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TREATMENT
Tension-Type Headache

The  pain  of  TTH  can  generally  be  managed  with  simple  analgesics 
such  as  acetaminophen,  aspirin,  or  NSAIDs.  Behavioral  approaches 
including relaxation can also be effective. Clinical studies have demon-
strated that triptans in pure TTH are not helpful, although triptans are 
effective  in  TTH  when  the  patient  also  has  migraine.  For  chronic 
TTH, amitriptyline is the only proven treatment (Table 430-6); other 
tricyclics,  selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors,  and  the  benzodi-
azepines have not been shown to be effective. There is no evidence for 
the efficacy of acupuncture. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum 
toxin type A in chronic TTH were negative.

 ■ TRIGEMINAL AUTONOMIC CEPHALALGIAS 
(TACs), INCLUDING CLUSTER HEADACHE
The  TACs  describe  a  grouping  of  primary  headaches  including  clus-
ter  headache,  paroxysmal  hemicrania  (PH),  SUNCT  (short-lasting 
unilateral  neuralgiform  headache  attacks  with  conjunctival  injection 
and  tearing)/SUNA  (short-lasting  unilateral  neuralgiform  headache 
attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms), and hemicrania continua 
(Table 430-1). TACs are characterized by relatively short-lasting attacks 
of head pain associated with lateralized cranial autonomic symptoms, 
such as lacrimation, conjunctival injection, aural fullness, or nasal con-
gestion (Table 430-7). Pain is usually severe and may occur more than 
once a day. Because of the associated nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, 
patients are often misdiagnosed with “sinus headache” and treated with 
decongestants, which are ineffective.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3365

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3366

TABLE 430-7  Clinical Features of the Trigeminal Autonomic Cephalalgias

Gender
Pain
  Type
  Severity
  Site
Attack frequency
Duration of attack
Autonomic features

Migrainous featuresb
Alcohol trigger
Cutaneous triggers
Indomethacin effect
Abortive treatment

Preventive treatment

CLUSTER HEADACHE
M > F

PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
F = M

SUNCT/SUNA
F ~ M

Stabbing, boring
Excruciating
Orbit, temple
1/alternate day–8/d
15–180 min
Yes

Throbbing, boring, stabbing
Excruciating
Orbit, temple
1–20/d (>5/d for more than half the time)
2–30 min
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yesc
No effective treatment

Indomethacind

Yes
Yes
No
—
Sumatriptan injection or nasal spray
Zolmitriptan nasal spray
Oxygen
nVNSc
Verapamil
Galcanezumab
Topiramate
Melatonin
Lithium

Burning, stabbing, sharp
Severe to excruciating
Periorbital
3–200/d
5–240 s
Yes (prominent conjunctival injection 
and lacrimation)a
Yes
No
Yes
—
Lidocaine (IV)

Lamotrigine

Topiramate

Gabapentin

aIf conjunctival injection and tearing are not present, consider SUNA. bNausea, photophobia, or phonophobia; photophobia and phonophobia are typically unilateral on the 
side of the pain. cNoninvasive vagus nerve stimulation is FDA approved in episodic cluster headache dIndicates complete response to indomethacin.
Abbreviations: SUNA, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic features; SUNCT, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache 
attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing.

TACs  must  be  differentiated  from  short-lasting  headaches  that  do 
not have prominent cranial autonomic syndromes, notably trigeminal 
neuralgia (TN), primary stabbing headache, and hypnic headache. The 
cycling pattern and length, frequency, and timing of attacks are useful 
in classifying patients. Patients with TACs should be considered, if clin-
ically  indicated,  to  undergo  pituitary  imaging  and  pituitary  function 
tests because there is an excess of TAC presentations in patients with 
pituitary  tumor–related  headache,  particularly  prolactin  and  growth 
hormone secreting tumors.

Cluster  Headache  Cluster  headache  is  a  relatively  rare  form  of 
primary  headache,  although  nonetheless  a  common  condition,  with 
a  population  frequency  of  ~0.1%.  The  pain  is  deep,  usually  retroor-
bital, often excruciating in intensity, nonfluctuating, and explosive in 
quality. A core feature of cluster headache is periodicity. At least one 
of the daily attacks of pain recurs at about the same hour each day for 
the duration of a cluster bout. The typical cluster headache patient has 
daily bouts of one to two attacks of relatively short-duration unilateral 
pain for 8–10 weeks a year; this is usually followed by a pain-free inter-
val that averages a little less than 1 year. Cluster headache is character-
ized as chronic when there is <3 months of sustained remission without 
treatment. Patients are generally perfectly well between episodes. Onset 
of attacks is nocturnal in about 50% of patients, and men are affected 
three  times  more  often  than  women.  Patients  with  cluster  headache 
tend to move about during attacks, pacing, rocking, or rubbing their 
head for relief; some may even become aggressive during attacks. This 
is  in  sharp  contrast  to  patients  with  migraine,  who  prefer  to  remain 
motionless during attacks.

Cluster  headache  is  associated  with  ipsilateral  symptoms  of  cranial 
parasympathetic  autonomic  activation:  conjunctival  injection  or  lacri-
mation, aural fullness, rhinorrhea or nasal congestion, or cranial sympa-
thetic dysfunction such as ptosis. The sympathetic deficit is peripheral 
and likely to be due to parasympathetic activation with injury to ascend-
ing sympathetic fibers surrounding a dilated carotid artery as it passes 

into the cranial cavity. When present, photophobia and phonophobia are 
far more likely to be unilateral and on the same side of the pain, rather 
than  bilateral,  as  is  seen  in  migraine.  This  phenomenon  of  unilateral 
photophobia/phonophobia is characteristic of TACs. Cluster headache is 
likely to be a disorder involving central pacemaker neurons and neurons 
in the posterior hypothalamic region (Fig. 430-3).

TREATMENT
Cluster Headache

The most satisfactory treatment is the administration of drugs to pre-
vent cluster attacks until the bout is over. However, treatment of acute 
attacks is required for all cluster headache patients at some time. 
ACUTE ATTACK TREATMENT
Cluster  headache  attacks  peak  rapidly,  and  thus  a  treatment  with 
rapid onset is required. Many patients with acute cluster headache 
respond  very  well  to  oxygen  inhalation.  This  should  be  given  as 
100% oxygen at 10–12 L/min for 15–20 min. It appears that high 
flow and high oxygen content are important. Sumatriptan 6 mg SC 
is rapid in onset and will usually shorten an attack to 10–15 min; 
there  is  no  evidence  of  tachyphylaxis.  Sumatriptan  (20  mg)  and 
zolmitriptan (5 mg) nasal sprays are both effective in acute cluster 
headache, offering a useful option for patients who may not wish 
to  self-inject  daily.  Noninvasive  vagus  nerve  stimulation  (nVNS) 
is  FDA  approved  for  the  acute  treatment  of  attacks  in  episodic 
cluster headache using three 2-min stimulation cycles applied con-
secutively at the onset of headache on the side of pain; this may be 
repeated after 9 min. Oral sumatriptan is not effective for preven-
tion or for acute treatment of cluster headache. 
PREVENTIVE TREATMENTS (TABLE 430-8)
The choice of a preventive treatment in cluster headache depends 
in part on the length of the bout. Patients with long bouts or those 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3366

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 430-8  Preventive Management of Cluster Headache
LONG-TERM PREVENTION
SHORT-TERM PREVENTION

EPISODIC CLUSTER HEADACHE
Prednisone 1 mg/kg up to 60 mg qd, 
tapering over 21 days
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
Galcanezumab 300 mg SC
Greater occipital nerve injection

EPISODIC CLUSTER HEADACHE AND 
PROLONGED CHRONIC CLUSTER 
HEADACHE
Verapamil 160–960 mg/d
nVNSb 6–24 stimulations/d
Melatonina 9–12 mg/d
Topiramatea 100–400 mg/d
Lithium 400–800 mg/d
Gabapentina 1200–3600 mg/d

aUnproven but of potential benefit. bNoninvasive vagus nerve stimulation.

with chronic cluster headache require medicines that are safe when 
taken  for  long  periods.  For  patients  with  relatively  short  bouts, 
limited courses of oral glucocorticoids can be very useful. A 10-day 
course  of  prednisone,  beginning  at  60  mg  daily  for  7  days  and 
followed  by  a  rapid  taper,  may  interrupt  the  pain  bout  for  many 
patients. Greater occipital nerve injection with lidocaine and corti-
costeroids has been shown to be effective in randomized controlled 
trials, with a benefit that lasts up to 6–8 weeks. The CGRP mono-
clonal antibody galcanezumab has been approved by the FDA for 
treatment of episodic cluster headache; it reduces attack frequency, 
is well tolerated, and is often an effective option.

Most  experts  favor  verapamil  as  the  first-line  preventive  treat-
ment  for  patients  with  chronic  cluster  headache  or  with  prolonged 
bouts. While verapamil compares favorably with lithium in practice, 
some patients require verapamil doses far in excess of those admin-
istered  for  cardiac  disorders.  The  initial  dose  range  is  40–80  mg   
twice daily; effective doses may be as high as 960 mg/d. Side effects 
such as constipation, leg swelling, or gingival hyperplasia can be prob-
lematic. Of paramount concern, however, is the cardiovascular safety 
of  verapamil,  particularly  at  high  doses.  Verapamil  can  cause  heart 
block by slowing conduction in the atrioventricular node, a condition 
that  can  be  monitored  by  following  the  PR  interval  on  a  standard 
electrocardiogram (ECG). Approximately 20% of patients treated with 
verapamil  develop  ECG  abnormalities,  which  can  be  observed  with 
doses as low as 240 mg/d; these abnormalities can worsen over time 
in  patients  on  stable  doses.  A  baseline  ECG  is  recommended  for  all 
patients. The ECG is repeated 10 days after a dose change in patients 
whose dose is being increased above 240 mg daily. Dose increases are 
usually  made  in  80-mg  increments.  For  patients  on  long-term  vera-
pamil, ECG monitoring every 6 months is advised. 

NEUROMODULATION THERAPY
When  medical  therapies  fail  in  chronic  cluster  headache,  neuro-
modulation strategies can be used. Sphenopalatine ganglion (SPG) 
stimulation  with  an  implanted  battery-free  stimulator  has  been 
shown  in  randomized  controlled  trials  to  be  effective  in  aborting 
attacks  and  reducing  their  frequency  over  time.  nVNS  compares 
favorably with standard-of-care in open-label experience. Similarly, 
occipital nerve stimulation has been used open label and appears to 
be beneficial. Deep-brain stimulation of the region of the posterior 
hypothalamic  gray  matter  is  successful  in  about  50%  of  patients 
treated, although its risk-versus-benefit ratio makes it inappropriate 
before all other less invasive options have been explored.

 ■ PAROXYSMAL HEMICRANIA
Paroxysmal  hemicrania  (PH)  is  characterized  by  frequent  unilateral, 
severe, short-lasting episodes of headache. Like cluster headache, the 
pain tends to be retroorbital but may be experienced all over the head 
and is associated with autonomic phenomena such as lacrimation and 
nasal  congestion.  Patients  with  remissions  are  said  to  have  episodic 
PH, whereas those with the nonremitting form are said to have chronic 
PH.  The  essential  features  of  PH  are:  unilateral  very  severe  pain; 
short-lasting  attacks  (2–45  min);  very  frequent  attacks  (usually  >5  a 

3367

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

day); marked autonomic features ipsilateral to the pain; rapid course 
(<72 h); and excellent response to indomethacin. In contrast to cluster 
headache, which predominantly affects males, the male-to-female ratio 
in PH is close to 1:1.

Indomethacin  (25–75  mg  tid),  which  can  completely  suppress 
attacks  of  PH,  is  the  treatment  of  choice.  Although  therapy  may  be 
complicated  by  indomethacin-induced  gastrointestinal  side  effects, 
currently  there  are  no  consistently  effective  alternatives.  Topiramate 
is helpful in some cases. Verapamil, an effective treatment for cluster 
headache, does not appear to be useful for PH. nVNS can be very effec-
tive in these patients. In occasional patients, PH can coexist with TN 
(PH-tic  syndrome);  similar  to  cluster-tic  syndrome,  each  component 
may require separate treatment.

Secondary PH has been reported with lesions in the region of the 
sella  turcica,  including  arteriovenous  malformation,  cavernous  sinus 
meningioma, pituitary pathology, and epidermoid tumors. Secondary 
PH  is  more  likely  if  the  patient  requires  high  doses  (>200  mg/d)  of 
indomethacin.  In  patients  with  apparent  bilateral  PH,  raised  cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) pressure should be suspected. It is important to 
note that indomethacin reduces CSF pressure. When a diagnosis of PH 
is considered, MRI is indicated to exclude a pituitary lesion.

 ■ SUNCT/SUNA
SUNCT is a rare primary headache syndrome characterized by severe, 
unilateral  orbital  or  temporal  pain  that  is  stabbing  or  throbbing  in 
quality.  Diagnosis  requires  at  least  20  attacks,  lasting  for  5–240  s; 
ipsilateral conjunctival injection and lacrimation should be present. In 
some patients, conjunctival injection or lacrimation is missing, and the 
diagnosis of SUNA can be made.

DIAGNOSIS  The pain of SUNCT/SUNA is unilateral and may be 
located anywhere in the head. Three basic patterns can be seen: single 
stabs, which are usually short-lived; groups of stabs; or a longer attack 
comprising  many  stabs  between  which  the  pain  does  not  completely 
resolve,  thus  giving  a  “saw-tooth”  phenomenon  with  attacks  lasting 
many minutes. Each pattern may be seen in the context of an under-
lying  continuous  head  pain.  Characteristics  that  lead  to  a  suspected 
diagnosis of SUNCT are the cutaneous (or other) triggers of attacks, a 
lack of refractory period to triggering between attacks, and the lack of a 
response to indomethacin. Apart from trigeminal sensory disturbance, 
the neurologic examination is normal in primary SUNCT/SUNA.

The diagnosis of SUNCT/SUNA is often confused with TN partic-
ularly  in  first-division  TN  (Chap. 441).  Minimal  or  no  cranial  auto-
nomic symptoms and a clear refractory period to triggering indicate a 
diagnosis of TN.

SECONDARY  (SYMPTOMATIC)  SUNCT  SUNCT  can  be 
seen with posterior fossa or pituitary lesions. All patients with SUNCT/
SUNA  should  be  evaluated  with  pituitary  function  tests  and  a  brain 
MRI with pituitary views.

TREATMENT
SUNCT/SUNA 

ABORTIVE THERAPY
Therapy of acute attacks is not a useful concept in SUNCT/SUNA 
because the attacks are of such short duration. However, IV lido-
caine,  which  arrests  the  symptoms,  can  be  used  in  hospitalized 
patients. 
PREVENTIVE THERAPY
Long-term prevention to minimize disability and hospitalization is 
the goal of treatment. The most effective treatment for prevention 
is lamotrigine, 200–400 mg/d. Topiramate and gabapentin may also 
be effective. Carbamazepine, 400–500 mg/d, has been reported by 
patients to offer modest benefit.

Surgical  approaches  such  as  microvascular  decompression  or 
destructive trigeminal procedures are seldom useful and often pro-
duce long-term complications. Greater occipital nerve injection has 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3367

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3368

produced limited benefit in some patients. Occipital nerve stimula-
tion is probably helpful in a subgroup of these patients. For intracta-
ble cases, short-term prevention with IV lidocaine can be effective.

 ■ HEMICRANIA CONTINUA
The essential features of hemicrania continua are moderate and con-
tinuous  unilateral  pain  associated  with  fluctuations  of  severe  pain; 
complete  resolution  of  pain  with  indomethacin;  and  exacerbations 
that may be associated with autonomic features, including conjunctival 
injection, lacrimation, and photophobia on the affected side. The age 
of onset ranges from 10 to 70 years; women are affected twice as often 
as men. The cause is unknown. 

TREATMENT
Hemicrania Continua

Treatment  consists  of  indomethacin;  other  NSAIDs  appear  to  be 
of little or no benefit. The IM injection of 100 mg of indomethacin 
has been proposed as a diagnostic tool, and administration with a 
placebo injection in a blinded fashion can be very useful diagnosti-
cally. Alternatively, a trial of oral indomethacin, starting with 25 mg 
tid, then 50 mg tid, and then 75 mg tid, can be given. Up to 2 weeks 
at the maximal dose may be necessary to assess whether a dose has 
a useful effect. Topiramate can be helpful in some patients. nVNS 
can  be  very  useful  in  these  patients.  Occipital  nerve  stimulation 
probably has a role in patients with hemicrania continua who are 
unable to tolerate indomethacin.

 ■ OTHER PRIMARY HEADACHE DISORDERS
Primary  Cough  Headache  Primary  cough  headache  is  a  gen-
eralized  headache  that  begins  suddenly,  lasts  for  seconds  or  several 
minutes, sometimes up to a few hours, and is precipitated by coughing; 
it  is  preventable  by  avoiding  coughing  or  other  precipitating  events, 
which  can  include  sneezing,  straining,  laughing,  or  stooping.  In  all 
patients with this syndrome, serious etiologies must be excluded before 
a diagnosis of “benign” primary cough headache can be established. A 
Chiari  malformation  or  any  lesion  causing  obstruction  of  CSF  path-
ways or displacing cerebral structures can be the cause of the head pain. 
Other conditions that can present with cough or exertional headache 
as the initial symptom include cerebral aneurysm, carotid stenosis, and 
vertebrobasilar disease. Benign cough headache can resemble benign 
exertional  headache  (below),  but  patients  with  the  former  condition 
are typically older.

TREATMENT
Primary Cough Headache

Indomethacin 25–50 mg two to three times daily is the treatment 
of  choice.  Some  patients  with  cough  headache  obtain  complete 
cessation  of  their  attacks  with  lumbar  puncture;  this  is  a  simple 
option  when  compared  to  prolonged  use  of  indomethacin,  and  it 
is effective in about one-third of patients. The mechanism of this 
response is unclear.

Primary  Exercise  Headache  Primary  exercise  headache  has 
features  resembling  both  cough  headache  and  migraine.  It  may  be 
precipitated by any form of exercise; it often has the pulsatile quality 
of migraine. The pain lasts <48 h, is bilateral, and is often throbbing 
at  onset;  migrainous  features  may  develop  in  patients  susceptible  to 
migraine. The duration tends to be shorter in adolescents than in older 
adults. Primary exercise headache can be prevented by avoiding exces-
sive exertion, particularly in hot weather or at high altitude.

The  mechanism  of  primary  exercise  headache  is  unclear.  Acute 
venous  distension  likely  explains  one  syndrome—the  acute  onset 
of  headache  with  straining  and  breath  holding,  as  in  weightlifter’s 

headache. Because exercise can trigger headache in a number of serious 
underlying conditions (Chap. 16), these must be considered in patients 
with exercise headache. Pain from angina may be referred to the head, 
probably by central connections of vagal afferents, and may present as 
exercise headache (cardiac cephalgia). The link to exercise is the main 
clinical  clue  that  headache  is  of  cardiac  origin.  Pheochromocytoma 
may  occasionally  cause  exercise  headache.  Intracranial  lesions  and 
stenosis of the carotid arteries are other possible etiologies.

TREATMENT
Primary Exercise Headache

Exercise  regimens  should  begin  modestly  and  progress  gradually 
to  higher  levels  of  intensity.  Indomethacin  at  daily  doses  from   
25–150  mg  is  generally  effective  in  benign  exertional  headache. 
Indomethacin (50 mg), a gepant, ergotamine (1 mg orally), and dihy-
droergotamine (2 mg by nasal spray) are useful preventive measures.

Primary  Headache  Associated  with  Sexual  Activity  Three 
types of sex headache are reported: a dull bilateral ache in the head and 
neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases; a sudden, severe, 
explosive  headache  occurring  at  orgasm;  and  a  postural  headache 
developing  after  coitus.  The  last  arises  from  vigorous  sexual  activity 
and is a form of low CSF pressure headache and thus not a primary 
headache  disorder  (Chap.  16).  Headaches  developing  at  the  time 
of  orgasm  are  not  always  benign;  5–12%  of  cases  of  subarachnoid 
hemorrhage  are  precipitated  by  sexual  intercourse.  Sex  headache  is 
reported by men more often than women and may occur at any time 
during the years of sexual activity. It may appear on several occasions 
in succession and then not trouble the patient again, even without an 
obvious change in sexual activity. In patients who stop sexual activity 
when headache is first noticed, the pain may subside within a period of  
5 min to 2 h. In about half of patients, sex headache will subside within 
6  months.  Most  patients  with  sex  headache  do  not  have  exercise  or 
cough headache; this clinical paradox is generally a marker of primary 
sex headache. Migraine is probably more common in patients with sex 
headache.

TREATMENT
Primary Sex Headache

Benign sex headaches recur irregularly and infrequently. Manage-
ment can often be limited to reassurance and advice about ceasing 
sexual  activity  if  a  mild,  warning  headache  develops.  Propranolol 
can be used to prevent headache that recurs regularly or frequently, 
but  the  dosage  required  varies  from  40–200  mg/d.  An  alterna-
tive  is  the  calcium  channel–blocking  agent  diltiazem,  60  mg  tid. 
Indomethacin (25–50 mg), frovatriptan (2.5 mg), or a gepant taken 
30–45 min prior to sexual activity can also be helpful.

Primary Thunderclap Headache  Sudden onset of severe head-
ache may occur in the absence of any known provocation. The differen-
tial diagnosis includes the sentinel bleed of an intracranial aneurysm, 
cervicocephalic  arterial  dissection,  and  cerebral  venous  thrombosis. 
Headaches of explosive onset may also be caused by the ingestion of 
sympathomimetic drugs or of tyramine-containing foods in a patient 
who is taking MAOIs, or they may be a symptom of pheochromocy-
toma.  Whether  thunderclap  headache  can  be  the  presentation  of  an 
unruptured cerebral aneurysm is uncertain. When neuroimaging stud-
ies  and  lumbar  puncture  exclude  subarachnoid  hemorrhage,  patients 
with thunderclap headache usually do very well over the long term. In 
one study of patients whose CT scans and CSF findings were negative, 
~15% had recurrent episodes of thunderclap headache, and nearly half 
subsequently developed migraine or TTH.

The first presentation of any sudden-onset severe headache should 
be  diligently  investigated  with  neuroimaging  (CT  or,  when  possible, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3368

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders MRI  with  MR  angiography)  and  CSF  examination.  Reversible  seg-
mental  cerebral  vasoconstriction  may  be  seen  in  primary  thunder-
clap  headache  without  an  intracranial  aneurysm,  and  it  is  thought 
that  this  may  be  an  underdiagnosed  condition.  In  the  presence  of 
posterior  leukoencephalopathy,  the  differential  diagnosis  includes 
cerebral angiitis, drug toxicity (cyclosporine, intrathecal methotrexate/
cytarabine,  pseudoephedrine,  or  cocaine),  posttransfusion  effects, 
and postpartum angiopathy. Treatment with nimodipine may be help-
ful,  although  the  vasoconstriction  of  primary  thunderclap  headache 
resolves spontaneously.

are  typically  moderately  severe  and  generalized,  although  they  may 
be  unilateral  and  can  be  throbbing.  Patients  may  report  falling  back 
to sleep only to be awakened by a further attack a few hours later; up 
to three repetitions of this pattern occur through the night. Daytime 
naps can also precipitate head pain. Most patients are female, and the 
onset is usually after age 60 years. Headaches are typically bilateral but 
may be unilateral. Photophobia, phonophobia, and nausea are usually 
absent.  The  major  secondary  consideration  in  this  headache  type  is 
poorly  controlled  hypertension;  24-h  blood  pressure  monitoring  is 
recommended to detect this treatable condition.

3369

Cold-Stimulus  Headache  This  refers  to  head  pain  triggered  by 
application or ingestion/inhalation of something cold. It is brought on 
quickly and typically resolves within 10–30 min of the stimulus being 
removed. It is best recognized as “brain-freeze” headache or ice-cream 
headache when due to ingestion. Although cold may be uncomfortable 
at some level for many people, it is the reliable, severe, and somewhat 
prolonged  nature  of  these  pains  that  set  them  apart.  The  transient 
receptor potential cation subfamily M member 8 (TRPM8) channel, a 
known cold-temperature sensor, may be a mediator of this syndrome. 
Naproxen 500 mg taken 30 min prior to exposure can be helpful for 
this problem.

External  Pressure  Headache  External  pressure  from  compres-
sion or traction on the head can produce a pain that may have some 
generalized  component,  although  the  pain  is  largely  focused  around 
the site of the pressure. It typically resolves within an hour of the stim-
ulus being removed. Examples of stimuli include helmets, swimming 
goggles, or very long ponytails. Treatment is to recognize the problem 
and remove the stimulus.

Primary  Stabbing  Headache  The  essential  features  of  primary 
stabbing  headache  are  stabbing  pain  confined  to  the  head  or,  rarely, 
the face, lasting from 1 to many seconds and occurring as a single stab 
or a series of stabs; absence of associated cranial autonomic features; 
absence of cutaneous triggering of attacks; and a pattern of recurrence 
at  irregular  intervals  (hours  to  days).  When  present  in  adolescents, 
primary stabbing headache may be a presenting and very troublesome 
problem  for  the  patient.  The  pains  have  been  variously  described  as 
“ice-pick pains” or “jabs and jolts.” They are more common in patients 
with other primary headaches, such as migraine, the TACs, and hemi-
crania continua. A key clinical feature is an irregular cadence compared 
to the regular cadence of the throbbing or pounding that characterizes 
migraine.

TREATMENT
Primary Stabbing Headache

The  response  of  primary  stabbing  headache  to  indomethacin   
(25–50 mg two to three times daily) is usually excellent. As a general 
rule, the symptoms wax and wane, and after a period of control on 
indomethacin, it is appropriate to withdraw treatment and observe 
the outcome.

Nummular Headache  Nummular  headache  is  felt  as  a  round  or 
elliptical discomfort that is fixed in place, ranges in size from 1–6 cm, and 
may be continuous or intermittent. Uncommonly it may be multifocal. 
It may be episodic but is more often continuous during exacerbations. 
Accompanying the pain there may be a local sensory disturbance, such 
as allodynia or hypesthesia. Local dermatologic or bony lesions need 
to be excluded by examination and investigation. This condition can be 
difficult to treat when present in isolation; tricyclics, such as amitrip-
tyline,  or  anticonvulsants,  such  as  topiramate  or  valproate,  are  most 
often tried. This phenotype can be seen in combination with migraine 
and the TACs, in which cases treatment of the associated condition is 
often effective for the nummular headache as well.

Hypnic  Headache  This  headache  syndrome  typically  begins  a 
few hours after sleep onset. The headaches last from 15–30 min and 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
0

M
i
g
r
a
i
n
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
P
r
i

m
a
r
y
H
e
a
d
a
c
h
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TREATMENT
Hypnic Headache

Patients with hypnic headache generally respond to a bedtime dose 
of lithium carbonate (200–600 mg). For those intolerant of lithium, 
verapamil  (160  mg)  is  an  alternative  strategy.  One  to  two  cups 
of coffee, or caffeine 60 mg orally, at bedtime may be effective in 
approximately one-third of patients. Case reports also suggest that 
flunarizine, 5 mg nightly, or indomethacin, 25–75 mg nightly, can 
be effective.

New  Daily  Persistent  Headache  Primary  new  daily  persistent 
headache  (NDPH)  occurs  in  both  men  and  women.  It  can  be  of  the 
migrainous  type,  with  features  of  migraine,  or  it  can  be  featureless, 
appearing as new-onset TTH. Those with migrainous features are the 
most  common  form  and  include  unilateral  headache  and  throbbing 
pain;  each  feature  is  present  in  about  one-third  of  patients.  Nausea, 
photophobia,  and/or  phonophobia  occur  in  about  half  of  patients. 
Some patients have a previous history of migraine; however, the pro-
portion of NDPH sufferers with preexisting migraine is no greater than 
the  frequency  of  migraine  in  the  general  population.  NDPH  may  be 
more common in adolescents. Treatment of migrainous-type primary 
NDPH consists of using the preventive therapies effective in migraine 
(see above). Featureless NDPH is one of the primary headache forms 
most  refractory  to  treatment.  Standard  preventive  therapies  can  be 
offered but are often ineffective. The secondary NDPHs are discussed 
elsewhere (Chap. 16).

Acknowledgment
The  editors  acknowledge  the  contributions  of  Neil  H.  Raskin  to  earlier 
editions of this chapter.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Ashina M. Migraine. N Engl J Med 383:1866, 2020.
Goadsby PJ: Primary headache disorders—five new things. Neurology 

Clinical Practice 9:233, 2019.

Goadsby PJ et al: A controlled trial of erenumab for episodic migraine. 

N Engl J Med 377:2123, 2017.

Goadsby PJ et al: Pathophysiology of migraine: A disorder of sensory 

processing. Physiol Rev 97:553, 2017.

Goadsby  PJ  et  al:  Trial  of  galcanezumab  in  prevention  of  episodic 

cluster headache. N Engl J Med 381:132, 2019.

Hoffmann J, May A: Diagnosis, pathophysiology, and management of 

cluster headache. Lancet Neurol 17:75, 2018.

Lipton RB et al: Migraine prevalence, disease burden, and the need for 

preventive therapy. Neurology 68:343, 2007.

Schankin CJ et al: “Visual snow”—a disorder distinct from persistent 

migraine aura. Brain 137:1419, 2014.

Silberstein SD et al: Fremanezumab for the preventive treatment of 

chronic migraine. N Engl J Med 377:2113, 2017.

Tolner EA et al: From migraine genes to mechanisms. Pain 156 Suppl 1: 

S64, 2015.

Wei  DY,  Goadsby  PJ:  Cluster  headache  pathogenesis—mechanisms 
from  current  and  emerging  treatments.  Nat  Rev  Neurol  17:308,  
2021.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3369

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3370

431

Alzheimer’s Disease
Gil D. Rabinovici, William W. Seeley,  
Bruce L. Miller

ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Approximately  50  million  people  across  the  world  are  living  with 
dementia.  Alzheimer’s  disease  (AD)  is  the  most  common  cause  of 
dementia, contributing to an estimated 60–70% of all cases. It is esti-
mated that the median annual total cost of caring for a single patient 
with  advanced  AD  is  >$50,000,  while  the  emotional  toll  for  family 
members and caregivers is immeasurable. AD can manifest as early as 
the third decade of life, but it is the most common cause of dementia 
in  the  elderly.  Patients  most  often  present  with  an  insidious  loss  of 
episodic  memory  followed  by  a  slowly  progressive  dementia.  In  typ-
ical amnestic AD, brain atrophy begins in the medial temporal lobes 
before spreading to the inferior temporal, lateral, medial parietal, and 
dorsolateral  frontal  cortices.  Microscopically,  there  are  widespread 
neuritic plaques containing amyloid beta (Aβ), neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau filaments, and Aβ accu-
mulation in blood vessel walls in cortex and leptomeninges (amyloid 
angiopathy,  see  “Pathology,”  below).  The  identification  of  causative 
mutations and susceptibility genes for AD has provided a foundation 
for  progress  in  understanding  the  biologic  basis  of  the  disorder.  The 
major genetic risk factor for AD is the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E 
(ApoE) gene. Carrying one ε4 allele increases the risk for AD by two- 
to threefold in women whereas carrying two alleles increases the risk 
ten- to fifteenfold in both sexes. Rapid progress in the development of 
imaging, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and plasma biomarkers of Aβ and 
phosphorylated tau has enabled detection of AD pathologic hallmarks 
in living people, opening the door to early detection and intervention 
with biologically specific therapies.

 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The  cognitive  changes  of  AD  tend  to  follow  a  characteristic  pattern, 
beginning  with  memory  impairment  and  progressing  to  deficits  in 
executive,  language,  and  visuospatial  functions.  Yet  ~20%  of  patients 
with AD present with nonmemory complaints such as word-finding, 
organizational,  or  navigational  difficulty.  In  other  patients,  visual 
processing  dysfunction  (referred  to  as  posterior  cortical  atrophy 
syndrome) or a progressive “logopenic” aphasia characterized by dif-
ficulties  with  naming  and  repetition  are  the  primary  manifestations 
of AD for years before progressing to involve memory and other cog-
nitive  domains.  Still,  other  patients  may  present  with  an  asymmetric 
akinetic-rigid-dystonic  (“corticobasal”)  syndrome  or  a  dysexecutive/
behavioral, i.e., “frontal” variant of AD. Depression, social withdrawal, 
and anxiety occur in early disease stages and may represent a prodrome 
before cognitive symptoms are apparent.

In  early  stages  of  typical  amnestic  AD,  the  memory  loss  may  go 
unrecognized  or  be  ascribed  to  benign  forgetfulness  of  aging.  The 
term  subjective  cognitive  decline  refers  to  self-perceived  worsening 
in  memory  or  other  cognitive  abilities  that  may  not  be  noticeable 
to  others  or  apparent  on  formal  neuropsychologic  testing.  Once  the 
memory loss becomes noticeable to the patient and family and friends 
and is confirmed on standardized memory tests, the term mild cogni-
tive  impairment  (MCI)  is  often  used.  This  construct  provides  useful 
prognostic information, because ~50% of patients with MCI (roughly 
12% per year) will progress to AD over 4 years. Increasingly, the MCI 
construct is being replaced by the notion of “early symptomatic AD” to 
signify that AD is considered the underlying disease (based on clinical 
or  biomarker  evidence)  in  a  patient  who  remains  functionally  com-
pensated. Even earlier in the course, “preclinical AD” refers to a person 
with CSF or positron emission tomography (PET) biomarker evidence 
of amyloid pathology (with or without tau pathology) in the absence 
of  symptoms.  It  is  estimated  that  preclinical  biomarker  changes  may 
precede clinical symptoms by 20 years or more, creating a window of 

opportunity for early-stage treatment and prevention trials. New evi-
dence suggests that partial and sometimes generalized seizures herald 
AD and can occur even prior to dementia onset, especially in younger 
patients and patients with autosomal dominant AD-causing mutations.
Eventually, with AD, the cognitive problems begin to interfere with 
daily activities, such as keeping track of finances, following instructions 
on  the  job,  driving,  shopping,  and  housekeeping.  Some  patients  are 
unaware  of  these  difficulties  (anosognosia),  but  most  remain  acutely 
attuned to their deficits in early disease stages. Changes in environment 
(travel, relocation, hospitalization) tend to destabilize the patient. Over 
time,  patients  become  lost  on  walks  or  while  driving.  Social  graces, 
routine  behavior,  and  superficial  conversation  may  be  surprisingly 
intact, even into the later stages of the illness.

In the middle stages of AD, the patient is unable to work, is easily 
lost and confused, and requires daily supervision. Language becomes 
impaired—first  naming,  then  comprehension,  and  finally  fluency. 
Word-finding  difficulties  and  circumlocution  can  be  evident  in  the 
early stages, even when formal testing demonstrates intact naming and 
fluency.  Apraxia  emerges,  manifesting  as  trouble  performing  learned 
sequential motor tasks such as using utensils or appliances. Visuospa-
tial  deficits  begin  to  interfere  with  dressing,  eating,  or  even  walking, 
and  patients  fail  to  solve  simple  puzzles  or  copy  geometric  figures. 
Simple calculations and clock reading become difficult in parallel.

In  the  late  stages,  some  persons  remain  ambulatory,  wandering 
aimlessly. Loss of judgment and reasoning is inevitable. Delusions are 
prevalent and usually simple, with common themes of theft, infidelity, 
or  misidentification.  Disinhibition  and  uncharacteristic  belligerence 
may  occur  and  alternate  with  passivity  and  withdrawal.  Sleep-wake 
patterns are disrupted, and nighttime wandering becomes disturbing to 
the household. Some patients develop a shuffling gait with generalized 
muscle  rigidity  associated  with  slowness  and  awkwardness  of  move-
ment. Patients often look parkinsonian (Chap. 435) but rarely have a 
high-amplitude, low-frequency tremor at rest. There is a strong overlap 
between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (Chap. 434) and AD, and 
some AD patients develop more classical parkinsonian features.

In the end stages, patients with AD become rigid, mute, incontinent, 
and  bedridden,  and  need  help  with  eating,  dressing,  and  toileting. 
Hyperactive  tendon  reflexes  and  myoclonic  jerks  (sudden  brief  con-
tractions of various muscles or the whole body) may occur spontane-
ously or in response to physical or auditory stimulation. Often death 
results  from  malnutrition,  secondary  infections,  pulmonary  emboli, 
heart disease, or, most commonly, aspiration. The typical duration of 
symptomatic AD is 8–10 years, but the course ranges from 1–25 years.  
For unknown reasons, some patients with AD show a steady decline 
in  function  while  others  have  prolonged  plateaus  without  major 
deterioration.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
A detailed discussion of the diagnosis of dementia is presented in 
Chap.  29.  Early  in  the  disease  course,  other  etiologies  of  dementia 
should be excluded (see Tables 29-1, 29-3, and 29-4). Neuroimaging 
studies (CT and MRI) do not show a single specific pattern with AD 
and may be normal early in the disease. As AD progresses, more dis-
tributed  but  usually  posterior-predominant  cortical  atrophy  becomes 
apparent,  along  with  atrophy  of  the  medial  temporal  memory  struc-
tures (see Fig. 29-1). The main purpose of imaging is to exclude other 
disorders, such as primary and secondary neoplasms, vascular demen-
tia, diffuse white matter disease, and normal-pressure hydrocephalus 
(NPH). Imaging also helps to distinguish AD from other degenerative 
disorders, such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Chap. 432) or the 
prion  disorder  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  (CJD)  (Chap.  438),  which 
feature imaging patterns that are different from AD. Functional imag-
ing studies, such as fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET, reveal hypometab-
olism in the posterior temporal-parietal cortex in AD (see Fig. 29-1).
Amyloid PET imaging (e.g., with radiotracers [11C]PIB, [18F]florbe-
tapir, [18F]florbetaben, or [18F]flutemetamol) confirms the presence of 
neuritic and diffuse Aβ plaques throughout the neocortex (Fig. 431-1). 
Although amyloid PET binding is detected in AD, approximately 25% 
of  cognitively  unimpaired  older  individuals  also  have  positive  scans, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3370

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3371

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
1

A
l
z
h
e
i
m
e
r
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

FIGURE 431-1  Molecular imaging of Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology in an 81-year-old with mild Alzheimer’s disease. A. Aβ positron emission tomography (PET) 
with [11C]PIB reveals extensive radiotracer retention in neocortex, consistent with the known distribution of amyloid plaques. B. Tau PET with [18F]FTP shows asymmetric 
uptake predominantly in left temporal cortex, consistent with intermediate-stage NFTs. Tracer uptake in midbrain and basal ganglia represents “off-target” (non-tau related) 
tracer retention. C. FDG-PET reveals reduced tracer uptake in left greater than right temporal and parietal cortex, indicative of decreased synaptic activity. The pattern of 
hypometabolism corresponds more closely to the pattern of tau than amyloid deposition. A–C. Axial brain slices are shown in neurologic orientation. L, left; R, right; SUVR, 
standardized uptake value ratio, a quantitative measure of PET radiotracer retention.

thought to represent preclinical disease and an increase in the risk of 
converting to clinical AD. Similarly, dementia due to a non-AD disor-
der can be the underlying etiology in a patient who tests positively on 
amyloid PET. Amyloid PET ligands also bind to vascular Aβ deposits 
in cerebral amyloid angiopathy (Chap. 428). Therefore, clinical use of 
amyloid PET should be restricted to specific scenarios in which knowl-
edge  of  amyloid  status  is  expected  to  impact  diagnosis  and  change 
management. For example, a negative amyloid PET scan in a patient 
with dementia makes an AD diagnosis unlikely.

Tau PET radiotracers (e.g., [18F]flortuacipir, [18F]MK-6240) bind to 
the paired helical filaments that form NFTs and are primarily available 
in the research setting. The pattern of binding is largely consistent with 
Braak neuropathologic staging of NFTs, with early retention in medial 
temporal regions, followed by spread into temporoparietal and cingu-
late  cortices,  dorsolateral  prefrontal  regions,  and,  ultimately,  primary 
sensory and motor areas.

Routine  spinal  fluid  examination  is  generally  normal,  but  CSF 
reductions in Aβ42 levels and the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio correlate with amy-
loid  deposition,  increases  in  phosphorylated  tau  (at  residue  181  or 
217) correlate with tangle inclusions, and increases in total tau levels 
represent a nonspecific finding seen in AD but also in other causes of 
neurodegeneration. Plasma measurements of Aβ and phosphorylated 
tau  with  ultra-sensitive  immunoassays  or  mass  spectrometry  show 
great promise and are likely to increase access and affordability of AD 
molecular biomarkers.

Electroencephalogram (EEG) is normal or shows nonspecific slow-
ing; prolonged EEG can be used to seek out intermittent nonconvulsive 
seizures.

Slowly progressive decline in memory and orientation, normal results 
on laboratory tests, and an MRI or CT scan showing only distributed or 
posteriorly  predominant  cortical  and  hippocampal  atrophy  are  highly 
suggestive of AD. A clinical diagnosis of AD reached after careful eval-
uation is confirmed at autopsy 70–90% of the time, with misdiagnosed 

cases  usually  resulting  from  pathologic  limbic-predominant  age- 
related  TDP-43  encephalopathy  (LATE)  neuropathologic  changes 
with  or  without  hippocampal  sclerosis,  primary  age-related  tauopa-
thy,  DLB,  vascular  pathology,  or  frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration  
(FTD).

Simple  clinical  clues  are  useful  in  the  differential  diagnosis.  Early 
prominent gait disturbance with only mild memory loss suggests vascu-
lar dementia or, rarely, NPH (see below). Resting tremor with stooped 
posture,  bradykinesia,  and  masked  facies  suggest  PD  (Chap.  435)  
or  DLB  (Chap.  434).  When  dementia  occurs  after  a  well-established 
diagnosis of PD, PD dementia (PDD) is usually the correct diagnosis, 
but many patients with this diagnosis will show a mixture of AD and 
DLB  at  autopsy.  The  early  appearance  of  parkinsonian  features  in 
association  with  fluctuating  alertness,  visual  hallucinations,  or  delu-
sional  misidentification  suggests  DLB.  Chronic  alcoholism  should 
prompt  the  search  for  vitamin  deficiency.  Loss  of  joint  position  and 
vibration  sensibility  accompanied  by  Babinski  signs  suggests  vitamin 
B12  deficiency,  especially  in  a  patient  with  a  history  of  autoimmune 
disease, small bowel resection or irradiation, or veganism (Chap. 99). 
Early onset of a focal seizure suggests a metastatic or primary brain 
neoplasm (Chap. 90). Previous or ongoing depression raises suspicion 
for depression-related cognitive impairment, although significant cog-
nitive changes with depression are uncommon and AD and DLB can 
feature a depressive or anxious prodrome. A history of treatment for 
insomnia, anxiety, psychiatric disturbance, or epilepsy suggests chronic 
drug  intoxication.  Rapid  progression  over  a  few  weeks  or  months 
associated with rigidity and myoclonus suggests CJD (Chap. 438). Prom-
inent  behavioral  changes  with  intact  navigation  and  focal  anterior- 
predominant atrophy on brain imaging are typical of FTD. A positive 
family history of dementia suggests either one of the familial forms of 
AD  or  one  of  the  other  genetic  disorders  associated  with  dementia, 
such  as  FTD  (Chap.  432),  Huntington’s  disease  (HD)  (Chap.  436), 
prion disease (Chap. 438), or rare hereditary ataxias (Chap. 439).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3371

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3372

A

B

FIGURE 431-2  Neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease. A. Early neurofibrillary degeneration, consisting of NFTs and neuropil threads, preferentially affects the medial 
temporal  lobes,  especially  the  stellate  pyramidal  neurons  that  compose  the  layer  2  islands  of  entorhinal  cortex,  as  shown  using  Gallyas  silver  staining.  B.  Higher 
magnification view reveals the fibrillar nature of tangles (arrows) and the complex structure of neuritic plaques (arrowheads), whose major component is Aβ (inset shows 
immunohistochemistry for Aβ). Scale bars are 500 μM in A, 50 μM in B, and 20 μM in B inset.

 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
The most important risk factors for AD are increasing age and a pos-
itive family history. In the United States, approximately 10% of people 
over age 65 years have AD, including 3% of people age 65–74 years, 17% 
of people age 75–84 years, and 32% of people age 85 years and older. A 
positive  family  history  of  dementia  suggests  a  genetic  contribution  to 
AD, which is usually attributable to the ApoE ε4 risk allele. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance occurs in only 1–2% of patients and is typically 
accompanied  by  a  multigenerational  history  of  early-onset  dementia. 
Female  sex  is  a  risk  factor  independent  of  the  greater  longevity  of 
females, and women who carry a single ApoE ε4 allele are more suscep-
tible  than  are  male  ε4  carriers.  A  history  of  mild-to-severe  traumatic 
brain injury increases the risk for AD. AD is more common in groups 
with  low  educational  attainment,  but  education  influences  test-taking 
ability, and it is clear that AD can affect persons of all intellectual levels. 
One study found that the capacity to express complex written language 
in  early  adulthood  correlated  with  a  decreased  risk  for  AD.  Similarly, 
illiteracy  and  low  educational  attainment  are  risk  factors  for  dementia. 
Numerous  environmental  factors,  including  aluminum,  mercury,  and 
viruses,  have  been  proposed  as  causes  of  AD,  but  rigorous  studies  have 
failed to demonstrate a significant role for any of these exposures. Simi-
larly, several studies suggest that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents is associated with a decreased risk of AD, but this risk has not been 
confirmed in large prospective studies. Vascular disease, and stroke in 
particular,  seems  to  lower  the  threshold  for  the  clinical  expression  of 
AD. Also, in many patients with AD, amyloid angiopathy can lead to 
microhemorrhages, large lobar hemorrhages, ischemic infarctions most 
often in the subcortical white matter, or in rare cases an inflammatory 
leukoencephalopathy. Diabetes increases the risk of AD threefold. Ele-
vated homocysteine and cholesterol levels; hypertension; obesity; hear-
ing loss; tobacco use; diminished serum levels of folic acid; low dietary 
intake of fruits, vegetables, and red wine; sleep disorders; low levels of 
exercise; and air pollution exposure are all being explored as potential 
risk factors for dementia in general and AD in particular.

 ■ PATHOLOGY
At  autopsy,  the  earliest  and  most  severe  degeneration  is  usually 
found  in  the  medial  temporal  lobe  (entorhinal/perirhinal  cortex  and 

hippocampus),  inferolateral  temporal  cortex,  and  nucleus  basalis  of 
Meynert. The characteristic microscopic findings are neuritic plaques 
and  NFTs  (Fig.  431-2).  These  lesions  accumulate  in  small  numbers 
during  normal  brain  aging  but  dominate  the  picture  in  AD.  The 
overall  burden  of  AD  neuropathologic  changes  can  be  graded  based 
on the topography of Aβ plaques, the density of neuritic plaques, and 
the  spatial  extent  of  NFTs  present.  Increasing  evidence  suggests  that 
soluble  amyloid  species  called  oligomers  may  cause  cellular  dysfunc-
tion and represent the early toxic molecule in AD. Eventually, further 
amyloid polymerization and fibril formation lead to neuritic plaques, 
which  contain  a  central  core  of  amyloid,  proteoglycans,  ApoE,  α- 
antichymotrypsin, and other proteins. Aβ is a protein of 39–42 amino 
acids that is derived proteolytically from a larger transmembrane pro-
tein, amyloid precursor protein (APP), when APP is cleaved by β and γ 
secretases (Fig. 431-3). The normal function of the Aβ peptides remains 
uncertain.  APP  has  neurotrophic  and  neuroprotective  properties. 
The plaque core is surrounded by a halo, which contains dystrophic, 
tau-immunoreactive neurites and activated microglia. The accumula-
tion of Aβ in cerebral arterioles is termed amyloid angiopathy. NFTs are 
composed of silver-staining neuronal cytoplasmic fibrils composed of 
abnormally phosphorylated tau protein; they appear as paired helical 
filaments by electron microscopy. Tau binds to and stabilizes microtu-
bules, supporting axonal transport of organelles, glycoproteins, neuro-
transmitters, and other important cargoes throughout the neuron. Once 
hyperphosphorylated, tau can no longer bind properly to microtubules 
and redistributes from the axon to throughout the neuronal cytoplasm 
and  distal  dendrites,  compromising  function.  Other  theories  empha-
size  that  abnormal  conformations  of  tau  induce  misfolding  of  native 
(unfolded)  tau  into  pathologic  conformations  and  that  this  prion-
like  templating  process  is  responsible  for  tau  spreading  (Chap.  424).  
Finally, patients with AD often show comorbid DLB, TDP-43, or vascu-
lar pathology. Most prevailing rodent models of AD involve expression 
of mutant transgenes that leads to Aβ42 accumulation in the absence of 
tauopathy. Even in these models, diminishing neuronal tau ameliorates 
cognitive  deficits  and  nonconvulsive  seizures  while  Aβ42  continues 
to  accumulate,  raising  hope  for  tau-lowering  therapies  in  humans. 
Biochemically, AD is associated with a decrease in the cortical levels 
of several proteins and neurotransmitters, especially acetylcholine, its 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3372

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Step 1: Cleavage by either α or β secretase

APP

β

α

γ

Cell
membrane

β Secretase product

α Secretase product

Step 2: Cleavage by γ secretase

Aβ42
Toxic
Amyloidogenic

Aβ40
Nontoxic

P3

Nontoxic

FIGURE  431-3  Amyloid  precursor  protein  (APP)  is  catabolized  by  α,  β,  and  γ 
secretases.  A  key  initial  step  is  the  digestion  by  either  β  secretase  (BACE)  or  α 
secretase  (ADAM10  or  ADAM17  [TACE]),  producing  smaller  nontoxic  products. 
Cleavage  of  the  β  secretase  product  by  γ  secretase  (Step  2)  results  in  either 
the toxic Aβ42 or the nontoxic Aβ40 peptide; cleavage of the α secretase product 
by γ secretase produces the nontoxic P3 peptide. Excess production of Aβ42 is a 
key initiator of cellular damage in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Therapeutics for AD 
have focused on attempts to reduce accumulation of Aβ42 by antagonizing β or γ 
secretases, promoting α secretase, or clearing Aβ42 that has already formed by use 
of specific antibodies.

synthetic  enzyme  choline  acetyltransferase,  and  nicotinic  cholinergic 
receptors. Reduction of acetylcholine reflects degeneration of cholin-
ergic neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert, located just below the 
thalamus and adjacent to the third ventricle, that project throughout 
the cortex. There is also noradrenergic and serotonergic depletion due 
to degeneration of upper brainstem nuclei such as the locus coeruleus 
(norepinephrine) and dorsal raphe (serotonin), where tau-immunore-
active neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions can be identified in early adult 
life, even in individuals lacking entorhinal cortex NFTs.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

Several genes play an important role in the pathogenesis of AD. 
One is the APP gene on chromosome 21. Adults with trisomy 21 
(Down’s syndrome) consistently develop the typical neuropatho-
logic hallmarks of AD if they survive beyond age 40 years, and many 
develop a progressive dementia superimposed on their baseline defi-
cits. The extra dose of the APP gene on chromosome 21 is the initiating 
cause of AD in adult Down’s syndrome and results in excess cerebral 
amyloid  production.  Supporting  this  hypothesis,  some  families  with 
early-age-of-onset  familial  AD  (FAD)  have  point  mutations  in  APP. 
Although very rare, these families were the first examples of single-gene 
autosomal dominant transmission of AD.

Investigation of large families with multigenerational FAD led to the 
discovery of two additional AD-causing genes, the presenilins. Presenilin-1 
(PSEN-1) is on chromosome 14 and encodes presenilin-1 protein (also 
known  as  S182).  Mutations  in  this  gene  cause  an  early-age-of-onset 
AD, with onset typically before age 60 and often before age 50, trans-
mitted in an autosomal dominant, highly penetrant fashion. More than 
100 different mutations have been found in the PSEN-1 gene in families 
from  a  wide  range  of  ethnic  backgrounds.  Presenilin-2  (PSEN-2)  is 
on chromosome 1 and encodes the presenilin-2 protein (also known 
as STM2). A mutation in the PSEN-2 gene was first found in a group 
of  American  families  with  Volga  German  ethnic  background.  Muta-
tions in PSEN-1 are much more common than those in PSEN-2. The 
presenilins  are  highly  homologous  and  encode  similar  proteins  that 
at  first  appeared  to  have  seven  transmembrane  domains  (hence  the 
designation  STM),  but  subsequent  studies  have  suggested  eight  such 
domains, with a ninth submembrane region. Both presenilins are cyto-
plasmic  neuronal  proteins  that  are  widely  expressed  throughout  the 
nervous system. They are homologous to a cell-trafficking protein, sel 
12, found in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Prior to symptom 

3373

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
1

A
l
z
h
e
i
m
e
r
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

onset,  patients  with  mutations  in  the  presenilin  genes  have  elevated 
CSF levels of Aβ42, and PSEN-1 mutations produce increased Aβ42 in 
the media in cell culture. PSEN-1 is involved in the cleavage of APP at 
the γ secretase site and mutations in either gene (PSEN-1 or APP) may 
disturb γ secretase cleavage. Mutations in PSEN-1 are the most com-
mon cause of early-age-of-onset FAD, representing 40–70% of all cases. 
Mutations in PSEN-1 tend to produce AD with an earlier age of onset 
(mean onset 45 years) and a shorter, more rapidly progressive course 
(mean duration 6–7 years) than mutations in PSEN-2 (mean onset 53 
years; duration 11 years). Although some carriers of PSEN-2 mutations 
have had onset of dementia after the age of 70 years, mutations in the 
presenilins rarely lead to late-age-of-onset AD. Clinical genetic testing 
for these uncommon mutations is available but likely to be revealing 
only in early-age-of-onset FAD and should be performed in association 
with formal genetic counseling.

The APOE  gene on chromosome 19 is involved in the pathogenesis 
of  AD.  The  protein  product,  ApoE,  participates  in  cholesterol  trans-
port  (Chap.  407),  and  the  gene  has  three  alleles:  ε2,  ε3,  and  ε4.  The 
ApoE ε4 allele confers increased risk of AD in the general population, 
including sporadic and late-age-of-onset familial forms. Approximately 
24–30%  of  the  nondemented  white  population  has  at  least  one  ε4 
allele (12–15% allele frequency), and about 2% are ε4/ε4 homozygotes. 
Among patients with AD, 40–65% have at least one ε4 allele, a highly 
significant elevation compared with controls. The increased risk asso-
ciated with a single ε4 allele is especially prominent in women. The risk 
of AD in ApoE ε4 carriers also varies by racial and ethnic background, 
with  increased  risk  in  East  Asians  and  decreased  risk  in  blacks  and 
Hispanics  compared  with  whites.  Additionally,  many  patients  with 
AD have no ε4 allele, and ε4 carriers may never develop AD. There-
fore, ε4 is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause AD. Nevertheless, 
the  ApoE  ε4  allele  represents  the  most  important  genetic  risk  factor 
for sporadic AD and acts as a dose-dependent disease modifier, with 
each  ApoE  ε4  allele  associated  with  an  approximately  10-year  earlier 
age of onset. The association between ApoE ε4 and AD is strongest in 
patients 60–85 years of age and is weaker in younger patients and in 
the very old. The precise mechanisms through which ApoE ε4 confers 
AD risk or hastens onset remain unclear, but ε4 leads to less efficient 
amyloid  clearance  and  production  of  toxic  fragments  from  cleavage 
of the molecule. ApoE can be identified in neuritic plaques and may 
also  be  involved  in  NFT  formation,  because  it  binds  to  tau  protein. 
ApoE ε4 decreases neurite outgrowth in dorsal root ganglion neuronal 
cultures,  perhaps  indicating  a  deleterious  role  in  the  brain’s  response 
to  injury.  Increasing  evidence  suggests  that  the  ε2  allele  may  reduce 
AD  risk.  Use  of  ApoE  testing  in  AD  diagnosis  remains  controversial 
because  its  predictive  value  remains  unclear  and  many  individuals 
with the ε4 allele will never develop dementia. Cognitively normal ε4 
heterozygotes and homozygotes may show decreased posterior cerebral 
cortical  metabolic  function  by  PET  imaging,  suggesting  presymp-
tomatic abnormalities due to AD or an inherited vulnerability of the 
AD-targeted network. In demented persons who meet clinical criteria 
for AD, finding an ε4 allele increases the reliability of diagnosis; how-
ever, the absence of an ε4 allele cannot be considered evidence against 
AD. Nevertheless, ApoE ε4 remains the single most important biologic 
marker associated with AD risk, and studies of ε4’s functional role and 
diagnostic utility are progressing rapidly. ApoE genotyping is available 
in some straight-to-consumer genetic testing platforms. The ε4 allele 
is  associated  with  increased  risk  for  cerebral  amyloid  angiopathy 
(CAA), DLB, and vascular dementia, while its association with FTD is 
uncertain. Some evidence suggests that ε4 may worsen the expression 
of non-AD degenerative disorders, head trauma, and other brain inju-
ries. Additional genes are also likely to be involved in AD, especially 
as minor-risk alleles for sporadic forms of the disease. Genome-wide 
association  studies  have  identified  more  than  20  additional  common 
genetic variants that, individually, have small (i.e., odds ratios ~1.1–1.2 
or  0.8–0.9)  impacts  on  the  risk  of  AD.  Implicated  genes  converge  in 
biologic  pathways  related  to  innate  immunity,  lipid  metabolism,  and 
synaptic  function.  Examples  include  the  clusterin  (CLU),  phosphati-
dylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), and comple-
ment component (3b/4b) receptor 1 (CR1) genes, among others. CLU 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3373

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3374 may play a role in synapse turnover, PICALM participates in clathrin-
mediated endocytosis, and CR1 may be involved in amyloid clearance 
or  synapse  loss  through  the  complement  pathway.  TREM2  is  a  gene 
involved with inflammation that increases the likelihood of dementia. 
Homozygous mutation carriers develop a frontal dementia with bone 
cysts  (Nasu-Hakola  disease),  whereas  heterozygotes  are  predisposed 
to the development of AD. TREM2 risk alleles are rare but have strong 
effects, with odds ratios estimated at 3–4 for developing clinical AD. 
Polygenic hazard scores that integrate the presence of multiple risk and 
protective  alleles  may  be  useful  in  predicting  an  individual’s  lifetime 
risk of developing AD. The vast majority of AD genetic studies have 
focused on white populations of European descent, and much less is 
known about the genetics of AD in nonwhite populations.

TREATMENT
Alzheimer’s Disease

The  management  of  AD  is  challenging  and  gratifying  despite  the 
absence  of  a  cure  or  a  robust  pharmacologic  treatment.  The  pri-
mary  focus  is  on  long-term  amelioration  of  associated  behavioral 
and  neurologic  problems,  as  well  as  providing  caregiver  support, 
though  many  potential  disease-modifying  therapies  are  currently 
being tested in human trials. 
PATIENT AND CAREGIVER EDUCATION
Building rapport with the patient, family members, and other care-
givers is essential. In the early stages of AD, memory aids such as 
notebooks and posted daily reminders can be helpful. Family mem-
bers should emphasize activities that are pleasant while curtailing 
those  that  increase  stress  on  the  patient.  Kitchens,  bathrooms, 
stairways,  and  bedrooms  need  to  be  made  safe,  and  eventually 
patients will need to stop driving. Loss of independence and change 
of environment may worsen confusion, agitation, and anger. Com-
munication and repeated calm reassurance are necessary. Caregiver 
“burnout” is common, often resulting in nursing home placement 
of  the  patient  or  new  health  problems  for  the  caregiver.  Respite 
breaks  for  the  caregiver  help  to  maintain  a  successful  long-term 
therapeutic  milieu.  Use  of  adult  day-care  centers  can  be  helpful. 
Local and national support groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Association 
and the Family Caregiver Alliance, are valuable resources. Internet 
access  to  these  resources  has  become  available  to  clinicians  and 
families in recent years. 
NEUROTRANSMITTER-BASED THERAPIES
Donepezil (target dose, 10 mg daily), rivastigmine (target dose, 6 mg  
twice daily or 9.5-mg patch daily), galantamine (target dose 24 mg 
daily, extended-release), and memantine (target dose, 10 mg twice 
daily)  are  approved  by  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration 
(FDA)  for  the  treatment  of  AD.  Due  to  hepatotoxicity,  tacrine  is 
no  longer  used.  Dose  escalations  for  each  of  these  medications 
must be carried out over 4–6 weeks to minimize side effects. The 
pharmacologic action of donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine 
is inhibition of the cholinesterases, primarily acetylcholinesterase, 
with  a  resulting  increase  in  cerebral  acetylcholine  levels.  Meman-
tine  appears  to  act  by  blocking  overexcited  N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA)  glutamate  receptors.  Double-blind,  placebo-controlled, 
crossover studies with cholinesterase inhibitors (in mild-to-severe 
AD dementia) and memantine (in moderate-to-severe AD demen-
tia)  have  shown  them  to  be  associated  with  modestly  improved 
caregiver  ratings  of  patients’  functioning  and  with  an  apparent 
decreased rate of decline in cognitive test scores over periods of up 
to  3  years.  The  average  patient  on  an  anticholinesterase  inhibitor 
maintains his or her mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score 
for close to a year, whereas a placebo-treated patient declines 2–3 
points  over  the  same  time  period.  Memantine,  used  in  conjunc-
tion  with  cholinesterase  inhibitors  or  by  itself,  slows  cognitive 
deterioration  and  decreases  caregiver  burden  for  patients  with 
moderate-to-severe AD but is not approved for mild AD. Neither 
cholinesterase inhibitors nor memantine has proven efficacious in 

patients with MCI. Cholinesterase inhibitors are relatively easy to 
administer, and their major side effects are gastrointestinal symp-
toms  (nausea,  diarrhea,  cramps),  altered  sleep  with  unpleasant  or 
vivid  dreams,  bradycardia  (usually  benign),  and  muscle  cramps. 
Potential side effects associated with memantine include constipa-
tion, dizziness, headache, and somnolence. A common approach to 
AD drug therapy is to initiate a cholinesterase inhibitor for a patient 
diagnosed  with  mild  AD  dementia,  and  to  add  memantine  when 
patients enter the moderate stage of disease. Cholinesterase inhib-
itors may also be effective in treating delusions and hallucinations, 
while memantine can reduce agitation. 

THERAPIES TARGETING AMYLOID-a
AD  drug  development  over  the  past  two  decades  has  focused  on 
the  prevention  or  clearance  of  Aβ  pathology.  In  June  2021,  adu-
canumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the N-terminus of the 
Aβ  peptide,  was  granted  accelerated  approval  by  the  FDA  based 
on  reduction  in  Aβ  plaques  (measured  by  PET)  in  two  phase  3, 
double-blinded, randomized placebo-controlled trials. However, a 
clinical benefit over placebo (measured by slower decline on cogni-
tive and functional scales) was observed with high-dose treatment 
(10 mg/kg) in only one of the two trials, and lower antibody doses 
did  not  show  a  benefit  vs.  placebo  in  either  trial.  Data  interpre-
tation  was  further  complicated  by  differences  in  dosing  between 
trials and early termination of both trials based on a prespecified 
futility  analysis,  which  ultimately  proved  erroneous.  Given  these 
circumstances,  continued  FDA  approval  will  be  contingent  upon 
verification of clinical benefit in confirmatory trials.

According  to  the  FDA  label,  aducanumab  should  only  be  con-
sidered  for  treatment  of  patients  with  MCI  or  early  dementia  due 
to  AD,  mirroring  the  early  clinical  stage  of  patients  enrolled  in  the 
phase  3  clinical  trials.  Patients  with  pre-clinical  (i.e.,  asymptom-
atic,  biomarker-positive)  AD  or  patients  with  moderate-severe  AD 
dementia should not be treated until data on safety or efficacy in these 
populations  is  available.  Expert  recommendations  further  stipulate 
that biomarker confirmation of Aβ based on CSF or PET be required 
prior to initiating treatment, since clinical diagnosis in isolation is not 
sufficient to ensure the presence of Aβ plaques. Patients with confound-
ing  neurological  or  psychiatric  conditions,  unstable  medical  illnesses, 
evidence of prior brain hemorrhages (including multiple microhem-
orrhages), or active anticoagulant treatment should be excluded.

Aducanumab  is  administered  as  an  intravenous  infusion  every   
4 weeks, with gradual dose titration from 1 mg/kg to 10 mg/kg over 
seven  infusions.  Amyloid-related  imaging  abnormalities  (ARIA) 
are the most common adverse effect, occurring in 41% of patients 
treated with high-dose aducanumab vs. 10% in the placebo groups. 
ARIA can manifest as vasogenic edema (ARIA-E) or cortical micro-
hemorrhages and superficial siderosis (ARIA-H). Of ARIA cases in 
the phase 3 trials, 74% were asymptomatic and detected by safety 
MRIs.  The  most  common  symptoms  associated  with  ARIA  were 
headache, altered mental status, dizziness, visual disturbances, and 
nausea. Symptoms were usually mild and transient, though severe 
cases with focal neurologic deficits have been described. Most cases 
occurred within the first eight infusions, though ARIA can occur at 
any time. Baseline and safety surveillance MRI scans (at minimum 
following the 7th and 12th infusions) are required for aducanumab 
treatment, and an MRI is also indicated in treated patients in whom 
ARIA is suspected clinically. Therefore, patients with contraindica-
tions  to  MRI  cannot  safely  receive  this  therapy.  ApoE  genotyping 
may also be considered to inform risk-benefit discussions prior to 
treatment,  because  ARIA-E  is  more  common  in  ApoE  ε4  carriers 
(43%)  compared  to  noncarriers  (20%).  It  is  highly  recommended 
that  the  antibody  only  be  prescribed  by  clinicians  who  have  ade-
quate training and access to the resources needed to safely deliver 
this complex therapy. 

ADDITIONAL THERAPIES
Mild-to-moderate depression is common in the early stages of AD 
and  may  respond  to  antidepressants  or  cholinesterase  inhibitors. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3374

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly used 
due  to  their  low  anticholinergic  side  effects  (for  example,  escita-
lopram,  target  dose  5–10  mg  daily).  Seizures  can  be  treated  with 
levetiracetam  unless  the  patient  had  a  different  regimen  that  was 
effective prior to the onset of AD. Agitation, insomnia, hallucina-
tions, and belligerence are especially troublesome characteristics of 
some AD patients, and these behaviors can lead to nursing home 
placement. The newer generation of atypical antipsychotics, such as 
risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine, are being used in low doses 
to treat these neuropsychiatric symptoms. The few controlled stud-
ies  comparing  drugs  against  behavioral  intervention  in  the  treat-
ment of agitation suggest mild efficacy with significant side effects 
related  to  sleep,  gait,  and  cardiovascular  complications,  including 
an increased risk of death. All antipsychotics carry a black box FDA 
warning for use in elderly patients with dementia and thus should 
be prescribed only with caution; however, careful, daily, nonphar-
macologic  behavior  management  is  often  not  available,  rendering 
medications necessary for some patients. Medications with strong 
anticholinergic effects should be vigilantly avoided, including pre-
scription and over-the-counter sleep aids (e.g., diphenhydramine) 
or incontinence therapies (e.g., oxybutynin).

Several  commonly  used  medications  and  supplements,  includ-
ing  estrogen  hormone  replacement  therapy,  statins,  vitamin  E, 
and  ginkgo  biloba,  appeared  to  be  associated  with  a  decreased 
risk of AD in epidemiologic or observational studies, but did not 
show efficacy in prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo- 
controlled trials. Many vitamins and dietary supplements are mar-
keted directly to consumers as “memory enhancing” or protective 
against  AD  without  clinical  evidence.  Patients  and  families  may 
come across anecdotal reports of “miraculous” responses to aggres-
sive treatments such as anti-interferon intrathecal infusions, intra-
venous  immunoglobulin,  antibiotics  (purportedly  to  treat  Lyme 
disease  or  another  questionable  infection),  metal  chelation,  and 
stem cell therapies, but there is no scientific evidence to support use 
of any of these approaches to treating AD, and significant concern 
for harm. 

EXPERIMENTAL THERAPIES
The design of AD clinical trials has been transformed by the avail-
ability of PET and CSF biomarkers of Aβ and tau. Many trials now 
require  biomarker  evidence  of  AD  for  trial  inclusion.  Biomarkers 
help assess target engagement (e.g., changes in CSF or PET Aβ in 
an antiamyloid trial) or modification of downstream disease patho-
physiology (e.g., changes in CSF or PET tau in an antiamyloid trial), 
with  the  pivotal  trials  leading  to  approval  of  aducanumab  being 
emblematic of this novel approach. Increasingly, many trials have 
shifted toward enrolling patients in the asymptomatic (preclinical) 
or very early symptomatic stages of AD, using positive biomarkers 
as  the  primary  inclusion  criterion.  Primary  (biomarker-negative) 
and  secondary  (biomarker-positive  but  no  symptoms)  prevention 
trials are underway in autosomal dominant mutation carriers, ApoE 
ε4 homozygotes, and even in the normally aging population.

Beyond  aducanumab,  several  additional  anti-Aβ  monoclonal 
antibodies (e.g., lecanemab, gantenerumab, and donanemab) have 
shown evidence of robust amyloid plaque lowering on PET and are 
currently  being  evaluated  in  clinical  trials  across  the  continuum 
from preclinical disease to mild dementia due to AD. As with adu-
canumab, ARIA-E and ARIA-H represent a safety concern for this 
class  of  drugs.  Active  vaccination  against  Aβ  is  another  approach 
that  aims  to  promote  immune-mediated  clearance  of  amyloid 
pathology. The first Aβ42 vaccine trial in humans was aborted after 
a  minority  of  patients  developed  meningoencephalitis,  but  subse-
quent trials with less immunogenic formulations have shown more 
favorable safety profiles.

Oral drugs that inhibit β and γ secretase reduce the cleavage of 
APP  to  Aβ42  and  showed  promise  in  ameliorating  pathology  and 
behavioral changes in AD transgenic mice. Unfortunately, placebo- 
controlled  trials  failed  to  show  clinical  efficacy,  and  trials  of  β 
secretase  inhibitors  in  particular,  consistently  found  significant 

3375

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
1

A
l
z
h
e
i
m
e
r
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

worsening of cognition in treated patients vs. placebo, though fortu-
nately this effect proved transient after discontinuing the drug. It is 
unclear whether toxicity of β and γ secretase inhibitors was directly 
related to changes in Aβ metabolism or to “off-target” drug effects.
Monoclonal antibodies directed against phosphorylated tau are 
in  earlier  stages  of  development.  These  antibodies  aim  to  pre-
vent  the  transsynaptic  spread  of  tau  and  have  proven  effective  in 
tau-transgenic mice. Safety profiles in human studies have proven 
favorable thus far. Additional therapeutic approaches targeting tau 
include:  active  immunization;  inhibition  of  tau  phosphorylation, 
acetylation, and aggregation; microtubule stabilization; and lowering of 
tau expression via antisense oligonucleotides or small interfering RNA. 
Other druggable pathways represented in the AD drug development 
pipeline  include  neuroinflammation,  metabolism/bioenergetics, 
synaptic  plasticity,  neuroprotection,  and  neurotransmitter-based 
treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms.

A general approach to the symptomatic management of dementia 

is presented in Chap. 25.

OTHER CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
FTD (Chap. 432), vascular dementia (Chap. 433), DLB (Chap. 434), 
and prion diseases (Chap. 438) are covered in dedicated chapters.

Prion  diseases  such  as  CJD  are  rare  neurodegenerative  conditions 
(prevalence  ~1  per  million)  that  produce  dementia.  CJD  is  a  rapidly 
progressive  disorder  associated  with  dementia,  focal  cortical  signs, 
rigidity,  and  myoclonus,  causing  death  <1  year  after  first  symptoms 
appear. The rapidity of progression seen with CJD is uncommon in AD 
so that the distinction between the two disorders is usually straightfor-
ward,  although  AD  can  on  occasion  present  as  a  rapidly  progressive 
dementia. In general, corticobasal degeneration (CBD) (Chap. 432)  
and  DLB  (Chap.  426),  more  rapid  degenerative  dementias  with 
prominent  movement  abnormalities,  are  more  likely  to  be  mistaken 
for CJD. The differential diagnosis for CJD includes other rapidly pro-
gressive dementing conditions such as viral or bacterial encephalitides, 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis, 
lymphoma, or paraneoplastic/autoimmune syndromes (Chap. 94). The 
markedly abnormal periodic complexes on EEG and cortical ribboning 
and  basal  ganglia  hyperintensities  on  diffusion-weighted  imaging  or 
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MRI are diagnostic features of CJD, 
although rarely, prolonged focal or generalized seizures can produce a 
similar imaging appearance.

Huntington’s  disease  (HD)  (Chap.  436)  is  an  autosomal  dominant 
degenerative brain disorder. Clinical hallmarks of HD include chorea, 
behavioral disturbance, and executive impairment. Symptoms typically 
begin in the fourth or fifth decade of life, but there is a wide range, from 
childhood to >70 years. Memory is frequently not impaired until late 
in the disease, but attention, judgment, self-awareness, and executive 
functions are often deficient at an early stage. Depression, apathy, social 
withdrawal,  irritability,  and  intermittent  disinhibition  are  common. 
Delusions  and  obsessive-compulsive  behavior  may  occur.  Disease 
duration is variable but typically lasts ~15 years.

Normal-pressure hydrocephalus is a relatively uncommon but treat-
able  syndrome.  The  clinical,  physiologic,  and  neuroimaging  charac-
teristics of NPH must be carefully distinguished from those of other 
dementias associated with gait impairment. Historically, many patients 
treated for NPH have suffered from other dementias, particularly AD, 
vascular  dementia,  DLB,  and  progressive  supranuclear  palsy  (PSP) 
(Chap.  432).  For  NPH,  the  clinical  triad  includes  an  abnormal  gait 
(ataxic  or  apractic),  dementia  (usually  mild  to  moderate,  with  an 
emphasis on executive impairment), and urinary urgency or inconti-
nence. Neuroimaging reveals enlarged lateral ventricles (hydrocepha-
lus) with little or no cortical atrophy, although the Sylvian fissures may 
appear  propped  open  (so-called  boxcarring),  which  can  be  mistaken 
for perisylvian atrophy. Crowding of dorsal frontal-parietal gyri helps 
distinguish  NPH  from  other  movement  disorders,  such  as  PSP  and 
CBD, in which dorsal atrophy with sulcal widening is common. NPH 
is a communicating hydrocephalus with a patent aqueduct of Sylvius  

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3375

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3376 (see  Fig.  29-3),  in  contrast  to  aqueductal  stenosis,  in  which  the 
aqueduct  is  small.  Lumbar  puncture  opening  pressure  falls  in  the 
high-normal range, and the CSF protein, glucose, and cell counts are 
normal. NPH may be caused by obstruction to normal CSF flow over 
the cerebral convexities and delayed resorption into the venous system. 
The  indolent  nature  of  the  process  results  in  enlarged  lateral  ventri-
cles  with  relatively  little  increase  in  CSF  pressure.  Presumed  edema, 
stretching, and distortion of subfrontal white matter tracts may lead to 
clinical symptoms, but the precise underlying pathophysiology remains 
unclear.  Some  patients  provide  a  history  of  conditions  that  pro-
duce  meningeal  scarring  (blocking  CSF  resorption)  such  as  previous 
meningitis,  subarachnoid  hemorrhage,  or  head  trauma.  Others  with 
long-standing  but  asymptomatic  congenital  hydrocephalus  may  have 
adult-onset deterioration in gait or memory that is confused with NPH. 
In  contrast  to  AD,  the  patient  with  NPH  complains  of  an  early  and 
prominent gait disturbance without cortical atrophy on CT or MRI.

Numerous attempts have been undertaken to improve NPH diagno-
sis with various special studies and to predict the success of ventricular 
shunting.  These  tests  include  radionuclide  cisternography  (showing 
a  delay  in  CSF  absorption  over  the  convexity)  and  various  efforts  to 
monitor  and  alter  CSF  flow  dynamics,  including  a  constant-pressure 
infusion test. None has proven to be specific or consistently useful. A 
transient improvement in gait or cognition may follow lumbar punc-
ture (or serial punctures) with removal of 30–50 mL of CSF, but this 
finding has also not proved to be consistently predictive of postshunt 
improvement.  Perhaps  the  most  reliable  strategy  is  a  period  of  close 
inpatient  evaluation  before,  during,  and  after  lumbar  CSF  drainage. 
Occasionally, when a patient with AD presents with gait impairment 
(at  times  due  to  comorbid  subfrontal  vascular  injury)  and  absent  or 
only  mild  cortical  atrophy  on  CT  or  MRI,  distinguishing  NPH  from 
AD  can  be  challenging.  Hippocampal  atrophy  on  MRI  favors  AD, 
whereas a characteristic “magnetic” gait with external hip rotation, low 
foot clearance, and short strides, along with prominent truncal sway or 
instability, favors NPH. The diagnosis of NPH should be avoided when 
hydrocephalus  is  not  detected  on  imaging  studies,  even  if  the  symp-
toms otherwise fit. Of those patients identified by careful diagnosis as 
having NPH, 30–50% will improve with ventricular shunting. Gait may 
improve more than cognition, but many reported failures to improve 
cognitively  may  have  resulted  from  comorbid  AD.  Importantly,  the 
presence of positive CSF AD biomarkers or amyloid PET is associated 
with lower likelihood of response to shunting. Short-lasting improve-
ment  is  common.  Patients  should  be  carefully  selected  for  shunting, 
because  subdural  hematoma,  infection,  and  shunt  failure  are  known 
complications and can be a cause for early nursing home placement in 
an elderly patient with previously mild dementia.

Intracranial hypotension, sometimes called sagging brain syndrome, 
is a disorder caused by low CSF pressure, leading to downward pres-
sure on the subcortical structures and disruption of cerebral function. 
It presents in a variable manner with headache, often exacerbated by 
coughing or a Valsalva maneuver or by moving from lying to standing. 
Other  common  symptoms  include  dizziness,  vomiting,  disruption  of 
sleep-wake  cycles,  and  sometimes  a  progressive  behavioral  variant 
FTD-like syndrome (Chap. 432). Although sometimes idiopathic, this 
syndrome can be caused by CSF leaks secondary to lumbar puncture, 
head  trauma,  or  spinal  cord  arachnoid  cysts.  Treatment  consists  of 
finding and patching the CSF leak.

Dementia  can  accompany  chronic  alcoholism  (Chap.  453)  and 
may  result  from  associated  malnutrition,  especially  of  B  vitamins, 
particularly  thiamine.  Other  poorly  defined  aspects  of  chronic  alco-
holism may, however, also produce cerebral damage. A rare idiopathic 
syndrome  of  dementia  and  seizures  with  degeneration  of  the  corpus 
callosum has been reported primarily in male Italian red wine drinkers 
(Marchiafava-Bignami disease).

Thiamine  (vitamin  B1)  deficiency  causes  Wernicke’s  encephalopa-
thy  (Chap.  307).  The  clinical  presentation  is  usually  a  malnourished 
patient  (frequently  but  not  necessarily  alcoholic)  with  confusion, 
ataxia,  and  diplopia  resulting  from  inflammation  and  necrosis  of 
periventricular  midline  structures,  including  dorsomedial  thalamus, 
mammillary  bodies,  midline  cerebellum,  periaqueductal  gray  matter, 

and trochlear and abducens nuclei. Damage to the dorsomedial thala-
mus correlates most closely with the memory loss. Prompt administra-
tion of parenteral thiamine (100 mg intravenously for 3 days followed 
by daily oral dosage) may reverse the disease if given within the first 
days of symptom onset. Prolonged untreated thiamine deficiency can 
result in an irreversible and profound amnestic syndrome (Korsakoff ’s 
syndrome) or even death.

In Korsakoff ’s syndrome, the patient is unable to recall new informa-
tion  despite  normal  immediate  memory,  attention  span,  and  level  of 
consciousness. Memory for new events is seriously impaired, whereas 
knowledge  acquired  prior  to  the  illness  remains  relatively  intact. 
Patients are easily confused, disoriented, and cannot store information 
for  more  than  a  few  minutes.  Superficially,  they  may  be  conversant, 
engaging, and able to perform simple tasks and follow immediate com-
mands. Confabulation is common, although not always present. There 
is no specific treatment because the previous thiamine deficiency has 
produced irreversible damage to the medial thalamic nuclei and mam-
millary bodies. Mammillary body atrophy may be visible on MRI in the 
chronic phase (see Fig. 307-6).

Vitamin  B12  deficiency,  as  can  occur  in  pernicious  anemia,  causes 
a  megaloblastic  anemia  and  may  also  damage  the  nervous  system 
(Chaps.  99  and  442).  Neurologically,  it  most  commonly  produces  a 
spinal  cord  syndrome  (myelopathy)  affecting  the  posterior  columns 
(loss of vibration and position sense) and corticospinal tracts (hyper-
active tendon reflexes with Babinski signs); it also damages peripheral 
nerves (neuropathy), resulting in sensory loss with depressed tendon 
reflexes.  Damage  to  myelinated  axons  may  also  cause  dementia.  The 
mechanism  of  neurologic  damage  is  unclear  but  may  be  related  to 
a  deficiency  of  S-adenosyl  methionine  (required  for  methylation  of 
myelin  phospholipids)  due  to  reduced  methionine  synthase  activity 
or  accumulation  of  methylmalonate,  homocysteine,  and  propionate, 
providing  abnormal  substrates  for  fatty  acid  synthesis  in  myelin. 
Use  of  histamine  blockers  or  metformin,  vegan  diets,  autoimmunity 
against gastric parietal cells, and various causes of malabsorption are 
the typical causes for vitamin B12 deficiency. The neurologic sequelae 
of  vitamin  B12  deficiency  may  occur  in  the  absence  of  hematologic 
manifestations,  making  it  critical  to  avoid  using  the  complete  blood 
count (CBC) and blood smear as a substitute for measuring B12 blood 
levels. Treatment with parenteral vitamin B12 (1000 μg intramuscularly 
daily for a week, weekly for a month, and monthly for life for perni-
cious anemia) stops progression of the disease if instituted promptly, 
but  complete  reversal  of  advanced  nervous  system  damage  will  not  
occur.

Deficiency  of  nicotinic  acid  (pellagra)  is  associated  with  skin  rash 
over sun-exposed areas, glossitis, and angular stomatitis (Chap. 333). 
Severe dietary deficiency of nicotinic acid along with other B vitamins 
such as pyridoxine may result in spastic paraparesis, peripheral neur-
opathy, fatigue, irritability, and dementia. This syndrome has been seen 
in prisoners of war and in concentration camps but should be consid-
ered in any malnourished individual. Low serum folate levels appear to 
be a rough index of malnutrition, but isolated folate deficiency has not 
been proved as a specific cause of dementia.

CNS  infections  usually  cause  delirium  and  other  acute  neurologic 
syndromes.  However,  some  chronic  CNS  infections,  particularly 
those  associated  with  chronic  meningitis  (Chap.  139),  may  produce 
a  dementing  illness.  The  possibility  of  chronic  infectious  meningi-
tis  should  be  suspected  in  patients  presenting  with  a  dementia  or 
behavioral syndrome, who also have headache, meningismus, cranial 
neuropathy,  and/or  radiculopathy.  Between  20–30%  of  patients  in 
the advanced stages of HIV infection become demented (Chap. 202).  
Cardinal  features  include  psychomotor  retardation,  apathy,  and 
impaired memory. This syndrome may result from secondary oppor-
tunistic  infections  but  can  also  be  caused  by  direct  infection  of  CNS 
neurons with HIV. Neurosyphilis (Chap. 182) was a common cause of 
dementia in the preantibiotic era; it is now uncommon but can still be 
encountered in patients with multiple sex partners, particularly among 
patients with HIV. Characteristic CSF changes consist of pleocytosis, 
increased protein, and a positive Venereal Disease Research Laboratory 
(VDRL) test.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3376

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3377

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
1

A
l
z
h
e
i
m
e
r
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Primary  and  metastatic  neoplasms  of  the  CNS  (Chap.  90)  usually 
produce focal neurologic findings and seizures rather than dementia, 
but if tumor growth begins in the frontal or temporal lobes, the initial 
manifestations may be memory loss or behavioral changes. An auto-
immune, sometimes paraneoplastic, syndrome of dementia associated 
with occult carcinoma (often small-cell lung cancer) is termed limbic 
encephalitis.  In  this  syndrome,  confusion,  agitation,  seizures,  poor 
memory,  emotional  changes,  and  frank  dementia  may  occur.  Para-
neoplastic encephalitis associated with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor antibodies presents as a progressive psychiatric disorder with 
memory  loss  and  seizures;  affected  patients  are  often  young  women 
with  ovarian  teratoma.  Autoimmune  etiologies  also  include  antibod-
ies  targeting  leucine-rich  glioma-inactivated  1  (LGI1;  faciobrachial 
dystonic  seizures);  contactin-associated  protein-like  2  (Caspr2;  insom-
nia, ataxia, myotonia); and  α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4- 
propionic  acid  (AMPA)-receptor  (limbic  encephalitis  with  relapses), 
among others (Chap. 94).

A  nonconvulsive  seizure  disorder  (Chap. 425)  may  underlie  a  syn-
drome  of  confusion,  clouding  of  consciousness,  and  garbled  speech. 
Often, psychiatric disease is suspected, but an EEG demonstrates the 
epileptic nature of the illness. If recurrent or persistent, the condition 
may  be  termed  complex  partial  status  epilepticus.  The  cognitive  dis-
turbance often responds to anticonvulsant therapy. The etiology may 
be previous small strokes or head trauma; some cases are idiopathic. 
Nonconvulsive  temporal  lobe  seizures  can  also  emerge  early  in  the 
course of AD.

It  is  important  to  recognize  systemic  diseases  that  indirectly  affect 
the brain and produce chronic confusion or dementia. Such conditions 
include  hypothyroidism;  vasculitis;  and  hepatic,  renal,  or  pulmonary 
disease. Hepatic encephalopathy may begin with irritability and confu-
sion and slowly progress to agitation, lethargy, and coma.

Isolated  vasculitis  of  the  CNS  (CNS  granulomatous  angiitis) 
(Chaps.  363 and 427) occasionally causes a chronic encephalopathy 
associated with confusion, disorientation, and clouding of conscious-
ness.  Headache  is  common,  and  strokes  and  cranial  neuropathies 
may  occur.  Brain  imaging  studies  may  be  normal  or  nonspecifically 
abnormal. CSF analysis reveals a mild pleocytosis or protein elevation. 
Cerebral angiography can show multifocal stenoses involving medium-
caliber  vessels,  but  some  patients  have  only  small-vessel  disease  that 
is  not  revealed  on  angiography.  The  angiographic  appearance  is  not 
specific  and  may  be  mimicked  by  atherosclerosis,  infection,  or  other 
causes  of  vascular  disease.  Brain  or  meningeal  biopsy  demonstrates 
endothelial cell proliferation and mononuclear infiltrates within blood 
vessel  walls.  The  prognosis  is  often  poor,  although  the  disorder  may 
remit  spontaneously.  Some  patients  respond  to  glucocorticoids  or 
chemotherapy.

Chronic  metal  exposure  represents  a  rare  cause  of  dementia.  The 
key  to  diagnosis  is  to  elicit  a  history  of  exposure  at  work  or  home. 
Chronic lead poisoning from inadequately fire-glazed pottery has been 
reported.  Fatigue,  depression,  and  confusion  may  be  associated  with 
episodic  abdominal  pain  and  peripheral  neuropathy.  Gray  lead  lines 
appear in the gums, usually accompanied by an anemia with basophilic 
stippling of red blood cells. The clinical presentation can resemble that 
of acute intermittent porphyria (Chap. 416), including elevated levels 
of  urine  porphyrins  as  a  result  of  the  inhibition  of  δ-aminolevulinic 
acid dehydrase. The treatment is chelation therapy with agents such as 
ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Chronic mercury poisoning 
produces dementia, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and tremulousness 
that may progress to a cerebellar intention tremor or choreoathetosis. 
The confusion and memory loss of chronic arsenic intoxication is also 
associated with nausea, weight loss, peripheral neuropathy, pigmenta-
tion and scaling of the skin, and transverse white lines of the fingernails 
(Mees’ lines). Treatment is chelation therapy with dimercaprol (British 
anti-Lewisite, BAL). Aluminum poisoning is rare but was documented 
with the dialysis dementia syndrome, in which water used during renal 
dialysis was contaminated with excessive amounts of aluminum. This 
poisoning  resulted  in  a  progressive  encephalopathy  associated  with 
confusion, nonfluent aphasia, memory loss, agitation, and, later, leth-
argy and stupor. Speech arrest and myoclonic jerks were common and 

associated with severe and generalized EEG changes. The condition has 
been eliminated by the use of deionized water for dialysis.

Recurrent  head  trauma  in  professional  athletes  may  lead  to  a 
dementia  previously  referred  to  as  “punch-drunk”  syndrome  or 
dementia  pugilistica  but  now  known  as  chronic  traumatic  encephal-
opathy  (CTE)  to  signify  its  relevance  to  contact  sport  athletes  other 
than boxers (Chap. 443). The symptoms can be progressive, beginning 
late in an athlete’s career or, more often, after retirement. Early in the 
course, a personality change occurs, associated with social instability, 
explosive rage, and sometimes paranoia and delusions. Later, memory 
loss progresses to full-blown dementia, often associated with parkin-
sonian  signs  and  ataxia  or  intention  tremor.  At  autopsy,  the  cerebral 
cortex shows tau-immunoreactive NFTs that are more prominent than 
amyloid plaques (which are usually diffuse or absent rather than neu-
ritic). NFTs and tau-positive reactive astrocytes are often clustered in 
the depths of cortical sulci and in a perivascular distribution. TDP-43 
inclusions (Chap. 432) have also been reported, highlighting the over-
lap with the FTD spectrum. Loss of neurons in the substantia nigra is a 
variable feature, and some with TDP-43 inclusions also develop motor 
neuron disease (MND) (Chap. 437).

Chronic  subdural  hematoma  (Chap.  443)  is  also  occasionally 
associated  with  dementia,  often  in  the  context  of  underlying  cortical 
atrophy from conditions such as AD or HD.

Transient global amnesia (TGA) is characterized by the sudden onset 
of a severe episodic memory deficit, usually occurring in persons aged 
>50  years.  Often  the  amnesia  occurs  in  the  setting  of  an  emotional 
stimulus or physical exertion. During the attack, the individual is alert 
and communicative, general cognition seems intact, and there are no 
other neurologic signs or symptoms. The patient may seem confused 
and  repeatedly  ask  about  his  or  her  location  in  place  and  time.  The 
ability  to  form  new  memories  returns  after  a  period  of  hours,  and 
the individual returns to normal with no recall for the period of the 
attack. Frequently no cause is determined, but cerebrovascular disease, 
epilepsy (7% in one study), migraine, or cardiac arrhythmias have all 
been  implicated.  Approximately  one-quarter  of  patients  experience 
recurrent attacks. Rare instances of permanent memory loss have been 
reported in patients with TGA-like spells, usually representing ische-
mic  infarction  of  the  hippocampus  or  dorsomedial  thalamic  nucleus 
bilaterally.  Seizure  activity  due  to  AD  should  always  be  suspected  in 
this syndrome.

The ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam is a rare degener-
ative disease that has occurred in the Chamorro natives on the island 
of Guam. Individuals may have any combination of parkinsonian fea-
tures, dementia, and MND. The most characteristic pathologic features 
are  the  presence  of  NFTs  in  degenerating  neurons  of  the  cortex  and 
substantia nigra and loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord, although 
recent  reanalysis  has  shown  that  some  patients  with  this  illness  also 
show coexisting TDP-43 pathology. Epidemiologic evidence supports 
a  possible  environmental  cause,  such  as  exposure  to  a  neurotoxin  or 
an  infectious  agent  with  a  long  latency  period.  One  interesting  but 
unproven candidate neurotoxin is the seed of the false palm tree, which 
Guamanians traditionally used to make flour. The amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) syndrome is no longer present in Guam, but a dement-
ing illness with rigidity continues to be seen.

Rarely,  adult-onset  leukodystrophies,  lysosomal-storage  diseases, 
and other genetic disorders can present as a dementia in middle to late 
life. Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) causes a progressive psy-
chiatric or dementia syndrome associated with an extensive, confluent 
frontal  white  matter  abnormality.  MLD  is  diagnosed  by  measuring 
reduced  arylsulfatase  A  enzyme  activity  in  peripheral  white  blood 
cells.  Adult-onset  presentations  of  adrenoleukodystrophy  have  been 
reported  in  female  carriers,  and  these  patients  often  feature  spinal 
cord and posterior white matter involvement. Adrenoleukodystrophy 
is  diagnosed  by  demonstrating  increased  levels  of  plasma  very-long-
chain  fatty  acids.  CADASIL  is  another  genetic  syndrome  associated 
with white matter disease, often frontally and temporally predominant. 
Diagnosis is made with skin biopsy, which shows osmophilic granules 
in  arterioles,  or  increasingly  through  genetic  testing  for  mutations 
in  Notch  3.  The  neuronal  ceroid  lipofuscinoses  are  a  genetically 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3377

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3378

heterogeneous group of disorders associated with myoclonus, seizures, 
vision  loss,  and  progressive  dementia.  Diagnosis  is  made  by  finding 
eosinophilic  curvilinear  inclusions  within  white  blood  cells  or  neu-
ronal tissue.

Psychogenic  amnesia  for  personally  important  memories  can  be 
seen.  Whether  this  results  from  deliberate  avoidance  of  unpleasant 
memories,  outright  malingering,  or  unconscious  repression  remains 
unknown and probably depends on the patient. Event-specific amnesia 
is more likely to occur after violent crimes such as homicide of a close 
relative or friend or sexual abuse. It may develop in association with 
severe drug or alcohol intoxication and sometimes with schizophrenia. 
More prolonged psychogenic amnesia occurs in fugue states that also 
commonly  follow  severe  emotional  stress.  The  patient  with  a  fugue 
state suffers from a sudden loss of personal identity and may be found 
wandering  far  from  home.  In  contrast  to  neurologic  amnesia,  fugue 
states are associated with amnesia for personal identity and events closely 
associated with the personal past. At the same time, memory for other 
recent events and the ability to learn and use new information are pre-
served. The episodes usually last hours or days and occasionally weeks 
or months while the patient takes on a new identity. On recovery, there 
is a residual amnesia gap for the period of the fugue. Very rarely does 
selective loss of autobiographic information reflect a focal injury to the 
brain areas involved with these functions.

Psychiatric  diseases  may  mimic  dementia.  Severely  depressed  or 
anxious individuals may appear demented, a phenomenon sometimes 
called pseudodementia. Memory and language are usually intact when 
carefully tested, and a significant memory disturbance usually suggests 
an  underlying  dementia,  even  if  the  patient  is  depressed.  Patients  in 
this  condition  may  feel  confused  and  unable  to  accomplish  routine 
tasks.  Vegetative  symptoms,  such  as  insomnia,  lack  of  energy,  poor 
appetite,  and  concern  with  bowel  function,  are  common.  Onset  is 
often  more  abrupt,  and  the  psychosocial  milieu  may  suggest  promi-
nent reasons for depression. Such patients respond to treatment of the 
underlying  psychiatric  illness.  Schizophrenia  is  usually  not  difficult 
to distinguish from dementia, but occasionally the distinction can be 
problematic. Schizophrenia generally has a much earlier age of onset 
(second and third decades of life) than most dementing illnesses and 
is  associated  with  intact  memory.  The  delusions  and  hallucinations 
of  schizophrenia  are  usually  more  complex,  bizarre,  and  threatening 
than  those  of  dementia.  Some  chronic  schizophrenics  develop  an 
unexplained progressive dementia late in life that is not related to AD. 
Conversely, FTD, HD, vascular dementia, DLB, AD, or leukoenceph-
alopathy  can  begin  with  schizophrenia-like  features,  leading  to  the 
misdiagnosis of a psychiatric condition. Later age of onset, significant 
deficits on cognitive testing, or the presence of abnormal neuroimag-
ing suggest a degenerative condition. Memory loss may also be part of 
a  conversion  disorder.  In  this  situation,  patients  commonly  complain 
bitterly  of  memory  loss,  but  careful  cognitive  testing  either  does  not 
confirm the deficits or demonstrates inconsistent or unusual patterns 
of cognitive problems. The patient’s behavior and “wrong” answers to 
questions often indicate that he or she understands the question and 
knows the correct answer.

Clouding of cognition by chronic drug or medication use, often pre-
scribed  by  physicians,  is  an  important  cause  of  dementia.  Sedatives, 
tranquilizers, and analgesics used to treat insomnia, pain, anxiety, or 
agitation may cause confusion, memory loss, and lethargy, especially 
in  the  elderly.  Discontinuation  of  the  offending  medication  often 
improves mentation.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Andrews  SJ  et  al:  Interpretation  of  risk  loci  from  genome-wide 
association  studies  of  ‘Alzheimer’s  disease.  Lancet  Neurol  19:326,  
2020.

Belloy ME et al: A quarter century of APOE and Alzheimer’s disease: 

Progress to date and the path forward. Neuron 101:820, 2019.

Braak H, Del Tredici K: Where, when, and in what form does spo-
radic Alzheimer’s disease begin? Curr Opin Neurol 25:708, 2012.
Jack  CR  et  al:  NIA-AA  Research  Framework:  Toward  a  biological 
definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14:535, 2018.

Lesman-Segev  OH  et  al:  Diagnostic  accuracy  of  amyloid  versus 
18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose  positron  emission  tomography  in  autopsy-
confirmed dementia. Ann Neurol 89:389, 2021.

Long JM, Holtzman DM: Alzheimer disease: An update on pathobi-

ology and treatment strategies. Cell 179:312, 2019.

Rabinovici  GD  et  al:  Association  of  amyloid  positron  emission 
tomography with subsequent change in clinical management among 
Medicare beneficiaries with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. 
JAMA 321:1286, 2019.

Rabinovici  GD:  Late-onset  Alzheimer  Disease.  Continuum  25:14, 

2019.

Selkoe DJ, Hardy J: The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 

25 years. EMBO Mol Med 8:595, 2016.

432 Frontotemporal Dementia

William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a group of clinical syndromes 
united by their links to underlying frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD) pathology. FTD, like the other major neurodegenerative dis-
eases,  is  considered  a  disease  of  abnormal  protein  aggregation,  with 
either  tau  or  transactive  response  DNA-binding  protein  of  43  kDa 
(TDP-43) implicated in most cases. FTD most often begins in the fifth 
to  seventh  decades  of  life  and  is  nearly  as  prevalent  as  Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) in this age group. Early studies suggested that FTD may 
be more common in men than women; however, more recent reports 
cast  doubt  on  this  finding.  Although  a  family  history  of  dementia  is 
common, autosomal dominant inheritance is seen in only 10–20% of 
all FTD cases.
 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Familial and sporadic forms of FTLD present with remarkable clinical 
heterogeneity.  Three  core  clinical  syndromes  have  been  described 
(Fig.  432-1).  In  the  behavioral  variant  (bvFTD),  the  most  common 
FTD syndrome, social and emotional dysfunction manifests as apathy, 
disinhibition, compulsivity, loss of empathy, and overeating, often but 
not  always  accompanied  by  deficits  in  executive  control.  Two  forms 
of  primary  progressive  aphasia  (PPA),  the  semantic  and  nonfluent/
agrammatic  variants,  are  commonly  due  to  FTLD  and  are  included 
under the FTD umbrella. In the semantic variant, patients slowly lose 
the ability to decode word, object, person-specific, and emotion mean-
ing, whereas patients with the nonfluent/agrammatic variant develop 
profound  inability  to  produce  words,  often  with  prominent  motor 
speech  impairment.  Any  of  these  three  clinical  syndromes,  but  most 
often bvFTD, may be accompanied by motor neuron disease (MND) 
(Chap.  437),  in  which  case  the  term  FTD-MND  is  applied.  In  addi-
tion,  the  corticobasal  syndrome  (CBS)  and  progressive  supranuclear 
palsy–Richardson  syndrome  (PSP-RS)  can  be  considered  part  of  the 
FTLD clinical spectrum. Furthermore, patients may evolve from any 
of the major syndromes described above to have prominent features of 
another syndrome.

Findings  at  the  bedside  are  dictated  by  the  anatomic  localization 
of the disorder. Degeneration with atrophy occurs in the medial and 
orbital  frontal  and  anterior  insula  in  bvFTD;  the  anterior  temporal 
region in semantic variant PPA; and the lateral frontal and precentral 
gyrus  of  the  dominant  hemisphere  in  nonfluent/agrammatic  PPA. 
Typically, parietal functions such as visuospatial processing and arith-
metic  calculations  are  unaffected  even  late  in  the  FTD  syndromes. 
Many patients with nonfluent aphasia or bvFTD later develop aspects 
of  PSP-RS  as  disease  spreads  into  subcortical  or  brainstem  struc-
tures,  or  CBS-like  features  appear  as  disease  moves  into  perirolandic  
cortices.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3378

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders FIGURE  432-1  Three  major  frontotemporal  dementia  (FTD)  clinical  syndromes.  Coronal  MRI  sections  from 
representative patients with behavioral variant FTD (left) and the semantic (center) and nonfluent/agrammatic (right) 
variants of primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Areas of early and severe atrophy in each syndrome are highlighted 
(white arrowheads). The behavioral variant features anterior cingulate and frontoinsular atrophy, spreading to orbital 
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Semantic variant PPA shows prominent temporopolar atrophy, more often on the 
left. Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA is associated with dominant frontal opercular and dorsal insula degeneration.

3379

pathology.  Microscopic  findings  seen 
across  all  patients  with  FTLD  include 
gliosis,  microvacuolation,  and  neu-
ronal  loss,  but  the  disease  is  subtyped 
according  to  the  protein  composition 
of  neuronal  and  glial  inclusions,  which 
contain  either  tau  or  TDP-43  in  ~90% 
of  patients,  with  the  remaining  ~10% 
showing  inclusions  containing  the  FET 
family of proteins (FUS, Ewing sarcoma 
protein, TAF-15) (Fig. 432-2).

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
2

F
r
o
n
t
o
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
l

D
e
m
e
n
t
i
a

 ■ PATHOGENESIS
In FTLD-tau, the toxicity and spreading 
capacity  of  misfolded  tau  are  critical 
for  the  pathogenesis  of  inherited  and 
sporadic  tauopathies,  although  loss  of 
tau microtubule stabilizing function may 
also  play  a  role.  In  recent  years,  the 
characteristic structures of the misfolded tau in each FTLD tauopathy 
have  been  resolved  using  cryo-electron  microscopy,  opening  up  new 
approaches to diagnosis and treatment. TDP-43 and FUS, in contrast, 
are RNA/DNA binding proteins whose roles in neuronal function are 
still being actively investigated. TDP-43 is a master regulator of gene 
expression, and loss of TDP-43 function results in mis-splicing events 
leading  to  mRNA  degradation  (via  nonsense-mediated  decay)  or 
aberrant transcripts that give rise to stable but dysfunctional peptides. 
One key role of TDP-43 and FUS proteins may be the chaperoning of 
mRNAs to the distal neuron for activity-dependent translation within 
dendritic spines. Because these proteins also form intracellular aggre-
gates and produce similar anatomic progression, protein toxicity and 
spreading  may  also  factor  heavily  in  the  pathogenesis  of  FTLD-TDP 
and FTLD-FET.

Increasingly,  misfolded  proteins  in  neurodegenerative  disease  are 
recognized as having “prion-like” properties in that they can template 
the  misfolding  of  their  natively  folded  (or  unfolded)  protein  coun-
terparts,  a  process  that  creates  exponential  amplification  of  protein 
misfolding  within  a  cell  and  may  promote  transcellular  and  even 
transsynaptic protein propagation between cells. This hypothesis could 
provide a unifying explanation for the stereotypical patterns of disease 
spread observed in each syndrome (Chap. 424).

Although the term Pick’s disease was once used to describe a pro-
gressive degenerative disorder characterized by selective involvement 
of  the  anterior  frontal  and  temporal  neocortex  and  pathologically 
by  intraneuronal  cytoplasmic  inclusions  (Pick  bodies),  it  is  now  used 
only  in  reference  to  a  specific  FTLD-tau  histopathologic  subtype. 
Classical  Pick  bodies  are  argyrophilic,  staining  positively  with  the 
Bielschowsky  silver  method  (but  not  with  the  Gallyas  method)  and 
also  with  immunostaining  for  hyperphosphorylated  tau.  Recognition 
of the three FTLD major molecular classes has allowed delineation of 
distinct FTLD subtypes within each class. These subtypes, based on the 
morphology and distribution of the neuronal and glial inclusions (Fig. 
432-3),  account  for  the  vast  majority  of  patients,  and  some  subtypes 
show strong clinical or genetic associations (Fig. 432-2). Despite this 
progress, clinical features do not allow reliable prediction of the under-
lying FTLD subtype, or even the major molecular class, for all clinical 
syndromes. Molecular PET imaging with ligands chosen to bind mis-
folded tau protein shows promise, but at the moment these ligands only 
show robust and specific binding to AD-related misfolded tau. Because 
FTLD-tau  and  FTLD-TDP  account  for  90%  of  FTLD  patients,  the 
ability to detect pathologic tau (or TDP-43) protein deposition in vivo 
would  greatly  improve  prediction  accuracy,  especially  when  amyloid 
PET imaging is negative.
 ■ TREATMENT
Caregivers for patients with FTD carry a heavy burden, especially when 
the  illness  disrupts  core  emotional  and  personality  functions  of  the 
loved one. Treatment is symptomatic, and there are currently no ther-
apies known to slow progression or improve symptoms. Many of the 

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

Autosomal dominant forms of FTD can result from mutations in 
C9orf72  (chromosome  9),  GRN  (chromosome  17),  and  MAPT 
(chromosome  17)  genes.  A  hexanucleotide  (GGGGCC)  expan-
sion  in  a  noncoding  exon  of  C9ORF72  is  the  most  common  genetic 
cause of familial or sporadic FTD (usually presenting as bvFTD with or 
without MND) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The expansion 
is associated with C9orf72 haploinsufficiency, nuclear mRNA foci con-
taining transcribed portions of the expansion and other mRNAs, neu-
ronal  cytoplasmic  inclusions  containing  dipeptide  repeat  proteins 
translated from the repeat mRNA, and TDP-43 neuronal cytoplasmic 
and glial inclusions. The pathogenic significance of these various fea-
tures  is  a  topic  of  vigorous  investigation.  MAPT  mutations  lead  to  a 
change in the alternate splicing of tau or cause loss of function in the 
tau molecule, thereby altering microtubule binding. With GRN, muta-
tions in the coding sequence of the gene encoding progranulin protein 
result in mRNA degradation due to nonsense-mediated decay, leading 
to a ~50% reduction in circulating progranulin protein levels. Intrigu-
ingly, homozygous GRN mutations cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscino-
sis,  focusing  investigators  on  the  lysosome  as  a  site  of  molecular 
dysfunction in GRN-related FTD. Progranulin is a growth factor that 
binds to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and sortilin receptors and partic-
ipates in tissue repair and tumor growth. How progranulin mutations 
lead  to  FTD  remains  unknown,  but  the  most  likely  mechanisms 
include lysosomal dysfunction and neuroinflammation. Often, MAPT 
and GRN mutations are associated with parkinsonian features, whereas 
ALS is rare. Infrequently, mutations in the valosin-containing protein 
(VCP, chromosome 9), TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), T cell–restricted 
intracellular  antigen-1  (TIA1),  and  charged  multivesicular  body  pro-
tein 2b (CHMP2b, chromosome 3) genes also lead to autosomal domi-
nant familial FTD. Mutations in the TARDBP (encoding TDP-43) and 
FUS (encoding fused in sarcoma [FUS]) genes (see below) cause famil-
ial ALS, sometimes in association with an FTD syndrome, although a 
few patients presenting with FTD alone have been reported.

 ■ NEUROPATHOLOGY
The pathologic hallmark of FTLD is a focal atrophy of frontal, insular, 
and/or  temporal  cortex,  which  can  be  visualized  with  neuroimaging 
studies  (Fig.  432-1)  and  is  often  profound  at  autopsy.  Neuroimaging 
studies  suggest  that  atrophy  often  begins  focally  in  one  hemisphere 
before spreading to anatomically interconnected cortical and subcor-
tical regions. Loss of cortical serotonergic innervation is seen in many 
patients. In contrast to AD, the cholinergic system is relatively spared 
in  FTD,  which  accounts  for  the  poor  efficacy  of  acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors in this group.

Although  early  studies  suggested  that  15–30%  of  patients  with 
FTD  showed  underlying  AD  at  autopsy,  progressive  refinement  in 
clinical diagnosis has improved prediction accuracy, and most patients 
diagnosed with FTD at a dementia clinic will show underlying FTLD 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3379

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3380

bvFTD

svPPA

nfvPPA

FTD-MND

CBS

PSP-RS

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)

Alzheimer’s
disease

FTLD-tau

FTLD-TDP*

FTLD-FET

FTLD-3
CHMP2B

Pick’s
3R tau

CBD
4R tau

PSP
4R tau

Type A
(PGRN)
(C9ORF72)

Type B
(C9ORF72)

Type C

aFTLD-U

BIBD

FTDP-17
MAPT

Other: CTE,
AGD, MST, GGT

Type D
VCP

Type U
(C9ORF72)
(TARDBP)

NIFID/
NIBD

FUS NOS
FUS

FIGURE  432-2  Frontotemporal  dementia  syndromes  are  united  by  underlying  frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration  pathology,  which  can  be  divided  according  to  the 
presence of tau, TDP-43, or FUS-containing inclusions in neurons and glia. Correlations between clinical syndromes and major molecular classes are shown with colored 
shading.  Despite  improvements  in  clinical  syndromic  diagnosis,  a  small  percentage  of  patients  with  some  frontotemporal  dementia  syndromes  will  show  Alzheimer’s 
disease  neuropathology  at  autopsy  (gray  shading).  aFTLD-U,  atypical  frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration  with  ubiquitin-positive  inclusions;  AGD,  argyrophilic  grain 
disease; BIBD, basophilic inclusion body disease; bvFTD, behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia; CBD, corticobasal degeneration; CBS, corticobasal syndrome; CTE, 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy; FET, FUS, Ewing sarcoma protein, TAF-15 family of proteins; FTD-MND, frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease; FTDP-17, 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17; FUS, fused in sarcoma; GGT, globular glial tauopathy; MST, multisystem tauopathy; nfvPPA, nonfluent/
agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia; NIBD, neurofilament inclusion body disease; NIFID, neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease; PSP, progressive 
supranuclear palsy; PSP-RS, progressive supranuclear palsy–Richardson syndrome; svPPA, semantic variant primary progressive aphasia; Type U, unclassifiable type.

behaviors that may accompany FTD, such as depression, hyperorality, 
compulsions, and irritability, can be ameliorated with antidepressants, 
especially SSRIs. Because FTD is often accompanied by parkinsonism, 
antipsychotics, which can exacerbate this problem, must be used with 
caution.  A  general  approach  to  the  symptomatic  management  of 
dementia is presented in Chap. 29.
 ■ PROGRESSIVE SUPRANUCLEAR PALSY 
SYNDROME
PSP-RS  is  a  degenerative  disorder  that  involves  the  brainstem,  basal 
ganglia, diencephalon, and selected areas of cortex. Clinically, PSP-RS 
begins with falls and executive or subtle personality changes (such as 
mental  rigidity,  impulsivity,  or  apathy).  Shortly  thereafter,  a  progres-
sive oculomotor syndrome ensues that begins with square wave jerks, 
followed  by  slowed  saccades  (vertical  worse  than  horizontal)  before 
resulting  in  progressive  supranuclear  ophthalmoparesis.  Dysarthria, 
dysphagia, and symmetric axial rigidity can be prominent features that 
emerge at any point in the illness. A stiff, unstable posture with hyper-
extension of the neck and a slow, jerky, toppling gait are characteristic. 
Frequent  unexplained  and  sometimes  spectacular  falls  are  common 
secondary to a combination of axial rigidity, inability to look down, and 
impaired judgment. Even once patients have severely limited voluntary 
eye  movements,  they  retain  oculocephalic  reflexes  (demonstrated 
using a vertical doll’s head maneuver); thus, the oculomotor disorder 
is supranuclear. The dementia overlaps with bvFTD, featuring apathy, 
frontal-executive  dysfunction,  poor  judgment,  slowed  thought  pro-
cesses, impaired verbal fluency, and difficulty with sequential actions 
and with shifting from one task to another. These features are common 
at presentation and often precede the motor syndrome. Some patients 
with a pathologic diagnosis of PSP begin with a nonfluent aphasia or 
motor speech disorder and progress to classical PSP-RS. Response to 
l-dopa  is  limited  or  absent;  no  other  treatments  exist.  Death  occurs 
within  5–10  years  of  onset.  Like  Pick’s  disease,  increasingly  the 
term  PSP  is  used  to  refer  to  a  specific  histopathologic  entity  within 
the  FTLD-tau  class.  In  PSP,  accumulation  of  hyperphosphorylated 
4-repeat tau is seen within neurons and glia. Tau neuronal inclusions 
often  appear  tangle-like  and  may  be  large,  spherical  (“globose”)  and 
coarse  in  subcortical  and  brainstem  structures.  The  most  prominent 

involvement is in the subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus, substantia 
nigra, periaqueductal gray, tectum, oculomotor nuclei, pontine nuclei, 
and dentate nucleus of cerebellum. Neocortical tangle-like inclusions, 
like those in AD, often take on a more flame-shaped morphology, but 
on electron microscopy PSP tangles can be shown to consist of straight 
tubules rather than the paired helical filaments found in AD. Further-
more,  PSP  is  associated  with  prominent  tau-positive  glial  inclusions, 
such  as  tufted  astrocytes  (Fig.  432-3),  coiled  oligodendroglial  inclu-
sions (“coiled bodies”), or, least often, thorny astrocytes. Most patients 
with PSP-RS show PSP at autopsy, although small numbers will show 
another tauopathy (corticobasal degeneration [CBD] or Pick’s disease; 
Fig. 432-2).

In addition to its overlap with FTD and CBS (see below), PSP is often 
confused  with  idiopathic  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD).  Although  elderly 
patients  with  PD  may  have  restricted  upgaze,  they  do  not  develop 
downgaze paresis or other abnormalities of voluntary eye movements 
typical of PSP. Dementia ultimately occurs in most patients with PD, 
often  due  to  the  emergence  of  a  full-blown  DLB-like  syndrome  or 
comorbid AD-type dementia. Furthermore, the behavioral syndromes 
seen with DLB differ from PSP (see below). Dementia in PD becomes 
more likely with increasing age, increasing severity of extrapyramidal 
signs, long disease duration, and the presence of depression. Patients 
with  PD  who  develop  dementia  also  show  cortical  atrophy  on  brain 
imaging. Neuropathologically, there may be AD-related changes in the 
cortex or Lewy body disease (LBD)-related α-synuclein inclusions in 
both the limbic system and cerebral cortex. DLB and PD are discussed 
in Chaps. 434 and 435, respectively.
 ■ CORTICOBASAL SYNDROME
CBS  is  a  slowly  progressive  dementia-movement  disorder  associated 
with severe degeneration in the perirolandic cortex and basal ganglia 
(substantia nigra and striatopallidum). Patients typically present with 
asymmetric  rigidity,  dystonia,  myoclonus,  and  apraxia  that  render  a 
progressively  incapacitated  limb,  at  times  associated  with  alien  limb 
phenomena in which the limb exhibits unintended motor actions such 
as  grasping,  groping,  drifting,  or  undoing.  Eventually  CBS  becomes 
bilateral  and  leads  to  dysarthria,  slow  gait,  action  tremor,  and  a 
frontal-predominant  dementia.  Whereas  CBS  refers  to  the  clinical 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3380

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3381

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
3

V
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
e
m
e
n
t
i
a

A

D

B

E

C

F

FIGURE  432-3  Neuropathology  in  frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration  (FTLD).  FTLD-tau  (A–C)  and  FTLD-TDP  (D–F)  account  for  >90%  of  patients  with  FTLD,  and 
immunohistochemistry reveals characteristic lesions in each of the major histopathologic subtypes within each class: A. Pick bodies in Pick’s disease; B. a tufted astrocyte 
in progressive supranuclear palsy; C. an astrocytic plaque in corticobasal degeneration; D. small compact or crescentic neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and short, thin 
neuropil threads in FTLD-TDP, type A; E. diffuse/granular neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (with a relative paucity of neuropil threads) in FTLD-TDP, type B; and F. long, 
tortuous dystrophic neurites in FTLD-TDP, type C. TDP can be seen within the nucleus in neurons lacking inclusions but mislocalizes to the cytoplasm and forms inclusions 
in FTLD-TDP. Immunostains are 3-repeat tau (A), phospho-tau (B and C), and TDP-43 (D–F). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar applies to all panels and 
represents 50 μm in A, B, C, and E and 100 μm in D and F.

syndrome, CBD refers to a specific histopathological FTLD-tau entity 
(Fig. 432-2). Although CBS was once thought to be pathognomonic for 
CBD, increasingly it has been recognized that CBS can be due to CBD, 
PSP, FTLD-TDP, and AD, the latter accounting for up to 30% of CBS 
in  some  series.  In  CBD,  the  microscopic  features  include  ballooned, 
achromatic, tau-positive neurons; astrocytic plaques (Fig. 432-3); and 
other dystrophic glial tau pathomorphologies that overlap with those 
seen  in  PSP.  Most  specifically,  CBD  features  a  severe  tauopathy  bur-
den in the subcortical white matter, consisting of axonal threads and 
oligodendroglial coiled bodies. As shown in Fig. 432-2, patients with 
bvFTD, nonfluent/agrammatic PPA, and PSP-RS may also show CBD 
at autopsy, emphasizing the importance of distinguishing clinical and 
pathologic  constructs  and  terminology.  Treatment  of  CBS  remains 
symptomatic; no disease-modifying therapies are available.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Irwin  DJ  et  al:  Frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration:  Defining  pheno-
typic  diversity  through  personalized  medicine.  Acta  Neuropathol 
129:469, 2015.

Mackenzie  I  et  al:  Nomenclature  and  nosology  for  neuropathologic 
subtypes  of  frontotemporal  lobar  degeneration:  An  update.  Acta 
Neuropathol 119:1, 2010.

Olney NT et al: Frontotemporal dementia. Neurol Clin 35:339, 2017.
Onyike  CU,  Diehl-Schmid  J:  The  epidemiology  of  frontotemporal 

dementia. Int Rev Psychiatry 25:130, 2013.

Roberson ED: Mouse models of frontotemporal dementia. Ann Neu-

rol 72:837, 2012.

Seeley WW: Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. Continuum 

(Minneap Minn) 25:76, 2019.

433 Vascular Dementia

Steven M. Greenberg, William W. Seeley

The term vascular dementia has traditionally been used to describe a 
subset  of  dementia  cases  due  primarily  to  one  or  more  symptomatic 
strokes.  Considered  as  such,  vascular  dementia  is  usually  ranked  the 
second  most  frequent  cause  of  dementia,  exceeded  only  by  Alzheimer’s 
disease  (Chap.  431),  and  is  especially  common  in  populations  with 
limited access to medical care, where vascular risk factors are under-
treated.  More  recently,  this  relatively  narrow  definition  of  vascular 
dementia  has  been  substantially  broadened  to  encompass  the  full 
impact  of  cerebrovascular  disease  on  age-related  cognitive  decline. 
The term vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia 
(VCID) reflects the observation that pathologic changes involving the 
cerebral vasculature are highly prevalent in the elderly and contribute 
to  cognitive  impairment,  whether  occurring  in  isolation  or—more 
commonly—in  conjunction  with  other  neurodegenerative  processes. 
The concept of VCID is one facet of the contemporary understanding 
of age-related cognitive decline as due to cumulative effects of distinct 
and  overlapping  neuropathologic  changes.  Multifactorial  or  “mixed” 
dementias appear to be more prevalent than single-etiology dementias 
and thus represent the rule rather than the exception.

Symptomatic stroke and asymptomatic vascular lesions, most com-
monly detected with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, 
both  contribute  importantly  to  cognitive  impairment.  At  least  some 
cognitive  impairment  is  present  in  approximately  half  of  stroke  sur-
vivors  and  progressively  increases  with  longer  periods  of  follow-up. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3381

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3382 Population-based  studies  also  demonstrate  substantially  increased 
risk of cognitive impairment among individuals without symptomatic 
stroke but with MRI evidence of cerebrovascular disease. The high risk 
for  subsequent  cognitive  impairment  or  dementia  conferred  by  MRI 
markers of otherwise silent vascular brain injury highlights the cumu-
lative impact of small distributed brain injuries—often associated with 
small-vessel brain disease—on compromising brain function. Further 
support  for  this  framework  comes  from  the  correlation  of  cognitive 
performance  during  life  with  postmortem  neuropathology.  Analysis 
of large community-based samples demonstrates independent contri-
butions to cognitive dysfunction and decline from both grossly visible 
infarcts  and  pathologic  markers  of  overall  cerebrovascular  disease 
severity such as atherosclerosis, arteriolosclerosis, and cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy scores. The Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging 
Project  analysis  of  1079  community-based  participants,  for  example, 
found each of these cerebrovascular entities to be moderate to severe 
in >30% of postmortem brains and, when present, to each account for 
~20% of an individual’s premortem cognitive decline.

Recent epidemiologic evidence of a decline in age-adjusted dementia 
incidence hints at the potential public impact of improving vascular health. 
The population-based Framingham Study reported 5-year age- and sex
-adjusted  cumulative  hazard  rates  for  dementia  of  3.6  per  100  persons 
during the late 1970s to early 1980s, 2.8 in the late 1980s to early 1990s, 
2.2 in the late 1990s to early 2000s, and 2.0 in the late 2000s to early 2010s. 
These time intervals coincide with parallel trends in hypertension control 
and stroke prevention, though the associations do not prove causation. 
Evidence supporting a potential causative effect of blood pressure control 
came  from  the  SPRINT-MIND  trial  targeting  systolic  blood  pressure 
(SBP) of <120 mmHg versus 140 mmHg in hypertensive individuals aged  
≥50 years. The study ended prematurely because of effective prevention 
of cardiovascular outcomes in the lower SBP target group but nonetheless 
demonstrated that SBP reduction reduced rates of mild cognitive impair-
ment (hazard ratio [HR], 0.81; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.69–0.95) 
and  combined  mild  cognitive  impairment  or  probable  dementia  (HR, 
0.85; 95% CI, 0.74–0.97), although not dementia alone (HR, 0.83; 95% CI, 
0.67–1.04). It is notable that both these studies measured all-cause cogni-
tive impairment rather than just a vascular dementia subset, underlining 
the potential importance of VCID as a target for dementia prevention.
 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
A review of data from across the globe indicates good evidence for vari-
ability in vascular dementia. Intracranial atherosclerosis, for example, 
is higher in Asians, Hispanics, and American blacks than it is in European 
and  American  whites,  while  whites  may  have  more  extracranial  dis-
ease.  The  causes  of  these  disparities  remain  under  investigation  but 
likely  include  access  to  health  care,  lifestyle  factors  such  as  diet,  and 
possible genetic influences.
 ■ SUBTYPES OF CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE 
ASSOCIATED WITH VCID
Large Cerebral Strokes  Symptomatic  strokes,  whether  ischemic 
(Chap.  427)  or  hemorrhagic  (Chap.  428),  reflect  irreversible  injury 
to discrete areas of cerebral cortex, subcortical white matter, or other 
subcortical and infratentorial structures and produce cognitive impair-
ment as a function of their size and location. Rare individual infarcts in 
specific strategic locations such as thalamus, medial temporal cortex, 
anterior  corpus  callosum,  or  dominant-side  angular  gyrus  can  suffi-
ciently impair episodic memory and functional skills to meet memory- 
based  criteria  for  dementia.  More  commonly,  strokes  occur  outside 
these strategic territories and affect various other aspects of cognition 
such  as  executive  function,  processing  speed,  and  visuospatial  per-
formance that fall under the broader VCID concept. Multiple strokes 
and larger volumes of infarcted territory are associated with a higher 
likelihood of poststroke cognitive dysfunction.

Stroke  patients  who  make  good  cognitive  recovery  nonetheless 
demonstrate  accelerated  poststroke  cognitive  decline.  Community
-based  individuals  in  the  longitudinal  Reasons  for  Geographic  and 
Racial Differences in Stroke study, for example, changed trajectory from 
an average prestroke cognitive gain of 0.021 points/year to poststroke 

cognitive loss of –0.035 points/year on the six-item screener global cog-
nitive function scale. Mechanisms for poststroke cognitive decline likely 
include ongoing effects of the cerebrovascular disease that gave rise to 
the index stroke as well as loss of cognitive reserve that makes the brain 
less resilient to any additional age-related disorders.

Cerebral Small-Vessel Disease  Diseases of the brain’s small ves-
sels (Chap. 427) can also cause symptomatic ischemic or hemorrhagic 
stroke but are more often clinically asymptomatic and recognized only 
during  evaluation  for  cognitive  decline  or  other  symptoms.  The  two 
common  age-related  cerebral  small-vessel  pathologies  are  arteriolo-
sclerosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Arteriolosclerosis represents 
thickening of arterioles due to infiltration of plasma proteins into the 
vessel  wall.  The  primary  risk  factors  for  this  process  are  age,  hyper-
tension,  and  diabetes  mellitus.  Cerebrovascular  arteriolosclerosis  can 
present  as  a  cause  of  ischemic  or  hemorrhagic  symptomatic  stroke, 
both most commonly centered in territories supplied by deep penetrat-
ing vessels such as thalamus, basal ganglia, or brainstem. Cerebral amy-
loid angiopathy is defined by deposition of the β-amyloid peptide in the 
walls of small cerebral arteries, arterioles, and capillaries, with conse-
quent loss of normal wall structure. Its primary risk factor is advancing 
age. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is most often recognized symptom-
atically as a cause of intracerebral hemorrhage (Chap. 428), commonly 
located  in  cerebral  cortex,  subcortical  white  matter  (collectively 
known as lobar hemorrhages), or the cerebral convexity subarachnoid 
space.  The  distinction  between  the  deep  penetrating  territories  most 
commonly  affected  by  arteriolosclerosis  and  superficial  lobar  brain 
regions affected by cerebral amyloid angiopathy often allows the two 
small-vessel diseases to be radiographically distinguished.

Despite  differences  in  their  underlying  pathogenic  mechanisms,  the 
two  cerebral  small-vessel  diseases  produce  a  similar  range  of  ischemic 
and  hemorrhagic  brain  lesions  detectable  by  histopathology  at  autopsy 
or  MRI  scan  during  life  (Fig.  433-1).  Small  (lacunar)  infarcts  are  a 
common  feature  of  arteriolosclerosis  and  less  commonly  of  cerebral 
amyloid  angiopathy.  Chronic  lacunar  infarcts  can  appear  on  MRI  fluid- 
attenuated  inversion  recovery  (FLAIR)  sequences  as  a  hyperintense 
rim  surrounding  a  hypointense  cavitated  core  with  diameters  typically 
3–15  mm  (Fig.  433-1A),  but  this  characteristic  appearance  evolves  in 
only a subset of small infarctions, and many cannot be readily identified 
in  the  chronic  stage.  Microinfarcts  <3  mm  are  characteristic  of  both 
small-vessel diseases. They are substantially more numerous than lacu-
nar infarcts but less easily visualized. Acute microinfarcts may be visible 
as  punctate  hyperintensities  on  diffusion-weighted  MRI  images  (Fig. 
433-1B), whereas a small subset of chronic microinfarcts is detectable on 
high-resolution T2-weighted MRI sequences as hyperintense lesions in 
the cerebral cortex. Cerebral microbleeds are less numerous than lacunes 
or microinfarcts but readily detected in their chronic stage because of the 
paramagnetic  effects  of  iron  products.  These  appear  as  round  hypoin-
tense lesions on T2*-weighted MRI, primarily in deep penetrating brain 
regions if caused by arteriolosclerosis (Fig. 433-1C) or lobar regions if 
caused by cerebral amyloid angiopathy (Fig. 433-1D).

Other  MRI  markers  of  small-vessel  disease  identify  diffuse  injury 
of the white matter. White matter hyperintensities on T2-weighted or 
FLAIR MRI sequences (Fig. 433-1E) are an almost ubiquitous feature 
of aging. Although these lesions are readily visible on clinical MRI, they 
represent a nonspecific marker of white matter gliosis, demyelination, 
or increased water content. Extremely severe diffuse white matter vas-
cular injury is commonly referred to as Binswanger’s disease or subcor-
tical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy, recognized as a clinical syndrome 
with gradual cognitive deterioration and notable white matter changes 
of small-vessel ischemic disease. On neuroimaging, a progressive con-
fluent subcortical and periventricular white matter disease is seen (see 
Fig.  29-2),  with  hypoperfusion  and  hypometabolism.  More  subtle 
alterations  in  white  matter  structure  can  be  sensitively  and  quantita-
tively detected by diffusion tensor MRI (Chap. 423) as increased water 
diffusivity or decreased diffusion directionality. Diffusion tensor mea-
sures of white matter structural integrity show a consistent association 
with cognitive performance and gait speed, reflecting the central role 
of  disconnection  of  key  brain  networks  in  mediating  the  effects  of 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3382

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders cerebral  small-vessel  disease.  These  diffusion  tensor–based  methods 
often  require  complex  processing  and  are  typically  used  in  research 
rather than clinical settings. A relatively simple diffusion tensor–based 
metric defined by the peak width of the skeletonized mean diffusivity 
(PSMD) histogram has emerged as a candidate method for quantifying 
white matter disconnection.

Role  of  Accompanying  Brain  Pathologies  The  concept  of 
VCID posits that large strokes and small-vessel disease often occur in 
combination with neurodegenerative brain diseases, most commonly 
Alzheimer’s  disease  (Chap.  431).  Many  clinicopathologic  correlation 
studies have established that the co-occurrence of cerebrovascular and 
neurodegenerative  lesions  produces  more  cognitive  and  functional 
impairment than expected from the effects of each disease mechanism 
considered  independently.  Interactions  between  cerebrovascular  and 
neurodegenerative  processes  may  also  contribute  to  dementia.  Such 

interactions might involve loss of blood-brain barrier integrity (possi-
bly allowing brain penetration of neurotoxic or inflammatory agents) 
and  impaired  clearance  of  β-amyloid  or  other  pathogenic  molecules 
from the brain (postulated to occur along perivascular drainage path-
ways driven by physiologic vascular motion).

3383

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Vascular Dementia

Identifying vascular contributors to a patient’s cognitive impairment 
can clarify the etiologic diagnosis and point to specific interventions 
aimed  at  slowing  progression.  Clinical  evaluation  is  focused  on 
identifying  vascular  risk  factors  (hypertension,  diabetes  mellitus, 
dyslipidemia, tobacco use, atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, 
or peripheral vascular disease), history of prior symptoms of stroke 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
3

V
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
e
m
e
n
t
i
a

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 433-1  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markers of cerebral small vessel disease. A. Lacunar infarct: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence 
showing hyperintense rim surrounding a hypointense cavitated core in the left thalamus (arrowhead). B. Acute microinfarct: diffusion-weighted sequence showing small 
hyperintense lesion in the left centrum semiovale (arrowhead). C. Cerebral microbleeds in deep penetrating brain region: T2*-weighted sequence showing multiple small 
hypointense lesions in the pons (arrowheads). D. Cerebral microbleeds in lobar brain regions: T2*-weighted sequence showing multiple small hypointense lesions lobar 
brain regions (arrowheads). E. White matter hyperintensities: FLAIR sequence showing confluent diffuse hyperintensities in white matter.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3383

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3384

FIGURE 433-1    (Continued)

E

or  transient  ischemic  attack,  and  family  history  of  early  stroke  or 
vascular disease. Although stepwise progression and certain cogni-
tive deficits such as loss of executive function are particularly sug-
gestive, most individuals with VCID follow the more typical pattern 
of gradual progression of impaired episodic memory.

The  mainstay  for  detection  and  subtyping  of  cerebrovas-
cular  disease  is  brain  MRI.  The  MRI  should  include  FLAIR, 
diffusion-weighed, and T2*-weighted sequences to detect the range 
of  lesions  noted  above:  large  and  small  chronic  infarcts,  acute 
microinfarcts, microbleeds, and white matter hyperintensities. Ves-
sel  imaging  studies  such  as  computed  tomography  or  magnetic 
resonance  angiography  are  not  required  for  initial  evaluation  of 
cognitive  impairment  though  may  be  useful  for  determining  the 
cause of any macroscopic infarcts that are identified. Genetic testing 
for rare hereditary forms of VCID such as cerebral autosomal dom-
inant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy 
(CADASIL) (Chap. 427) or hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
can be considered for cases in which there is a particularly young 
onset,  positive  family  history,  or  suggestive  neuroimaging,  but  is 
otherwise unnecessary.

TREATMENT
Vascular Dementia

Very few trials have addressed the optimal treatment for individuals 
with  asymptomatic  large-  or  small-vessel  cerebrovascular  disease, 
leaving uncertainty as to whether to follow primary or secondary 
stroke  prevention  guidelines.  At  a  minimum,  treatment  should 
assiduously  follow  primary  stroke  prevention  guidelines.  The 
American  Heart  Association  recommends  the  prudent  approach 
for vascular health of managing blood pressure, controlling choles-
terol, reducing blood sugar, maintaining an active lifestyle, adher-
ing  to  a  heart-healthy  diet,  losing  weight,  and  discontinuing 
smoking  (Life’s  Simple  7,  https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/
healthy-lifestyle/my-life-check--lifes-simple-7). Blood pressure targets 
are  <140/90  mmHg  for  all  individuals  and  <130/80  mmHg  for 
those  with  estimated  10-year  cardiovascular  disease  risk  ≥10%, 
which  likely  applies  to  many  individuals  with  imaging  evidence 
of  asymptomatic  brain  infarcts  or  advanced  small-vessel  disease. 
The usefulness of other treatments for secondary stroke prevention 
such  as  antiplatelet  or  statin  therapy  has  not  been  established  for 

asymptomatic infarcts. These agents are reasonable to consider, how-
ever, when the imaging appearance suggests embolic or large-vessel- 
related strokes. All individuals with asymptomatic infarcts should 
be  screened  for  atrial  fibrillation,  and  those  with  embolic-appearing 
infarcts can be considered for prolonged cardiac monitoring. Simi-
larly, patients with infarcts in the territories of large arteries should 
be considered for vascular imaging.

The few trials of symptomatic medications for cognitive impair-
ment  due  to  vascular  etiologies  have  suggested  modest  cognitive 
benefits comparable to those found in Alzheimer’s disease patients. 
Therefore,  it  may  be  reasonable  in  VCID  to  consider  agents  such 
as  the  cholinesterase  inhibitors  donepezil,  rivastigmine,  or  galan-
tamine for mild to moderate cognitive impairment and high-dose 
donepezil or the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonist meman-
tine  for  moderate  to  severe  impairment (Chap.  431).  A  shared 
decision-making  approach  in  considering  these  medications  is 
useful, given their relatively small impact on daily function.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Boyle  PA  et  al:  Person-specific  contribution  of  neuropathologies  to 

cognitive loss in old age. Ann Neurol 83:74, 2018.

Corriveau RA et al: The science of vascular contributions to cogni-
tive impairment and dementia (VCID): A framework for advancing 
research priorities in the cerebrovascular biology of cognitive decline. 
Cell Mol Neurobiol 36:281, 2016.

Dichgans  M,  Leys  D:  Vascular  cognitive  impairment.  Circ  Res 

120:573, 2017.

Greenberg SM et al: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy and Alzheimer dis-

ease: One peptide, two pathways. Nat Rev Neurol 16:30, 2020.

Levine DA et al: Trajectory of cognitive decline after incident stroke. 

JAMA 314:41, 2015.

Smith EE et al: Prevention of stroke in patients with silent cerebrovas-
cular  disease:  A  scientific  statement  for  healthcare  professionals 
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke 48:e44, 2017.

Snowdon DA et al: Brain infarction and the clinical expression of Alz-

heimer disease. The Nun Study. JAMA 277:813, 1997.

Vermeer SE et al: Silent brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and 

cognitive decline. N Engl J Med 348:1215, 2003.

Wardlaw  JM  et  al:  Neuroimaging  standards  for  research  into  small 
vessel disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. 
Lancet Neurol 12:822, 2013.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3384

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3385

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
4

D
e
m
e
n
t
i
a
w

i
t
h
L
e
w
y
B
o
d
i
e
s

434

Dementia with  
Lewy Bodies
Irene Litvan, William W. Seeley,  
Bruce L. Miller

Lewy  body  disease  (LBD),  manifesting  as  Parkinson’s  disease  and 
dementia (PDD) or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), is the second 
most common cause of neurodegenerative dementia, after Alzheimer’s 
disease  (AD)  (Chap.  431).  Approximately  10%  of  patients  with  PD 
develop  PDD  per  year,  with  the  majority  of  PD  patients  developing 
PDD over time. The incidence of DLB is approximately 7 per 100,000 
person-years.  The  prevalence  of  both  PDD  and  DLB  increases  with 
aging, and both affect men more often than women.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Most researchers conceptualize PDD and DLB as points on a spectrum 
of  LBD  pathology.  Cognitively,  PDD  and  DLB  usually  manifest  with 
severe  executive,  attentional,  and  visuospatial  deficits  but  preserved 
episodic  memory.  Cognitive  decline  in  LBD  affects  performance  of 
daily  living  activities  beyond  other  PD  symptoms.  Early  psychosis 
including  well-formed  visual  hallucinations,  fluctuating  cognition, 
rapid  eye  movement  sleep  behavior  disorder  (RBD),  and  parkinson-
ism are the main diagnostic features in DLB. The sense of a presence 
behind the person may precede well-formed hallucinations. Delusions 
are  less  frequent  than  hallucinations  and  are  usually  related  to  mis-
identification,  infidelity,  theft,  or  persecution.  Fluctuating  attention 
and concentration are other characteristic features. Minor day-to-day 
variation  in  cognitive  functioning  is  common  across  dementias,  but 
in DLB these fluctuations can be marked, with short periods of con-
fusion or severe lethargy that may rapidly resolve. Patients with PDD 
and DLB are highly sensitive to infectious or metabolic disturbances. 
The first manifestation  of  DLB  in  some  patients  is  delirium,  often 
precipitated by an infection, new medicine, or other systemic distur-
bance. Parkinsonism in DLB is usually associated with early postural 
instability and can present early or later in the course. RBD is a charac-
teristic, often prodromal, feature. Normally, dreaming is accompanied 
by skeletal muscle paralysis, but patients with RBD enact dreams, often 
violently, leading to injuries to themselves or their bed partners. Both 
PDD and DLB may be accompanied or preceded by anosmia, consti-
pation, RBD, depression, and anxiety.

The  symptom  profile  in  DLB  and  PDD  can  provide  clues  for  the 
differential diagnosis at the clinic. Clinically, the time interval between 
parkinsonism and dementia differentiate PDD and DLB. PDD presents 
in patients with long-standing PD, who manifest dementia often with 
visual hallucinations, fluctuating attention or alertness, and RBD. On 
the  other  hand,  when  the  dementia  and  the  neuropsychiatric  symp-
toms precede or co-emerge with the parkinsonism, the patient is diag-
nosed with DLB. Patients with DLB, more frequently than those with 
PDD, also have AD co-pathology, making the prediction of underlying 
pathology  challenging  for  clinicians.  Episodic  memory  disturbance 
points to the diagnosis of comorbid AD. Orthostatic hypotension that 
can lead to syncopal events, erectile dysfunction, and constipation can 
be present early in DLB, at times making it challenging to differentiate 
DLB  from  multiple  system  atrophy  (MSA).  In  MSA  the  autonomic 
disturbances occur early and are usually more severe than in DLB, and 
cognition is relatively preserved. Anosmia is also more characteristic 
of LBD than MSA.
 ■ PRODROMAL PHASE
Both  PDD  and  DLB  have  a  prodromal  phase  where  patients  have  a 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), with cognitive deficits that do not 
have  a  substantial  impact  on  daily  life.  PD-MCI  is  characterized  by 
deficits in executive, attention, and visuospatial disturbances, but can 
also  present  with  an  amnestic  or  multiple-domain  MCI.  Prodromal 
DLB is also characterized by similar cognitive disturbances but is also 

Fluctuating 
cognition with 
variations in 
attention
Sleep

Recurrent visual 
hallucinations

Biomarkers

Polysomnogram

CSF

MRI

TABLE 434-1  Distinguishing MCI Due to Lewy Body Disease or 
Alzheimer’s Disease
CLINICAL 
FEATURES
MCI

PRODROMAL MCI-LB 
PATHOLOGY
MCI usually affecting 
executive, attention, and/or 
visuospatial functions
Frequent and severe

PRODROMAL MCI-AD 
PATHOLOGY
MCI with impaired 
memory and semantic 
naming
Rare or not severe

REM sleep behavior disorder

Frequent

Insomnia, frequent 
awakenings
Rare

REM sleep behavior disorder 
with atonia
Decreased CSF α-synuclein by 
RT-QuIC

Atrophy of the amygdala

18F-deoxyglucose 
PET scan

Amyloid PET scan

MIBG myocardial 
scintigraphy
DAT scan or PET 
dopamine scan

Hypometabolism in occipital 
lobe and increased in posterior 
cingulate (cingulate island 
sign)
Normal, unless associated 
with AD
Post-ganglionic sympathetic 
denervation
Reduced dopamine transporter 
in the basal ganglia, 
particularly putamen

Normal

Decreased CSF 
β-amyloid and increased 
phospho-tau. This can be 
performed in blood now.
Atrophy of the 
parahippocampal/
hippocampal areas
Hypometabolism in 
parieto-temporal lobes

Abnormal parieto-
temporal areas
Normal

Normal

AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DAT, dopamine transporter; LB, 
Lewy bodies; MIBG, meta-iodobenzylguanidine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 
PET, positron emission tomography; RT-QuIC, real-time quaking-induced conversion.

associated  with  either  hallucinations  unrelated  to  medications,  RBD, 
fluctuations  in  attention,  or  parkinsonism.  It  is  at  times  challenging 
to  differentiate  prodromal  MCI-DLB  and  PD-MCI  when  the  major 
features  are  RBD  and  parkinsonism,  for  which  the  term  prodromal 
MCI-Lewy body (MCI-LB) was recently proposed. RBD may precede 
the  development  of  an  LBD-related  syndrome  by  many  years,  usu-
ally  evolving  into  either  PD  or  DLB.  The  clinical  profile  and  several 
biomarkers can help differentiate MCI due to LBD vs. AD pathology 
(Table 434-1).

PATHOLOGY
The key neuropathologic feature in LBD is the presence of Lewy bodies 
and  Lewy  neurites  throughout  specific  brainstem  nuclei,  substantia 
nigra,  amygdala,  cingulate  gyrus,  and,  ultimately,  the  neocortex. 
Lewy bodies are intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions that stain with 
periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and ubiquitin but are now identified with 
antibodies  to  the  presynaptic  protein  α-synuclein.  Lewy  bodies  are 
composed of straight neurofilaments 7–20 nm long with surrounding 
amorphous  material  and  contain  epitopes  recognized  by  antibodies 
against  phosphorylated  and  nonphosphorylated  neurofilament  pro-
teins, ubiquitin, and α-synuclein. The presence of α-synuclein aggre-
gates in neurons and glia in PDD and DLB molecularly classifies these 
diseases as synucleinopathies. In general, neuronal and synaptic loss, 
rather than Lewy pathology per se, best predicts the clinical deficits.

Formal  criteria  identify  three  stages  of  progression:  (1)  Brainstem 
predominant;  (2)  transitional  limbic;  and  (3)  diffuse  neocortical. 
Importantly, healthy older individuals may also show isolated scattered 
Lewy  body  pathology  in  the  substantia  nigra,  amygdala,  or  olfactory 
bulb.  Pathologic  studies  have  shown  that  PD  usually  starts  in  the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3385

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3386

enteric  nervous  system  and  spreads  through  the  vagus  nerve  to  the 
heart, lower brainstem, substantia nigra, limbic system, and lastly the 
cerebral  cortex.  PD  may  also  begin  in  the  olfactory  bulb  and  spread 
through olfactory system connections or start independently in enteric 
and  olfactory  bulb  areas.  Evidence  from  human  anatomic  pathology 
and  animal  models  suggests  that  LBD  may  similarly  propagate  via 
a  prion-like  mechanism.  Abnormally  folded  α-synuclein  aggregates 
propagate transneuronally following connection pathways of the ner-
vous  system.  This  pathologic  propagation  from  the  periphery  to  the 
brain  correlates  with  the  evolution  of  clinical  symptoms;  PD  usually 
manifests  first  with  nonmotor  features  characterized  by  constipation 
and/or hyposmia, followed by anxiety, depression, RBD, parkinsonism, 
and  lastly  dementia.  PDD  is  manifested  clinically  when  limbic  and 
cortical areas are involved.

A profound cholinergic deficit, owing to basal forebrain and pedun-
culopontine nucleus involvement, is present in most patients with DLB 
and may be associated with the characteristic fluctuations, inattention, 
and  visual  hallucinations.  Adrenergic  deficits  from  locus  coeruleus 
involvement further undermine arousal and alerting.
PATHOGENESIS
Both  genes  and  environmental  factors  are  thought  to  contribute  to 
the development of LBD. The presence of alpha-synuclein aggregates 
in  Lewy  bodies  led  to  the  discovery  of  α-synuclein  duplications  and 
triplications that manifest clinically as PD or DLB. There are multiple 
genes associated with PD, but mutations of glucocerebrosidase (GBA) 
particularly lead to PDD or DLB presentations (Chap. 435).

The  origins  of  LBD  in  gastrointestinal  and  olfactory  areas  suggest 
that environmental toxins acting on a susceptible genetic background 
may  contribute  to  the  LBD  pathogenesis  (a  “double-hit”  hypothesis). 
Several toxins have been associated with PD (Chap. 435), but epidemi-
ologic studies of risk factors in DLB remain inconclusive.

LABORATORY FEATURES
In patients presenting with cognitive disturbances, it is always neces-
sary to rule out treatable causes of dementia such as drugs, infections, 
or metabolic disturbances (Chap. 29). MRI of the brain can be helpful 
to rule out vascular parkinsonism or subdural hematomas, or support 
the diagnosis of other disorders such as MSA (i.e., pontine “hot-cross 
buns” sign; Chap. 440).

Biomarkers  that  support  the  diagnosis  of  LBD  include  polysom-
nogram  showing  RBD  with  atonia,  CSF  showing  either  α-synuclein 
oligomers  (RT-QuIC)  or  CSF  or  blood  levels  of  phospho-tau217, 
iodine-123-meta-iodobenzylguanidine  (MIBG)  cardiac  scintigraphy 
showing cardiac postganglionic sympathetic denervation, and dopamine 
transporter  imaging  using  single-photon  emission  computed  tomog-
raphy (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) (Table 434-1).

TREATMENT
Dementia with Lewy Bodies

use of a cholinesterase inhibitor. Patients with DLB should not be 
exposed to typical neuroleptics that can lead to a neuroleptic malig-
nant syndrome and death, or anticholinergics or dopamine agonists 
that can exacerbate their symptoms.

RBD usually responds to melatonin, requiring at times 20 mg/
day.  If  melatonin  is  not  effective,  clonazepam,  gabapentin,  or 
codeine can be used with caution due to the possibility of worsen-
ing cognition or falls. Antidepressants, especially those with strong 
anxiolytic properties (escitalopram, paroxetine, duloxetine, or ven-
lafaxine; see Chap. 452), are often necessary for mood and anxiety 
symptoms.  Orthostatic  hypotension  may  require  treatment  with 
nonpharmacologic  measures  (diet  high  in  salt  and  liquids,  a  30° 
elevation of the head of the bed) or pharmacologic therapies (i.e., 
fludrocortisone, midodrine, droxidopa). Physical therapy can max-
imize motor function and protect against fall-related injury. Home 
safety assessments and transfer instruction should also be provided. 
Education for patients and caregivers and social worker support are 
also important. Therefore, the care of patients with LBD requires a 
multidisciplinary approach.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Emre M et al: Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with 

Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 22:1689, 2007.

Litvan  I  et  al:  Diagnostic  criteria  for  mild  cognitive  impairment  in 
Parkinson’s  disease:  Movement  Disorder  Society  Task  Force  guide-
lines. Mov Disord 27:349, 2012.

Mckeith IG et al: Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy 
bodies: Fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium. Neurology 
89:88, 2017.

Mckeith  IG  et  al:  Research  criteria  for  the  diagnosis  of  prodromal 

dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology 94:743, 2020.

Rossi M et al: Ultrasensitive RT-QuIC assay with high sensitivity and 
specificity for Lewy body-associated synucleinopathies. Acta Neuro-
pathol 140:49, 2020.

Sonni  I  et  al:  Clinical  validity  of  presynaptic  dopaminergic  imaging 
with 123I-ioflupane and noradrenergic imaging with 123I-MIBG in 
the differential diagnosis between Alzheimer’s disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies in the context of a structured 5-phase development 
framework. Neurobiol Aging 52:228, 2017.

435 Parkinson’s Disease

C. Warren Olanow,  
Anthony H.V. Schapira

Although there are currently no disease-modifying agents to pre-
vent,  slow,  or  cure  LBD-related  dementias,  several  symptomatic 
treatments are available. By addressing the substantial cholinergic 
deficit in DLB, cholinesterase inhibitors such as rivastigmine (target 
dose 6 mg twice daily or 9.5 mg patch daily) or donepezil (target 
dose 10 mg daily) often improve cognition, reduce hallucinosis, and 
stabilize  delusional  symptoms.  The  atypical  antipsychotic  pima-
vanserin  is  frequently  helpful  to  treat  the  psychosis  and  does  not 
worsen parkinsonism; it is approved by the FDA for patients with 
PDD and is often used off-label for DLB. Pimavanserin is a selec-
tive inverse agonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor that does not 
block  dopamine  receptors  but  carries  an  FDA  warning  regarding 
an increase in risk of death, especially in older patients. Low-dose 
clozapine (begin at 6.25 mg, increasing up to 25 mg, daily) is also 
effective  for  treating  hallucinations  and  delusions,  but  requires 
frequent  blood  draws  due  to  the  risk  of  agranulocytosis.  Patients 
with LBD are sensitive to dopaminergic medications, which must 
be carefully titrated; tolerability may be improved with concomitant 

PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND  
RELATED DISORDERS
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common age-related neu-
rodegenerative disease, exceeded only by Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Its 
cardinal clinical features were first described by the English physician 
James Parkinson in 1817. James Parkinson was a general physician who 
captured the essence of this condition based on a visual inspection of 
a mere handful of patients, several of whom he only observed walking 
on  the  street  and  did  not  formally  examine.  It  is  estimated  that  the 
number  of  people  with  PD  in  the  most  populous  nations  worldwide 
is  ~5  million  persons,  and  this  number  is  expected  to  double  within  
20 years based on the aging of the population. The mean age of onset of 
PD is about 60 years, and the lifetime risk is ~3% for men and 2% for 
women. The frequency of PD increases with age, but cases can be seen 
in  individuals  in  their  twenties  and  even  younger,  particularly  when 
associated with a gene mutation.

Clinically,  PD  is  characterized  by  rest  tremor,  rigidity  (stiffness), 
bradykinesia (slowing), and gait dysfunction with postural instability. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3386

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 435-1  Clinical Features of Parkinson’s Disease
OTHER MOTOR 
CARDINAL MOTOR 
FEATURES
FEATURES
Micrographia
Bradykinesia
Masked facies 
Rest tremor
(hypomimia)
Rigidity
Reduced eye 
Postural instability
blinking
Drooling
Soft voice 
(hypophonia)
Dysphagia
Freezing
Falling

NONMOTOR FEATURES
Anosmia
Sensory disturbances (e.g., pain)
Mood disorders (e.g., depression)
Sleep disturbances (e.g., fragmented 
sleep, RBD)
Autonomic disturbances
  Orthostatic hypotension
  Gastrointestinal disturbances
  Genitourinal disturbances
  Sexual dysfunction
Cognitive impairment/dementia

Abbreviation: RBD, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.

These are known as the classical or “cardinal” features of the disease. 
Additional  clinical  features  can  include  freezing  of  gait,  speech  diffi-
culty, swallowing impairment, and a series of nonmotor features that 
include autonomic disturbances, sensory alterations, mood disorders, 
sleep dysfunction, cognitive impairment, and dementia (see Table 435-1 
and discussion below).

Pathologically,  the  hallmark  features  of  PD  are  degeneration 
of  dopaminergic  neurons  in  the  substantia  nigra  pars  compacta 
(SNc),  reduced  striatal  dopamine,  and  intraneuronal  proteinaceous 

inclusions in cell bodies and axons that stain for α-synuclein (known 
as  Lewy  bodies  and  Lewy  neurites,  collectively  as  Lewy  pathology)  
(Fig.  435-1).  While  interest  has  focused  on  the  dopamine  system, 
neuronal degeneration with Lewy pathology can also affect cholinergic 
neurons of the nucleus basalis of Meynert (NBM), norepinephrine neu-
rons of the locus coeruleus (LC), serotonin neurons in the raphe nuclei 
of the brainstem, and neurons of the olfactory system, cerebral hemi-
spheres, spinal cord, and peripheral autonomic nervous system. This 
“nondopaminergic”  pathology  is  likely  responsible  for  the  nonmotor 
clinical features listed above and in Table 435-1. It has been postulated 
that  Lewy  pathology  can  begin  in  the  peripheral  autonomic  nervous 
system,  olfactory  system,  and  dorsal  motor  nucleus  of  the  vagus 
nerve  in  the  lower  brainstem,  and  then  spread  in  a  predictable  and 
sequential manner to affect the SNc and cerebral hemispheres (Braak 
staging).  These  studies  thus  suggest  that  the  classic  degeneration  of 
SNc dopamine neurons and the cardinal motor features of PD develop 
at a midstage of the illness. Indeed, epidemiologic studies suggest that 
clinical  symptoms  reflecting  early  involvement  of  nondopaminergic 
neurons  such  as  constipation,  anosmia,  rapid  eye  movement  (REM) 
behavior sleep disorder, and cardiac denervation can precede the onset 
of  the  classic  motor  features  of  PD  by  several  years  if  not  decades. 
Originally it was considered that these are risk factors for developing 
PD, but based on pathological findings it is now considered likely that 
they  represent  an  early  premotor  form  of  the  disease.  Intense  efforts 
are underway to  accurately  define  a premotor stage of  PD with high 
sensitivity and specificity. This will be of particular importance when a 
neuroprotective therapy is available as it would be desirable to initiate 
disease-modifying treatment at the earliest possible stage of the disease.

3387

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

A

B

C

FIGURE 435-1  Pathologic specimens from a patient with Parkinson’s disease (PD) compared to a normal control demonstrating (A) reduction of pigment in SNc in PD (right) 
versus control (left), (B) reduced numbers of cells in SNc in PD (right) compared to control (left), and (C) Lewy bodies (arrows) within melanized dopamine neurons in PD. 
SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3387

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3388

TABLE 435-2  Differential Diagnosis of Parkinsonism
Parkinson’s Disease
  Sporadic
  Genetic
Dementia with Lewy bodies

Atypical Parkinsonism
  Multiple-system atrophy (MSA)
  Cerebellar type (MSA-c)
  Parkinson type (MSA-p)
Progressive supranuclear palsy

  Parkinsonism variant
  Richardson variant
Corticobasal syndrome
Frontotemporal dementia

Secondary Parkinsonism
  Drug-induced
  Tumor

Infection
  Vascular
  Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
  Trauma
  Liver failure

 Toxins (e.g., carbon monoxide, 
manganese, MPTP, cyanide, hexane, 
methanol, carbon disulfide)

Neurodegenerative disorders that are 
associated with parkinsonism
  Wilson’s disease
  Huntington’s disease

 Neurodegeneration with brain iron 
accumulation

  SCA 3 (spinocerebellar ataxia)

 Fragile X–associated 
ataxia-tremor-parkinsonism

  Prion diseases
  X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism

 Alzheimer’s disease with 
parkinsonism

  Dopa-responsive dystonia

Abbreviation: MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Parkinsonism  is  a  generic  term  that  is  used  to  define  a  syndrome 
manifest  by  bradykinesia  with  rigidity  and/or  tremor.  It  has  a  differ-
ential  diagnosis  (Table  435-2)  that  reflects  differences  in  the  site  of 
involvement  within  the  basal  ganglia,  the  nature  of  the  pathology, 
and  the  clinical  picture.  The  basal  ganglia  are  comprised  of  a  group 
of subcortical nuclei that include the striatum (putamen and caudate 
nucleus),  subthalamic  nucleus  (STN),  globus  pallidus  pars  externa 
(GPe),  globus  pallidus  pars  interna  (GPi),  and  the  SNc  (Fig.  435-2). 
Among the different forms of parkinsonism, PD is the most common 
(~75% of cases). Historically, PD was diagnosed based on the presence 
of two of three parkinsonian features (tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia). 
However, postmortem studies found a 24% error rate when diagnosis 
was based solely on these criteria. Clinicopathologic correlation studies 
subsequently determined that parkinsonism (bradykinesia and rigid-
ity) associated with rest tremor, asymmetry of motor impairment, and 
a good response to levodopa is much more likely to predict the correct 
pathologic  diagnosis.  With  these  revised  criteria  (known  as  the  U.K. 
Brain  Bank  Criteria),  a  clinical  diagnosis  of  PD  could  be  confirmed 
pathologically in >90% of cases. Imaging of the dopamine system (see 
below)  further  increases  diagnostic  accuracy.  The  International  Par-
kinson’s Disease and Movement Disorder Society (MDS) has suggested 
revised clinical criteria for PD (known as the MDS Clinical Diagnostic 
Criteria  for  Parkinson’s  disease),  which  are  thought  to  increase  diag-
nostic accuracy even further, particularly in early cases where levodopa 
has not yet been tried. While motor parkinsonism has been retained 
as the core feature of the disease, the diagnosis of PD as the specific 
type of parkinsonism relies on three additional categories of diagnostic 
features:  supportive  criteria  (features  that  increase  confidence  in  the 
diagnosis of PD), absolute exclusion criteria, and red flags (which must 

be counterbalanced by supportive criteria to permit a diagnosis of PD). 
Utilizing  these  criteria,  two  levels  of  certainty  have  been  delineated; 
clinically  established  PD  and  clinically  probable  PD  (see  Berg  et  al. 
Movement Disorders 30:1591, 2015 in Further Reading).

Imaging  of  the  brain  dopamine  system  in  patients  with  PD  can 
be  performed  using  positron  emission  tomography  (PET)  or  single-
photon  emission  computed  tomography  (SPECT).  These  studies 
typically  show  reduced  and  asymmetric  uptake  of  striatal  dopamin-
ergic  biomarkers,  particularly  in  the  posterior  putamen  with  relative 
sparing of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 435-3). These findings reflect the 
degeneration  of  nigrostriatal  dopaminergic  neurons  and  the  loss  of 
their striatal terminals. Imaging can be useful in patients where there 
is  diagnostic  uncertainty  (e.g.,  early  stage,  essential  tremor,  dystonic 
tremor, psychogenic tremor) or in research studies in order to ensure 
accuracy, but is not necessary in routine practice. This may change in 
the future when there is a disease-modifying therapy and it is critically 
important to make a correct diagnosis as early as possible. There is also 
some evidence that the diagnosis of PD, and even pre-PD, may be made 
based on the presence of increased iron in the SNc using transcranial 
sonography or special MRI protocols.

Genetic testing can be helpful for establishing a diagnosis but is not 
routinely employed as monogenic forms of PD are relatively rare and 
likely account for no more than 10% of cases (see discussion below). 
A genetic form of PD should be considered in patients with a strong 
positive family history, early age of onset (<40 years), a particular eth-
nic background (see below), and in research studies. Genetic variants 
of  the  glucocerebrosidase  gene  (GBA)  are  the  most  common  genetic 
association  with  PD.  They  are  present  in  5–15%  of  PD  patients,  and 
in 25% of Ashkenazi PD patients. However, only about 30% of people 
with GBA variants will develop PD by age 80 years. Genetic variants 

Striatum
(Putamen and
Caudate)

Globus Pallidus
Globus Pallidus

STN

SNc

Striatum
Globus Pallidus

A

SNc

B

FIGURE 435-2  Basal ganglia nuclei. Schematic (A) and postmortem (B) coronal sections illustrating the various components of the basal ganglia. SNc, substantia nigra 
pars compacta; STN, subthalamic nucleus.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3388

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3389

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

MSA manifests as a combination of the atypical parkinsonian fea-
tures  described  above,  as  well  as  cerebellar  and  autonomic  features. 
Clinical syndromes can be divided into a predominantly parkinsonian 
(MSA-p)  or  cerebellar  (MSA-c)  form.  Clinically,  MSA  is  suspected 
when  a  patient  presents  with  features  of  atypical  parkinsonism  in 
conjunction  with  cerebellar  signs  and/or  prominent  autonomic  dys-
function, usually orthostatic hypotension (Chap. 440). Pathologically, 
MSA is characterized by degeneration of the SNc, striatum, cerebellum, 
and inferior olivary nuclei coupled with characteristic glial cytoplasmic 
inclusions  (GCIs)  that  stain  positively  for  α-synuclein  (Lewy  bodies) 
particularly  in  oligodendrocytes  rather  than  in  SNc  neurons  as  in 
PD.  MRI  can  show  pathologic  iron  accumulation  in  the  striatum  on 
T2-weighted  scans,  high  signal  change  in  the  region  of  the  external 
surface of the putamen (putaminal rim) in MSA-p, or cerebellar and 
brainstem atrophy (the pontine “hot cross bun” sign [Fig. 440-2]) in 
MSA-c. There is currently no established evidence for any gene muta-
tion/genetic risk factor for MSA.

PSP is a form of atypical parkinsonism that is characterized by par-
kinsonism  as  noted  above  coupled  with  slow  ocular  saccades,  eyelid 
apraxia, and restricted vertical eye movements with particular impair-
ment of downward gaze. Patients frequently experience hyperextension 
of the neck with early gait disturbance and falls. In later stages, speech 
and  swallowing  difficulty  and  cognitive  impairment  may  become 
evident. Two clinical forms of PSP have been identified; a “Parkinson” 
form that can closely resemble PD in the early stages and can include a 
positive response to levodopa, and the more classic “Richardson” form 
that is characterized by the features described above with little or no 
response to levodopa. MRI may reveal a characteristic atrophy of the 
midbrain with relative preservation of the pons on midsagittal images 
(the so-called hummingbird sign). Pathologically, PSP is characterized 
by  degeneration  of  the  SNc,  striatum,  STN,  midline  thalamic  nuclei, 
and pallidum, coupled with neurofibrillary tangles and inclusions that 
stain for the tau protein. Mutations in the MAPT gene that encodes for 
the tau protein have been detected in some familial cases.

CBS is a relatively uncommon condition that usually presents with 
asymmetric dystonic contractions and clumsiness of one hand coupled 
with cortical sensory disturbances manifest as apraxia, agnosia, focal 
limb myoclonus, or alien limb phenomenon (where the limb assumes 
a position in space without the patient being aware of its location or 
recognizing  that  the  limb  belongs  to  them).  Dementia  may  occur  at 
any  stage  of  the  disease.  Both  cortical  and  basal  ganglia  features  are 
required  to  make  this  diagnosis.  MRI  frequently  shows  asymmetric 
cortical  atrophy,  but  this  must  be  carefully  sought  and  may  not  be 
obvious  to  casual  inspection.  Pathologic  findings  include  achromatic 
neuronal  degeneration  with  tau  deposits.  Considerable  overlap  may 
occur  both  clinically  and  pathologically  between  CBS  and  PSP,  and 
they may be difficult to distinguish without pathologic confirmation.

Secondary parkinsonisms occur as a consequence of other etiologic 
factors  such  as  drugs,  stroke,  tumor,  infection,  or  exposure  to  toxins 
(e.g., carbon monoxide, manganese) that cause basal ganglia dysfunc-
tion.  Clinical  features  reflect  the  region  of  the  basal  ganglia  that  has 
been damaged. For example, strokes or tumors that affect the SNc may 
have a clinical picture that is largely identical to the motor features of 
PD, whereas toxins such as carbon monoxide or manganese that dam-
age the globus pallidus more closely resemble atypical parkinsonism. 
Dopamine-blocking agents such as neuroleptics are the most common 
cause of secondary parkinsonism. These drugs are most widely used in 
psychiatry, but physicians should be aware that drugs such as metoclo-
pramide which are primarily used to treat gastrointestinal problems are 
also neuroleptic agents and may induce secondary parkinsonism. These 
drugs  can  also  cause  acute  and  tardive  dyskinesias  (see  Chap.  436). 
Other drugs that can cause secondary parkinsonism include tetrabena-
zine, calcium channel blockers (flunarizine, cinnarizine), amiodarone, 
and lithium.

Parkinsonism  can  also  be  seen  as  a  feature  of  dopa-responsive 
dystonia (DRD), a condition that results from a mutation in the GTP-
Cyclohydrolase  1  gene,  which  can  lead  to  a  defect  in  a  cofactor  for 
tyrosine hydroxylase with impairment in the manufacture of dopa and 
dopamine. While it typically presents as dystonia (Chap. 436), it can 

A

B

FIGURE 435-3  [11C]Dihydrotetrabenazine positron emission tomography (a marker 
of  VMAT2)  in  healthy  control  (A)  and  Parkinson’s  disease  (B)  patient.  Note  the 
reduced  striatal  uptake  of  tracer,  which  is  most  pronounced  in  the  posterior 
putamen and tends to be asymmetric. (Courtesy of Dr. Jon Stoessl.)

of  the  LRRK2  gene  have  also  attracted  particular  interest  as  they  are 
responsible  for  ~1%  of  typical  sporadic  cases  of  the  disease.  LRRK2 
mutations are a particularly common cause of PD (~25%) in Ashkenazi 
Jews and North African Berber Arabs; however, there is considerable 
variability  in  penetrance  and  many  carriers  never  develop  clinical 
features of PD. Genetic testing is of particular interest for identifying 
at-risk individuals in a research setting and for defining enriched pop-
ulations for clinical trials of therapies directed at a particular mutation.

Atypical,  Secondary,  and  Other  Forms  of  Parkinsonism  
Atypical  parkinsonism  refers  to  a  group  of  neurodegenerative  con-
ditions  that  are  usually  associated  with  more  widespread  pathology 
than found in PD (e.g., degeneration of striatum, globus pallidus, cer-
ebellum, and brainstem, as well as the SNc). These conditions include 
multiple system atrophy (MSA; Chap. 440), progressive supranuclear 
palsy  (PSP;  Chap.  432),  and  corticobasal  syndrome  (CBS;  Chap.  432). 
As  a  group,  they  tend  to  present  with  parkinsonism  (rigidity  and 
bradykinesia)  but  manifest  clinical  differences  from  PD  reflecting 
their more widespread pathology. These include early involvement of 
speech and gait, absence of rest tremor, lack of motor asymmetry, poor 
or no response to levodopa, and a more aggressive clinical course. In 
the early stages, some cases may show a modest benefit from levodopa 
and can be difficult to distinguish from PD, but the diagnosis becomes 
clearer as the disease evolves over time. Neuroimaging of the dopamine 
system is usually not helpful, as striatal dopamine depletion can be seen 
in both PD and atypical parkinsonism. By contrast, metabolic imaging 
of the basal ganglia/thalamus network (using 2-F-deoxyglucose) may 
be  helpful,  showing  a  pattern  of  decreased  activity  in  the  GPi  with 
increased activity in the thalamus, the reverse of what is seen in PD.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3389

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3390

TABLE 435-3  Features Suggesting an Atypical or Secondary Cause of 
Parkinsonism

SYMPTOMS/SIGNS

History

Early speech and gait impairment (lack 
of tremor, lack of motor asymmetry, 
early falls)
Exposure to neuroleptics
Onset prior to age 40 years

Liver disease

Early hallucinations and dementia with 
later development of PD features
Diplopia, impaired vertical gaze
Poor or no response to an adequate 
trial of levodopa

Physical Examination

Dementia as first or early feature
Prominent orthostatic hypotension
Prominent cerebellar signs
Slow saccades with impaired 
downgaze
High-frequency (6–10 Hz) symmetric 
postural tremor with a prominent 
kinetic component

ALTERNATIVE DIAGNOSIS TO 
CONSIDER

Atypical parkinsonism

Drug-induced parkinsonism
Genetic form of PD, Wilson’s disease, 
DRD
Wilson’s disease, non-Wilsonian 
hepatolenticular degeneration
Dementia with Lewy bodies

PSP
Atypical or secondary parkinsonism

Dementia with Lewy bodies
MSA-p
MSA-c
PSP

Essential tremor

Abbreviations: DRD, dopa-responsive dystonia; MSA-c, multiple-system atrophy–
cerebellar type; MSA-p, multiple-system atrophy–Parkinson’s type; PD, Parkinson’s 
disease; PSP, progressive supranuclear palsy.

present as a biochemically based form of parkinsonism (due to reduced 
synthesis of dopamine) that closely resembles PD and responds to levo-
dopa but is not associated with abnormalities on fluoro-dopa positron 
emission  tomography  (FD-PET)  nor  neurodegeneration.  This  diag-
nosis should be considered in individuals aged <20 years who present 
with parkinsonism particularly if there are dystonic features.

Finally, parkinsonism can be seen as a feature of a variety of other 
neurodegenerative  disorders  such  as  Wilson’s  disease,  Huntington’s 
disease (especially the juvenile form known as the Westphal variant), 
certain spinocerebellar ataxias, and neurodegenerative disorders with 
brain  iron  accumulation  such  as  pantothenate  kinase  (PANK)–
associated neurodegeneration (formerly known as Hallervorden-Spatz 
disease).  It  is  particularly  important  to  rule  out  Wilson’s  disease,  as 
progression can be prevented with the use of copper chelators.

Some  features  that  suggest  that  parkinsonism  might  be  due  to  a 

condition other than classic PD are shown in Table 435-3.
 ■ ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
Most  PD  cases  occur  sporadically  (~85–90%)  and  are  of  unknown 
cause. Gene mutations (see below) are the only known causes of PD. 
Twin  studies  performed  several  decades  ago  suggested  that  envi-
ronmental  factors  might  play  an  important  role  in  patients  with  an 
age of onset ≥50 years, with genetic factors being more important in 
younger-onset  patients.  However,  the  demonstration  of  later-onset 
genetic  variants  (e.g.,  LRRK2  and  GBA)  argues  against  the  emphasis 
on  environmental  factors,  even  in  individuals  >50  years  of  age.  The 
environmental  hypothesis  received  some  support  in  the  1980s  with 
the  demonstration  that  MPTP  (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahy-
dropyridine),  a  by-product  of  the  illicit  manufacture  of  a  heroin-like 
drug, caused a PD syndrome in addicts in northern California. MPTP 
is  transported  into  the  central  nervous  system,  where  it  is  oxidized 
to  form  MPP+,  a  mitochondrial  toxin  that  is  selectively  taken  up  by, 
and damages, dopamine neurons, but typically without the formation 
of  Lewy  bodies.  Importantly,  MPTP  or  MPTP-like  compounds  have 
not been linked to sporadic PD. Epidemiologic studies have reported 
an  increased  risk  of  developing  PD  in  association  with  exposure  to 

pesticides,  rural  living,  farming,  and  drinking  well  water.  Dozens  of 
other  associations  have  also  been  reported  in  individual  studies,  but 
results  have  been  inconsistent,  and  no  environmental  factor  has  yet 
been proven to be a cause or contributor to PD. Some possible protec-
tive factors have also been identified in epidemiologic studies including 
caffeine,  cigarette  smoking,  intake  of  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory 
drugs, and calcium channel blockers. The validity of these findings and 
the responsible mechanism remain to be established.

About  10%  of  PD  cases  are  familial  in  origin,  and  mutations  in 
several  PD-linked  genes  have  been  identified  (Table  435-4).  While 
monogenic mutations have been shown to be causative of PD, several 
genetic risk factors that increase the risk of developing PD have also 
been identified. Large-size genome-wide association studies (GWASs) 
have  identified  more  than  25  independent  gene  variants  (single- 
nucleotide polymorphisms) as PD risk factors including variants in the 
SNCA, LRRK2, MAPT, and GBA genes as well as in the HLA region 
on chromosome 6. It has been proposed that many cases of PD may 
be  due  to  a  “double  hit”  involving  an  interaction  between  (a)  one  or 
more  genetic  risk  factors  that  induce  susceptibility  coupled  with  (b) 
exposure  to  a  toxic  environmental  factor  that  may  induce  epigenetic 
or somatic DNA alterations or has the potential to directly damage the 
dopaminergic  system.  In  this  scenario,  both  factors  are  required  for 
PD to ensue, while the presence of either one alone is not sufficient to 
cause the disease. Notably, however, even if a genetic or environmental 
risk factor doubles the risk to develop PD, this results in a lifetime risk 
of only 4% or lower, and thus cannot presently be used for individual 
patient counseling.

Several  factors  have  been  implicated  in  the  pathogenesis  of  cell 
death  in  PD,  including  oxidative  stress,  inflammation,  excitotoxicity, 
mitochondrial  dysfunction,  lysosomal/proteasomal  dysfunction,  and 
the  accumulation  of  misfolded  proteins  with  consequent  proteolytic 
stress. Studies also suggest that with aging, dopamine neurons switch 
from sodium to calcium pacing through calcium channels, potentially 
making  these  high-energy  neurons  vulnerable  to  calcium-mediated 
neurotoxicity. Whatever the pathogenic mechanism, cell death appears 
to occur, at least in part, by way of a signal-mediated apoptotic or “sui-
cidal” process. Each of these mechanisms offers a potential target for 
putative  neuroprotective  drugs.  In  addition,  a  role  for  inflammation 
is  implicated  by  the  genetic  association  of  PD  with  the  class  II  HLA 
gene DRB1 (variants of which are associated with either protection or 
risk for PD), and that autoreactive T-cells recognizing peptides derived 
from  alpha-synuclein  are  present  in  PD  patients.  However,  it  is  not 
clear which of these factors is primary, if they are the same in all cases 
or  specific  to  individual  (genetic)  subgroups,  if  they  act  by  way  of  a 
network such that multiple insults are required for neurodegeneration 
to ensue, or if the findings discovered to date merely represent epiphe-
nomena  unrelated  to  the  true  cause  of  cell  death  that  still  remains 
undiscovered (Fig. 435-4).

Although gene mutations cause only a minority of cases of PD, they 
have been very helpful in pointing to specific pathogenic pathways and 
molecular mechanisms that are likely to be central to the neurodegen-
erative process in the sporadic form of the disease. To date, most inter-
est  has  focused  on  pathways  implicated  by  mutations  in  α-synuclein 
(SNCA), GBA, LRRK2, and PINK1/Parkin.

SNCA was the first PD-linked gene mutation and the most intensely 
investigated with respect to causative mutations, risk variants, as well 
as function of the gene and its encoded protein. Shared clinical features 
of patients with SNCA mutations include earlier age of disease onset 
than  in  nongenetic  PD,  a  faster  progression  of  motor  signs  that  are 
mostly  levodopa-responsive,  early  occurrence  of  motor  fluctuations, 
and  presence  of  prominent  nonmotor  features,  particularly  cognitive 
impairment.  Intriguingly,  SNCA  constitutes  the  major  component 
of  Lewy  bodies  implicating  the  protein  in  sporadic  forms  of  PD  as 
well (Fig. 435-1). Importantly, duplication or triplication of the wild-
type SNCA gene also causes PD with triplication carriers being more 
severely affected than carriers of duplications. These findings indicate 
that increased production of the normal protein alone can cause PD. 
Lewy pathology was discovered to have developed in healthy embry-
onic dopamine neurons that had been implanted into the striatum of 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3390

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 435-4  Confirmed Genetic Causes of Parkinson’s Disease*
DESIGNATION* AND 
REFERENCE

GENEREVIEWS AND OMIM REFERENCE

CLINICAL CLUES

3391

INHERITANCE

PREVIOUS LOCUS 
SYMBOL

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

1. Classical PD

PARK-SNCA

PARK-LRRK2

PARK-VPS35

PARK-GBA

2. Early-onset PD

PARK-Parkin

PARK-PINK1

PARK-DJ1

3. Parkinsonism

PARK-ATP13A2

GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 168601

GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1208/
OMIM 607060
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 614203
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 168600/606463

GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1155/
OMIM 600116
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 605909
GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 606324

GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 606693

PARK-FBXO7

PARK-DNAJC6

PARK-SYNJ1

GeneReviews
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1223/
OMIM 260300
GeneReviews: n/a
OMIM 615528
GeneReviews: n/a
OMIM 615530

Missense mutations cause classical 
parkinsonism. Duplication or triplication 
mutations in this gene cause early-onset 
parkinsonism with prominent dementia.
Clinically typical PD

Clinically typical PD

Clinically typical PD—possibly faster 
progression and greater risk of cognitive 
impairment

AD

AD

AD

AD

PARK1

PARK8

PARK17

Often presents with dystonia, typically in a 
leg

AR

PARK2

Often presents with psychiatric features

AR

PARK6

AR

AR

AR

AR

AR

Kufor-Rakeb syndrome with parkinsonism 
and dystonia; additional features: 
Supranuclear gaze palsy, spasticity/
pyramidal signs, dementia, facial-faucial-
finger mini-myoclonus, dysphagia, dysarthria, 
olfactory dysfunction
Early-onset parkinsonism with pyramidal 
signs

May present with mental retardation and 
seizures

May have seizures, cognitive decline, 
abnormal eye movements, and dystonia

PARK7

PARK9

PARK15

PARK19

PARK20

According to the recommendations of the International Parkinson’s and Movement Disorder Society (C Marras: Mov Disord 31:436, 2016).

PD patients, suggesting that the abnormal protein had transferred from 
affected cells to healthy unaffected dopamine neurons. Based on these 
findings, it has been proposed that the SNCA protein may be a prion, 
and  PD  a  prion  or  prion-like  disorder  (Chaps.  424  and  438).  Like 
the prion protein PrPC, SNCA can misfold to form β-rich sheets, join 
to  form  toxic  oligomers  and  aggregates,  polymerize  to  form  amyloid 
plaques (i.e., Lewy bodies), and cause neurodegeneration with spread 
to involve unaffected neurons. Indeed, injection of SNCA fibrils into 
the  striatum  of  both  transgenic  and  wild-type  rodents  leads  to  the 
development of Lewy pathology in host neurons, neurodegeneration, 
behavioral abnormalities, and spread of SNCA pathology to anatomi-
cally connected sites. Further support for this hypothesis comes from 
the demonstration that inoculation into the striatum of homogenates 
derived from human Lewy bodies induces dopamine cell degeneration 
and  widespread  Lewy  pathology  in  mice  and  primates.  Exciting  new 
evidence also suggests that SNCA pathology might begin peripherally 
in the enteric nervous system within the GI tract and spread by way 
of  the  vagus  nerve  to  the  lower  brainstem  (dorsal  motor  nucleus  of 
the  vagus)  and  ultimately  to  the  SNc  to  cause  the  motor  features  of 
PD. There is growing interest in the possibility that the gut micro-
biome  in  PD  patients  causes  inflammatory  changes  that  promote 

alpha-synuclein  misfolding  and  spread.  The  gut-brain  axis  might 
therefore  offer  a  mechanism  by  which  alpha-synuclein  pathology 
might spread to the brain and cause PD, and therefore provides a novel 
target for therapeutic intervention.

Collectively, this evidence supports the concept that neuroprotective 
therapies for PD might be developed based on inhibiting the accumu-
lation or accelerating the removal of SNCA aggregates, knocking down 
levels  of  host  SNCA,  preventing  the  spread  of  misfolded  SNCA,  or 
blocking the templating phenomenon whereby misfolded SNCA pro-
motes misfolding of the native protein in a prion-like chain reaction. 
Many of these approaches are currently being tested in the laboratory 
and preliminary clinical trials have already been initiated.

Mutations in the GBA gene represent the most important risk factor 
in  terms  of  effect  size  for  the  development  of  PD.  GBA  encodes  for 
the  enzyme  glucocerebrosidase  (GCase),  which  promotes  lysosomal 
function  and  enhances  the  clearance  of  misfolded  proteins  such 
as  SNCA.  Experimentally,  there  is  a  direct  pathophysiological  link 
between  increased  levels  of  SNCA  and  reduced  levels  of  GBA.  The 
identification of GBA as a risk gene for PD resulted from the clinical 
observation that patients with Gaucher’s disease (GD) and their rela-
tives commonly show signs of parkinsonism. This clinical observation 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3391

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3392

Etiology

Oxidative stress

Inflammation

Protein aggregation

Excitotoxicity

Mitochondrial
dysfunction

Cell death

FIGURE 435-4  Schematic representation of how pathogenetic factors implicated 
in  Parkinson’s  disease  interact  in  a  network  manner,  ultimately  leading  to  cell 
death. This figure illustrates how interference with any one of these factors may 
not  necessarily  stop  the  cell  death  cascade.  (Reproduced  with  permission  from  
CW Olanow: The pathogenesis of cell death in Parkinson’s disease–2007. Mov Dis 
22:S335, 2007.)

led to the discovery that literally hundreds of mutations in GBA con-
fer  risk  for  the  development  of  PD.  Further,  it  has  been  shown  that 
reduced levels of GCase activity due to GBA variants impair lysosomal 
function, which results in the accumulation of SNCA. Conversely, the 
accumulation of SNCA can lead to inhibition of lysosomal function 
and  a  further  reduction  in  levels  of  GBA/GCase  by  interfering  with 
endoplasmic  reticulum-to-Golgi  trafficking.  Thus,  experimentally 
there  is  a  vicious  cycle  in  which  decreased  GBA  activity  leads  to  the 
accumulation of SNCA, and increased levels of SNCA lead to a further 
impairment  in  lysosomal  function.  In  this  regard,  it  is  noteworthy 
that  lysosomal  function  is  impaired  and  levels  of  GCase  are  reduced 
in patients with sporadic PD, and not just in those with GBA variants. 
These  bidirectional  effects  of  SNCA  and  GBA  form  a  positive  feed-
back loop that, after surpassing a theoretical threshold, could lead to 
self-propagating  disease.  These  findings  suggest  that  this  molecular 
pathway may not only apply to patients with a GBA variant, but also 
to patients with sporadic PD or other synucleinopathies who have two 
normal wild-type GBA alleles. Some studies suggest that patients with 
GBA variants have a faster rate of progression and increased frequency 
of cognitive impairment. Studies of drugs that enhance GCase activity 
and promote lysosomal function are currently being tested in the clinic.
Multiple  LRRK2  mutations  have  also  now  been  clearly  linked 
to  PD,  with  p.G2019S  being  the  most  common,  possibly  due  to  a 
founder  effect  in  the  Ashkenazi  Jewish  and  North  African  Arab 
populations.  Mutations  in  LRRK2  account  for  3–41%  of  familial  PD 
cases  (depending  on  the  specific  population)  and  are  also  found  in 
apparently  sporadic  cases,  albeit  at  a  lower  rate.  The  phenotype  of 
LRRK2  p.G2019S  mutations  is  largely  indistinguishable  from  that  of 
sporadic PD, although tremor appears to be more common; leg tremor 
may be a useful diagnostic clue. The penetrance of LRRK2 mutations 
is incomplete (30–74% depending on the ethnic group), and patients 
tend to run a more benign course. The mechanism responsible for cell 
death with this mutation is not conclusively known but is thought to 
involve enhanced kinase activity with altered phosphorylation of target 
proteins (including autophosphorylation) with possible impairment of 
lysosomal function. Kinase inhibitors can block toxicity associated with 
LRRK2 mutations in laboratory models, and there has also been much 
interest  in  developing  drugs  directed  at  this  target.  However,  nonse-
lective kinase inhibitors are potentially toxic to the lungs and kidneys. 
Fortunately, LRRK2 inhibitors have now been developed that have good 
preclinical safety and are currently being tested in PD populations.

Mutations in Parkin and PINK1 have also been identified as a cause 
of PD. Parkin mutations are the more common, and the major cause 
of autosomal recessive and early-onset PD, accounting for up to 77% 

of cases of juvenile PD with an age of onset <20 years, and for 10–20% 
of  early-onset  PD  patients  in  general.  The  disease  is  slowly  progres-
sive,  responds  well  to  antiparkinsonian  treatment,  and  is  commonly 
complicated  by  dystonia,  but  very  rarely  by  dementia.  At  pathology, 
neurodegeneration tends to be restricted to the SNc and LC in patients 
with  Parkin  mutations,  and  Lewy  bodies  are  typically  absent.  The 
reason for these differences from classic PD is not known but may be 
related  to  impaired  ubiquitination  of  damaged  proteins  (parkin  is  a 
ubiquitin ligase that is required for Lewy body formation but may be 
impaired in the mutant form). The clinical phenotypes of Parkin- and 
PINK1-linked PD are similar. Parkin and PINK1 proteins are involved 
in  cell-protection  mechanisms  and  in  the  turnover  and  clearance  of 
damaged mitochondria (mitophagy). Mutations in Parkin and PINK1 
cause  mitochondrial  dysfunction  in  transgenic  animals  that  can  be 
corrected  with  overexpression  of  Parkin.  Improving  mitochondrial 
function is a particularly attractive potential therapeutic target because 
postmortem studies in PD patients show a defect in complex I of the 
respiratory chain in SNc neurons.

Thus, evidence is accumulating that genetic factors play an impor-
tant role in both familial and “sporadic” forms of PD. It is anticipated 
that  better  understanding  of  the  pathways  responsible  for  cell  death 
caused  by  these  mutations  will  permit  the  development  of  more  rel-
evant  animal  models  of  PD  and  better-defined  targets  for  the  devel-
opment of gene-specific neuroprotective drugs. A precision medicine 
approach  in  which  therapies  are  directed  specifically  at  patients  who 
carry a mutation is of great interest, but it should also be appreciated 
that these same targets may also prove to be of importance for therapies 
directed at patients with sporadic PD.
 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PD
The classic model of the organization of the basal ganglia in the nor-
mal  and  PD  states  is  provided  in  Fig.  435-5.  With  respect  to  motor 
function,  a  series  of  neuronal  circuits  with  multiple  feedback  and 
feedforward  loops  link  the  basal  ganglia  nuclei  with  corresponding 
cortical  and  brainstem  motor  regions  in  a  somatotopic  manner.  The 
striatum is the major input region of the basal ganglia, while the GPi 
and SNr are the major output regions. The input and output regions are 
connected via direct and indirect pathways that have reciprocal effects 
on the activity of the basal ganglia output. The output of the basal gan-
glia provides inhibitory (GABAergic) tone to thalamic and brainstem 
neurons that in turn connect to motor systems in the cerebral cortex 
and spinal cord that control motor function. An increase in neuronal 
activity  in  the  output  regions  of  the  basal  ganglia  (GPi/SNr)  is  asso-
ciated  with  poverty  of  movement  or  parkinsonism,  while  decreased 
output  results  in  movement  facilitation  and  involuntary  movements 
such as dyskinesia. Dopaminergic projections from SNc neurons serve 
to modulate neuronal firing and to stabilize the basal ganglia network. 
Normal dopamine innervation thus serves to facilitate the selection of 
the desired movement and to suppress or reject unwanted movements. 
Cortical  loops  integrating  the  cortex  and  the  basal  ganglia  are  now 
thought to also play an important role in regulating other systems as 
well such as behavioral, emotional, and cognitive functions.

In PD, dopamine denervation with loss of dopaminergic tone leads 
to increased firing of neurons in the STN and GPi, excessive inhibition 
of the thalamus, reduced activation of cortical motor systems, and the 
development of parkinsonian features (Fig. 435-5). The current role of 
surgery in the treatment of PD is based on this model, which predicted 
that  lesions  or  high-frequency  stimulation  of  the  STN  or  GPi  might 
reduce this neuronal overactivity and improve PD features. The model 
has proven less useful in understanding the origins of dyskinesia (see 
Fig. 435-5).

TREATMENT
Parkinson’s Disease 

LEVODOPA
Since  its  introduction  in  the  late  1960s,  levodopa  has  been  the 
mainstay  of  therapy  for  PD.  Experiments  in  the  late  1950s  by 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3392

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3393

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

Normal

Cortex

Putamen

SNc

GPe

STN

A

VL

GPi

SNr

PPN

B

PD

Cortex

Putamen

SNc

GPe

STN

Dyskinesia

Cortex
Cortex

Putamen

DA DA

SNc

GPe

STN

VL

GPi

SNr

PPN

C

VL

GPi

SNr

PPN

FIGURE 435-5  Basal ganglia organization. Classic model of the organization of the basal ganglia in the normal (A), Parkinson’s disease (PD) (B), and levodopa-induced 
dyskinesia (C) state. Inhibitory connections are shown as blue arrows and excitatory connections as red arrows. The striatum is the major input region and receives its 
major input from the cortex. The GPi and SNr are the major output regions, and they project to the thalamocortical and brainstem motor regions. The striatum and GPi/SNr 
are connected by direct and indirect pathways. This model predicts that parkinsonism results from increased neuronal firing in the STN and GPi and that lesions or DBS of 
these targets might provide benefit. This concept led to the rationale for surgical therapies for PD. The model also predicts that dyskinesia results from decreased firing of 
the output regions, resulting in excessive cortical activation by the thalamus. This component of the model is not completely correct because lesions of the GPi ameliorate 
rather than increase dyskinesia in PD, suggesting that firing frequency is just one of the components that lead to the development of dyskinesia. DBS, deep brain stimulation; 
GPe, external segment of the globus pallidus; GPi, internal segment of the globus pallidus; PPN, pedunculopontine nucleus; SNc, substantia nigra, pars compacta; SNr, 
substantia nigra, pars reticulata; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VL, ventrolateral thalamus. (Reproduced with permission from JA Obeso et al: Pathophysiology of the basal 
ganglia in Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci 23:S8, 2000.)

Carlsson  and  colleagues  demonstrated  that  blocking  dopamine 
uptake  with  reserpine  caused  rabbits  to  become  parkinsonian; 
this  could  be  reversed  with  the  dopamine  precursor,  levodopa. 
Subsequently, Hornykiewicz demonstrated a dopamine deficiency 
in the striatum of PD patients and suggested the potential benefit 
of  dopamine  replacement  therapy.  Dopamine  does  not  cross  the 
blood-brain  barrier  (BBB),  so  clinical  trials  were  initiated  with 
levodopa, the precursor of dopamine. Studies over the course of the 
next  decade  confirmed  the  value  of  levodopa  and  revolutionized 
the treatment of PD.

Levodopa  is  routinely  administered  in  combination  with  a 
peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor to prevent its peripheral metab-
olism to dopamine and the development of nausea, vomiting, and 
orthostatic  hypotension  due  to  activation  of  dopamine  receptors 
in the area postrema (the nausea and vomiting center) that are not 
protected by the BBB. In the United States, levodopa is combined 
with  the  decarboxylase  inhibitor  carbidopa  (Sinemet),  whereas  in 
many  other  countries  it  is  combined  with  benserazide  (Madopar). 
Levodopa  plus  a  decarboxylase  inhibitor  is  also  available  in  a 
methylated formulation, a controlled-release formulation (Sinemet 
CR  or  Madopar  HP)  and  in  combination  with  a  catechol-O- 
methyltransferase  (COMT)  inhibitor  (Stalevo).  A  long-acting  for-
mulation of levodopa (Rytary) and a levodopa carbidopa intestinal 
gel that is administered by continuous intraintestinal infusion via 
an implanted jejunal tube are also now available. An inhaled form of 
levodopa that is rapidly and reliably absorbed through the pulmo-
nary alveoli has recently been approved as an on-demand therapy 
for the treatment of individual “off ” episodes (see below).

Levodopa remains the most effective symptomatic treatment for 
PD  and  the  gold  standard  against  which  new  therapies  are  com-
pared. No current medical or surgical treatment provides antipar-
kinsonian benefits superior to what can be achieved with levodopa. 
Levodopa benefits the classic motor features of PD, prolongs inde-
pendence and employability, improves quality of life, and increases 
life span. Indeed, levodopa also benefits some “nondopaminergic” 
features  such  as  anxiety,  depression,  and  sweating.  Almost  all  PD 
patients experience improvement, and failure to respond to an ade-
quate trial of levodopa should cause the diagnosis to be questioned.

There  are  important  limitations  of  levodopa  therapy.  Acute 
dopaminergic  side  effects  include  nausea,  vomiting,  and  orthos-
tatic  hypotension.  These  are  usually  transient  and  can  generally 
be  avoided  by  starting  with  low  doses  and  gradual  titration.  If 
they persist, they can be treated with additional doses of a periph-
eral  decarboxylase  inhibitor  (e.g.,  carbidopa),  administering  with 
food,  or  adding  a  peripheral  dopamine-blocking  agent  such  as 
domperidone  (not  available  in  the  United  States).  As  the  disease 
continues to progress, features such as falling, freezing, autonomic 
dysfunction,  sleep  disorders,  and  dementia  may  emerge  that  are 
not  adequately  controlled  by  levodopa.  Indeed,  these  nondopa-
minergic  features  (especially  falls  and  dementia)  are  the  primary 
source  of  disability  and  the  main  reason  for  hospitalization  and 
nursing  home  placement  for  patients  with  advanced  PD  in  the 
levodopa era.

The major concern with levodopa is that chronic levodopa treat-
ment  is  associated  with  the  development  of  motor  complications 
in  the  large  majority  of  patients.  These  consist  of  fluctuations  in 
motor response (“on” episodes when the drug is working and “off ” 
episodes  when  parkinsonian  features  return  as  drug  wears  off) 
and involuntary movements known as dyskinesias, which typically 
complicate “on” periods (Fig. 435-6). When patients initially take 
levodopa, benefits are long-lasting (many hours) even though the 
drug  has  a  relatively  short  half-life  (60–90  min).  With  continued 
treatment, however, the duration of benefit following an individual 
dose becomes progressively shorter until it approaches the half-life 
of the drug. This loss of benefit is known as the wearing-off effect. 
Some patients may also experience a rapid and unpredictable switch 
from the “on” to the “off ” state known as the on-off phenomenon. 
In  advanced  cases,  because  of  variability  in  the  bioavailability 
of  standard  oral  levodopa,  the  response  to  a  dose  of  levodopa 
may be variable and unpredictable with a given dose leading to a 
full-on  response,  a  partial  on-on  response,  a  delay  in  turning  on 
(delayed-on), or no response at all (no-on). Peak-dose dyskinesias 
can occur at the time of levodopa peak plasma concentration and 
maximal  clinical  benefit.  They  are  usually  choreiform  but  can 
manifest  as  dystonic  movements,  myoclonus,  or  other  movement 
disorders. They are not troublesome when mild but can be disabling 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3393

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3394

Early PD

Moderate PD

Advanced PD

t
c
e

f
f

e

l

a
c
n

i

i
l

Dyskinesia
threshold

Response
threshold

t
c
e

f
f

e

l

a
c
n

i

i
l

Dyskinesia
threshold

Response
threshold

t
c
e

f
f

e

l

a
c
n

i

i
l

C

C

C

Dyskinesia
threshold

Response
threshold

↑Levodopa

2

4
Time (h)

6

↑Levodopa

2

4
Time (h)

6

↑Levodopa

2

4
Time (h)

6

• Long-duration motor response
• Low incidence of dyskinesias

• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time may be associated
  with dyskinesias

• Short-duration motor response
• “On” time consistently associated
  with dyskinesias

FIGURE 435-6  Changes in motor response associated with chronic levodopa treatment. Levodopa-induced motor complications. Schematic illustration of the gradual 
shortening of the duration of a beneficial motor response to levodopa (wearing off) and the appearance of dyskinesias complicating “on” time. PD, Parkinson’s disease.

when severe, and can limit the ability to use higher doses of levo-
dopa to better control PD motor features. In more advanced states, 
patients may cycle between “on” periods complicated by disabling 
dyskinesias  and  “off ”  periods  in  which  they  suffer  from  severe 
parkinsonism  and  painful  dystonic  postures.  Patients  may  also 
experience “diphasic dyskinesias,” which occur with lower plasma 
levodopa levels, and manifest as the levodopa dose begins to take 
effect and again as it wears off. These dyskinesias typically consist 
of transient, stereotypic, rhythmic movements that predominantly 
involve  the  lower  extremities  asymmetrically  and  are  frequently 
associated with parkinsonism in other body regions. They can be 
relieved by increasing the dose of levodopa, although higher doses 
may induce more severe peak-dose dyskinesia and disappear as the 
concentration declines. Long-term double-blind studies show that 
the  risk  of  developing  motor  complications  can  be  minimized  by 
using the lowest dose of levodopa that provides satisfactory benefit 
and through the use of polypharmacy to avoid the need for raising 
the dose of levodopa.

The cause of levodopa-induced motor complications is not pre-
cisely known. They are more likely to occur in younger individuals, 
with the use of higher doses of levodopa, in women, and in those 
with  more  severe  disease.  The  classic  model  of  the  basal  ganglia 
has  been  useful  for  understanding  the  origin  of  motor  features 
in  PD  but  has  proved  less  valuable  for  understanding  levodopa- 
induced dyskinesias (Fig. 435-5). The model predicts that dopamine 
replacement  might  excessively  inhibit  the  pallidal  output  system, 
thereby  leading  to  increased  thalamocortical  activity,  enhanced 
stimulation of cortical motor regions, and the development of dys-
kinesia. However, lesions of the pallidum that dramatically reduce 
its  output  are  associated  with  amelioration  rather  than  induction 
of dyskinesia as would be suggested by the classic model. It is now 
thought  that  dyskinesia  results  from  alterations  in  the  GPi/SNr 
neuronal  firing  pattern  (pauses,  bursts,  synchrony,  etc.)  and  not 
simply the firing frequency alone. This leads to the transmission of  
“misinformation”  from  pallidum  to  thalamus/cortex  that,  along 
with firing frequency, contributes to the development of dyskine-
sia.  Surgical  lesions  or  high-frequency  stimulation  targeted  at  the 
GPi or STN presumably ameliorate dyskinesia by interfering with 
(blocking or masking) this abnormal neuronal activity and prevent-
ing the transfer of misinformation to motor systems.

A number of studies suggest that motor complications develop 
in response to nonphysiologic levodopa replacement. Striatal dopa-
mine levels are normally maintained at a relatively constant level. 
In PD, where dopamine neurons and terminals have degenerated, 
striatal dopamine levels are dependent on the peripheral availability 
of levodopa. Intermittent oral doses of levodopa result in fluctuat-
ing  plasma  levels  because  of  variability  in  the  transit  of  the  drug 
from the stomach to the duodenum where it is absorbed and the 
short half-life of the drug. This variability is translated to the brain 
and results in exposure of striatal dopamine receptors to alternating 

high  and  low  concentrations  of  dopamine.  This  in  turn  has  been 
shown  to  induce  molecular  alterations  in  striatal  neurons,  neuro-
physiologic changes in pallidal output neurons, and ultimately the 
development of motor complications. It has been hypothesized that 
more continuous delivery of levodopa might be more physiologic 
and  prevent  the  development  of  motor  complications.  Indeed, 
double-blind  studies  have  demonstrated  that  continuous  intrain-
testinal  infusion  of  levodopa/carbidopa  or  subcutaneous  infusion 
of apomorphine is associated with significant improvement in “off ” 
time and in “on” time without dyskinesia in advanced PD patients 
compared  with  optimized  standard  oral  levodopa.  These  benefits 
are  superior  to  what  has  been  observed  in  double-blind  placebo- 
controlled studies with other dopaminergic agents. Intestinal infu-
sion  of  levodopa  is  approved  in  the  United  States  (Duopa)  and 
Europe  (Duodopa).  The  treatment  is,  however,  complicated  by 
potentially serious adverse events related to the surgical procedure, 
problems  related  to  the  tubing,  and  the  inconvenience  of  having 
to wear an infusion system. SC apomorphine infusion is approved 
in  Europe  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States  (see  below).  New 
approaches are currently being tested in which levodopa is contin-
uously administered by a subcutaneous route, an intraoral infusion 
system, or by long-acting oral levodopa formulations in an effort to 
avoid the need for a surgical procedure.

Behavioral  complications  can  also  be  associated  with  levodopa 
treatment. A dopamine dysregulation syndrome has been described 
where patients have a craving for levodopa and take frequent and 
unnecessary  doses  of  the  drug  in  an  addictive  manner.  (In  this 
regard, it is noteworthy that cocaine binds to the dopamine uptake 
receptor.)  PD  patients  taking  high  doses  of  levodopa  can  also 
develop  purposeless,  stereotyped  behaviors  such  as  the  assembly 
and disassembly or collection and sorting of objects. This is known 
as  punding,  a  term  taken  from  the  Swedish  description  of  the 
meaningless behaviors seen in chronic amphetamine users. Hyper-
sexuality  and  other  impulse-control  disorders  are  occasionally 
encountered  with  levodopa,  although  these  are  more  commonly 
seen with dopamine agonists.

Finally,  because  levodopa  undergoes  oxidative  metabolism  and 
has  the  potential  to  generate  toxic  free  radicals,  there  has  been 
long-standing  concern  that,  independent  of  the  drug’s  ability  to 
provide symptomatic benefits, it might accelerate neuronal degen-
eration.  Alternatively,  as  levodopa  improves  long-term  outcomes 
in  comparison  to  the  pre-levodopa  era,  it  has  been  suggested 
that  by  restoring  striatal  dopamine,  levodopa  has  the  potential 
to  have  a  disease-modifying  or  neuroprotective  effect.  Neither  of 
these hypotheses has been established. A recent delayed-start study 
showed  neither  beneficial  nor  deleterious  effects  of  levodopa  on 
disease progression. Thus, it is generally recommended that levo-
dopa be used solely based on its potential to provide symptomatic 
benefits balanced by the risk of inducing motor complications and 
other side effects. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3394

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
 
DOPAMINE AGONISTS
Dopamine  agonists  are  a  diverse  group  of  drugs  that  act  directly 
on  dopamine  receptors.  Unlike  levodopa,  they  do  not  require 
metabolic conversion to an active product and do not undergo oxi-
dative metabolism. Initial dopamine agonists were ergot derivatives 
(e.g.,  bromocriptine,  pergolide,  cabergoline)  and  were  associated 
with  potentially  serious  ergot-related  side  effects  such  as  cardiac 
valvular  damage  and  pulmonary  fibrosis.  They  have  largely  been 
replaced  by  a  second  generation  of  non-ergot  dopamine  agonists 
(e.g.,  pramipexole,  ropinirole,  rotigotine).  In  general,  dopamine 
agonists do not have comparable efficacy to levodopa. They were 
initially introduced as adjuncts to levodopa to enhance motor func-
tion and reduce “off ” time in fluctuating patients. Subsequently, it 
was  shown  that  dopamine  agonists  are  less  prone  than  levodopa 
to  induce  dyskinesia,  possibly  because  they  are  relatively  long- 
acting in comparison to levodopa. For this reason, many physicians 
initiate  therapy  with  a  dopamine  agonist  particularly  in  younger 
patients  who  are  more  prone  to  develop  motor  complications, 
although supplemental levodopa is eventually required in virtually 
all  patients.  This  view  has  been  tempered  by  the  recognition  that 
dopamine  agonists  are  associated  with  potentially  serious  adverse 
effects  such  as  unwanted  sleep  episodes  and  impulse-control  dis-
orders (see below). Both ropinirole and pramipexole are available 
as  orally  administered  immediate  (tid)  and  extended-release  (qd) 
formulations. Rotigotine is administered as a once-daily transder-
mal  patch  and  may  be  useful  in  managing  surgical  patients  who 
are not able to be treated with an oral therapy. Apomorphine is the 
one  dopamine  agonist  with  efficacy  thought  to  be  comparable  to 
levodopa, but it must be administered parenterally as it is rapidly 
and extensively metabolized if taken orally. It has a short half-life 
and duration of activity (45 min). It can be administered by subcu-
taneous injection as a rescue agent for the treatment of severe “off ” 
episodes but can also be administered by continuous subcutaneous 
infusion where it has been demonstrated to reduce both “off ” time 
and dyskinesia in advanced patients. This latter approach has been 
approved in Europe but not yet in the United States. A sublingual 
bilayer formulation of apomorphine has recently been approved as 
a rapid and reliable therapy for individual “off ” periods that avoids 
the need for a subcutaneous (SC) injection (see below).

Dopamine agonist use is associated with a variety of side effects. 
Acute  side  effects  are  primarily  dopaminergic  and  include  nau-
sea,  vomiting,  and  orthostatic  hypotension.  These  can  usually  be 
avoided  or  minimized  by  starting  with  low  doses  and  using  slow 
titration over weeks. Side effects associated with chronic use include 
hallucinations, cognitive impairment, and leg edema. Sedation with 
sudden  unintended  episodes  of  falling  asleep  that  can  occur  in 
dangerous situations such as while driving a motor vehicle has been 
reported. Patients should be informed about this potential problem 
and  should  not  drive  when  tired.  Dopamine  agonists  can  also  be 
associated  with  impulse-control  disorders,  including  pathologic 
gambling,  hypersexuality,  and  compulsive  eating  and  shopping. 
Patients should be advised of these risks and specifically questioned 
for their occurrence at follow-up examinations. The precise cause 
of these problems, and why they appear to occur more frequently 
with dopamine agonists than levodopa, remains to be resolved, but 
reward  systems  associated  with  dopamine  and  alterations  in  the 
ventral  striatum  and  orbitofrontal  regions  have  been  implicated. 
In general, chronic side effects are dose-related and can be avoided 
or minimized with lower doses. Injections of apomorphine can be 
complicated by skin lesions at sites of administration, which can be 
minimized by proper cleaning and alteration of the injection site. 
The  sublingual  bilayer  formulation  of  apomorphine  is  associated 
with  a  relatively  high  frequency  of  oropharyngeal  side  effects, 
which are generally mild and resolve either spontaneously or with 
treatment withdrawal. 
MAO-B INHIBITORS
Inhibitors  of  monoamine  oxidase  type  B  (MAO-B)  block  central 
dopamine metabolism and increase synaptic concentrations of the 

3395

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

neurotransmitter.  Selegiline  and  rasagiline  are  relatively  selective 
suicide inhibitors of the MAO-B isoform of the enzyme. Clinically, 
these agents provide antiparkinsonian benefits when used as mono-
therapy in early disease stages and reduced “off ” time when used as 
an adjunct to levodopa in patients with motor fluctuations. MAO-B 
inhibitors are generally safe and well tolerated. They may increase 
dyskinesia  in  levodopa-treated  patients,  but  this  can  usually  be 
controlled by down-titrating the dose of levodopa. Inhibition of the 
MAO-A isoform prevents metabolism of tyramine in the gut, lead-
ing to a potentially fatal hypertensive reaction known as a “cheese 
effect” because it can be precipitated by foods rich in tyramine such 
as some cheeses, aged meats, and red wine. Selegiline and rasagiline 
do not functionally inhibit MAO-A and are not associated with a 
cheese effect with doses used in clinical practice. There are theoret-
ical risks of a serotonin reaction in patients receiving concomitant 
selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitor  (SSRI)  antidepressants,  but 
these  are  rarely  encountered.  Safinamide  (Xadago)  is  a  reversible 
MAO-B  inhibitor  that  has  been  approved  as  an  adjunct  to  levo-
dopa  for  treating  advanced  PD  patients  with  motor  fluctuations. 
The drug also acts to block activated sodium channels and inhibit 
glutamate release, and therefore has the potential to provide anti-
dyskinetic as well as anti-parkinsonian effects.

Interest in MAO-B inhibitors has also focused on their potential 
to have disease-modifying effects. MPTP toxicity can be prevented 
experimentally  by  coadministration  of  a  MAO-B  inhibitor  that 
blocks  its  oxidative  conversion  to  the  toxic  pyridinium  ion  MPP+ 
that  is  taken  up  by  and  selectively  damages  dopamine  neurons. 
MAO-B  inhibitors  also  have  the  potential  to  block  the  oxidative 
metabolism of dopamine and prevent oxidative stress. In addition, 
both selegiline and rasagiline incorporate a propargyl ring within 
their  molecular  structure  that  provides  antiapoptotic  effects  in 
laboratory models. The DATATOP study showed that in untreated 
PD patients, selegiline significantly delayed the time until the emer-
gence of disability necessitating the introduction of levodopa. How-
ever,  it  could  not  be  definitively  determined  whether  this  benefit 
was due to a neuroprotective effect that slowed disease progression 
or a symptomatic effect that merely masked ongoing neurodegen-
eration. The ADAGIO study used a two-period delayed-start design 
and  demonstrated  that  early  treatment  with  rasagiline  1  mg/d 
provided benefits that could not be achieved when treatment with 
the  same  drug  was  initiated  at  a  later  time  point,  consistent  with 
the  drug  having  a  disease-modifying  effect.  However,  this  benefit 
was not seen with the 2-mg dose, and it has not received regulatory 
approval for this indication. 

COMT INHIBITORS
When levodopa is administered with a decarboxylase inhibitor, it 
is primarily metabolized in the periphery by the catechol-O-methyl 
transferase  (COMT)  enzyme.  Inhibitors  of  COMT  increase  the 
elimination half-life of levodopa and enhance its brain availability. 
Combining  levodopa  with  a  COMT  inhibitor  reduces  “off ”  time 
and  prolongs  “on”  time  in  fluctuating  patients  while  enhancing 
motor  scores.  Two  COMT  inhibitors,  tolcapone  and  entacapone, 
have been available for more than a decade; tolcapone is adminis-
tered  three  times  daily  while  entacapone  is  administered  in  com-
bination  with  each  dose  of  levodopa.  More  recently  opicapone,  a 
long-acting COMT inhibitor that requires only once-daily admin-
istration, has been approved in both Europe and the United States. 
A  combination  tablet  of  levodopa,  carbidopa,  and  entacapone   
(Stalevo) is also available.

Side  effects  of  COMT  inhibitors  are  primarily  dopaminer-
gic  (nausea,  vomiting,  increased  dyskinesia)  and  can  usually  be 
controlled  by  down-titrating  the  dose  of  levodopa  by  20–30%  if 
required.  Severe  diarrhea  has  been  described  with  tolcapone,  and 
to  a  lesser  degree  with  entacapone,  and  necessitates  stopping  the 
medication  in  5–10%  of  individuals.  Rare  cases  of  fatal  hepatic 
toxicity have been reported with tolcapone. It is still used because 
it is the most effective of the COMT inhibitors, but periodic mon-
itoring of liver function is required. Liver problems have not been 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3395

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3396

encountered with entacapone or opicapone. Discoloration of urine 
can be seen with COMT inhibitors due to accumulation of a metab-
olite, but it is of no clinical concern.

It  has  been  proposed  that  initiating  levodopa  in  combination 
with  a  COMT  inhibitor  to  enhance  its  elimination  half-life  could 
provide more continuous levodopa delivery and reduce the risk of 
motor complications. While this result has been demonstrated in a 
preclinical  MPTP  model  of  PD,  and  continuous  infusion  reduces 
both “off ” time and dyskinesia in advanced PD patients, no benefit 
of  initiating  levodopa  with  a  COMT  inhibitor  compared  to  levo-
dopa  alone  was  detected  in  early  PD  patients  in  the  STRIDE-PD 
study. This may have been because the combination was not admin-
istered at frequent enough intervals to provide continuous levodopa 
availability. For now, the main value of COMT inhibitors continues 
to be in patients who experience motor fluctuations. 

OTHER MEDICAL THERAPIES
Adenosine  A2A  receptor  antagonists  are  a  class  of  drugs  that 
inhibit A2A receptors, which form heterodimers with D2 dopamine 
receptors  on  medium  spiny  striatal  D2-bearing  neurons  of  the 
indirect pathway. Blockade of A2A receptors decreases the excessive 
activation of the indirect pathway in PD and theoretically restores 
balance  in  the  basal  ganglia-thalamocortical  circuit,  providing  a 
dopaminergic effect without the need to increase levodopa doses. 
These  agents  are  generally  used  in  combination  with  low  doses 
of  levodopa  and  provide  modest  anti-parkinsonian  effects  with  a 
reduced  risk  of  motor  complications.  Three  A2A  antagonists  have 
been studied in PD but development in two has been discontinued; 
preladenant  because  it  failed  in  phase  3  studies  and  tozadenant 
because  of  agranulocytosis  in  a  few  patients.  Istradefylline  is  the 
only  agent  which  is  currently  approved  for  use.  Clinical  trials  in 
advanced PD patients showed improvement in “off ” time compa-
rable  to  other  available  agents  but  not  in  dyskinesia.  The  drug  is 
generally well tolerated with adverse events similar to dopaminergic 
agents. Interestingly, caffeine is a potent A2A antagonist, and large 
epidemiologic  studies  suggest  that  drinking  coffee  is  associated 
with a reduced frequency of PD. This has raised the question as to 
whether this class of agent might be neuroprotective, but this has 
not been established in clinical trials.

Amantadine was originally introduced as an antiviral agent but 
the  drug  was  appreciated  to  also  have  antiparkinsonian  effects, 
likely due to N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonism. 
While  some  physicians  use  amantadine  in  patients  with  early 
disease for its mild symptomatic effects, it is most widely used as 
an  antidyskinesia  agent  in  patients  with  advanced  PD.  Indeed,  it 
is  the  only  oral  agent  that  has  been  demonstrated  in  controlled 
studies to reduce dyskinesia without worsening parkinsonian fea-
tures  (indeed,  motor  benefits  have  been  reported).  Cognitive 
impairment is a major concern particularly with high doses. Other 
side  effects  include  livedo  reticularis  and  weight  gain.  Amanta-
dine  should  always  be  discontinued  gradually  because  patients 
can  experience  withdrawal-like  symptoms.  An  extended-release 
formulation  of  amantadine  has  recently  been  approved  in  the   
United States.

Central-acting  anticholinergic  drugs  such  as  trihexyphenidyl 
and  benztropine  were  used  historically  for  the  treatment  of  PD, 
but they lost favor with the introduction of levodopa. Their major 
clinical effect is on tremor, although it is not certain that this benefit 
is superior to what can be obtained with agents such as levodopa 
and  dopamine  agonists.  Still,  they  can  be  helpful  in  individual 
patients with severe tremor. Their use is limited particularly in the 
elderly,  due  to  their  propensity  to  induce  a  variety  of  side  effects 
including  urinary  dysfunction,  glaucoma,  and  particularly  cogni-
tive impairment.

The  anticonvulsant  zonisamide  has  also  been  shown  to  have 
antiparkinsonian  effects  and  is  approved  for  use  in  Japan.  Its 
mechanism  of  action  is  unknown.  Several  classes  of  drugs  are 
currently being investigated in an attempt to enhance antiparkin-
sonian  effects,  reduce  “off ”  time,  and  treat  or  prevent  dyskinesia. 

TABLE 435-5  Drugs Commonly Used for Treatment of Parkinson’s 
Diseasea
AGENT
Levodopaa
  Carbidopa/levodopa

10/100, 25/100, 25/250 mg

AVAILABLE DOSAGES

TYPICAL DOSING

200–1000 mg 
levodopa/day

  Benserazide/levodopa
 Carbidopa/levodopa 
CR
 Benserazide/levodopa 
MDS
  Parcopa

 Rytary (carbidopa/
levodopa)
 Carbidopa/levodopa/
entacapone

Dopamine agonists
  Pramipexole
  Pramipexole ER
  Ropinirole
  Ropinirole XL
  Rotigotine patch
  Apomorphine SC
COMT inhibitors
  Entacapone

  Tolcapone
  Opicapone
MAO-B inhibitors
  Selegiline
  Rasagiline
  Safinamide
On-demand therapy for 
off periods

Inhaled levodopa
 Apomorphine 
sublingual strip

Others

 A2A antagonist—
Istradefylline
 Amantadine—
immediate, 
extended-release

25/100, 50/200 mg
25/100, 50/200 mg

25/200, 25/250 mg

10/100, 25/100, 25/250 mg
23.75/95, 36.25/145, 48.75/195, 
61.25/245
12.5/50/200, 18.75/75/200, 
25/100/200, 31.25/125/200, 
37.5/150/200, 50/200/200 mg

See conversion 
tables

0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 mg
0.375, 0.75, 1.5. 3.0, 4.5 mg
0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0 mg
2, 4, 6, 8 mg
2-, 4-, 6-, 8-mg patches
2–8 mg

0.25–1.0 mg tid
1–3 mg/d
6–24 mg/d
6–24 mg/d
4–24 mg/d
2–8 mg

200 mg

100, 200 mg
50 mg

5 mg
0.5, 1.0 mg
100 mg

5–40 mg

20, 40 mg

100–400 mg

200 mg with each 
levodopa dose
100–200 mg tid
50 mg HS

5 mg bid
1 mg QAM
100 mg QAM

Up to 5 doses per day
Up to 5 doses per day

20 or 40 mg per day

aTreatment should be individualized. Generally, drugs should be started in low doses 
and titrated to optimal dose.
Note: Drugs should not be withdrawn abruptly but should be gradually lowered or 
removed as appropriate.
Abbreviations: COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; MAO-B, monoamine oxidase 
type B; QAM, every morning.

These include nicotinic agonists, glutamate antagonists, and 5-HT1A 
agonists.

A list of the major drugs and available dosage strengths currently 

available to treat PD is provided in Table 435-5. 
ON-DEMAND THERAPIES FOR “OFF” PERIODS
Despite  all  available  therapies,  many  patients  continue  to  experi-
ence “off ” periods. “Off ” periods represent a return of parkinsonian 
features  following  the  benefit  of  a  levodopa  dose  administration 
and  can  be  disabling  for  patients,  causing  them  to  be  at  risk  for 
falling and choking. As noted above, taking an additional levodopa 
tablet  does  not  reliably  treat  individual  “off ”  episodes,  and  some 
patients may continue in the “off ” state for hours despite more fre-
quent levodopa use. This inability to reliably and rapidly treat “off ” 
episodes  causes  many  patients  to  become  depressed,  withdrawn, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3396

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  unwilling  to  participate  in  social  activities.  Three  therapies 
have  now  been  approved  as  specific  on-demand  treatments  for 
“off ”  periods:  inhaled  levodopa,  subcutaneous  injections  of  apo-
morphine, and sublingual apomorphine. Each of these avoids the 
variable bioavailability seen with levodopa and provides relatively 
predictable return to the “on” state. 

NEUROPROTECTION
Despite the many therapeutic agents available for the treatment of 
PD,  patients  continue  to  progress  and  to  develop  intolerable  dis-
ability. A neuroprotective or disease-modifying therapy that slows 
or stops disease progression remains the major unmet therapeutic 
need.  Some  trials  have  shown  positive  results  (e.g.,  selegiline, 
rasagiline,  pramipexole,  ropinirole)  consistent  with  a  disease- 
modifying  effect.  However,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  determine 
with  certainty  if  the  positive  results  were  due  to  neuroprotection 
with  slowing  of  disease  progression  or  confounding  symptomatic 
or pharmacologic effects that mask disease progression. Based on 
genetic and laboratory findings described above, several novel tar-
gets for a putative neuroprotective therapy have been discovered and 
multiple candidate therapies are currently being investigated. The 
most  exciting  targets  among  these  etiopathogenic  factors  include 
agents that interfere with SNCA accumulation, LRRK2 inhibitors, 
GBA  and  GCase  enhancers  and  anti-inflammatory  agents  that 
inhibit  activation  of  microglia  and  cytokine  production.  Many  of 
these agents have already shown promise in relevant animal models 
of PD and are currently in clinical trials in PD patients. 

SURGICAL TREATMENT
Surgical treatments for PD have been used for more than a century. 
Lesions  were  initially  placed  in  the  motor  cortex  and  improved 
tremor but were associated with motor deficits, and this approach 
was  abandoned.  Subsequently,  it  was  appreciated  that  lesions 
placed  into  the  ventral  intermediate  (VIM)  nucleus  of  the  thala-
mus  reduced  contralateral  tremor  without  inducing  hemiparesis, 
but  these  lesions  did  not  meaningfully  help  other  more  disabling 
features of PD. In the 1990s, it was shown that lesions placed in the 
posteroventral portion of the GPi (motor territory) improved rigid-
ity  and  bradykinesia  as  well  as  tremor.  Importantly,  pallidotomy 
was also associated with marked improvement in contralateral dys-
kinesia. This procedure gained favor with greater understanding of 
the pathophysiology of PD (see above). However, this procedure is 
not optimal, because bilateral lesions are associated with side effects 
such  as  dysphagia,  dysarthria,  and  impaired  cognition.  Lesions 
of  the  STN  are  also  associated  with  antiparkinsonian  benefit  and 
reduced levodopa requirement, but there is a concern about the risk 
of hemiballismus, and this procedure is not commonly performed.
Most surgical procedures for PD performed today use deep brain 
stimulation (DBS). Here, an electrode is placed into the target area 
and  connected  to  a  stimulator  inserted  subcutaneously  over  the 
chest wall. DBS simulates the effects of a lesion without needing to 
make a brain lesion. The precise mechanism whereby DBS works 
is not fully resolved but may act by disrupting the abnormal neu-
rophysiologic signals associated with PD and motor complications. 
The stimulation variables can be adjusted with respect to electrode 
configuration,  voltage,  frequency,  and  pulse  duration  in  order  to 
maximize benefit and minimize adverse side effects. The procedure 
does not require making a lesion in the brain and is thus suitable 
for  performing  bilateral  procedures  with  relative  safety.  In  cases 
with  intolerable  side  effects,  stimulation  can  be  stopped  and  the 
system removed.

DBS  for  PD  primarily  targets  the  STN  or  the  GPi.  It  provides 
dramatic results, particularly with respect to tremor and reducing 
both  “off ”  time  and  dyskinesias  but  does  not  provide  superior 
clinical benefits to levodopa. The procedure is thus primarily indi-
cated for patients who suffer disability resulting from levodopa-in-
duced motor complications that cannot be satisfactorily controlled 
with  drug  manipulation  or  those  with  severe  tremor.  Side  effects 
can  result  from  the  surgical  procedure  (hemorrhage,  infarction, 

3397

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

infection),  DBS  system  (infection,  lead  break,  lead  displacement, 
skin ulceration), or the stimulation itself (ocular and speech abnor-
malities, muscle twitches, paresthesias, depression, and rarely sui-
cide).  Recent  studies  indicate  that  benefits  following  DBS  of  the 
STN  and  GPi  are  comparable,  but  that  GPi  stimulation  may  be 
associated  with  a  reduced  frequency  of  depression.  Although  not 
all  PD  patients  are  candidates,  the  procedure  can  be  profoundly 
beneficial for many. Long-term studies demonstrate continued ben-
efits with respect to the classic motor features of PD, but DBS does 
not prevent the development of nondopaminergic features, which 
continue to evolve and are a source of disability. Studies continue 
to  evaluate  the  optimal  way  to  use  DBS  (low-  vs  high-frequency 
stimulation,  closed-loop  systems,  etc.).  Trials  of  DBS  in  early  PD 
patients show benefits that may be superior to best medical therapy, 
but this must be weighed against the cost of the procedure and the 
risk  of  side  effects  in  patients  who  might  otherwise  be  well  con-
trolled with medical therapies for many years. Additionally, the PD 
landscape is changing with the availability of on-demand therapies 
for  treating  “off ”  periods  and  the  likelihood  that  future  therapies 
may provide continuous levodopa availability with reduced risk of 
motor complications. Controlled studies comparing DBS to other 
therapies aimed at improving motor function without causing dys-
kinesia, such as Duodopa and apomorphine infusions, remain to be 
performed. The utility of DBS may also be reduced in future years 
if new medical therapies are developed that provide the benefits of 
levodopa  without  motor  complications.  New  targets  for  DBS  are 
also being actively explored, as well as “smart” closed-loop devices 
that sense the patient’s need for stimulation, to provide greater ben-
efits against gait dysfunction, depression, and cognitive impairment 
(Chap. 487).

MRI-guided  ultrasound  is  also  now  being  used  as  a  means  of 
damaging  critical  target  regions  such  as  the  GPi  or  STN  in  PD 
patients  with  motor  complications  in  a  noninvasive  manner  that 
avoids the needs for a surgical procedure. Preliminary results sug-
gest good target localization and safety. 

OTHER EXPERIMENTAL THERAPIES FOR PD
There  has  been  considerable  scientific  and  public  interest  in  a 
number  of  novel  interventions  that  are  being  investigated  as  pos-
sible  treatments  for  PD.  These  include  cell-based  therapies  (such 
as  transplantation  of  fetal  nigral  dopamine  cells  or  dopamine 
neurons  derived  from  stem  cells),  gene  therapies,  trophic  factors, 
and  therapies  directed  against  gene-specific  targets.  Transplant 
strategies  are  based  on  the  concept  of  implanting  dopaminergic 
cells into the striatum to replace degenerating SNc dopamine neu-
rons.  Fetal  nigral  mesencephalic  cells  have  been  demonstrated  to 
survive  implantation,  re-innervate  the  striatum  in  an  organotypic 
manner, and restore motor function in PD models. However, two 
double-blind studies failed to show significant benefit of fetal nigral 
transplantation in comparison to a sham operation with respect to 
their primary endpoints. Additionally, grafting of fetal nigral cells 
is  associated  with  a  previously  unrecognized  form  of  dyskinesia 
(graft-induced dyskinesia) that persists after lowering or even stop-
ping levodopa. This has been postulated to be related to suboptimal 
release of dopamine from grafted cells leading to a sustained form 
of diphasic dyskinesia. In addition, there is evidence that after many 
years,  transplanted  healthy  embryonic  dopamine  neurons  from 
unrelated donors develop PD pathology and become dysfunctional, 
suggesting transfer of α-synuclein from affected to unaffected neu-
rons in a prion-like manner (see discussion above). Perhaps most 
importantly, it is not clear how replacing dopamine cells alone will 
improve  nondopaminergic  features  such  as  falling  and  dementia, 
which are the major sources of disability for patients with advanced 
disease. While stem cells, and specifically induced pluripotent stem 
cells  (iPSCs)  derived  from  the  recipient,  may  overcome  problems 
related  to  immunity,  type  and  number  of  cells,  and  physiologic 
integration, many of these same concerns still apply. To date, stem 
cells have not yet been properly tested in PD patients and bear the 
additional concern of tumors and other unanticipated side effects. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3397

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3398 While there remains a need for scientifically based studies attempt-
ing to evaluate the potential role of cell-based therapies in PD, there 
is  no  scientific  basis  to  warrant  routine  treatment  of  PD  patients 
with stem cells as is being marketed in some countries.

Trophic  factors  are  a  series  of  proteins  that  enhance  neuronal 
growth and restore function to damaged neurons. Several different 
trophic  factors  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  beneficial  effects 
on  dopamine  neurons  in  laboratory  studies.  Glial-derived  neu-
rotrophic  factor  (GDNF)  and  neurturin  have  attracted  particular 
attention as possible therapies for PD. However, double-blind trials 
of intraventricular and intraputaminal infusions of GDNF failed to 
show benefits compared to placebo in PD patients, possibly because 
of inadequate delivery of the trophic molecule to the target region.
Gene therapy offers the potential of providing long-term expres-
sion of a therapeutic protein with a single procedure. Gene therapy 
involves placing the nucleic acid of a therapeutic protein into a viral 
vector that can then be taken up and incorporated into the genome 
of host cells and then synthesized and released on a continual basis. 
The AAV2 virus has been most often used as the vector because it 
does  not  promote  an  inflammatory  response,  is  not  incorporated 
into the host genome, does not induce insertional mutagenesis, and 
is associated with long-lasting transgene expression. Clinical trials 
of AAV2 delivery of the trophic factor neurturin showed promising 
results  in  open-label  trials  but  failed  in  double-blind  trials,  even 
when  injected  into  both  the  putamen  and  the  SNc.  Nonetheless, 
long-term  postmortem  studies  have  demonstrated  transgene  sur-
vival with biological effects as long as 10 years after treatment. Still, 
the  degree  of  putaminal  coverage  was  very  small  and  it  is  likely 
that much higher gene doses will be required if this type of therapy 
is to provide positive results. Gene delivery is also being explored 
as  a  means  of  delivering  aromatic  amino  acid  decarboxylase  with 
or  without  tyrosine  hydroxylase  to  the  striatum  to  facilitate  the 
conversion  of  orally  administered  levodopa  to  dopamine.  Animal 
studies  suggest  that  this  approach  can  provide  antiparkinsonian 
benefits with reduced motor complications, and clinical trials in PD 
patients are underway. Gene therapy is also being studied as a way 
to enhance GBA and the gene product GCase in an attempt to pro-
mote clearance of toxic alpha synuclein. Importantly, no clinically 
significant adverse events have been encountered in gene therapy 
studies to date, but there remains a risk of unanticipated side effects. 
Further, it is not clear how current approaches, even if successful, 
will address the nondopaminergic features of the illness. 

MANAGEMENT OF THE NONMOTOR AND 
NONDOPAMINERGIC FEATURES OF PD
Although  PD  treatment  has  primarily  focused  on  the  dopamin-
ergic features of the illness, management of the nondopaminergic 
features should not be ignored. Some nonmotor features, although 
they likely reflect nondopaminergic pathology, nonetheless benefit 
from dopaminergic drugs. For example, problems such as anxiety, 
panic attacks, depression, pain, sweating, sensory problems, freez-
ing, and constipation all tend to be worse during “off ” periods and 
have  been  reported  to  improve  with  better  dopaminergic  control. 
Approximately  50%  of  PD  patients  suffer  depression  during  the 
course of the disease, and depression is frequently underdiagnosed 
and undertreated. Antidepressants should not be withheld, partic-
ularly  for  patients  with  major  depression,  although  dopaminergic 
agents such as pramipexole may prove helpful for both depression 
and PD motor features. Anxiety is also a common problem, and if 
not adequately managed with better antiparkinsonian control, can 
be treated with short-acting benzodiazepines.

Psychosis  can  be  a  problem  for  some  PD  patients  and  is  often 
a harbinger of developing dementia. In contrast to AD, hallucina-
tions are typically visual, formed, and nonthreatening. Importantly, 
they can limit the use of dopaminergic agents necessary to obtain 
satisfactory motor control. They can be associated with the use of 
dopaminergic drugs, and the first approach is typically to withdraw 
agents that are less effective than levodopa such as anticholinergics, 

amantadine, and dopamine agonists followed by lowering the dose 
of levodopa if possible. Psychosis in PD often responds to low doses 
of atypical neuroleptics and may permit higher doses of levodopa 
to be tolerated. Clozapine is an effective drug, but it can be asso-
ciated  with  agranulocytosis,  and  regular  monitoring  is  required. 
Quetiapine avoids these problems, but it has not been established to 
be  effective  in  placebo-controlled  trials.  Pimavanserin  (Nuplazid) 
differs from other atypical neuroleptics in that it is also an inverse 
agonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. It has been shown to be 
effective in double-blind trials with a relatively good safety profile, 
and was recently approved for use in the United States.

Dementia  in  PD  (PDD)  is  common,  ultimately  affecting  as 
many as 80% of patients. Its frequency increases with aging and, in 
contrast to AD, primarily affects executive functions and attention, 
with relative sparing of language, memory, and calculation domains. 
When  dementia  precedes,  develops  coincident  with,  or  occurs 
within 1 year after onset of motor dysfunction, it is by convention 
referred to as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; Chap. 434). These 
patients  are  particularly  prone  to  experience  hallucinations  and 
diurnal fluctuations. Pathologically, DLB is characterized by Lewy 
bodies  distributed  throughout  the  cerebral  cortex  (especially  the 
hippocampus  and  amygdala)  and  is  more  likely  to  be  associated 
with  AD  pathology.  It  is  likely  that  DLB  and  PD  with  dementia 
represent a spectrum of PD rather than separate disease entities. It 
is notable that variants of the GBA gene are a significant risk factor 
for both PD and DLB. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) frequently 
precedes  the  onset  of  dementia  and  is  a  more  reliable  index  of 
impending dementia than in the general population. Indeed, many 
PD  patients  demonstrate  abnormalities  in  cognitive  testing  even 
at the earliest stages of the disease despite having no overt clinical 
dysfunction. Drugs used to treat PD can worsen cognitive function 
and should be stopped or reduced to try to provide a compromise 
between antiparkinsonian benefit and preserved cognitive function. 
Drugs are usually discontinued in the following sequence: anticho-
linergics,  amantadine,  dopamine  agonists,  COMT  inhibitors,  and 
MAO-B inhibitors. Eventually, patients with cognitive impairment 
should be managed with the lowest dose of standard levodopa that 
provides meaningful antiparkinsonian effects and does not worsen 
mental function. Anticholinesterase agents such as memantine and 
cholinesterase  inhibitors  such  as  rivastigmine  improve  measures 
of cognitive function and can improve attention in PD, but do not 
improve cognition or quality of life in any meaningful way. More 
effective  therapies  that  treat  or  prevent  dementia  are  a  critical 
unmet need in the therapy of PD.

Autonomic  disturbances  are  common  and  frequently  require 
attention.  Orthostatic  hypotension  can  be  problematic  and  con-
tribute to falling. Initial treatment should include adding salt to the 
diet and elevating the head of the bed to prevent overnight sodium 
natriuresis. Low doses of fludrocortisone (Florinef) or midodrine 
provide  control  for  most  cases.  The  norepinephrine  precursor 
3-0-methylDOPA  (Droxidopa)  has  been  shown  to  provide  mild 
and transient benefits for patients with orthostatic hypotension and 
was recently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Vasopressin  and  erythropoietin  can  be  used  in  more  severe  or 
refractory  cases.  If  orthostatic  hypotension  is  prominent  in  early 
parkinsonian  cases,  a  diagnosis  of  MSA  should  be  considered 
(Chap. 440). Sexual dysfunction may be helped with sildenafil or 
tadalafil. Urinary problems, especially in males, should be treated 
in consultation with a urologist to exclude prostate problems. Anti-
cholinergic agents, such as oxybutynin (Ditropan), may be helpful. 
Constipation  can  be  a  very  important  problem  for  PD  patients. 
Mild laxatives or enemas can be useful, but physicians should first 
ensure  that  patients  are  drinking  adequate  amounts  of  fluid  and 
consuming a diet rich in bulk with green leafy vegetables and bran. 
Agents that promote gastrointestinal (GI) motility can also be help-
ful. Several recent studies are evaluating the effect on constipation 
of  agents  that  interfere  with  inflammation  and  alpha  synuclein 
misfolding in the GI tract.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3398

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Sleep  disturbances  are  common  in  PD  patients,  with  many 
experiencing  fragmented  sleep  with  excess  daytime  sleepiness. 
Restless leg syndrome, sleep apnea, and other sleep disorders also 
occur  with  increased  frequency  and  should  be  treated  as  appro-
priate. REM behavior disorder (RBD) is a syndrome composed of 
violent  movements  and  vocalizations  during  REM  sleep,  possibly 
representing acting out of dreams due to a failure of motor inhibi-
tion  that  typically  accompanies  REM  sleep  (Chap. 31).  Many  PD 
patients  have  a  history  of  RBD  preceding  the  onset  of  the  classic 
motor features of PD by many years, and most cases of RBD even-
tually  go  on  to  develop  an  α-synucleinopathy  (PD  or  MSA).  Low 
doses  of  clonazepam  (0.5–1  mg  at  bedtime)  are  usually  effective 
in  controlling  this  problem.  Consultation  with  a  sleep  specialist 
and polysomnography may be necessary to identify and optimally 
treat sleep problems. Excess daytime sleepiness can be problematic 
for PD patients, and therapies such as Xyrem that are effective in 
narcolepsy are currently being evaluated in PD. 

NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
Gait dysfunction with falling is an important cause of disability in 
PD. Dopaminergic therapies can help patients whose gait is worse 
in “off ” times, but there are currently no specific therapies for gait 
dysfunction. Canes and walkers may become necessary to increase 
stability and reduce the risk of falling. An effective therapy for gait 
impairment is an important unmet need in PD.

Freezing, where patients suddenly become stuck in place for sec-
onds to minutes as if their feet were glued to the ground, is a major 
cause of falling. Freezing may occur during “on” or “off ” periods. 
Freezing during “off ” periods may respond to dopaminergic thera-
pies, but there are no specific treatments for on-period freezing and 
the mechanism is not well understood. Some patients will respond 
to sensory cues such as marching in place, singing a song, or step-
ping over an imaginary line or obstacle.

Speech  impairment  is  another  source  of  disability  for  many 
advanced PD patients. Speech therapy programs may be helpful, but 
benefits are generally limited and transient.

Exercise has been shown to maintain and even improve function 
for PD patients, and active and passive exercises with full range of 
motion  reduce  the  risk  of  arthritis  and  frozen  joints.  Some  labo-
ratory studies suggest the possibility that exercise might also have 
neuroprotective  effects,  but  this  has  not  been  confirmed  in  PD 
patients.  Exercise  is  generally  recommended  for  all  PD  patients. 
It is less clear that any specific type of physical therapy or exercise 
programs such as tai chi or dance offer any specific advantage. It is 
important for patients to maintain social and intellectual activities 
to the extent possible. Education, assistance with financial planning, 
social services, and attention to home safety are important elements 
of the overall care plan. Information is available through numerous 
PD  foundations  and  on  the  Internet  but  should  be  reviewed  with 
physicians  to  ensure  accuracy.  The  needs  of  the  caregiver  should 
not be neglected. Caring for a person with PD involves a substantial 
work effort and there is an increased incidence of depression among 
caregivers. Support groups for patients and caregivers may be useful. 

CURRENT MANAGEMENT OF PD
The  management  of  PD  should  be  tailored  to  the  needs  of  the 
individual patient, and there is no single treatment approach that 
is universally accepted and applicable to all individuals. Clearly, if 
an agent could be demonstrated to have disease-modifying effects, 
it should be initiated at the time of diagnosis. Indeed, recent studies 
suggest  that  dopamine  terminal  degeneration  may  be  complete 
within 4 years of diagnosis. Epidemiologic and pathologic studies 
suggest that constipation, RBD, and anosmia may represent premo-
tor features of PD and, along with imaging of the dopamine system, 
could  permit  diagnosis  and  the  initiation  of  a  disease-modifying 
therapy even prior to the onset of the classical motor features of the 
disease. However, no therapy has been conclusively proven to be a 
disease-modifying agent as yet, although rasagiline 1 mg per day met 

3399

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
5

P
a
r
k
i
n
s
o
n
’
s
D
i
s
e
a
s
e

all three prespecified primary endpoints consistent with a disease- 
modifying effect. For now, physicians must use their judgment in 
deciding whether or not to introduce a drug such as rasagiline for 
its possible disease-modifying effects based on available preclinical 
and clinical information.

The  next  important  issue  to  address  is  when  to  initiate  symp-
tomatic  therapy  and  which  agent  to  use.  Several  studies  suggest 
that it may be best to start therapy at the time of diagnosis in order 
to  preserve  beneficial  compensatory  mechanisms  and  possibly 
provide  functional  benefits  with  improved  quality  of  life  even  in 
the early stage of the disease. Levodopa remains the most effective 
symptomatic  therapy  for  PD,  and  some  recommend  starting  it 
immediately using low doses (≤400 mg/d), as motor complications 
have now clearly been shown to be dose-related. Others, however, 
prefer  to  delay  introduction  of  levodopa  treatment,  particularly 
in younger patients, in order to reduce the risk of inducing motor 
complications. An alternate approach is to begin with an MAO-B 
inhibitor and/or a dopamine agonist, and reserve levodopa for later 
stages when these drugs no longer provide satisfactory control. In 
making  this  decision,  the  age,  degree  of  disability,  and  side  effect 
profile  of  the  drug  must  all  be  considered.  In  patients  with  more 
severe disability, the elderly, and those with cognitive impairment, 
significant  comorbidities,  or  in  whom  the  diagnosis  is  uncertain, 
most  physicians  would  initiate  therapy  with  levodopa.  Regardless 
of  initial  choice,  most  patients  ultimately  require  polypharmacy 
(combination  of  levodopa,  an  MAO-B  inhibitor,  and  a  dopamine 
agonist)  in  order  to  minimize  the  total  daily  levodopa  dose  and 
reduce  the  risk  of  motor  complications.  While  it  is  important  to 
use  low  doses  of  each  agent  to  reduce  the  risk  of  side  effects,  it 
is  important  not  to  deny  patients  levodopa  when  they  cannot  be 
adequately controlled with alternative medications. It is important 
to discuss the risks and benefits of the different therapeutic options 
with  patients  so  that  they  have  informed  opinions  as  to  whether 
they wish to start therapy and if so which drug to start.

If motor complications develop, patients can initially be treated 
by adjusting the frequency and dose of levodopa or by combining 
lower doses of levodopa with a dopamine agonist, a COMT inhib-
itor,  or  an  MAO-B  inhibitor.  More  recently  the  A2A  antagonist 
istradefylline  has  been  approved  in  the  United  States  as  an  addi-
tional medical therapy for treating “off ” periods. Amantadine is the 
only drug that has been demonstrated to treat dyskinesia without 
worsening  parkinsonism,  but  benefits  may  decline  over  time  and 
there  are  important  side  effects  related  to  cognitive  function.  In 
advanced cases where patients suffer motor complications that can-
not be adequately controlled with medical therapies, it may be nec-
essary to consider a surgical procedure such as DBS or Duodopa, 
but as described above, these procedures have their own set of com-
plications. The use of DBS in early PD patients has been advocated 
by some, but there is considerable skepticism about this approach 
considering the costs and potential side effects, when inexpensive, 
well-tolerated, and effective medical alternatives are available. Con-
tinuous intraintestinal infusion of levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel 
(Duodopa) offers similar benefits to DBS, but also requires a sur-
gical  intervention  with  potentially  serious  complications.  Contin-
uous infusion of apomorphine is a treatment option that does not 
require surgery but is associated with potentially troublesome skin 
nodules.  Well-controlled  comparative  studies  of  these  approaches 
are awaited. There are ongoing efforts aimed at developing systems 
that provide continuous delivery of levodopa or a long-acting for-
mulation  of  levodopa  that  mirror  the  pharmacokinetic  properties 
of  a  levodopa  infusion.  Such  a  formulation  might  provide  all  of 
the  benefits  of  levodopa  without  motor  complications  and  avoid   
the  need  for  polypharmacy  and  surgical  intervention.  Treatment 
for  the  nonmotor  features  of  PD  should  be  instituted  as  deemed 
appropriate, and exercise therapy is recommended for all patients.

A decision tree that considers the various treatment options and 
decision points for the management of PD is provided in Fig. 435-7.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3399

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3400

Parkinson’s disease

Nonpharmacologic intervention

Pharmacologic intervention

Neuroprotection —? Rasagiline

Functional disability

Yes

No

Dopamine agonists
MAO-B inhibitor

Levodopa

Combination therapy

Levodopa/dopamine
agonist/COMT
Inhibitor/MAO-B Inhibitor

Surgery/CDS

FIGURE  435-7  Treatment  options  for  the  management  of  Parkinson’s  disease 
(PD).  Decision  points  include:  (1)  Introduction  of  a  neuroprotective  therapy:  no 
drug has been established to have or is currently approved for neuroprotection or 
disease modification, but there are several agents that have this potential based 
on  laboratory  and  preliminary  clinical  studies  (e.g.,  rasagiline  1  mg/d,  coenzyme 
Q10  1200  mg/d,  the  dopamine  agonist  ropinirole,  and  pramipexole).  (2)  When  to 
initiate symptomatic therapy: There is a trend toward initiating therapy at the time 
of diagnosis or early in the course of the disease because patients may have some 
disability  even  at  an  early  stage,  and  there  is  the  possibility  that  early  treatment 
may  preserve  beneficial  compensatory  mechanisms;  however,  some  experts 
recommend waiting until there is functional disability before initiating therapy. (3) 
What therapy to initiate: many experts favor starting with a monoamine oxidase type 
B (MAO-B) inhibitor in mildly affected patients because of the good safety profile 
of the drug and the potential for a disease-modifying effect; dopamine agonists for 
younger patients with functionally significant disability to reduce the risk of motor 
complications; and levodopa for patients with more advanced disease, the elderly, 
or those with cognitive impairment. Recent studies suggest the early employment 
of polypharmacy using low doses of multiple drugs to avoid side effects associated 
with high doses of any one agent. (4) Management of motor complications: motor 
complications are typically approached with combination therapy to try to reduce 
dyskinesia  and  enhance  the  “on”  time.  When  medical  therapies  cannot  provide 
satisfactory  control,  surgical  therapies  such  as  DBS  or  continuous  infusion  of 
levodopa/carbidopa  intestinal  gel  can  be  considered.  (5)  Nonpharmacologic 
approaches:  interventions  such  as  exercise,  education,  and  support  should  be 
considered throughout the course of the disease. CDS, continuous dopaminergic 
stimulation;  COMT,  catechol-O-methyltransferase.  (Reproduced  with  permission 
from CW Olanow et al: The scientific and clinical basis for the treatment of Parkinson 
disease (2009). Neurology 72(21 Suppl 4):S1, 2009.)

 ■ FURTHER READING
Ascherio A, Schwarzschild MA: The epidemiology of Parkinson’s 
disease: Risk factors and prevention. Lancet Neurol 15:1257, 2016.
Berg D et al: MDS research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease. 

Mov Disord 12:1600, 2015.

Blauwendraat  C  et  al:  The  genetic  architecture  of  Parkinson’s  dis-

ease. Lancet Neurol 19:170, 2020.

Dorsey ER et al: Projected number of people with Parkinson disease 
in the most populous nations, 2005 through 2030. Neurology 68:384, 
2007.

Höglinger  GU  et  al:  Clinical  diagnosis  of  progressive  supranuclear 
palsy: The Movement Disorder Society criteria. Movement Disorder 
Society-endorsed PSP Study Group. Mov Disord 32:853, 2017.

Hollenbach  JA  et  al:  A  specific  amino  acid  motif  of  HLA-DRB1 
mediates risk and interacts with smoking history in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116:7419, 2019.

Kieburtz  K  et  al:  A  new  approach  to  the  development  of  disease-
modifying therapies for PD; treating another pandemic. Mov Disord 
36:59, 2021.

Marras C et al: Nomenclature of genetic movement disorders: Rec-
ommendations of the International Parkinson and Movement Disor-
der Society task force. Mov Disord 32:724, 2017.

Obeso JA et al: Past, present and future of Parkinson’s disease: A special 
essay  on  the  200th  Anniversary  of  the  Shaking  Palsy.  Mov  Disord 
32:1264, 2017.

Olanow  CW,  Prusiner  SB:  Is  Parkinson’s  disease  a  prion  disorder? 

Proc Natl Acad Sci 106:12571, 2009.

Olanow CW et al: A double-blind delayed-start study of rasagiline in 

early Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 361:1268, 2009.

Olanow  CW  et  al:  Scientific  and  clinical  basis  for  the  treatment  of 

PD—2009. Neurology 72:S1, 2009.

Postuma  RB  et  al:  MDS  clinical  diagnostic  criteria  for  Parkinson’s 

disease. Mov Disord 12:1591, 2015.

Schapira  AH  et  al:  Slowing  of  neurodegeneration  in  Parkinson’s 
disease  and  Huntington’s  disease:  Future  therapeutic  perspectives. 
Lancet 384:545, 2014.

Schapira  AHV  et  al:  Non-motor  features  of  Parkinson  disease.  Nat 

Rev Neurosci 18:435, 2017.

Verschuur CVM et al: Randomized delayed-start trial of levodopa in 

Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 380:315, 2019.

436 Tremor, Chorea, and Other 
Movement Disorders
C. Warren Olanow, Christine Klein

HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Hyperkinetic  movement  disorders  are  characterized  by  involuntary 
movements  unaccompanied  by  weakness  (Table  436-1).  This  term  is 
somewhat arbitrary and potentially misleading as hypokinetic disorders 
such  as  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD)  are  often  accompanied  by  tremor, 
which is a hyperkinetic feature, and hyperkinetic disorders such as dys-
tonia may manifest slow or restricted movement because of the severe 
muscle contractions. Nonetheless, the terms continue to be used because 
of  convention.  The  major  hyperkinetic  movement  disorders  and  the 
diseases with which they are associated are considered in this section.

TREMOR
 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Tremor is defined as an involuntary, rhythmic, oscillatory movement 
of a body part with alternating contractions of agonist and antagonist 
muscles. It can be most prominent at rest (rest tremor), on assuming 
a posture (postural tremor), on actively reaching for a target (kinetic 
tremor), or on carrying out a movement (action tremor). Tremor may 
also be characterized based on its distribution, frequency, amplitude, 
and related neurologic dysfunction. Tremor is classified along two axes: 
Axis 1 covers the clinical characteristics, including historical features 
(age  at  onset,  family  history,  temporal  evolution),  tremor  character-
istics  (body  distribution,  activation  condition),  associated  signs  (sys-
temic,  neurologic),  and  laboratory  tests  (electrophysiology,  imaging). 
Axis 2 relates to the etiology of the tremor and distinguishes acquired, 
genetic, or idiopathic origins.

PD (Chap. 427) is characterized by a predominant resting tremor, 
essential tremor (ET) characterized by a tremor that typically occurs 
while trying to sustain a posture coupled with an action tremor, and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3400

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 436-1  Hyperkinetic Movement Disorders
Tremor

Dystonia

Athetosis

Chorea

Myoclonus
Tic

Rhythmic oscillation of a body part due to intermittent muscle 
contractions
Involuntary, patterned, sustained, or repeated muscle 
contractions often associated with twisting movements and 
abnormal posture
Slow, distal, writhing, involuntary movements with a 
propensity to affect the arms and hands (this represents a 
form of dystonia with increased mobility)
Rapid, semipurposeful, graceful, dancelike nonpatterned 
involuntary movements involving distal or proximal muscle 
groups. When the movements are of large amplitude and 
predominant proximal distribution, the term ballism is used.
Sudden, brief (<100 ms), jerklike, arrhythmic muscle twitches
Brief, repeated, stereotyped muscle contractions that can 
often be suppressed for a short time. These can be simple 
and involve a single muscle group or complex and affect a 
range of motor activities.

cerebellar dysfunction characterized by a kinetic tremor (brought out 
by trying to touch an object) and is usually associated with hypotonia 
and past pointing. Normal individuals can have a physiologic tremor 
that typically manifests as a mild, high-frequency (10–12 Hz), postural, 
or action tremor typically affecting the upper extremities. This tremor 
is usually of no clinical consequence and often is only appreciated with 
an  accelerometer  or  under  stress.  An  enhanced  physiologic  tremor 
(EPT) can be seen in up to 10% of the population, and tends to occur 
in  association  with  anxiety,  fatigue,  a  metabolic  disturbance  (e.g., 
hyperthyroidism, electrolyte abnormalities), drugs (e.g., valproate, lith-
ium), or toxins (e.g., caffeine, smoking, alcohol). Treatment is initially 
directed  at  control  of  any  underlying  disorder  and,  if  necessary,  can 
often be improved with a beta blocker.
 ■ ESSENTIAL TREMOR
ET  is  the  most  common  movement  disorder,  affecting  ~5%  of  the 
population  (an  estimated  5–10  million  persons  in  the  United  States 
or  Western  Europe).  It  can  present  in  childhood  but  dramatically 
increases  in  prevalence  in  those  aged  >70  years.  ET  is  characterized 
by a high-frequency tremor (6–10 Hz) that predominantly affects the 
upper extremities. The tremor is most often manifest as a postural or 
action  tremor  and,  in  severe  cases,  can  interfere  with  functions  such 
as eating and drinking. It is typically bilateral and symmetric but may 
begin on one side and remain asymmetric. Patients with severe ET can 
have  an  intention  tremor  with  overshoot  and  slowness  of  movement 
suggesting  the  possibility  of  a  cerebellar  origin.  Tremor  involves  the 
head  in  ~30%  of  cases,  voice  in  ~20%,  tongue  in  ~20%,  face/jaw  in 
~10%, and lower limbs in ~10%. Multiple body parts are involved in at 
least 50% of cases. The tremor is characteristically improved by alcohol 
and worsened by stress. Usually the neurologic examination is normal 
aside from tremor, but subtle impairment of coordination or tandem 
walking may be present, and disturbances of hearing, cognition, per-
sonality, mood, and olfaction have also been described. The differential 
diagnosis includes dystonic tremor (see below) or PD. PD can usually 
be  differentiated  from  ET  because  the  former  stops  at  the  onset  of  a 
voluntary action and is typically associated with bradykinesia with pro-
gressive  slowing  of  sequential  movements  (sequence  effect),  rigidity, 
gait and postural instability, and other parkinsonian features. However, 
the  examiner  should  be  aware  that  PD  patients  may  have  a  postural 
tremor and ET patients may develop a rest tremor, but that these typi-
cally only begin after a latency of a few seconds (emergent tremor). In 
contrast  to  the  micrographia  of  PD,  ET  patients  have  relatively  large 
handwriting with evidence of the effect of tremor. The examiner must 
also differentiate the effect of tremor when assessing tone in order to 
distinguish the tremor of ET from the cogwheel rigidity found in PD.
 ■ ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The etiology and pathophysiology of ET are not known. Approximately 
50%  of  cases  have  a  positive  family  history  with  an  autosomal  dom-
inant  pattern  of  inheritance.  Linkage  studies  have  detected  possibly 

3401

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
6

T
r
e
m
o
r
,

C
h
o
r
e
a
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
v
e
m
e
n
t

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

linked loci in large ET families. Recently, expansion of GGC repeat in 
the human-specific NOTCH2NLC gene has been found to be associ-
ated  with  ET,  but  no  independently  confirmed  causative  genes  have 
been identified to date. It is likely that there are undiscovered genes for 
ET that have escaped detection to date because of the heterogeneity of 
the syndrome and the high population frequency of ET likely resulting 
in a large number of phenocopies, (i.e., family members with a similar 
clinical syndrome, but not carrying the causative mutation). The cer-
ebellum and inferior olives have been implicated as possible sites of a 
“tremor pacemaker” based on the presence of cerebellar signs in about 
10% of ET patients, and increased metabolic activity and blood flow in 
these regions in some patients. Some pathologic studies have described 
cerebellar pathology with a loss of Purkinje cells and axonal torpedoes, 
but  these  findings  are  controversial,  and  the  precise  pathologic  cor-
relate of ET remains to be defined. It is likely that multiple causes of ET 
will ultimately be identified.

 ■ TREATMENT
Many  cases  are  mild,  do  not  cause  any  functional  impairment,  and 
require  no  treatment  other  than  reassurance.  Occasionally,  tremor 
can be severe and interfere with eating, writing, and activities of daily 
living.  This  is  more  likely  to  occur  as  the  patient  ages  and  is  often 
associated with a reduction in tremor frequency. Beta blockers and pri-
midone are the standard drug therapies for ET and are useful in about 
50%  of  cases.  Propranolol  (20–120  mg  daily,  given  in  divided  doses) 
is  usually  effective  at  relatively  low  doses,  but  higher  doses  may  be 
needed in some patients. The drug is contraindicated in patients with 
bradycardia or asthma. Hand tremor tends to be most improved, while 
head tremor is often refractory. Primidone can be helpful but should 
be started at low doses (12.5 mg) and gradually increased (125–250 mg 
tid) to avoid sedation, nausea, and dizziness. Benefits have also been 
reported  with  gabapentin  and  topiramate,  but  these  drugs  have  not 
been  widely  employed.  Botulinum  toxin  injections  may  be  helpful 
for limb or voice tremor, but treatment can be associated with muscle 
weakness. Surgical therapies targeting the ventro-intermediate (VIM) 
nucleus of the thalamus can be very effective for severe and drug-resis-
tant cases. Recently, focal ultrasound (which is a procedure that does 
not  require  surgery)  has  also  been  shown  to  be  an  effective  therapy 
against tremor in ET.

DYSTONIA
 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by sustained or inter-
mittent  muscle  contractions  of  agonist/antagonist  muscles  causing 
abnormal, often repetitive movements and postures. Dystonic move-
ments are typically patterned and twisting and may be associated with 
a “dystonic” tremor in which the tremor is most pronounced when the 
body part is moved in the direction of the dystonia. Dystonia is often 
initiated or worsened by voluntary action and associated with overflow 
muscle activation. Dystonia can range from focal minor contractions 
affecting  only  an  individual  muscle  group  to  severe  and  disabling 
involvement of multiple muscle groups. The frequency is estimated to 
be 16 per 100,000 (~50,000 cases in the United States) but is likely to be 
much higher because many cases are not recognized. Dystonia is often 
brought out by voluntary movements (action dystonia) and can extend 
to involve other muscle groups and body regions not required for the 
intended action (overflow). It can be aggravated by stress and fatigue 
and attenuated by relaxation and sensory tricks such as touching the 
affected body part (geste antagoniste).

Historically, dystonia has been described as primary or secondary. 
However, because of a confusing and not always congruent combina-
tion of phenotypic and etiologic features, the older terms are no longer 
recommended.  A  Movement  Disorder  Society  Task  Force  charged 
with  redefining  dystonia  recommends  classifying  dystonia  along  the 
same  main  axes  as  ET:  clinical  and  etiologic.  On  clinical  grounds, 
dystonia can be categorized by age of onset (infancy, childhood, ado-
lescence, early and late adulthood), body distribution (focal, segmental, 
multifocal,  and  generalized),  temporal  pattern  (static  or  progressive, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3401

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3402 action-specific [diurnal and paroxysmal]), and association with addi-
tional features. Clinical description along these lines enables formulat-
ing specific dystonia syndromes (e.g., early-onset generalized isolated 
dystonia). From an etiologic point of view, dystonia primarily reflects 
genetic abnormalities, although occasionally there may be other causes 
such  as  dystonia  following  trauma  and  stroke.  Genetic  features  used 
for  classification  include  mode  of  inheritance  or  identification  of  a 
specific genetic defect. More than 200 genes have been linked to differ-
ent, mainly childhood-onset and generalized forms of dystonia. These 
include forms in which dystonia is the only disease manifestation with 
the exception of tremor (“isolated dystonia”), forms in which dystonia 
co-occurs  with  another  movement  disorder  such  as  parkinsonism  or 
myoclonus  (“combined  dystonia”),  and  disorders  in  which  dystonia 
is one of several clinical manifestations and may be a less prominent 
or even inconsistent feature (“complex dystonia”). Most of the genetic 
forms belong to the latter phenotypic group, which also represents the 
most heterogeneous class in terms of clinical expression.
 ■ ISOLATED DYSTONIAS
Focal, Multifocal, and Segmental Dystonia  Adult-onset, focal 
dystonia  is  by  far  the  most  frequent  form  of  isolated  dystonia,  with 
women being affected about twice as often as men. Focal dystonia typ-
ically presents in the fourth to sixth decade of life. The major clinical 
phenotypes are as follows: (1) Cervical dystonia—dystonic contractions 
of neck muscles causing the head to deviate to one side (laterocollis), 
twist (torticollis), move in a forward direction (anterocollis), or move in a 
backward direction (retrocollis). Muscle contractions can be painful and 
occasionally can be complicated by a secondary cervical radiculopathy. 
(2) Blepharospasm—dystonic contractions of the eyelids with increased 
blinking that can interfere with reading, watching television, working 
on  a  computer,  and  driving.  This  can  sometimes  be  severe  enough 
to  cause  functional  blindness.  (3)  Oromandibular  dystonia  (OMD)— 
contractions of muscles of the lower face, lips, tongue, and jaw (opening 
or closing). Meige’s syndrome is a combination of OMD and blepharo-
spasm that predominantly affects women aged >60 years. (4) Spasmodic 
dysphonia—dystonic contractions of the vocal cords during phonation, 
causing impaired speech. Most cases affect the adductor muscles and 
cause speech to have a choking or strained quality. Less commonly, the 
abductors are affected, leading to speech with a breathy or whispering 
quality. (5) Limb dystonias—these can be present in either arms or legs 
and are often brought out by task-specific activities such as handwriting 
(writer’s cramp), playing a musical instrument (musician’s cramp), or 
putting in golf (the yips). The vast majority of patients with this class 
of dystonia have cervical dystonia (~50%) or blepharospasm (~20%). 
Focal hand or leg dystonia (~5%), spasmodic dysphonia (~2%), musi-
cian’s  dystonia  (~3%),  or  OMD  (~1%)  are  much  less  common.  Focal 
dystonias can extend to involve other body regions (about 30% of cases) 
and are frequently misdiagnosed as psychiatric or orthopedic in origin. 
Their cause is usually not known. They are rarely monogenic (~1%); 
autoimmunity and trauma have been suggested as other possible etiolo-
gies. Focal dystonias are often associated with a high-frequency tremor 
that  can  resemble  ET.  Dystonic  tremor  can  usually  be  distinguished 
from  ET  because  it  tends  to  occur  in  conjunction  with  the  dystonic 
contraction and disappears when the dystonia is relieved (e.g., turning 
the head in the opposite direction of the dystonia).

Generalized Dystonia  Generalized dystonia is often hereditary in 
nature and, unlike focal dystonia, typically has an age of onset in child-
hood or adolescence. There are currently at least seven well-established 
genes that, when mutated, can cause a generalized dystonia; TOR1A, 
THAP1,  ANO3,  GNAL,  KMT2B,  PRKRA,  and  HPCA.  While  PRKRA 
and HPCA mutations are recessively inherited, all others are transmit-
ted in an autosomal dominant fashion. According to the recommenda-
tions of the International Parkinson’s Disease and Movement Disorder 
Society,  monogenic  forms  of  dystonia  are  classified  according  to  the 
absence or presence of accompanying additional clinical features and 
preceded by a “DYT” prefix, e.g., DYT-TOR1A. These genetic forms 
are  primarily  inherited  in  an  autosomal  dominant  fashion  and  are 
found in <5% of dystonia patients. Further, not all mutation carriers 

develop  generalized  dystonia;  about  35%  remain  unaffected  despite 
harboring a pathogenic mutation (reduced penetrance), and rarely they 
present with dystonia that remains focal or segmental in nature.

Mutations in the TOR1A gene (torsin family 1 member A—formerly 
known as the DYT1 gene) are the most common cause of early-onset 
generalized  dystonia.  The  first,  and  currently  the  only  clearly  estab-
lished  mutation,  is  a  3-base  pair  deletion  in  the  TOR1A  gene.  The 
mutation is frequently found among Ashkenazi Jewish patients due to 
a founder effect. Mutation carriers usually present with dystonia in an 
extremity  in  childhood  that  later  progresses  to  other  body  parts,  but 
typically spares the face and neck. Rare carriers of two mutated alleles 
have been described and are characterized by a severe neurodevelop-
mental syndrome and arthrogryposis.

Mutations in the THAP1 (THAP domain containing, apoptosis asso-
ciated  protein  1)  gene  have  been  linked  to  adolescent-onset  dystonia 
with  mixed  phenotype.  About  100  different  mutations  have  been 
reported  in  THAP1.  Mutations  typically  manifest  with  dysphonia  or 
writer’s  cramp  beginning  in  late  childhood  or  adolescence.  Over  the 
course  of  the  disease,  dystonia  can  spread  to  other  body  parts  with 
prominent craniocervical involvement.

Mutations in the ANO3 (anoctamin 3) gene were first reported in 
patients  with  predominantly  craniocervical  dystonia  with  a  broad 
range of ages of onset. While a large number of missense variants can 
be found in healthy individuals, a pathogenic role of ANO3 mutations 
has been confirmed by the description of additional families with dys-
tonia and myoclonic jerks.

Mutations in the GNAL (guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit 
alpha  L)  gene  are  a  rare  cause  of  cervical  or  cranial  dystonia,  with  a 
few patients developing a generalized dystonia. Mean age of onset is in 
the thirties. About 30 different GNAL mutations have been reported in 
dystonia patients.

In  addition  to  the  above,  missense  mutations  in  KMT2B  (lysine 
methyltransferase 2B) have been confirmed to be a cause of an early- 
onset generalized dystonia that may be accompanied by other syndro-
mic features including intellectual disability, microcephaly, psychiatric 
features,  dysmorphia,  or  skin  lesions.  The  majority  of  the  mutations 
occurred  de  novo.  KMT2B  mutations  may  account  for  up  to  10%  of 
early-onset  generalized  dystonia,  but  further  validation  is  warranted, 
and placement into the group of isolated vs complex dystonias is cur-
rently under debate.

The vast majority of PRKRA mutation carriers develop a generalized 
dystonia, frequently with laryngeal involvement. Likewise, all patients 
described to carry HPCA mutations are characterized by generalized 
dystonia.

 ■ COMBINED DYSTONIAS
A number of other well-established genes have been described that are 
associated with combined forms of dystonia in which dystonia occurs 
in conjunction with a different movement disorder, such as parkinson-
ism or myoclonus.

Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD; also known as Segawa syndrome) 
is caused by mutations in the GCH1 (GTP cyclohydrolase-1) gene that 
encodes  the  rate-limiting  enzyme  in  the  biosynthesis  of  dopamine 
via the biopterin pathway. It is manifest as a childhood-onset form of 
dystonia with diurnal fluctuations and is important to recognize as the 
condition dramatically responds to low doses of levodopa. Parkinson-
ism can be a major, or even the only, finding, and there may be a pre-
synaptic dopaminergic deficit as evidenced by SPECT. To date, more 
than  100  different  mutations  have  been  reported  with  a  penetrance 
of around 50%, which is considerably higher in women compared to 
men.  Recessively  inherited  (biallelic)  mutations  in  GCH1  result  in  a 
much  more  severe  clinical  phenotype  with  developmental  delay  and 
infantile onset. Due to the enzymatic defect in levodopa biosynthesis, 
there is a lifelong and dramatic response to levodopa therapy. Younger 
patients  are  frequently  misdiagnosed  as  having  cerebral  palsy,  and 
all  young-onset  forms  of  dystonia  should  be  tested  with  levodopa  to 
exclude the possibility of DRD. Importantly, since the dopamine neu-
ronal network is anatomically preserved, these patients do not develop 
dyskinesia with chronic levodopa treatment.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3402

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders X-linked  dystonia-parkinsonism  (Lubag)  is  a  combined  form  of 
dystonia  and  parkinsonism  that  is  found  exclusively  in  patients  of 
Filipino origin due to a founder effect and seems to be fully penetrant. 
Patients  usually  develop  focal  (cranial)  dystonia  first  that  rapidly 
generalizes  and,  after  5–10  years,  is  gradually  replaced  by  a  form  of 
L-dopa-unresponsive  parkinsonism.  A  retrotransposon  insertion  in 
the  TAF1  (TATA-box  binding  protein  associated  factor  1)  gene  is  the 
cause of the disease, and 50% of the age-at-onset variability is explained 
by  the  variable  length  of  a  hexameric  repeat  expansion  within  the 
retrotransposon.

Mutations  in  the  ATP1A3  (ATPase  Na+/K+  transporting  subunit 
alpha 3) gene present with a characteristic, sudden-onset dystonia usu-
ally in adolescence or young adulthood, often triggered by high fever, 
physical exertion, or emotional stress. Dystonic symptoms frequently 
show a rostrocaudal gradient with a strong involvement of the bulbar 
region, often accompanied by parkinsonian features such as bradyki-
nesia. In addition, mutations in ATP1A3 have been linked to a variety 
of  clinical  syndromes  (pleiotropy),  including  epileptic  or  hemiplegic 
attacks, ataxia, cognitive decline, and other neurologic disorders, often 
with a more severe course and an earlier age at onset.

Myoclonic-dystonia  is  characterized  by  action-induced,  alcohol- 
responsive  myoclonic  jerks  predominantly  involving  the  upper  body 
half.  Onset  is  usually  in  childhood  or  adolescence.  Many  individuals 
also  develop  psychiatric  features  such  as  depression,  anxiety-related 
disorders,  and  alcohol  dependence.  The  disorder  is  primarily  related 
to mutations in the SGCE (sarcoglycan epsilon) gene, which codes for 
the ε member of the sarcoglycan family. About 80 different mutations 
have been reported in SGCE including deletions of the entire gene. The 
latter type of mutation often also involves loss of adjacent genes leading 
to additional clinical features such as joint problems. SGCE mutations 
are incompletely penetrant and only manifest when inherited from the 
father  due  to  the  epigenetic  effect  of  maternal  imprinting  of  SGCE. 
Another  recently  identified  cause  of  myoclonus-dystonia  is  KCTD17 
mutation.

A number of additional monogenic causes have been suggested for 
isolated  and  combined  forms  of  dystonia  but  still  await  independent 
confirmation. Table 436-2 provides a list of the confirmed monogenic 
forms of isolated and combined dystonias.
 ■ COMPLEX DYSTONIAS
In the complex dystonias, dystonia is a part of a syndrome that is char-
acterized  by  multiple  different  clinical  manifestations  of  the  disease. 
Most  frequently,  they  are  hereditary  such  as  Wilson’s  disease  (WD), 
Huntington’s  disease  (HD),  Lesh  Nyhan  syndrome,  corticobasal  gan-
glionic  disorders,  and  a  variety  of  other  neurologic,  neurometabolic, 

and mitochondrial disorders. Complex dystonias may also develop as 
a consequence of drugs or toxins (previously referred to as secondary 
dystonias). Drug-induced dystonia may be acute or chronic and is most 
commonly seen with neuroleptic drugs or after chronic levodopa treat-
ment in PD patients. Dystonia can also be observed following discrete 
lesions  in  the  striatum,  and  occasionally  in  the  pallidum,  thalamus, 
cortex,  or  brainstem  due  to  infarction,  hemorrhage  anoxia,  trauma, 
tumor, infection, or toxins such as manganese or carbon monoxide. In 
these cases, dystonia often assumes a segmental distribution but may 
be  generalized  when  lesions  are  bilateral  or  widespread.  More  rarely, 
dystonia can develop following peripheral nerve injury and be associ-
ated with features of complex regional pain syndrome (Chap. 17). 
A psychogenic origin is responsible for some cases of dystonia; these 
typically present with fixed, immobile dystonic postures (see below).
 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DYSTONIA
Even  in  cases  with  a  known  dystonia  gene  mutation,  the  pathophys-
iologic  basis  of  dystonia  is  not  completely  known.  The  phenomenon 
is  characterized  by  co-contracting  synchronous  bursts  of  agonist  and 
antagonist  muscle  groups  with  recruitment  of  muscle  groups  that  are 
not required for a given movement (overflow). Dystonia is character-
ized by derangement of the basic physiologic principle of action selec-
tion,  leading  to  abnormal  recruitment  of  inappropriate  muscles  for  a 
given action with inadequate inhibition of this undesired motor activity. 
Physiologically, loss of surround inhibition is observed at multiple levels 
of the motor system (e.g., cortex, brainstem, spinal cord) accompanied 
by  increased  cortical  excitability  and  reorganization.  Attention  has 
focused on the basal ganglia as the site of origin of at least some types 
of dystonia because there are alterations in blood flow and metabolism 
in these structures. Further, lesions of the basal ganglia (particularly the 
putamen) can induce dystonia, and surgical ablation or deep brain stim-
ulation (DBS) of specific regions of the globus pallidus may ameliorate 
dystonia. The dopamine system has also been implicated, because dopa-
minergic therapies can both induce and treat some forms of dystonia in 
different  circumstances.  Interestingly,  no  specific  pathology  has  been 
consistently identified to underlie dystonia.

3403

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
6

T
r
e
m
o
r
,

C
h
o
r
e
a
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
v
e
m
e
n
t

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TREATMENT
Dystonia

Treatment of dystonia is for the most part symptomatic except in 
rare  cases  where  correction  of  a  primary  underlying  condition  is 
possible. Wilson’s disease should be ruled out, particularly in young 
patients  with  dystonia.  Levodopa  should  be  tried  in  all  cases  of 

TABLE 436-2  Confirmed Monogenic Forms of Isolated and Combined Dystoniaa

FORM OF DYSTONIA
Isolated

Combined

Dystonia plus 
parkinsonism

Dystonia plus 
myoclonus

GENE
TOR1A

THAP1

ANO3
GNAL
KMT2Bb

GCH1

TAF1
PRKRA
ATP1A3
SGCE

LOCUS NAME
DYT1

DESIGNATION AND 
PHENOTYPIC SUBGROUPa
DYT-TOR1A

DYT6

DYT24
DYT25
DYT28

DYT5a

DYT3
DYT16
DYT12
DYT11

DYT-THAP1

DYT-ANO3
DYT-GNAL
DYT-KMT2B

DYT-GCH1

DYT-TAF1
DYT-PRKRA
DYT-ATP1A3
DYT-SGCE

ADDITIONAL DISTINGUISHING 
FEATURES
Childhood or adolescent-onset, 
generalized
Adolescent-onset, cranial or 
generalized
Adult-onset, focal or segmental
Mostly adult-onset, focal or segmental
Early-onset, generalized, mild 
syndromic features
Dopa-responsive

Neurodegeneration
Dystonia with mild parkinsonism
Rapid-onset
Psychiatric disease

MOI
AD

AD

AD
AD
AD

AD

XL
AR
AD
AD

aAccording to C Marras et al: Mov Disord 31:436, 2016. bSeveral, but not all, patients show syndromic features; DYT-KMT2B may thus be better placed with the complex 
dystonias.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; MOI, mode of inheritance; XL, X-linked.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3403

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3404

childhood-onset dystonia to test for DRD. High-dose anticholiner-
gics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl 20–120 mg/d) may be beneficial in chil-
dren, but adults can rarely tolerate high doses because of side effects 
related to cognitive impairment and hallucinations. Oral baclofen 
(20–120 mg) may also be helpful, but benefits, if present, are usually 
modest,  and  side  effects  of  sedation,  weakness,  and  memory  loss 
can be problematic. Intrathecal infusion of baclofen is more likely 
to  be  useful,  particularly  for  leg  and  trunk  dystonia,  but  benefits 
are frequently not sustained, and complications can be serious and 
include  infection,  seizures,  and  coma.  Tetrabenazine  is  another 
consideration; the usual starting dose is 12.5 mg/d and the average 
treating dose is 25–75 mg/d, but its use may be limited by sedation 
and  the  development  of  parkinsonism.  Parkinsonian  side  effects 
can be minimized with deuterated tetrabenazine. Neuroleptics can 
both improve and induce dystonia, but they are typically not rec-
ommended because of their potential to induce parkinsonism and 
other movement disorders, including tardive dystonia. Clonazepam 
and diazepam are sometimes effective.

Botulinum toxin has become the preferred treatment for patients 
with focal and segmental dystonia, particularly where involvement is 
limited to small muscle groups such as in blepharospasm, torticollis, 
and  spasmodic  dysphonia.  Botulinum  toxin  acts  by  blocking  the 
release  of  acetylcholine  at  the  neuromuscular  junction,  leading  to 
reduced dystonic muscle contractions. However, treatment with bot-
ulinum toxin can be complicated by excessive weakness that can be 
troublesome, particularly if it involves neck and swallowing muscles. 
No  systemic  side  effects  are  encountered  with  the  doses  typically 
used, but benefits are transient, and repeat injections are required at 
2- to 5-month intervals. Some patients fail to respond after having 
experienced  an  initial  benefit.  This  has  been  attributed  to  devel-
opment  of  neutralizing  antibodies,  but  improper  muscle  selection, 
injection technique, and inadequate dose should be excluded.

Surgical  therapy  is  an  alternative  for  patients  with  severe  dys-
tonia who are not responsive to other treatments. Peripheral pro-
cedures such as rhizotomy and myotomy were used in the past to 
treat  cervical  dystonia  but  are  now  rarely  employed.  DBS  of  the 
pallidum can provide dramatic benefits for some patients with var-
ious  forms  of  hereditary  and  nonhereditary  generalized  dystonia. 
This  represents  a  major  therapeutic  advance  because  previously 
there  was  no  consistently  effective  therapy,  especially  for  patients 
with severe disability. Benefits tend to be obtained with a lower fre-
quency of stimulation than used in PD or ET, and often occur only 
after  a  relatively  long  latency.  Better  results  are  typically  obtained 
in  younger  patients  with  shorter  disease  duration  and  in  those 
with certain monogenic forms, such as DYT-Tor1A. Recent studies 
suggest that DBS may also be valuable for patients with focal and 
secondary dystonias, although results are less consistent. Supportive 
treatments such as physical therapy and education should be a part 
of the treatment regimen for all types of dystonia.

Physicians should be aware of dystonic storm, a rare but poten-
tially fatal condition that can occur in response to a stress situation 
such as a surgical procedure or a systemic infection in patients with 
preexisting  dystonia.  It  consists  of  the  acute  onset  of  generalized 
and  persistent  dystonic  contractions  that  can  involve  the  vocal 
cords or laryngeal muscles, leading to airway obstruction. Patients 
may  experience  rhabdomyolysis  with  renal  failure  and  should 
be  managed  in  an  intensive  care  unit  with  airway  protection  if 
required.  Treatment  can  be  instituted  with  one  or  a  combination 
of  anticholinergics,  diphenhydramine,  baclofen,  benzodiazepines, 
and dopaminergic agents. Spasms may be difficult to control, and 
anesthesia with muscle paralysis may be required.

CHOREAS
 ■ HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
HD is a progressive, fatal, highly penetrant autosomal dominant dis-
order  characterized  by  motor,  behavioral,  oculomotor,  and  cognitive 
dysfunction.  The  disease  is  named  for  George  Huntington,  a  family 

physician who described cases on Long Island, New York, in the nine-
teenth century. Onset is typically between the ages of 25 and 45 years 
(range,  3–70  years)  with  a  prevalence  of  2–8  cases  per  100,000  and 
an  average  age  at  death  of  60  years.  It  is  prevalent  in  Europe,  North 
America,  South  America,  and  Australia  but  is  rare  in  African  blacks 
and  Asians.  HD  is  characterized  by  rapid,  nonpatterned,  semipur-
poseful,  involuntary  choreiform  movements,  and  for  this  reason  was 
formerly referred to as Huntington’s chorea. However, dysarthria, gait 
disturbance,  oculomotor  abnormalities,  behavioral  disturbance,  and 
cognitive  impairment  with  dementia  are  also  common  features;  thus 
the  condition  is  currently  referred  to  as  Huntington’s  disease.  In  the 
early stages, chorea tends to be focal or segmental, but progresses over 
time to involve multiple body regions. With advancing disease, there 
tends to be a reduction in chorea and the emergence of dystonia, rigid-
ity, bradykinesia, and myoclonus. Functional decline is often predicted 
by progressive weight loss despite adequate calorie intake. In younger 
patients (~10% of cases), HD can present as an akinetic-rigid parkin-
sonian syndrome (Westphal variant). HD patients eventually develop 
behavioral  and  cognitive  disturbances,  and  the  majority  progress  to 
dementia.  Depression  with  suicidal  tendencies,  aggressive  behav-
ior,  and  psychosis  can  be  prominent  features.  HD  patients  may  also 
develop non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and neuroendocrine 
abnormalities (e.g., hypothalamic dysfunction). A clinical diagnosis of 
HD can be strongly suspected in cases of chorea with a positive family 
history, but genetic testing provides the ultimate confirmation of the 
diagnosis.

The  disease  predominantly  affects  the  striatum  but  progresses 
to  involve  the  cerebral  cortex  and  other  brain  regions.  Progressive 
atrophy  of  the  head  of  the  caudate  nucleus,  which  forms  the  lateral 
margin of the lateral ventricle, can be visualized on MRI (Fig. 436-1), 
but the putamen can be equally or even more severely affected. More 
diffuse cortical atrophy can be seen in the middle and late stages of the 
disease.  Supportive  studies  include  reduced  metabolic  activity  in  the 
caudate nucleus and putamen, and reduced brain metabolites on MR 
spectroscopy. Genetic testing can be used to confirm the diagnosis and 
to detect at-risk individuals in the family but must be performed with 
caution and in conjunction with trained counselors, because positive 
results  can  worsen  depression  and  even  generate  suicidal  reactions. 
Indeed, genetic counseling is a requirement in some regions. The neu-
ropathology of HD consists of prominent neuronal loss and gliosis in 
the caudate nucleus and putamen; similar changes are also widespread 
in the cerebral cortex. Intraneuronal inclusions containing aggregates 
of ubiquitin and the mutant protein huntingtin are found in the nuclei 
of affected neurons.

In  anticipation  of  developing  neuroprotective  therapies,  there  has 
been an intensive effort to define the premanifest stage of HD. Subtle 
motor impairment, cognitive alterations, and imaging changes can be 
detected in at-risk individuals who later go on to develop the manifest 
form of the disease. Defining the rate of progression of these features 
is paramount for future studies of putative disease-modifying therapies 
designed to slow the rate of disease progression and the development 
of cumulative disability.
 ■ ETIOLOGY
HD is caused by an increase in the number of polyglutamine (CAG) 
repeats (>40) in the coding sequence of the huntingtin gene located on 
the short arm of chromosome 4. The larger the number of repeats, the 
earlier the disease is manifest. Intermediate forms of the disease with 
36–39 repeats are described in some patients, typically with less severe 
clinical involvement. Acceleration of the process tends to occur, par-
ticularly in males, with subsequent generations having larger numbers 
of repeats and earlier age of disease onset, a phenomenon referred to 
as anticipation. There is also evidence of somatic gene expansion that 
occurs over time.

The  huntingtin  gene  encodes  the  highly  conserved  cytoplasmic 
protein  huntingtin  (HTT),  which  is  widely  distributed  in  neurons 
throughout  the  central  nervous  system  (CNS).  Mutated  HTT  RNA 
is  toxic.  Mutant  HTT  disrupts  transcription,  impairs  immune  and 
mitochondrial function, and is aberrantly modified post-translationally. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3404

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3405

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
6

T
r
e
m
o
r
,

C
h
o
r
e
a
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
v
e
m
e
n
t

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

FIGURE  436-1  Huntington’s  disease.  A.  Coronal  fluid  attenuated  inversion  recovery  (FLAIR)  magnetic  resonance  imaging  shows  enlargement  of  the  lateral  ventricles 
reflecting typical atrophy (arrows). B. Axial FLAIR image demonstrates abnormal high signal in the caudate and putamen (arrows).

Genome-wide  association  studies  have  nominated  DNA  repair  path-
ways  as  modifiers  of  somatic  instability  and  disease  course  in  HD. 
Fragments of the mutant HTT can also be toxic, possibly by translo-
cating into the nucleus and interfering with transcriptional regulation 
of proteins. Neuronal inclusions found in affected regions in HD may 
represent  a  protective  mechanism  aimed  at  segregating  and  facilitat-
ing the clearance of these toxic proteins. There is also interest in the 
possibility  that  protein  accumulation  and  aggregation  in  HD,  like 
Alzheimer’s disease (Chap. 431) and PD (Chap. 435), may be critical 
to the disease process and reflect a prion-like disorder (Chap. 438; see 
also Chap. 424). Models of HD with striatal pathology can be induced 
in  multiple  transgenic  animals  that  express  the  mutant  gene  and  by 
excitotoxic agents such as kainic acid and 3-nitropropionic acid, which 
promote calcium entry into the cell and cytotoxicity.

TREATMENT
Huntington’s Disease

Although the gene for HD was identified more than 25 years ago, 
there  is  still  no  disease-modifying  therapy  for  this  disorder,  and 
symptomatic  treatment  is  limited.  Current  treatment  involves  a 
multidisciplinary approach, with medical, neuropsychiatric, social, 
and  genetic  counseling  for  patients  and  their  families.  Dopa-
mine-blocking  agents  may  control  the  choreatic  movements. 
Tetrabenazine  (a  presynaptic  dopamine-depleting  agent)  has  been 
approved  for  the  treatment  of  chorea  but  can  cause  secondary 
parkinsonism.  Deuterated  tetrabenazine  (Austedo)  has  also  been 
approved  as  a  treatment  for  chorea  in  HD.  Deuteration  interferes 
with  the  metabolism  of  tetrabenazine  and  avoids  a  high  Cmax, 
which is thought to contribute to adverse effects. In clinical trials, 
deuterated tetrabenazine has been shown to have fewer dose-related 
side  effects  than  tetrabenazine  and  therefore  can  be  administered 
in higher doses with potentially superior clinical benefits. Neuro-
leptics are generally not recommended because of their potential to 
induce other troubling movement disorders and because HD cho-
rea tends to be self-limited and is usually not disabling. These drugs 
may be used, however, in patients with severe and disabling chorea. 
Depression and anxiety can be major problems, and patients should 
be  treated  with  appropriate  antidepressant  and  antianxiety  drugs 
and  monitored  for  mania  and  suicidal  ideations.  Psychosis  can 
be  treated  with  atypical  antipsychotics  such  as  clozapine  (50–600 
mg/d), quetiapine (50–600 mg/d), and risperidone (2–8 mg/d).

A  neuroprotective  therapy  that  slows  or  stops  disease  pro-
gression  is  the  major  unmet  medical  need  in  HD.  Strategies  to 
reduce mutant HTT focus on inhibiting mRNA synthesis either by 

blocking transcription (zinc finger motif protein), preventing post-
transcriptional processes, and promoting early mRNA degradation 
(antisense  oligonucleotides;  ASO)  or  inhibiting  translation  with 
short-interfering  RNA.  The  most  advanced  of  these  experimental 
therapeutic  approaches  investigated  intrathecal  administration  of 
an  ASO  in  patients  with  early  HD  in  a  randomized,  placebo- 
controlled,  double-blind  phase  1–2a  clinical  trial.  While  a  dose- 
dependent  reduction  in  concentrations  of  mutant  HTT  was 
observed and there were no side effects, the study was prematurely 
terminated,  presumably  because  no  clinical  benefit  was  detected. 
Drugs that enhance mitochondrial function and increase the clear-
ance  of  defective  mitochondria  are  also  being  tested  as  possible 
disease-modifying therapies. Other investigative approaches include 
immunotherapy,  dietary  supplements  (Resveratrol),  lipid-lowering 
medication  (Fenofibrate),  and  anaplerotic  therapy  (Triheptanoin), 
and  DBS  of  the  globus  pallidus  pars  interna  (GPi).  Perhaps  most 
promising at this time is the sigma 1 receptor agonist pridopidine. 
While previous 6-month trials with this drug showed no significant 
benefit  with  respect  to  total  motor  function,  significant  benefits 
were observed in total functional capacity after 1 year, particularly 
in  patients  with  relatively  mild  disease.  Double-blind  studies  are 
currently underway.

HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE-LIKE DISORDERS
A group of rare inherited conditions that can mimic HD, designated 
HD-like  (HDL)  disorders,  has  also  been  identified.  HDL-1,  2,  and  4 
are autosomal dominant conditions that typically present in adulthood. 
HDL-3 is recessively inherited, presents in early childhood, and differs 
markedly from HD and the other HDLs. HDL-1 is due to expansion 
of  an  octapeptide  repeat  in  PRNP,  the  gene  encoding  the  prion  pro-
tein (Chap. 438). Thus HDL-1 is properly considered a prion disease. 
Patients  exhibit  onset  of  personality  change  in  the  third  or  fourth 
decade  of  life,  followed  by  chorea,  rigidity,  myoclonus,  ataxia,  and 
epilepsy. HDL-2 manifests in the third or fourth decade of life with a 
variety of movement disorders, including chorea, dystonia, or parkin-
sonism and dementia. Most patients are of African descent. Acantho-
cytosis  can  sometimes  be  seen  in  these  patients,  and  this  condition 
must  be  distinguished  from  neuroacanthocytosis  (below).  HDL-2  is 
caused  by  an  abnormally  expanded  CTG/CAG  trinucleotide  repeat 
expansion in the junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene. The pathology of HDL-2 
consists  of  intranuclear  inclusions  immunoreactive  for  ubiquitin  and 
expanded polyglutamine repeats. HDL-4, the most common condition 
in this group, is caused by expansion of trinucleotide repeats in TBP, 
the gene that encodes the TATA box-binding protein involved in regu-
lating transcription; this condition is identical to spinocerebellar ataxia 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3405

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3406 (SCA) 17 (Chap. 439), and most patients present primarily with ataxia 
rather  than  chorea.  Mutations  of  the  C9Orf72  gene  associated  with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 437) have also been reported in 
some individuals with an HDL phenotype.
 ■ OTHER CHOREAS
Chorea  can  be  seen  in  a  number  of  additional  disorders  related  to 
genetic mutations or other disease states.

Among the hereditary forms of childhood-onset chorea, mutations 
in the NKX2-1 gene cause a benign hereditary chorea. Mutations in the 
ADCY5 (adenylate cyclase 5) gene are an increasingly recognized and 
relatively  common  cause  of  childhood-onset  chorea,  often  in  combi-
nation with dystonia and developmental delay. Characteristic perioral 
movements are a hallmark of the disorder.

Chorea-acanthocytosis (neuroacanthocytosis) is a progressive and 
typically  fatal  autosomal  recessive  disorder  that  is  characterized 
by  chorea  coupled  with  red  cell  abnormalities  on  peripheral  blood 
smear  (acanthocytes).  The  chorea  can  be  severe  and  associated  with 
self-mutilating behavior, dystonia, tics, seizures, and a polyneuropathy. 
Mutations in the VPS13A gene encoding chorein have been described. 
A  phenotypically  similar  X-linked  form  of  the  disorder  has  been 
described  in  older  individuals  who  have  reactivity  with  Kell  blood 
group  antigens  (McLeod  syndrome).  A  benign  hereditary  chorea  of 
childhood (BHC1) due to mutations in the gene for thyroid transcrip-
tion factor 1 and a late-onset benign senile chorea (BHC2) have also 
been reported. It is important to ensure that patients with these types 
of choreas do not have HD.

Chorea  may  also  occur  in  association  with  a  variety  of  infections 
and degenerative disorders as well as vascular diseases and hypo- and 
hyperglycemia. Sydenham’s chorea (originally called St. Vitus’ dance) 
is  more  common  in  females  and  is  typically  seen  in  childhood 
(5–15  years).  It  often  develops  in  association  with  prior  exposure  to 
group  A  streptococcal  infection  (Chap.  148)  and  is  thought  to  be 
autoimmune in nature. It is characterized by the acute onset of chorei-
form movements and behavioral disturbances. With the reduction in 
the incidence of rheumatic fever, the incidence of Sydenham’s chorea 
has fallen, but it can still be seen in developing countries. The chorea 
generally  responds  to  dopamine-blocking  agents,  valproic  acid,  and 
carbamazepine, but is self-limited, and treatment is generally restricted 
to those with severe chorea. Chorea may recur in later life, particularly 
in association with pregnancy (chorea gravidarum) or treatment with 
sex hormones. Several reports have documented cases of chorea associ-
ated with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody–positive 
encephalitis  (Chap.  94)  following  herpes  simplex  virus  encephalitis, 
and  in  paraneoplastic  syndromes  associated  with  anti-CRMP-5  or 
anti-Hu  antibodies  (Chap.  90).  Systemic  lupus  erythematosus 
(Chap. 356) is the most common systemic disorder that is associated 
with chorea. The chorea can last for days to years. Chorea can also be 
seen with hyperthyroidism, autoimmune disorders including Sjögren’s 
syndrome, infectious disorders including HIV disease, metabolic altera-
tions,  and  polycythemia  rubra  vera.  Chorea  has  also  been  described 
following open-heart surgery in the pediatric population and in associ-
ation with many medications (especially anticonvulsants, cocaine, CNS 
stimulants, estrogens, and lithium). Chorea is commonly seen as a side 
effect of chronic levodopa treatment in patients with PD (Chap. 435).

 ■ BALLISM/HEMIBALLISMUS
Ballism is a violent form of choreiform movement composed of wild, 
flinging, large-amplitude movements most frequently affecting proxi-
mal limb muscles on one side of the body (hemiballism). The move-
ments may affect only one limb (monoballism) or, more exceptionally, 
both upper or lower limbs (paraballism). The movements may be so 
severe as to cause exhaustion, dehydration, local injury, and, in extreme 
cases, death. Fortunately, dopamine-blocking drugs can be very help-
ful, and importantly, hemiballismus is usually self-limiting and tends to 
resolve spontaneously after weeks or months. The most common cause 
is a partial lesion (infarct or hemorrhage) in the subthalamic nucleus 
(STN), but in 30–40% of cases the lesion is found in the putamen, thal-
amus, or parietal cortex. Hemiballismus is also a common feature of 

the paroxysmal dyskinesias (see below). In extreme cases, pallidotomy 
or DBS of the GPi can be effective and abolish the involuntary move-
ments. Interestingly, surgically induced lesions and DBS of the STN in 
PD patients are usually not associated with hemiballismus.

TICS
A tic is a brief, rapid, recurrent, stereotyped, and seemingly purpose-
less motor contraction. Motor tics can be simple, with movement only 
affecting  an  individual  muscle  group  (e.g.,  blinking,  twitching  of  the 
nose, jerking of the neck), or complex, with coordinated involvement 
of multiple muscle groups (e.g., jumping, sniffing, head banging, and 
echopraxia [mimicking movements]). Phonic (or vocal) tics can also 
be simple (e.g., grunting) or complex (e.g., echolalia [repeating other 
people’s  words],  palilalia  [repeating  one’s  own  words],  and  coprolalia 
[expression of obscene words]). Patients may also experience sensory 
tics, composed of unpleasant focal sensations in the face, head, or neck. 
These can be mild and of little clinical consequence or severe and dis-
abling. Tics may present in adulthood and can be seen in association 
with a variety of disorders, including PD, HD, trauma, dystonia, drugs 
(e.g., levodopa, neuroleptics), and toxins.
 ■ TOURETTE’S SYNDROME
Tourette’s  syndrome  (TS)  is  a  neurobehavioral  disorder  named  after 
the French neurologist Georges Gilles de la Tourette. It predominantly 
affects males, and the prevalence is estimated to be 0.03–1.6%, but it 
is likely that many mild cases do not come to medical attention. TS is 
characterized  by  multiple  motor  tics  often  accompanied  by  vocaliza-
tions (phonic tics). Patients characteristically can voluntarily suppress 
tics for short periods of time, but then experience an irresistible urge 
to express them. Tics vary in intensity and may be absent for days or 
weeks  only  to  recur,  occasionally  in  a  different  pattern.  Tics  tend  to 
present between ages 2 and 15 years (mean 7 years) and often lessen or 
even disappear in adulthood, particularly in males. Associated behav-
ioral disturbances include anxiety, depression, attention deficit hyper-
activity  disorder,  and  obsessive-compulsive  disorder.  Patients  may 
experience personality disorders, self-destructive behaviors, difficulties 
in school, and impaired interpersonal relationships.

Etiology  and  Pathophysiology  TS  has  a  high  heritability  and 
is  thus  thought  to  be  a  genetic  disorder,  but  no  specific  monogenic 
cause  has  yet  been  identified.  Current  evidence  supports  a  complex 
inheritance pattern with an important contribution of de novo, likely 
gene-disrupting variants. Four likely risk genes with multiple de novo 
damaging  variants  in  unrelated  probands  include  WWC1,  CELSR3, 
NIPBL, and FN1. The risk of a family with one affected child having 
a second is about 25%. The pathophysiology of TS is not known, but 
alterations  in  dopamine  neurotransmission,  opioids,  and  second- 
messenger systems have been proposed.

TREATMENT
Tics
Patients with mild disease often only require education and coun-
seling (for themselves and family members). In a high proportion 
of  patients,  the  severity  of  tics  wanes  in  adult  life,  becoming  less 
of  a  medical  problem,  thus  arguing  for  conservative  management 
if possible during the first decades of life. Drug treatment is indi-
cated when the tics are disabling and interfere with quality of life 
and  social  interactions.  Therapy  is  individualized,  and  there  is 
no  singular  treatment  regimen  that  has  been  properly  evaluated 
in  double-blind  trials.  Some  physicians  use  the  α-agonist  cloni-
dine,  starting  at  low  doses  and  gradually  increasing  the  dose  and   
frequency  until  satisfactory  control  is  achieved.  Guanfacine 
(0.5–2  mg/d) is an α-agonist that is preferred by some because it 
requires  only  once-daily  dosing.  Other  physicians  prefer  to  use 
neuroleptics. Atypical neuroleptics are usually used initially (risp-
eridone,  olanzapine,  ziprasidone)  because  they  are  thought  to  be 
associated with a reduced risk of tardive dyskinesia. If they are not 
effective,  low  doses  of  classical  neuroleptics  such  as  haloperidol, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3406

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders fluphenazine,  pimozide,  or  tiapride  can  be  tried  because  the  risk 
of tardive dyskinesia in young people is relatively low. Tetrabena-
zine  and  deuterated  tetrabenazine  are  currently  being  evaluated. 
Botulinum toxin injections can be effective in controlling focal tics 
that involve small muscle groups. Behavioral features, and partic-
ularly  anxiety  and  compulsions,  can  be  a  disabling  feature  of  TS 
and  should  be  treated  as  appropriate.  The  potential  value  of  DBS 
targeting  the  anterior  portion  of  the  internal  capsule,  the  GPi,  or 
the  thalamus  is  currently  being  explored  and  a  large-scale  public 
database and registry for DBS in TS has been established.

MYOCLONUS
Myoclonus is a brief, rapid (<100 ms), shocklike, jerky movement con-
sisting  of  single  or  repetitive  muscle  discharges.  Myoclonic  jerks  can 
be focal, multifocal, segmental, or generalized and can occur sponta-
neously, in association with voluntary movement (action myoclonus), 
or  in  response  to  an  external  stimulus  (reflex  myoclonus).  Negative 
myoclonus  consists  of  a  brief  loss  of  muscle  activity  (e.g.,  asterixis 
in  hepatic  failure).  Myoclonic  jerks  can  be  severe  and  interfere  with 
normal movement or benign and of no clinical consequence as is com-
monly  observed  in  normal  people  when  waking  up  or  falling  asleep 
(hypnagogic jerks).

Myoclonic  jerks  differ  from  tics  in  that  they  are  not  typically 
repetitive,  can  severely  interfere  with  normal  voluntary  movement, 
and  are  not  suppressible.  They  can  arise  in  association  with  abnor-
mal  neuronal  discharges  in  cortical,  subcortical,  brainstem,  or  spinal 
cord  regions,  particularly  in  association  with  hypoxemia  (especially 
following  cardiac  arrest),  encephalopathy,  and  neurodegeneration. 
Reversible myoclonus can be seen with metabolic disturbances (renal 
failure, electrolyte imbalance, hypocalcemia), toxins, and many medi-
cations. Hereditary myoclonus syndromes can be grouped into three 
classes  based  on  clinical  features:  prominent  myoclonus  syndromes, 
prominent  myoclonus  syndromes  combined  with  another  prominent 
movement disorder, and disorders that usually present with other phe-
notypes  but  can  also  manifest  as  a  prominent  myoclonus  syndrome. 
An  additional  movement  disorder  is  seen  in  nearly  all  myoclonus 
syndromes,  most  commonly  ataxia  or  dystonia.  Furthermore,  cogni-
tive  decline  and  epilepsy  are  present  in  the  vast  majority  of  patients. 
The most common form of action myoclonus of cortical origin with 
ataxia and generalized epilepsy is myoclonic epilepsy type 1 (EPM-1) 
or Unverricht-Lundborg disease, which can have a variable but often 
progressive  course.  This  is  an  autosomal  recessive  disease  caused  by 
mutations  in  the  CSBT  gene.  Other  causes  are  Lafora  body  epilepsy 
or  progressive  myoclonic  epilepsy  (PME-2)  caused  by  mutations  in 
the  EPM2A  gene  or  the  NHLRC1  gene  and  ceroid  lipofuscinosis.  In 
patients  with  less  severe  or  absent  epilepsy,  mitochondrial  disorders 
and neurodegenerative disorders affecting the cerebellum (i.e., SCAs) 
should be considered. Essential myoclonus is a relatively benign famil-
ial  condition  characterized  by  multifocal,  very  brief,  lightning-like 
movements  that  are  frequently  alcohol-sensitive.  Mutations  in  the 
epsilon-sarcoglycan gene have been associated with myoclonus seen in 
association with dystonia (myoclonic-dystonia).

TREATMENT
Myoclonus
Treatment primarily consists of managing the underlying condition 
or  removing  an  offending  agent.  Pharmacologic  therapy  involves 
one  or  a  combination  of  GABAergic  agents  such  as  valproic  acid 
(800–3000 mg/d), piracetam (8–20 g/d), clonazepam (2–15 mg/d), 
levetiracetam (1000–3000 mg/d), or primidone (500–1000 mg/d). 
Treatment may be associated with striking clinical improvement in 
chronic  cases  (e.g.,  postanoxic  myoclonus,  progressive  myoclonic 
epilepsy)  in  which  a  cortical  origin  for  the  myoclonic  discharges 
has been identified. The serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan 
(plus carbidopa) may be useful in some cases of postanoxic myoclo-
nus. DBS can be highly effective in myoclonus dystonia.

3407

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
6

T
r
e
m
o
r
,

C
h
o
r
e
a
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
v
e
m
e
n
t

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

DRUG-INDUCED MOVEMENT DISORDERS
This  important  group  of  movement  disorders  is  primarily  associated 
with  drugs  that  block  dopamine  receptors  (neuroleptics)  or  central 
dopaminergic  transmission.  These  drugs  are  widely  used  in  psychia-
try, but it is important to appreciate that drugs used in the treatment 
of  nausea  or  vomiting  (e.g.,  prochlorperazine  [Compazine])  or  gas-
troesophageal disorders (e.g., metoclopramide) are neuroleptic agents 
and can also cause these disorders. Hyperkinetic movement disorders 
secondary to neuroleptic drugs can be divided into those that present 
acutely,  subacutely,  or  after  prolonged  exposure  (tardive  syndromes). 
Dopamine-blocking  drugs  can  also  be  associated  with  a  reversible 
parkinsonian syndrome for which anticholinergics are often concom-
itantly  prescribed,  but  these  drugs  are  not  effective  antiparkinsonian 
agents, they are associated with cognitive side effects, and there is con-
cern that this may increase the risk of developing a tardive syndrome.

 ■ ACUTE
Dystonia is the most common acute hyperkinetic drug reaction. It is 
typically  generalized  in  children  and  focal  in  adults  (e.g.,  blepharo-
spasm, torticollis, or OMD). The reaction can develop within minutes 
of  exposure  and  can  be  successfully  treated  in  most  cases  with  par-
enteral  administration  of  anticholinergics  (benztropine  or  diphenhy-
dramine), benzodiazepines (lorazepam, clonazepam, or diazepam), or 
dopamine agonists. The abrupt onset of severe spasms may occasion-
ally be confused with a seizure; however, there is no loss of conscious-
ness, automatisms, EEG abnormalities, or postictal features typical of 
epilepsy. The acute onset of chorea, stereotypic behavior, and tics may 
also be seen, particularly following exposure to CNS stimulants such as 
methylphenidate, cocaine, or amphetamines.

 ■ SUBACUTE
Akathisia is the most common reaction in this category. It consists of 
motor restlessness with a need to move that is alleviated by movement. 
Therapy  consists  of  removing  the  offending  agent.  When  this  is  not 
possible,  symptoms  may  be  ameliorated  with  benzodiazepines,  anti-
cholinergics, beta blockers, or dopamine agonists.

 ■ TARDIVE SYNDROMES
These disorders develop months to years after initiation of the neuro-
leptic agent. Tardive dyskinesias (TD) are most common, and typically 
present  with  choreiform  and/or  dystonic  movements  involving  the 
mouth, lips, and tongue. In severe cases, the trunk, limbs, and respi-
ratory  muscles  may  also  be  affected.  In  approximately  one-third  of 
patients,  TD  remit  within  3  months  of  stopping  the  drug,  and  most 
patients  gradually  improve  over  the  course  of  several  years.  How-
ever, abnormal movements may also develop, persist, or worsen after 
stopping the offending agent. The movements are thought to be often 
mild  and  more  upsetting  to  the  family  than  to  the  patient,  but  they 
can  be  severe  and  disabling,  particularly  in  the  context  of  an  under-
lying  psychiatric  disorder.  Atypical  antipsychotics  (e.g.,  clozapine, 
risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole) are 
associated with a lower risk of causing TD in comparison to traditional 
antipsychotics. Younger patients have a lower risk of developing neu-
roleptic-induced TD, whereas elderly people, females, and those with 
underlying  organic  cerebral  dysfunction  have  been  reported  to  be  at 
greater risk. Chronic use is associated with increased risk of TD, and 
specifically, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has warned that 
use of metoclopramide for >12 weeks increases the risk of TD. Because 
TD can be permanent and resistant to treatment, antipsychotics should 
be used judiciously, atypical neuroleptics should be the preferred agent 
when possible although there are now questions as to the risk of TD 
with atypical neuroleptics as well, and continued use should be regu-
larly monitored and cease when possible.

Treatment primarily consists of stopping the offending agent. If the 
patient is receiving a traditional antipsychotic, and withdrawal is not 
possible,  replacement  with  an  atypical  antipsychotic  (e.g.,  clozapine) 
should be tried. Abrupt cessation of a neuroleptic should be avoided 
because acute withdrawal can induce worsening. TD can persist after 
withdrawal of antipsychotics and can be difficult to treat. Valbenazine 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3407

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3408 (Ingrezza)  is  an  ester  of  tetrabenazine  that  is  approved  for  the  treat-
ment of TD based on results of efficacy in double-blind trials, but it is 
associated with sleepiness and QT prolongation. It acts as a vesicular 
monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT-2) inhibitor and blocks storage 
of  dopamine.  Deuterated  tetrabenazine  is  also  being  studied  for  this 
indication.  Benefits  in  open-label  studies  have  been  reported  with 
valproic  acid  (750–3000  mg/d),  anticholinergics,  or  botulinum  toxin 
injections.  Other  approaches  that  have  been  tried  include  baclofen 
(40–80  mg/d)  or  clonazepam  (1–8  mg/d).  In  some  cases,  where  the 
abnormal  movement  is  refractory  to  therapy,  pallidal  DBS  may  be  a 
treatment option.

Chronic  neuroleptic  exposure  can  also  be  associated  with  tardive 
dystonia, with preferential involvement of axial muscles and character-
istic rocking movements of the trunk and pelvis. Tardive dystonia can 
be  more  troublesome  than  tardive  dyskinesia  and  frequently  persists 
despite stopping medication. Valproic acid, anticholinergics, and botu-
linum toxin may occasionally be beneficial, but patients are frequently 
refractory to medical therapy. Tardive akathisia, tardive TS, and tardive 
tremor syndromes are rare but may also occur after chronic neuroleptic 
exposure.

Neuroleptic medications can also be associated with a neuroleptic 
malignant  syndrome  (NMS).  NMS  is  characterized  by  the  acute  or 
subacute onset of muscle rigidity, elevated temperature, altered mental 
status, hyperthermia, tachycardia, labile blood pressure, renal failure, 
and  markedly  elevated  creatine  kinase  levels.  Symptoms  typically 
evolve within days or weeks after initiating the drug. NMS can also be 
precipitated by the abrupt withdrawal of dopaminergic medications in 
PD patients. Treatment involves immediate cessation of the offending 
antipsychotic drug and the introduction of a dopaminergic agent (e.g., 
a dopamine agonist or levodopa), dantrolene, or a benzodiazepine. In 
very severe cases, when oral intake is not possible, a patch (delivering 
rotigotine  subcutaneously)  or  an infusion  pump  (delivering  apomor-
phine subcutaneously) may be the best approach to provide dopamin-
ergic treatment. Treatment may need to be undertaken in an intensive 
care setting and include supportive measures such as control of body 
temperature (antipyretics and cooling blankets), hydration, electrolyte 
replacement, and control of renal function and blood pressure.

Drugs  that  have  serotonin-like  activity  (tryptophan,  MDMA  or 
“ecstasy,”  meperidine)  or  that  block  serotonin  reuptake  can  induce  a 
rare,  but  potentially  fatal,  serotonin  syndrome  that  is  characterized 
by confusion, hyperthermia, tachycardia, and coma as well as rigidity, 
ataxia, and tremor. Myoclonus is often a prominent feature, in contrast 
to NMS, which it resembles in other respects. Patients can be managed 
with  propranolol,  diazepam,  diphenhydramine,  chlorpromazine,  or 
cyproheptadine as well as supportive measures.

A  variety  of  drugs  can  also  be  associated  with  parkinsonism  and 
other hyperkinetic movement disorders. Some examples include phe-
nytoin (chorea, dystonia, tremor, myoclonus), carbamazepine (tics and 
dystonia),  tricyclic  antidepressants  (dyskinesias,  tremor,  myoclonus), 
fluoxetine  (myoclonus,  chorea,  dystonia),  oral  contraceptives  (dys-
kinesia),  β-adrenergics  (tremor),  buspirone  (akathisia,  dyskinesias, 
myoclonus), and digoxin, cimetidine, diazoxide, lithium, methadone, 
and fentanyl (dyskinesias).

PAROXYSMAL DYSKINESIAS
Paroxysmal dyskinesias are a group of rare disorders characterized by 
episodic,  brief  involuntary  movements  that  can  manifest  as  various 
types of hyperkinetic movements, including chorea, dystonia, tremor, 
myoclonus,  and  ballism.  There  are  three  main  types:  (1)  paroxysmal 
kinesigenic  dyskinesia  (PKD),  where  the  involuntary  movements  are 
triggered  by  sudden  movement,  (2)  paroxysmal  nonkinesigenic  dyski-
nesias (PNKD), where the attacks are not induced by movement, and 
(3) rare cases of paroxysmal exertion-induced dyskinesia (PED), where 
attacks are induced by prolonged exercise.

PKD  is  characterized  by  brief,  self-limited  attacks  induced  by 
movement onset such as running but also occasionally by unexpected 
sound or photic stimulation. Attacks may affect one side of the body, 
last seconds to minutes at a time, and recur several times a day. They 

usually  manifest  as  a  mixed  hyperkinetic  movement  disorder  with 
dystonic  posturing  of  a  limb,  ballismus,  and  chorea,  which  may  also 
become generalized. PKD is most commonly familial with an autoso-
mal dominant pattern of inheritance and mutations in the proline-rich 
transmembrane protein 2 (PRRT2) gene, but may also occur secondary 
to various brain disorders such as multiple sclerosis or hyperglycemia. 
PKD is more frequent in males (4:1), and the onset is typically in the 
first  or  second  decade  of  life.  About  70%  report  sensory  symptoms 
such as tingling or numbness of the affected limb preceding the attack 
by  a  few  milliseconds.  The  evolution  is  relatively  benign,  and  there 
is a trend toward resolution of the attacks over time. Treatment with 
low-dose anticonvulsant therapy such as carbamazepine or phenytoin 
is  advised  when  the  attacks  are  frequent  and  interfere  with  daily  life 
activities and is effective in about 80% of patients. Some clinical fea-
tures of PKD (abrupt and short-lasting attacks preceded by an “aura”), 
the association with true seizure episodes, and its favorable response 
to  anticonvulsant  drugs  have  led  to  speculation  that  it  is  epileptic  in 
origin, but this has not been established.

PNKD  involves  attacks  of  generalized  dyskinesias  precipitated  by 
alcohol, caffeine, stress, or fatigue. In comparison with PKD, the epi-
sodes have a relatively longer duration (minutes to hours) and are less 
frequent  (one  to  three  per  day).  PNKD  is  inherited  as  an  autosomal 
dominant condition with high (~80%) but incomplete penetrance. A 
missense  mutation  in  the  myofibrillogenesis  regulator  (PNKD)  gene 
has  been  identified  in  several  families.  Recognition  of  the  condition 
and elimination of the underlying precipitating factors, where possible, 
are the first priorities. Tetrabenazine, neuroleptics, dopamine-blocking 
agents, propranolol, clonazepam, and baclofen may be helpful. Treat-
ment  may  not  be  required  if  the  condition  is  mild  and  self-limited. 
Most patients with PNKD do not benefit from anticonvulsant drugs, 
but some may respond to clonazepam or other benzodiazepines.

The  SLC2A1  (solute  carrier  family  2  member  1)  gene,  previously 
linked  to  GLUT1  (glucose  transporter  of  the  blood-brain  barrier) 
deficiency  syndrome,  has  been  identified  to  also  cause  paroxysmal 
PED. The attacks in this disorder are characterized by a combination 
of chorea, athetosis, and dystonia in excessively exercised body regions 
with the legs being most frequently affected. A single attack lasts from a 
few minutes to an hour and occurs after prolonged physical exercise. In 
addition to the movement disorder, several patients have other disease 
manifestations  between  episodes  such  as  epilepsy,  hemolytic  anemia, 
and migraine. A ketogenic diet is an effective therapeutic option.

RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder that affects ~10% 
of the adult population (it is rare in Asians) and can cause significant 
morbidity  in  some  individuals.  It  was  first  described  in  the  seven-
teenth  century  by  the  English  physician  Thomas  Willis  but  has  only 
recently been recognized as a bona fide movement disorder. The four 
core  symptoms  required  for  diagnosis  are:  an  urge  to  move  the  legs 
usually caused or accompanied by an unpleasant sensation in the legs; 
symptoms that begin or worsen with rest; partial or complete relief by 
movement; and worsening during the evening or night.

Symptoms  most  commonly  begin  in  the  legs  but  can  spread  to, 
or  even  begin  in,  the  upper  limbs.  The  unpleasant  sensation  is  often 
described as a creepy-crawly feeling, paresthesia, or burning. In about 
80% of patients, RLS is associated with periodic leg movements (PLMs) 
during sleep and occasionally while awake. These involuntary move-
ments are usually brief, lasting no more than a few seconds, and recur 
every  5–90  s.  The  restlessness  and  PLMs  are  a  major  cause  of  sleep 
disturbance, leading to poor-quality sleep and daytime sleepiness.

Primary  RLS  has  a  strong  genetic  component;  however,  no  caus-
ative  gene  has  been  identified.  Genome  association  studies  have 
identified  variants  associated  with  RLS  risk,  the  strongest  candidates 
in  the  PTPRD,  BTBD9,  and  MEIS1  genes.  The  mean  age  of  onset  in 
familial  forms  is  in  the  third  decade  of  life,  although  pediatric  cases 
are recognized. The severity of symptoms is variable. Secondary RLS 
may be associated with pregnancy or a range of underlying disorders, 
including  anemia,  ferritin  deficiency,  renal  failure,  and  peripheral 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3408

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3409

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
6

T
r
e
m
o
r
,

C
h
o
r
e
a
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
v
e
m
e
n
t

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

neuropathy. The pathogenesis probably involves disordered dopamine 
function, which may be peripheral or central, possibly in association 
with an abnormality of iron metabolism. Diagnosis is made on clinical 
grounds but can be supported by polysomnography and the demon-
stration  of  PLMs.  The  neurologic  examination  is  normal.  Secondary 
causes of RLS should be excluded, and ferritin levels, glucose, and renal 
function should be measured.

Most RLS sufferers have mild symptoms that do not require specific 
treatment.  General  measures  to  improve  sleep  hygiene  and  quality 
should  be  attempted  first.  If  symptoms  remain  intrusive,  low  doses 
of  dopamine  agonists,  e.g.,  pramipexole  (0.25–0.5  mg),  ropinirole  
(1–2 mg), or patch rotigotine (2–3 mg), taken 1–2 h before bedtime are 
generally effective. Levodopa may also be effective but is more likely to 
be associated with augmentation (spread and worsening of restlessness 
and its appearance earlier in the day) or rebound (reappearance some-
times with worsening of symptoms at a time related to the drug’s short 
half-life).  Augmentation  can  also  be  seen  with  dopamine  agonists, 
particularly  if  higher  doses  are  employed.  Other  drugs  that  can  be 
effective include anticonvulsants, analgesics, and opiates. Management 
of secondary RLS should be directed to correcting the underlying dis-
order; for example, iron replacement for anemia.

OTHER DISORDERS THAT MAY PRESENT 
WITH A COMBINATION OF PARKINSONISM 
AND HYPERKINETIC MOVEMENTS
 ■ WILSON’S DISEASE (SEE ALSO CHAP. 415)
Wilson’s disease (WD) is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder of 
copper  metabolism  that  produces  neurologic,  psychiatric,  and  liver 
manifestations,  alone  or  in  combination.  It  is  caused  by  mutations 
in  the  ATP7B  gene  encoding  a  P-type  ATPase.  The  disease  was  first 
described by the English neurologist Kinnier Wilson at the beginning 
of the twentieth century, although at around the same time the German 
physicians  Kayser  and  Fleischer  separately  noted  the  characteristic 
association of corneal pigmentation with hepatic and neurologic fea-
tures. WD has a worldwide prevalence of ~1 in 30,000, with a mutation 
carrier  frequency  of  1  in  90.  About  half  of  WD  patients  (especially 
younger  patients)  present  with  liver  abnormalities.  The  remainder 
present  with  neurologic  disease  (with  or  without  underlying  liver 
abnormalities), and a small proportion have hematologic or psychiatric 
problems at disease onset.

Neurologic onset usually manifests in the second decade of life with 
tremor, rigidity, and dystonia. The tremor is usually in the upper limbs, 
bilateral, and asymmetric. Tremor can be on intention or occasionally 
at rest and, in advanced disease, can take on a wing-beating character-
istic (a flapping movement when the arms are held outstretched with 
the  fingers  opposed).  Other  features  can  include  parkinsonism  with 
bradykinesia, dystonia (particularly facial grimacing), dysarthria, and 
dysphagia. More than half of those with neurologic features have a his-
tory  of  psychiatric  disturbances,  including  depression,  mood  swings, 
and overt psychosis. Kayser-Fleischer (KF) rings are seen virtually in 
all patients with neurologic features and 80% of those with hepatic pre-
sentations. KF rings represent the deposition of copper in Descemet’s 
membrane around the cornea. They consist of a characteristic grayish 
rim or circle at the limbus of the cornea and are best detected by slit-
lamp  examination.  Neuropathologic  examination  is  characterized  by 
neurodegeneration  and  astrogliosis  in  the  basal  ganglia,  particularly 
in the striatum.

WD  should  always  be  considered  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of 
a movement disorder in the first decades of life. Low levels of blood 
copper  and  ceruloplasmin  and  high  levels  of  urinary  copper  may  be 
present, but normal levels do not exclude the diagnosis. Brain imaging 
usually  reveals  generalized  brain  atrophy  in  established  cases,  and 
~50%  have  signal  hypointensity  in  the  caudate  head,  putamen,  glo-
bus  pallidus,  substantia  nigra,  and  red  nucleus  on  T2-weighted  MRI 
scans. However, correlation of imaging changes with clinical features 
is not good. Liver biopsy with demonstration of high copper levels and 
genetic testing remain the gold standard for the diagnosis.

In  the  absence  of  treatment,  the  course  is  progressive  and  leads 
to  severe  neurologic  dysfunction  and  early  death  in  the  majority  of 
patients,  although  a  small  proportion  experience  a  relatively  benign 
course. Treatment is directed at reducing tissue copper levels and main-
tenance therapy to prevent reaccumulation. There is no clear consensus 
on optimal treatment, and patients should be managed in a unit with 
expertise in WD. Penicillamine is frequently used to increase copper 
excretion, but may lead to a worsening of symptoms in the initial stages 
of therapy. Side effects are common and can to some degree be atten-
uated  by  coadministration  of  pyridoxine.  Tetrathiomolybdate  blocks 
the  absorption  of  copper  and  can  be  used  instead  of  penicillamine. 
Trientine and zinc are useful drugs for maintenance therapy. Effective 
treatment can reverse the neurologic features in most patients, partic-
ularly  when  started  early.  However,  some  patients  may  still  progress, 
especially those with hepatocerebral disease. KF rings tend to decrease 
after 3–6 months and disappear by 2 years. Adherence to maintenance 
therapy is a major challenge in long-term care. Patients with advanced 
hepatic disease may require a liver transplant, and the potential role of 
organ-specific chelation therapy is under investigation.

 ■ NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN  
IRON ACCUMULATION
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) represents a 
group of inherited disorders characterized by iron accumulation in the 
basal  ganglia.  Clinically,  they  can  manifest  as  progressive  neurologic 
disorders  with  a  variety  of  clinical  features  including  parkinsonism, 
dystonia,  neuropsychiatric  abnormalities,  and  retinal  degeneration. 
Cognitive disorders and cerebellar dysfunction may also be seen. Pre-
sentation is usually in childhood, but adult cases have been described. 
Multiple  genes  have  been  identified.  Pantothenate  kinase–associated 
neurodegeneration  (PKAN),  formerly  known  as  Hallervorden-Spatz 
disease, is caused by a mutation in the PANK2 gene, and is the most 
common form of NBIA, accounting for about 50% of cases. Onset is 
usually in early childhood and is manifest as a combination of dystonia, 
parkinsonism,  and  spasticity.  MRI  shows  a  characteristic  low  signal 
abnormality in the center of the globus pallidus on T2-weighted scans 
caused by iron accumulation and known as the “eye of the tiger” sign. 
Numerous other gene mutations have been described associated with 
iron  accumulation  including  PLA2G6,  C19orf12,  FA2H,  ATP13A2, 
WDR45, FTL, CP, COASY, and DCAF17. One must be cautious, how-
ever, not to assume that all cases with iron accumulation in the basal 
ganglia represent an NBIA, because iron accumulation in specific basal 
ganglia regions is normal, and excess iron accumulation may occur in 
the basal ganglia as a nonspecific secondary consequence of neurode-
generation unrelated to a defect in iron metabolism.

FUNCTIONAL (PSYCHOGENIC) DISORDERS
Virtually  all  movement  disorders  including  tremor,  tics,  dystonia, 
myoclonus,  chorea,  ballism,  and  parkinsonism  can  be  psychogenic 
in  origin.  The  term  functional  neurological  symptom  disorder  (FND)/
conversion disorder has been suggested to replace the term psychogenic 
disorder  in  order  to  remove  the  criterion  of  psychological  stress  as  a 
prerequisite for diagnosis; however, the terminology remains contro-
versial and both terms are used. A diagnosis can be made by identi-
fying  neurologic  signs  that  are  specific  to  FNDs  without  reliance  on 
psychological stressors or suggestive historical clues. Tremor affecting 
the upper limbs is the most common psychogenic movement disorder. 
Psychogenic movements can result from a somatoform or conversion 
disorder,  malingering  (e.g.,  seeking  financial  gain),  or  a  factitious 
disorder (e.g., seeking psychological gain). Functional movement dis-
orders are relatively common (estimated to be 2–3% of patients seen 
in  a  movement  disorder  clinic),  more  frequent  in  women,  disabling 
for the patient and family, and expensive for society. Clinical features 
suggesting a functional or psychogenic movement disorder include an 
acute onset with a pattern of abnormal movement that is inconsistent 
with the phenotype of a known movement disorder. Diagnosis is based 
on  the  nonorganic  quality  of  the  movement,  the  absence  of  findings 
of  an  organic  disease  process,  and  positive  features  that  specifically 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3409

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3410 point to a functional illness such as variability and distractibility. For 
example,  in  a  functional  or  psychogenic  disorder,  the  magnitude  of 
tremor is increased with attention and diminishes or even disappears 
when  the  patient  is  distracted  by  being  asked  to  perform  a  different 
task or is unaware that he or she is being observed. This is the opposite 
of what is seen with an organic tremor where the magnitude of tremor 
is increased with distraction and tends to be reduced when observed. 
Other positive features suggesting a psychogenic problem include vari-
able tremor frequency, entrainment of frequency with the frequency of 
a designated movement in the contralateral limb such as tapping, and 
a  response  to  placebo  interventions.  Associated  features  can  include 
nonanatomic  sensory  findings,  give-way  weakness,  astasia-abasia 
(an  odd,  gyrating  gait  or  posture)  (Chap.  26),  and  multiple  somatic 
complaints  with  no  underlying  pathology  (somatoform  disorder). 
Comorbid psychiatric problems such as anxiety, depression, and emo-
tional trauma may be present but are not necessary for the diagnosis, 
which  is  why  some  prefer  to  call  the  movement  disorder  functional 
rather  than  psychogenic.  Functional  movement  disorders  typically 
occur as an isolated entity but may also be seen in association with an 
underlying organic problem. The diagnosis can usually be made based 
on history and clinical features alone, and unnecessary tests or medi-
cations  can  be  avoided.  If  there  are  underlying  psychiatric  problems, 
they should be identified and treated, but as noted many patients with 
functional movement disorders have no obvious psychiatric pathology. 
Treatment of FND starts with explaining the diagnosis to the patient 
in a nonthreatening manner, but many are resistant to accepting this 
diagnosis.  Psychological  therapies  (especially  cognitive-behavioral) 
are  the  method  of  choice.  An  increasing  role  of  physiotherapy  has 
recently been recognized; comorbid depression, anxiety, and pain may 
be treated pharmacologically. Patients with hypochondriasis, factitious 
disorders, and malingering have a poor prognosis.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Albanese  A  et  al:  Therapeutic  advances  in  dystonia.  Mov  Disord 

30:1547, 2015.

Balint B, Bhatia KP: Dystonia: An update on phenomenology, classi-
fication, pathogenesis and treatment. Curr Opin Neurol 27:468, 2014.
Bhatia KP et al: Consensus statement on the classification of tremors 
from  the  task  force  on  tremor  of  the  International  Parkinson  and 
Movement Disorder Society. Mov Disord 33:75, 2018.

Billnitzer A, Jankovic J: Current management of tics and Tourette 
syndrome: Behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical treatments. Neu-
rotherapeutics 17:1681, 2020.

Espay  AJ  et  al:  Essential  pitfalls  in  “essential”  tremor.  Mov  Disord 

32:325, 2017.

Espay AJ et al: Current concepts in diagnosis and treatment of func-

tional neurological disorders. JAMA Neurol 75:1132, 2018.

Kieburtz K et al: Huntington’s disease: Current and future therapeutic 

prospects. Mov Disorders 33:1033, 2018.

Krack P et al: Current applications and limitations of surgical treat-

ments for movement disorders. Mov Disord 32:36, 2017.

Maras C et al: Nomenclature of genetic movement disorders: Recom-
mendations of the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society task force. Mov Disord 32:724, 2017.

Mestre TA: Recent advances in the therapeutic development for Hun-

tington disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 59:125, 2019.

Pan L, Feigin A: Huntington’s disease: New frontiers in therapeutics. 

Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 21:10, 2021.

Tabrizi SJ et al: Targeting Huntingtin expression in patients with Hun-

tington’s disease. N Engl J Med 380:2307, 2019.

Van Der Veen S et al: Nomenclature of genetically determined myo-
clonus syndromes: Recommendations of the International Parkinson 
and  Movement  Disorder  Society  Task  Force.  Mov  Disord  34:1602, 
2019.

437 Amyotrophic Lateral  
Sclerosis and Other Motor 
Neuron Diseases
Robert H. Brown, Jr.

AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS (ALS)
ALS  is  the  most  common  progressive  motor  neuron  disease.  It  is  a 
prime example of a neurodegenerative disease and is arguably the most 
devastating of the neurodegenerative disorders.
 ■ PATHOLOGY
The  pathologic  hallmark  of  motor  neuron  degenerative  disorders  is 
death  of  lower  motor  neurons  (consisting  of  anterior  horn  cells  in 
the  spinal  cord  and  their  brainstem  homologues  innervating  bulbar 
muscles)  and  upper,  or  corticospinal,  motor  neurons  (originating  in 
layer five of the motor cortex and descending via the pyramidal tract 
to synapse with lower motor neurons, either directly or indirectly via 
interneurons) (Chap. 24). Although at its onset ALS may involve selec-
tive loss of function of only upper or lower motor neurons, it ultimately 
causes  progressive  loss  of  both  categories  of  motor  neurons.  Indeed, 
in  the  absence  of  clear  involvement  of  both  motor  neuron  types, 
the diagnosis of ALS is questionable. In a subset of cases, ALS arises 
concurrently  with  frontotemporal  dementia  (Chap.  432);  in  these 
instances, there is degeneration of frontotemporal cortical neurons and 
corresponding cortical atrophy.

Other  motor  neuron  diseases  involve  only  particular  subsets  of 
motor neurons (Tables 437-1 and 437-2). Thus, in bulbar palsy and spi-
nal muscular atrophy (SMA; also called progressive muscular atrophy), 
the  lower  motor  neurons  of  brainstem  and  spinal  cord,  respectively, 
are  most  severely  involved.  By  contrast,  pseudobulbar  palsy,  primary 
lateral  sclerosis  (PLS),  and  hereditary  spastic  paraplegia  (HSP)  affect 
only upper motor neurons innervating the brainstem and spinal cord.

In  each  of  these  diseases,  the  affected  motor  neurons  undergo 
shrinkage, often with accumulation of the pigmented lipid (lipofuscin) 
that normally develops in these cells with advancing age. In ALS, the 
motor  neuron  cytoskeleton  is  typically  affected  early  in  the  illness. 
Focal enlargements are frequent in proximal motor axons; ultrastruc-
turally, these “spheroids” are composed of accumulations of neurofil-
aments and other proteins. Commonly in both sporadic and familial 
ALS, the affected neurons demonstrate ubiquitin-positive aggregates, 
typically associated with the protein TDP43 (see below). Also seen is 
proliferation of astroglia and microglia, the inevitable accompaniment 
of all degenerative processes in the central nervous system (CNS).

The  death  of  the  peripheral  motor  neurons  in  the  brainstem  and 
spinal  cord  leads  to  denervation  and  atrophy  of  the  corresponding 
muscle fibers. Histochemical and electrophysiologic evidence indicates 
that in the early phases of the illness denervated muscle can be rein-
nervated by sprouting of nearby distal motor nerve terminals, although 
reinnervation in this disease is considerably less extensive than in most 
other disorders affecting motor neurons (e.g., poliomyelitis, peripheral 
neuropathy).  As  denervation  progresses,  muscle  atrophy  is  readily 
recognized  in  muscle  biopsies  and  on  clinical  examination.  This  is 
the basis for the term amyotrophy. The loss of cortical motor neurons 
results in thinning of the corticospinal tracts that travel via the inter-
nal capsule (Fig. 437-1) and pyramidal tracts in the brainstem to the 
lateral and anterior white matter columns of the spinal cord. The loss 
of  fibers  in  the  lateral  columns  and  resulting  fibrillary  gliosis  impart 
a  particular  firmness  (lateral  sclerosis).  A  remarkable  feature  of  the 
disease  is  the  selectivity  of  neuronal  cell  death.  By  light  microscopy, 
the entire sensory apparatus and cerebellar structures that control the 
coordination  of  movement  remain  intact.  Except  in  cases  of  fronto-
temporal dementia, the components of the brain required for cognitive 
processing are also preserved. However, immunostaining indicates that 
neurons bearing ubiquitin, a marker for degeneration, are also detected 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3410

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 437-1  Etiology of Motor Neuron Disorders
INVESTIGATION
DIAGNOSTIC CATEGORY
Structural lesions
MRI scan of head (including foramen 
magnum and cervical spine)

 Parasagittal or foramen magnum 
tumors

  Cervical spondylosis
  Chiari malformation of syrinx
 Spinal cord arteriovenous 
malformation

Infections
  Bacterial—tetanus, Lyme
  Viral—poliomyelitis, herpes zoster
  Retroviral—myelopathy
Intoxications, physical agents
  Toxins—lead, aluminum, others
  Drugs—strychnine, phenytoin
  Electric short, x-irradiation
Immunologic mechanisms
  Plasma cell dyscrasias
  Autoimmune polyradiculopathy

 Motor neuropathy with conduction 
block

  Paraneoplastic
  Paracarcinomatous
Metabolic
  Hypoglycemia
  Hyperparathyroidism
  Hyperthyroidism

 Deficiency of folate, vitamin B12, 
vitamin E

  Malabsorption
  Deficiency of copper, zinc
  Mitochondrial dysfunction
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperglycinuria

Hereditary disorders
  C9orf72
  Superoxide dismutase
  TDP43
  FUS/TLS
  Androgen receptor defect  

(Kennedy’s disease)

CSF exam, culture
Lyme titer
Antiviral antibody
HTLV-1 titers
24-h urine for heavy metals
Serum lead level

Complete blood counta
Sedimentation ratea
Total proteina
Anti-GM1 antibodiesa
Anti-Hu antibody
MRI scan, bone marrow biopsy

Fasting blood sugara
Routine chemistries including calciuma
PTH
Thyroid functiona
Vitamin B12, vitamin E, folatea
Serum zinc, coppera
24-h stool fat, carotene, prothrombin 
time
Fasting lactate, pyruvate, ammonia
Lipid electrophoresis
Urine and serum amino acids
CSF amino acids
WBC or cheek swab DNA for 
mutational analysis

aShould be obtained in all cases.
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FUS/TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated in 
liposarcoma; HTLV-1, human T-cell lymphotropic virus; MRI, magnetic resonance 
imaging; PTH, parathyroid; WBC, white blood cell.

in nonmotor systems. Moreover, studies of glucose metabolism in the 
illness also indicate that there is neuronal dysfunction outside of the 
motor system. Pathologic studies reveal proliferation of microglial cells 
and  astrocytes  in  affected  regions;  in  some  cases,  this  phenomenon, 
designated  neuroinflamation,  can  be  visualized  using  positron  emis-
sion  tomography  (PET)  scanning  for  ligands  that  are  recognized  by 
activated microglia. Within the motor system, there is some selectivity 
of  involvement.  Thus,  motor  neurons  required  for  ocular  motility 
remain  unaffected,  as  do  the  parasympathetic  neurons  in  the  sacral 
spinal  cord  (the  nucleus  of  Onufrowicz,  or  Onuf)  that  innervate  the 
sphincters of the bowel and bladder.

 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The  manifestations  of  ALS  are  somewhat  variable  depending  on 
whether corticospinal neurons or lower motor neurons in the brain-
stem  and  spinal  cord  are  more  prominently  involved.  With  lower 

TABLE 437-2  Sporadic Motor Neuron Diseases
CHRONIC
Upper and lower motor neuron
Predominantly upper motor neuron
Predominantly lower motor neuron

ENTITY
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Primary lateral sclerosis
Multifocal motor neuropathy with 
conduction block
Motor neuropathy with 
paraproteinemia or cancer
Motor predominant peripheral 
neuropathies

OTHER
Associated with other 
neurodegenerative disorders
Secondary motor neuron disorders 
(see Table 437-1)

ACUTE
Poliomyelitis
Herpes zoster
Coxsackie virus
West Nile virus

motor  neuron  dysfunction  and  early  denervation,  typically  the  first 
evidence of the disease is insidiously developing asymmetric weakness, 
usually first evident distally in one of the limbs. A detailed history often 
discloses recent development of cramping with volitional movements, 
typically  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning  (e.g.,  while  stretching  in 
bed). Weakness caused by denervation is associated with progressive 
wasting  and  atrophy  of  muscles  and,  particularly  early  in  the  illness, 
spontaneous twitching of motor units, or fasciculations. In the hands, 
a preponderance of extensor over flexor weakness is common. When 
the  initial  denervation  involves  bulbar  rather  than  limb  muscles,  the 
problem  at  onset  is  difficulty  with  chewing,  swallowing,  and  move-
ments of the face and tongue. Rarely, early involvement of the muscles 
of  respiration  may  lead  to  death  before  the  disease  is  far  advanced 

3411

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
7

A
m
y
o
t
r
o
p
h
i
c
L
a
t
e
r
a
l
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
t
o
r
N
e
u
r
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

FIGURE  437-1  Amyotrophic 
lateral  sclerosis.  Axial  T2-weighted  magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scan through the lateral ventricles of the brain reveals 
abnormal  high  signal  intensity  within  the  corticospinal  tracts  (arrows).  This  MRI 
feature  represents  an  increase  in  water  content  in  myelin  tracts  undergoing 
Wallerian degeneration secondary to cortical motor neuronal loss. This finding is 
commonly  present  in  ALS  but  can  also  be  seen  in  AIDS-related  encephalopathy, 
infarction, or other disease processes that produce corticospinal neuronal loss in 
a symmetric fashion.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3411

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3412 elsewhere. With prominent corticospinal involvement, there is hyper-
activity of the muscle-stretch reflexes (tendon jerks) and, often, spastic 
resistance  to  passive  movements  of  the  affected  limbs.  Patients  with 
significant reflex hyperactivity complain of muscle stiffness often out of 
proportion to weakness. Degeneration of the corticobulbar projections 
innervating the brainstem results in dysarthria and exaggeration of the 
motor expressions of emotion. The latter leads to involuntary excess in 
weeping or laughing (pseudobulbar affect).

Virtually  any  muscle  group  may  be  the  first  to  show  signs  of  dis-
ease,  but,  as  time  passes,  more  and  more  muscles  become  involved 
until ultimately the disorder takes on a symmetric distribution in all 
regions. It is characteristic of ALS that, regardless of whether the initial 
disease  involves  upper  or  lower  motor  neurons,  both  will  eventually 
be implicated. Even in the late stages of the illness, sensory, bowel and 
bladder,  and  cognitive  functions  are  preserved.  Even  when  there  is 
severe brainstem disease, ocular motility is spared until the very late 
stages of the illness. As noted, in some cases (particularly those that are 
familial),  ALS  develops  concurrently  with  frontotemporal  dementia, 
characterized by early behavioral abnormalities with prominent behav-
ioral features indicative of frontal lobe dysfunction.

A committee of the World Federation of Neurology has established 
diagnostic  guidelines  for  ALS.  Essential  for  the  diagnosis  is  simulta-
neous  upper  and  lower  motor  neuron  involvement  with  progressive 
weakness and the exclusion of all alternative diagnoses. The disorder 
is  ranked  as  “definite”  ALS  when  three  or  four  of  the  following  are 
involved:  bulbar,  cervical,  thoracic,  and  lumbosacral  motor  neurons. 
When  two  sites  are  involved,  the  diagnosis  is  “probable,”  and  when 
only one site is implicated, the diagnosis is “possible.” An exception is 
made for those who have progressive upper and lower motor neuron 
signs at only one site and a mutation in the gene encoding superoxide 
dismutase (SOD1; see below).

It  is  now  recognized  that  another  clinical  manifestation  in  most 
cases  of  ALS  is  the  presence  in  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)  of  markers 
of  neurodegeneration,  such  as  elevated  levels  of  neurofilament  light 
chains or phosphorylated neurofilament heavy chains; some markers 
of  inflammation  (e.g.,  monocyte  chemoattractant  protein  1)  are  also 
elevated. These CSF biomarkers are increasingly used as endpoints in 
clinical trials.

 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
The illness is relentlessly progressive, leading to death from respiratory 
paralysis; the median survival is from 3 to 5 years. There are very rare 
reports  of  stabilization  or  even  regression  of  ALS.  In  most  societies, 
there is an incidence of 1–3 per 100,000 and a prevalence of 3–5 per 
100,000. It is striking that at least 1 in 1000 deaths in North America 
and  Western  Europe  (and  probably  elsewhere)  are  due  to  ALS;  this 
finding predicts that more than 300,000 individuals now alive in the 
United States will die of ALS. Several endemic foci of higher prevalence 
exist in the western Pacific (e.g., in specific regions of Guam or Papua 
New  Guinea).  In  the  United  States  and  Europe,  men  are  somewhat 
more  frequently  affected  than  women.  Epidemiologic  studies  have 
incriminated  risk  factors  for  this  disease  including  exposure  to  pes-
ticides  and  insecticides,  silica,  smoking,  and  possibly  service  in  the 
military. Although ALS is overwhelmingly a sporadic disorder, some 
10% of cases are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
 ■ FAMILIAL ALS
Several  forms  of  selective  motor  neuron  disease  are  inheritable 
(Table  437-3).  Familial  ALS  (FALS)  involves  both  corticospinal  and 
lower motor neurons. Apart from its inheritance as an autosomal dom-
inant trait, it is clinically indistinguishable from sporadic ALS. Genetic 
studies  have  identified  mutations  in  multiple  genes,  including  those 
encoding the protein C9orf72 (open reading frame 72 on chromosome 
9), cytosolic enzyme SOD1 (superoxide dismutase), the RNA binding 
proteins TDP43 (encoded by the TAR DNA binding protein gene), and 
fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS), as the most 
common causes of FALS. Mutations in C9orf72 account for ~45–50% 
of FALS and perhaps 5–10% of sporadic ALS cases. Mutations in SOD1 

explain another 20% of cases of FALS, whereas TDP43 and FUS/TLS 
each represent about 5% of familial cases. Mutations in several other 
genes (such as optineurin, TBK1 and profilin-1) each cause about ~1% 
of cases.

Rare mutations in other genes are also clearly implicated in ALS-like 
diseases.  Thus,  a  familial,  dominantly  inherited  motor  disorder  that 
in  some  individuals  closely  mimics  the  ALS  phenotype  arises  from 
mutations in a gene that encodes a vesicle-binding protein. Mutations 
in  senataxin,  a  helicase,  cause  an  early-adult-onset,  slowly  evolving 
ALS variant. Kennedy’s syndrome is an X-linked, adult-onset disorder 
that may mimic ALS, as described below. Tau gene mutations usually 
underlie frontotemporal dementia, but in some instances may be asso-
ciated with prominent motor neuron findings.

Genetic analyses are also beginning to illuminate the pathogenesis 
of some childhood-onset motor neuron diseases. For example, a slowly 
disabling  degenerative,  predominantly  upper  motor  neuron  disease 
that  starts  in  the  first  decade  is  caused  by  mutations  in  a  gene  that 
expresses  a  novel  signaling  molecule  with  properties  of  a  guanine-
exchange factor, termed alsin.
 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Because ALS is currently untreatable, it is imperative that potentially 
remediable  causes  of  motor  neuron  dysfunction  be  excluded  (Table 
437-1). This is particularly true in cases that are atypical by virtue of 
(1) restriction to either upper or lower motor neurons, (2) involvement 
of neurons other than motor neurons, and (3) evidence of motor neu-
ronal  conduction  block  on  electrophysiologic  testing.  Compression 
of the cervical spinal cord or cervicomedullary junction from tumors 
in  the  cervical  regions  or  at  the  foramen  magnum  or  from  cervical 
spondylosis  with  osteophytes  projecting  into  the  vertebral  canal  can 
produce weakness, wasting, and fasciculations in the upper limbs and 
spasticity in the legs, closely resembling ALS. The absence of cranial 
nerve  involvement  may  be  helpful  in  differentiation,  although  some 
foramen  magnum  lesions  may  compress  the  twelfth  cranial  (hypo-
glossal) nerve, with resulting paralysis of the tongue. Absence of pain 
or  of  sensory  changes,  normal  bowel  and  bladder  function,  normal 
radiologic studies of the spine, and normal CSF all favor ALS. Where 
doubt exists, MRI scans and possibly contrast myelography should be 
performed to visualize the cervical spinal cord.

Another  important  entity  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of  ALS  is 
multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (MMCB), discussed 
below.  A  diffuse,  lower  motor  axonal  neuropathy  mimicking  ALS 
sometimes evolves in association with hematopoietic disorders such as 
lymphoma or multiple myeloma. In this clinical setting, the presence 
of an M-component in serum should prompt consideration of a bone 
marrow biopsy. Lyme disease (Chap. 186) may also cause an axonal, 
lower motor neuropathy, although typically with intense proximal limb 
pain and a CSF pleocytosis.

Other treatable disorders that occasionally mimic ALS are chronic 
lead  poisoning  and  thyrotoxicosis.  These  disorders  may  be  suggested 
by  the  patient’s  social  or  occupational  history  or  by  unusual  clinical 
features.  When  the  family  history  is  positive,  disorders  involving  the 
genes  encoding  C9orf72,  cytosolic  SOD1,  TDP43,  FUS/TLS,  and 
adult hexosaminidase A or α-glucosidase deficiency must be excluded 
(Chap.  418).  These  are  readily  identified  by  appropriate  laboratory 
tests; importantly, panels for simultaneous analysis of multiple ALS and 
FTD genes are now commercially available. Benign fasciculations are 
occasionally a source of concern because on inspection they resemble 
the fascicular twitchings that accompany motor neuron degeneration. 
The  absence  of  weakness,  atrophy,  or  denervation  phenomena  on 
electrophysiologic examination usually excludes ALS or other serious 
neurologic disease. Patients who have recovered from poliomyelitis may 
experience a delayed deterioration of motor neurons that presents clin-
ically with progressive weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations. Its cause 
is unknown, but it is thought to reflect sublethal prior injury to motor 
neurons by poliovirus (Chap. 204).

Rarely, ALS develops concurrently with features indicative of more 
widespread  neurodegeneration.  Thus,  one  infrequently  encounters 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3412

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3413

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
7

A
m
y
o
t
r
o
p
h
i
c
L
a
t
e
r
a
l
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
t
o
r
N
e
u
r
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

TABLE 437-3  Selected Genetic Motor Neuron Diseases

GENE 
SYMBOL

DISEASE
I. Upper and Lower Motor Neurons (Familial ALS)
ALS1

SOD1

GENE NAME

INHERITANCE

FREQUENCY 
(IN THE UNITED 
STATES)

USUAL ONSET

PROTEIN 
FUNCTION

UNUSUAL FEATURES

Cu/Zn superoxide 
dismutase 1
Alsin

AD

AR

20% FALS

Adult

<1% FALS

Juvenile

Protein 
antioxidant
GEF signaling

ALS2

ALS4
ALS6

ALS8/SMA

ALS10

ALS12
ALS14

ALS18

ALS20

ALS

ALS-FTD
ALS-FTD

ALS-FTD

ALS-FTD

ALS-FTD

ALS2

SETX
FUS/TLS

VAPB

TARDBP

OPTN
VCP

PFN1

TBK1
UBQLN2

CHMP2B

C9ORF72

MAPT

HNRNPA1

Heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein A1

DCTN1

Dynactin

AD
AD

Senataxin
Fused in sarcoma/
translocated in 
liposarcoma
Vesicle-associated 
protein B
TAR DNA binding protein AD

AD

Optineurin
Valosin-containing 
protein
Profilin 1

AD/AR
AD

AD

AD

AD

Tank-binding kinase 1
Ubiquilin 2

AD
X-LD

Chromatin-modifying 
protein 2B
Chromosome 9 open 
reading frame 72
Microtubule-associated 
protein Tau

AD

AD

AD

Survival motor neuron

AR

Hexosaminidase B

II. Lower Motor Neurons
Spinal muscular 
atrophies
GM2-gangliosidosis
  1. Sandhoff’s disease HEXB

SMN

  2. AB variant

GM2A

GM2-activator protein

 3.  Adult Tay-Sachs 

HEXA

Hexosaminidase A

disease

AR

X-linked spinobulbar 
muscular atrophy
III. Upper Motor Neuron (Selected HSPs)
  SPG3A

ATL1

Androgen receptor

Atlastin

  SPG4

SPAST

Spastin

  SPG6

NIPA1

  SPG8

  SPG10

  SPG31

WASHC5

KIF5A

REEP1

Nonimprinted in 
Prader-Willi/Angelman 
syndrome 1
Strumpellin

Kinesin heavy-chain 
isoform 5A
Receptor expression 
enhancing protein 1

AR

AR

AR

XR

AD

AD

AD

AD

AD

AD

~1% FALS
5% FALS

Late juvenile
Adult

<1%

5% FALS

~1% FALS
~ 1% FALS

~1% FALS

<1%

<1%

<1%

<1% FALS

Adult

Adult

Adult
Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult
Adult or 
juvenile
Adult

40–50% FALS

Adult

Adult

Severe corticobulbar, 
corticospinal features 
may mimic PLS; 
childhood onset
Late-childhood onset

DNA helicase
DNA, RNA 
binding

Vesicular 
trafficking
DNA, RNA 
binding
Attenuates NF-κB
ATPase

Involved in actin 
polymerization
Heteronuclear 
RNA binding 
protein
Axonal transport May cause vocal cord 

paralysis or PLSe
Also mimics PLS

May also be associated 
with parkinsonism, PLS
Usually causes only FTD

NF-κB signaling
Protein 
degradation
Chromatin-
binding protein
Regulates vesicle 
trafficking
Cytoskeletal 
protein

1/10,000 live 
births

Infancy

RNA metabolism

Childhood

Childhood

Childhood

Adult

Ganglioside 
recycling
Ganglioside 
recycling
Ganglioside 
recycling
Nuclear signaling

10% AD FSP

Childhood

GTPase—vesicle 
recycling

50–60% AD FSP Early adulthood ATPase family—

Some sensory loss

microtubule 
associate

Early adulthood Membrane 

transporter or 
receptor

Early adulthood Ubiquitous, 
spectrin-like
Motor-associated 
protein
Mitochondrial 
protein

Second–third 
decade
Early

Deleted in Prader-Willi, 
Angelman’s

± Peripheral neuropathy, 
retardation
Rarely, amyotrophy

(Continued)

10% AD FSP

10% AD FSP

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3413

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3414

TABLE 437-3  Selected Genetic Motor Neuron Diseases

(Continued)

DISEASE

  SPG5

  SPG7

  SPG11

GENE 
SYMBOL

CYP7B1

GENE NAME

Cytochrome P450

SPG7

Paraplegin

SPG11

Spatacsin

  SPG39

PNPLA6

  SPG44

  SPG2

  SPG1

GJC2

PLP

L1-CAM

Adrenoleukodystrophy

ABCD1

Patatin-like 
phospholipase domain-
containing protein 6 
/ neuropathy target 
esterase
Gap junction protein 
gamma 2/ Connexin 47
Proteolipid protein

Neural cell adhesion 
molecule L1 precursor
Adrenoleukodystrophy 
protein

INHERITANCE

AR

AR

AR

AR

AR

XR

XR

XR

FREQUENCY 
(IN THE UNITED 
STATES)

USUAL ONSET

5–10% AR FSP

Variable

5–10% AR FSP

Variable

20–70% AR FSP 
depends on 
ethnicity

Predominantly 
childhood

PROTEIN 
FUNCTION

Degrades 
endogenous 
substances

Mitochondrial 
protein
Cytosolic, ? 
membrane-
associated

Early childhood Esterase

UNUSUAL FEATURES

Sensory loss

Rarely, optic atrophy, 
ataxia, rarely PLS
Some sensory loss, thin 
corpus callosum; may 
mimic ALS (ALS5)
May have PLS-like 
phenotype

Childhood

Gap junction 
protein

Early childhood Myelin protein

Infancy

Cell adhesion 
molecule

Possible mild CNS 
features
Sometimes multiple CNS 
features

Early adulthood ATP binding 
transporter 
protein

Possible adrenal 
insufficiency, CNS 
inflammation

Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; AR, autosomal recessive; BSCL2, Bernadelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy 2B; CNS, central 
nervous system; FUS/TLS, fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma; GEF, Guanidine nucleotide exchange factor; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; TDP43, Tar DNA 
binding protein 43 kd; XR, X-linked recessive.

otherwise-typical ALS patients with a parkinsonian movement disor-
der or frontotemporal dementia, particularly in instances of C9orf72 
mutations, which strongly suggests that the simultaneous occurrence 
of  two  disorders  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  gene  mutation.  As 
another example, prominent amyotrophy has been described as a dom-
inantly  inherited  disorder  in  individuals  with  bizarre  behavior  and  a 
movement disorder suggestive of parkinsonism; many such cases have 
now been ascribed to mutations that alter the expression of tau protein 
in the brain (Chap. 432). In other cases, ALS develops simultaneously 
with a striking frontotemporal dementia. An ALS-like disorder has also 
been  described  in  some  individuals  with  chronic  traumatic  enceph-
alopathy,  associated  with  deposition  of  TDP43  and  neurofibrillary 
tangles in motor neurons.

 ■ PATHOGENESIS
The  cause  of  sporadic  ALS  is  not  well  defined.  Several  mechanisms 
that  impair  motor  neuron  viability  have  been  elucidated  in  rodents 
induced  to  develop  motor  neuron  disease  by  SOD1  or  profilin-1 
transgenes  with  ALS-associated  mutations.  One  may  loosely  group 
the  genetic  causes  of  ALS  into  three  categories.  In  one  group,  the 
primary problem is inherent instability of the mutant proteins, with 
subsequent perturbations in protein degradation (SOD1, ubiquilin-1 
and 2, p62). In the second category, the causative mutant genes per-
turb  RNA  processing,  transport,  and  metabolism  (C9orf73,  TDP43, 
FUS). In the case of C9orf72, the molecular pathology is an expansion 
of an intronic hexanucleotide repeat (-GGGGCC-) beyond an upper 
normal  of  30  repeats  to  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  repeats.  As 
observed in other intronic repeat disorders such as myotonic dystro-
phy (Chap. 449) and spinocerebellar atrophy type 8 (Chap. 439), the 
expanded intronic repeats generate expanded RNA repeats that form 
intranuclear foci and may confer toxicity by sequestering transcription 
factors or by undergoing noncanonical protein translation across all 
possible  reading  frames  of  the  expanded  RNA  tracts.  Importantly, 
the  latter  process  generates  lengthy  dipeptides  that  are  detected  in 
the spinal fluid and are a unique biomarker for C9orf72 ALS. TDP43 
and FUS are multifunctional proteins that bind RNA and DNA and 
shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, playing multiple roles 
in  the  control  of  cell  proliferation,  DNA  repair  and  transcription, 

and gene translation, both in the cytoplasm and locally in dendritic 
spines  in  response  to  electrical  activity.  How  mutations  in  FUS/TLS 
provoke motor neuron cell death is not clear, although this may rep-
resent loss of function of FUS/TLS in the nucleus or an acquired, toxic 
function of the mutant proteins in the cytosol. In the third group of 
ALS genes, the primary problem is defective axonal cytoskeleton and 
transport  (dynactin,  profilin-1).  It  is  striking  that  variants  in  other 
genes influence survival in ALS but not ALS susceptibility. Interme-
diate-length  polyglutamine-coding  expansions  (-CAG-)  in  the  gene 
ataxin-2 confer increased ALS susceptibility; suppression of ataxin-2 
expression extends survival in transgenic ALS mice and is the basis for 
clinical trials of ataxin-2 suppression. Beyond the upstream, primary 
defects, it is also evident that the ultimate neuronal cell death process 
is  complex,  involving  multiple  cellular  processes  acting  in  diverse 
components of the motor neuron (dendrites, cell body, axons, neuro-
muscular junction) to accelerate cell death. These include but are not 
limited  to  excitotoxicity,  defective  autophagy,  impairment  of  axonal 
transport, oxidative stress, activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress 
and  the  unfolded  protein  response,  and  mitochondrial  dysfunction. 
As well, the hexanucleotide expansions that cause C9orf72 ALS disrupt 
nucleocytoplasmic  transport;  the  importance  of  this  observation  is 
underscored by the finding that mutations in the gene encoding GLE1, 
a  protein  that  mediates  mRNA  export,  cause  an  aggressive,  infantile 
motor neuron disease.

Multiple studies have convincingly demonstrated that proliferating, 
activated  nonneuronal  cells  such  as  microglia  and  astrocytes  impor-
tantly influence the disease course, at least in ALS-transgenic mice. A 
striking  additional  finding  in  ALS  and  most  neurodegenerative  dis-
orders is that miscreant proteins arising from gene defects in familial 
forms of these diseases are often implicated in sporadic forms of the 
same disorder. For example, some reports propose that nonheritable, 
posttranslational  modifications  in  SOD1  are  pathogenic  in  sporadic 
ALS; indeed, SOD1 aggregates are sometimes observed in spinal cord 
in sporadic ALS without SOD1 mutations. Germline mutations in the 
genes encoding β-amyloid and α-synuclein cause familial forms of Alz-
heimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, and posttranslational, noninherited 
abnormalities in these proteins are also central to sporadic Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s diseases.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3414

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TREATMENT
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

No treatment arrests the underlying pathologic process in ALS. The 
drug riluzole (100 mg/d) was approved for ALS because it produces 
a modest lengthening of survival. In one trial, the survival rate at 
18 months with riluzole was similar to placebo at 15 months. The 
mechanism of this effect is not known with certainty; riluzole may 
reduce excitotoxicity by diminishing glutamate release. Riluzole is 
generally well tolerated; nausea, dizziness, weight loss, and elevated 
liver  enzymes  occur  occasionally.  A  second  drug,  edaravone,  has 
also  been  approved  by  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration 
based  on  a  single  6-month  study  in  a  highly  selected  ALS  popu-
lation  that  demonstrated  a  modest  reduction  in  the  trajectory  of 
worsening on an ALS disability scale; survival was not included as 
an endpoint. This drug, which is believed to act as an antioxidant, 
is administered via recurring monthly 10-day series of daily intra-
venous  infusions.  Recently  the  combined  oral  administration  of 
phenylbutyrate and taurursodiol was reported to slow progression 
and prolong survival in ALS by improving function in mitochon-
dria and the endoplasmic reticulum.

Interventions  such  as  antisense  oligonucleotides  (ASO)  and 
microRNAs that diminish expression of mutant SOD1 protein pro-
long  survival  in  transgenic-ALS  rodent  models  and  are  also  now 
in  clinical  trials  for  SOD1-mediated  ALS;  initial  pilot  data  from 
human trials document reductions in SOD1 levels but have not yet 
shown clear clinical benefit. Human trials are now also underway 
for promising ASOs that suppress expression of the C9orf72 gene. 
Pathophysiologic  studies  of  mutant  SOD1–related  ALS  in  mice 
have  disclosed  diverse  targets  for  therapy;  consequently,  multiple 
therapies  are  presently  in  clinical  trials  for  ALS  including  exper-
imental  trials  of  small  molecules,  mesenchymal  stem  cells,  and 
immunosuppression.

In the absence of a primary therapy for ALS, a variety of reha-
bilitative  aids  may  substantially  assist  ALS  patients.  Foot-drop 
splints  facilitate  ambulation  by  obviating  the  need  for  excessive 
hip  flexion  and  by  preventing  tripping  on  a  floppy  foot.  Finger- 
extension  splints  can  potentiate  grip.  Respiratory  support  may  be 
life-sustaining.  For  patients  electing  against  long-term  ventilation 
by  tracheostomy,  positive-pressure  ventilation  by  mouth  or  nose 
provides  transient  (weeks  to  months)  relief  from  hypercarbia  and 
hypoxia. Also extremely beneficial for some patients is a respiratory 
device  (cough  assist  machine)  that  produces  an  artificial  cough. 
This is highly effective in clearing airways and preventing aspira-
tion  pneumonia.  When  bulbar  disease  prevents  normal  chewing 
and  swallowing,  gastrostomy  is  uniformly  helpful,  restoring  nor-
mal  nutrition  and  hydration.  Fortunately,  an  increasing  variety  of 
speech  synthesizers  are  now  available  to  augment  speech  when 
there is advanced bulbar palsy. These facilitate oral communication 
and may be effective for telephone use.

In  contrast  to  ALS,  several  of  the  disorders  (Tables  437-1  and 
437-3) that bear some clinical resemblance to ALS are treatable. For 
this reason, a careful search for causes of secondary motor neuron 
disease is warranted.

OTHER MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
 ■ SELECTED LOWER MOTOR NEURON DISORDERS
In  these  motor  neuron  diseases,  the  peripheral  motor  neurons  are 
affected  without  evidence  of  involvement  of  the  corticospinal  motor 
system (Tables 437-1, 437-2, and 437-3).

X-Linked Spinobulbar Muscular Atrophy (Kennedy’s Disease)  
This is an X-linked lower motor neuron disorder in which progressive 
weakness and wasting of limb and bulbar muscles begins in males in 
mid-adult life and is conjoined with androgen insensitivity manifested 
by  gynecomastia  and  reduced  fertility  (Chap.  391).  In  addition  to 
gynecomastia,  which  may  be  subtle,  two  findings  distinguishing  this 

disorder from ALS are the absence of signs of pyramidal tract disease 
(spasticity) and the presence of a subtle sensory neuropathy in some 
patients.  The  underlying  molecular  defect  is  an  expanded  trinucleo-
tide repeat (CAG) in the first exon of the androgen receptor gene on  
the X chromosome. An inverse correlation appears to exist between the 
number of CAG repeats and the age of onset of the disease.

3415

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
7

A
m
y
o
t
r
o
p
h
i
c
L
a
t
e
r
a
l
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
o
t
o
r
N
e
u
r
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Adult  Tay-Sachs  Disease  Several  reports  have  described  adult- 
onset, predominantly lower motor neuropathies arising from deficiency 
of the enzyme β-hexosaminidase (hex A). These tend to be distinguish-
able  from  ALS  because  they  are  very  slowly  progressive  and  in  some 
cases may have been symptomatic for years; dysarthria and radiograph-
ically evident cerebellar atrophy may be prominent. In rare cases, spas-
ticity may also be present, although it is generally absent (Chap. 419).

Spinal  Muscular  Atrophy  The  SMAs  are  a  family  of  selective 
lower motor neuron diseases of early onset. Despite some phenotypic 
variability (largely in age of onset), the defect in the majority of fam-
ilies with SMA is loss of a protein (SMN, for survival motor neuron) 
that is important in the formation and trafficking of RNA complexes 
across the nuclear membrane. Neuropathologically these disorders are 
characterized by extensive loss of large motor neurons; muscle biopsy 
reveals evidence of denervation atrophy. Several clinical forms exist.

Infantile SMA (SMA I, Werdnig-Hoffmann disease) has the earliest 
onset  and  most  rapidly  fatal  course.  In  some  instances,  it  is  apparent 
even  before  birth,  as  indicated  by  decreased  fetal  movements  late  in 
the third trimester. Though alert, afflicted infants are weak and floppy 
(hypotonic)  and  lack  muscle-stretch  reflexes.  Death  generally  ensues 
within the first year of life. Chronic childhood SMA (SMA II) begins later 
in childhood and evolves with a more slowly progressive course. Juve-
nile SMA (SMA III, Kugelberg-Welander disease) manifests during late 
childhood and runs a slow, indolent course. Unlike most denervating 
diseases, in this chronic disorder weakness is greatest in the proximal 
muscles; indeed, the pattern of clinical weakness can suggest a primary 
myopathy such as limb-girdle dystrophy. Electrophysiologic and muscle 
biopsy evidence of denervation distinguish SMA III from the myopathic 
syndromes. Remarkably, two treatments have shown dramatic benefit 
in  infantile  SMA.  One,  nusinersen,  now  an  approved  therapy,  entails 
administering small oligonucleotides that alter mRNA splicing of one 
of the SMN genes, generating sufficient normal SMN protein to provide 
clinical benefit (including prolonged survival). The other treatment uses 
systemically administered adeno-associated virus (AAV) to deliver the 
missing SMN gene to motor neurons and other cells.

Multifocal Motor Neuropathy with Conduction Block 
In this 
disorder,  lower  motor  neuron  function  is  regionally  and  chronically 
disrupted  by  focal  blocks  in  conduction.  Many  cases  have  elevated 
serum titers of mono- and polyclonal antibodies to ganglioside GM1; it 
is  hypothesized  that  the  antibodies  produce  selective,  focal,  paranodal 
demyelination of motor neurons. MMCB is not typically associated with 
corticospinal signs. In contrast with ALS, MMCB may respond dramati-
cally to therapy such as IV immunoglobulin or chemotherapy; thus, it is 
imperative that MMCB be excluded when considering a diagnosis of ALS.

Other Forms of Lower Motor Neuron Disease 
In individual 
families, other syndromes characterized by selective lower motor neu-
ron  dysfunction  in  an  SMA-like  pattern  have  been  described.  There 
are  rare  X-linked  and  autosomal  dominant  forms  of  apparent  SMA. 
There is an ALS variant of juvenile onset, the Fazio-Londe syndrome, 
that  involves  mainly  the  musculature  innervated  by  the  brainstem. 
A  component  of  lower  motor  neuron  dysfunction  is  also  found  in 
degenerative disorders such as Machado-Joseph disease and the related 
olivopontocerebellar degenerations (Chap. 439).

 ■ SELECTED DISORDERS OF THE UPPER  
MOTOR NEURON
Primary Lateral Sclerosis  This rare disorder arises sporadically 
in  adults  in  mid-to-late  life.  Clinically,  PLS  is  characterized  by  pro-
gressive spastic weakness of the limbs, preceded or followed by spastic 
dysarthria  and  dysphagia,  indicating  combined  involvement  of  the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3415

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3416 corticospinal  and  corticobulbar  tracts.  Fasciculations,  amyotrophy, 
and sensory changes are absent; neither electromyography nor muscle 
biopsy shows denervation. On neuropathologic examination, there is 
selective loss of the large pyramidal cells in the precentral gyrus and 
degeneration  of  the  corticospinal  and  corticobulbar  projections.  The 
peripheral motor neurons and other neuronal systems are spared. The 
course of PLS is variable; although long-term survival is documented, 
the course may be as aggressive as in ALS, with ~3-year survival from 
onset to death. Early in its course, PLS raises the question of multiple 
sclerosis or other demyelinating diseases as diagnostic considerations 
(Chap.  444).  A  myelopathy  suggestive  of  PLS  is  infrequently  seen 
with infection with the retrovirus human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1 
(HTLV-1) (Chap. 442). The clinical course and laboratory testing will 
distinguish these possibilities.

Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia 
In its pure form, HSP is usually 
transmitted  as  an  autosomal  trait;  most  adult-onset  cases  are  dom-
inantly  inherited.  There  are  more  than  80  genetic  types  of  HSP  for 
which causative mutations in more than 60 genes have been identified. 
Table  437-3  lists  more  commonly  identified  genetic  types  of  HSP. 
Symptoms usually begin in the third or fourth decade of life, present-
ing as progressive spastic weakness beginning in the lower extremities; 
however,  there  are  variants  with  onset  so  early  that  the  differential 
diagnosis  includes  cerebral  palsy.  HSP  typically  has  a  long  survival, 
presumably because respiratory function is spared. Late in the illness, 
there may be urinary urgency and incontinence and sometimes fecal 
incontinence; sexual function tends to be preserved.

In pure forms of HSP, the spastic leg weakness is often accompanied 
by posterior column (vibration and position) abnormalities and distur-
bance of bowel and bladder function. Some family members may have 
spasticity without clinical symptoms.

By contrast, particularly when recessively inherited, HSP may have 
complex  or  complicated  forms  in  which  altered  corticospinal  and 
dorsal column function is accompanied by significant involvement of 
other  regions  of  the  nervous  system,  including  amyotrophy,  mental 
retardation, optic atrophy, and sensory neuropathy.

Neuropathologically,  in  HSP  there  is  degeneration  of  the  cortico-
spinal tracts, which appear nearly normal in the brainstem but show 
increasing atrophy at more caudal levels in the spinal cord; in effect, 
this pathologic picture is of a dying-back or distal axonopathy of long 
neuronal fibers within the CNS.

Defects at numerous loci underlie both dominantly and recessively 
inherited  forms  of  HSP  (Table  437-3).  The  gene  most  commonly 
implicated  in  dominantly  inherited  HSP  is  spastin,  which  encodes  a 
microtubule interacting protein. The most common childhood-onset 
dominant form arises from mutations in the atlastin gene.

An  infantile-onset  form  of  X-linked,  recessive  HSP  arises  from 
mutations  in  the  gene  for  myelin  proteolipid  protein.  This  is  an 
example  of  rather  striking  allelic  variation,  as  most  other  mutations 
in  the  same  gene  cause  not  HSP  but  Pelizaeus-Merzbacher  disease, 
a  widespread  disorder  of  CNS  myelin.  Another  recessive  variant  is 
caused by defects in the paraplegin gene. Paraplegin has homology to 
metalloproteases that are important in mitochondrial function in yeast. 
A slowly progressive, adult-onset X-linked progressive spastic paraly-
sis designated adrenomyeloneuropathy is caused by mutations in the 
ABCD1 gene; these cases are associated with elevated serum levels of 
very-long-chain fatty acids (Chap. 442).

 ■ FURTHER READING
Brown RH, Al-Chalabi A: Review article: Amyotrophic lateral scle-

rosis. N Engl J Med 377:162, 2017.

Finkel RS et al: Treatment of infantile-onset spinal muscular atrophy 
with nusinersin: A phase 2, open-label, dose-escalation study. Lancet 
388:3017, 2016.

Gendron TF et al: Poly(GP) proteins are a useful pharmacodynamic 
marker  for  C9ORF72-associated  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis.  Sci 
Transl Med 9:pii:eaai7866, 2017.

Miller TM et al: Phase 1 trial of antisense oligonucleotide tofersen for 

SOD1 ALS. N Engl J Med 383:109, 2020.

Mueller C et al: SOD1 suppression with adeno-associated virus and 

microRNA in familial ALS. N Engl J Med 383:151, 2020.

Robberecht W, Philips T: The changing scene of amyotrophic lateral 

sclerosis. Nat Rev Neurosci 14:248, 2013.

Schüle  R  et  al:  Hereditary  spastic  paraplegia:  Clinicogenetic  lessons 

from 608 patients. Ann Neurol 79:646, 2016.

Taylor  JP  et  al:  Decoding  ALS:  From  genes  to  mechanism.  Nature 

539:197, 2016.

Van  Damme  P,  Robberecht  W:  STING-Induced  Inflammation—A 

Novel Therapeutic Target in ALS? N Engl J Med 384:765, 2021.

Visser AE et al: Multicentre, population-based, case-control study of 
particulates, combustion products and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
risk. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 90:854, 2019.

The  Writing  Group  on  Behalf  of  the  Edaravone  (MCI-186) 
ALS  19  STUDY  GROUP:  Safety  and  efficacy  of  edaravone  in  well 
defined  patients  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis:  A  randomised, 
double-blind, placebo controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 16:505, 2017.
 ■ WEBSITES
Several websites provide valuable information on ALS including those 
offered  by  the  Muscular  Dystrophy  Association  (www.mdausa.org), 
the  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  Association  (www.alsa.org),  the 
World  Federation  of  Neurology  and  the  Neuromuscular  Unit  at 
Washington University in St. Louis (www.neuro.wustl.edu), and the 
Northeast  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  Consortium  (www.neals.
org).

438 Prion Diseases

Stanley B. Prusiner, Michael Geschwind

Prions  are  proteins  that  adopt  alternative  conformations,  which 
become self-propagating. Some prions cause degeneration of the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS). Once relegated to causing a group of rare 
CNS  disorders,  such  as  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease  (CJD),  increasing 
evidence  argues  that  prions  cause  more  common  neurodegenerative 
diseases  (NDs)  including  Alzheimer’s  disease  (AD)  and  Parkinson’s 
disease (PD). While CJD is caused by the accumulation of PrPSc pri-
ons, recent investigations demonstrate unequivocally that α-synuclein 
prions cause multiple system atrophy (MSA) (Chap. 440). Infectious 
MSA prions have been recovered from human brain samples stored in 
formalin for up to 20 years. Similar resistance to formalin was demon-
strated for brain samples from sheep with scrapie. Increasingly, studies 
show  that  Aβ  and  tau  prions  together  cause  AD,  α-synuclein  prions 
cause both PD and MSA, and tau prions alone cause frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration (FTLD). In this chapter, we confine our discussion 
to CJD, which typically presents with a rapidly progressive dementia as 
well as motor and behavioral abnormalities. The illness is relentlessly 
progressive and generally causes death within 7 months of onset. Most 
patients with CJD are between 50 and 75 years of age; however, patients 
as young as 12 and as old as 96 have been recorded. The role of prions 
in the pathogenesis of NDs is reviewed in Chap. 424.

CJD is one malady in a group of disorders caused by prions com-
posed of the prion protein (PrP). PrP prions reproduce by binding to 
the normal, cellular isoform of the prion protein (PrPC) and stimulat-
ing conversion of PrPC into the disease-causing isoform PrPSc. PrPC is 
rich in α-helix and has little β-structure, whereas PrPSc has less α-helix 
and a high amount of β-structure. The α-to-β structural transition in 
PrP is the fundamental event underlying this group of prion diseases 
(Table 438-1).

Four  new  concepts  have  emerged  from  studies  of  PrP  prions:  (1) 
Prions are the only known transmissible pathogens that are devoid of 
nucleic acid; all other infectious agents possess genomes composed of 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3416

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 438-1  Glossary of PrP Prion Terminology
Prion

Proteinaceous infectious particle that lacks nucleic acid. 
Prions are composed entirely of alternatively folded proteins 
that undergo self-propagation. Distinct strains of prions exhibit 
different biologic properties, which are epigenetically heritable. 
PrP prions cause scrapie in sheep and goats, mad cow disease, 
and related neurodegenerative diseases of humans such as 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
Disease-causing Scrapie isoform of the prion protein. This 
protein is the only identifiable macromolecule in purified 
preparations of scrapie prions.
Cellular isoform of the prion protein. PrPC is the precursor  
of PrPSc.
A fragment of PrPSc, generated by truncation of the NH2-
terminus by limited digestion with proteinase K. PrP 27-30 
retains prion infectivity and polymerizes into amyloid.
PrP gene located on human chromosome 20.
An aggregate of prions composed largely of PrP 27-30 
molecules. Created by detergent extraction and limited 
proteolysis of PrPSc. Morphologically and histochemically 
indistinguishable from many amyloids.
Amyloid containing PrP in the brains of animals or humans with 
prion disease; often accumulates as plaques.

PrPSc

PrPC

PrP 27-30

PRNP
Prion rod

PrP amyloid

either RNA or DNA that direct the synthesis of their progeny. (2) Prion 
diseases may manifest as infectious, genetic, or sporadic disorders; no 
other group of illnesses with a single etiology presents with such a wide 
spectrum of clinical manifestations. (3) Prion diseases result from the 
accumulation of PrPSc, the conformation of which differs substantially 
from that of its precursor, PrPC. (4) Distinct strains of prions exhibit 
different  biologic  properties,  which  are  epigenetically  inherited.  In 
other  words,  PrPSc  can  exist  in  a  variety  of  different  conformations, 
many of which seem to specify particular disease phenotypes.

How  a  specific  conformation  of  a  PrPSc  molecule  is  imparted  to 
PrPC during prion replication to produce nascent PrPSc with the same 
conformation is not well understood. Additionally, it is unclear what 
factors  determine  where  in  the  CNS  a  particular  PrPSc  molecule  will 
be created.

SPECTRUM OF PrP PRION DISEASES
The sporadic form of CJD is the most common PrP prion disorder in 
humans. Sporadic CJD (sCJD) accounts for ~85% of all cases of human 
PrP prion disease, and genetic prion diseases account for 10–15% of all 
cases  (Table  438-2).  Genetic  prion  diseases  were  historically  divided 
into three forms: familial CJD (fCJD), Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker 
(GSS) disease, and fatal familial insomnia (FFI). All dominantly inher-
ited PrP prion diseases are caused by mutations in the PrP gene.

Although infectious PrP prion diseases account for <1% of all cases 
and infection does not seem to play an important role in the natural 
history of these illnesses, the transmissibility of PrP prions is an impor-
tant biologic feature. Kuru of the Fore people of Papua New Guinea is 
well established to have resulted from the consumption of brains from 
dead  relatives  during  ritualistic  cannibalism.  After  the  cessation  of 
ritualistic cannibalism in the late 1950s, kuru nearly disappeared, with 
the exception of a few recent patients exhibiting incubation periods of  
>40  years.  Iatrogenic  CJD  (iCJD)  seems  to  be  the  result  of  the  acci-
dental  inoculation  of  patients  with  prions.  Variant  CJD  (vCJD)  in 
teenagers  and  young  adults  in  Europe  is  the  result  of  exposure  to 
tainted beef from cattle with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). 
Although occasional cases of iCJD still occur, this form of CJD is cur-
rently on the decline due to public health measures aimed at preventing 
the spread of PrP prions.

More  than  seven  diseases  of  animals  are  caused  by  prions  
(Table 438-2). Scrapie of sheep and goats is the prototypic PrP prion 
disease. Mink encephalopathy, BSE, feline spongiform encephalopathy, 
and exotic ungulate encephalopathy are all thought to occur after the 
consumption of prion-infected foodstuffs. The BSE epidemic emerged 
in  Britain  in  the  late  1980s  and  was  shown  to  be  due  to  industrial 

TABLE 438-2  The PrP Prion Diseases
DISEASE
Human
Kuru

Fore people

HOST

iCJD

vCJD
fCJD
GSS
FFI

sCJD

sFI

Animal
Scrapie

BSE

TME

Humans

Humans
Humans
Humans
Humans

Humans

Humans

Sheep, goats

Cattle

Mink

CWD
FSE
Exotic ungulate 
encephalopathy

Mule deer, elk
Cats
Greater kudu, 
nyala, or oryx

MECHANISM OF PATHOGENESIS

Infection through ritualistic 
cannibalism
Infection from prion-contaminated 
hGH, dura mater grafts, etc.
Infection from bovine prions
Germline mutations in PRNP
Germline mutations in PRNP
Germline mutation in PRNP (D178N, 
M129)
Somatic mutation or spontaneous 
conversion of PrPC into PrPSc?
Somatic mutation or spontaneous 
conversion of PrPC into PrPSc?

Infection in genetically susceptible 
sheep and goats
Infection with prion-contaminated 
MBM
Infection with prions from sheep or 
cattle
Unknown
Infection with prion-contaminated beef
Infection with prion-contaminated 
MBM

3417

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
8

P
r
i
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Abbreviations: BSE, bovine spongiform encephalopathy; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob  
disease; CWD, chronic wasting disease; fCJD, familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease;  
FFI, fatal familial insomnia; FSE, feline spongiform encephalopathy; GSS, 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease; hGH, human growth hormone; iCJD, 
iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; MBM, meat and bone meal; sCJD, sporadic 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; sFI, sporadic fatal insomnia; TME, transmissible mink 
encephalopathy; vCJD, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

cannibalism. Whether BSE began as a sporadic case of BSE in a cow or 
started with scrapie in sheep is unknown. The origin of chronic wasting 
disease (CWD), a prion disease endemic in deer and elk in regions of 
North  America,  and  more  recently  identified  in  isolated  populations 
in Scandinavia and Korea, is uncertain. In contrast to other prion dis-
eases, CWD is highly communicable among cervids. Bodily excretions, 
such  as  feces,  urine,  and  saliva,  from  asymptomatic,  infected  cervids 
contain prions that are likely to be responsible for the spread of CWD.
 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
CJD is found throughout the world. The incidence of sCJD is ~1 case 
per million population, although a person’s lifetime risk of dying from 
CJD is ~1 in 5000 deaths. Because sCJD is an age-dependent ND, its 
incidence  is  expected  to  increase  steadily  as  older  segments  of  pop-
ulations  in  developed  and  developing  countries  continue  to  expand. 
Although many geographic clusters of CJD have been reported, each 
has been shown to segregate with a PrP gene mutation and/or included 
misdiagnoses.  Attempts  to  identify  common  exposure  to  some  etio-
logic agent have been unsuccessful for both the sporadic and familial 
cases. Ingestion of scrapie-infected sheep or goats as a cause of CJD in 
humans has not been demonstrated by epidemiologic studies, although 
speculation about this potential route of infection continues. Of par-
ticular interest are deer hunters who develop CJD, because up to 90% 
of culled deer in some game herds have been shown to harbor CWD 
prions. Whether PrP prion disease in deer, elk, or moose has passed 
to cows, sheep, or directly to humans remains unknown. Studies with 
rodents demonstrate that oral infection with prions can occur, but the 
process is inefficient compared to intracerebral inoculation.
 ■ PATHOGENESIS
The  human  PrP  prion  diseases  were  initially  classified  as  NDs  of 
unknown etiology on the basis of pathologic changes being confined to 
the CNS. Even though the familial nature of GSS and a subset of CJD 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3417

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3418

PrP Polypeptide

CHO CHO

GPI

S S

PrPC

209 amino acids

PrPSc

209 amino acids

PrP 27-30

Codon

~142 amino acids

1

23

50

94

131

188

231

254

FIGURE 438-1  PrP prion protein isoforms. Bar diagram of Syrian hamster PrP, which 
consists of 254 amino acids. After processing of the NH2 and COOH termini, both PrPC 
and PrPSc consist of 209 residues. After limited proteolysis, the NH2 terminus of PrPSc 
is truncated to form PrP 27-30 composed of ~142 amino acids. CHO, N-linked sugars; 
GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor attachment site; S–S, disulfide bond.

cases was well described, the significance of this observation became 
more obscure with the transmission of GSS and CJD to animals. With 
the transmission of kuru and CJD to nonhuman primates, investigators 
began to view these diseases as infectious CNS illnesses caused by slow 
viruses. Eventually, the familial nature of GSS and a minority of CJD 
cases became clear with the discovery in 1989 of mutations in the PrP 
gene (PRNP) of these patients. The prion concept explains how a single 
disease can manifest as sporadic, heritable, and infectious. Moreover, 
the hallmark of all PrP prion diseases, whether sporadic, dominantly 
inherited,  or  acquired  by  infection,  is  that  they  involve  the  aberrant 
folding of the PrP protein.

A  major  feature  that  distinguishes  PrP  prions  from  viruses  is  the 
finding that both PrP isoforms are encoded by a chromosomal gene. In 
humans, the PrP gene is designated PRNP and is located on the short 
arm of chromosome 20. Limited proteolysis of PrPSc produces a smaller, 
protease-resistant molecule of ~142 amino acids designated PrP 27-30; 
PrPC is completely hydrolyzed under the same conditions (Fig. 438-1). 
PrP 27-30 polymerizes into prion rods that are morphologically indis-
tinguishable  from  the  filaments  that  aggregate  to  form  PrP  amyloid 
plaques  in  the  CNS.  This  discovery  raised  the  possibility  that  many 
other NDs might be caused by different proteins, all of which can fold 
into prions.

Prion Strains  Distinct strains of PrP prions exhibit different bio-
logic  properties,  which  are  epigenetically  heritable.  The  existence  of 
prion strains raised the question of how heritable biologic information 
can  be  enciphered  in  a  molecule  other  than  nucleic  acid.  Various 
strains of PrP prions have been defined by incubation times, distribu-
tion of neuronal vacuolation on neuropathology, and stabilities of PrPSc 
to  denaturation.  Subsequently,  the  patterns  of  PrPSc  deposition  were 
found  to  correlate  with  vacuolation  profiles,  and  these  patterns  were 
also used to characterize prion strains.

Persuasive evidence that strain-specific information is enciphered in 
the tertiary structure of PrPSc comes from transmission of two different 

inherited human prion diseases to mice expressing a chimeric human–
mouse PrP transgene. In most forms of fCJD and the majority of sCJD 
cases, the protease-resistant fragment of PrPSc after deglycosylation has 
a molecular mass of 21 kDa (i.e., type 1 prions), whereas in FFI, and 
a minority of sCJD cases, it is 19 kDa (type 2 prions) (Table 438-3). 
This  difference  in  molecular  mass  was  shown  to  be  due  to  different 
sites of proteolytic cleavage at the NH2 termini of the two human PrPSc 
molecules, reflecting different tertiary structures. These distinct con-
formations were not unexpected because the amino acid sequences of 
the PrP fragments differ. Extracts from the brains of patients with FFI 
transmitted disease to the mice expressing the chimeric human–mouse 
PrP transgene and resulted in the formation of 19-kDa PrPSc, whereas 
brain  extracts  from  fCJD  and  sCJD  patients  harboring  21-kDa  PrPSc 
resulted  in  21-kDa  PrPSc  in  mice  expressing  the  same  transgene.  On 
second passage, these differences were maintained, demonstrating that 
chimeric  PrPSc  can  exist  in  two  different  conformations  as  demon-
strated by the sizes of the protease-resistant fragments, even though the 
amino acid sequence of PrPSc is invariant.

This analysis was extended when patients with sporadic fatal insom-
nia (sFI) were identified. Although they did not carry a PRNP muta-
tion,  the  patients  demonstrated  a  clinical  and  pathologic  phenotype 
that was indistinguishable from that of patients with FFI. Furthermore, 
19-kDa  PrPSc  was found  in  their  brains, and  on  passage of  sFI prion 
disease to mice expressing the chimeric human–mouse PrP transgene, 
19-kDa PrPSc was also found. These findings indicate that the disease 
phenotype is dictated by the conformation of PrPSc and not the amino 
acid sequence. PrPSc acts as a template for the conversion of PrPC into 
nascent PrPSc. On the passage of prions into mice expressing a chimeric 
hamster–mouse PrP transgene, a change in the conformation of PrPSc 
was accompanied by the emergence of a new strain of prions.

Many new strains of prions were generated using recombinant (rec) 
PrP produced in bacteria; recPrP was polymerized into amyloid fibrils 
to make “synthetic prions,” which were inoculated into transgenic mice 
over-expressing  high  levels  of  wild-type  mouse  PrPC.  Approximately 
500 days later, the mice died of prion disease. The incubation times of 
the “synthetic prions” in mice were dependent on the conditions used 
for polymerization of the amyloid fibrils, which affected the stability of 
those amyloid fibrils. Highly stable amyloids gave rise to stable prions 
with long incubation times; low-stability amyloids led to prions with 
short incubation times. Amyloids of intermediate stability gave rise to 
prions with intermediate stabilities and intermediate incubation times. 
Such findings are consistent with earlier studies showing that the incu-
bation  times  of  synthetic  and  naturally  occurring  prions  are  directly 
proportional to the stability of the prion.

Species  Barrier  Studies  on  the  role  of  the  primary  and  tertiary 
structures  of  PrP  in  the  transmission  of  prion  disease  have  provided 
new insights into the pathogenesis of these maladies. The amino acid 
sequence of PrP encodes the species of the prion, and the prion derives 
its  PrPSc  sequence  from  the  last  mammal  in  which  it  was  passaged. 
While the primary structure of PrP is likely to be the most important 
or  even  the  sole  determinant  of  the  tertiary  structure  of  PrPC,  PrPSc 
seems to function as a template in determining the tertiary structure of 
nascent PrPSc molecules as they are formed from PrPC. In turn, prion 

TABLE 438-3  Distinct Prion Strains Generated in Humans with Inherited Prion Diseases and Transmitted to Transgenic Micea
INCUBATION TIME [DAYS ± SEM] (n/n0)
HOST PrP GENOTYPE
INOCULUM
FFI(D178N, M129)
None
Tg(MHu2M)
FFI
Tg(MHu2M)
FFI → Tg(MHu2M)
fCJD(E200K)
None
Tg(MHu2M)
fCJD
Tg(MHu2M)
fCJD → Tg(MHu2M)

HOST SPECIES
Human
Mouse
Mouse
Human
Mouse
Mouse

170 ± 2 (10/10)
167 ± 3 (15/15)

206 ± 7 (7/7)
136 ± 1 (6/6)

PrPSc (kDa)
19
19
19
21
21
21

aTg(MHu2M) mice express a chimeric mouse-human PrP gene.
Notes: Clinicopathologic phenotype is determined by the conformation of PrPSc in accord with the results of the transmission of human prions from patients with FFI to 
transgenic mice.
Abbreviations: fCJD, familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; FFI, fatal familial insomnia; SEM, standard error of the mean.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3418

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3419

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
8

P
r
i
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

diversity  appears  to  be  enciphered  in the  conformation  of  PrPSc,  and 
thus prion strains seem to represent different conformers of PrPSc.

In  general,  transmission  of  PrP  prion  disease  from  one  species  to 
another is inefficient, in that not all intracerebrally inoculated animals 
develop disease, and those that fall ill do so only after long incubation 
times that can approach the natural life span of the animal. This “spe-
cies barrier” to transmission is correlated with the degree of similarity 
between the amino acid sequences of PrPC in the inoculated host and of 
PrPSc in the inoculum. The importance of sequence similarity between 
the host and donor PrP argues that PrPC directly interacts with PrPSc in 
the prion conversion process.

SPORADIC AND INHERITED  
PrP PRION DISEASES
Several  different  scenarios  might  explain  the  initiation  of  sporadic 
prion disease: (1) A somatic mutation may be the cause and thus follow 
a path similar to that for germline mutations in inherited disease. In 
this situation, the mutant PrPSc must be capable of targeting wild-type 
PrPC, a process known to be possible for some mutations but less likely 
for others. (2) The activation energy barrier separating wild-type PrPC 
from  PrPSc  could  be  crossed  on  rare  occasions  when  viewed  in  the 
context of a population. Most individuals would be spared, but presen-
tations in older persons, with an incidence of ~1 per million, would be 
seen. (3) PrPSc may be present at low levels in some normal cells, where 
it performs an important, but as yet unknown, function. The level of 
PrPSc in such cells is hypothesized to be sufficiently low as not to be 
detected by routine bioassay. In some altered metabolic states, the cel-
lular mechanisms for clearing PrPSc might become compromised, and 
the rate of PrPSc formation would then begin to exceed the capacity of 
the cell to clear it. The third possible mechanism is attractive because 
it suggests that PrPSc is not simply a misfolded protein, as proposed for 
the first and second mechanisms, but that it is an alternatively folded 
molecule with a function. Moreover, the multitude of conformational 
states  that  PrPSc  can  adopt,  as  described  above,  raises  the  possibility 
that PrPSc or another protein might function in a process such as short-
term  memory  where  information  storage  is  thought  to  occur  in  the 
absence of new protein synthesis.

More than 40 different mutations resulting in nonconservative sub-
stitutions in the human PRNP gene have been found to segregate with 
inherited human prion diseases. Missense mutations, a deletion, and 
expansions  in  the  octapeptide  repeat  region  of  the  gene,  called  octa-
peptide repeat insertions (OPRIs), are responsible for genetic forms of 
prion disease.

Although phenotypes may vary dramatically, even within families, 
specific phenotypes observed with certain mutations appear to cause 
sCJD.  More  than  20  missense  variants—including  substitutions  at 
codons 102, 105, 117, 198, and 217, and mid to longer OPRIs—cause 
the GSS form of PrP prion disease with prominent parkinsonian and 
cerebellar features. Regarding OPRI mutations, the normal human PrP 
sequence contains an unstable section in the N-terminal region com-
prised  of  five  repeats—a  nine-amino-acid  sequence  or  nonapeptide 
(R1) followed by four octapeptide repeats. Insertions from 2 to 12 extra 
octapeptide  repeats  frequently  cause  variable  phenotypes  including 
conditions  indistinguishable  from  sCJD,  GSS-like  presentations,  and 
even a slowly progressive dementing illness of many years in duration 
to an early-age-of-onset disorder that is similar to AD. A mutation at 
codon  178  that  results  in  substitution  of  asparagine  for  aspartic  acid 
generally causes FFI if methionine is encoded at codon 129 on the same 
allele. In contrast, a typical dementing CJD phenotype has been gener-
ally found with a valine encoded at codon 129 of the same allele. Stop 
codon (nonsense) mutations are rare and cause a range of phenotypes, 
including some with a prolonged course of years to decades, GSS- or 
AD-like  presentations,  autonomic  and  sensory  peripheral  nervous 
system involvement, chronic gastrointestinal upset, and extensive PrPSc 
amyloid deposits.

 ■ HUMAN PRNP GENE POLYMORPHISMS
Polymorphisms  influence  the  susceptibility  to  sporadic,  genetic, 
and  acquired  forms  of  PrP  prion  disease.  The  methionine/valine 

polymorphism at codon 129 of  PRNP not only modulates the age of 
onset  of  some  genetic  prion  diseases  but  also  can  affect  the  clinical 
phenotype. The findings that homozygosity at codon 129 (both alleles 
being either methionine [M] or valine [V]) predisposes an individual 
to sCJD and that codon 129 MM predisposes a person to vCJD sup-
port a model of prion production that favors PrP interactions between 
homologous proteins.

Substitution  of  the  basic  residue  lysine  at  position  218  in  mouse 
PrP  produced  dominant-negative  inhibition  of  prion  replication  in 
transgenic  mice.  This  same  lysine  at  position  219  in  human  PrP  has 
been  found  in  12%  of  the  Japanese  population,  a  group  that  appears 
to be resistant to prion disease. Dominant-negative inhibition of prion 
replication was also found with substitution of the basic residue arginine 
at position 171; sheep with arginine were resistant to scrapie prions but 
were  susceptible  to  BSE  prions  that  were  inoculated  intracerebrally.  A 
very  interesting  polymorphism  at  codon  127  in  PRNP  was  identified 
among longtime survivors of the kuru epidemic in the Fore ethnic group 
of Papua New Guinea, which when expressed in transgenic mice with 
humanized PRNP prevented the animals from acquiring prion disease.

ACQUIRED PrP PRION DISEASES
 ■ IATROGENIC CJD
Accidental transmission of CJD to humans appears to have occurred 
with  corneal  transplantation,  contaminated  electroencephalogram 
(EEG) electrode implantation, and surgical procedures. Corneas from 
donors  with  unsuspected  CJD  have  been  transplanted  to  apparently 
healthy recipients who developed CJD after variable incubation peri-
ods. The same improperly decontaminated EEG electrodes that caused 
CJD in two young patients with intractable epilepsy caused CJD in a 
chimpanzee 18 months after their experimental implantation.

Surgical procedures may have resulted in accidental inoculation of 
patients with prions, presumably because some instrument or appara-
tus in the operating theater became contaminated when a CJD patient 
underwent  surgery.  Although  the  epidemiology  of  these  studies  is 
highly suggestive, no proof for such episodes exists.

Dura  Mater  Grafts  More  than  160  cases  of  CJD  after  implanta-
tion of dura mater grafts have been recorded. All of the grafts appear 
to have been acquired from a single manufacturer whose preparative 
procedures were inadequate to inactivate human prions. One case of 
CJD  occurred  after  repair  of  an  eardrum  perforation  with  a  pericar-
dium graft.
Human  Growth  Hormone  and  Pituitary  Gonadotropin  Therapy  
The  transmission  of  CJD  prions  from  contaminated  human  growth 
hormone  (hGH)  preparations  derived  from  human  pituitaries  has 
been  responsible  for  fatal  cerebellar  disorders  with  dementia  in  
>180  patients  ranging  in  age  from  10  to  41  years.  These  patients 
received  injections  of  hGH  every  2–4  days  for  4–12  years.  If  it  is 
thought  that  these  patients  developed  CJD  from  injections  of  prion-
contaminated hGH preparations, the possible incubation periods range 
from 4 to 30 years. Only recombinant hGH is now used therapeutically 
so that possible contamination with prions is no longer an issue.

Notably, evidence has accumulated in deceased patients with hGH 
CJD  that  some  also  carry  Aβ  prions.  This  finding  demonstrated  the 
iatrogenic propagation of Aβ prions in the human CNS.

Four cases of CJD have occurred in women receiving human pitu-

itary gonadotropin.

 ■ VARIANT CJD
The restricted geographic occurrence and chronology of vCJD raised 
the  possibility  that  BSE  prions  had  been  transmitted  to  humans 
through the consumption of tainted beef. More than 190 cases of vCJD 
have  occurred,  with  >90%  of  these  in  Britain.  Variant  CJD  has  also 
been  reported  in  people  either  living  in  or  originating  from  France,  
Ireland,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Portugal,  Spain,  Saudi  Arabia,  the 
United States, Canada, and Japan.

The  steady  decline  in  the  number  of  vCJD  cases  over  the  past 
decade argues either that there will not be a prion disease epidemic in 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3419

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3420 Europe, similar to those seen for BSE and kuru. What is certain is that 
PrP-prion-tainted meat should be prevented from entering the human 
food supply.

The most compelling evidence that vCJD is caused by BSE prions 
was  obtained  from  experiments  in  mice  expressing  the  bovine  PrP 
transgene. Both BSE and vCJD prions were efficiently transmitted to 
these transgenic mice and with similar incubation periods. In contrast 
to  sCJD  prions,  vCJD  prions  did  not  transmit  disease  efficiently  to 
mice expressing a chimeric human–mouse PrP transgene. Earlier stud-
ies  with  nontransgenic  mice  suggested  that  vCJD  and  BSE  might  be 
derived from the same source because both inocula transmitted disease 
with similar but very long incubation periods.

Attempts  to  determine  the  origin  of  BSE  and  vCJD  prions  have 
relied  on  passaging  studies  in  mice,  some  of  which  are  described 
above,  as  well  as  studies  of  the  conformation  and  glycosylation  of 
PrPSc. One scenario suggests that a particular conformation of bovine 
PrPSc  was  selected  for  heat  resistance  during  the  rendering  process 
and was then reselected multiple times as cattle infected by ingesting 
prion-contaminated meat and bone meal (MBM) were slaughtered and 
their offal rendered into more MBM. Variant CJD cases have virtually 
disappeared with protection of the beef supply in Europe. Interestingly, 
almost all of the approximately 238 cases of vCJD reported as of 2021 
have been homozygous for methionine (MM) at codon 129 in PRNP, 
except two of the more recent cases were codon 129 MV, which is the 
most common codon 129 polymorphism.

 ■ NEUROPATHOLOGY
Frequently,  the  brains  of  patients  with  CJD  have  no  recognizable 
abnormalities on gross examination. Patients who survive for several 
years have variable degrees of cerebral atrophy.

On light microscopy, the pathologic hallmarks of CJD are spongi-
form degeneration (vacuolation), neuronal loss, and astrocytic gliosis. 
The lack of an inflammatory response in CJD and other prion diseases 
is  an  important  pathologic  feature  of  these  degenerative  disorders. 
Spongiform degeneration is characterized by many 1- to 5-μm vacu-
oles in the neuropil between nerve cell bodies. Generally, the spongi-
form changes occur in the cerebral cortex, putamen, caudate nucleus, 
thalamus, and molecular layer of the cerebellum. Astrocytic gliosis is 
a constant but nonspecific feature of PrP prion diseases. Widespread 
proliferation of fibrous astrocytes is found throughout the gray matter 
of brains infected with CJD prions. Astrocytic processes filled with glial 
filaments form extensive networks.

Amyloid plaques have been found in ~10% of CJD cases. Purified 
CJD prions from humans and animals exhibit the ultrastructural and 
histochemical characteristics of amyloid when treated with detergents 
during  limited  proteolysis.  On  first  passage  of  samples  from  some 
human  Japanese  CJD  cases  into  mice,  amyloid  plaques  were  found. 
These plaques stain with antibodies raised against PrP, demonstrating 
that the amyloid is composed of PrP.

The  amyloid  plaques  of  GSS  disease  are  morphologically  distinct 
from  those  seen  in  kuru  or  scrapie.  GSS  plaques  consist  of  a  central 
dense  core  of  amyloid  surrounded  by  smaller  globules  of  amyloid. 
Ultrastructurally, they consist of a radiating fibrillar network of amy-
loid fibrils, with scant or no neuritic degeneration. The plaques can be 
distributed throughout the brain but are most frequently found in the 
cerebellum. They are often located adjacent to blood vessels. Congo-
philic angiopathy has been noted in some cases of GSS disease.

In vCJD, a characteristic feature is the presence of “florid plaques.” 
These are composed of a central core of PrP amyloid, surrounded by 
vacuoles in a pattern suggesting petals on a flower.
 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Nonspecific  prodromal  symptoms  occur  in  approximately  a  third  of 
patients with CJD and may include fatigue, sleep disturbance, weight 
loss,  headache,  anxiety,  vertigo,  malaise,  and  ill-defined  pain.  Most 
patients  with  CJD  present  with  deficits  in  higher  cortical  function. 
Behavioral  and  psychiatric  symptoms,  such  as  depression,  apathy, 
insomnia,  appetite  changes,  psychosis,  and  visual  hallucinations,  are 

very  common  and  often  the  defining  features  of  the  illness.  These 
deficits  almost  always  progress  over  weeks  or  months  to  a  state  of 
profound dementia characterized by memory loss, impaired judgment, 
and  a  decline  in  virtually  all  aspects  of  intellectual  function.  A  few 
patients present early with either isolated visual impairment or cere-
bellar gait and coordination deficits, referred to as the Heidenhain and 
Brownell-Oppenheim variants, respectively. Frequently, the cerebellar 
deficits are rapidly followed by progressive dementia. Visual problems 
often begin with blurred vision and diminished acuity, rapidly followed 
by dementia. Patients with early visual deficits appear to have a faster 
decline overall.

Other  symptoms  and  signs  include  extrapyramidal  dysfunction 
manifested  as  rigidity,  masklike  facies,  dystonia,  myoclonus,  or  less 
commonly choreoathetoid movements and pyramidal signs (usually 
mild  and  not  actual  weakness).  Some  uncommon  features  include 
seizures  (usually  major  motor),  hypoesthesia,  supranuclear  gaze 
palsy, motor neuron disease, optic atrophy, and vegetative signs such 
as changes in weight, temperature, sweating, or menstruation.

Myoclonus  A  majority  of  patients  with  CJD  eventually  develop 
myoclonus that appears at various times throughout the illness. Unlike 
other involuntary movements, myoclonus persists during sleep. Startle 
myoclonus  elicited  by  loud  sounds  or  bright  lights  is  frequent.  It  is 
important  to  stress  that  myoclonus  is  neither  specific  nor  confined 
to CJD and tends to occur later in the course of CJD. Dementia with 
myoclonus can also be due to AD (Chap. 431), dementia with Lewy 
bodies  (Chap.  434),  corticobasal  degeneration  (Chap.  432),  crypto-
coccal  encephalitis  (Chap.  215),  or  the  myoclonic  epilepsy  disorder 
Unverricht-Lundborg disease (Chap. 425).

Clinical  Course 
In  documented  cases  of  accidental  transmission 
of CJD to humans, an incubation period of 1.5–2 years preceded the 
development  of  clinical  disease.  In  other  cases,  incubation  periods  
>40 years have been suggested. Most patients with CJD live 6–12 months 
after the onset of clinical signs and symptoms, whereas some live for up 
to a few years. Some mutations causing genetic prion disease can have 
durations of a decade or longer.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
The  constellation  of  dementia,  myoclonus,  and  periodic  electrical 
bursts in an afebrile 60-year-old patient generally indicates CJD. Clini-
cal abnormalities in CJD are confined to the CNS. Fever, elevated sedi-
mentation rate, leukocytosis in blood, or a pleocytosis in cerebrospinal 
fluid  (CSF)  should  alert  the  physician  to  another  etiology  to  explain 
the patient’s CNS dysfunction, although there are rare cases of CJD in 
which mild CSF pleocytosis is observed.

Variations in the typical course appear in inherited and transmitted 
forms  of  the  disease.  Most  mutations  causing  fCJD  have  a  slightly 
earlier mean age of onset, although usually an otherwise similar clin-
ical  and  radiologic  presentation  to  sCJD.  In  GSS,  ataxia  is  usually  a 
prominent and presenting feature, with dementia occurring late in the 
disease course. GSS presents earlier than sCJD (mean age 43 years) and 
is  typically  more  slowly  progressive  than  sCJD;  death  usually  occurs 
within 5 years of onset. FFI is characterized by insomnia and dysau-
tonomia;  dementia  occurs  only  in  the  terminal  phase  of  the  illness. 
Rare sporadic cases have been identified. Variant CJD has an unusual 
clinical  course,  with  a  prominent  psychiatric  prodrome  that  may 
include visual hallucinations and early ataxia, whereas frank dementia 
is usually a late sign of vCJD.

 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Many conditions mimic CJD. Dementia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 434) 
is the most common disorder to be mistaken for CJD. It can present 
in  a  subacute  fashion  with  delirium,  myoclonus,  and  extrapyramidal 
features.  Other  neurodegenerative  disorders  to  consider  include  AD, 
FTD, corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, ceroid 
lipofuscinosis, and myoclonic epilepsy with Lafora bodies. The absence 
of abnormalities on diffusion-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3420

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3421

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
8

P
r
i
o
n
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

recovery (FLAIR) MRI will almost always distinguish these dementing 
conditions from CJD.

Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, which presents as a subacute progres-
sive encephalopathy with myoclonus and periodic triphasic complexes 
on  the  EEG,  should  be  excluded  in  every  case  of  suspected  CJD.  It 
is  diagnosed  by  the  finding  of  high  titers  of  antithyroglobulin  or 
antithyroid peroxidase (antimicrosomal) antibodies in the blood and 
improves  with  glucocorticoid  therapy.  Unlike  CJD,  fluctuations  in 
severity typically occur in Hashimoto’s encephalopathy.

Intracranial vasculitides (Chap. 363) may produce nearly all of the 
symptoms and signs associated with CJD, sometimes without systemic 
abnormalities.  Myoclonus  is  exceptional  with  cerebral  vasculitis,  but 
focal  seizures  may  confuse  the  picture.  Prominent  headache,  absence 
of  myoclonus,  stepwise  change  in  deficits,  abnormal  CSF,  and  focal 
white  matter  change  on  MRI  or  angiographic  abnormalities  all  favor 
vasculitis.

Autoimmune  and  paraneoplastic  conditions  (Chap.  94),  particularly 
limbic encephalitis and cortical encephalitis, can also mimic CJD. In many 
of these patients, dementia appears prior to the diagnosis of a tumor, and 
in some, no tumor is ever found. Detection of the paraneoplastic antibod-
ies is often the only way to distinguish these cases from CJD.

Other  diseases  that  can  simulate  CJD  include  neurosyphilis 
(Chap. 182), AIDS dementia complex (Chap. 202), progressive multifo-
cal leukoencephalopathy (Chap. 137), subacute sclerosing panenceph-
alitis,  progressive  rubella  panencephalitis,  herpes  simplex  encephalitis 
(Chap. 137), diffuse intracranial tumor (gliomatosis cerebri; Chap. 90), 
anoxic encephalopathy, dialysis dementia, uremia, hepatic encephalop-
athy, and lithium or bismuth intoxication.

 ■ LABORATORY TESTS
The only specific diagnostic tests for CJD and other human PrP prion 
diseases measure PrPSc. The most widely used method involves limited 
proteolysis that generates PrP 27-30, which is detected by immunoas-
say  after  denaturation.  The  conformation-dependent  immunoassay 
(CDI) is based on immunoreactive epitopes that are exposed in PrPC 
but buried in PrPSc. In humans, the diagnosis of CJD can be established 
by brain biopsy if PrPSc is detected although biopsy is rarely indicated. 
If no attempt is made to measure PrPSc, but the constellation of patho-
logic changes frequently found in CJD is seen in a brain biopsy, then 
the  diagnosis  is  reasonably  secure  (see  “Neuropathology,”  above). 
The  high  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  cortical  ribboning  and  basal 
ganglia hyperintensity on FLAIR and diffusion-weighted MRI for the 
diagnosis of CJD have greatly diminished the need for brain biopsy in 
patients with suspected CJD. Because PrPSc is not uniformly distributed 
throughout the CNS, the apparent absence of PrPSc in a limited sample 
such as a biopsy does not rule out prion disease. At autopsy, sufficient 
brain samples should be taken for both PrPSc immunoassay, preferably 
by CDI, and immunohistochemistry of tissue sections.

To establish the diagnosis of either sCJD or familial prion disease, 
sequencing the PRNP gene must be performed. Finding the wild-type 
PRNP  gene  sequence  permits  the  diagnosis  of  sCJD  if  there  is  no 
history to suggest infection from an exogenous source of prions. The 
identification of a mutation in the PRNP gene sequence that encodes 
a  nonconservative  amino  acid  substitution  argues  for  familial  prion 
disease.

MRI  is  valuable  for  distinguishing  sCJD  from  most  other  condi-
tions. On FLAIR sequences and diffusion-weighted imaging, ~90% of 
patients show increased intensity in the basal ganglia and cortical rib-
boning (Fig. 438-2). This pattern is not seen with other neurodegener-
ative disorders but has been seen infrequently with viral encephalitis, 
paraneoplastic syndromes, or seizures. When the typical MRI pattern 
is present, in the proper clinical setting, diagnosis is facilitated. How-
ever, some cases of sCJD do not show this typical pattern, and other 
early diagnostic approaches are still needed. CT findings are generally 
nonspecific; they may be normal or show cortical atrophy.

CSF  is  nearly  always  normal  but  may  show  protein  elevation  and, 
rarely, mild pleocytosis. Although the stress protein 14-3-3 is elevated 
in the CSF of some patients with CJD, similar elevations of 14-3-3 are 

FIGURE  438-2  T2-weighted  FLAIR  MRI  showing  hyperintensity  in  the  cortex  in  a 
patient with sCJD. This so-called cortical ribboning along with increased intensity 
in the basal ganglia on T2- or diffusion-weighted imaging can aid in the diagnosis 
of CJD.

found in patients with other disorders; thus, this elevation is not spe-
cific. Similarly, elevations of CSF neuron-specific enolase and tau occur 
in CJD but lack specificity for diagnosis.

The EEG is often useful in the diagnosis of CJD, although only ~60% 
of  individuals  show  the  typical  pattern,  which  appears  quite  late  in 
the clinical course. During the early phase of CJD, the EEG is usually 
normal or shows only scattered theta activity. In most advanced cases, 
repetitive, high-voltage, triphasic, and polyphasic sharp discharges are 
seen,  but  in  many  cases,  their  presence  is  transient.  The  presence  of 
these  stereotyped  periodic  bursts  of  <200  ms  in  duration,  occurring 
every 1–2 s, makes the diagnosis of CJD very likely. These discharges 
are  frequently  but  not  always  symmetric;  there  may  be  a  one-sided 
predominance  in  amplitude.  As  CJD  progresses,  normal  background 
rhythms become fragmentary and slower.

 ■ CARE OF CJD PATIENTS
Although CJD is communicable, the likelihood of transmission from 
one  patient  to  another  is  remote.  The  risk  of  accidental  inoculation 
by  aerosols  is  small;  nonetheless,  procedures  producing  aerosols 
should  be  performed  in  certified  biosafety  cabinets.  Biosafety  level  2 
practices,  containment  equipment,  and  facilities  are  recommended 
by  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  and  the  National 
Institutes  of  Health.  The  primary  worry  in  caring  for  patients  with 
CJD is the inadvertent infection of health care workers by needle and 
stab wounds, although with the possible exception of vCJD even blood 
transfusions appear to carry minimal risk for transmission. Electroen-
cephalographic  and  electromyographic  needles  should  not  be  reused 
after studies on patients with CJD have been performed.

Autopsies  on  patients  whose  clinical  diagnosis  is  CJD  can  be  per-
formed with minimal risk to pathologists or other morgue employees. 
Standard  microbiologic  practices  outlined  here,  along  with  specific 
recommendations  for  decontamination,  are  generally  adequate  pre-
cautions for the care of patients with CJD and the handling of infected 
specimens.

 ■ DECONTAMINATION OF CJD PRIONS
Prions are generally resistant to commonly used inactivation proce-
dures, and there is some disagreement about the optimal conditions 
for  sterilization.  Some  investigators  recommend  treating  CJD-
contaminated  materials  once  with  1  N  NaOH  at  room  temperature, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3421

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3422

but  we  believe  this  procedure  may  be  inadequate  for  sterilization. 
Autoclaving at 134°C for 5 h or treatment with 2 N NaOH for several 
hours is recommended for sterilization of prions. The term sterilization 
implies complete destruction of prions; any residual infectivity can be 
hazardous. Transgenic mouse studies show that sCJD prions bound to 
stainless-steel  surfaces  are  resistant  to  inactivation  by  autoclaving  at 
134°C for 2 h; exposure of bound prions to an acidic detergent solution 
prior to autoclaving rendered prions susceptible to inactivation. Recent 
studies  show  that  α-synuclein  prions  in  brain  homogenates  prepared 
from  MSA  patients  bind  to  stainless-steel  wires  and  that  the  bound 
prions can be transmitted to transgenic mice expressing mutant human 
α-synuclein.

 ■ PREVENTION AND THERAPEUTICS
There  is  no  known  effective  therapy  for  preventing  or  treating  CJD. 
The finding that phenothiazines and acridines inhibit PrPSc formation 
in cultured cells led to clinical studies of quinacrine in CJD patients. 
Unfortunately, quinacrine failed to slow the rate of cognitive decline in 
CJD,  possibly  because  therapeutic  concentrations  of  quinacrine  were 
not  achieved  in  the  brain.  Although  inhibition  of  the  P-glycoprotein 
(Pgp) transport system resulted in substantially increased quinacrine 
levels  in  the  brains  of  mice,  the  prion  incubation  times  were  not 
extended by treatment with the drug. Whether such an approach can 
be used to treat CJD remains to be established.

Like  the  acridines,  anti-PrP  antibodies  have  been  shown  to  elimi-
nate  PrPSc  from  cultured  cells.  Additionally,  such  antibodies  in  mice, 
either  administered  by  injection  or  produced  from  a  transgene,  have 
been  shown  to  prevent  prion  disease  when  prions  are  introduced  by 
a peripheral route, such as intraperitoneal inoculation. Unfortunately, 
the antibodies were ineffective in mice inoculated intracerebrally with 
prions.  Several  drugs,  including  pentosan  polysulfate  as  well  as  por-
phyrin and phenylhydrazine derivatives, delay the onset of disease in 
animals  inoculated  intracerebrally  with  prions  if  the  drugs  are  given 
intracerebrally beginning soon after inoculation.

DIFFERENT PRIONS CAUSING OTHER 
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES
There  is  a  rapidly  expanding  body  of  literature  demonstrating  that 
besides PrP, other proteins including amyloid beta (Aβ), tau, α-synuclein, 
and  huntingtin  can  all  refold  into  prions  (Chap.  424).  Experimental 
and  postmortem  studies  have  shown  that  mutant  transgenes  in  cul-
tured  cells  or  mice  expressing  the  amyloid  precursor  protein  (APP), 
tau, or α-synuclein produce prions. Both cultured cells and Tg mice, 
either  spontaneously  or  after  inoculation  with  prions  from  autopsy 
specimens,  support  prion  propagation.  For  example,  transgenic  mice 
expressing mutant APP produce Aβ amyloid plaques containing fibrils 
composed of the Aβ peptide that can be transmitted serially to Tg mice 
and cultured cells. Similarly, tau aggregates in transgenic mice and cul-
tured cells can initiate the aggregation of tau into fibrils that resemble 
those  found  in  neurofibrillary  tangles  and  Pick  bodies.  Such  tangles 
have been found in AD, FTDs, Pick’s disease, as well as posttraumatic 
brain  injury  (chronic  traumatic  encephalopathy)  (Chap.  443),  all  of 
which are thought to be caused by the prion isoforms of Aβ and/or tau.
In patients with advanced PD who received grafts of fetal substantia 
nigral neurons, Lewy bodies containing β-sheet-rich α-synuclein were 
identified in grafted cells ~10 years after transplantation, arguing for 
the  axonal  transport  of  misfolded  α-synuclein  crossing  into  grafted 
neurons,  where  it  initiated  aggregation  of  nascent  α-synuclein  into 
fibrils that coalesced into Lewy bodies. These findings combined with 
MSA  studies  argue  that  the  synucleinopathies  are  caused  by  prions. 
Brain homogenates from MSA patients injected into transgenic mice 
transmitted lethal neurodegeneration in ~3 months; moreover, recom-
binant synuclein injected into wild-type mice initiated the deposition 
of  synuclein  fibrils.  Similar  to  the  Tg  mouse  studies  with  Aβ  and 
tau,  cultured  cells  expressing  mutant  α-synuclein  also  support  prion 
formation.

In summary, a wealth of evidence continues to accumulate arguing 
that  proteins  causing  AD,  PD,  FTDs,  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis 

(ALS), and even Huntington’s disease (HD) acquire alternative confor-
mations that become self-propagating. Each of these NDs is thought to 
be caused by the aberrant folding of a different protein that undergoes 
a  self-replicating  conformational  change  to  become  a  prion.  Prions 
explain many of the features that NDs have in common: (1) incidence 
increases with age, (2) steady progression over years, (3) spread from 
one region of the CNS to another, (4) protein deposits often but not 
always  consisting  of  amyloid  fibrils,  and  (5)  late  onset  of  inherited 
forms. Notably, amyloid plaques containing PrPSc are a nonobligatory 
feature  of  PrP  prion  disease  in  humans  and  animals.  Furthermore, 
amyloid  plaques  in  AD  do  not  correlate  with  the  level  of  dementia; 
however,  the  level  of  soluble  (oligomeric)  Aβ  peptide  does  correlate 
with memory loss and other intellectual deficits.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Aoyagi A et al: Aβ and tau prion-like activities decline with longevity 
in the Alzheimer’s disease human brain. Sci Transl Med 11:eaat8462, 
2019.

Collinge J: Mammalian prions and their wider relevance in neurode-

generative diseases. Nature 539:217, 2016.

Kraus A et al: Structure of an infectious mammalian prion. bioRxiv 

preprint, 2021.

Prusiner SB (ed): Prion Biology. Cold Spring Harbor, NY, Cold Spring 

Harbor Laboratory Press, 2017.

Prusiner  SB  (ed):  Prion  Diseases.  Cold  Spring  Harbor,  NY,  Cold 

Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2017.

Prusiner  SB  et  al:  Evidence  for  α-synuclein  prions  causing  multiple 
system  atrophy  in  humans  with  parkinsonism.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci 
USA 112:E5308, 2015.

439 Ataxic Disorders

Roger N. Rosenberg

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Ataxic Disorders

Symptoms and signs of ataxia consist of gait impairment, unclear 
(“scanning”) speech, visual blurring due to nystagmus, hand inco-
ordination,  and  tremor  with  movement.  These  result  from  the 
involvement  of  the  cerebellum  and  its  afferent  and  efferent  path-
ways,  including  the  spinocerebellar  pathways,  and  the  frontopon-
tocerebellar  pathway  originating  in  the  rostral  frontal  lobe.  True 
cerebellar ataxia must be distinguished from ataxia associated with 
vestibular  nerve  or  labyrinthine  disease,  as  the  latter  results  in  a 
disorder  of  gait  associated  with  a  significant  degree  of  dizziness, 
light-headedness, or the perception of movement (Chap. 19). True 
cerebellar  ataxia  is  devoid  of  these  vertiginous  complaints  and  is 
clearly an unsteady gait due to imbalance. Sensory disturbances can 
also on occasion simulate the imbalance of cerebellar disease; with 
sensory ataxia, imbalance dramatically worsens when visual input is 
removed (Romberg sign). Rarely, weakness of proximal leg muscles 
mimics cerebellar disease. In the patient who presents with ataxia, 
the  rate  and  pattern  of  the  development  of  cerebellar  symptoms 
help to narrow the diagnostic possibilities (Table 439-1). A gradual 
and progressive increase in symptoms with bilateral and symmetric 
involvement  suggests  a  genetic,  metabolic,  immune,  or  toxic  eti-
ology.  Conversely,  focal,  unilateral  symptoms  with  headache  and 
impaired level of consciousness accompanied by ipsilateral cranial 
nerve palsies and contralateral weakness imply a space-occupying 
cerebellar lesion.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3422

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3423

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
9

A
t
a
x
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TABLE 439-1  Etiology of Cerebellar Ataxia

SYMMETRIC AND PROGRESSIVE SIGNS

FOCAL AND IPSILATERAL CEREBELLAR SIGNS

ACUTE (HOURS TO DAYS)
Intoxication: alcohol, 
lithium, phenytoin, 
barbiturates (positive 
history and toxicology 
screen)
Acute viral cerebellitis 
(CSF supportive of acute 
viral infection)
Postinfection syndrome

SUBACUTE (DAYS TO 
WEEKS)
Intoxication: mercury, 
solvents, gasoline, glue
Cytotoxic 
chemotherapeutic drugs
Alcoholic-nutritional 
(vitamin B1 and B12 
deficiency)
Lyme disease

CHRONIC (MONTHS TO 
YEARS)
Paraneoplastic syndrome
Antigliadin antibody 
syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Inherited diseases
Tabes dorsalis (tertiary 
syphilis)
Phenytoin toxicity
Amiodarone

ACUTE (HOURS TO DAYS)
Vascular: cerebellar 
infarction, hemorrhage, or 
subdural hematoma
Infectious: cerebellar 
abscess (mass lesion on 
MRI/CT, history in support 
of lesion)

SUBACUTE (DAYS TO 
WEEKS)
Neoplastic: cerebellar 
glioma or metastatic 
tumor (positive for 
neoplasm on MRI/CT)
Demyelinating: multiple 
sclerosis (history, CSF, 
and MRI are consistent)
AIDS-related multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy 
(positive HIV test and 
CD4+ cell count for AIDS)

CHRONIC (MONTHS TO 
YEARS)
Stable gliosis secondary 
to vascular lesion or 
demyelinating plaque 
(stable lesion on MRI/
CT older than several 
months)
Congenital lesion: 
Chiari or Dandy-
Walker malformations 
(malformation noted on 
MRI/CT)

Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

SYMMETRIC ATAXIA
Progressive and symmetric ataxia can be classified with respect to 
onset as acute (over hours or days), subacute (weeks or months), 
or chronic (months to years). Acute and reversible ataxias include 
those  caused  by  intoxication  with  alcohol,  phenytoin,  lithium, 
barbiturates, and other drugs. Intoxication caused by toluene expo-
sure, gasoline sniffing, glue sniffing, spray painting, or exposure to 
methyl mercury or bismuth are additional causes of acute or sub-
acute ataxia, as is treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs 
such as fluorouracil and paclitaxel. Patients with a postinfectious 
syndrome  (especially  after  varicella)  may  develop  gait  ataxia  and 
mild  dysarthria,  both  of  which  are  reversible  (Chap.  444).  Rare 
infectious  causes  of  acquired  ataxia  include  poliovirus,  coxsack-
ievirus,  echovirus,  Epstein-Barr  virus,  toxoplasmosis,  Legionella, 
and Lyme disease.

The subacute development of ataxia of gait over weeks to months 
(degeneration of the cerebellar vermis) may be due to the combined 
effects of alcoholism and malnutrition, particularly with deficiencies 
of vitamins B1 and B12. Hyponatremia has also been associated with 
ataxia. Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia is associated with a number 
of different tumors (and autoantibodies) such as breast and ovarian 
cancers  (anti-Yo),  small-cell  lung  cancer  (anti-PQ-type  voltage-
gated calcium channel), and Hodgkin’s disease (anti-Tr) (Chap. 94). 
Another  paraneoplastic  syndrome  associated  with  myoclonus  and 
opsoclonus occurs with breast (anti-Ri) and lung cancers and neuro-
blastoma. Elevated serum anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 
antibodies have been associated with a progressive ataxic syndrome 
affecting  speech  and  gait.  For  all  of  these  paraneoplastic  ataxias, 
the  neurologic  syndrome  may  be  the  presenting  symptom  of  the 
cancer. Another immune-mediated progressive ataxia is associated 
with antigliadin (and antiendomysium) antibodies and the human 
leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  DQB1*0201  haplotype;  in  some  affected 
patients, biopsy of the small intestine reveals villus atrophy consis-
tent with gluten-sensitive enteropathy (Chap. 325). Finally, subacute 
progressive  ataxia  may  be  caused  by  a  prion  disorder,  especially 
when  an  infectious  etiology,  such  as  transmission  from  contami-
nated human growth hormone, is responsible (Chap. 438).

Chronic symmetric gait ataxia suggests an inherited ataxia (dis-
cussed below), a metabolic disorder, or a chronic infection. Hypo-
thyroidism  must  always  be  considered  as  a  readily  treatable  and 
reversible  form  of  gait  ataxia.  Infectious  diseases  that  can  present 
with ataxia are meningovascular syphilis and tabes dorsalis due to 
degeneration  of  the  posterior  columns  and  spinocerebellar  path-
ways in the spinal cord.

FOCAL ATAXIA
Acute  focal  ataxia  commonly  results  from  cerebrovascular  dis-
ease,  usually  ischemic  infarction  or  cerebellar  hemorrhage.  These 
lesions  typically  produce  cerebellar  symptoms  ipsilateral  to  the 

injured  cerebellum  and  may  be  associated  with  an  impaired  level 
of  consciousness  due  to  brainstem  compression  and  increased 
intracranial pressure; ipsilateral pontine signs, including sixth and 
seventh nerve palsies, may be present. Focal and worsening signs of 
acute ataxia should also prompt consideration of a posterior fossa 
subdural  hematoma,  bacterial  abscess,  or  primary  or  metastatic 
cerebellar tumor. CT or MRI studies will reveal clinically significant 
processes of this type. Many of these lesions represent true neuro-
logic  emergencies,  as  sudden  herniation,  either  rostrally  through 
the  tentorium  or  caudal  herniation  of  cerebellar  tonsils  through 
the foramen magnum, can occur and is usually devastating. Acute 
surgical decompression may be required (Chap. 301). Lymphoma 
or progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in a patient 
with AIDS may present with an acute or subacute focal cerebellar 
syndrome. Chronic etiologies of progressive ataxia include multiple 
sclerosis (Chap. 444) and congenital lesions such as a Chiari mal-
formation  (Chap.  442)  or  a  congenital  cyst  of  the  posterior  fossa 
(Dandy-Walker syndrome).

THE INHERITED ATAXIAS
Inherited ataxias may show autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, 
or maternal (mitochondrial) modes of inheritance. A genomic classifi-
cation (Table 439-2)1 has now largely superseded previous ones based 
on clinical expression alone.

Although the clinical manifestations and neuropathologic findings of 
cerebellar disease dominate the clinical picture, there may also be charac-
teristic changes in the basal ganglia, brainstem, spinal cord, optic nerves, 
retina, and peripheral nerves. In large families with dominantly inherited 
ataxias, many gradations are observed from purely cerebellar manifesta-
tions to mixed cerebellar and brainstem disorders, cerebellar and basal 
ganglia syndromes, and spinal cord or peripheral nerve disease. Rarely, 
dementia is present as well. The clinical picture may be homogeneous 
within a family with dominantly inherited ataxia, but sometimes most 
affected family members show one characteristic syndrome, while one 
or several members have an entirely different phenotype.

 ■ AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT ATAXIAS
The  autosomal  spinocerebellar  ataxias  (SCAs)  include  SCA  types  1 
through  43,  dentatorubropallidoluysian  atrophy  (DRPLA),  and  epi-
sodic  ataxia  (EA)  types  1  to  7  (Table  439-2).  SCA1,  SCA2,  SCA3 
(Machado-Joseph disease [MJD]), SCA6, SCA7, and SCA17 are caused 
by CAG triplet repeat expansions in different genes. SCA8 is due to an 
untranslated CTG repeat expansion, SCA12 is linked to an untranslated 
CAG repeat, and SCA10 is caused by an untranslated pentanucleotide 
repeat.  The  clinical  phenotypes  of  these  SCAs  overlap.  The  genotype 

1Table 439-2 can be found online at www.accessmedicine.com.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3423

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3424

has  become  the  gold  standard  for  diagnosis  and  classification.  CAG 
encodes  glutamine,  and  these  expanded  CAG  triplet  repeat  expan-
sions result in expanded polyglutamine proteins, termed  ataxins, that 
produce  a  toxic  gain  of  function  with  autosomal  dominant  inheri-
tance. Although the phenotype is variable for any given disease gene, 
a  pattern  of  neuronal  loss  with  gliosis  is  produced  that  is  relatively 
unique for each ataxia. Immunohistochemical and biochemical studies 
have  shown  cytoplasmic  (SCA2),  neuronal  (SCA1,  MJD,  SCA7),  and 
nucleolar (SCA7) accumulation of the specific mutant polyglutamine-
containing ataxin proteins. Expanded polyglutamine ataxins with more 
than  ~40  glutamines  are  potentially  toxic  to  neurons  for  a  variety  of 
reasons including: high levels of gene expression for the mutant poly-
glutamine  ataxin  in  affected  neurons;  conformational  change  of  the 
aggregated protein to a β-pleated structure; abnormal transport of the 
ataxin  into  the  nucleus  (SCA1,  MJD,  SCA7);  binding  to  other  poly-
glutamine proteins, including the TATA-binding transcription protein 
and the CREB-binding protein, impairing their functions; altering the 
efficiency of the ubiquitin-proteasome system of protein turnover; and 
inducing neuronal apoptosis. An earlier age of onset (anticipation) and 
more  aggressive  disease  in  subsequent  generations  are  due  to  further 
expansion of the CAG triplet repeat and increased polyglutamine num-
ber  in  the  mutant  ataxin.  The  most  common  disorders  are  discussed  
below.

 ■ SCA1
SCA1  was  previously  referred  to  as  olivopontocerebellar  atrophy,  but 
genomic data have shown that that entity represents several different 
genotypes with overlapping clinical features.

Symptoms  and  Signs  SCA1  is  characterized  by  the  development 
in  early-  or  middle-adult  life  of  progressive  cerebellar  ataxia  of  the 
trunk  and  limbs,  impairment  of  equilibrium  and  gait,  slowness  of 
voluntary  movements,  scanning  speech,  nystagmoid  eye  movements, 
and oscillatory tremor of the head and trunk. Dysarthria, dysphagia, 
and  oculomotor  and  facial  palsies  may  also  occur.  Extrapyramidal 
symptoms include rigidity, an immobile face, and parkinsonian tremor. 
The reflexes are usually normal, but knee and ankle jerks may be lost, 
and  extensor  plantar  responses  may  occur.  Dementia  may  be  noted 
but is usually mild. Impairment of sphincter function is common, with 
urinary  and  sometimes  fecal  incontinence.  Cerebellar  and  brainstem 
atrophy are evident on MRI (Fig. 439-1).

Marked shrinkage of the ventral half of the pons, disappearance of 
the olivary eminence on the ventral surface of the medulla, and atrophy 
of the cerebellum are evident on gross postmortem inspection of the 

FIGURE 439-1  Sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain of a 60-year-
old man with gait ataxia and dysarthria due to spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1), 
illustrating  cerebellar  atrophy  (arrows).  (Reproduced  with  permission  from  RN 
Rosenberg, P Khemani, in RN Rosenberg, JM Pascual [eds]: Rosenberg’s Molecular 
and Genetic Basis of Neurological and Psychiatric Disease, 5th ed. London, Elsevier, 
2015.)

brain. Variable loss of Purkinje cells, reduced numbers of cells in the 
molecular and granular layer, demyelination of the middle cerebellar 
peduncle  and  the  cerebellar  hemispheres,  and  severe  loss  of  cells  in 
the  pontine  nuclei  and  olives  are  found  on  histologic  examination. 
Degenerative changes in the striatum, especially the putamen, and loss 
of the pigmented cells of the substantia nigra may be found in cases 
with  extrapyramidal  features.  More  widespread  degeneration  in  the 
central nervous system (CNS), including involvement of the posterior 
columns and the spinocerebellar fibers, is often present.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

SCA1 encodes a gene product, called ataxin-1 that regulates tran-
scriptional repression with various nuclear factors. As a protein 
that can bind RNA, ataxin 1 may also regulate gene transcription 
posttranslationally.  The  mutant  allele  has  40  CAG  repeats  located 
within the coding region, whereas alleles from unaffected individuals 
have ≤36 repeats. A few patients with 38–40 CAG repeats have been 
described.  There  is  a  direct  correlation  between  a  larger  number  of 
repeats  and  a  younger  age  of  onset  for  SCA1.  Juvenile  patients  have 
higher numbers of repeats, and anticipation is present in subsequent 
generations.  Transgenic  mice  carrying  SCA1  developed  ataxia  and 
Purkinje  cell  pathology.  Leucine-rich  acidic  nuclear  protein  localiza-
tion,  but  not  aggregation,  of  ataxin-1  appears  to  be  required  for  cell 
death initiated by the mutant protein.

 ■ SCA2
Symptoms and Signs  Another clinical phenotype, SCA2, has been 
described in patients from Cuba and India. Cuban patients probably 
are descendants of a common ancestor, and the population may be the 
largest homogeneous group of patients with ataxia described. The age 
of onset ranges from 2 to 65 years, and there is considerable clinical 
variability within families. Although neuropathologic and clinical find-
ings are compatible with a diagnosis of SCA1, including slow saccadic 
eye  movements,  ataxia,  dysarthria,  parkinsonian  rigidity,  optic  disc 
pallor, mild spasticity, and retinal degeneration, SCA2 is a unique form 
of cerebellar degenerative disease.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

The gene in SCA2 families also contains CAG repeat expansions 
coding for a polyglutamine-containing protein, ataxin-2. Normal 
alleles contain 15–32 repeats; mutant alleles have 35–77 repeats. 
Ataxin-2  has  recently  been  shown  to  assemble  with  polyribosomes. 
Ataxin-2 is also an important risk factor for sporadic amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis (ALS).

 ■ MACHADO-JOSEPH DISEASE/SCA3
MJD was first described among the Portuguese and their descendants 
in  New  England  and  California.  Subsequently,  MJD  has  been  found 
in families from Portugal, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, England, 
France, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Spain, Taiwan, and the United States. 
In  most  populations,  it  is  the  most  common  autosomal  dominant 
ataxia.

Symptoms and Signs  MJD has been classified into three clinical 
types.  In  type  I  MJD  (ALS-parkinsonism-dystonia  type),  neurologic 
deficits appear in the first two decades and involve weakness and spas-
ticity of extremities, especially the legs, often with dystonia of the face, 
neck, trunk, and extremities. Patellar and ankle clonus are common, as 
are extensor plantar responses. The gait is slow and stiff, with a slightly 
broadened base and lurching from side to side; this gait results from 
spasticity, not true ataxia. There is no truncal titubation. Pharyngeal 
weakness and spasticity cause difficulty with speech and swallowing. 
Of note is the prominence of horizontal and vertical nystagmus, loss of 
fast saccadic eye movements, hypermetric and hypometric saccades, 
and  impairment  of  upward  vertical  gaze.  Facial  fasciculations,  facial 
myokymia, lingual fasciculations without atrophy, ophthalmoparesis, 
and ocular prominence are common early manifestations.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3424

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders In  type  II  MJD  (ataxic  type),  true  cerebellar  deficits  of  dysarthria 
and  gait  and  extremity  ataxia  begin  in  the  second  to  fourth  decades 
along  with  corticospinal  and  extrapyramidal  deficits  of  spasticity, 
rigidity,  and  dystonia.  Type  II  is  the  most  common  form  of  MJD. 
Ophthalmoparesis, upward vertical gaze deficits, and facial and lingual 
fasciculations are also present. Type II MJD can be distinguished from 
the clinically similar disorders SCA1 and SCA2.

Type  III  MJD  (ataxic-amyotrophic  type)  presents  in  the  fifth  to 
seventh decades with a pancerebellar disorder that includes dysarthria 
and gait and extremity ataxia. Distal sensory loss involving pain, touch, 
vibration, and position senses and distal atrophy are prominent, indi-
cating the presence of peripheral neuropathy. The deep tendon reflexes 
are  depressed  to  absent,  and  there  are  no  corticospinal  or  extrapyra-
midal findings.

The mean age of onset of symptoms in MJD is 25 years. Neurologic 
deficits invariably progress and lead to death from debilitation within 
15  years  of  onset,  especially  in  patients  with  types  I  and  II  disease. 
Usually, patients retain full intellectual function.

The major pathologic findings are variable loss of neurons and glial 
replacement in the corpus striatum and severe loss of neurons in the 
pars  compacta  of  the  substantia  nigra.  A  moderate  loss  of  neurons 
occurs in the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum and in the red nucleus. 
Purkinje cell loss and granule cell loss occur in the cerebellar cortex. 
Cell  loss  also  occurs  in  the  dentate  nucleus  and  in  the  cranial  nerve 
motor  nuclei.  Sparing  of  the  inferior  olives  distinguishes  MJD  from 
other dominantly inherited ataxias.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

The  gene  for  MJD  maps  to  14q24.3-q32.  Unstable  CAG  repeat 
expansions are present in the MJD gene coding for a polyglutamine-
containing protein named ataxin-3, or MJD-ataxin. An earlier age 
of onset is associated with longer repeats. Alleles from normal individu-
als  have  between  12  and  37  CAG  repeats,  whereas  MJD  alleles  have 
60–84  CAG  repeats.  Polyglutamine-containing  aggregates  of  ataxin-3 
(MJD-ataxin) have been described in neuronal nuclei undergoing degen-
eration. MJD-ataxin codes for a ubiquitin protease, which is inactive due 
to expanded polyglutamines. Proteosome function is impaired, resulting 
in altered clearance of proteins and cerebellar neuronal loss.
 ■ SCA6
Genomic screening for CAG repeats in other families with autosomal 
dominant  ataxia  and  vibratory  and  proprioceptive  sensory  loss  have 
yielded  another  locus.  Of  interest  is  that  different  mutations  in  the 
same  gene  for  the  α1A  voltage-dependent  calcium  channel  subunit 
(CACNLIA4; also referred to as the CACNA1A gene) at 19p13 result in 
different clinical disorders. CAG repeat expansions (21–27 in patients; 
4–16  triplets  in  normal  individuals)  result  in  late-onset  progressive 
ataxia  with  cerebellar  degeneration.  Missense  mutations  in  this  gene 
result  in  familial  hemiplegic  migraine.  Nonsense  mutations  resulting 
in termination of protein synthesis of the gene product yield hereditary 
paroxysmal cerebellar ataxia or EA. Some patients with familial hemi-
plegic  migraine  develop  progressive  ataxia  and  also  have  cerebellar 
atrophy.

 ■ SCA7
This  disorder  is  distinguished  from  all  other  SCAs  by  the  presence 
of  retinal  pigmentary  degeneration.  The  visual  abnormalities  first 
appear  as  blue-yellow  color  blindness  and  proceed  to  frank  visual 
loss  with  macular  degeneration.  In  almost  all  other  respects,  SCA7 
resembles several other SCAs in which ataxia is accompanied by var-
ious noncerebellar findings, including ophthalmoparesis and extensor 
plantar  responses.  The  genetic  defect  is  an  expanded  CAG  repeat  in 
the  SCA7  gene  at  3p14-p21.1.  The  expanded  repeat  size  in  SCA7  is 
highly  variable.  Consistent  with  this,  the  severity  of  clinical  findings 
varies from essentially asymptomatic to mild late-onset symptoms to 
severe, aggressive disease in childhood with rapid progression. Marked 
anticipation has been recorded, especially with paternal transmission. 
The  disease  protein,  ataxin-7,  forms  aggregates  in  nuclei  of  affected 

neurons, as has also been described for SCA1 and SCA3/MJD. Ataxin 7 
is a subunit of GCN5, a histone acetyltransferase-containing complex.

3425

 ■ SCA8
This form of ataxia is caused by a CTG repeat expansion in an untrans-
lated region of a gene on chromosome 13q21. There is marked mater-
nal bias in transmission, perhaps reflecting contractions of the repeat 
during  spermatogenesis.  The  mutation  is  not  fully  penetrant.  Symp-
toms include slowly progressive dysarthria and gait ataxia beginning at 
~40 years of age with a range between 20 and 65 years. Other features 
include  nystagmus,  leg  spasticity,  and  reduced  vibratory  sensation. 
Severely affected individuals are nonambulatory by the fourth to sixth 
decades. MRI shows cerebellar atrophy. The mechanism of disease may 
involve a dominant “toxic” effect occurring at the RNA level, as occurs 
in myotonic dystrophy.

 ■ DENTATORUBROPALLIDOLUYSIAN ATROPHY
DRPLA has a variable presentation that may include progressive ataxia, 
choreoathetosis, dystonia, seizures, myoclonus, and dementia. DRPLA 
is due to unstable CAG triplet repeats in the open reading frame of a 
gene named atrophin located on chromosome 12p12-ter. Larger expan-
sions are found in patients with earlier onset. The number of repeats 
is 49 in patients with DRPLA and ≤26 in normal individuals. Antici-
pation  occurs  in  successive  generations,  with  earlier  onset  of  disease 
in association with an increasing CAG repeat number in children who 
inherit the disease from their father. One well-characterized family in 
North Carolina has a phenotypic variant known as the Haw River syn-
drome, now recognized to be due to the DRPLA mutation.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
3
9

A
t
a
x
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

 ■ EPISODIC ATAXIA
EA  types  1  and  2  are  two  rare  dominantly  inherited  disorders  that 
have  been  mapped  to  chromosomes  12p  (a  potassium  channel  gene, 
KCNA1, Phe249Leu mutation) for type 1 and 19p for type 2. Patients 
with EA-1 have brief episodes of ataxia with myokymia and nystagmus 
that last only minutes. Startle, sudden change in posture, and exercise 
can induce episodes. Acetazolamide or anticonvulsants may be thera-
peutic. Patients with EA-2 have episodes of ataxia with nystagmus that 
can last for hours or days. Stress, exercise, or excessive fatigue may be 
precipitants. Acetazolamide may be therapeutic and can reverse the rel-
ative intracellular alkalosis detected by magnetic resonance spectros-
copy. Stop codon, nonsense mutations causing EA-2 have been found 
in  the  CACNA1A  gene,  encoding  the  α1A  voltage-dependent  calcium 
channel subunit (see “SCA6,” above).

 ■ AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE ATAXIAS
Friedreich’s  Ataxia  This  is  the  most  common  form  of  inherited 
ataxia, comprising one-half of all hereditary ataxias. It can occur in a 
classic form or in association with a genetically determined vitamin E 
deficiency syndrome; the two forms are clinically indistinguishable.
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS  Friedreich’s ataxia presents before 25 years of 
age  with  progressive  staggering  gait,  frequent  falling,  and  titubation. 
The lower extremities are more severely involved than the upper ones. 
Dysarthria occasionally is the presenting symptom; rarely, progressive 
scoliosis, foot deformity, nystagmus, or cardiopathy is the initial sign.

The neurologic examination reveals nystagmus, loss of fast saccadic 
eye movements, truncal titubation, dysarthria, dysmetria, and ataxia of 
trunk and limb movements. Extensor plantar responses (with normal 
tone  in  trunk  and  extremities),  absence  of  deep  tendon  reflexes,  and 
weakness (greater distally than proximally) are usually found. Loss of 
vibratory and proprioceptive sensation occurs. The median age of death 
is 35 years. Women have a significantly better prognosis than men.

Cardiac involvement occurs in 90% of patients. Cardiomegaly, sym-
metric  hypertrophy,  murmurs,  and  conduction  defects  are  reported. 
Moderate  mental  retardation  or  psychiatric  syndromes  are  present 
in a small percentage of patients. A high incidence (20%) of diabetes 
mellitus is found and is associated with insulin resistance and pancre-
atic β-cell dysfunction. Musculoskeletal deformities are common and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3425

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3426

secretion of VLDL in liver. This defect results in a deficiency of delivery 
of vitamin E to tissues, including the central and peripheral nervous 
system,  as  VLDL  is  the  transport  molecule  for  vitamin  E  and  other 
fat-soluble substitutes. AVED is due to mutations in the gene for α-to-
copherol  transfer  protein  (α-TTP).  These  patients  have  an  impaired 
ability to bind vitamin E into the VLDL produced and secreted by the 
liver, resulting in a deficiency of vitamin E in peripheral tissues. Hence, 
either absence of VLDL (abetalipoproteinemia) or impaired binding of 
vitamin E to VLDL (AVED) causes an ataxic syndrome. Once again, 
a genotype classification has proved to be essential in sorting out the 
various forms of the Friedreich’s disease syndrome, which may be clin-
ically indistinguishable.

Ataxia  Telangiectasia  •  SYMPTOMS  AND  SIGNS  Patients  with 
ataxia telangiectasia (AT) present in the first decade of life with pro-
gressive  telangiectatic  lesions  associated  with  deficits  in  cerebellar 
function  and  nystagmus.  The  neurologic  manifestations  correspond 
to those in Friedreich’s disease, which should be included in the differ-
ential diagnosis. Truncal and limb ataxia, dysarthria, extensor plantar 
responses,  myoclonic  jerks,  areflexia,  and  distal  sensory  deficits  may 
develop. There is a high incidence of recurrent pulmonary infections 
and  neoplasms  of  the  lymphatic  and  reticuloendothelial  system  in 
patients with AT. Thymic hypoplasia with cellular and humoral (IgA 
and  IgG2)  immunodeficiencies,  premature  aging,  and  endocrine 
disorders  such  as  type  1  diabetes  mellitus  are  described.  There  is  an 
increased  incidence  of  lymphomas,  Hodgkin’s  disease,  acute  T-cell 
leukemias, and breast cancer.

The most striking neuropathologic changes include loss of Purkinje, 
granule, and basket cells in the cerebellar cortex as well as of neurons 
in  the  deep  cerebellar  nuclei.  The  inferior  olives  of  the  medulla  may 
also have neuronal loss. There is a loss of anterior horn neurons in the 
spinal cord and of dorsal root ganglion cells associated with posterior 
column spinal cord demyelination. A poorly developed or absent thy-
mus gland is the most consistent defect of the lymphoid system.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
The gene for AT (the ATM gene) at 11q22-23 encodes a protein that 
is  similar  to  several  yeast  and  mammalian  phosphatidylinositol-3′ 
kinases  involved  in  mitogenic  signal  transduction,  meiotic  recombi-
nation, and cell cycle control. Defective DNA repair in AT fibroblasts 
exposed  to  ultraviolet  light  has  been  demonstrated.  The  discovery 
of  ATM  permits  early  diagnosis  and  identification  of  heterozygotes 
who are at risk for cancer (e.g., breast cancer). Elevated serum alpha- 
fetoprotein and immunoglobulin deficiency are noted.

 ■ MITOCHONDRIAL ATAXIAS
Spinocerebellar  syndromes  have  been  identified  with  mutations  in 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Thirty pathogenic mtDNA point muta-
tions and 60 different types of mtDNA deletions are known, several of 
which cause or are associated with ataxia (Chap. 449).

TREATMENT
Ataxic Disorders

The most important goal in management of patients with ataxia is 
to  identify  treatable  disease  entities.  Mass  lesions  must  be  recog-
nized  promptly  and  treated  appropriately.  Autoimmune  paraneo-
plastic disorders can often be identified by the clinical patterns of 
disease that they produce, measurement of specific autoantibodies, 
and  uncovering  the  primary  cancer;  these  disorders  are  often 
refractory to therapy, but some patients improve following removal 
of the tumor or immunotherapy (Chap. 94). Ataxia with antigliadin 
antibodies  and  gluten-sensitive  enteropathy  may  improve  with  a 
gluten-free  diet.  Malabsorption  syndromes  leading  to  vitamin  E 
deficiency  may  lead  to  ataxia.  The  vitamin  E  deficiency  form  of 
Friedreich’s ataxia must be considered, and serum vitamin E levels 
measured.  Vitamin  E  therapy  is  indicated  for  these  rare  patients. 
Vitamin  B1  and  B12  levels  in  serum  should  be  measured,  and  the 

FIGURE 439-2  Sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spinal 
cord  of  a  patient  with  Friedreich’s  ataxia,  demonstrating  spinal  cord  atrophy. 
(Reproduced  with  permission  from  RN  Rosenberg,  P  Khemani,  in  RN  Rosenberg, 
JM Pascual [eds]: Rosenberg’s Molecular and Genetic Basis of Neurological and 
Psychiatric Disease, 5th ed. London, Elsevier, 2015.)

include  pes  cavus,  pes  equinovarus,  and  scoliosis.  MRI  of  the  spinal 
cord shows atrophy (Fig. 439-2).

The  primary  sites  of  pathology  are  the  spinal  cord,  dorsal  root 
ganglion  cells,  and  the  peripheral  nerves.  Slight  atrophy  of  the  cere-
bellum and cerebral gyri may occur. Sclerosis and degeneration occur 
predominantly in the spinocerebellar tracts, lateral corticospinal tracts, 
and posterior columns. Degeneration of the glossopharyngeal, vagus, 
hypoglossal, and deep cerebellar nuclei is described. The cerebral cor-
tex is histologically normal except for loss of Betz cells in the precentral 
gyri. The peripheral nerves are extensively involved, with a loss of large 
myelinated fibers. Cardiac pathology consists of myocytic hypertrophy 
and  fibrosis,  focal  vascular  fibromuscular  dysplasia  with  subintimal 
or  medial  deposition  of  periodic  acid-Schiff  (PAS)-positive  material, 
myocytopathy with unusual pleomorphic nuclei, and focal degenera-
tion of nerves and cardiac ganglia.

 ■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

The classic form of Friedreich’s ataxia has been mapped to 9q13-
q21.1,  and  the  mutant  gene,  frataxin,  contains  expanded  GAA 
triplet  repeats  in  the  first  intron.  There  is  homozygosity  for 
expanded GAA repeats in >95% of patients. Normal persons have 7–22 
GAA repeats, and patients have 200–900 GAA repeats. A more varied 
clinical syndrome has been described in compound heterozygotes who 
have one copy of the GAA expansion and the other copy a point muta-
tion  in  the  frataxin  gene.  When  the  point  mutation  is  located  in  the 
region of the gene that encodes the amino-terminal half of frataxin, the 
phenotype is milder, often consisting of a spastic gait, retained or exag-
gerated reflexes, no dysarthria, and mild or absent ataxia.

Patients with Friedreich’s ataxia have undetectable or extremely low 
levels of frataxin mRNA, as compared with carriers and unrelated indi-
viduals; thus, disease appears to be caused by a loss of expression of the 
frataxin protein. Frataxin is a mitochondrial protein involved in iron 
homeostasis. Mitochondrial iron accumulation due to loss of the iron 
transporter coded by the mutant frataxin gene results in a deficiency in 
iron/sulfur clusters containing mitochondrial enzymes, decreased ATP 
production, and accumulation of iron in the heart. Excess oxidized iron 
results in turn in the oxidation of cellular components and irreversible 
cell injury.

Two forms of hereditary ataxia associated with abnormalities in the 
interactions  of  vitamin  E  (α-tocopherol)  with  very-low-density  lipo-
protein (VLDL) have been delineated. These are abetalipoproteinemia 
(Bassen-Kornzweig  syndrome)  and  ataxia  with  vitamin  E  deficiency 
(AVED).  Abetalipoproteinemia  is  caused  by  mutations  in  the  gene 
coding  for  the  larger  subunit  of  the  microsomal  triglyceride  transfer 
protein (MTP). Defects in MTP result in impairment of formation and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3426

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders vitamins administered to patients having deficient levels. Hypothy-
roidism  is  easily  treated.  The  cerebrospinal  fluid  should  be  tested 
for  a  syphilitic  infection  in  patients  with  progressive  ataxia  and 
other features of tabes dorsalis. Similarly, antibody titers for Lyme 
disease  and  Legionella  should  be  measured  and  appropriate  anti-
biotic  therapy  should  be  instituted  in  antibody-positive  patients. 
Aminoacidopathies,  leukodystrophies,  urea-cycle  abnormalities, 
and mitochondrial encephalomyopathies may produce ataxia, and 
some  dietary  or  metabolic  therapies  are  available  for  these  disor-
ders. The deleterious effects of phenytoin and alcohol on the cere-
bellum are well known, and these exposures should be avoided in 
patients with ataxia of any cause.

There is no proven therapy for any of the autosomal dominant 
ataxias (SCA1 to SCA43). There is preliminary evidence that ide-
benone, a free-radical scavenger, can improve myocardial hypertro-
phy in patients with classic Friedreich’s ataxia; there is no current 
evidence,  however,  that  it  improves  neurologic  function.  A  small 
preliminary study in a mixed population of patients with different 
inherited ataxias raised the possibility that the glutamate antagonist 
riluzole  may  offer  modest  benefit.  Iron  chelators  and  antioxidant 
drugs are potentially harmful in Friedreich’s patients because they 
may  increase  heart  muscle  injury.  Acetazolamide  can  reduce  the 
duration of symptoms of EA. At present, identification of an at-risk 
person’s  genotype,  together  with  appropriate  family  and  genetic 
counseling, can reduce the incidence of these cerebellar syndromes 
in future generations (Chap. 467).

 ■ GENETIC DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES
1.  Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, Texas, 1-713-798-6522

http://www.bcm.edu/genetics/index.cfm?pmid=21387

2.  GeneDx

http://www.genedx.com

3.  Transgenomic, 1-877-274-9432

http://www.transgenomic.com/labs/neurology

 ■ GLOBAL FEATURES
Ataxias  with  autosomal  dominant,  autosomal  recessive,  X-linked, 
or  mitochondrial  forms  of  inheritance  are  present  on  a  worldwide 
basis.  Machado-Joseph  disease  (SCA3)  (autosomal  dominant)  and 
Friedreich’s  ataxia  (autosomal  recessive)  are  the  most  common  types 
in most populations. Genetic markers are now commercially available 
to  precisely  identify  the  genetic  mutation  for  correct  diagnosis  and 
also for family planning. Early detection of asymptomatic preclinical 
disease can reduce or eliminate the inherited form of ataxia in some 
families on a global, worldwide basis.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Anheim M et al: The autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias. N Engl J 

Med 16:636, 2012.

Jacobi  H  et  al:  Long-term  disease  progression  in  spinocerebellar 
ataxia types 1, 2, 3, and 6: A longitudinal cohort study. Lancet Neurol 
14:1101, 2015.

Martin  D,  Hayden  M:  Role  of  repeats  in  protein  clearance.  Nature 

545:33, 2017.

Paulson HL et al: Polyglutamine spinocerebellar ataxias—from genes 

to potential therapy. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:613; 2017.

Romano S et al: Riluzole in patients with hereditary cerebellar ataxia: 
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 
14:985, 2015.

3427

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
0

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

t
h
e
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
i
c
N
e
r
v
o
u
s
S
y
s
t
e
m

440 Disorders of the  

Autonomic Nervous System
Richard J. Barohn, John W. Engstrom

The autonomic nervous system (ANS) innervates the entire neuraxis 
and  influences  all  organ  systems.  It  regulates  blood  pressure  (BP); 
heart rate; sleep; and glandular, pupillary, bladder, and bowel function. 
It  maintains  organ  homeostasis  and  operates  automatically;  its  full 
importance becomes recognized only when ANS function is compro-
mised,  resulting  in  dysautonomia.  Dysautonomia  can  result  from  a 
primary disorder of the central or peripheral nervous system, or from 
a  nonneurogenic  cause.  Not  infrequently  more  than  one  contributor 
may be present, for example the additive effects of a medication in a 
patient with diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular insufficiency, or normal 
aging  may  be  responsible.  It  is  helpful  to  characterize  dysautonomia 
by its time course (acute, subacute, or chronic; progressive or static), 
severity,  and  whether  manifestations  are  continuous  or  intermittent. 
Hypothalamic disorders that cause disturbances in homeostasis are 
discussed in Chaps. 18 and 378.

ANATOMIC ORGANIZATION
The  activity  of  the  ANS  is  regulated  by  central  neurons  responsive 
to  diverse  afferent  inputs.  After  central  integration  of  afferent  infor-
mation,  autonomic  outflow  is  adjusted  to  permit  the  functioning  of 
the  major  organ  systems  in  accordance  with  the  needs  of  the  whole 
organism. Connections between the cerebral cortex and the autonomic 
centers  in  the  brainstem  coordinate  autonomic  outflow  with  higher 
mental functions.

The preganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system 
leave  the  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  in  the  third,  seventh,  ninth, 
and tenth cranial nerves as well as the second and third sacral nerves, 
whereas the preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic nervous system 
exit the spinal cord between the first thoracic and the second lumbar 
segments (Fig. 440-1). The autonomic preganglionic fibers are thinly 
myelinated. The postganglionic neurons, located in ganglia outside the 
CNS, give rise to the postganglionic unmyelinated autonomic nerves 
that  innervate  organs  and  tissues  throughout  the  body.  Responses  to 
sympathetic  and  parasympathetic  stimulation  are  frequently  antago-
nistic (Table 440-1), reflecting highly coordinated interactions within 
the  CNS;  the  resultant  changes  in  parasympathetic  and  sympathetic 
activity  provide  more  precise  control  of  autonomic  responses  than 
could be achieved by the modulation of a single system. In general, the 
“fight  or  flight”  response  is  a  consequence  of  increased  sympathetic 
activity while the “rest and digest” reflects increased parasympathetic 
activity.

Acetylcholine (ACh) is the preganglionic neurotransmitter for both 
the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the ANS as well as the 
postganglionic neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic neurons; the 
preganglionic receptors are nicotinic, and the postganglionic are mus-
carinic  in  type.  Norepinephrine  (NE)  is  the  neurotransmitter  of  the 
postganglionic  sympathetic  neurons,  except  for  cholinergic  neurons 
innervating the eccrine sweat glands.

The  gastrointestinal  (GI)  tract  has  long  been  described  as  part  of 
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. However, it has 
many unique characteristics such that it is now considered separately 
as the enteric nervous system. Parasympathetic control of the GI sys-
tem is through the craniospinal nerves (vagus and S2-S4 nerves) while 
sympathetic efferent control is through the thoracolumbar region. The 
enteric nervous system itself is made up of a series of ganglia that form 
a network of plexuses with several hundred million cells (the equiva-
lent of the number of cells in the spinal cord). Meissner’s (submucosal) 
plexus,  Auerbach’s  (myenteric),  Cajal’s  (deep  muscular),  mucosal, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3427

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3428

III

VII

IX

X

T1
T2
T3
T4

T5

T6
T7
T8
T9  
T10  

T11  
T12 
L1
L2

S2
S3
S4           

Parasympathetic nerves

Preganglionic fibers
Postganglionic fibers

Sympathetic nerves

Preganglionic fibers
Postganglionic fibers

Eye

Lacrimal gland

Submandibular
and sublingual
salivary glands

Parotid gland

Heart

Lungs

Ciliary
ganglion

Otic g.

Celiac g.

Sup.
mes.
g.

Renal g.

Inf.
mes.
g.

Stomach

Small
intestine

Suprarenal
gland

Kidney

Colon

Rectum

Pelvic splanchnic
nerve

Sex organs

Urinary
bladder

FIGURE 440-1  Schematic representation of the autonomic nervous system. (Adapted with permission from R Snell: Clinical Neuroanatomy, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3428

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 440-1  Effects of Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Systems on 
Various Effector Organs

Pupil
Accommodation
Heart

Arteries

Veins

Tracheobronchial 
tree

Gastrointestinal 
tract

Bladder

Salivary glands

Skin
Sweat glands

Genitalia
Adrenal medulla
Glycogen

PARASYMPATHETIC
Pupilloconstriction
Increased
Negative chronotropic 
effect
Negative inotropic effect

Vasodilation

SYMPATHETIC
Pupillodilation (alpha)
Decreased
Positive chronotropic effect 
(beta)
Positive inotropic effect 
(beta)
Vasoconstriction (alpha)
Vasodilation (beta)
Vasoconstriction (alpha)
Vasoconstriction (beta)
Bronchodilation (beta)

Bronchoconstriction
Increased bronchial gland 
secretions
Increased motility
Relaxation of sphincter

Copious, thin, watery saliva

Detrusor contraction
Relaxation of sphincter

Decreased motility (beta)
Contraction of sphincters 
(alpha)
Detrusor relaxation (beta)
Contraction of sphincter 
(alpha)
Scant, thick, viscid saliva 
(alpha)
Piloerection (cutis anserina) No piloerection
Increased secretion 
(cholinergic)
Ejaculation
Catecholamine release
Glycogenolysis (alpha and 
beta)
Lipolysis (alpha and beta)

Decreased secretion

Ejaculation/Erection

Glycogen synthesis

Source: Reproduced with permission from WW Campbell: The autonomic nervous 
system, in DeJong’s The Neurologic Examination, 8th ed. Wolters Kluwer, 2020.

and submucosal plexuses comprise the majority of nerves within the 
enteric nervous system. Numerous neurotransmitters have now been 
identified within the enteric nervous system, with many neurons con-
taining both primary and co-transmitter neurotransmitters.

CLINICAL EVALUATION
 ■ CLASSIFICATION
Disorders  of  the  ANS  may  result  from  pathology  of  either  the  CNS 
or  the  peripheral  nervous  system  (PNS)  (Table  440-2).  Signs  and 
symptoms may result from interruption of the afferent limb, CNS pro-
cessing  centers,  or  efferent  limb  of  reflex  arcs  controlling  autonomic 
responses. For example, a lesion of the medulla produced by a posterior 
fossa  tumor  can  impair  BP  responses  to  postural  changes  and  result 
in orthostatic hypotension (OH). OH can also be caused by lesions of 
the afferent limb of the baroreflex arc (e.g., radiation or congenital dis-
ease), spinal cord, or peripheral vasomotor nerve fibers (e.g., diabetic 
and other neuropathies). Lesions of the efferent limb cause the most 
consistent  and  severe  OH.  The  site  of  reflex  interruption  is  usually 
established  by  the  clinical  context  in  which  the  dysautonomia  arises, 
combined with judicious use of ANS testing and neuroimaging stud-
ies. The presence or absence of CNS signs, association with sensory or 
motor  polyneuropathy,  medical  illnesses,  medication  use,  and  family 
history are important considerations. Some syndromes do not fit easily 
into any classification scheme.

 ■ SYMPTOMS OF AUTONOMIC DYSFUNCTION
Clinical manifestations can result from loss of function, overactivity, or 
dysregulation of autonomic circuits. Disorders of autonomic function 

3429

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
0

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

t
h
e
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
i
c
N
e
r
v
o
u
s
S
y
s
t
e
m

should be considered in patients with unexplained OH, syncope, sleep 
dysfunction, altered sweating (hyperhidrosis or hypohidrosis), impo-
tence, constipation, or other GI symptoms (bloating, nausea, vomiting 
of  old  food,  diarrhea),  or  bladder  disorders  (urinary  frequency,  hes-
itancy,  or  incontinence).  Symptoms  may  be  widespread  or  regional 
in  distribution.  An  autonomic  history  focuses  on  systemic  functions 
(orthostatic  symptoms,  BP,  heart  rate,  sleep,  fever,  hypothermia, 
sweating) and involvement of individual organ systems (pupils, bowel, 
bladder, sexual function). Specific symptoms of orthostatic intolerance 
are diverse (Table 440-3).

Early  autonomic  symptoms  may  be  overlooked.  Impotence, 
although not specific for autonomic failure, often heralds autonomic 
failure  in  men  and  may  precede  other  symptoms  by  years  (Chap. 
397). A decrease in the frequency of spontaneous early-morning erec-
tions may occur months before loss of nocturnal penile tumescence 
and development of total impotence. Bladder dysfunction may appear 
early in men and women, particularly in those with a CNS etiology. 
Cold feet may indicate increased peripheral vasomotor constriction, 
although this symptom is a very common complaint among healthy 
individuals as well. Brain and spinal cord disease above the level of the 
lumbar spine results first in urinary frequency and small bladder vol-
umes and eventually in urinary incontinence (upper motor neuron or 
spastic bladder). By contrast, PNS disease of autonomic nerve fibers 
results  in  large  bladder  volumes,  urinary  frequency,  and  overflow 
incontinence  (lower  motor  neuron  or  flaccid  bladder).  Measure-
ments of bladder volume (postvoid residual), or urodynamic studies, 
are  useful  tests  for  distinguishing  between  upper  and  lower  motor 
neuron bladder dysfunction in the early stages of dysautonomia. GI 
autonomic dysfunction typically presents as progressively severe con-
stipation.  Diarrhea  may  develop  (typically  in  diabetes  mellitus)  due 
to  many  reasons  including  rapid  transit  of  contents,  uncoordinated 
small-bowel  motor  activity,  an  osmotic  basis  from  bacterial  over-
growth  associated  with  small-bowel  stasis,  or  anorectal  dysfunction 
with diminished sphincter control and increased intestinal secretion. 
Impaired glandular secretory function may cause difficulty with food 
intake due to decreased salivation or eye irritation due to decreased 
lacrimation.  Loss  of  sweat  function  (anhidrosis),  a  critical  element 
of  thermoregulation,  may  result  in  hyperthermia.  Patients  with  a 
length-dependent neuropathy may present with distal anhidrosis but 
the  primary  symptom  may  be  proximal  hyperhidrosis  that  occurs 
to  maintain  thermoregulation  (Chap.  18).  Lack  of  sweating  after  a 
hot  bath,  during  exercise,  or  on  a  hot  day  can  suggest  sudomotor  
failure.

OH (also called postural hypotension) is perhaps the most common 
and disabling feature of autonomic dysfunction. There are numerous 
causes  of  OH  (e.g.,  medications,  anemia,  dehydration,  or  volume 
depletion),  but  when  the  OH  is  specifically  due  to  dysfunction  of 
the  ANS  it  is  referred  to  as  neurogenic  OH.  The  prevalence  of  OH 
is  relatively  high,  especially  when  OH  associated  with  aging  and 
diabetes  mellitus  is  included  (Table  440-4).  OH  can  cause  a  variety 
of symptoms, including dimming or loss of vision, light-headedness, 
diaphoresis,  diminished  hearing,  pallor,  weakness,  and  shortness 
of  breath.  Syncope  results  when  the  drop  in  BP  impairs  cerebral 
perfusion.  Other  manifestations  of  impaired  baroreflexes  are  supine 
hypertension,  a  heart  rate  that  is  fixed  regardless  of  posture,  post-
prandial  hypotension,  and  an  excessively  high  nocturnal  BP.  Many 
patients with OH have a preexisting diagnosis of hypertension or have 
concomitant  supine  hypertension,  reflecting  the  great  importance  of 
baroreflexes  in  maintaining  postural  and  supine  normotension.  The 
appearance  of  OH  in  patients  receiving  antihypertensive  treatment 
may  indicate  overtreatment  or  the  onset  of  an  autonomic  disorder. 
The most common causes of OH are not neurologic in origin (Table 
440-5); these must be distinguished from the neurogenic causes. The 
mortality rates of nonneurogenic OH are similar to that of the general 
population while neurogenic OH carries a three- to sevenfold higher 
mortality rate. Neurocardiogenic and cardiac causes of syncope are 
considered in Chap. 21.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3429

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3430

TABLE 440-2  Classification of Clinical Autonomic Disorders
I.  Autonomic Disorders with Brain Involvement

A.  Associated with multisystem degeneration

3. Disorders of the hypothalamus

1.  Multisystem degeneration: autonomic failure clinically prominent

a.  Multiple-system atrophy (MSA)
b.  Parkinson’s disease with autonomic failure
c.  Diffuse Lewy body disease with autonomic failure

2.  Multisystem degeneration: autonomic failure clinically not usually 

prominent
a.  Parkinson’s disease without autonomic failure
b.  Other extrapyramidal disorders (inherited spinocerebellar 
atrophies, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal 
degeneration, Machado-Joseph disease, fragile X syndrome 
[FXTAS])

B.  Unassociated with multisystem degeneration (focal CNS disorders)

1.  Disorders mainly due to cerebral cortex involvement

a.  Frontal cortex lesions causing urinary/bowel incontinence
b.  Focal seizures (temporal lobe or anterior cingulate)
c.  Cerebral infarction of the insula

2.  Disorders of the limbic and paralimbic circuits

a.  Shapiro’s syndrome (agenesis of corpus callosum, hyperhidrosis, 

hypothermia)

b.  Autonomic seizures
c.  Limbic encephalitis

a.  Thiamine deficiency (Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome)
b.  Diencephalic syndrome
c.  Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
d.  Serotonin syndrome
e.  Fatal familial insomnia
f.  Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) syndromes (diabetes insipidus, inappropriate ADH 

secretion)

g.  Disturbances of temperature regulation (hyperthermia, hypothermia)
h.  Disturbances of sexual function
i.  Disturbances of appetite
j.  Disturbances of BP/HR and gastric function
k.  Horner’s syndrome

4. Disorders of the brainstem and cerebellum

a.  Posterior fossa tumors
b.  Syringobulbia and Arnold-Chiari malformation
c.  Disorders of BP control (hypertension, hypotension)
d.  Cardiac arrhythmias
e.  Central sleep apnea
f.  Baroreflex failure
g.  Horner’s syndrome
h.  Vertebrobasilar and lateral medullary (Wallenberg’s) syndromes
i.  Brainstem encephalitis

II.  Autonomic Disorders with Spinal Cord Involvement

A.  Traumatic quadriplegia
B.  Syringomyelia
C.  Subacute combined degeneration
D.  Multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica

III.  Autonomic Neuropathies

E.  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
F.  Tetanus
G.  Stiff-person syndrome
H.  Spinal cord tumors

A.  Acute/subacute autonomic neuropathies

B. Chronic peripheral autonomic neuropathies

a.  Subacute autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG)
b.  Subacute paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy
c.  Guillain-Barré syndrome
d.  Botulism
e.  Porphyria
f.  Drug-induced autonomic neuropathies—stimulants, drug 

withdrawal, vasoconstrictor, vasodilators, beta-receptor antagonists, 
beta-agonists

g.  Toxin-induced autonomic neuropathies
h.  Subacute cholinergic neuropathy

1.  Distal small fiber neuropathy—cryptogenic sensory polyneuropathy (CSPN)
2.  Combined sympathetic and parasympathetic failure

a.  Amyloid
b.  Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
c.  AAG (paraneoplastic and idiopathic)
d.  Sensory neuronopathy with autonomic failure
e.  Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome)
f.  Diabetic, uremic, or nutritional deficiency
g.  Geriatric dysautonomia (age >80 years)
h.  Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
i.  HIV-related autonomic neuropathy

Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; HR, heart rate; POTS, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome.

3.  Disorders of orthostatic intolerance: reflex syncope; POTS; prolonged bed rest; 

space flight; chronic fatigue

TABLE 440-3  Symptoms of Orthostatic Intolerance
Light-headedness (dizziness)
Weakness or tiredness
Cognitive difficulty (thinking/
concentrating)
Blurred vision
Tremulousness
Vertigo
Pallor
Anxiety
Palpitations
Clammy feeling
Nausea

88%
72%
47%

47%
38%
37%
31%
29%
26%
19%
18%

Source: Reproduced with permission from PA Low et al: Prospective evaluation of 
clinical characteristics of orthostatic hypotension. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 70:617, 
1995.

TABLE 440-4  Prevalence of Orthostatic Hypotension in  
Different Situations
DISORDER
Aging
Diabetic neuropathy
Other autonomic neuropathies
Multiple-system atrophy
Pure autonomic failure

PREVALENCE
14–20%
10%
>60%
>90%
>95%

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3430

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3431

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
0

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

t
h
e
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
i
c
N
e
r
v
o
u
s
S
y
s
t
e
m

TABLE 440-5  Nonneurogenic Causes of Orthostatic Hypotension
Cardiac Pump Failure
•	 Myocardial infarction
•	 Myocarditis
•	 Constrictive pericarditis
•	 Aortic stenosis
•	 Tachyarrhythmias
•	 Bradyarrhythmias
•	 Venous obstruction
Reduced Intravascular Volume
•	 Straining or heavy lifting, urination, defecation
•	 Dehydration
•	 Diarrhea, emesis
•	 Hemorrhage
•	 Burns
•	 Salt-losing nephropathy
•	 Adrenal insufficiency
•	 Diabetes insipidus
Metabolic
•	 Adrenocortical insufficiency
•	 Hypoaldosteronism
•	 Pheochromocytoma
•	 Severe potassium depletion
Venous Pooling
•	 Alcohol
•	 Postprandial dilation of splanchnic vessel beds
•	 Vigorous exercise with dilation of skeletal vessel beds
•	 Heat: hot environment, hot showers and baths, fever
•	 Prolonged recumbency or standing
•	 Sepsis
Medications
•	 Antihypertensives
•	 Diuretics
•	 Vasodilators: nitrates, hydralazine
•	 Alpha- and beta-blocking agents
•	 Central nervous system sedatives: barbiturates, opiates
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants
•	 Phenothiazines

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Orthostatic Hypotension and Other ANS Disorders

The first step in the evaluation of symptomatic OH is the exclusion 
of  treatable  causes.  The  history  should  include  a  review  of  medi-
cations  that  may  affect  the  ANS  (Table  440-6).  The  main  classes 
of drugs that may cause OH are diuretics, antihypertensive agents 
(preload reducers, vasodilators, negative inotropic or chronotropic 
agents), antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants and SSRIs), etha-
nol, opioids, insulin, dopamine agonists, and barbiturates. However, 
the precipitation of OH by medications may also be the first sign 
of  an  underlying  autonomic  disorder.  The  history  may  reveal  an 
underlying cause for symptoms (e.g., diabetes, Parkinson’s disease) 
or  specific  underlying  mechanisms  (e.g.,  cardiac  pump  failure, 
reduced  intravascular  volume).  The  relationship  of  symptoms  to 
meals  (splanchnic  pooling),  standing  on  awakening  in  the  morning 
(intravascular volume depletion), ambient warming (vasodilatation), 
or  exercise  (muscle  arteriolar  vasodilatation)  should  be  sought. 
Standing time to first symptom and to presyncope (Chap. 21) should 
be followed for management.

Physical  examination  includes  measurement  of  supine  and 
standing pulse and BP. OH is defined as a sustained drop in systolic 
(≥20 mmHg) or diastolic (≥10 mmHg) BP after 3 min of standing. 
In  nonneurogenic  causes  of  OH  (such  as  hypovolemia),  the  BP 

TABLE 440-6  Some Drugs That Affect Autonomic Function
SYMPTOM
Impotence

DRUG CLASS
Opioids
Anabolic steroids
Some antiarrhythmics
Some antihypertensives
Some diuretics
Some SSRIs
Opioids
Decongestants

Some antihypertensives
Some SSRIs
Opioids

SPECIFIC EXAMPLES
Tylenol #3
—
Prazosin
Clonidine
Benazepril
Venlafaxine
Fentanyl
Brompheniramine
Diphenhydramine
Amlodipine
Citalopram
Morphine

Urinary retention

Diaphoresis

Abbreviations: CCBs, calcium channel blockers; HCTZ, hydrochlorothiazide; SSRIs, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

drop  is  accompanied  by  a  compensatory  increase  in  heart  rate  of 
>15 beats/min. In neurogenic OH, the pulse fails to rise despite the 
drop in blood pressure. A clue that the patient has neurogenic OH 
is  the  aggravation  or  precipitation  of  OH  by  autonomic  stressors 
(a  meal,  hot  bath,  or  exercise).  Neurologic  examination  should 
include  mental  status  (neurodegenerative  disorders  such  as  Lewy 
body dementia can be accompanied by significant dysautonomia), 
cranial nerves (abnormal pupils with Horner’s or Adie’s syndrome), 
motor  tone  (parkinsonian  syndromes),  and  motor  strength  and 
sensation  (polyneuropathies).  In  patients  without  a  clear  diagno-
sis  initially,  follow-up  evaluations  every  few  months  or  whenever 
symptoms worsen may reveal the underlying cause. 
AUTONOMIC TESTING
Autonomic  function  tests  are  helpful  to  document  and  localize 
abnormalities when findings on history and examination are incon-
clusive; to detect subclinical involvement; or to follow the course of 
an autonomic disorder. 
Heart Rate Variation With Deep Breathing  This tests the parasym-
pathetic component of cardiovascular reflexes via the vagus nerve. 
Results  are  influenced  by  multiple  factors  including  the  subject’s 
position (recumbent, sitting, or standing), rate and depth of respi-
ration (6 breaths per minute and a forced vital capacity [FVC] >1.5 L 
are  optimal),  age,  medications,  weight,  and  degree  of  hypocapnia. 
Interpretation of results requires comparison of test data with results 
from age-matched controls collected under identical test conditions. 
For  example,  the  lower  limit  of  normal  heart  rate  variation  with 
deep breathing in persons <20 years of age is >15–20 beats/min, but 
for persons aged >60 it is 5–8 beats/min. Heart rate variation with 
deep  breathing  (respiratory  sinus  arrhythmia)  is  abolished  by  the 
muscarinic  ACh  receptor  antagonist  atropine  but  is  unaffected  by 
sympathetic postganglionic blockade (e.g., propranolol). 
Valsalva  Response  This  response  (Table  440-7)  assesses  the 
integrity  of  the  baroreflex  control  of  heart  rate  (parasympa-
thetic) and BP (sympathetic adrenergic). Under normal conditions, 
increases in BP at the carotid bulb trigger a reduction in heart rate 
(increased vagal tone), and decreases in BP trigger an increase in 
heart rate (reduced vagal tone). The Valsalva response is tested in 
the supine position. The subject exhales against a closed glottis (or 
into  a  manometer  maintaining  a  constant  expiratory  pressure 
of 40 mmHg) for 15 s while measuring changes in heart rate and 
beat-to-beat  BP.  Without  directly  measuring  expiratory  pressure, 
heart rate, and beat-to-beat blood pressure, the Valsalva maneuver 
cannot be interpreted correctly. There are four phases of the BP and 
heart  rate  response  to  the  Valsalva  maneuver.  Phases  I  and  III  are 
mechanical and related to changes in intrathoracic and intraabdom-
inal pressure. In early phase II, reduced venous return results in a 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3431

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3432 TABLE 440-7  Normal Blood Pressure and Heart Rate Changes During the Valsalva Maneuver

PHASE
I

II early
II late

III

IV

MANEUVER
Forced expiration against a 
partially closed glottis
Continued expiration
Continued expiration

End of expiration

Recovery

BLOOD PRESSURE
Rises; aortic compression from raised 
intrathoracic pressure
Falls; decreased venous return to the heart
Rises; reflex increase in peripheral vascular 
resistance
Falls; increased capacitance of pulmonary 
bed
Rises; persistent vasoconstriction and 
increased cardiac output

HEART RATE
Decreases

COMMENTS
Mechanical

Increases (reflex tachycardia)
Increases at slower rate

Increases further

Compensatory bradycardia

Reduced vagal tone
Requires intact efferent 
sympathetic response
Mechanical

Requires intact efferent 
sympathetic response

fall in stroke volume and BP, counteracted by a combination of reflex 
tachycardia  and  increased  total  peripheral  resistance.  Increased 
total peripheral resistance arrests the BP drop ~5–8 s after the onset 
of  the  maneuver.  Late  phase  II  begins  with  a  progressive  rise  in   
BP  toward  or  above  baseline.  Venous  return  and  cardiac  output 
return  to  normal  in  phase  IV.  Persistent  peripheral  arteriolar 
vasoconstriction  and  increased  cardiac  adrenergic  tone  result  in  a 
temporary BP overshoot and phase IV bradycardia (mediated by the 
baroreceptor reflex). Abnormalities in BP during phase II recovery 
or phase IV overshoot suggest sympathetic adrenergic dysfunction.
Autonomic  parasympathetic  function  during  the  Valsalva 
maneuver is measured using heart rate changes. The Valsalva ratio 
is defined as the maximum phase II tachycardia divided by the min-
imum phase IV bradycardia (Table 440-8) and is predominantly a 
measure of parasympathetic function. 
Sudomotor Function  Sweating is induced by release of ACh from 
sympathetic  postganglionic  fibers.  The  quantitative  sudomotor 
axon  reflex  test  (QSART)  is  a  measure  of  regional  autonomic 
function mediated by ACh-induced sweating. A reduced or absent 
response indicates a lesion of the postganglionic sudomotor axon. 
For  example,  sweating  may  be  reduced  in  the  feet  as  a  result  of 
distal polyneuropathy (e.g., diabetes). The thermoregulatory sweat 
test  (TST)  is  a  qualitative  measure  of  global  sweat  production  in 
response  to  an  elevation  of  body  temperature  under  controlled 
conditions. An indicator powder placed on the anterior surface of 
the body changes color with sweat production during temperature 
elevation.  The  pattern  of  color  change  measures  the  integrity  of 
both  the  preganglionic  and  postganglionic  sudomotor  function. 
A  postganglionic  lesion  is  present  if  both  QSART  and  TST  show 
absent  sweating.  In  a  preganglionic  lesion,  the  QSART  is  normal 
but TST shows anhidrosis. 

TABLE 440-8  Neural Pathways Underlying Some Standardized 
Autonomic Tests
TEST EVALUATED
HRDB

PROCEDURE
6 deep breaths/min

Valsalva ratio

QSART

Expiratory pressure,  
40 mmHg for 10–15 s
Axon-reflex test 4 limb 
sites

BPBB to VM

BPBB response to VM

HUT

BPBB and heart rate 
response to HUT

AUTONOMIC FUNCTION
Cardiovagal 
(parasympathetic) function
Cardiovagal 
(parasympathetic) function
Postganglionic (sympathetic 
cholinergic) sudomotor 
function
Sympathetic adrenergic 
function: baroreflex 
adrenergic control of vagal 
and vasomotor function
Sympathetic adrenergic 
and cardiovagal 
(parasympathetic) 
responses to HUT

Abbreviations: BPBB, beat-to-beat blood pressure; HRDB, heart rate response to 
deep breathing; HUT, head-up tilt; QSART, quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test; 
VM, Valsalva maneuver.

Orthostatic BP Recordings  Beat-to-beat BP measurements deter-
mined in supine, 70° tilt, and tilt-back positions are useful to quan-
titate orthostatic failure of BP control. Allow a 20-min period of rest 
in the supine position before assessing changes in BP during tilting. 
The BP change combined with heart rate monitoring is useful for the 
evaluation of patients with suspected OH or unexplained syncope. 
Tilt Table Testing For Syncope  The great majority of patients with 
syncope  do  not  have  autonomic  failure.  Tilt  table  testing  can  be 
used  to  make  the  diagnosis  of  vasovagal  syncope  with  sensitivity, 
specificity, and reproducibility. A standardized protocol is used that 
specifies the tilt apparatus, tilt angle, and duration of tilt. A passive 
phase for 30–40 min with a tilt angle at 60°–70° can identify reflex 
syncope, psychogenic syncope, or be nondiagnostic. Pharmacologic 
provocation  of  syncope  (with  intravenous,  sublingual,  or  spray 
nitroglycerin) is controversial because it increases sensitivity at the 
cost  of  specificity.  Recommendations  for  the  performance  of  tilt 
studies for syncope have been incorporated in consensus guidelines.

SPECIFIC SYNDROMES OF ANS 
DYSFUNCTION
 ■ MULTIPLE-SYSTEM ATROPHY
Multiple-system atrophy (MSA) is an entity that comprises autonomic 
failure (OH or a neurogenic bladder) and either parkinsonism (MSA-p) 
or a cerebellar syndrome (MSA-c). MSA-p is the more common form; 
the  parkinsonism  is  atypical  in  that  there  is  more  symmetric  motor 
involvement  than  in  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD;  Chap.  435),  tremor  is 
not  as  prominent,  and  there  is  a  poor  or  only  transient  response  to 
levodopa. Symptomatic OH within 1 year of onset of parkinsonism is 
suggestive of MSA-p. There is a very high frequency of impotence in 
men.  Although  autonomic  abnormalities  are  common  in  advanced 
PD, the severity and distribution of autonomic failure are more severe 
and generalized in MSA. Brain MRI is a useful diagnostic adjunct: in 
MSA-p, iron deposition in the striatum may be evident as T2 hypoin-
tensity, and in MSA-c, cerebellar atrophy is present with a characteristic 
T2 hyperintense signal (“hot cross bun” sign) in the pons (Fig. 440-2). 
However, these MRI findings are typically present only with advanced 
disease.  Cardiac  postganglionic  adrenergic  innervation,  measured 
by  uptake  of  fluorodopamine  on  positron  emission  tomography,  is 
markedly impaired in the dysautonomia of PD but is usually normal 
in  MSA.  Neuropathologic  changes  include  neuronal  loss  and  gliosis 
in many CNS regions, including the brainstem, cerebellum, striatum, 
and  intermediolateral  cell  column  of  the  thoracolumbar  spinal  cord. 
Glial cytoplasmic inclusions that stain positively (for Lewy bodies) are 
present primarily in oligodendrocytes in MSA, in contrast to neuronal 
inclusions  in  PD.  Furthermore,  transfer  of  brain  extracts  from  MSA 
patients  into  susceptible  mice  resulted  in  widespread  α-synuclein 
aggregate  formation  and  neurodegeneration,  consistent  with  a  prion 
mechanism.

MSA is uncommon, with a prevalence estimated at 2–5 per 100,000 
individuals. Onset is typically in the mid-fifties, men are slightly more 
often affected than women, and most cases are sporadic. The diagno-
sis  should  be  considered  in  adults  aged  >30  years  who  present  with 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3432

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3433

careful monitoring of BP during procedures in patients with acute or 
chronic spinal cord injury are essential. In patients with supine hyper-
tension,  BP  can  be  lowered  by  tilting  the  head  upward  or  sitting  the 
patient up. Vasodilator drugs may be used to treat acute elevations in 
BP. Clonidine can be used prophylactically to reduce the hypertension 
resulting from bladder stimulation. Dangerous increases or decreases 
in body temperature may result from an inability to sense heat or cold 
exposure or control peripheral vasoconstriction or sweating below the 
level of the spinal cord injury.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
0

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

t
h
e
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
i
c
N
e
r
v
o
u
s
S
y
s
t
e
m

 ■ PERIPHERAL NERVE AND NEUROMUSCULAR 
JUNCTION DISORDERS
Peripheral  neuropathies  (Chap.  446)  are  the  most  common  cause  of 
chronic  autonomic  insufficiency.  Polyneuropathies  that  affect  small 
myelinated and unmyelinated fibers of the sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic  nerves  commonly  occur  in  diabetes  mellitus,  amyloidosis, 
chronic alcoholism, porphyria, idiopathic small-fiber polyneuropathy, 
and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Neuromuscular junction disorders with 
autonomic  involvement  include  botulism  and  Lambert-Eaton  syn-
drome (Chap. 448).

Diabetes  Mellitus  The  presence  of  autonomic  neuropathy  in 
patients with diabetes increases the mortality rate 1.5- to 3-fold, even 
after adjusting for other cardiovascular risk factors. Estimates of 5-year 
mortality risk among these patients are 15–53%. Although many deaths 
are due to secondary vascular disease, there are patients who specifi-
cally suffer cardiac arrest due to autonomic neuropathy. The autonomic 
involvement is also predictive of other complications including renal 
disease,  stroke,  and  sleep  apnea.  Tight  glycemic  control  with  insulin 
significantly  reduces  the  long-term  risk  of  autonomic  cardiovascular 
neuropathy. Diabetes mellitus is discussed in Chaps. 403–405.

Amyloidosis  Autonomic  neuropathy  occurs  in  both  sporadic 
and  familial  forms  of  amyloidosis.  The  AL  (immunoglobulin  light 
chain)  type  is  associated  with  primary  amyloidosis  or  amyloidosis 
secondary  to  multiple  myeloma.  The  amyloid  transthyretin  (TTR) 
type, with transthyretin as the primary protein component, is respon-
sible for the most common form of inherited amyloidosis. Although 
patients  usually  present  with  a  distal  sensorimotor  polyneuropathy 
accompanied by autonomic insufficiency that can precede the devel-
opment  of  the  polyneuropathy  or  occur  in  isolation.  The  diagnosis 
can  be  made  by  protein  electrophoresis  of  blood  and  urine,  tissue 
biopsy (abdominal fat pad, rectal mucosa, or sural nerve) to search 
for amyloid deposits, and genetic testing for transthyretin mutations 
in familial cases. Recently two gene-modulating therapies have been 
shown to be effective in hereditary amyloidosis from TTR mutations. 
Death  is  usually  due  to  cardiac  or  renal  involvement.  Postmortem 
studies  reveal  amyloid  deposition  in  many  organs,  including  two 
sites  that  contribute  to  autonomic  failure:  intraneural  blood  vessels 
and autonomic ganglia. Pathologic examination reveals a loss of both 
unmyelinated and myelinated nerve fibers. Amyloidosis is discussed 
in Chap. 112.

Alcoholic  Neuropathy  Abnormalities  in  parasympathetic  vagal 
and  efferent  sympathetic  function  are  usually  mild  in  alcoholic 
polyneuropathy.  OH  is  usually  due  to  brainstem  involvement,  rather 
than injury to the PNS. Impotence is a major problem, but concurrent 
gonadal  hormone  abnormalities  may  play  a  role  in  this  symptom. 
Clinical symptoms of autonomic failure generally appear only when the 
stocking-glove polyneuropathy is severe, and there is usually coexisting 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy (Chap. 307). Autonomic involvement may 
contribute to the high mortality rates associated with alcoholism. Alco-
holism is discussed in Chap. 453.

Porphyria  Autonomic dysfunction is most extensively documented 
in acute intermittent porphyria but can also occur with variegate por-
phyria and hereditary coproporphyria. Autonomic symptoms include 
tachycardia, sweating, urinary retention, abdominal pain, nausea and 
vomiting,  insomnia,  hypertension,  and  (less  commonly)  hypoten-
sion.  Another  prominent  symptom  is  anxiety.  Abnormal  autonomic 

FIGURE 440-2  Multiple-system atrophy, cerebellar type (MSA-c). Axial T2-weighted 
magnetic  resonance  image  at  the  level  of  the  pons  shows  a  characteristic 
hyperintense signal, the “hot cross bun” sign (arrows). This appearance can also 
be  seen  in  some  spinocerebellar  atrophies,  as  well  as  other  neurodegenerative 
conditions affecting the brainstem.

OH  or  urinary  incontinence  and  either  parkinsonism  that  is  poorly 
responsive  to  dopamine  replacement  or  a  cerebellar  syndrome.  MSA 
generally  progresses  relentlessly  to  death  7–10  years  after  onset,  but 
survival beyond 15 years has been reported. MSA-p is more prevalent 
in Western countries, while MSA-c is more common in Japan. Factors 
that  predict  a  worse  prognosis  include  early  autonomic  dysfunction, 
rapid progression of disability, bladder dysfunction, female gender, the 
MSA-p subtype, and an older age at onset. Management is symptom-
atic for neurogenic OH (see below), sleep disorders including laryngeal 
stridor, GI, and urinary dysfunction. GI management includes frequent 
small meals, soft diet, stool softeners, and bulk agents. Gastroparesis 
is  difficult  to  treat;  metoclopramide  stimulates  gastric  emptying  but 
worsens  parkinsonism  by  blocking  central  dopamine  receptors.  The 
peripheral dopamine (D2 and D3) receptor antagonist domperidone has 
been  used  in  patients  with  various  GI  conditions  in  many  countries, 
and  although  not  available  in  the  United  States,  it  can  be  obtained 
through  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration’s  (FDA)  Expanded 
Access to Investigational Drugs program.

Autonomic  dysfunction  is  also  a  common  feature  in  dementia 
with  Lewy  bodies  (Chap.  434),  with  the  severity  usually  intermedi-
ate  between  that  found  in  MSA  and  PD.  In  multiple  sclerosis  (MS; 
Chap. 444), autonomic complications reflect the CNS location of MS 
involvement and generally worsen with disease duration and disabil-
ity,  but  are  generally  a  secondary  complaint  and  not  of  the  severity 
seen in the synucleinopathies.

 ■ SPINAL CORD
Spinal  cord  lesions  from  any  cause  can  result  in  focal  autonomic 
deficits  or  autonomic  hyperreflexia  (e.g.,  spinal  cord  transection  or 
hemisection) affecting bowel, bladder, sexual, temperature-regulation, 
or cardiovascular functions. Quadriparetic patients exhibit both supine 
hypertension  and  OH  after  upward  tilting.  Autonomic  dysreflexia 
describes a dramatic increase in BP in patients with traumatic spinal 
cord lesions above the T6 level, often in response to irritation of the 
bladder,  skin,  or  muscles.  Cord  injury  below  T6  allows  for  compen-
satory  splanchnic  vasodilation  and  prevents  autonomic  dysreflexia. 
The  triggers  may  be  clinically  silent  because  perception  of  painful 
sensations arising from structures innervated below the level of a spi-
nal cord lesion is often blunted or absent. A distended bladder, often 
from an obstructed Foley catheter or a urinary infection, is a common 
trigger  of  dysreflexia.  Associated  symptoms  can  include  facial  flush-
ing,  headache,  hypertension,  or  piloerection.  Potential  complications 
include  intracranial  vasospasm  or  hemorrhage,  cardiac  arrhythmia, 
and  death.  Awareness  of  the  syndrome,  identifying  the  trigger,  and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3433

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3434 function can occur both during acute attacks and during remissions. 
Elevated  catecholamine  levels  during  acute  attacks  correlate  with  the 
degree  of  tachycardia  and  hypertension  that  is  present.  Porphyria  is 
discussed in Chap. 416.

Guillain-Barré Syndrome  BP fluctuations and arrhythmias from 
autonomic  instability  can  be  severe.  It  is  estimated  that  2–10%  of 
patients with severe Guillain-Barré syndrome suffer fatal cardiovascu-
lar collapse. GI autonomic involvement, sphincter disturbances, abnor-
mal sweating, and pupillary dysfunction can also occur. Demyelination 
has  been  described  in  the  vagus  and  glossopharyngeal  nerves,  the 
sympathetic chain, and the white rami communicantes. Interestingly, 
the degree of autonomic involvement appears to be independent of the 
severity of motor or sensory neuropathy. Acute autonomic and sensory 
neuropathy is a variant that spares the motor system and presents with 
neurogenic OH and varying degrees of sensory loss. It is treated simi-
larly to Guillain-Barré syndrome, but prognosis is less favorable, with 
persistent severe sensory deficits and variable degrees of OH in many 
patients. Guillain-Barré Syndrome is discussed in Chap. 447.

Autoimmune  Autonomic  Ganglionopathy  (AAG)  and  
Seronegative  Autoimmune  Autonomic  Neuropathy 
(SAAN)  These conditions present with the subacute development 
of  autonomic  disturbances  including  OH,  enteric  neuropathy  (gas-
troparesis,  ileus,  constipation/diarrhea),  flaccid  bladder,  and  cholin-
ergic failure (e.g., loss of sweating, sicca complex, and a tonic pupil). 
A chronic form of AAG resembles pure autonomic failure (PAF) (see 
below).  Autoantibodies  against  the  α3  subunit  of  the  ganglionic  Ach 
receptor  are  considered  diagnostic  of  AAG.  When  these  antibodies 
are not detected, the cases may be labeled SAAN, but it is unclear if 
these can be clearly divided into different categories. Pathology shows 
preferential  involvement  of  small  unmyelinated  nerve  fibers,  with 
sparing  of  larger  myelinated  ones.  Onset  of  the  neuropathy  follows 
a  viral  infection  in  approximately  half  of  cases.  Up  to  one-third  of 
untreated patients experience significant functional improvement over 
time. Immunotherapies that have been reported to be helpful include 
plasmapheresis, intravenous immune globulin, glucocorticoids, azathi-
oprine, rituximab, and mycophenolate mofetil. OH, gastroparesis, and 
sicca symptoms can be managed symptomatically.

AAG can also occur on a paraneoplastic basis, with adenocarcinoma 
or small-cell carcinoma of the lung, lymphoma, or thymoma being the 
most  common  (Chap.  94).  Cerebellar  involvement  or  dementia  may 
coexist (see Tables 94-1–94-3), and the neoplasm can be occult.

Botulism  Botulinum  toxin  binds  presynaptically  to  cholinergic 
nerve terminals and, after uptake into the cytosol, blocks ACh release. 
This  acute  cholinergic  neuropathy  presents  as  motor  paralysis  and 
autonomic disturbances that include blurred vision, dry mouth, nau-
sea, unreactive or sluggishly reactive pupils, constipation, and urinary 
retention (Chap. 153).

 ■ PURE AUTONOMIC FAILURE (PAF)
This sporadic syndrome consists of postural hypotension, impotence, 
bladder  dysfunction,  and  impaired  sweating.  The  disorder  begins  in 
midlife  and  occurs  in  women  more  often  than  men.  The  symptoms 
can be disabling, but life span is unaffected. The clinical and pharma-
cologic characteristics suggest primary involvement of postganglionic 
autonomic  neurons.  A  severe  reduction  in  the  density  of  neurons 
within sympathetic ganglia results in low supine plasma NE levels and 
noradrenergic supersensitivity. Some patients who are initially labeled 
with this diagnosis subsequently go on to develop AAG, but more often 
a neurodegenerative disease supervenes, typically Lewy body demen-
tia, PD, or MSA. In one recent series, more than one-third of patients 
initially diagnosed with PAF developed a CNS synucleinopathy within 
4 years, and the presence of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disor-
der (RBD; Chap. 31) was predictive of subsequent CNS disease. Skin 
biopsies and autopsy studies demonstrate phosphorylated α-synuclein 
inclusions  in  postganglionic  sympathetic  adrenergic  and  cholinergic 
nerve fibers, distinguishing PAF from AAG and indicating that PAF is 

a synucleinopathy; notably, patients with PD also have alpha synuclein 
inclusions in sympathetic nerve biopsies.

 ■ POSTURAL ORTHOSTATIC TACHYCARDIA 
SYNDROME (POTS)
This  syndrome  is  characterized  by  symptomatic  orthostatic  intoler-
ance  without  OH,  accompanied  by  either  an  increase  in  heart  rate 
to >120 beats/min or an increase of 30 beats/min with standing that 
subsides on sitting or lying down. Women are affected approximately 
five  times  more  often  than  men,  and  most  develop  the  syndrome 
between the ages of 15 and 50. Presyncopal symptoms (light-headed-
ness, weakness, blurred vision) combined with symptoms of autonomic 
overactivity  (palpitations,  tremulousness,  nausea)  are  common.  The 
pathogenesis  is  typically  multifactorial,  which  frequently  confounds 
the clinical picture. A number of potential causes have been reported, 
including sympathetic denervation distally in the legs with preserved 
cardiovascular function or reduced cardiac function due to decondi-
tioning.  Hypovolemia,  venous  pooling,  impaired  brainstem  barore-
ceptor  regulation,  or  increased  sympathetic  activity  may  also  play  a 
role.  No  standardized  approach  to  diagnosis  has  been  established, 
and therapy typically has included symptomatic relief with a focus on 
cardiovascular rehabilitation, including a sustained exercise program. 
Expansion of fluid volume with water, salt, and fludrocortisone can be 
helpful as an initial intervention. In some patients, low-dose propra-
nolol (20 mg) provides a modest improvement in heart rate control and 
exercise capacity. If these approaches are inadequate, then midodrine, 
pyridostigmine, or clonidine can be considered.

 ■ INHERITED DISORDERS
Eight hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSANs) exist, 
designated HSAN I–VIII. The most important autonomic variants are 
HSAN  I  and  HSAN  III.  HSAN  I  is  dominantly  inherited  and  often 
presents  as  a  distal  small-fiber  neuropathy  (burning  feet  syndrome) 
associated  with  sensory  loss  and  foot  ulcers.  The  most  common 
responsible  gene,  on  chromosome  9q,  is  SPTLC1.  SPTLC  is  a  key 
enzyme in the regulation of ceramide. Cells from HSAN I patients with 
the mutation produce higher-than-normal levels of glucosyl ceramide, 
perhaps triggering apoptosis. HSAN III (Riley-Day syndrome; familial 
dysautonomia) is an autosomal recessive disorder of Ashkenazi Jewish 
children and adults and is much less prevalent than HSAN I. Decreased 
tearing,  hyperhidrosis,  reduced  sensitivity  to  pain,  areflexia,  absent 
fungiform papillae on the tongue, and labile BP may be present. Indi-
viduals with HSAN III have afferent, but not efferent, baroreflex failure 
that  causes  the  classic  episodic  abdominal  crises  and  blood  pressure 
surges  in  response  to  emotional  stimuli.  Pathologic  examination  of 
nerves  reveals  a  loss  of  sympathetic,  parasympathetic,  and  sensory 
neurons. The defective gene, IKBKAP, prevents normal transcription 
of important molecules in neural development.

 ■ PRIMARY FOCAL HYPERHIDROSIS
This syndrome presents with excess sweating of the palms and soles or 
excess sweating of the axilla beginning in childhood or early adulthood. 
The condition tends to improve with age. The disorder affects 0.6–1.0% 
of  the  population.  The  etiology  is  unclear,  but  there  may  be  a  genetic 
component because 25% of patients have a positive family history. The 
condition can be socially embarrassing (e.g., shaking hands) or even dis-
abling (e.g., inability to write without soiling the paper). Topical antiper-
spirants are occasionally helpful. More useful are potent anticholinergic 
drugs such as glycopyrrolate 1–2 mg PO tid or oxybutynin 5 mg po bid. 
T2 ganglionectomy or sympathectomy is successful in >90% of patients 
with  palmar  hyperhidrosis.  The  advent  of  endoscopic  transaxillary  T2 
sympathectomy  has  lowered  the  complication  rate  of  the  procedure. 
The most common postoperative complication is compensatory hyper-
hidrosis,  which  improves  spontaneously  over  months.  Other  potential 
complications include recurrent hyperhidrosis (16%), Horner’s syndrome 
(<2%), gustatory sweating, wound infection, hemothorax, and intercostal 
neuralgia. Local injection of botulinum toxin has also been used to block 
cholinergic,  postganglionic  sympathetic  fibers  to  sweat  glands.  This 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3434

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3435

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
0

D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s
o
f

t
h
e
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
i
c
N
e
r
v
o
u
s
S
y
s
t
e
m

approach is effective but limited by the need for repetitive injections (the 
effect usually lasts 4 months before waning).
 ■ ACUTE SYMPATHETIC OVERACTIVITY 
SYNDROMES
An  autonomic  storm  is  an  acute  state  of  sustained  sympathetic  surge 
that  results  in  variable  combinations  of  alterations  in  BP  and  heart 
rate,  body  temperature,  respiration,  and  sweating.  Causes  of  auto-
nomic  storm  include  brain  and  spinal  cord  injury,  toxins  and  drugs, 
autonomic  neuropathy,  and  chemodectomas  (e.g.,  pheochromocy-
toma).  Brain  injury  is  the  most  common  cause  of  autonomic  storm 
and typically follows severe head trauma and postresuscitation anox-
ic-ischemic brain injury. Autonomic storm can also occur with other 
acute  intracranial  lesions  such  as  hemorrhage,  cerebral  infarction, 
rapidly expanding tumors, subarachnoid hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, 
or  (less  commonly)  an  acute  spinal  cord  lesion.  The  most  consistent 
setting is that of an acute intracranial catastrophe of sufficient size and 
rapidity to produce a massive catecholaminergic surge. The surge can 
cause seizures, neurogenic pulmonary edema, and myocardial injury. 
Manifestations  include  fever,  tachycardia,  hypertension,  tachypnea, 
hyperhidrosis, pupillary dilatation, and flushing. Lesions of the afferent 
limb of the baroreflex can result in milder recurrent autonomic storms; 
these can be associated with tumors or follow neck irradiation or sur-
gery that damages the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves.

Drugs and toxins may also be responsible, including sympathomi-
metics  such  as  phenylpropanolamine,  cocaine,  amphetamines,  and 
tricyclic antidepressants; tetanus; and, less often, botulinum toxin. The 
serotonin syndrome can occur from polypharmaceutical use of drugs 
that  inhibit  serotonin  uptake  and  metabolism  (particularly  selective 
serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  and  mixed  norepinephrine/serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors; see Chap. 452) or an antidepressant monoamine 
oxidase  inhibitor  can  produce  a  dramatic  autonomic  syndrome  with 
hypertension, sweating, tachycardia, dilated pupils, and mental status 
changes.  Cocaine,  including  “crack,”  can  cause  a  hypertensive  state 
with flushing, hypertension, tachycardia, fever, mydriasis, anhidrosis, 
and a toxic psychosis. The hyperadrenergic state associated with Guil-
lain-Barré syndrome can produce a moderate autonomic storm. Pheo-
chromocytoma (Chap. 387) presents with a paroxysmal or sustained 
hyperadrenergic  state,  headache,  hyperhidrosis,  palpitations,  anxiety, 
tremulousness, and hypertension.

Neuroleptic  malignant  syndrome  refers  to  a  syndrome  of  muscle 
rigidity,  hyperthermia,  and  hypertension  in  patients  treated  with 
neuroleptic  agents  (including  lower  potency  and  atypical  antipsy-
chotic  agents,  and  even  antiemetic  drugs  such  as  metoclopramide 
and  promethazine)  (Chap.  436).  Management  of  autonomic  storm 
includes  ruling  out  other  causes  of  autonomic  instability,  includ-
ing  malignant  hyperthermia,  porphyria,  and  seizures.  Sepsis  and 
encephalitis  need  to  be  excluded  with  appropriate  studies.  An 
electroencephalogram  (EEG)  should  be  done  to  search  for  seizure 
activity; MRI of the brain and spine is often necessary. The patient 
should be managed in an intensive care unit and the causal agent dis-
continued. Management with lorazepam, dantrolene, bromocriptine, 
or  apomorphine  is  based  upon  clinical  experience  and  not  clinical 
trials. Supportive treatment may need to be maintained for several 
weeks. For chronic and milder autonomic storm, propranolol and/or 
clonidine can be effective.
 ■ MISCELLANEOUS AND CONTROVERSIAL 
AUTONOMIC SYNDROMES
Other conditions associated with autonomic failure include infections, 
malignancy,  and  poisoning  (organophosphates).  Disorders  of  the 
hypothalamus can affect autonomic function and produce abnormal-
ities  in  temperature  control,  satiety,  sexual  function,  and  circadian 
rhythms (Chap. 380).
 ■ COMPLEX REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROMES (CRPS)
The failure to identify a primary role of the ANS in the pathogenesis 
of these disorders has resulted in a change of nomenclature. The terms 
CRPS types I and II are now used in place of reflex sympathetic dystro-
phy (RSD) and causalgia.

CRPS type I is a regional pain syndrome that often develops after 
tissue injury and most commonly affects one limb. Examples of asso-
ciated injury include minor shoulder or limb trauma, fractures, myo-
cardial infarction, or stroke. Allodynia (the perception of a nonpainful 
stimulus  as  painful),  hyperpathia  (an  exaggerated  pain  response  to 
a  painful  stimulus),  and  spontaneous  pain  occur.  The  symptoms  are 
unrelated to the severity of the initial trauma and are not confined to 
the distribution of a single peripheral nerve. CRPS type II is a regional 
pain syndrome that develops after injury to a specific peripheral nerve, 
often a major nerve trunk. Spontaneous pain initially develops within 
the territory of the affected nerve but eventually may spread outside the 
nerve distribution. Although CRPS type I (RSD) has been classically 
divided  into  three  clinical  phases,  there  is  little  evidence  that  CRPS 
“progresses” from one stage to another. Currently, the Budapest con-
sensus criteria for clinical diagnosis of CRPS delete staging and require 
at least three symptoms and two signs in the following four categories: 
(1)  sensory,  (2)  vasomotor,  (3)  sudomotor/edema,  and  (4)  motor/
trophic. Pain (usually burning or electrical in quality) is the primary 
clinical feature of CRPS. Limb pain syndromes that do not meet these 
criteria are best classified as “limb pain—not otherwise specified.” In 
CRPS, localized sweating (increased resting sweat output) and changes 
in blood flow may produce temperature differences between affected 
and unaffected limbs.

The natural history of typical CRPS may be more benign and more 
variable than previously recognized. A variety of surgical and medical 
treatments  have  been  developed,  with  conflicting  reports  of  efficacy. 
Clinical trials suggest that early mobilization with physical therapy or a 
brief course of glucocorticoids may be helpful for early CRPS type I or 
II. Chronic glucocorticoid treatment is not recommended. Medications 
to treat neuropathic pain can be helpful. Current treatment paradigms 
are multidisciplinary with a focus on early mobilization, physical ther-
apy, pain management, patient education, and psychological support.

TREATMENT
Autonomic Failure

Management of autonomic failure is aimed at specific treatment of 
the  cause  and  alleviation  of  symptoms.  Of  particular  importance 
is  the  removal  of  drugs  or  amelioration  of  underlying  conditions 
that cause or aggravate the autonomic symptoms, especially in the 
elderly. For example, OH can be caused or aggravated by antihyper-
tensive agents, antidepressants, levodopa or dopaminergic agonists, 
ethanol, opioids, insulin, and barbiturates. A summary of drugs that 
can cause impotence, urinary retention, or diaphoresis by class and 
putative mechanism is shown in Table 440-6. 
PATIENT EDUCATION
Only  a  minority  of  patients  with  OH  require  drug  treatment.  All 
patients  should  be  taught  the  mechanisms  of  postural  normoten-
sion (volume status, resistance and capacitance bed, autoregulation) 
and the nature of orthostatic stressors (time of day and the influ-
ence of meals, heat, standing, and exercise). Patients should learn 
to recognize orthostatic symptoms early (especially subtle cognitive 
symptoms, weakness, and fatigue) and to modify or avoid activities 
that provoke episodes. Other measures may include keeping a BP 
log and dietary education (salt/fluids). Learning physical counter-
maneuvers  that  reduce  standing  OH  and  practicing  postural  and 
resistance training and cardiovascular reconditioning are frequently 
helpful. 
SYMPTOMATIC TREATMENT
Nonpharmacologic  approaches  are  summarized  in  Table  440-9. 
Adequate  intake  of  salt  and  fluids  to  produce  a  voiding  volume 
of 1.5–2.5 L of urine (containing >170 meq/L of Na+) each 24 h is 
essential. Sleeping with the head of the bed elevated will minimize 
the  effects  of  supine  nocturnal  hypertension.  Prolonged  recum-
bency  should  be  avoided  when  possible.  Patients  are  advised  to 
sit with legs dangling over the edge of the bed for several minutes 
before attempting to stand in the morning; other postural stressors 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3435

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3436 TABLE 440-9  Initial Treatment of Orthostatic Hypotension (OH)

Patient education: mechanisms and stressors of OH
High-salt diet (10–20 g/d)
High-fluid intake (2 L/d)
Elevate head of bed 10 cm (4 in.) to minimize supine hypertension
Maintain postural stimuli
Learn physical counter-maneuvers
Compression garments
Correct anemia

should be similarly approached in a gradual manner. One maneuver 
that can reduce OH is leg-crossing with maintained contraction of 
leg muscles for 30 seconds; this compresses leg veins and increases 
systemic  resistance.  Compressive  garments,  such  as  compression 
stockings  or  abdominal  binders,  are  helpful  on  occasion  but  are 
uncomfortable for many patients. For transient worsening of OH, 
drinking two 250-mL (8-oz) glasses of water within 5 min can raise 
standing BP 20–30 mmHg for about 2 h, beginning ~5 min after the 
fluid load. The patient can increase intake of salt and fluids (bouil-
lon treatment), increase use of physical counter-maneuvers (elevate 
the legs when supine), or temporarily resort to a full-body stocking 
(compression pressure 30–40 mmHg).

Anemia  can  be  corrected  with  erythropoietin,  administered 
subcutaneously at doses of 25–75 U/kg three times per week. The 
hematocrit increases after 2–6 weeks. A weekly maintenance dose is 
usually necessary. However, the increased intravascular volume that 
accompanies the rise in hematocrit can exacerbate supine hyperten-
sion and requires monitoring.

If  these  measures  are  not  sufficient,  additional  pharmacologic 
treatment may be necessary. Midodrine, a directly acting α1-agonist 
that  does  not  cross  the  blood-brain  barrier,  is  effective.  It  has  a 
duration of action of 2–4 h. The usual dose is 5–10 mg orally tid, but 
some patients respond best to a decremental dose (e.g., 15 mg on 
awakening, 10 mg at noon, and 5 mg in the afternoon). Midodrine 
should  not  be  taken  after  6:00  pm.  Side  effects  include  pruritus, 
uncomfortable piloerection, and supine hypertension, especially at 
higher  doses.  Droxidopa  (Northera)  for  treatment  of  neurogenic 
OH  associated  with  PAF,  PD,  or  MSA  is  effective  in  decreasing 
symptoms of OH. Pyridostigmine appears to improve OH without 
aggravating  supine  hypertension  by  enhancing  ganglionic  trans-
mission  (maximal  when  orthostatic,  minimal  when  supine),  but 
with only modest clinical effects on BP. Fludrocortisone will reduce 
OH but aggravates supine hypertension. At doses between 0.1 mg/d 
and 0.3 mg bid orally, it enhances renal sodium conservation and 
increases  the  sensitivity  of  arterioles  to  NE.  Susceptible  patients 
may develop fluid overload, congestive heart failure, supine hyper-
tension,  or  hypokalemia.  Potassium  supplements  are  often  nec-
essary  with  chronic  administration  of  fludrocortisone.  Sustained 
elevations of supine BP >180/110 mmHg should be avoided. Supine 
hypertension  (>180/110  mmHg)  can  be  self-treated  by  avoiding 
the supine position (e.g., sleeping in a recumbent chair or elevating 
the head of the bed) and reducing fludrocortisone. If these simple 
measures  are  not  adequate,  drugs  to  be  considered  include  oral 
hydralazine (25 mg qhs), oral nifedipine (Procardia; 10 mg qhs), or 
a nitroglycerin patch.

A  promising  drug  combination  (atomoxetine  and  yohimbine) 
has  been  studied  for  use  in  human  subjects  with  severe  OH  not 
responsive  to  other  agents,  as  can  occur  in  some  patients  with 
diabetes and severe autonomic neuropathy not responsive to other 
medications. The atomoxetine blocks the NE reuptake transporter, 
and  yohimbine  blocks  α2  receptors  that  mediate  the  sympathetic 
feedback  loop  for  downregulation  of  BP  in  response  to  atomox-
etine.  The  result  is  a  dramatic  increase  in  BP  and  standing  toler-
ance. Yohimbine is no longer produced commercially and must be 
obtained from a compounding pharmacy. This combination is not 
FDA approved for this purpose.

Postprandial  OH  may  respond  to  several  measures.  Frequent, 
small, low-carbohydrate meals may diminish splanchnic shunting 
of  blood  after  meals  and  reduce  postprandial  OH.  Prostaglan-
din  inhibitors  (ibuprofen  or  indomethacin)  taken  with  meals  or 
midodrine (10 mg with the meal) can be helpful. The somatostatin 
analogue octreotide can be useful in the treatment of postprandial 
syncope by inhibiting the release of GI peptides that have vasodi-
lator and hypotensive effects. The subcutaneous dose ranges from  
25 μg bid to 200 μg tid.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Campbell  WW,  Barohn  RJ:  The  Autonomic  Nervous  System,  in 
DeJong’s  The  Neurologic  Examination,  8th  ed.  WW  Campbell,  RJ 
Barohn (eds). Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2020.

Francescangeli  J  et  al:  The  serotonin  syndrome:  From  molecular 

mechanisms to clinical practice. Int J Mol Sci 20:2288, 2019.

Gibbons CH et al: The recommendations of a consensus panel for the 
screening, diagnosis, and treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypoten-
sion and associated supine hypertension. J Neurol 264:1587, 2017.

Golden EP et al: Seronegative autoimmune autonomic neuropathy: 

A distinct clinical entity. Clin Auto Res 28:115; 2018.

Kaufmann  H  et  al:  Natural  history  of  pure  autonomic  failure:  

A United States prospective cohort. Ann Neurol 81:287, 2017.

MacDonald  S  et  al:  Longitudinal  follow-up  of  biopsy-proven  small 

fiber neuropathy. Muscle Nerve 60:376, 2019.

Novak P: Autonomic disorders. Am J Med 132:420, 2018.
Woerman  AL  et  al:  Kinetics  of  α-synuclein  prions  preceding  neu-
ropathological  inclusions  in  multiple  system  atrophy.  PLoS  Pathol 
16:e1008222, 2020.

441 Trigeminal Neuralgia,  
Bell’s Palsy, and Other  
Cranial Nerve Disorders
Vanja C. Douglas, Stephen L. Hauser

The  cranial  nerves  consist  of  12  paired  nerves  that  mediate  variable 
combinations  of  motor,  sensory,  and  autonomic  functions.  They  are 
considered as a group because of their close anatomic relationship to 
the  brainstem  (Fig.  441-1)  and  to  one  another,  and  tendency  to  be 
involved  together  in  a  variety  of  disease  states.  Nine  cranial  nerves 
connect  directly  with  brainstem  nuclei;  the  exceptions  are  cranial 
nerves 1 (olfactory) and 2 (optic) that are more accurately considered 
fiber tracts of the brain, and cranial nerve 11 (spinal accessory) whose 
motor neurons reside largely in the upper cervical cord. Analogous to 
spinal nerves (Chap. 442), motor fibers of the cranial nerves have their 
origin in the brainstem or upper cervical cord, while sensory nerves are 
pseudounipolar, with ganglia outside the central nervous system and a 
synapse with second-order fibers in the brainstem.

Symptoms  and  signs  of  cranial  nerve  pathology  are  common  in 
internal medicine. They often develop in the context of a widespread 
neurologic disturbance, and in such situations, cranial nerve involve-
ment  may  represent  the  initial  manifestation  of  the  illness.  In  other 
disorders,  involvement  is  largely  restricted  to  one  or  several  cranial 
nerves;  these  distinctive  disorders  are  reviewed  in  this  chapter.  Dis-
orders  of  olfaction  are  discussed  in  Chap.  33,  vision  and  ocular 
movement in Chap. 32, hearing in Chap. 34, and vestibular function 
in Chap. 22.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3436

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Olfactory
bulb and
peduncle

Cranial
nerves

II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X

XI
XII

Frontal
lobe

Temporal
lobe

Pituitary
gland

Mamillary
bodies

Trigeminal
ganglion

Cerebello-
pontine
angle

Cerebellum

FIGURE  441-1  Ventral  view  of  the  brain,  illustrating  relationships  between  the 
12 pairs of cranial nerves and the brainstem. (Adapted from SG Waxman: Clinical 
Neuroanatomy, 29th ed. http://www.accessmedicine.com)

FACIAL PAIN OR NUMBNESS
 ■ ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
The  trigeminal  (fifth  cranial)  nerve  supplies  sensation  to  the  skin 
of the face, anterior half of the head, and the nasal and oral mucosa 
(Fig.  441-2).  The  motor  part  innervates  the  muscles  involved  in 
chewing  (including  masseters  and  pterygoids)  as  well  as  the  anterior 
belly  of  the  digastric,  mylohyoid,  tensor  veli  palatini,  and  the  tensor 
tympani  (hearing  especially  for  high-pitched  tones).  It  is  the  largest 
of the cranial nerves. It exits in the lateral midpons and traverses the 
middle cranial fossa to the semilunar (gasserian, trigeminal) ganglion 
in Meckel’s cave, where the nerve splits into three divisions (ophthal-
mic [V1], maxillary [V2], and mandibular [V3]). V1 and V2 traverse 
the cavernous sinus to exit in the superior orbital fissure and foramen 
rotundum; V3 exits through the foramen ovale. The trigeminal nerve 
is predominantly sensory, and motor innervation is exclusively carried 
in V3. The cornea is primarily innervated by V1, although an inferior 
crescent  may  be  V2.  Upon  entering  the  pons,  pain  and  temperature 
fibers  descend  ipsilaterally  to  the  upper  cervical  spinal  cord  as  the 
spinal  tract  of  V,  before  synapsing  with  the  spinal  nucleus  of  V;  this 
accounts  for  the  facial  numbness  that  can  occur  with  spinal  cord 
lesions above C2. In the brainstem, the spinal tract of V is also located 
adjacent to crossed ascending fibers of the spinothalamic tract, produc-
ing a “crossed” sensory loss for pain and temperature (ipsilateral face, 
contralateral arm/trunk/leg) with lesions of the lateral lower brainstem. 
CN  V  is  also  ensheathed  by  oligodendrocyte-derived,  rather  than 
Schwann cell–derived, myelin for up to 7 mm after it leaves the brain-
stem, unlike just a few millimeters for other cranial and spinal nerves; 
this may explain the high frequency of trigeminal neuralgia in multiple 
sclerosis (MS) (Chap. 444), a disorder of oligodendrocyte myelin.
 ■ TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA (TIC DOULOUREUX)
Clinical Manifestations  Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by 
excruciating paroxysms of pain in the lips, gums, cheek, or chin and, 

3437

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
1

T
r
i
g
e
m
i
n
a
l

N
e
u
r
a
l
g
i
a
,

B
e
l
l
’
s
P
a
l
s
y
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
C
r
a
n
i
a
l

N
e
r
v
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

very rarely, in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the fifth 
nerve. The pain seldom lasts more than a few seconds or a minute or 
two but may be so intense that the patient winces, hence the term tic. 
The  paroxysms,  experienced  as  single  jabs  or  clusters,  tend  to  recur 
frequently, both day and night, for several weeks at a time. They may 
occur  spontaneously  or  be  brought  on  with  movements  of  affected 
areas by speaking, chewing, or smiling. Another characteristic feature 
is the presence of trigger zones, typically on the face, lips, or tongue, 
that  provoke  attacks;  patients  may  report  that  tactile  stimuli—e.g., 
washing  the  face,  brushing  the  teeth,  or  exposure  to  a  draft  of  air—
generate excruciating pain. An essential feature of trigeminal neural-
gia is that objective signs of sensory loss cannot be demonstrated on 
examination.

Trigeminal neuralgia is relatively common, with an estimated annual 
incidence of 4–8 per 100,000 individuals. Middle-aged and elderly per-
sons are affected primarily, and ~60% of cases occur in women. Onset 
is  typically  sudden,  and  bouts  tend  to  persist  for  weeks  or  months 
before remitting spontaneously. Remissions may be long-lasting, but in 
most patients, the disorder ultimately recurs.

Pathophysiology  Symptoms  result  from  ectopic  generation  of 
action  potentials  in  pain-sensitive  afferent  fibers  of  the  fifth  cranial 
nerve  root  just  before  it  enters  the  lateral  surface  of  the  pons.  Com-
pression  or  other  pathology  in  the  nerve  leads  to  demyelination  of 
large myelinated fibers that do not themselves carry pain sensation but 
become  hyperexcitable  and  electrically  coupled  with  smaller  unmy-
elinated or poorly myelinated pain fibers in close proximity; this may 
explain  why  tactile  stimuli,  conveyed  via  the  large  myelinated  fibers, 
can stimulate paroxysms of pain. Compression of the trigeminal nerve 
root by a blood vessel, most often the superior cerebellar artery or on 
occasion a tortuous vein, is believed to be the source of trigeminal neu-
ralgia  in  most  patients.  In  cases  of  vascular  compression,  age-related 
brain  sagging  and  increased  vascular  thickness  and  tortuosity  may 
explain the prevalence of trigeminal neuralgia in later life.
Differential  Diagnosis  Trigeminal  neuralgia  must  be  distin-
guished from other causes of face and head pain (Chap. 16) and from 
pain  arising  from  diseases  of  the  jaw,  teeth,  or  sinuses.  Pain  from 
migraine  or  cluster  headache  tends  to  be  deep-seated  and  steady, 
unlike the superficial stabbing quality of trigeminal neuralgia; rarely, 
cluster headache is associated with trigeminal neuralgia, a syndrome 
known  as  cluster-tic.  Other  rare  headaches  include  short-lasting 
unilateral  headache  attacks  with  conjunctival  injection  and  tearing 
(SUNCT;  Chap. 430). In temporal  arteritis,  superficial facial pain is 
present but is not typically shocklike, the patient frequently complains 
of  myalgias  and  other  systemic  symptoms,  and  an  elevated  erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP) is usually 
present (Chap. 363). When trigeminal neuralgia develops in a young 
adult or is bilateral, MS is a key consideration, and in such cases, the 
cause is a demyelinating plaque near the root entry zone of the fifth 
nerve in the pons; often, evidence of facial sensory loss can be found on 
careful examination. Cases that are secondary to mass lesions—such as 
aneurysms, neurofibromas, acoustic schwannomas, or meningiomas—
usually produce objective signs of sensory loss in the trigeminal nerve 
distribution (trigeminal neuropathy, see below).
Laboratory Evaluation  An ESR or CRP is indicated if temporal 
arteritis is suspected. In typical cases of trigeminal neuralgia, neuroim-
aging studies are usually unnecessary but may be valuable in patients 
younger  than  40  years  or  when  symptoms  are  bilateral  and  MS  is  a 
consideration or in assessing overlying vascular lesions in order to plan 
for decompression surgery.

TREATMENT
Trigeminal Neuralgia

Drug  therapy  with  carbamazepine  is  effective  in  ~50–75%  of 
patients. Carbamazepine should be started as a single daily dose of 
100 mg taken with food and increased gradually (by 100 mg daily 
in divided doses every 1–2 days) until substantial (>50%) pain relief 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3437

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3438

KEY

Ophthalmic (V1)
Maxillary (V2)
Mandibular (V3)

C2

C3

C4

Supraorbital nerve

Frontal branch
of frontal nerve

Supratrochlear
nerve

Ciliary ganglion
nerve

Infratrochlear
nerve
Internal nasal
rami

Infraorbital
nerve
External
nasal rami

Nasal and labial
rami of infraorbital
nerve
Anterior superior
alveolar neves

Submaxillary
ganglion

Submaxillary
and sublingual
glands

Mental nerve

Anterior ethmoidal nerve

Posterior ethmoidal nerve

Nasociliary nerve
Frontal nerve

Ophthalmic nerve

Mesencephalic nucleus of V

Semilunar
ganglion

Main sensory nucleus of V

Main motor nucleus of V

Nucleus of spinal tract of V

Mandibular nerve
Anterior and posterior deep temporal
nerves (to temporal muscles)

Otic ganglion
Pterygopalatine ganglion

Auriculotemporal nerve

External pterygoid muscle

Chorda tympani nerve

Buccinator nerve

Internal pterygoid muscle 

Masseter muscle

Mylohyoid nerve

Lacrimal Maxillary

Lingual nerve
Inferior alveolar nerve

Anterior belly of
digastric muscle

FIGURE  441-2  The  trigeminal  nerve  and  its  branches  and  sensory  distribution  on  the  face.  The  three  major  sensory  divisions  of  the  trigeminal  nerve  consist  of  the 
ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular nerves. (Reproduced with permission from Waxman SG: Clinical Neuroanatomy, 26th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)

is  achieved.  Most  patients  require  a  maintenance  dose  of  200  mg 
four times daily. Doses >1200 mg daily provide no additional bene-
fit. Dizziness, imbalance, sedation, and rare cases of agranulocytosis 
are the most important side effects of carbamazepine. If treatment 
is  effective,  it  is  usually  continued  for  1  month  and  then  tapered 
as  tolerated.  Oxcarbazepine  (300–1200  mg  bid)  is  an  alternative 
to  carbamazepine  that  has  less  bone  marrow  toxicity  and  proba-
bly  is  equally  efficacious.  If  these  agents  are  not  well  tolerated  or 
are  ineffective,  phenytoin  (300–400  mg  daily)  is  another  option. 
Lamotrigine (400 mg daily), baclofen (10–20 mg tid), or topiramate 
(50 mg bid) may also be tried. Gabapentin, up to 3600 mg daily in 
divided doses, may occasionally provide relief.

If drug treatment fails, surgical therapy should be offered. The 
most  widely  used  method  is  currently  microvascular  decompres-
sion  to  relieve  pressure  on  the  trigeminal  nerve  as  it  exits  the 
pons.  This  procedure  requires  a  suboccipital  craniotomy.  This 

procedure  appears  to  have  a  >70%  efficacy  rate  and  a  low  rate 
of  pain  recurrence  in  responders;  the  response  is  better  for  clas-
sic  ticlike  symptoms  than  for  nonlancinating  facial  pains.  High- 
resolution magnetic resonance angiography is useful preoperatively 
to  visualize  the  relationships  between  the  fifth  cranial  nerve  root 
and nearby blood vessels.

Gamma knife radiosurgery of the trigeminal nerve root is also 
used  for  treatment  and  results  in  complete  pain  relief,  sometimes 
delayed  in  onset,  in  approximately  one-half  of  patients  and  a  low 
risk  of  persistent  facial  numbness;  the  response  is  sometimes 
long-lasting,  but  recurrent  pain  develops  over  2–3  years  in  one-
third of patients. Compared with surgical decompression, gamma 
knife  surgery  appears  to  be  somewhat  less  effective  but  has  few 
serious complications.

Another  procedure,  radiofrequency  thermal  rhizotomy,  creates 
a heat lesion of the trigeminal ganglion or nerve. Short-term relief 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3438

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders is experienced by >95% of patients; long-term studies indicate that 
pain recurs in up to one-third of treated patients. Postoperatively, 
partial numbness of the face is common, masseter (jaw) weakness 
may  occur  especially  following  bilateral  procedures,  and  corneal 
denervation with secondary keratitis can follow rhizotomy for first-
division trigeminal neuralgia. Percutaneous balloon compression of 
the trigeminal ganglion is an alternative approach performed under 
general anesthesia that results in similar rates of short- and long-
term  pain  relief  and  is  also  commonly  complicated  by  ipsilateral 
facial numbness.

 ■ TRIGEMINAL NEUROPATHY
A  variety  of  diseases  can  affect  the  trigeminal  nerve  (Table  441-1). 
Most present with sensory loss on the face or with weakness of the jaw 
muscles.  Deviation  of  the  jaw  on  opening  indicates  weakness  of  the 
pterygoids on the side to which the jaw deviates. Some cases are due 
to Sjögren’s syndrome or a collagen-vascular disease such as systemic 
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, or mixed connective tissue disease. 
Among  infectious  causes,  herpes  zoster  (acute  or  postherpetic)  and 
leprosy  should  be  considered.  Tumors  of  the  middle  cranial  fossa 
(meningiomas), of the trigeminal nerve (schwannomas), or of the base 
of  the  skull  (metastatic  tumors)  may  cause  a  combination  of  motor 
and  sensory  signs.  Lesions  in  the  cavernous  sinus  can  affect  the 
first  and  second  divisions  of  the  trigeminal  nerve,  and  lesions  of 
the  superior  orbital  fissure  can  affect  the  first  (ophthalmic)  division; 
the  accompanying  corneal  anesthesia  increases  the  risk  of  ulceration 
(neurokeratitis).

Isolated sensory loss over the chin (mental neuropathy) can be the 
only manifestation of systemic malignancy. Rarely, an idiopathic form 
of trigeminal neuropathy is observed. It is characterized by numbness 
and  paresthesias,  sometimes  bilaterally,  with  loss  of  sensation  in  the 
territory  of  the  trigeminal  nerve  but  without  weakness  of  the  jaw. 
Gradual recovery is the rule. Tonic spasm of the masticatory muscles, 
known as trismus, is symptomatic of tetanus (Chap. 152) or may occur 
in patients treated with phenothiazines.

TABLE 441-1  Trigeminal Nerve Disorders
Nuclear (Brainstem) Lesions
Multiple sclerosis
Stroke
Syringobulbia
Glioma
Lymphoma
Preganglionic Lesions
Acoustic neuroma
Meningioma
Metastasis
Chronic meningitis
Cavernous carotid aneurysm
Semilunar Ganglion Lesions
Trigeminal neuroma
Herpes zoster
Infection (spread from otitis media or mastoiditis)
Cavernous Sinus Lesions (see Table 441-2)
Peripheral Nerve Lesions
Tumor (e.g., nasopharyngeal carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, lymphoma)
Trauma
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome
Collagen-vascular diseases
Sarcoidosis
Leprosy
Drugs (stilbamidine, trichloroethylene)
Idiopathic trigeminal neuropathy

3439

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
1

T
r
i
g
e
m
i
n
a
l

N
e
u
r
a
l
g
i
a
,

B
e
l
l
’
s
P
a
l
s
y
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
C
r
a
n
i
a
l

N
e
r
v
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

FACIAL WEAKNESS
 ■ ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
(Fig.  441-3)  The  seventh  cranial  nerve  supplies  all  the  muscles  con-
cerned  with  facial  expression,  as  well  as  the  stapedius,  stylohyoid, 
and posterior belly of the digastric. The sensory and parasympathetic 
components  (the  nervus  intermedius)  convey  taste  sensation  from 
the  anterior  two-thirds  of  the  tongue,  cutaneous  impulses  from  the 
anterior  wall  of  the  external  auditory  canal,  and  preganglionic  para-
sympathetic  signals  to  the  pterygopalatine  and  submaxillary  ganglia, 
stimulating lacrimation, rhinorrhea and salivation. The motor nucleus 
of the seventh nerve lies anterior and lateral to the abducens nucleus. 
After leaving the pons, the seventh nerve enters the internal auditory 
meatus with the acoustic nerve. The nerve continues its course in its 
own  bony  channel,  the  facial  canal,  and  exits  from  the  skull  via  the 
stylomastoid  foramen.  It  then  passes  through  the  parotid  gland  and 
subdivides to supply the facial muscles.

A  complete  interruption  of  the  facial  nerve  at  the  stylomastoid 
foramen paralyzes all muscles of facial expression. The corner of the 
mouth  droops,  the  creases  and  skinfolds  are  effaced,  the  forehead  is 
unfurrowed, and the eyelids will not close. Upon attempted closure of 
the lids, the eye on the paralyzed side rolls upward (Bell’s phenome-
non). The lower lid sags and falls away from the conjunctiva, permit-
ting tears to spill over the cheek. Food collects between the teeth and 
lips, and saliva may dribble from the corner of the mouth. The patient 
complains of a heaviness or numbness in the face, but sensory loss is 
rarely demonstrable and taste is intact.

If the lesion is in the middle-ear portion, taste is lost over the ante-
rior two-thirds of the tongue on the same side. If the nerve to the sta-
pedius is interrupted, there is hyperacusis (sensitivity to loud sounds). 
Lesions in the internal auditory meatus may affect the adjacent audi-
tory  and  vestibular  nerves,  causing  deafness,  tinnitus,  or  dizziness. 
Intrapontine lesions that paralyze the face usually affect the abducens 
nucleus as well, and often the corticospinal and sensory tracts.

If the peripheral facial paralysis has existed for some time and recov-
ery of motor function is incomplete, a continuous diffuse contraction of 
facial muscles may appear. The palpebral fissure becomes narrowed, and 
the nasolabial fold deepens. Facial spasms, initiated by movements of the 
face, may develop (hemifacial spasm). Anomalous regeneration of seventh 
nerve fibers may result in other troublesome phenomena. If fibers origi-
nally connected with the orbicularis oculi come to innervate the orbicularis 
oris, closure of the lids may cause a retraction of the mouth (synkinesis), 
or if parasympathetic fibers originally connected with salivary glands later 
innervate  the  lacrimal  gland,  anomalous  tearing  (“crocodile  tears”)  may 
occur with eating. Another facial synkinesia is triggered by jaw opening, 
causing closure of the eyelids on the side of the facial palsy (jaw-winking).

 ■ BELL’S PALSY
The most common form of facial paralysis is Bell’s palsy. The annual 
incidence  of  this  idiopathic  disorder  is  ~25  per  100,000  annually,  or 
about 1 in 60 persons in a lifetime. Risk factors include pregnancy and 
diabetes mellitus.

Clinical Manifestations  The onset of Bell’s palsy is fairly abrupt, 
with maximal weakness being attained by 48 h as a general rule. Pain 
behind the ear may precede the paralysis for a day or two. Taste sensa-
tion may be lost unilaterally, and hyperacusis may be present. In some 
cases, there is mild cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis. MRI may reveal 
swelling  and  uniform  enhancement  of  the  geniculate  ganglion  and 
facial nerve and, in some cases, entrapment of the swollen nerve in the 
temporal  bone.  Approximately  80%  of  patients  recover  within  a  few 
weeks or months. Electromyography may be of some prognostic value; 
evidence of denervation after 10 days indicates there has been axonal 
degeneration, that there will be a long delay (3 months as a rule) before 
regeneration  occurs,  and  that  it  may  be  incomplete.  The  presence  of 
incomplete paralysis in the first week is the most favorable prognostic 
sign. Recurrences are reported in ~7% of cases.

Pathophysiology 
In  acute  Bell’s  palsy,  there  is  inflammation  of 
the facial nerve with mononuclear cells, consistent with an infectious 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3439

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3440

Motor nucleus
VI n.

Motor nucleus
VII n.

Nucleus
fasciculus
solitarius

Superior
salivatory
nucleus

Geniculate
ganglion

Major superficial
petrosal nerve

Lacrimal gland

Trigeminal
ganglion

1

2

3

V n.

C
VII n.

B

A

Chorda
tympani

Lingual
nerve

Pterygopalatine
ganglion

To nasal and
palatine glands

Submandibular
ganglion

Sublingual gland

Submandibular gland

Fasciculus
solitarius

FIGURE 441-3  The facial nerve. A, B, and C denote lesions of the facial nerve at the stylomastoid foramen, distal and proximal to the geniculate ganglion, respectively. Green 
lines indicate the parasympathetic fibers, red line indicates motor fibers, and purple lines indicate visceral afferent fibers (taste). (Reproduced with permission from MB 
Carpenter: Core Text of Neuroanatomy, 2nd ed. Williams & Wilkins, 1978.)

or immune cause. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 DNA was fre-
quently detected in endoneurial fluid and posterior auricular muscle, 
suggesting that a reactivation of this virus in the geniculate ganglion 
may  be  responsible  for  most  cases.  Reactivation  of  varicella-zoster 
virus  is  associated  with  Bell’s  palsy  in  up  to  one-third  of  cases  and 
may  represent  the  second  most  frequent  cause.  A  variety  of  other 
viruses have also been implicated less commonly, and Bell’s palsy can 
be  observed  in  the  setting  of  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV) 
seroconversion.

Differential  Diagnosis  There  are  many  other  causes  of  acute 
facial  palsy  that  must  be  considered  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of 
Bell’s  palsy.  Lyme  disease  can  cause  unilateral  or  bilateral  facial  pal-
sies;  in  endemic  areas,  ≥10%  of  cases  of  facial  palsy  are  likely  due 
to  infection  with  Borrelia  burgdorferi  (Chap.  186).  Ramsay  Hunt 
syndrome,  caused  by  reactivation  of  herpes  zoster  in  the  geniculate 
ganglion, consists of a severe facial palsy associated with a vesicular 
eruption in the external auditory canal and sometimes in the pharynx 
and  other  parts  of  the  cranial  integument;  often  the  eighth  cranial 
nerve is affected as well. Facial palsy that is often bilateral occurs in 
sarcoidosis (Chap. 367) and in Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chap. 447). 
Leprosy  frequently  involves  the  facial  nerve,  and  facial  neuropa-
thy  may  also  occur  in  diabetes  mellitus,  connective  tissue  diseases 
including Sjögren’s syndrome, and amyloidosis. The rare Melkersson- 
Rosenthal syndrome consists of recurrent facial paralysis; recurrent—
and  eventually  permanent—facial  (particularly  labial)  edema;  and, 
less constantly, plication of the tongue. Its cause is unknown. Acoustic 
neuromas  frequently  involve  the  facial  nerve  by  local  compression. 
Infarcts,  demyelinating  lesions  of  MS,  and  tumors  are  the  common 
pontine  lesions  that  interrupt  the  facial  nerve  fibers;  other  signs  of 
brainstem  involvement  are  usually  present.  Tumors  that  invade  the 
temporal bone (carotid body, cholesteatoma, dermoid) may produce 
a  facial  palsy,  but  the  onset  is  insidious  and  the  course  progressive. 
Facial palsy after temporal bone fracture can present acutely or after a 
delay of several days; blunt head injury without temporal bone fracture 
may also trigger facial palsy.

All  these  forms  of  nuclear  or  peripheral  facial  palsy  must  be  dis-
tinguished  from  the  supranuclear  type.  In  the  latter,  the  frontalis 
and  orbicularis  oculi  muscles  of  the  forehead  are  involved  less  than 
those  of  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  since  the  upper  facial  muscles 
are innervated by corticobulbar pathways from both motor cortices, 
whereas the lower facial muscles are innervated only by the opposite 
hemisphere.  In  supranuclear  lesions,  there  may  be  a  dissociation  of 
emotional and voluntary facial movements, and often some degree of 
paralysis  of  the  arm  and  leg or  an  aphasia  (in dominant-hemisphere 
lesions) is present.

Laboratory Evaluation  The diagnosis of Bell’s palsy can usually 
be  made  clinically  in  patients  with  (1)  a  typical  presentation,  (2)  no 
risk factors or preexisting symptoms for other causes of facial paralysis, 
(3)  absence  of  cutaneous  lesions  of  herpes  zoster  in  the  external  ear 
canal, and (4) a normal neurologic examination with the exception of 
the facial nerve. Particular attention to the eighth cranial nerve, which 
courses near to the facial nerve in the pontomedullary junction and in 
the temporal bone, and to other cranial nerves is essential. In atypical 
or  uncertain  cases,  an  ESR  or  CRP,  testing  for  diabetes  mellitus,  a 
Lyme titer, HIV serologies, angiotensin-converting enzyme and chest 
imaging studies for possible sarcoidosis, a lumbar puncture for possible 
Guillain-Barré  syndrome,  or  MRI  scanning  may  be  indicated.  MRI 
often shows swelling and enhancement of the facial nerve in idiopathic 
Bell’s palsy (Fig. 441-4).

TREATMENT
Bell’s Palsy
Symptomatic measures include (1) the use of paper tape to depress 
the upper eyelid during sleep and prevent corneal drying, (2) arti-
ficial tears; and (3) massage of the weakened muscles. A course of 
glucocorticoids, given as prednisone 60–80 mg daily during the first 
5 days and then tapered over the next 5 days, modestly shortens the 
recovery  period  and  improves  the  functional  outcome.  Although 
large and well-controlled randomized trials found no added benefit 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3440

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3441

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
1

T
r
i
g
e
m
i
n
a
l

N
e
u
r
a
l
g
i
a
,

B
e
l
l
’
s
P
a
l
s
y
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
C
r
a
n
i
a
l

N
e
r
v
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

FIGURE 441-4  Axial and coronal T1-weighted images after gadolinium with fat suppression demonstrate diffuse smooth linear enhancement of the left facial nerve, 
involving the genu, tympanic, and mastoid segments within the temporal bone (arrows), without evidence of mass lesion. Although highly suggestive of Bell’s palsy, similar 
findings may be seen with other etiologies such as Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, and perineural malignant spread.

of the antiviral agents valacyclovir (1000 mg daily for 5–7 days) or 
acyclovir (400 mg five times daily for 10 days) compared to gluco-
corticoids alone, either of these agents should be used if vesicular 
lesions  are  observed  in  the  palate  or  external  auditor  canal.  For 
patients  with  permanent  paralysis  from  Bell’s  palsy,  a  number  of 
cosmetic surgical procedures have been used to restore a relatively 
symmetric appearance to the face.

 ■ OTHER MOTOR DISORDERS OF THE FACE
Hemifacial  spasm  consists  of  painless  irregular  involuntary  contrac-
tions  on  one  side  of  the  face.  Most  cases  appear  related  to  vascular 
compression  of  the  exiting  facial  nerve  in  the  pons.  Other  cases 
develop  as  a  sequela  to  Bell’s  palsy  or  are  secondary  to  compression 
and/or demyelination of the nerve by tumor, infection, or MS. Local 
injections of botulinum toxin into affected muscles can relieve spasms 
for 3–4 months, and the injections can be repeated. Refractory cases 
due  to  vascular  compression  usually  respond  to  surgical  decompres-
sion  of  the  facial  nerve.  Anecdotal  reports  describe  success  using 
carbamazepine,  gabapentin,  or  baclofen.  Blepharospasm  is  an  invol-
untary recurrent spasm of both eyelids that usually occurs in elderly 
persons as an isolated phenomenon or with varying degrees of spasm 
of other facial muscles. Severe, persistent cases of blepharospasm can 
be  treated  by  local  injection  of  botulinum  toxin  into  the  orbicularis 
oculi. Clonazepam, baclofen, and trihexyphenidyl have also been used 
to treat this disorder. Facial myokymia refers to a fine rippling activity 
of the facial muscles; it may be caused by MS or follow Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (Chap. 447).

OTHER CRANIAL NERVE DISORDERS
 ■ GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NEURALGIA
The  ninth  cranial  (glossopharyngeal)  nerve  (Fig.  441-5)  conveys 
somatic sensation from the pharynx, middle ear, tympanic membrane, 
eustachian tube, and posterior third of the tongue to the spinal trigem-
inal nucleus. It also relays taste from the posterior third of the tongue 
and  information  about  blood  pressure  from  baroreceptors  in  the 
carotid sinus to the nucleus solitarius, which also serves as the sensory 
nucleus for the vagus nerve. Motor function originates in the nucleus 
ambiguus  and  is  limited  to  the  stylopharyngeus  muscle.  Parasympa-
thetic fibers from the medullary inferior salivatory nucleus synapse in 
the otic ganglion with postganglionic fibers that innervate the parotid 
gland.  Glossopharyngeal  neuralgia  resembles  trigeminal  neuralgia  in 
many respects but is much less common. Sometimes it involves por-
tions of the tenth (vagus) nerve. The pain is intense and paroxysmal; 
it  originates  on  one  side  of  the  throat,  approximately  in  the  tonsillar 
fossa. In some cases, the pain is localized in the ear or may radiate from 
the throat to the ear because of involvement of the tympanic branch 
of  the  glossopharyngeal  nerve.  Spasms  of  pain  may  be  initiated  by 

swallowing or coughing. There is no demonstrable motor or sensory 
deficit. Cardiac symptoms—bradycardia or asystole, hypotension, and 
fainting—have  been  reported.  Glossopharyngeal  neuralgia  can  result 
from vascular compression, MS, or tumors, but many cases are idio-
pathic. Medical therapy is similar to that for trigeminal neuralgia, and 
carbamazepine is generally the first choice. If drug therapy is unsuc-
cessful, surgical procedures—including microvascular decompression 
if vascular compression is evident—or rhizotomy of glossopharyngeal 
and vagal fibers in the jugular bulb is frequently successful.

 ■ DYSPHAGIA AND DYSPHONIA
The tenth cranial (vagus) nerve (Fig. 441-6) carries somatic sensation 
from the posterior aspect of the external auditory canal, laryngophar-
ynx, superior larynx, and meninges of the posterior fossa to the spinal 
trigeminal  nucleus,  as  well  as  taste  from  the  epiglottis  and  pharynx 
and visceral sensation from chemoreceptors and baroreceptors in the 
aortic arch, heart, and gastrointestinal tract to the splenic flexure to the 
nucleus solitarius. The motor part originates in the nucleus ambiguous 
and innervates most muscles of the oropharynx and soft palate as well 
as all laryngeal muscles. Parasympathetic fibers originate in the dorsal 
motor nucleus of the vagus nerve and decrease the heart rate through 
action  at  the  sino-atrial  and  atrioventricular  nodes;  others  promote 
peristalsis  and  secretion  of  the  alimentary  tract  from  the  esophagus 
to  the  splenic  flexure.  When  the  intracranial  portion  of  one  vagus 
(tenth cranial) nerve is interrupted, the soft palate droops ipsilaterally 
and does not rise in phonation. There is loss of the gag reflex on the 
affected side, as well as of the “curtain movement” of the lateral wall of 
the  pharynx,  whereby  the  faucial  pillars  move  medially  as  the  palate 
rises in saying “ah.” The voice is hoarse and slightly nasal, and the vocal 
cord lies immobile midway between abduction and adduction. Loss of 
sensation at the external auditory meatus and the posterior pinna may 
also be present.

The vagus nerve may be involved at the meningeal level by neoplas-
tic and infectious processes and within the medulla by tumors, vascular 
lesions (e.g., the lateral medullary syndrome), and motor neuron dis-
ease. The nerve may be involved by infection with varicella zoster virus. 
Injury to the vagus nerve in the carotid sheath can occur with carotid 
dissection  or  following  endarterectomy.  The  pharyngeal  branches  of 
both vagal nerves may be affected in diphtheria; the voice has a nasal 
quality,  and  regurgitation  of  liquids  through  the  nose  occurs  during 
swallowing.  Polymyositis  and  dermatomyositis,  which  cause  hoarse-
ness and dysphagia by direct involvement of laryngeal and pharyngeal 
muscles, may be confused with diseases of the vagus nerves. Dysphagia 
is also a symptom in some patients with myotonic dystrophy. Nonneu-
rologic causes of dysphagia are discussed in Chap. 44.

The  recurrent  laryngeal  nerves,  especially  the  left,  are  most  often 
damaged  as  a  result  of  intrathoracic  disease.  Aneurysm  of  the  aortic 
arch,  an  enlarged  left  atrium,  and  tumors  of  the  mediastinum  and 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3441

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3442

Geniculotympanic
nerve

Great petrosal
nerve

Pterygopalatine
ganglion

Facial
nerve

Nerve of the
pterygoid canal

Otic
ganglion

Parotid
gland

Small petrosal
nerve

Auditory tube
(eustachian)

Deep petrosal nerve
(sympathetic)

Internal carotid artery

Parasympathetic
nerves

Sensory nerves

Motor nerves

Sympathetic
nerves

Petrous
portion of
temporal
bone

FO

FR

TP

Jugular
foramen

VII

Tympanic nerve
Tympanic nerve
(of jacobson) to
(of jacobson) to
tympanic plexus
tympanic plexus

Styloglossus
muscle

Communication
with facial nerve

Stylopharyngeal
muscle

Sensory branches to
soft palate, fauces,
and tonsils

Tonsils

Inferior salivatory nucleus
(parasympathetic)

Ambiguus nucleus
(motor)

Nucleus of solitary
tract (sensory)

Superior or jugular ganglion

Petrous ganglion

Communication
with auricular
branch of X

Nodose ganglion

X 

Superior cervical
sympathetic ganglion

Carotid body

Carotid sinus and
nerve plexus

Common carotid artery

Sympathetic root
(vasomotor)

IX (Sensory)

Sinus
nerve

Vagal root
(motor and
sensory)

Pharyngeal
plexus

To muscles and mucous
membrane of the pharynx
and soft palate

Taste and sensation to
posterior third of tongue

FIGURE 441-5  The ninth cranial (glossopharyngeal) nerve. TP, tympanum plexus; FR, foramen rotundum; FO, foramen ovale. (Reproduced with permission from SG Waxman: 
Clinical Neuroanatomy, 29th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2020.)

bronchi are much more frequent causes of an isolated vocal cord palsy 
than are intracranial disorders. However, a substantial number of cases 
of recurrent laryngeal palsy remain idiopathic.

When confronted with a case of laryngeal palsy, the physician must 
attempt  to  determine  the  site  of  the  lesion.  If  it  is  intramedullary, 
there  are  usually  other  signs,  such  as  ipsilateral  cerebellar  dysfunc-
tion, loss of pain and temperature sensation over the ipsilateral face 
and contralateral arm and leg, and an ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome. 
If the lesion is extramedullary, the glossopharyngeal and spinal acces-
sory nerves are frequently involved (jugular foramen syndrome). If it 
is extracranial in the posterior laterocondylar or retroparotid space, 
there may be a combination of ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth cra-
nial nerve palsies and Horner’s syndrome (Table 441-2). If there is no 
sensory loss over the palate and pharynx and no palatal weakness or 
dysphagia, the lesion is below the origin of the pharyngeal branches, 

which leave the vagus nerve high in the cervical region; the usual site 
of disease is then the mediastinum.

 ■ NECK WEAKNESS
The eleventh cranial nerve (spinal accessory) is a pure motor nerve aris-
ing from the nucleus ambiguus and the ventral horn of the spinal cord 
from C1–C6. The nerve travels superiorly through the foramen mag-
num and exits through the jugular foramen to innervate the ipsilateral 
sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. Isolated involvement of the 
accessory (eleventh cranial) nerve can occur anywhere along its route, 
resulting  in  partial  or  complete  paralysis  of  the  sternocleidomastoid 
and trapezius muscles. Spinal accessory nerve palsy does not result in 
significant neck weakness because several other muscles also turn the 
head and flex the neck; therefore, detection of accessory nerve injury 
relies  on  palpating  the  absence  of  sternocleidomastoid  contraction 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3442

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3443

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
1

T
r
i
g
e
m
i
n
a
l

N
e
u
r
a
l
g
i
a
,

B
e
l
l
’
s
P
a
l
s
y
,
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
C
r
a
n
i
a
l

N
e
r
v
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Meningeal branch to
posterior fossa

VII

Auricular branch to
posterior auricle
and part of
external meatus

IX

X

J

XI

N

Superior
laryngeal
nerve

Muscles to
palate and
pharynx

Sensation to
lower pharynx 

Epiglottic and
lingual rami

Nucleus of solitary tract

Nucleus of spinal
tract of V

Dorsal motor nucleus
of vagus

Ambiguus nucleus

Spinal roots of
accessory nerve

C1

C5

Sternocleidomastoid muscle

Trapezius muscle

Arytenoid, thyroarytenoid,
and cricoarytenoid muscles

Esophagus

Right subclavian artery

Cardiac nerves

Cardiac plexus

Pulmonary plexus

Esophageal plexus

Celiac plexus

Liver

Inferior pharyngeal
constrictor

Glottis

Cricothyroid muscle

Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve

Left vagus nerve

Aortic arch

Diaphragm

Stomach

Spleen

Pancreas

Left kidney

Gallbladder

Right kidney

Small intestine

Sensory nerves

Parasympathetic nerves

Motor nerves

FIGURE 441-6  The vagus nerve. J, jugular (superior) ganglion; N, nodose (inferior) ganglion. (Reproduced with permission from SG Waxman: Clinical Neuroanatomy,  
29th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2020.)

during head turning. Similarly, shoulder shrug is only slightly impacted 
by trapezius weakness, although the affected shoulder is lower at rest, 
scapular  winging  occurs,  and  the  arm  cannot  abduct  beyond  90°. 
Isolated  spinal  accessory  nerve  palsy  is  often  iatrogenic  due  to  neck 
surgery or jugular vein cannulation, or traumatic. An idiopathic form 
of accessory neuropathy, akin to Bell’s palsy, has been described, and 
it may be recurrent in some cases. Most but not all patients recover.

 ■ TONGUE PARALYSIS
The  twelfth  cranial  nerve  (hypoglossal)  supplies  the  ipsilateral  mus-
cles  of  the  tongue.  Nerve  lesions  cause  the  tongue  to  deviate  toward 
the  ipsilateral  side  during  protrusion  due  to  ipsilateral  genioglossus 
weakness,  in  addition  to  weakness  of  tongue  movements  toward  the 
affected  side  to  weakness  of  ipsilateral  intrinsic  tongue  musculature. 
Atrophy and fasciculation of the tongue develop weeks to months after 
interruption of the nerve. The nucleus of the nerve or its fibers of exit 

may be involved by intramedullary lesions such as tumor, poliomyeli-
tis, or most often motor neuron disease. Lesions of the basal meninges 
and the occipital bones (platybasia, invagination of occipital condyles, 
Paget’s disease) may compress the nerve in its extramedullary course 
or  as  it  exits  the  skull  in  the  hypoglossal  canal.  Isolated  lesions  of 
unknown cause can occur.

MULTIPLE CRANIAL NERVE PALSIES
Several cranial nerves may be affected by the same disease process. In 
this situation, the main clinical problem is to determine whether the 
lesion  lies  within  the  brainstem  or  outside  it.  Lesions  that  lie  on  the 
surface of the brainstem are characterized by involvement of adjacent 
cranial nerves (often occurring in succession) and late and rather slight 
involvement  of  the  long  sensory  and  motor  pathways  and  segmental 
structures lying within the brainstem. The opposite is true of primary 
lesions within the brainstem. The extramedullary lesion is more likely 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3443

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3444

TABLE 441-2  Cranial Nerve Syndromes
SITE
Orbital apex

CRANIAL NERVES USUAL CAUSE
II, III, IV, first 
division V, VI

Sphenoid fissure 
(superior orbital)
Lateral wall of 
cavernous sinus

III, IV, first division 
V, VI
III, IV, first division 
V, VI, often with 
proptosis

Retrosphenoid space II, III, IV, V, VI

Apex of petrous bone V, VI
Internal auditory 
meatus

VII, VIII

Pontocerebellar 
angle
Jugular foramen
Posterior 
laterocondylar space
Posterior retroparotid 
space

V, VI, VII, VIII, and 
sometimes IX
IX, X, XI
IX, X, XI, XII

IX, X, XI, XII, and 
Horner’s syndrome

Invasive fungal infections, 
amyloidosis, granulomatous 
disease
Invasive tumors of sphenoid bone; 
aneurysms
Infection, thrombosis, aneurysm 
or fistula of cavernous sinus; 
invasive tumors from sinuses and 
sella turcica; benign granuloma 
responsive to glucocorticoids
Large tumors of middle cranial 
fossa
Petrositis; tumors of petrous bone
Tumors of petrous bone (dermoids, 
etc.); infectious processes; acoustic 
neuroma
Acoustic neuroma; meningioma

Tumors and aneurysms
Tumors of parotid gland and carotid 
body and metastatic tumors
Tumors of parotid gland, carotid 
body, lymph nodes; metastatic 
tumor; tuberculous adenitis

to cause bone erosion or enlargement of the foramens of exit of cranial 
nerves. The intramedullary lesion involving cranial nerves often pro-
duces a crossed sensory or motor paralysis (cranial nerve signs on one 
side of the body and tract signs on the opposite side).

Involvement  of  multiple  cranial  nerves  outside  the  brainstem 
is  frequently  the  result  of  trauma,  localized  infections  including  
varicella-zoster virus, infectious and noninfectious (especially carcino-
matous)  causes  of  meningitis  (Chaps.  138  and  139),  granulomatous 
diseases such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Chap. 363), Behçet’s 
disease,  vascular  disorders  including  those  associated  with  diabetes, 
enlarging aneurysms, or locally infiltrating tumors. Among the tumors, 
nasopharyngeal  cancers,  lymphomas,  neurofibromas,  meningiomas, 
chordomas,  cholesteatomas,  carcinomas,  and  sarcomas  have  all  been 
observed  to  involve  a  succession  of  lower  cranial  nerves.  Owing  to 
their anatomic relationships, the multiple cranial nerve palsies form a 
number of distinctive syndromes, listed in Table 441-2. Sarcoidosis is 
the cause of some cases of multiple cranial neuropathy; tuberculosis, 
the  Chiari  malformation,  platybasia,  and  basilar  invagination  of  the 
skull are additional causes.

Cavernous  sinus  syndrome  (Fig.  441-7)  is  a  distinctive  and  fre-
quently  life-threatening  disorder.  It  often  presents  as  orbital  or  facial 
pain;  orbital  swelling,  chemosis  due  to  occlusion  of  the  ophthalmic 
veins;  fever;  oculomotor  neuropathy  affecting  the  third,  fourth,  and 
sixth cranial nerves; and trigeminal neuropathy affecting the ophthal-
mic (V1) and occasionally the maxillary (V2) divisions of the trigem-
inal nerve. Cavernous sinus thrombosis, often secondary to infection 
from orbital cellulitis (frequently Staphylococcus aureus), a cutaneous 
source  on  the  face,  or  sinusitis  (especially  with  mucormycosis  in 
diabetic patients), is the most frequent cause; other etiologies include 
aneurysm  of  the  carotid  artery,  a  carotid-cavernous  fistula  (orbital 
bruit may be present), meningioma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, other 
tumors,  or  an  idiopathic  granulomatous  disorder  (Tolosa-Hunt  syn-
drome). The two cavernous sinuses directly communicate via intercav-
ernous channels; thus, involvement on one side may extend to become 
bilateral. Early diagnosis is essential, especially when due to infection, 
and treatment depends on the underlying etiology.

In  infectious  cases,  prompt  administration  of  broad-spectrum 
antibiotics,  drainage  of  any  abscess  cavities,  and  identification  of  the 
offending  organism  are  essential.  Anticoagulant  therapy  may  benefit 
cases of primary thrombosis. Repair or occlusion of the carotid artery 
may be required for treatment of fistulas or aneurysms. Tolosa-Hunt 

Optic
  chiasma

Hypophysis

Sphenoid
  sinus

Ant. cerebral a.

Int. carotid a.

Ant. clinoid process

Subarachnoid
space

Oculomotor (III) n.
Trochlear (IV) n.

Ophthalmic (VI) n.

Maxillary (V2) n.

Pia

Arachnoid

Dura

Abducens (VI) n.

FIGURE 441-7  Anatomy of the cavernous sinus in coronal section, illustrating the 
location of the cranial nerves in relation to the vascular sinus, internal carotid artery 
(which loops anteriorly to the section), and surrounding structures.

syndrome generally responds to glucocorticoids. A dramatic improve-
ment  in  pain  is  usually  evident  within  a  few  days;  oral  prednisone  
(60  mg  daily)  is  usually  continued  for  2  weeks  and  then  gradually 
tapered over a month, or longer if pain recurs. Occasionally an immu-
nosuppressive medication, such as azathioprine or methotrexate, needs 
to be added to maintain an initial response to glucocorticoids.

Lesions in the superior orbital fissure and orbital apex cause more 
prominent vision loss than those in the cavernous sinus due to com-
pression of the optic nerve; the second branch of the trigeminal nerve 
is  usually  spared.  The  cause  is  often  an  invasive  fungal  infection, 
frequently  due  to  osseous  erosion  through  the  wall  of  the  maxillary, 
sphenoid, or ethmoid sinuses. Infiltrative processes such as amyloido-
sis, granulomatosis with polyarteritis, and an idiopathic inflammatory 
syndrome similar to Tolosa-Hunt are additional causes, and biopsy is 
often necessary for diagnosis.

As  noted  above,  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  commonly  affects  the 
facial  nerves  bilaterally.  In  the  Fisher  variant  of  Guillain-Barré  syn-
drome,  oculomotor  paresis  occurs  with  ataxia  and  areflexia  in  the 
limbs  (Chap.  447).  Wernicke’s  encephalopathy  can  cause  a  severe 
ophthalmoplegia combined with other brainstem signs (Chap. 307).

Progressive bulbar palsy is a slowly progressive purely motor disorder 
affecting multiple cranial nerve nuclei. Weakness of the face, jaw, phar-
ynx, neck and tongue is usually present accompanied by atrophy and 
fasciculations. It is a form of motor neuron disease (Chap. 437). Pure 
motor  syndromes  without  atrophy  raise  the  question  of  myasthenia 
gravis (Chap. 448), and with rapidly evolving Guillain Barre syndrome, 
diphtheria and poliomyelitis are additional considerations.

Glossopharyngeal neuropathy in conjunction with vagus and acces-
sory  nerve  palsies  may  occur  with  herpes  zoster  infection  or  with  a 
tumor  or  aneurysm  in  the  posterior  fossa  or  in  the  jugular  foramen, 
through which all three nerves exit the skull. Hoarseness due to vocal 
cord paralysis, some difficulty in swallowing, deviation of the soft pal-
ate to the intact side, anesthesia of the posterior wall of the pharynx, 
and weakness of the upper part of the trapezius and sternocleidomas-
toid muscles make up jugular foramen syndrome.

Paralysis of the vagus and hypoglossal nerves (Tapia syndrome) can 
rarely  follow  endotracheal  intubation  and  has  been  reported  during 
the COVID-19 pandemic; symptoms consist of dysphonia and tongue 
deviation, and usually resolve within a few months.

An idiopathic form of multiple cranial nerve involvement on one or 
both sides of the face is occasionally seen. The syndrome consists of 
a subacute onset of boring facial pain, followed by paralysis of motor 
cranial  nerves.  The  clinical  features  overlap  those  of  Tolosa-Hunt 
syndrome  and  appear  to  be  due  to  idiopathic  inflammation  of  the 
dura mater, which may be visualized by MRI. The syndrome is usually 
responsive to glucocorticoids.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3444

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  ■ FURTHER READING
Bendtsen L et al: Advances in diagnosis, classification, pathophysiol-
ogy, and management of trigeminal neuralgia. Lancet 19:784, 2020.
Decavel P et al: Tapia syndrome at the time of the COVID-19 pan-
demic:  Lower  cranial  neuropathy  following  prolonged  intubation. 
Neurology 95:312, 2020.

Gagyor  I  et  al:  Antiviral  treatment  of  Bell’s  palsy  (idiopathic  facial 

paralysis). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD001869, 2019.

Gutierrez S et al: Lower cranial nerve syndromes: A review. Neuro-

surg Rev 44:1345, 2020.

Kelly  HR,  Curtin  HD:  Imaging  of  skull  base  lesions.  Handb  Clin 

Neurol 135:637, 2016.

Madhok  VB  et  al:  Corticosteroids  for  Bell’s  palsy  (idiopathic  facial 

paralysis). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD001942, 2016.

442 Diseases of the Spinal Cord

Stephen L. Hauser

Diseases  of  the  spinal  cord  are  frequently  devastating.  They  pro-
duce  quadriplegia,  paraplegia,  and  sensory  deficits  far  beyond  the 
damage they would inflict elsewhere in the nervous system because 
the spinal cord contains, in a small cross-sectional area, almost the 
entire motor output and sensory input of the trunk and limbs. Many 
spinal  cord  diseases  are  reversible  if  recognized  and  treated  at  an 
early  stage  (Table  442-1);  thus,  they  are  among  the  most  critical 
of  neurologic  emergencies.  The  efficient  use  of  diagnostic  proce-
dures, guided by knowledge of the anatomy and the clinical features 
of spinal cord diseases, is required to maximize the likelihood of a 
successful outcome.

TABLE 442-1  Treatable Spinal Cord Disorders
Compressive
  Epidural, intradural, or intramedullary neoplasm
  Epidural abscess
  Epidural hemorrhage
  Cervical spondylosis
  Herniated disk
  Posttraumatic compression by fractured or displaced vertebra or hemorrhage
Vascular
  Arteriovenous malformation and dural fistula
  Antiphospholipid syndrome and other hypercoagulable states
Inflammatory
  Multiple sclerosis
  Neuromyelitis optica
  Sarcoidosis

 Systemic immune-mediated disorders: SLE, Sjögren’s, Behcet’s disease, APL 
antibody syndrome, others vasculitis
 Other CNS disorders: anti-MOG, anti-GFAP, paraneoplastic,a CLIPPERS, 
Erdheim-Chester

Infectious
  Viral: VZV, HSV-1 and 2, CMV, HIV, HTLV-1, others
  Bacterial and mycobacterial: Borrelia, Listeria, syphilis, others
  Mycoplasma pneumoniae
  Parasitic: schistosomiasis, toxoplasmosis, cysticercosis
Developmental
  Syringomyelia
  Meningomyelocele
  Tethered cord syndrome
Metabolic
  Vitamin B12 deficiency (subacute combined degeneration)
  Folate deficiency
  Copper deficiency

3445

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Spinal Cord Disease

SPINAL CORD ANATOMY RELEVANT TO CLINICAL SIGNS
The spinal cord is a thin, tubular extension of the central nervous 
system contained within the bony spinal canal. It originates at the 
medulla  and  continues  caudally  to  the  conus  medullaris  at  the 
lumbar level; its fibrous extension, the filum terminale, terminates 
at the coccyx. The adult spinal cord is ~46 cm (18 in.) long, oval in 
shape, and enlarged in the cervical and lumbar regions, where neu-
rons  that  innervate  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  respectively, 
are located. The white matter tracts containing ascending sensory 
and descending motor pathways are located peripherally, whereas 
nerve  cell  bodies  are  clustered  in  an  inner  region  of  gray  matter 
shaped like a four-leaf clover that surrounds the central canal (ana-
tomically an extension of the fourth ventricle). The membranes that 
cover the spinal cord—the pia, arachnoid, and dura—are continu-
ous with those of the brain, and the cerebrospinal fluid is contained 
within the subarachnoid space between the pia and arachnoid.

The  spinal  cord  has  31  segments,  each  defined  by  an  exit-
ing  ventral  motor  root  and  entering  dorsal  sensory  root.  During 
embryologic development, growth of the cord lags behind that of 
the vertebral column, and the mature spinal cord ends at approx-
imately  the  first  lumbar  vertebral  body.  The  lower  spinal  nerves 
take  an  increasingly  downward  course  to  exit  via  intervertebral 
foramina. The first seven pairs of cervical spinal nerves exit above 
the  same-numbered  vertebral  bodies,  whereas  all  the  subsequent 
nerves exit below the same-numbered vertebral bodies because of 
the presence of eight cervical spinal cord segments but only seven 
cervical vertebrae. The relationship between spinal cord segments 

aIncluding anti-amphiphysin, CRMP-5, Hu.
Abbreviations: CLIPPERS, chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine 
perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, 
central nervous system; CRMP5, collapsin response mediator 5-IgG; GFAP, 
glial fibrillary acidic protein; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.

and  the  corresponding  vertebral  bodies  is  shown  in  Table  442-2. 
These  relationships  assume  particular  importance  for  localization 
of  lesions  that  cause  spinal  cord  compression.  Sensory  loss  below 
the  circumferential  level  of  the  umbilicus,  for  example,  corre-
sponds to the T10 cord segment but indicates involvement of the 
cord  adjacent  to  the  seventh  or  eighth  thoracic  vertebral  body 
(see  Figs.  25-2  and  25-3).  In  addition,  at  every  level,  the  main 
ascending  and  descending  tracts  are  somatotopically  organized 
with a laminated distribution that reflects the origin or destination 
of nerve fibers. 
Determining the Level of the Lesion  The presence of a horizon-
tally  defined  level  below  which  sensory,  motor,  and  autonomic 
function is impaired is a hallmark of a lesion of the spinal cord. This 

TABLE 442-2  Spinal Cord Levels Relative to the Vertebral Bodies
SPINAL CORD LEVEL
Upper cervical
Lower cervical
Upper thoracic
Lower thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral

CORRESPONDING VERTEBRAL BODY
Same as cord level
1 level higher
2 levels higher
2–3 levels higher
T10–T12
T12–L1

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3445

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3446

sensory level is sought by asking the patient to identify a pinprick 
or cold stimulus applied to the proximal legs and lower trunk and 
successively moved up toward the neck on each side. Sensory loss 
below this level is the result of damage to the spinothalamic tract on 
the opposite side, one to two segments higher in the case of a unilat-
eral spinal cord lesion, and at the level of a bilateral lesion. The dis-
crepancy in the level of a unilateral lesion is the result of the course 
of  the  second-order  sensory  fibers,  which  originate  in  the  dorsal 
horn, and ascend for one or two levels as they cross anterior to the 
central canal to join the opposite spinothalamic tract. Lesions that 
transect the descending corticospinal and other motor tracts cause 
paraplegia  or  quadriplegia  with  heightened  deep  tendon  reflexes, 
Babinski  signs,  and  eventual  spasticity  (upper  motor  neuron  syn-
drome).  Transverse  damage  to  the  cord  also  produces  autonomic 
disturbances  consisting  of  absent  sweating  below  the  implicated 
cord level and bladder, bowel, and sexual dysfunction.

The uppermost level of a spinal cord lesion can also be localized 
by  attention  to  the  segmental  signs  corresponding  to  disturbed 
motor  or  sensory  innervation  by  an  individual  cord  segment.   
A  band  of  altered  sensation  (hyperalgesia  or  hyperpathia)  at  the 
upper  end  of  the  sensory  disturbance,  fasciculations  or  atrophy 
in  muscles  innervated  by  one  or  several  segments,  or  a  muted  or 
absent deep tendon reflex may be noted at this level. These signs 
also can occur with focal root or peripheral nerve disorders; thus, 
they are most useful when they occur together with signs of long-
tract  damage.  With  severe  and  acute  transverse  lesions,  the  limbs 
initially  may  be  flaccid  rather  than  spastic.  This  state  of  “spinal 
shock” lasts for several days, rarely for weeks, and may be mistaken 
for extensive damage to the anterior horn cells over many segments 
of the cord or for an acute polyneuropathy.

The main features of transverse damage at each level of the spinal 

cord are summarized below. 
Cervical Cord  Upper cervical cord lesions produce quadriplegia 
and weakness of the diaphragm. The uppermost level of weakness 
and reflex loss with lesions at C5–C6 is in the biceps; at C7, in finger 
and wrist extensors and triceps; and at C8, finger and wrist flexion. 
Horner’s  syndrome  (miosis,  ptosis,  and  facial  hypohidrosis)  may 
accompany a cervical cord lesion at any level. 
Thoracic Cord  Lesions here are localized by the sensory level on 
the trunk and, if present, by the site of midline back pain. Useful 
markers of the sensory level on the trunk are the nipples (T4) and 
umbilicus  (T10).  Leg  weakness  and  disturbances  of  bladder  and 
bowel  function  accompany  the  paralysis.  Lesions  at  T9–T10  par-
alyze the lower—but not the upper—abdominal muscles, resulting 
in  upward  movement  of  the  umbilicus  when  the  abdominal  wall 
contracts (Beevor’s sign). 
Lumbar  Cord  Lesions  at  the  L2–L4  spinal  cord  levels  paralyze 
flexion  and  adduction  of  the  thigh,  weaken  leg  extension  at  the 
knee, and abolish the patellar reflex. Lesions at L5–S1 paralyze only 
movements of the foot and ankle, flexion at the knee, and extension 
of the thigh, and abolish the ankle jerks (S1). 
Sacral  Cord/Conus  Medullaris  The  conus  medullaris  is  the 
tapered caudal termination of the spinal cord, comprising the sacral 
and  single  coccygeal  segments.  The  distinctive  conus  syndrome 
consists  of  bilateral  saddle  anesthesia  (S3–S5),  prominent  bladder 
and bowel dysfunction (urinary retention and incontinence with lax 
anal tone), and impotence. The bulbocavernosus (S2–S4) and anal 
(S4–S5) reflexes are absent (Chap. 422). Muscle strength is largely 
preserved. By contrast, lesions of the cauda equina, the nerve roots 
derived  from  the  lower  cord,  are  characterized  by  low  back  and 
radicular pain, asymmetric leg weakness and sensory loss, variable 
areflexia in the lower extremities, and relative sparing of bowel and 
bladder function. Mass lesions in the lower spinal canal often pro-
duce  a  mixed  clinical  picture  with  elements  of  both  cauda  equina 
and  conus  medullaris  syndromes.  Cauda  equina  syndromes  are 
also discussed in Chap. 17. 

Special  Patterns  of  Spinal  Cord  Disease  The  location  of  the 
major  ascending  and  descending  pathways  of  the  spinal  cord  are 
shown in Fig. 442-1. Most fiber tracts—including the posterior col-
umns and the spinocerebellar and pyramidal tracts—are situated on 
the side of the body they innervate. However, afferent fibers medi-
ating pain and temperature sensation ascend in the spinothalamic 
tract contralateral to the side they supply. The anatomic configura-
tions of these tracts produce characteristic syndromes that provide 
clues to the underlying disease process.
Brown-Sequard  Hemicord  Syndrome  This  consists  of  ipsi-
lateral  weakness  (corticospinal  tract)  and  loss  of  joint  position 
and  vibratory  sense  (posterior  column),  with  contralateral  loss  of 
pain and temperature sense (spinothalamic tract) one or two levels 
below  the  lesion.  Segmental  signs,  such  as  radicular  pain,  muscle 
atrophy, or loss of a deep tendon reflex, are unilateral. Partial forms 
are more common than the fully developed syndrome. 
Central  Cord  Syndrome  This  syndrome  results  from  selective 
damage to the gray matter nerve cells and crossing spinothalamic 
tracts surrounding the central canal. In the cervical cord, the central 
cord  syndrome  produces  arm  weakness  out  of  proportion  to  leg 
weakness and a “dissociated” sensory loss, meaning loss of pain and 
temperature sensations over the shoulders, lower neck, and upper 
trunk (cape distribution), in contrast to preservation of light touch, 
joint position, and vibration sense in these regions. Spinal trauma, 
syringomyelia, and intrinsic cord tumors are the main causes. 
Anterior  Spinal  Artery  Syndrome 
Infarction  of  the  cord  is 
generally the result of occlusion or diminished flow in this artery. 
The result is bilateral tissue destruction at several contiguous levels 
that spares the posterior columns. All spinal cord functions—motor, 
sensory, and autonomic—are lost below the level of the lesion, with 
the striking exception of retained vibration and position sensation. 
Foramen  Magnum  Syndrome  Lesions  in  this  area  interrupt 
decussating pyramidal tract fibers destined for the legs, which cross 
caudal to those of the arms, resulting in weakness of the legs (crural 
paresis).  Compressive  lesions  near  the  foramen  magnum  may 
produce weakness of the ipsilateral shoulder and arm followed by 
weakness of the ipsilateral leg, then the contralateral leg, and finally 
the contralateral arm, an “around-the-clock” pattern that may begin 
in any of the four limbs. There is typically suboccipital pain spread-
ing to the neck and shoulders. 
Intramedullary  and  Extramedullary  Syndromes 
It  is  useful 
to  differentiate  intramedullary  processes,  arising  within  the  sub-
stance  of  the  cord,  from  extramedullary  ones  that  lie  outside  the 
cord and compress the spinal cord or its vascular supply. The differ-
entiating features are only relative and serve as clinical guides. With 
extramedullary lesions, radicular pain is often prominent, and there 
is  early  sacral  sensory  loss  and  spastic  weakness  in  the  legs  with 
incontinence  due  to  the  superficial  location  of  the  corresponding 
sensory  and  motor  fibers  in  the  spinothalamic  and  corticospinal 
tracts (Fig. 442-1). Intramedullary lesions tend to produce poorly 
localized burning pain rather than radicular pain and to spare sen-
sation in the perineal and sacral areas (“sacral sparing”), reflecting 
the laminated configuration of the spinothalamic tract with sacral 
fibers  outermost;  corticospinal  tract  signs  appear  later.  Regarding 
extramedullary lesions, a further distinction is made between extra-
dural and intradural masses, as the former are generally malignant 
and the latter benign (neurofibroma being a common cause). Con-
sequently, a long duration of symptoms favors an intradural origin.

ACUTE AND SUBACUTE  
SPINAL CORD DISEASES
Symptoms of the cord diseases that evolve over days or weeks are focal 
neck or back pain, followed by various combinations of paresthesias, 
sensory loss, motor weakness, and sphincter disturbance. There may 
be mild sensory symptoms only or a devastating functional transection 
of  the  cord.  When  paresthesias  begin  in  the  feet  and  then  ascend  a 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3446

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Posterior Columns
(Joint Position, Vibration, Pressure)

Fasciculus
cuneatus

Fasciculus
gracilis

L S

T

C

Anterior horn
(motor neurons)

Dorsal root

Dorsal 
spinocerebellar
tract

Ventral
spinocerebellar
tract

L/
S

Lateral
spinothalamic
tract

Pain, 
temperature

Ventral 
root

L/
S

T C

L

S

S L T C

Ventral
spinothalamic
tract

Pressure, touch
(minor role)

F

P

E

D

Ventral
(uncrossed)
corticospinal
tract

Distal limb
movements
(minor role)

Lateral
corticospinal
(pyramidal) tract

Rubrospinal
tract

Lateral
reticulospinal
tract

Vestibulospinal
tract

Ventral
reticulospinal
tract

Tectospinal
tract

Distal limb
movements

Axial and 
proximal
limb 
movements

3447

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

FIGURE 442-1  Transverse section through the spinal cord, composite representation, illustrating the principal ascending (left) and descending (right) pathways. The lateral 
and ventral spinothalamic tracts ascend contralateral to the side of the body that is innervated. In humans, the lateral corticospinal (pyramidal) tract is thought to lack strict 
somatotopic organization in the spinal cord. C, cervical; D, distal; E, extensors; F, flexors; L, lumbar; P, proximal; S, sacral; T, thoracic.

polyneuropathy is often considered, and in such cases the presence of 
bladder disturbances and a sharply demarcated spinal cord level pro-
vide important clues to the spinal cord origin of the disease.

In severe and abrupt cases, areflexia reflecting spinal shock may be 
present,  but  hyperreflexia  supervenes  over  days  or  weeks;  persistent 
areflexic paralysis with a sensory level usually indicates necrosis over 
multiple segments of the spinal cord.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
Compressive and Noncompressive Myelopathy

DISTINGUISHING COMPRESSIVE FROM  
NONCOMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHY
The  first  priority  is  to  exclude  treatable  compression  of  the  cord 
by a mass lesion. The common causes are tumor, epidural abscess 
or hematoma, herniated disk, and spondylitic vertebral pathology. 
Epidural  compression  due  to  malignancy  or  abscess  often  causes 
warning signs of neck or back pain, bladder disturbances, and sen-
sory  symptoms  that  precede  the  development  of  paralysis.  Spinal 
subluxation,  hemorrhage,  and  noncompressive  etiologies  such  as 
infarction are more likely to produce myelopathy without anteced-
ent  symptoms.  MRI  with  gadolinium,  centered  on  the  clinically 
suspected level, is the initial diagnostic procedure if it is available; 
it is often appropriate to image the entire spine (cervical through 
sacral regions) to search for additional clinically silent lesions. Once 
compressive lesions have been excluded, noncompressive causes of 
acute myelopathy that are intrinsic to the cord are considered, pri-
marily vascular, inflammatory, and infectious etiologies.

 ■ COMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
Neoplastic  Spinal  Cord  Compression 
In  adults,  most  neo-
plasms are epidural in origin, resulting from metastases to the adjacent 

vertebral  column.  The  propensity  of  solid  tumors  to  metastasize  to 
the  vertebral  column  probably  reflects  the  high  proportion  of  bone 
marrow located in the axial skeleton. Almost any malignant tumor can 
metastasize  to  the  spinal  column,  with  breast,  lung,  prostate,  kidney, 
lymphoma,  and  myeloma  being  particularly  frequent.  The  thoracic 
spinal column is most commonly involved; exceptions are metastases 
from  prostate  and  ovarian  cancer,  which  occur  disproportionately 
in  the  sacral  and  lumbar  vertebrae,  probably  from  spread  through 
Batson’s plexus, a network of veins along the anterior epidural space. 
Retroperitoneal neoplasms (especially lymphomas or sarcomas) enter 
the spinal canal laterally through the intervertebral foramina and pro-
duce radicular pain with signs of weakness that corresponds to the level 
of involved nerve roots.

Pain  is  usually  the  initial  symptom  of  spinal  metastasis;  it  may  be 
aching  and  localized  or  sharp  and  radiating  in  quality  and  typically 
worsens with movement, coughing, or sneezing and characteristically 
awakens  patients  at  night.  A  recent  onset  of  persistent  back  pain, 
particularly  if  in  the  thoracic  spine  (which  is  uncommonly  involved 
by spondylosis), should prompt consideration of vertebral metastasis. 
Rarely, pain is mild or absent. Plain radiographs of the spine and radi-
onuclide bone scans have a limited role in diagnosis because they do 
not  identify  15–20%  of  metastatic  vertebral  lesions  and  fail  to  detect 
paravertebral masses that reach the epidural space through the inter-
vertebral foramina. MRI provides excellent anatomic resolution of the 
extent of spinal tumors (Fig. 442-2) and is able to distinguish between 
malignant  lesions  and  other  masses—epidural  abscess,  tuberculoma, 
lipoma, or epidural hemorrhage, among others—that present in a sim-
ilar fashion. Vertebral metastases are usually hypointense relative to a 
normal bone marrow signal on T1-weighted MRI; after the administra-
tion of gadolinium, contrast enhancement may deceptively “normalize” 
the appearance of the tumor by increasing its intensity to that of nor-
mal bone marrow. Infections of the spinal column (osteomyelitis and 
related disorders) are distinctive in that, unlike tumor, they often cross 
the disk space to involve the adjacent vertebral body.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3447

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3448

A

B

FIGURE 442-2  Epidural spinal cord compression due to breast carcinoma. Sagittal 
T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) magnetic resonance imaging scans through 
the  cervicothoracic  junction  reveal  an  infiltrated  and  collapsed  second  thoracic 
vertebral body with posterior displacement and compression of the upper thoracic 
spinal  cord.  The  low-intensity  bone  marrow  signal  in  A  signifies  replacement  by 
tumor.

If spinal cord compression is suspected, imaging should be obtained 
promptly.  If  there  are  radicular  symptoms  but  no  evidence  of  mye-
lopathy,  it  may  be  safe  to  defer  imaging  for  24–48  h.  Up  to  40%  of 
patients who present with cord compression at one level are found to 
have asymptomatic epidural metastases elsewhere; thus, imaging of the 
entire length of the spine is important to define the extent of disease.

TREATMENT
Neoplastic Spinal Cord Compression

Proper  management  of  cord  compression  is  based  on  multiple 
considerations,  including  radiosensitivity  of  the  primary  tumor, 
extent of compression, prior therapy to the site, and stability of the 
spine.  Treatment  includes  glucocorticoids  to  reduce  cord  edema, 
surgery  and/or  local  radiotherapy  (initiated  as  early  as  possible) 
to  the  symptomatic  lesion,  and  specific  therapy  for  the  underly-
ing tumor type. Glucocorticoids (typically dexamethasone, 10 mg 
intravenously)  can  be  administered  before  an  imaging  study  if 
there is clinical suspicion of cord compression and continued at a 
lower dose (4 mg every 6 h orally) until definitive treatment with 
radiotherapy  and/or  surgical  decompression  is  completed.  In  one 
trial,  initial  management  with  surgery  followed  by  radiotherapy 
was more effective than radiotherapy alone for patients with a sin-
gle area of spinal cord compression by extradural tumor; however, 
patients with recurrent cord compression, brain metastases, radio-
sensitive tumors, or severe motor symptoms of >48 h in duration 
were  excluded  from  this  study.  Stereotactic  body  radiotherapy, 
which  delivers  high  doses  of  focused  radiation,  is  preferred  for 
radioresistant tumor types and for patients requiring re-irradiation.
Biopsy  of  the  epidural  mass  is  unnecessary  in  patients  with 
known primary  cancer, but it is indicated if a history of underly-
ing cancer is lacking. Surgical treatment, either decompression by 
laminectomy or a spinal fixation procedure, is also indicated when 
signs of cord compression worsen despite radiotherapy; the maxi-
mum-tolerated dose of radiotherapy has been delivered previously 
to  the  site;  a  vertebral  compression  fracture  or  spinal  instability 
contributes  to  cord  compression;  or  in  cases  of  high-grade  spinal 
cord compression from a radioresistant tumor.

A good response to therapy can be expected in individuals who 
are  ambulatory  at  presentation.  Treatment  usually  prevents  new 
weakness,  and  some  recovery  of  motor  function  occurs  in  up  to 
one-third  of  patients.  Motor  deficits  (paraplegia  or  quadriplegia), 

once  established  for  >12  h,  do  not  usually  improve,  and  beyond   
48 h the prognosis for substantial motor recovery is poor. Although 
most  patients  do  not  experience  recurrences  in  the  months  fol-
lowing  radiotherapy,  with  survival  beyond  2  years  recurrence 
becomes  increasingly  likely  and  can  be  managed  with  additional 
radiotherapy.

In  contrast  to  tumors  of  the  epidural  space,  most  intradural  mass 
lesions are slow-growing and benign. Meningiomas and neurofibromas 
account for most of these, with occasional cases caused by chordoma, 
lipoma,  dermoid,  or  sarcoma.  Meningiomas  (Fig.  442-3)  are  often 
located  posterior  to  the  thoracic  cord  or  near  the  foramen  magnum, 
although they can arise from the meninges anywhere along the spinal 
canal. Neurofibromas are benign tumors of the nerve sheath that typ-
ically arise from the posterior root; when multiple, neurofibromatosis 
is the likely etiology. Symptoms usually begin with radicular sensory 
symptoms  followed  by  an  asymmetric,  progressive  spinal  cord  syn-
drome. Therapy is surgical resection.

Primary intramedullary tumors of the spinal cord are uncommon. 
They  present  as  central  cord  or  hemicord  syndromes,  often  in  the 
cervical  region.  There  may  be  poorly  localized  burning  pain  in  the 
extremities  and  sparing  of  sacral  sensation.  In  adults,  these  lesions 
are  ependymomas,  hemangioblastomas,  or  low-grade  astrocytomas 
(Fig. 442-4). Complete resection of an intramedullary ependymoma 
is  often  possible  with  microsurgical  techniques.  Debulking  of  an 
intramedullary  astrocytoma  can  also  be  helpful,  as  these  are  often 
slowly  growing  lesions;  the  value  of  adjunctive  radiotherapy  and 
chemotherapy  is  uncertain.  Secondary  (metastatic)  intramedullary 
tumors  also  occur,  especially  in  patients  with  advanced  metastatic 
disease (Chap. 90), although these are not nearly as frequent as brain 
metastases.

Spinal  Epidural  Abscess  Spinal  epidural  abscess  presents  with 
midline  back  or  neck  pain,  fever,  and  progressive  limb  weakness. 
Prompt recognition of this distinctive process may prevent permanent 
sequelae. Aching pain is almost always present, either over the spine 
or in a radicular pattern. The duration of pain prior to presentation is 
generally ≤2 weeks but may on occasion be several months or longer. 

FIGURE  442-3  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  of  a  thoracic  meningioma.  Coronal 
T1-weighted  postcontrast  image  through  the  thoracic  spinal  cord  demonstrates 
intense  and  uniform  enhancement  of  a  well-circumscribed  extramedullary  mass 
(arrows) that displaces the spinal cord to the left.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3448

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3449

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

FIGURE  442-4  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  of  an  intramedullary  astrocytoma. 
Sagittal T1-weighted postcontrast image through the cervical spine demonstrates 
expansion of the upper cervical spine by a mass lesion emanating from within the 
spinal  cord  at  the  cervicomedullary  junction.  Irregular  peripheral  enhancement 
occurs within the mass (arrows).

Fever is typically but not invariably present, accompanied by elevated 
white blood cell count, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein. As 
the abscess expands, further spinal cord damage results from venous 
congestion  and  thrombosis.  Once  weakness  and  other  signs  of  mye-
lopathy  appear,  progression  may  be  rapid  and  irreversible.  A  more 
chronic sterile granulomatous form of abscess is also known, usually 
after treatment of an acute epidural infection.

Risk factors include an impaired immune status (HIV, diabetes mel-
litus,  renal  failure,  alcoholism,  malignancy),  intravenous  drug  abuse, 
and  infections  of  the  skin  or  other  tissues.  Two-thirds  of  epidural 
infections result from hematogenous spread of bacteria from the skin 
(furunculosis), soft tissue (pharyngeal or dental abscesses; sinusitis), or 
deep viscera (bacterial endocarditis). The remainder arises from direct 
extension of a local infection to the subdural space; examples of local 
predisposing  conditions  are  vertebral  osteomyelitis,  decubitus  ulcers, 
lumbar  puncture,  epidural  anesthesia,  or  spinal  surgery.  Most  cases 
are due to Staphylococcus aureus; gram-negative bacilli, Streptococcus, 
anaerobes,  and  fungi  can  also  cause  epidural  abscesses.  Methicillin- 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an important consideration, 
and therapy should be tailored to this possibility. Tuberculosis from an 
adjacent vertebral source (Pott’s disease) remains an important cause 
in the developing world.

MRI (Fig. 442-5) localizes the abscess and excludes other causes of 
myelopathy. Blood cultures are positive in more than half of cases, but 
direct aspiration of the abscess at surgery is often required for a micro-
biologic diagnosis. Lumbar puncture is only required if encephalopathy 
or  other  clinical  signs  raise  the  question  of  associated  meningitis,  a 
feature that is found in <25% of cases. The level of the puncture should 
be  planned  to  minimize  the  risk  of  meningitis  due  to  passage  of  the 
needle  through  infected  tissue.  A  high  cervical  tap  is  sometimes  the 
safest  approach.  Cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)  abnormalities  in  epidural 
and  subdural  abscesses  consist  of  pleocytosis  with  a  preponderance 
of  polymorphonuclear  cells,  an  elevated  protein  level,  and  a  reduced 
glucose level, but the responsible organism is not cultured unless there 
is associated meningitis.

TREATMENT
Spinal Epidural Abscess

Treatment  is  by  decompressive  laminectomy  with  debridement 
combined with long-term antibiotic treatment. Surgical evacuation 
prevents  development  of  paralysis  and  may  improve  or  reverse 

A

B

FIGURE  442-5  Magnetic  resonance  (MR)  imaging  of  a  spinal  epidural  abscess 
due  to  tuberculosis.  A.  Sagittal  T2-weighted  free  spin-echo  MR  sequence.  A 
hypointense mass replaces the posterior elements of C3 and extends epidurally to 
compress  the  spinal  cord  (arrows).  B.  Sagittal  T1-weighted  image  after  contrast 
administration reveals a diffuse enhancement of the epidural process (arrows) with 
extension into the epidural space.

paralysis in evolution, but it is unlikely to improve deficits of more 
than several days in duration. Broad-spectrum antibiotics typically 
vancomycin 15–20 mg/kg q12h (staphylococcus including MRSA, 
streptococcus), ceftriaxone 2 gm q24h (gram-negative bacilli), and 
when indicated metronidazole 30 mg/kg per day divided into q6h 
intervals (anaerobes) should be started empirically before surgery 
and  then  modified  on  the  basis  of  culture  results;  medication  is 
generally continued for 6–8 weeks. If surgery is contraindicated or if 
there is a fixed paraplegia or quadriplegia that is unlikely to improve 
following  surgery,  long-term  administration  of  systemic  and  oral 
antibiotics  can  be  used;  in  such  cases,  the  choice  of  antibiotics 
may be guided by results of blood cultures. Surgical management 
remains the treatment of choice unless the abscess is limited in size 
and causes few or no neurologic signs.

With prompt diagnosis and treatment of spinal epidural abscess, 

up to two-thirds of patients experience significant recovery.

Spinal  Epidural  Hematoma  Hemorrhage  into  the  epidural  (or 
subdural) space causes acute focal or radicular pain followed by vari-
able signs of a spinal cord or conus medullaris disorder. Therapeutic 
anticoagulation,  trauma,  tumor, or  blood  dyscrasias  are  predisposing 
conditions. Rare cases complicate lumbar puncture or epidural anes-
thesia. MRI and CT confirm the clinical suspicion and can delineate 
the extent of the bleeding. Treatment consists of prompt reversal of any 
underlying clotting disorder and surgical decompression. Surgery may 
be  followed  by  substantial  recovery,  especially  in  patients  with  some 
preservation of motor function preoperatively. Because of the risk of 
hemorrhage, lumbar puncture should be avoided whenever possible in 
patients with severe thrombocytopenia or other coagulopathies.

Hematomyelia  Hemorrhage into the substance of the spinal cord 
is  a  rare  result  of  trauma,  intraparenchymal  vascular  malformation 
(see  below),  vasculitis  due  to  polyarteritis  nodosa  or  systemic  lupus 
erythematosus  (SLE),  bleeding  disorders,  or  a  spinal  cord  neoplasm. 
Hematomyelia  presents  as  an  acute  painful  transverse  myelopathy. 
With  large  lesions,  extension  into  the  subarachnoid  space  results  in 
subarachnoid  hemorrhage  (Chap.  302).  Diagnosis  is  by  MRI  or  CT. 
Therapy is supportive, and surgical intervention is generally not useful. 
An exception is hematomyelia due to an underlying vascular malfor-
mation, for which spinal angiography and endovascular occlusion may 
be indicated, or surgery to evacuate the clot and remove the underlying 
vascular lesion.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3449

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3450 Acute  Spondylytic  Myelopathy  Of  particular  concern  are 
hyperextension injuries in patients with underlying degenerative cervi-
cal spine disease (Chap. 17). The provoking stimulus may be obvious 
such as a forward fall, or occur after seemingly innocuous low-impact 
movements  of  the  neck.  A  preexisting  stenotic  spinal  canal  is  often 
present and “buckling” of the posterior ligamentum flavum (less com-
monly acute disc herniation or subluxation) is believed to produce the 
cord compression, sometimes with a central cord syndrome (see above) 
and involvement of the upper, more than lower, limbs. Deficits can be 
transient, resulting in a “concussion” of the spinal cord, or permanent. 
The  more  common  syndrome  of  chronic  spondylitic  myelopathy  is  dis-
cussed below.
 ■ NONCOMPRESSIVE MYELOPATHIES
Once a compressive etiology has been excluded as the cause of an acute 
myelopathy, the principal challenge is to distinguish vascular/ischemic 
from inflammatory/infectious causes. This is often not straightforward, 
because  clinical  presentations  can  overlap.  Moreover,  findings  that 
usually point to an inflammatory etiology—such as focal gadolinium 
enhancement on MRI scans or pleocytosis in the CSF—can also occur 
with  spinal  cord  ischemia.  Ischemia  is  likely  in  hyperacute  presenta-
tions with back or neck pain, and when an anterior pattern of spinal 
cord injury is identified on clinical examination or by MRI. By contrast, 
inflammation is more likely in cases that develop subacutely, or when 
systemic symptoms, CSF oligoclonal bands, or multiple discrete spinal 
cord MRI lesions are present. The most frequent inflammatory causes 
of acute myelopathy are multiple sclerosis (MS); neuromyelitis optica 
(NMO); sarcoidosis; systemic inflammatory diseases such as SLE and 
Behcet’s disease; postinfectious or idiopathic transverse myelitis, which 
is presumed to be an immune condition related to acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (Chap. 441); and infectious (primarily viral) causes.
The evaluation generally requires a lumbar puncture and a search 

for underlying systemic disease (Table 442-3).

Spinal Cord Infarction  The cord is supplied by three arteries that 
course  vertically  over  its  surface:  a  single  anterior  spinal  artery  and 

TABLE 442-3  Evaluation of Myelopathy
1.  MRI of spinal cord with and without contrast (exclude compressive causes).
2.  CSF studies: Cell count, protein, glucose, IgG index/synthesis rate, 

oligoclonal bands, VDRL; Gram’s stain, acid-fast bacilli, and India ink stains; 
PCR for VZV, HSV-2, HSV-1, EBV, CMV, HHV-6, enteroviruses, HIV; antibody 
for HTLV-1, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Chlamydia 
pneumoniae; viral, bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal cultures.

3.  Blood studies for infection: HIV; RPR; IgG and IgM enterovirus antibody; IgM 
mumps, measles, rubella, group B arbovirus, Brucella melitensis, Chlamydia 
psittaci, Bartonella henselae, schistosomal antibody; cultures for B. 
melitensis. Also consider nasal/pharyngeal/anal cultures for enteroviruses; 
stool O&P for Schistosoma ova.

4.  Vascular causes: MRI, CT myelogram; spinal angiogram.
5.  Multiple sclerosis: Brain MRI scan; evoked potentials.
6.  Neuromyelitis optica and related disorders: Serum anti-aquaporin-4 

antibody, anti-MOG antibody, anti-GFAP antibody.

7.  Sarcoidosis: Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme; serum Ca; 24-h urine 

Ca; chest x-ray; chest CT; slit-lamp eye examination; total-body gallium scan; 
lymph node biopsy.

8.  Systemic immune-mediated disorders: ESR; ANA; ENA; dsDNA; rheumatoid 

factor; anti-SSA; anti-SSB, complement levels; antiphospholipid and 
anticardiolipin antibodies; p-ANCA; antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin 
antibodies; if Sjögren’s syndrome suspected, Schirmer test, salivary gland 
scintigraphy, and salivary/lacrimal gland biopsy.

9.  Paraneoplastic disorders: Antibody for amphiphysin, CRMP5, Hu, others.
10.  Other: vitamin B12, copper, zinc.
Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CRMP5, 
collapsin response mediator 5-IgG; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed 
tomography; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ENA, epithelial neutrophil-activating peptide; 
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; HHV, human 
herpes virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 
virus; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; MRI, magnetic resonance 
imaging; O&P, ova and parasites; p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic 
antibodies; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin (test); VDRL, 
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.

paired posterior spinal arteries. The anterior spinal artery originates in 
paired branches of the vertebral arteries at the craniocervical junction 
and is fed by additional radicular vessels that arise at C6, at an upper 
thoracic level, and, most consistently, at T11–L2 (artery of Adamkie-
wicz). At each spinal cord segment, paired penetrating vessels branch 
from the anterior spinal artery to supply the anterior two-thirds of the 
cord;  the  posterior  spinal  arteries,  which  often  become  less  distinct 
below the midthoracic level, supply the posterior columns.

Spinal cord ischemia can occur at any level; however, the presence of 
the artery of Adamkiewicz below, and the anterior spinal artery circu-
lation above, creates a region of marginal blood flow in the upper tho-
racic segments. With hypotension or cross-clamping of the aorta, cord 
infarction typically occurs at the level of T3–T4, and also at boundary 
zones between the anterior and posterior spinal artery territories. The 
latter may result in a rapidly progressive syndrome over hours of weak-
ness and spasticity with little sensory change.

Acute  infarction  in  the  territory  of  the  anterior  spinal  artery  pro-
duces  paraplegia  or  quadriplegia,  dissociated  sensory  loss  affecting 
pain and temperature sense but sparing vibration and position sense, 
and loss of sphincter control (“anterior cord syndrome”). Onset may be 
sudden but more typically is progressive over minutes or a few hours, 
unlike stroke in the cerebral hemispheres. Sharp midline or radiating 
back pain localized to the area of ischemia is frequent. Areflexia due 
to spinal shock is often present initially; with time, hyperreflexia and 
spasticity  appear.  Less  common  is  infarction  in  the  territory  of  the 
posterior spinal arteries, resulting in loss of posterior column function 
either on one side or bilaterally.

Causes of spinal cord infarction include aortic atherosclerosis, dis-
secting aortic aneurysm, vertebral artery occlusion or dissection in the 
neck, aortic surgery, or profound hypotension from any cause. A surf-
er’s myelopathy usually in the thoracic region, has been associated with 
prolonged back extension due to lifting the upper body off the board 
while  waiting  for  waves;  it  typically  manifests  as  back  pain  followed 
by  an  anterior  cord  syndrome  with  progressive  paralysis  and  loss  of 
sphincter control, and is likely vascular in origin. Cardiogenic emboli, 
vasculitis (Chap. 363), and collagen vascular disease (particularly SLE 
[Chap.  356],  Sjögren’s  syndrome  [Chap.  361],  and  the  antiphospho-
lipid antibody syndrome [Chap. 357]) are other etiologies. Occasional 
cases develop from embolism of nucleus pulposus material into spinal 
vessels,  usually  from  local  spine  trauma.  In  a  substantial  number  of 
cases, no cause can be found, and thromboembolism in arterial feeders 
is suspected. MRI may fail to demonstrate infarctions of the cord, espe-
cially in the first day, but often the imaging becomes abnormal at the 
affected level. MRI features suggestive of cord infarction include diffu-
sion  weighted  restriction;  longitudinally  extensive  anterior  T2  signal 
brightness  on  sagittal  images  (“pencil-like  sign”);  focal  enhancement 
in  the  anterior  horns;  and  paired  areas  of  focal  T2  hyperintensity  in 
the anterior medial cord on axial images (“owl’s eyes”). When present, 
infarction of a vertebral body adjacent to the area of cord involvement 
is diagnostically helpful.

With  cord  infarction  due  to  presumed  thromboembolism,  acute 
anticoagulation  is  not  indicated,  with  the  possible  exception  of  the 
unusual transient ischemic attack or incomplete infarction with a stut-
tering or progressive course. The antiphospholipid antibody syndrome 
is treated with anticoagulation (Chap. 357). Increasing systemic blood 
pressure to a mean arterial pressure of >90 mmHg, or lumbar drainage 
of spinal fluid, was reportedly helpful in a few published cases of cord 
infarction,  but  neither  of  these  approaches  has  been  studied  system-
atically.  Prognosis  following  spinal  cord  infarction  is  influenced  by 
the severity of the deficits at presentation; patients with severe motor 
weakness and those with persistent areflexia usually do poorly, but in 
one recent large series some improvement over time occurred in many 
patients, with more than half ultimately regaining some ambulation.

Inflammatory  and  Immune  Myelopathies  (Myelitis)  This 
broad category includes the demyelinating conditions MS, NMO, and 
postinfectious  myelitis,  as  well  as  sarcoidosis,  systemic  autoimmune 
disease, and infections. In approximately one-quarter of cases of myeli-
tis,  no  underlying  cause  can  be  identified.  Some  will  later  manifest 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3450

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders additional  symptoms  of  an  immune-mediated  disease.  Transverse 
myelitis  refers  to  a  pattern  of  extensive  spinal  cord  injury,  clinically 
manifest  as  bilateral  sensory  symptoms,  unilateral  or  bilateral  weak-
ness, and bladder and/or bowel disturbance. In most of the developed 
world MS is the most common inflammatory cause of an acute myelitis 
but  involvement  is  usually  partial  and  not  transverse.  Recurrent  epi-
sodes of myelitis are usually due to one of the immune-mediated dis-
eases or to infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2 (below).

and values are elevated in only a minority of cases), serum calcium, and 
a gallium scan may assist in the diagnosis. Initial treatment is with high 
doses of glucocorticoids, which need to be administered long term and 
tapered slowly while monitoring resolution of clinical and MRI signs 
of active disease; relapses are managed with high-dose glucocorticoids 
plus a steroid-sparing immunosuppressant drug (typically mycopheno-
late mofetil, azathioprine, or methotrexate), or with the tumor necrosis 
factor α-inhibitor infliximab. Sarcoidosis is discussed in Chap. 367.

3451

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

MULTIPLE  SCLEROSIS  MS  may  present  with  acute  myelitis,  particu-
larly in individuals of Asian or African ancestry. In whites, MS attacks 
rarely cause a transverse myelopathy (i.e., attacks of bilateral sensory 
disturbances,  unilateral  or  bilateral  weakness,  and  bladder  or  bowel 
symptoms), but MS is among the most common causes of a partial cord 
syndrome.  MRI  findings  in  MS-associated  myelitis  typically  consist 
of mild swelling of the cord and diffuse or multifocal “shoddy” areas 
of  abnormal  signal  on  T2-weighted  sequences.  Contrast  enhance-
ment, indicating disruption in the blood-brain barrier associated with 
inflammation,  is  present  in  many  acute  cases.  In  one  study  68%  of 
patients  presenting  with  partial  myelitis  developed  MS  after  a  mean 
follow-up of 4 years; risk factors for conversion to MS included age <40 
years; inflammatory CSF, and >3 periventricular lesions on brain MRI.
Treatment  of  acute  episodes  of  MS-associated  myelitis  consists 
of  intravenous  methylprednisolone  (500  mg  qd  for  3  days)  followed 
by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg per day for several weeks, then gradual 
taper). A course of plasma exchange may be indicated for severe cases 
if glucocorticoids are ineffective. MS is discussed in Chap. 444.

NEUROMYELITIS  OPTICA  NMO  is  an  immune-mediated  demyeli-
nating  disorder  consisting  of  a  severe  myelopathy  that  is  typically 
longitudinally extensive, meaning that the lesion spans three or more 
vertebral segments. NMO is associated with optic neuritis that is often 
bilateral and may precede or follow myelitis by weeks or months, and 
also by brainstem and, in some cases, hypothalamic or focal cerebral 
white  matter  involvement.  Recurrent  myelitis  without  optic  nerve 
or  other  involvement  can  also  occur  in  NMO.  CSF  studies  reveal  a 
variable  mononuclear  pleocytosis  of  up  to  several  hundred  cells  per 
microliter (higher than in typical MS) with occasional cases showing 
polymorphonuclear predominant pattern; oligoclonal bands are pres-
ent in <20% of NMO cases. Diagnostic serum autoantibodies against 
the  water  channel  protein  aquaporin-4  (AQP-4)  are  present  in  90% 
of patients with NMO; in some AQP-4 negative cases autoantibodies 
against the CNS myelin protein myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG) are found. NMO has also been associated with SLE (see below) 
as  well  as  with  other  systemic  autoimmune  diseases;  rare  cases  are 
paraneoplastic. Acute relapses of NMO are treated with glucocorticoids 
and, for severe or refractory cases, plasma exchange. Three monoclonal 
antibodies are now available for prophylactic treatment: eculizumab, a 
terminal  complement  inhibitor;  inebilizumab,  a  B-cell  depleter;  and 
satralizumab,  an  IL-6  receptor  blocker.  Off-label  use  of  azathioprine, 
mycophenolate, or rituximab are other options. Treatment for 5 years 
or longer is generally recommended. NMO is discussed in Chap. 445.

SARCOIDOSIS  Sarcoid myelopathy may present as a slowly progressive 
or  relapsing  disorder.  Clinically,  sensory  involvement  often  predom-
inates.  MRI  reveals  edematous  swelling  of  the  spinal  cord  that  may 
mimic  tumor  and  subpial  gadolinium  enhancement  of  active  lesions 
typically  along  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  cord.  In  some  cases  nodular 
enhancing lesions can be seen; lesions may be single or multiple, and 
on  axial  images  enhancement  of  the  central  cord  is  often  present. 
The  typical  CSF  profile  consists  of  a  mild  lymphocyte-predominant 
pleocytosis and elevated protein level; in a minority of cases, reduced 
glucose and oligoclonal bands are found. The diagnosis is particularly 
difficult when systemic manifestations of sarcoid are minor or absent 
(nearly 50% of cases) or when other typical neurologic manifestations 
of the disease, such as cranial neuropathy, hypothalamic involvement, 
or meningeal enhancement visualized by MRI, are lacking. A slit-lamp 
examination  of  the  eye  to  search  for  uveitis,  chest  x-ray  and  CT  to 
assess  pulmonary  involvement  and  mediastinal  lymphadenopathy, 
serum or CSF angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE; lacks specificity 

SYSTEMIC IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISORDERS  Myelitis occurs in a small 
number of patients with SLE, many cases of which are associated with 
antibodies to AQP-4 and satisfy diagnostic criteria for NMO (discussed 
above). These patients are at high risk of developing future episodes of 
myelitis and/or optic neuritis. In others the etiology of SLE-associated 
myelitis is uncertain; antiphospholipid antibodies have been suggested 
to play a role; however, the presence of these antibodies appears to be 
no more frequent in SLE patients with and without myelitis. The CSF 
in  NMO-associated  myelitis  typically  shows  a  pleocytosis  often  with 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and no oligoclonal bands; in cases not 
due to NMO a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and oligoclonal bands are 
variable findings. Although there are no systematic trials of therapy for 
SLE myelitis, based on limited data high-dose glucocorticoids followed 
by  cyclophosphamide  have  been  recommended.  Severe  episodes  that 
do  not  initially  respond  to  glucocorticoids  are  often  treated  with  a 
course of plasma exchange. Sjögren’s syndrome (Chap. 361) can also be 
associated with NMO and also with cases of chronic progressive mye-
lopathy.  Other  immune-mediated  myelitides  include  Behçet’s  disease 
(Chap. 364), antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (Chap. 357), mixed 
connective tissue disease (Chap. 360), and vasculitis related to polyar-
teritis  nodosa,  perinuclear  antineutrophilic  cytoplasmic  (p-ANCA) 
antibodies, or primary central nervous system vasculitis (Chap. 363). 
Occasional  cases  of  myelitis,  often  accompanied  by  other  manifesta-
tions that can include encephalitis or optic neuritis, have been recently 
associated  with  autoantibodies  against  glial  fibrillary  acidic  protein 
(GFAP)  (Chap.  444).  Other  rare  etiologies  are  chronic  lymphocytic 
inflammation  with  pontine  perivascular  enhancement  responsive  to 
steroids (CLIPPERS), and Erdheim-Chester disease producing inflam-
matory masslike lesions that can be intramedullary or extraaxial and 
compressive.

POSTINFECTIOUS  MYELITIS  Many  cases  of  myelitis,  termed  postin-
fectious or postvaccinal, follow an infection or vaccination. Numerous 
organisms have been implicated, including Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 
cytomegalovirus  (CMV),  mycoplasma,  influenza,  measles,  varicella, 
mumps, and yellow fever. As in the related disorder acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (Chap. 444), postinfectious myelitis often begins as 
the  patient  appears  to  be  recovering  from  an  acute  febrile  infection, 
or in the subsequent days or weeks, but an infectious agent cannot be 
isolated from the nervous system or CSF. Serum anti-MOG antibodies 
are present acutely in about half of cases. The presumption is that the 
myelitis represents an autoimmune disorder triggered by infection and 
is not due to direct infection of the spinal cord. No randomized con-
trolled trials of therapy exist; treatment is usually with glucocorticoids 
or, in fulminant cases, plasma exchange.

ACUTE  INFECTIOUS  MYELITIS  Many  viruses  have  been  associated 
with an acute myelitis that is infectious in nature rather than postinfec-
tious. Nonetheless, the two processes are often difficult to distinguish. 
Herpes zoster is the best characterized viral myelitis, but HSV types 1 
and 2, EBV, CMV, and rabies virus are other well-described causes and 
Zika virus has also been recognized as a cause of infectious myelitis. 
HSV-2 (and less commonly HSV-1) produces a distinctive syndrome 
of recurrent sacral cauda equina neuritis in association with outbreaks 
of genital herpes (Elsberg’s syndrome). Poliomyelitis is the prototypic 
viral myelitis, but it is more or less restricted to the anterior gray matter 
of the cord containing the spinal motoneurons. A polio-like syndrome 
can  also  be  caused  by  a  large  number  of  enteroviruses  (including 
enterovirus  A-71  and  coxsackie),  and  with  Japanese  encephalitis  and 
other  flaviviruses  such  as  West  Nile  virus.  Beginning  in  2012,  cases 
of  acute  flaccid  paralysis  in  children  and  adolescents  have  appeared 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3451

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3452 associated  with  enterovirus  A-71  and  D-68  infection.  Chronic  viral 
myelitic infections, such as those due to HIV or human T-cell lympho-
tropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), are discussed below.

Bacterial and mycobacterial myelitis (most are essentially abscesses) 
are less common than viral causes and much less frequent than cerebral 
bacterial abscess. Almost any pathogenic species may be responsible, 
including Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Listeria monocytogenes, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Treponema pallidum (syphilis). Myco-
plasma pneumoniae may be a cause of myelitis, but its status is uncer-
tain because many cases are more properly classified as postinfectious.
Schistosomiasis  (Chap.  234)  is  an  important  cause  of  parasitic 
myelitis in endemic areas. The process is intensely inflammatory and 
granulomatous, caused by a local response to tissue-digesting enzymes 
from  the  ova  of  the  parasite,  typically  Schistosoma  haematobium  or 
Schistosoma  mansoni.  Toxoplasmosis  (Chap.  228)  can  occasionally 
cause a focal myelopathy, and this diagnosis should especially be con-
sidered in patients with AIDS (Chap. 202). Cysticercosis (Chap. 235) is 
another consideration, although myelitis from this helminth is far less 
common than parenchymal brain or meningeal involvement.

In cases of suspected viral myelitis, it may be appropriate to begin 
specific therapy pending laboratory confirmation. Herpes zoster, HSV, 
and  EBV  myelitis  are  treated  with  intravenous  acyclovir  (10  mg/kg 
q8h) or oral valacyclovir (2 g tid) for 10–14 days; CMV is treated with 
ganciclovir (5 mg/kg IV bid) plus foscarnet (60 mg/kg IV tid) or cido-
fovir (5 mg/kg per week for 2 weeks).

High-Voltage  Electrical  Injury  Spinal  cord  injuries  are  promi-
nent following electrocution from lightning strikes or other accidental 
electrical  exposures.  The  syndrome  consists  of  transient  weakness 
acutely  (often  with  an  altered  sensorium  and  focal  cerebral  distur-
bances), sometimes followed several days or even weeks later by a mye-
lopathy that can be severe and permanent. This is a rare injury type, 
and limited data incriminate a vascular pathology involving the ante-
rior spinal artery and its branches in some cases. Therapy is supportive.
CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
 ■ SPONDYLOTIC MYELOPATHY
Spondylotic myelopathy is the most common cause of myelopathy and 
of gait difficulty in the elderly, accounting for more than half of non-
traumatic spinal cord injuries in some series. Neck and shoulder pain 
with stiffness are early symptoms; impingement of bone and soft tissue 
overgrowth  on  nerve  roots  results  in  radicular  arm  pain,  most  often 
in  a  C5  or  C6  distribution.  Compression  of  the  cervical  cord,  which 
occurs in fewer than one-third of cases, produces a slowly progressive 
spastic  paraparesis,  at  times  asymmetric  and  often  accompanied  by 
paresthesias in the feet and hands. Vibratory sense is diminished in the 
legs, there is a Romberg sign, and occasionally there is a sensory level 
for vibration or pinprick on the upper thorax. In some cases, coughing 
or straining produces leg weakness or radiating arm or shoulder pain. 
Dermatomal sensory loss in the arms, atrophy of intrinsic hand mus-
cles, increased deep-tendon reflexes in the legs, and extensor plantar 
responses  are  common.  Urinary  urgency  or  incontinence  occurs  in 
advanced cases, but there are many alternative causes of these problems 
in older individuals. A tendon reflex in the arms is often diminished 
at  some  level;  most  often  at  the  biceps  (C5-C6).  In  individual  cases, 
radicular, myelopathic, or combined signs may predominate. The diag-
nosis should be considered in appropriate cases of progressive cervical 
myelopathy, paresthesias of the feet and hands, or wasting of the hands.
Diagnosis is usually made by MRI and may be suspected from CT 
images;  plain  x-rays  are  less  helpful.  Extrinsic  cord  compression  and 
deformation  are  appreciated  on  axial  MRI  views,  and  T2-weighted 
sequences  may  reveal  areas  of  high  signal  intensity  within  the  cord 
adjacent  to  the  site  of  compression.  A  cervical  collar  may  be  helpful 
in milder cases, but the likelihood of progression of medically treated 
myelopathy  is  high,  estimated  at  8%  over  1  year.  Definitive  therapy 
consists  of  surgical  decompression,  either  posterior  laminectomy  or 
an  anterior  approach  with  resection  of  the  protruded  disk  and  bony 
material. Cervical spondylosis and related degenerative diseases of 
the spine are discussed in Chap. 17.

 ■ VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS OF THE  
CORD AND DURA
Vascular  malformations,  comprising  ~4%  of  all  mass  lesions  of  the 
cord and overlying dura, are treatable causes of progressive myelopa-
thy. Most common are fistulas located within the dura or posteriorly 
along the surface of the cord. Most dural arteriovenous (AV) fistulas 
are  located  at  or  below  the  midthoracic  level,  usually  consisting  of  a 
direct connection between a radicular feeding artery in the nerve root 
sleeve with dural veins. The typical presentation is a middle-aged man 
with  a  progressive  myelopathy  that  worsens  slowly  or  intermittently 
and may have periods of remission, sometimes mimicking MS. Acute 
deterioration due to hemorrhage into the spinal cord (hematomyelia) 
or  subarachnoid  space  may  also  occur  but  is  rare.  In  many  cases, 
progression  results  from  local  ischemia  and  edema  due  to  venous 
congestion. Most patients have incomplete sensory, motor, and blad-
der disturbances. The motor disorder may predominate and produce a 
mixture of upper and restricted lower motor neuron signs, simulating 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Pain over the dorsal spine, dyses-
thesias, or radicular pain may be present. Other symptoms suggestive 
of  AV  malformation  (AVM)  or  dural  fistula  include  intermittent 
claudication;  symptoms  that  change  with  posture,  exertion,  Valsalva 
maneuver, or menses; and fever.

Less  commonly,  AVM  disorders  are  intramedullary  rather  than 
dural. One unusual disorder is a progressive thoracic myelopathy with 
paraparesis developing over weeks or months, characterized patholog-
ically by abnormally thick, hyalinized vessels within the cord (subacute 
necrotic myelopathy or Foix-Alajouanine syndrome).

Spinal  bruits  are  infrequent  but  may  be  sought  at  rest  and  after 
exercise  in  suspected  cases.  A  vascular  nevus  on  the  overlying  skin 
may  indicate  an  underlying  vascular  malformation  as  occurs  with 
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber  syndrome.  MR  angiography  and  CT  angi-
ography can detect the draining vessels of many AVMs (Fig. 442-6). 
Definitive  diagnosis  requires  selective  spinal  angiography,  which 
defines the feeding vessels and the extent of the malformation. Treat-
ment is tailored to the anatomy and location of the lesion, and generally 
consists of microsurgical resection, endovascular embolization of the 
major feeding vessels, or a combination of the two approaches.

FIGURE  442-6  Arteriovenous  malformation.  Sagittal  magnetic  resonance  scans 
of the thoracic spinal cord: T2 fast spin-echo technique (left) and T1 postcontrast 
image (right). On the T2-weighted image (left), abnormally high signal intensity is 
noted  in  the  central  aspect  of  the  spinal  cord  (arrowheads).  Numerous  punctate 
flow voids indent the dorsal and ventral spinal cord (arrow). These represent the 
abnormally  dilated  venous  plexus  supplied  by  a  dural  arteriovenous  fistula.  After 
contrast  administration  (right),  multiple,  serpentine,  enhancing  veins  (arrows)  on 
the ventral and dorsal aspect of the thoracic spinal cord are visualized, diagnostic 
of  arteriovenous  malformation.  This  patient  was  a  54-year-old  man  with  a  4-year 
history of progressive paraparesis.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3452

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3453

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

 ■ RETROVIRUS-ASSOCIATED MYELOPATHIES
The  myelopathy  associated  with  HTLV-1,  formerly  called  tropical 
spastic paraparesis, is a slowly progressive spastic syndrome with vari-
able sensory and bladder disturbance. Approximately half of patients 
have mild back or leg pain. The neurologic signs may be asymmetric, 
often  lacking  a  well-defined  sensory  level;  the  only  sign  in  the  arms 
may be hyperreflexia after several years of illness. The onset is usually 
insidious, and the tempo of progression of the illness occurs at a vari-
able rate; in one study, median time for progression to cane-, walker-, 
or  wheelchair-dependent  state  was  6,  13,  and  21  years,  respectively. 
Progression appears to be more rapid in older patients and those with 
higher  viral  loads.  Diagnosis  is  made  by  demonstration  of  HTLV-1-
specific  antibody  in  serum  by  enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay 
(ELISA),  confirmed  by  radioimmunoprecipitation  or  Western  blot 
analysis.  Especially  in  endemic  areas,  a  finding  of  HTLV-1  seropos-
itivity  in  a  patient  with  myelopathy  does  not  necessarily  prove  that 
HTLV-1  is  causative.  The  CSF/serum  antibody  index  may  provide 
support  by  establishing  intrathecal  synthesis  of  antibodies,  including 
oligoclonal antibodies, favoring HTVL-1 myelopathy over asymptom-
atic  carriage.  Measuring  proviral  DNA  by  polymerase  chain  reaction 
(PCR) in serum and CSF cells can be useful as an ancillary part of diag-
nosis. The pathogenesis of the myelopathy is uncertain. It could result 
from  an  immune  response  directed  against  HTLV-1  antigens  in  the 
nervous system, or alternatively to secondary autoimmunity triggered 
by  the  viral  infection.  There  is  no  proven  effective  treatment.  Based 
on limited evidence, the use of chronic low-dose oral glucocorticoids 
can be tried; interferon is of uncertain value, and antiviral treatment is 
ineffective. Symptomatic therapy for spasticity and bladder symptoms 
may be helpful.

A  progressive  myelopathy  can  also  result  from  HIV  infection 
(Chap. 197). It is characterized by vacuolar degeneration of the pos-
terior and lateral tracts, resembling subacute combined degeneration 
(see below).

SYRINGOMYELIA
Syringomyelia is a developmental cavity in the cervical cord that may 
enlarge  and  produce  progressive  myelopathy  or  may  remain  asymp-
tomatic. Symptoms begin insidiously in adolescence or early adulthood, 
progress  irregularly,  and  may  undergo  spontaneous  arrest  for  several 
years. Many young patients acquire a cervical-thoracic scoliosis. More 
than  half  of  all  cases  are  associated  with  Chiari  type  1  malformations 
in  which  the  cerebellar  tonsils  protrude  through  the  foramen  mag-
num and into the cervical spinal canal. The pathophysiology of syrinx 
expansion is controversial, but some interference with the normal flow 
of CSF seems likely, perhaps by the Chiari malformation. Acquired cav-
itations of the cord in areas of necrosis are also termed syrinx cavities; 
these follow trauma, myelitis, necrotic spinal cord tumors, and chronic 
arachnoiditis due to tuberculosis and other etiologies.

The presentation is a central cord syndrome consisting of a regional 
dissociated sensory loss (loss of pain and temperature sensation with 
sparing  of  touch  and  vibration)  and  areflexic  weakness  in  the  upper 
limbs. The sensory deficit has a distribution that is “suspended” over 
the nape of the neck, shoulders, and upper arms (cape distribution) or 
in the hands. Most cases begin asymmetrically with unilateral sensory 
loss in the hands that leads to injuries and burns that are not appreci-
ated by the patient. Muscle wasting in the lower neck, shoulders, arms, 
and  hands  with  asymmetric  or  absent  reflexes  in  the  arms  reflects 
expansion  of  the  cavity  in  the  gray  matter  of  the  cord.  As  the  cavity 
enlarges and compresses the long tracts, spasticity and weakness of the 
legs,  bladder  and  bowel  dysfunction,  and  Horner’s  syndrome  appear. 
Some patients develop facial numbness and sensory loss from damage 
to the descending tract of the trigeminal nerve (C2 level or above). In 
cases with Chiari malformations, cough-induced headache and neck, 
arm, or facial pain may be reported. Extension of the syrinx into the 
medulla,  syringobulbia,  causes  palatal  or  vocal  cord  paralysis,  dys-
arthria, horizontal or vertical nystagmus, episodic dizziness or vertigo, 
and tongue weakness with atrophy.

MRI accurately identifies developmental and acquired syrinx cavi-
ties and their associated spinal cord enlargement (Fig. 442-7). Images 

FIGURE  442-7  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  of  syringomyelia  associated  with  a 
Chiari  malformation.  Sagittal  T1-weighted  image  through  the  cervical  and  upper 
thoracic spine demonstrates descent of the cerebellar tonsils below the level of the 
foramen magnum (black arrows). Within the substance of the cervical and thoracic 
spinal cord, a cerebrospinal fluid collection dilates the central canal (white arrows).

of the brain and the entire spinal cord should be obtained to delineate 
the full longitudinal extent of the syrinx, assess posterior fossa struc-
tures  for  the  Chiari  malformation,  and  determine  whether  hydro-
cephalus is present.

TREATMENT
Syringomyelia

Treatment of syringomyelia is generally unsatisfactory. The Chiari 
tonsillar herniation may be decompressed, generally by suboccipital 
craniectomy, upper cervical laminectomy, and placement of a dural 
graft. Fourth ventricular outflow is reestablished by this procedure. 
If  the  syrinx  cavity  is  large,  some  surgeons  recommend  direct 
decompression or drainage, but the added benefit of this procedure 
is uncertain, and complications are common. With Chiari malfor-
mations, shunting of hydrocephalus generally precedes any attempt 
to correct the syrinx. Surgery may stabilize the neurologic deficit, 
and some patients improve. Patients with few symptoms and signs 
from the syrinx do not require surgery and are followed by serial 
clinical and imaging examinations.

Syrinx cavities secondary to trauma or infection, if symptomatic, 
are treated with a decompression and drainage procedure in which 
a  small  shunt  is  inserted  between  the  cavity  and  subarachnoid 
space;  alternatively,  the  cavity  can  be  fenestrated.  Cases  due  to 
intramedullary spinal cord tumor are generally managed by resec-
tion of the tumor.

 ■ CHRONIC MYELOPATHY OF MULTIPLE 
SCLEROSIS
A  chronic  progressive  myelopathy  is  the  most  frequent  cause  of  dis-
ability  in  both  primary  progressive  and  secondary  progressive  forms 
of MS. Involvement is typically bilateral but asymmetric and produces 
motor, sensory, and bladder/bowel disturbances. Fixed motor disabil-
ity appears to result from extensive loss of axons in the corticospinal 
tracts. Diagnosis is facilitated by identification of earlier attacks such 
as  optic  neuritis.  MRI,  CSF,  and  evoked-response  testing  are  confir-
matory. Treatment with ocrelizumab, an anti-CD20 B-cell monoclonal 
antibody,  is  effective  in  patients  with  primary  progressive  MS,  and 
disease-modifying therapy is also indicated in patients with secondary 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3453

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3454 progressive  MS  who  have  clinical  or  MRI  evidence  of  active  disease. 

MS is discussed in Chap. 444.
 ■ SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION 
(VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY)
This  treatable  myelopathy  presents  with  subacute  paresthesias  in  the 
hands and feet, loss of vibration and position sensation, and a progres-
sive spastic and ataxic weakness. Loss of reflexes due to an associated 
peripheral  neuropathy  in  a  patient  who  also  has  Babinski  signs  is  a 
helpful diagnostic clue. Optic atrophy and irritability or other cogni-
tive changes may be prominent in advanced cases and are occasionally 
the  presenting  symptoms.  The  myelopathy  of  subacute  combined 
degeneration tends to be diffuse rather than focal; signs are generally 
symmetric and reflect predominant involvement of the posterior and 
lateral  tracts,  including  Romberg  sign.  Causes  include  dietary  defi-
ciency,  especially  in  vegans,  and  gastric  malabsorption  syndromes 
including pernicious anemia (Chap. 99). The diagnosis is confirmed 
by the finding of macrocytic red blood cells, a low serum B12 concen-
tration, and elevated serum levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic 
acid. Treatment is by replacement therapy, beginning with 1000 μg of 
intramuscular vitamin B12 daily for 5 days and then continued as a once 
monthly maintenance dose; oral maintenance is also reasonable, except 
in cases of pernicious anemia.

Two  closely  related  conditions  deserve  mention  here.  The  first  is 
folate  deficiency–associated  myelopathy,  now  only  rarely  seen  since 
widespread  programs  of  dietary  fortification  with  folate  have  been 
implemented. A second is due to inhalation with nitrous oxide (laugh-
ing gas), an irreversible inhibitor of vitamin B12, which also produces a 
myelopathy identical to subacute combined degeneration. Exposure to 
nitrous oxide may occur during dental or surgical procedures or from 
recreational inhalation (“doing whippets”).
 ■ HYPOCUPRIC MYELOPATHY
This  myelopathy  is  similar  to  subacute  combined  degeneration 
(described above), except serum levels of B12 are normal. Low levels of 
serum copper are found, and often there is also a low level of serum 
ceruloplasmin. Some cases follow gastrointestinal procedures, particu-
larly bariatric surgery, that result in impaired copper absorption; others 
have been associated with excess zinc from health food supplements or 
in the past zinc-containing denture creams, all of which impair copper 
absorption via induction of metallothionein, a copper-binding protein. 
Many cases are idiopathic. There is often a coexisting anemia. Improve-
ment  or  at  least  stabilization  may  be  expected  with  reconstitution  of 
copper stores by oral supplementation.
 ■ TABES DORSALIS
The classic syphilitic syndromes of tabes dorsalis and meningovascular 
inflammation of the spinal cord are now less frequent than in the past 
but must be considered in the differential diagnosis of spinal cord dis-
orders. The characteristic symptoms of tabes are fleeting and repetitive 
lancinating pains, primarily in the legs or less often in the back, thorax, 
abdomen,  arms,  and  face.  Ataxia  of  the  legs  and  gait  due  to  loss  of 
position  sense  occurs  in  half  of  patients.  Paresthesias,  bladder  distur-
bances, and acute abdominal pain with vomiting (visceral crisis) occur 
in 15–30% of patients. The cardinal signs of tabes are loss of reflexes in 
the  legs;  impaired  position  and  vibratory  sense;  Romberg  sign;  and, 
in  almost  all  cases,  bilateral  Argyll  Robertson  pupils,  which  fail  to 
constrict  to  light  but  accommodate.  Diabetic  polyradiculopathy  may 
simulate  this  condition.  Treatment  of  tabes  dorsalis  and  other  forms 
of  neurosyphilis  consists  of  penicillin  G  administered  intravenously, 
or intramuscularly in combination with oral probenecid (Chap. 182).
 ■ HEREDITARY SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA
Many  cases  of  slowly  progressive  myelopathy  are  genetic  in  origin 
(Chap. 437). More than 80 different causative loci have been identified, 
including  autosomal  dominant,  autosomal  recessive,  and  X-linked 
forms.  Especially  for  the  recessive  and  X-linked  forms,  a  family  his-
tory of myelopathy may be lacking. Most patients present with almost 
imperceptibly progressive spasticity and weakness in the legs, usually 
but  not  always  symmetrical.  Sensory  symptoms  and  signs  are  absent 

or mild, but sphincter disturbances may be present. In some families, 
additional  neurologic  signs  are  prominent,  including  nystagmus, 
ataxia, or optic atrophy. The onset may be as early as the first year of 
life  or  as  late  as  middle  adulthood.  Only  symptomatic  therapies  are 
available.

PRIMARY LATERAL SCLEROSIS
This is a mid- to late-life onset degenerative disorder characterized by 
progressive spasticity with weakness, eventually accompanied by dys-
arthria and dysphonia; bladder symptoms occur in approximately half 
of  patients.  Sensory  function  is  spared.  The  disorder  resembles  ALS 
and  is  considered  a  variant  of  the  motor  neuron  degenerations,  but 
without  the  characteristic  lower  motor  neuron  disturbance  and  with 
typically  a  slower  progression.  Some  cases  may  represent  late-onset 
cases of familial spastic paraplegia, particularly autosomal recessive or 
X-linked varieties in which a family history may be absent. (See also 
Chap. 437.)
 ■ ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
This  X-linked  disorder  is  a  variant  of  adrenoleukodystrophy  (ALD). 
Most affected males have a history of adrenal insufficiency and then 
develop  a  progressive  spastic  (or  ataxic)  paraparesis  beginning  in 
early or sometimes middle adulthood; some patients also have a mild 
peripheral  neuropathy.  Female  heterozygotes  may  develop  a  slower, 
insidiously  progressive  spastic  myelopathy  beginning  later  in  adult-
hood  and  without  adrenal  insufficiency.  Diagnosis  is  usually  made 
by  demonstration  of  elevated  levels  of  very-long-chain  fatty  acids  in 
plasma and in cultured fibroblasts. The responsible gene encodes the 
adrenoleukodystrophy  protein  (ALDP),  a  peroxisomal  membrane 
transporter involved in carrying long-chain fatty acids to peroxisomes 
for  degradation.  Corticosteroid  replacement  is  indicated  if  hypoad-
renalism is present. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been 
successful in slowing progression of cognitive decline in some patients 
with ALD treated early in their disease but appears to be ineffective for 
the myelopathy of ALD. Nutritional supplements (Lorenzo’s oil) have 
also been attempted for this condition without evidence of efficacy.
 ■ CANCER-RELATED SYNDROMES
Cancer-related  causes  of  chronic  myelopathy,  besides  the  common 
neoplastic compressive myelopathy discussed earlier, include radiation 
injury  (Chap.  90),  and  a  myelopathy  resembling  subacute  combined 
degeneration that can follow intrathecal administration of methotrex-
ate  (a  folate  antagonist).  Rare  paraneoplastic  myelopathies  are  most 
often associated with lung cancer and anti-amphiphysin (also breast), 
anti-collapsin  response  mediator  5  (CRMP5)  (also  lymphoma),  or 
anti-Hu  antibodies  (Chap.  94).  Another  uncommon  lymphoma- 
associated paraneoplastic syndrome is a progressive flaccid paresis with 
destruction of anterior horn cells. NMO with aquaporin-4 antibodies 
(Chap. 445) can also rarely be paraneoplastic in origin. Metastases to 
the  cord  are  probably  more  common  than  any  of  these  disorders  in 
patients with cancer.
 ■ OTHER CHRONIC MYELOPATHIES
Tethered cord syndrome is a developmental disorder of the lower spinal 
cord and nerve roots that rarely presents in adulthood as low back pain 
accompanied  by  a  progressive  lower  spinal  cord  and/or  nerve  root 
syndrome. Some patients have a small leg or foot deformity indicating 
a long-standing process, and in others, a dimple, patch of hair, or sinus 
tract on the skin overlying the lower back is the clue to a congenital 
lesion.  Diagnosis  is  made  by  MRI,  which  demonstrates  a  low-lying 
conus  medullaris  and  thickened  filum  terminale.  The  MRI  may  also 
reveal  diastematomyelia  (division  of  the  lower  spinal  cord  into  two 
halves), lipomas, cysts, or other congenital abnormalities of the lower 
spine  coexisting  with  the  tethered  cord.  Treatment  is  with  surgical 
release.

There  are  a  number  of  rare  toxic  causes  of  spastic  myelopathy, 
including  lathyrism  due  to  ingestion  of  chickpeas  containing  the 
excitotoxin  β-N-oxalylamino-L-alanine  (BOAA),  seen  primarily  in  
the developing world or during famines, and Konzo due to ingestion 
of the cyanogen-containing casava plant found in sub-Saharan Africa.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3454

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3455

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
2

D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
S
p
i
n
a
l

C
o
r
d

TABLE 442-4  Expected Neurologic Function Following Complete Cord Lesions
SELF-CARE
LEVEL
Dependent on others; requires respiratory 
High quadriplegia (C1–C4)
support
Partially independent with adaptive 
equipment
Independent

Low quadriplegia (C5–C8)

Paraplegia (below T1)

Independent

TRANSFERS
Dependent on others

May be dependent or independent

MAXIMUM MOBILITY
Motorized wheelchair

May use manual wheelchair, drive an 
automobile with adaptive equipment
Ambulates short distances with aids

Source: Adapted from JF Ditunno, CS Formal: Chronic spinal cord injury. N Engl J Med 330:550, 1994.

Often,  a  cause  of  intrinsic  myelopathy  can  be  identified  only 

through periodic reassessment.

REHABILITATION OF SPINAL  
CORD DISORDERS
The  prospects  for  recovery  from  an  acute  destructive  spinal  cord 
lesion  fade  after  ~6  months.  There  are  currently  no  effective  means 
to promote repair of injured spinal cord tissue; promising but entirely 
experimental  approaches  include  the  use  of  factors  that  influence 
reinnervation  by  axons  of  the  corticospinal  tract,  nerve  and  neural 
sheath graft bridges, forms of electrical stimulation at the site of injury, 
and the local introduction of stem cells. The disability associated with 
irreversible spinal cord damage is determined primarily by the level of 
the lesion and by whether the disturbance in function is complete or 
incomplete  (Table 442-4).  Even  a  complete  high  cervical  cord  lesion 
may be compatible with a productive life. The primary goals are devel-
opment  of  a  rehabilitation  plan  framed  by  realistic  expectations  and 
attention to the neurologic, medical, and psychological complications 
that commonly arise.

Many  of  the  usual  symptoms  associated  with  medical  illnesses, 
especially  somatic  and  visceral  pain,  may  be  lacking  because  of  the 
destruction  of  afferent  pain  pathways.  Unexplained  fever,  worsening 
of spasticity, or deterioration in neurologic function should prompt a 
search  for  infection,  thrombophlebitis,  or  an  intraabdominal  pathol-
ogy.  The  loss  of  normal  thermoregulation  and  inability  to  maintain 
normal  body  temperature  can  produce  recurrent  fever  (quadriplegic 
fever), although most episodes of fever are due to infection of the uri-
nary tract, lung, skin, or bone.

Bladder  dysfunction  generally  results  from  loss  of  supraspinal 
innervation of the detrusor muscle of the bladder wall and the sphinc-
ter  musculature.  Detrusor  spasticity  is  treated  with  anticholinergic 
drugs  (oxybutynin,  2.5–5  mg  qid)  or  tricyclic  antidepressants  with 
anticholinergic properties (imipramine, 25–200 mg/d). Failure of the 
sphincter muscle to relax during bladder emptying (urinary dyssynergia) 
may  be  managed  with  the  α-adrenergic  blocking  agent  terazosin 
hydrochloride  (1–2  mg  tid  or  qid),  with  intermittent  catheterization, 
or, if that is not feasible, by use of a condom catheter in men or a per-
manent indwelling catheter. Surgical options include the creation of an 
artificial bladder by isolating a segment of intestine that can be cathe-
terized intermittently (enterocystoplasty) or can drain continuously to 
an external appliance (urinary conduit). Bladder areflexia due to acute 
spinal shock or conus lesions is best treated by catheterization. Bowel 
regimens and disimpaction are necessary in most patients to ensure at 
least biweekly evacuation and avoid colonic distention or obstruction.
Patients with acute cord injury are at risk for venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism. Use of calf-compression devices and anticoagulation 
with low-molecular-weight heparin are recommended. In cases of persis-
tent paralysis, anticoagulation should probably be continued for 3 months.
Prophylaxis against decubitus ulcers should involve frequent changes 
in position in a chair or bed, the use of special mattresses, and cushion-
ing of areas where pressure sores often develop, such as the sacral promi-
nence and heels. Early treatment of ulcers with careful cleansing, surgical 
or enzyme debridement of necrotic tissue, and appropriate dressing and 
drainage may prevent infection of adjacent soft tissue or bone.

Spasticity  is  aided  by  stretching  exercises  to  maintain  mobility  of 
joints. Drug treatment is effective but may result in reduced function, 
as some patients depend on spasticity as an aid to stand, transfer, or 
walk.  Baclofen  (up  to  240  mg/d  in  divided  doses)  is  effective;  it  acts 

by  facilitating  γ-aminobutyric  acid–mediated  inhibition  of  motor 
reflex  arcs.  Diazepam  acts  by  a  similar  mechanism  and  is  useful 
for  leg  spasms  that  interrupt  sleep  (2–4  mg  at  bedtime).  Tizanidine  
(2–8  mg  tid),  an  α2  adrenergic  agonist  that  increases  presynaptic 
inhibition  of  motor  neurons,  is  another  option.  For  nonambulatory 
patients, the direct muscle inhibitor dantrolene (25–100 mg qid) may 
be used, but it is potentially hepatotoxic. In refractory cases, intrath-
ecal  baclofen  administered  via  an  implanted  pump,  botulinum  toxin 
injections, or dorsal rhizotomy may be required to control spasticity.

Despite the loss of sensory function, many patients with spinal cord 
injury experience chronic pain sufficient to diminish their quality of 
life. Randomized controlled studies indicate that gabapentin or prega-
balin is useful in this setting. Epidural electrical stimulation and intra-
thecal infusion of pain medications have been tried with some success. 
Management of chronic pain is discussed in Chap. 13.

A paroxysmal autonomic hyperreflexia may occur following lesions 
above  the  major  splanchnic  sympathetic  outflow  at  T6.  Headache, 
flushing, and diaphoresis above the level of the lesion, as well as hyper-
tension with bradycardia or tachycardia, are the major symptoms. The 
trigger is typically a noxious stimulus—for example, bladder or bowel 
distention,  a  urinary  tract  infection,  or  a  decubitus  ulcer—below  the 
level  of  the  cord  lesion.  Treatment  consists  of  removal  of  offending 
stimuli;  ganglionic  blocking  agents  (mecamylamine,  2.5–5  mg)  or 
other short-acting antihypertensive drugs are useful in some patients.
Attention to these details allows longevity and a productive life for 

patients with complete transverse myelopathies.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Badhiwala JH et al: Degenerative cervical myelopathy—update and 

future directions. Nat Rev Neurol 16:108, 2020.

Barreras P et al: Clinical biomarkers differentiate myelitis from vas-

cular and other causes of myelopathy. Neurology 90:12, 2018.

Kühl JS et al: Long-term outcomes of allogeneic haematopoietic stem 
cell  transplantation  for  adult  cerebral  X-linked  adrenoleukodystro-
phy. Brain 140:953, 2017.

Levi  AD,  Schwab  JM:  A  critical  reappraisal  of  corticospinal  tract 
somatotopy and its role in traumatic cervical spinal cord syndromes. 
J Neurosurg Spine 12:1, 2021.

Ozpinar A et al: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic eval-
uation, and prognosis of spinal arteriovenous malformations. Handb 
Clin Neurol 143:145, 2017.

Parks  NE:  Metabolic  and  toxic  myelopathies.  Continuum  (Minneap 

Minn) 27:143, 2021.

Patchell  RA  et  al:  Direct  decompressive  surgical  resection  in  the 
treatment  of  spinal  cord  compression  caused  by  metastatic  cancer:  
A randomised trial. Lancet 366:643, 2005.

Robertson  CE  et  al:  Recovery  after  spinal  cord  infarcts:  Long-term 

outcome in 115 patients. Neurology 78:114, 2012.

Ropper AE, Ropper AH: Acute spinal cord compression. N Engl J Med 

376:1358, 2017.

Ruet A et al: Predictive factors for multiple sclerosis in patients with 
clinically isolated spinal cord syndrome. Mult Scler 17:312, 2011.
Yáñez  ML  et  al:  Diagnosis  and  treatment  of  epidural  metastases. 

Cancer 123:1106, 2017.

Zalewski  NL,  Flanagan  EP:  Autoimmune  and  paraneoplastic 

myelopathies. Semin Neurol 38:278, 2018.

Zalewski NL et al: Characteristics of spontaneous spinal cord infarc-
tion and proposed diagnostic criteria. JAMA Neurol 76:56, 2019.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3455

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3456

443

Concussion and Other 
Traumatic Brain Injuries
Geoffrey T. Manley, Benjamin L. Brett,  
Michael McCrea

 ■ INTRODUCTION
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) represents a significant global public health 
problem. In the United States, estimates of the frequency of TBI range 
between 2.5 and 4 million cases per year, depending on the study and 
methods  used  to  define  and  include  cases.  Age-specific  rates  show  a 
bimodal  distribution,  with  highest  risk  in  younger  individuals  and 
older adults. The most common mechanism of injury in the young is 
motor vehicle accidents and is more common in men, whereas in older 
adults, falls are the major cause of injury and are more likely to occur 
in women.

TBI imposes substantial demands on health care systems. World-
wide, at least 10 million TBIs are serious enough to result in death or 
hospitalization,  producing  a  global  economic  burden  of  $400  billion 
annually. In the United States, the estimated annual cost is >$76 billion. 
Due  to  advances  in  medical  care  and  other  factors,  more  people  are 
surviving  TBI  than  ever  before.  Brain  injury  accounts  for  more  lost 
productivity at work among Americans than any other form of injury. 
An estimated 5.3 million Americans are living with significant disabil-
ities resulting from TBI that complicate their return to a full and pro-
ductive  life.  Increased  media  attention  to  military  and  sports-related 
TBI has highlighted the growing concern that injuries that were previ-
ously dismissed can have lifelong consequences for some individuals.

Head  injuries  are  so  common  that  almost  all  physicians  will  be 
called  upon  to  provide  some  aspect  of  immediate  care  or  to  see 
patients  who  are  suffering  from  various  sequelae.  Patients  and  their 
families initially need education regarding the natural history of TBI 
along with treatment of acute symptoms such as headache. Continued 
follow-up  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  sequelae  experienced  by 
some  patients—such  as  postconcussive  disorder  (PCD),  depression, 
or  sleep  disorder—are  identified  and  treated  appropriately.  Effective 
management of TBI and its consequences often requires a coordinated 
multidisciplinary care team.

 ■ DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
TBI is commonly defined as an alteration in brain function, or other evi-
dence of brain pathology, caused by an external force, and characterized 
by the following: (1) any period of loss or decreased level of consciousness 
(LOC), (2) any loss of memory for events immediately before (retrograde) 
or after (posttraumatic) the injury, (3) any neurologic deficits, and/or (4) 
any alteration in mental state at the time of injury.

Evidence of TBI can include visual, neuroradiologic, or laboratory 
confirmation of damage to the brain, but TBI is more often diagnosed 
on the basis of acute clinical criteria. In addition to standard CT imag-
ing,  structural  MRI  and  functional  imaging  (resting-state  functional 
MRI) techniques show increasing sensitivity, and it is likely that sensi-
tive blood-based biomarkers will play an increasingly important role in 
the diagnosis and treatment of these patients (described below).
MECHANISMS  OF  TBI  Common  mechanisms  of  TBI  include  the  head 
being  struck  by  an  object,  the  head  striking  an  object,  the  brain 
undergoing  an  acceleration/deceleration  movement,  a  foreign  body 
penetrating the brain, or forces generated from events such as a blast 
or explosion. Motor vehicle crashes have historically been cited as the 
most  common  cause  of  TBI.  All  forms  of  transportation,  however, 
are  common  causes  of  TBI,  including  motorcycle  crashes,  bicycle 
accidents,  skateboarding,  and  pedestrian  injuries.  The  other  leading 
causes  of  TBI  are  falls,  assaults,  and  sports,  with  varied  frequency 
across the lifespan. Certainly, there has been an increased focus on the 
high  frequency  of  mild TBI  (mTBI),  often  referred  to  as  concussion, 
encountered  by  athletes  participating  in  contact  and  collision  sports 

at all competitive levels, as well as the potential short-term effects and 
long-term risks associated with sport-related concussion.

CLASSIFICATION OF TBI SEVERITY  Numerous systems have been devel-
oped over the years to define and classify TBI severity along a con-
tinuum from mild to moderate to severe. These systems are usually 
most  applicable  to  closed  head  injuries.  In  nearly  all  classification 
systems, TBI severity is graded based on acute injury characteristics 
rather  than  postacute  injury  status,  as  other  factors  can  intervene 
to  influence  functional  outcome.  This  can  be  problematic,  as  some 
patients with severe TBI will have a full recovery and some with mild 
TBI  will  be  left  with  lifetime  disability.  Historically,  the  presence 
and  duration  of  unconsciousness  and  amnesia  have  been  the  main 
points of distinction along the gradient of TBI severity. Current TBI 
classification  systems  remain  symptom-based  and  do  not  incorpo-
rate patho-anatomical or molecular features, such as CT findings and 
blood-based biomarkers.

The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is the most recognized and widely 
used  method  for  grading  TBI  severity.  The  GCS  provides  a  practical 
indicator of gross neurologic status by assessing motor function, verbal 
responses, and the patient’s ability to open his or her eyes voluntarily or 
in response to external commands and stimuli. The grading is applied 
to the best response that can be elicited from the patient at the time of 
assessment,  preferably  before  any  paralyzing  or  sedating  medication 
is administered or the patient is intubated, as these interventions con-
found interpretation of the score. The GCS assessment produces scores 
ranging from 3 to 15 (Table 443-1).

Upon  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  GCS  in  2014,  the  wording  for 
responses was revised, and recommendations were made to improve its 
utility. Importantly, individual patients are best described by the three 
components of the coma scale (eye, verbal, motor, e.g., E3V4M6); the 
derived total coma score (e.g., 13) is less informative and should only 
be used to characterize groups of patients.

Several  injury-classification  systems  have  been  developed  to  go 
beyond GCS score or acute injury characteristics and incorporate chief 
signs  and  symptoms  in  defining  mTBI.  The  use  of  multiple  severity 
indicators is intended to improve sensitivity in the detection of mTBI 
(GCS  13–15),  while  also  taking  into  consideration  traditional  acute 
injury characteristics that have been presumed to predict outcome fol-
lowing mild and moderate brain injury. Loss of consciousness (LOC) 
and  posttraumatic  amnesia  (PTA)  remain  the  most  common  injury 
characteristics  referenced  in  these  classification  systems.  In  the  case 
of  moderate  (GCS  9–12)  and  severe  (GCS  3–8)  TBI,  GCS  score  and 
the duration of LOC and PTA can be robust predictors of long-term 
outcome  and  morbidity.  In  cases  of  mTBI,  however,  while  PTA  and 
LOC are important indicators of acute injury, they are less predictive 
of eventual recovery time and outcome.

TABLE 443-1  Glasgow Coma Scale
EYE OPENING (E)
Spontaneous
To speech
To pressure
None

4
3
2
1

VERBAL RESPONSE (V)
Oriented
Confused
Words
Sounds
None

5
4
3
2
1

Best Motor Response (M)

Obeying commands
Localizing
Normal flexion
Abnormal flexion
Extension
None

6
5
4
3
2
1

Note: Revised GCS (2014).
Source: Reproduced with permission from G Teasdale et al: The Glasgow Coma 
Scale at 40 years: Standing the test of time. Lancet Neurol 13:844, 2014.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3456

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  ■ TBI TYPES AND PATHOLOGIES
MILD TBI (CONCUSSION)  It is estimated that 70–90% of all treated TBIs 
are  mild  in  severity  based  on  traditional  case  definitions  and  acute 
injury  characteristics,  with  most  reported  estimates  in  the  order  of 
85%. The published figures likely underrepresent the true incidence of 
mTBI because of variable case definitions and heterogeneous methods. 
Moreover, because a subgroup of individuals with milder brain injuries 
does not seek medical attention, epidemiologic studies that depend on 
hospital-based data also underestimate the true incidence.

The  term  concussion,  while  popular,  is  vague  and  is  not  based  on 
widely accepted objective criteria, resulting in multiple definitions from 
various groups. There has been debate as to whether concussion is part 
of  the  TBI  spectrum  or  a  separate  entity.  In  2017,  the  Concussion  in 
Sports Group issued a consensus statement that “concussion is a trau-
matic brain injury” (McCrory et al, 2017). By firmly placing concussion 
in  the  spectrum  of  TBI,  the  underlying  pathophysiologic  processes 
common to all TBI presentations can now be considered together.

CT imaging is often normal in this population. However, emerging 
evidence indicates that 3-tesla (3T) MRI scans can identify pathology 
consistent with acute brain injury such as contusion and microhemor-
rhage. When patients with mTBI have CT and/or MRI abnormalities, 
they are often referred to as complicated mTBI and are more likely to 
have an unfavorable outcome.
 ■ SKULL FRACTURE, EXTRA-AXIAL HEMATOMA, 
CONTUSION, AND AXONAL INJURY
Skull Fracture  A blow to the skull that exceeds the elastic tolerance 
of  the  bone  causes  a  fracture.  Intracranial  lesions  accompany  roughly 
two-thirds  of  skull  fractures,  and  the  presence  of  a  fracture  increases 
many-fold the chances of an underlying subdural or epidural hematoma. 
Consequently, fractures are primarily markers of the site and severity of 
injury. If the underlying arachnoid membrane has been torn, fractures 
also provide potential pathways for entry of bacteria to the cerebrospinal 
fluid  (CSF)  with  a  risk  of  meningitis  and  for  leakage  of  CSF  outward 
through the dura. If there is leakage of CSF, severe orthostatic headache 
results from lowered pressure in the spinal fluid compartment.

Most  fractures  are  linear  and  extend  from  the  point  of  impact 
toward the base of the skull. Basilar skull fractures are often extensions 
of  adjacent  linear  fractures  over  the  convexity  of  the  skull  but  may 
occur independently owing to stresses on the floor of the middle cra-
nial fossa or occiput. Basilar fractures are usually parallel to the petrous 
bone or along the sphenoid bone and directed toward the sella turcica 
and  ethmoidal  groove.  Although  most  basilar  fractures  are  uncom-
plicated,  they  can  cause  CSF  leakage,  pneumocephalus,  and  delayed  
cavernous-carotid  fistulas.  Hemotympanum  (blood  behind  the  tym-
panic membrane), ecchymosis over the mastoid process (Battle sign), 
and periorbital ecchymosis (“raccoon sign”) are clinical signs associated 
with basilar fractures.
 ■ EPIDURAL AND SUBDURAL HEMATOMAS
Hemorrhages  between  the  dura  and  skull  (epidural)  or  beneath  the 
dura (subdural) have characteristic clinical and imaging features. They 
are sometimes associated with underlying brain contusions and other 
injuries, often making it difficult to determine the relative contribution 
of each component to the clinical state. The mass effect of raised intra-
cranial pressure (ICP) caused by these hematomas can be life threaten-
ing, making it imperative to identify them rapidly by CT or MRI scan 
and to surgically remove them when appropriate.

Epidural Hematoma 
(Fig. 443-1) These highly dangerous lesions 
usually arise from an injury to a meningeal arterial vessel and evolve 
rapidly.  They  are  often  accompanied  by  a  “lucid  interval”  of  several 
minutes to hours prior to neurologic deterioration. They occur in up 
to 10% of cases of severe head injury, but are less often associated with 
underlying cortical damage compared to subdural hematomas. Rapid 
surgical  evacuation  and  ligation  or  cautery  of  the  damaged  vessel, 
usually  the  middle  meningeal  artery  that  has  been  lacerated  by  an 
overlying skull fracture, is indicated. If recognized and treated rapidly, 
patients often have a favorable outcome.

3457

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
3

C
o
n
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
T
r
a
u
m
a
t
i
c
B
r
a
i
n
I
n
j
u
r
i
e
s

FIGURE 443-1  Acute epidural hematoma. The tightly attached dura is stripped from 
the inner table of the skull, producing a characteristic lenticular-shaped hemorrhage 
on noncontrast CT scan. Epidural hematomas are usually caused by tearing of the 
middle meningeal artery following fracture of the temporal bone.

Acute  Subdural  Hematoma 
(Fig.  443-2)  Direct  cranial  trauma 
may be minor and is not always required for acute subdural hemorrhage 
to occur, especially in the elderly and those taking anticoagulant medi-
cations. Acceleration forces alone, as from whiplash, are sometimes suf-
ficient to produce subdural hematoma. Up to one-third of patients have 
a lucid interval lasting minutes to hours before coma supervenes, but 
most are drowsy or comatose from the moment of injury. A unilateral 
headache and slightly enlarged pupil on the side of the hematoma are 
frequently, but not invariably, present. Small subdural hematomas may 
be asymptomatic and usually do not require surgical evacuation if they 
do not enlarge. Stupor or coma, hemiparesis, and unilateral pupillary 
enlargement are signs of larger hematomas. The bleeding that causes 
larger  subdural  hematomas  is  primarily  venous  in  origin,  although 
arterial bleeding sites are sometimes found at operation, and a few large 
hematomas  have  a  purely  arterial  origin.  In  an  acutely  deteriorating 
patient, an emergency craniotomy is required. In contrast to epidural 
hematomas,  there  is  significant  morbidity  and  mortality  associated 
with acute subdural hematomas that require surgery.

Chronic  Subdural  Hematoma  A  subacutely  evolving  syndrome 
due  to  subdural  hematoma  occurs  days  or  weeks  after  injury  with 
drowsiness,  headache,  confusion,  or  mild  hemiparesis,  usually  in  the 
elderly with age-related atrophy and often after only minor or unnoticed 
trauma.  On  imaging  studies,  chronic  subdural  hematomas  appear  as 
crescentic  clots  over  the  convexity  of  one  or  both  hemispheres,  most 

FIGURE  443-2  Acute  subdural  hematoma.  Noncontrast  CT  scan  reveals  a 
hyperdense  clot  that  has  an  irregular  border  with  the  brain  and  causes  more 
horizontal displacement (mass effect) than might be expected from its thickness. 
The disproportionate mass effect is the result of the large rostral-caudal extent of 
these hematomas. Compare to Fig. 443-1.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3457

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3458

FIGURE  443-3  CT  scan  of  chronic  bilateral  subdural  hematomas  of  different 
ages. The collections began as acute hematomas and have become hypodense in 
comparison to the adjacent brain after a period during which they were isodense 
and difficult to appreciate. Some areas of resolving blood are contained on the more 
recently formed collection on the left (arrows).

commonly  in  the  frontotemporal  region  (Fig.  443-3).  A  history  of 
trauma may or may not be elicited in relation to chronic subdural hema-
toma;  the  injury  may  have  been  trivial  and  forgotten,  particularly  in 
the elderly and those with clotting disorders. Headache is common but 
not invariable. Additional features that may appear weeks later include 
slowed thinking, vague change in personality, seizure, or a mild hemi-
paresis.  The  headache  typically  fluctuates  in  severity,  sometimes  with 
changes in head position. Drowsiness, inattentiveness, and incoherence 
of thought are generally more prominent than focal signs such as hemi-
paresis. Rarely, chronic hematomas cause brief episodes of hemiparesis 
or aphasia that are indistinguishable from transient ischemic attacks.

CT  without  contrast  initially  shows  a  low-density  mass  over  the 
convexity of the hemisphere. Between 2–6 weeks after the initial bleed-
ing, the clot becomes isodense compared to adjacent brain and may be 
inapparent.  Many  subdural  hematomas  that  are  several  weeks  in  age 
contain areas of blood and intermixed serous fluid. Infusion of contrast 
material  demonstrates  enhancement  of  the  vascular  fibrous  capsule 
surrounding the collection. MRI reliably identifies both subacute and 
chronic hematomas.

Clinical  observation  coupled  with  serial  imaging  is  a  reasonable 
approach to patients with few symptoms and small chronic subdural 
collections that do not cause mass effect. Treatment with surgical evac-
uation through burr holes is usually successful, if a cranial drain is used 
postoperatively. The fibrous membranes that grow from the dura and 
encapsulate the collection may require removal with a craniotomy to 
prevent recurrent fluid accumulation.
 ■ TRAUMATIC SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is common in TBI. Rupture of small 
cortical  arteries  or  veins  can  cause  bleeding  into  the  subarachnoid 
space. Traumatic SAH is often seen in the sulci and is frequently the 
only  radiographic  finding  on  CT  following  mild  TBI.  SAH  occurs 
diffusely after severe TBI and confers an increase in mortality. In mild 
TBI,  SAH  provides  an  objective  imaging  biomarker  for  TBI,  and  in 
some patients is associated with unfavorable outcomes.

Contusion 
(Fig. 443-4) A surface bruise of the brain, or contusion, 
consists of varying degrees of petechial hemorrhage, edema, and tissue 
destruction. Contusions and deeper hemorrhages result from mechan-
ical forces that displace and compress the hemispheres forcefully and 
by deceleration of the brain against the inner skull, either under a point 
of impact (coup lesion) or, as the brain swings back, in the antipolar 
area (contrecoup lesion). Trauma sufficient to cause prolonged uncon-
sciousness usually produces some degree of contusion. Blunt decelera-
tion impact, as occurs against an automobile dashboard or from falling 
forward onto a hard surface, causes contusions on the orbital surfaces 
of the frontal lobes and the anterior and basal portions of the temporal 

FIGURE 443-4  Traumatic cerebral contusion. Noncontrast CT scan demonstrating a 
hyperdense hemorrhagic region in the anterior temporal lobe.

lobes. With lateral forces, as from impact on an automobile door frame, 
contusions are situated on the lateral convexity of the hemisphere. The 
clinical signs of contusion are determined by the location and size of 
the lesion; often, there are no focal abnormalities with a routine neuro-
logic exam, but these injured regions are later the sites of gliotic scars 
that may produce seizures. A hemiparesis or gaze preference is fairly 
typical of moderately sized contusions. Large bilateral contusions pro-
duce stupor with extensor posturing, while those limited to the frontal 
lobes cause a taciturn state. Contusions in the temporal lobe may cause 
delirium or an aggressive, combative syndrome. Torsional or shearing 
forces within the brain can cause hemorrhages of the basal ganglia and 
other  deep  regions.  Large  contusions  and  hemorrhages  after  minor 
trauma should raise concerns for coagulopathy due to an underlying 
disease or more commonly anticoagulant therapy.

Acute contusions are easily visible on CT and MRI scans, appearing 
as inhomogeneous hyperdensities on CT and as hyperintensities on T2 
and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequences; there 
is  usually  surrounding  localized  brain  edema  and  some  subarachnoid 
bleeding. Blood in the CSF due to trauma may provoke a mild inflamma-
tory reaction. Over a few days, contusions acquire a surrounding contrast 
enhancement and edema that may be mistaken for tumor or abscess.

Axonal  Injury 
(Fig.  443-5)  Traumatic  axonal  injury  (TAI)  is 
one  of  the  most  common  injuries  after  TBI.  There  is  disruption,  or 
shearing,  of  axons  at  the  time  of  impact  and  this  is  associated  with 

FIGURE  443-5  Multiple  small  areas  of  hemorrhage  and  tissue  disruption  in  the 
white matter of the frontal lobes on noncontrast CT scan. These appear to reflect 
an extreme type of the diffuse axonal shearing lesions that occur with closed head 
injury.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3458

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3459

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
3

C
o
n
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
T
r
a
u
m
a
t
i
c
B
r
a
i
n
I
n
j
u
r
i
e
s

microhemorrhages.  It  occurs  following  high-speed  deceleration  inju-
ries, such as motor vehicle collisions (Johnson et al, 2013). The pres-
ence of ≥4 areas of TAI is called diffuse axonal injury (DAI), and when 
widespread, has been proposed to explain persistent coma and the veg-
etative state after TBI (Chap. 28). Only severe TAI lesions that contain 
substantial blood are visualized by CT, usually in the corpus callosum 
and centrum semiovale. More commonly, the CT will be negative for 
TAI, but subsequent MRI, particularly gradient-echo or susceptibility
-weighted imaging, will show hemosiderin deposits reflective of micro-
hemorrhages in addition to the axonal damage on diffusion sequences. 
Traditionally,  TAI  and  DAI  have  been  considered  as  sequelae  much 
more likely to result from moderate and severe injuries. Accumulating 
evidence  has  demonstrated  that  diffuse  white  matter  abnormalities 
purportedly reflective of axonal injury, such as changes in microstruc-
ture and neurite density, are quite common in mild TBI as well. The 
degree of these changes correlates with metrics of injury severity (e.g., 
symptom burden) and recovery duration.
 ■ CRANIAL NERVE INJURIES
The  cranial  nerves  most  often  injured  with  TBI  are  the  olfac-
tory,  optic,  oculomotor,  and  trochlear  nerves;  the  first  and  second 
branches of the trigeminal nerve; and the facial and auditory nerves. 
Anosmia and an apparent loss of taste (actually a loss of perception 
of aromatic flavors, with retained elementary taste perception) occur 
in ~10% of persons with serious head injuries, particularly from falls 
on the back of the head. This is the result of displacement of the brain 
and shearing of the fine olfactory nerve filaments that course through 
the cribriform bone. At least partial recovery of olfactory and gusta-
tory function is expected, but if bilateral anosmia persists for several 
months, the prognosis is poor. Partial optic nerve injuries from closed 
trauma result in blurring of vision, central or paracentral scotomas, 
or sector defects. Direct orbital injury may cause short-lived blurred 
vision for close objects due to reversible iridoplegia. Diplopia limited 
to downward gaze and corrected when the head is tilted away from 
the side of the affected eye indicates trochlear (fourth nerve) nerve 
damage. It occurs frequently as an isolated problem after minor head 
injury or may develop for unknown reasons after a delay of several 
days. Facial nerve injury caused by a basilar fracture is present imme-
diately  in  up  to  3%  of  severe  injuries;  it  may  also  be  delayed  for 
5–7  days.  Fractures  through  the  petrous  bone,  particularly  the  less 
common transverse type, are liable to produce facial palsy. Delayed 
facial  palsy  occurring  up  to  a  week  after  injury,  the  mechanism  of 
which is unknown, has a good prognosis. Injury to the eighth cranial 
nerve from a fracture of the petrous bone causes loss of hearing, ver-
tigo, and nystagmus immediately after injury. Deafness from eighth 
nerve injury is rare and must be distinguished from blood in the mid-
dle ear or disruption of the middle ear ossicles. Dizziness, tinnitus, 
and high-tone hearing loss occur from cochlear concussion.
 ■ SEIZURES
Convulsions are surprisingly uncommon immediately after TBI, but a 
brief period of tonic extensor posturing or a few clonic movements of 
the limbs just after the moment of impact can occur. However, the cor-
tical scars that evolve from contusions are highly epileptogenic and may 
later manifest as seizures, even after many months or years (Chap. 425). 
The  severity  of  injury  roughly  determines  the  risk  of  future  seizures. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  17%  of  individuals  with  brain  contusion, 
subdural hematoma, or prolonged LOC will develop a seizure disorder 
and that this risk extends for an indefinite period of time, whereas the 
risk is ≤2% after mild injury. The majority of convulsions in the latter 
group occur within 5 years of injury but may be delayed for decades. 
Penetrating injuries have a much higher rate of subsequent epilepsy.

CLINICAL SYNDROMES AND TREATMENT 
OF HEAD INJURY
 ■ CONCUSSION/MILD TBI
The patient who has briefly lost consciousness or been stunned after 
a  minor  head  injury  usually  becomes  fully  alert  and  attentive  within 
minutes but may complain of headache, dizziness, faintness, nausea, a 

single episode of emesis, difficulty with concentration, a brief amnestic 
period, or slight blurring of vision. This typical concussion syndrome 
has  a  good  prognosis  with  little  risk  of  subsequent  deterioration. 
Children  are  particularly  prone  to  drowsiness,  vomiting,  and  irrita-
bility,  symptoms  that  are  sometimes  delayed  for  several  hours  after 
apparently minor injuries. Vasovagal syncope that follows injury may 
cause undue concern. Generalized or frontal headache is common in 
the following days. It may be migrainous (throbbing and hemicranial) 
in  nature  or  aching  and  bilateral.  After  several  hours  of  observation, 
patients with minor injury may be accompanied home and observed 
for a day by a family member or friend, with written instructions to 
return if symptoms worsen.

Persistent  severe  headache  and  repeated  vomiting  in  the  context 
of  normal  alertness  and  no  focal  neurologic  signs  is  usually  benign, 
but  CT  should  be  obtained  and  a  longer  period  of  observation  is 
appropriate.  The  decision  to  perform  imaging  tests  also  depends  on 
clinical signs that indicate that the impact was severe (e.g., persistent 
confusion,  repeated  vomiting,  palpable  skull  fracture);  the  presence 
of  other  serious  bodily  injuries,  an  underlying  coagulopathy,  or  age  
>65  years;  and  on  the  degree  of  surveillance  that  can  be  antici-
pated  after  discharge.  Guidelines  have  also  indicated  that  older  age  
(>65 years), two or more episodes of vomiting, >30 min of retrograde 
or  persistent  anterograde  amnesia,  seizure,  and  concurrent  drug  or 
alcohol intoxication are sensitive (but not specific) indicators of intra-
cranial hemorrhage that justify CT scanning.

Though not incorporated into conventional clinical practice guide-
lines,  growing  evidence  suggests  that  MRI  improves  sensitivity  for 
detection  of  small  intracranial  hemorrhages  and  other  lesions  in 
mild  TBI  patients,  particular  among  those  with  negative  findings 
on  CT.  Specifically,  intracranial  abnormalities  are  fairly  common 
on  MRI  (27%)  in  CT-negative  patients.  Further,  acute  MRI  findings 
have prognostic utility in predicting recovery and outcome after mTBI/ 
concussion (e.g., risk of functional impairment, time to return to activity).
Blood-based (serum and plasma) biomarkers of astrocyte damage/
astrogliosis (glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP]) and neuronal injury 
(ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 [UCHL1]) also hold promise 
in  improving  detection  and  outcome  prediction  across  the  full  spec-
trum of TBI. With development of new rapid assay systems, these can 
now be used for real-time point-of-care assessment; GFAP in particular 
has  high  discriminant  ability  to  detect  intracranial  abnormalities,  as 
well  as  potential  to  differentiate  CT+,  CT–/MRI+,  and  CT–/MRI– 
patients.  Similar  to  MRI,  emerging  biomarkers  appear  to  have  not 
only diagnostic but also prognostic utility in predicting the trajectory 
of recovery and functional impairments weeks and months after TBI.

 ■ SPORT-RELATED CONCUSSION
Based on its reported prevalence, acute effects, and fears over poten-
tial long-term neurologic consequences, sport-related concussion has 
become  the  focus  of  increasing  concern  from  clinicians,  researchers, 
sporting  organizations,  and  athletes  themselves.  Concussion  is  a  fre-
quent injury in contact and collision sports (e.g., football, hockey, wres-
tling) at all levels of participation, including youth sports. Head injury 
associated  with  sport  and  recreational  activity  accounts  for  45%  of 
TBI-related emergency department visits in children age 17 years and 
under.  Between  1997  to  2007,  emergency  department  visits  for  8-  to 
13-year-old children affected by concussion in organized team sports 
doubled,  and  increased  by  >200%  in  the  14-  to  19-year-old  group. 
Over the last decade, data from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention indicate that this trend has reversed, with a 27% decrease 
in emergency department visits for sport- and recreation-related TBI 
in the United States between 2012 and 2018. Given that national and 
state  surveillance  systems  continue  to  report  increased  sport-related 
concussion rates over the same time period, it could be inferred that 
diagnosis and management of sport-related concussion outside of the 
emergency department has increased.

The natural history of clinical recovery following sport-related con-
cussion has been a subject of substantial ongoing research. In general, 
the findings on acute recovery are favorable. A 2003 report was the first 
to  chart  the  continuous  time  course  of  acute  recovery  within  several 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3459

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3460 days after concussion, indicating that >90% of athletes reported symp-
tom  recovery  within  1  week.  Several  other  prospective  studies  have 
since demonstrated that the overwhelming majority of athletes achieve 
a  complete  recovery  in  symptoms,  cognitive  functioning,  postural 
stability, and other functional impairments over a period of 1–3 weeks 
following concussion.

In  recent  years,  a  paradigm  shift  toward  a  more  rapid  return  to 
activity and a focus on rehabilitation has occurred. Specifically, while 
experts  agree  that  initial  rest  post-injury  is  beneficial  for  recovery, 
extended inactivity beyond 5 days can be detrimental and increase risk 
for  protracted  recovery.  Rather,  active  rehabilitation  involving  super-
vised  subthreshold  exercise  has  been  shown  to  improve  duration  of 
symptoms and decrease risk of protracted recovery.

There are many anecdotal reports, however, of athletes who remain 
symptomatic or impaired on functional testing well beyond the win-
dow  of  recovery  commonly  reported  in  group  studies.  The  greatest 
challenge  arguably  still  facing  sport  medicine  clinicians  and  public 
health experts is how to most effectively manage and reduce risk in this 
subset of athletes who do not follow the “typical” course of recovery. 
The precise frequency of athletes who do not follow the typical course 
of rapid, spontaneous recovery and instead exhibit prolonged postcon-
cussive  symptoms  or  other  functional  impairments  after  concussion 
remains unclear. Postinjury symptom burden is the most robust pre-
dictor of recovery and risk of prolonged symptoms. Preinjury mental 
health diagnosis and history of prior concussion are two factors that 
have been consistently identified as being associated with potential for 
prolonged recovery as well.

Following  acute  concussion,  multimodal  advanced  neuroimaging 
has  demonstrated  a  variety  of  changes,  including  decreased  cerebral 
blood  flow,  increased  global  and  local  functional  connectivity,  and 
alterations  in  white  matter  microstructure  reflecting  axonal  organi-
zation.  In  general,  these  metrics  correlate  with  measures  of  injury 
severity,  and  resolution  of  these  changes  tends  to  parallel  clinical 
recovery. However, a number of studies have shown that slight changes 
on  advanced  multimodal  imaging  can  persist  even  after  symptoms 
have fully resolved, supporting the concept that the “tail” of neurobio-
logic recovery may extend beyond the time course of apparent clinical 
recovery.

In the current absence of adequate data, a commonsense approach 
to  athletic  concussion  has  been  to  remove  the  individual  from  play 
immediately and avoid contact sports for at least several days after a 
mild injury, and for a longer period if there are more severe injuries 
or if there are protracted neurologic symptoms such as headache and 
difficulty  concentrating.  No  individual  should  return  to  play  unless 
all  concussion-related  symptoms  have  resolved  and  an  assessment 
has been made by a health care professional who has experience with 
treatment of concussion. Validated symptom inventories, such as the 
Rivermead  Post-Concussion  Symptom  Questionnaire  (Table  443-2), 
have been developed to aid clinicians with recording and quantifying 
the  diverse  range  of  physical,  cognitive,  and  behavioral  symptoms 
that can occur following concussion. In addition to characterizing the 
constellation of acute symptoms and their severity, symptom invento-
ries can be beneficial to track the course and resolution of symptoms 
through  recovery.  Differentiating  concussion-related  symptoms  from 
factors that may be also influencing endorsement (e.g., preinjury mood 
difficulties)  is  an  important  component  of  managing  recovery  from 
sport-related concussion. Once cleared, the individual can then begin a 
graduated program of increasing activity. Younger athletes are particu-
larly likely to experience protracted concussive symptoms, and a slower 
return to play in this age group may be reasonable. These guidelines 
are designed in part to avoid a perpetuation of symptoms but also to 
prevent  the  rare  second-impact  syndrome,  in  which  diffuse  and  fatal 
cerebral swelling follows a second minor head injury.

 ■ POSTCONCUSSIVE STATES
The  postconcussion  syndrome  (PCS)  refers  to  a  state  following  mild 
TBI  consisting  of  combinations  of  fatigue,  dizziness,  headache,  and 
difficulty  in  concentration.  Management  is  difficult  and  generally 
requires the identification and management of the specific problem or 

TABLE 443-2  Review of Concussion Symptoms
PHYSICAL
Headaches

COGNITIVE
Forgetfulness or poor 
memory
Poor concentration

Dizziness

Nausea and/or vomiting

Taking longer to think

Noise sensitivity
Sleep disturbance
Fatigue
Blurred vision
Light sensitivity
Double vision

BEHAVIORAL
Being irritable, easily 
angered
Feeling depressed or 
tearful
Feeling frustrated or 
impatient
Restlessness

Note: Items were adapted from the Rivermead Post-Concussion Symptom 
Questionnaire. Each item is rated on a 5-point Likert scale (0–4), as follows: 0 = Not 
experienced at all; 1 = No more of a problem now than preinjury; 2 = A mild problem; 
3 = A moderate problem; 4 = A severe problem. Total scores can range from 0–64.

problems that are most troubling to the individual. A clear explanation 
and education around the symptoms that may follow concussion has 
been shown to reduce subsequent complaints. Care is taken to avoid 
prolonged use of drugs that produce dependence. Headache may ini-
tially be treated with acetaminophen and small doses of amitriptyline. 
Vestibular exercises (Chap. 22) and small doses of vestibular suppres-
sants such as promethazine (Phenergan) may be helpful when dizziness 
is the main problem. Patients, who after mild or moderate injury have 
difficulty with memory or with complex cognitive tasks at work, may 
be reassured to know that these problems usually improve over several 
months,  and  a  reduced  workload  or  other  accommodations  may  be 
prescribed in the interim.

For  the  vast  majority  of  individuals  with  mTBI,  the  symptoms  of 
PCS subside and resolve within a few weeks of injury. For a subset of 
individuals with mTBI, however, complaints of postconcussion symp-
toms persist beyond the expectation derived from TBI severity mark-
ers. The term postconcussion disorders (PCDs) has been proposed for 
diagnostic  use  and  to  improve  characterization  of  specific  symptoms 
or types of sequelae following mTBI. These include neurologic, cogni-
tive, behavioral, or somatic complaints that continue beyond the acute 
and subacute periods, becoming chronic and often operationalized as 
persisting  beyond  3  months.  Although  the  overall  risk  of  developing 
PCD  following  mTBI  is  low,  the  frequency  of  mTBI  patients  who 
meet criteria for a diagnosis of PCD and present in a clinical setting is 
believed to be higher.

mTBI patients with PCD frequently present to the outpatient clin-
ics  of  primary  care  physicians,  physiatrists,  or  neurologists  seeking 
relief  for  lingering  PCD-related  symptoms.  While  some  patients  will 
have  already  received  an  initial  medical  workup  to  rule  out  a  more 
serious  brain  injury  during  the  acute  phase,  many  patients  will  have 
had  no  prior  contact  with  health  care  specialists.  A  medical  workup 
ordered  in  the  outpatient  setting  for  PCD-related  complaints  is  typ-
ically  unremarkable  for  any  identifiable  neurologic  cause  to  account 
for the persisting symptoms reported by the patient. The development 
of uniform decision trees or “standard of care” treatment regimens for 
PCD-related symptoms has been limited by the diversity of symptoms 
that patients experience, even within mTBI subgroups that have sus-
tained  very  similar  injury  patterns.  While  some  patients  experience 
somatic symptoms, others complain of subjective cognitive or behav-
ioral  changes.  Symptom  inventories  (Table  443-2)  can  be  helpful  in 
documenting the broad range of these symptoms and serve as a metric 
for improvement following symptom-based treatment.

Active rehabilitation for the treatment of PCD involving subthresh-
old  exercise  has  increased  in  popularity  over  recent  years  and  has 
gained empirical support for its effectiveness as a useful intervention 
for protracted recovery.

PCD  is  not  a  unidimensional  condition  but  rather  an  outcome 
influenced by diverse cognitive, emotional, medical, psychosocial, and 
motivational factors. Because of this complexity, treatments targeting 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3460

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3461

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
3

C
o
n
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
T
r
a
u
m
a
t
i
c
B
r
a
i
n
I
n
j
u
r
i
e
s

persistent and refractory PCD-related symptoms should be tailored to 
the needs and expectations of the individual patient, with referrals to 
specialists as needed for assistance with management of headache, neck 
and  back  pain,  dizziness  and  vertigo,  and  other  symptoms  reported 
within the context of PCD. A comprehensive review of concussion- and 
PCD-related  symptoms  presented  in  Table  443-2  allows  for  develop-
ment of an individualized approach that leverages currently available 
treatment for those sequelae that are most bothersome to the patient 
(e.g., vestibular rehabilitation therapy for vertigo, melatonin for sleep 
disturbance). Patients are frequently referred to behavioral health pro-
viders such as neuropsychologists, rehabilitation psychologists, health 
psychologists, and/or psychiatrists for a variety of reasons, but partic-
ularly when they are experiencing cognitive, emotional, or behavioral 
changes  that  accompany  PCD.  Patients  with  mood  disorders  (e.g., 
depression), anxiety disorders (e.g., posttraumatic stress disorder), or 
adjustment  reactions  may  benefit  from  psychiatric  consultation  for 
appropriate medication trials or from time-limited psychotherapy such 
as cognitive behavioral therapy.

Due to the complexity of presentation and varying diagnostic crite-
ria, there are limited studies regarding overall prognosis of PCD. How-
ever, treatment of PCD-related symptoms targeted to the individual’s 
specific difficulties can improve functional outcomes and patient-rated 
quality of life. Further, collaborative care has been shown to improve 
outcomes  among  patients  experiencing  persistent  postconcussion 
symptoms. These improved outcomes are likely due to a multidisciplin-
ary team’s ability to simultaneously address the diverse set of symptoms 
that can occur with PCD.

 ■ INJURY OF INTERMEDIATE SEVERITY
Patients  who  are  not  fully  alert  or  have  persistent  confusion,  behav-
ioral  changes,  extreme  dizziness,  or  focal  neurologic  signs  such  as 
hemiparesis should be admitted to the hospital and undergo a cerebral 
imaging  study.  A  cerebral  contusion  or  hematoma  will  usually  be 
found. Common syndromes include: (1) delirium with a disinclination 
to be examined or moved, expletive speech, and resistance if disturbed 
(anterior temporal lobe contusions); (2) a quiet, disinterested, slowed 
mental  state  (abulia)  alternating  with  irascibility  (inferior  frontal  
and frontopolar contusions); (3) a focal deficit such as aphasia or mild 
hemiparesis  (due  to  subdural  hematoma  or  convexity  contusion  or, 
less  often,  carotid  artery  dissection);  (4)  confusion  and  inattention, 
poor performance on simple mental tasks, and fluctuating orientation 
(associated  with  several  types  of  injuries,  including  those  described 
above,  and  with  medial  frontal  contusions  and  interhemispheric 
subdural hematoma); (5) repetitive vomiting, nystagmus, drowsiness, 
and  unsteadiness  (labyrinthine  concussion,  but  occasionally  due  to  a 
posterior fossa subdural hematoma or vertebral artery dissection); and 
(6)  diabetes  insipidus  (damage  to  the  median  eminence  or  pituitary 
stalk).  Injuries  of  this  degree  can  be  complicated  by  drug  or  alcohol 
intoxication,  and  clinically  inapparent  cervical  spine  injury  may  be 
present.  Blast  injuries  are  often  accompanied  by  rupture  of  the  tym-
panic membranes.

After  surgical  removal  of  hematomas,  patients  in  this  category 
improve  over  weeks  to  months.  During  the  first  week,  the  state  of 
alertness, memory, and other cognitive functions often fluctuate, and 
agitation  and  somnolence  are  common.  Behavioral  changes  tend  to 
be worse at night, as with many other encephalopathies, and may be 
treated  with  small  doses  of  antipsychotic  medications.  Subtle  abnor-
malities of attention, intellect, spontaneity, and memory return toward 
normal  weeks  or  months  after  the  injury,  sometimes  abruptly.  How-
ever, the full extent of recovery may not be realized for several years. 
Persistent cognitive problems are discussed below.

 ■ SEVERE INJURY
Patients who are comatose from the moment of injury require imme-
diate  neurologic  attention  and  resuscitation.  After  intubation,  with 
care taken to immobilize the cervical spine, the depth of coma, pupil-
lary size and reactivity, limb movements, and Babinski responses are 
assessed.  As  soon  as  vital  functions  permit  and  cervical  spine  x-rays 
and a CT scan have been obtained, the patient should be transported 

to a critical care unit. Hypoxia should be reversed, and normal saline 
used as the resuscitation fluid in preference to albumin. The finding of 
an epidural or subdural hematoma or large intracerebral hemorrhage 
is  usually  an  indication  for  prompt  surgery  and  intracranial  decom-
pression  in  an  otherwise  salvageable  patient.  Measurement  of  ICP 
with a ventricular catheter or fiberoptic device in order to guide treat-
ment has been favored by many units but has not improved outcome. 
Similarly, induced hypothermia has shown no benefit. Hyperosmolar 
intravenous solutions are used in various regimens to limit intracranial 
pressure. Prophylactic antiepileptic medications are recommended for 
7 days and should be discontinued unless there are multiple seizures 
postinjury. Management of raised ICP, a frequent feature of severe head 
injury, is discussed in Chap. 307.

Despite the improvement in mortality for severe TBI over the past 
few decades, a great deal of therapeutic nihilism persists in TBI. The 
common use of a 6-month outcome for TBI clinical studies reinforces 
this misconception. The recovery from severe TBI can take years. Fur-
thermore, the ability to predict long-term outcome is limited and fre-
quently incorrect. Best-practice guidelines recommend, in the absence 
of brain death, that aggressive therapy be instituted for at least 72 h in 
the acute injury period.

 ■ LONG-TERM OUTCOMES IN TBI
TBI (aggregated mild to severe) is associated with a 63–96% increased 
risk of all-cause dementia. The degree of risk for dementia ranges along 
the gradient of TBI severity (i.e., greatest risk among severe injuries). 
To date, investigations have less reliably established mTBI as a robust 
risk  factor  for  dementia,  likely  due  to  methodologic  heterogeneity 
(e.g.,  use  of  different  diagnostic  criteria,  exposure  misclassification, 
self-report  vs.  physician  diagnoses  of  TBI  or  dementia).  Though  an 
identified  risk  factor  for  all-cause  dementia,  pathophysiologic  and 
epidemiologic factors that underlie the association between TBI with 
risk of specific neurodegenerative pathologies and dementia-subtypes 
are  not  well  understood.  As  a  result,  associations  between  TBI  with 
clinical  syndromes  (e.g.,  Alzheimer’s  disease,  Parkinson’s  disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) or distinct neuropathologies (e.g., beta- 
amyloid, Lewy bodies, transactive response DNA-binding protein 43) 
have  been  inconsistently  reported  in  the  literature.  In  a  large  study 
involving  clinical  and  neuropathologic  data  from  three  pooled  pro-
spective studies of community-based cohorts, a significant relationship 
was  found  between  TBI  with  LOC  >1  h  and  subsequent  Parkinson’s 
disease  diagnosis,  progression  rate  of  parkinsonism,  and  Lewy  body 
accumulation at postmortem examination.

There is some evidence that repeated mTBI or sport-related concus-
sions,  particularly  among  boxing  and  professional  American  football 
athletes, are associated with delayed and potentially progressive neuro-
behavioral changes. The brains of these patients display a characteristic 
deposition of tau protein in neurons located in the superficial cortical 
layers and perivascular regions, and particularly in the depths of sulci. 
This pattern has been defined as the pathognomonic lesion of chronic 
traumatic  encephalopathy  (CTE).  A  variety  of  neurodegenerative 
pathologies are commonly found in the presence of CTE, adding to the 
complexity of diagnosis. While staging criteria for this neuropathologic 
entity have yet to be established, a consensus meeting to define the neu-
ropathologic criteria for CTE proposed an algorithm assessing CTE as 
“low” or “high” in severity. Overall, its contribution, if any, to late-life 
dementia and parkinsonism in former athletes, soldiers, or others who 
have sustained repeated concussive injuries is unknown.

Research  criteria  for  the  clinical  diagnosis  of  CTE  have  been  pro-
posed, and include a range of cognitive and/or behavioral symptoms, 
including executive dysfunction, depression, insomnia, and behavioral 
dyscontrol. Multiple studies have suggested that these proposed criteria 
lack specificity (i.e., they are frequent in other conditions and non-CTE 
cases).  As  such,  CTE  remains  a  postmortem  diagnosis.  Advances  in 
positron emission tomography (PET) have allowed for in vivo investi-
gation of tau deposition. Significant correlations between greater years 
of  football  participation  and  greater  standardized  uptake  value  ratio 
(SUVR)  of  18F-flortaucipir  (purportedly  representative  of  tau  deposi-
tion) in the bilateral superior frontal, bilateral medial temporal, and left 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3461

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3462 parietal regions have been reported. However, increased SUVR in these 
regions  was  not  significantly  associated  with  neuropsychologic  and 
neuropsychiatric function. Taken together, further study is required to 
better  refine  the  clinical  and  postmortem  diagnostic  criteria  of  CTE, 
enhance clinicopathologic correlation, and ultimately improve patient 
care and management. CTE is also discussed in Chap. 424.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Johnson  VE  et  al:  Axonal  pathology  in  traumatic  brain  injury.  Exp 

Neurol 246:35, 2013.

Kowalski R et al: Recovery of consciousness and functional outcome 
in moderate and severe traumatic brain injury. JAMA Neurol 78:548, 
2021.

McCrory P et al: Consensus statement on concussion in sport—the 
5th international conference on concussion in sport held in Berlin, 
October 2016. Br J Sports Med 51:838, 2017.

Mez  J  et  al:  Clinicopathological  evaluation  of  chronic  traumatic 
encephalopathy  in  players  of  American  football.  JAMA  318:360, 
2017.

Nelson L et al: Recovery after mild traumatic brain injury in patients 
presenting  to  US  level  I  trauma  centers:  A  Transforming  Research 
and  Clinical  Knowledge  in  Traumatic  Brain  Injury  (TRACK-TBI) 
study. JAMA Neurol 76:1049, 2019.

Taylor  CA  et  al:  Traumatic  brain  injury-related  emergency  depart-
ment  visits,  hospitalizations,  and  deaths—United  States,  2007  and 
2013. MMWR Surveill Summ 66:1, 2017.

444 Multiple Sclerosis

Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser

MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central ner-
vous  system  (CNS)  characterized  by  chronic  inflammation,  demyeli-
nation, gliosis (plaques or scarring), and neuronal loss; the course can 
be relapsing or progressive. MS plaques typically develop at different 
times and in different CNS locations (i.e., MS is said to be disseminated 
in time and space). More than 900,000 individuals in the United States 
and millions of individuals worldwide are affected. The clinical course 
is extremely variable, ranging from a relatively benign condition to a 
rapidly evolving and incapacitating disease requiring profound lifestyle 
adjustments.

 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The onset of MS may be abrupt or insidious. Symptoms may be severe 
or  seem  so  trivial  that  a  patient  may  not  seek  medical  attention  for 
months  or  years.  Indeed,  at  autopsy,  ~0.1%  of  individuals  who  were 
asymptomatic during life will be found, unexpectedly, to have patho-
logic evidence of MS. Similarly, an MRI scan obtained for an unrelated 
reason may show evidence of asymptomatic MS. Symptoms of MS are 
extremely  varied  and  depend  on  the  location  and  severity  of  lesions 
within the CNS (Table 444-1). Examination often reveals evidence of 
neurologic dysfunction, often in asymptomatic locations. For example, 
a patient may present with symptoms in one leg but signs in both.

Sensory symptoms are varied and include both paresthesias (e.g., tin-
gling, prickling sensations, formications, “pins and needles,” or painful 
burning)  and  hypesthesia  (e.g.,  reduced  sensation,  numbness,  or  a 
“dead”  feeling).  Unpleasant  sensations  (e.g.,  feelings  that  body  parts 
are swollen, wet, raw, or tightly wrapped) are also common. Sensory 
impairment of the trunk and legs below a horizontal line on the torso  
(a  sensory  level)  indicates  that  the  spinal  cord  is  the  origin  of  the 

TABLE 444-1  Initial Symptoms of Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
PERCENTAGE  
OF CASES
37
36
35
24
15
11
6
4
4

SYMPTOM
Sensory loss
Optic neuritis
Weakness
Paresthesias
Diplopia
Ataxia
Vertigo
Paroxysmal attacks
Bladder

SYMPTOM
Lhermitte
Pain
Dementia
Visual loss
Facial palsy
Impotence
Myokymia
Epilepsy
Falling

PERCENTAGE  
OF CASES
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

Source: Data from RJ Swingler, DA Compston: The morbidity of multiple sclerosis.  
Q J Med 83:325, 1992.

sensory disturbance. It is often accompanied by a bandlike sensation of 
tightness around the torso. Pain is a common symptom of MS, experi-
enced by >50% of patients. Pain can occur anywhere on the body and 
can change locations over time.

Optic neuritis (ON) presents as diminished visual acuity, dimness, or 
decreased color perception (desaturation) in the central field of vision. 
These  symptoms  can  be  mild  or  may  progress  to  severe  visual  loss. 
Rarely, there is complete loss of light perception. Visual symptoms are 
generally monocular but may be bilateral. Periorbital pain (aggravated 
by eye movement) often precedes or accompanies the visual loss. An 
afferent  pupillary  defect  (Chap.  32)  is  usually  present.  Fundoscopic 
examination  may  be  normal  or  reveal  optic  disc  swelling  (papillitis). 
Pallor of the optic disc (optic atrophy) commonly follows ON. Uveitis 
is uncommon and should raise the possibility of alternative diagnoses 
such as sarcoidosis or lymphoma.

Weakness  of  the  limbs  may  manifest  as  loss  of  strength,  speed,  or 
dexterity; as fatigue; or as a disturbance of gait. Exercise-induced weak-
ness is a characteristic symptom of MS. The weakness is of the upper 
motor  neuron  type  (Chap.  24)  and  is  usually  accompanied  by  other 
pyramidal  signs  such  as  spasticity,  hyperreflexia,  and  Babinski  signs. 
Occasionally,  a  tendon  reflex  may  be  lost  (simulating  a  lower  motor 
neuron lesion) if an MS lesion disrupts the afferent reflex fibers in the 
spinal cord (see Fig. 24-2).

Facial weakness due to a lesion in the pons may resemble idiopathic 
Bell’s palsy (Chap. 441). Unlike Bell’s palsy, facial weakness in MS is 
usually not associated with ipsilateral loss of taste sensation or retro-
auricular pain.

Spasticity (Chap. 24) is commonly associated with spontaneous and 
movement-induced  muscle  spasms.  More  than  30%  of  MS  patients 
have moderate to severe spasticity, especially in the legs. This is often 
accompanied by painful spasms interfering with ambulation, work, or 
self-care. Occasionally, spasticity provides support for the body weight 
during  ambulation,  and  in  these  cases,  treatment  of  spasticity  may 
actually do more harm than good.

Visual  blurring  in  MS  may  result  from  ON  or  diplopia  (double 
vision); if the symptom resolves when either eye is covered, the cause 
is  diplopia.  Diplopia  may  be  caused  by  internuclear  ophthalmoplegia 
(INO) or palsy of the sixth cranial nerve (rarely the third or fourth). 
An INO consists of impaired adduction of one eye due to a lesion in the 
ipsilateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (Chaps. 32 and V3). Promi-
nent  nystagmus  is  often  observed  in  the  abducting  eye,  along  with  a 
small skew deviation. A bilateral INO is particularly suggestive of MS. 
Other common gaze disturbances in MS include (1) a horizontal gaze 
palsy, (2) a “one and a half ” syndrome (horizontal gaze palsy plus an 
INO), and (3) acquired pendular nystagmus.

Ataxia usually manifests as cerebellar tremors (Chap. 439). Ataxia 
may also involve the head and trunk or the voice, producing a charac-
teristic cerebellar dysarthria (scanning speech).

Vertigo may appear suddenly from a brainstem lesion, superficially 
resembling acute labyrinthitis (Chap. 22). Hearing loss (Chap. 34) may 
also occur in MS but is uncommon.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3462

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  ■ ANCILLARY SYMPTOMS
Paroxysmal  symptoms  are  distinguished  by  their  brief  duration  (10  s 
to 2 min), high frequency (5–40 episodes per day), lack of any altera-
tion of consciousness or change in background electroencephalogram 
during episodes, and a self-limited course (generally lasting weeks to 
months). They may be precipitated by hyperventilation or movement. 
These  syndromes  may  include  Lhermitte’s  symptom;  tonic  contrac-
tions of a limb, face, or trunk (tonic seizures); paroxysmal dysarthria 
and  ataxia;  paroxysmal  sensory  disturbances;  and  several  other  less 
well-characterized  syndromes.  Paroxysmal  symptoms  probably  result 
from  spontaneous  discharges,  arising  at  the  edges  of  demyelinated 
plaques and spreading to adjacent white matter tracts.

Lhermitte’s  symptom  is  an  electric  shock–like  sensation  (typically 
induced by flexion or other movements of the neck) that radiates down 
the back into the legs. Rarely, it radiates into the arms. It is generally 
self-limited  but  may  persist  for  years.  Lhermitte’s  symptom  can  also 
occur  with  other  disorders  of  the  cervical  spinal  cord  (e.g.,  cervical 
spondylosis).

Trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neural-
gia (Chap. 441) can occur when the demyelinating lesion involves the 
root entry (or exit) zone of the fifth, seventh, and ninth cranial nerve, 
respectively. Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux) is a very brief lanci-
nating facial pain often triggered by an afferent input from the face or 
teeth. Most cases of trigeminal neuralgia are not MS related; however, 
atypical features such as onset before age 50 years, bilateral symptoms, 
objective sensory loss, or nonparoxysmal pain should raise the possi-
bility that MS could be responsible.

Facial  myokymia  consists  of  either  persistent  rapid  flickering  con-
tractions of the facial musculature (especially the lower portion of the 
orbicularis oculus) or a contraction that slowly spreads across the face. 
It results from lesions of the corticobulbar tracts or brainstem course 
of the facial nerve.

Heat sensitivity refers to neurologic symptoms produced by an ele-
vation of the body’s core temperature. For example, unilateral visual blur-
ring may occur during a hot shower or with physical exercise (Uhthoff’s 
symptom).  It  is  also  common  for  MS  symptoms  to  worsen  transiently, 
sometimes dramatically, during febrile illnesses. Such heat-related symp-
toms probably result from transient conduction block.

Bladder  dysfunction  is  present  in  >90%  of  MS  patients,  and  in 
one-third of patients, dysfunction results in weekly or more frequent 
episodes of incontinence. During normal reflex voiding, relaxation of 
the bladder sphincter (α-adrenergic innervation) is coordinated with 
contraction  of  the  detrusor  muscle  in  the  bladder  wall  (muscarinic 
cholinergic  innervation).  Detrusor  hyperreflexia,  due  to  impairment 
of suprasegmental inhibition, causes urinary frequency, urgency, noc-
turia, and uncontrolled bladder emptying. Detrusor  sphincter  dyssyn-
ergia, due to loss of synchronization between detrusor and sphincter 
muscles,  causes  difficulty  in  initiating  and/or  stopping  the  urinary 
stream, producing hesitancy, urinary retention, overflow incontinence, 
and recurrent infection.

Constipation  occurs  in  >30%  of  patients.  Fecal  urgency  or  bowel 

incontinence is less common (<15%) but can be socially debilitating.

Sexual dysfunction may manifest as decreased libido, impaired geni-
tal sensation, impotence in men, and diminished vaginal lubrication or 
adductor spasms in women.

Cognitive dysfunction can include memory loss; impaired attention; 
difficulties  in  executive  functioning,  memory,  and  problem  solving; 
slowed information processing; and problems shifting between cognitive 
tasks. Euphoria (elevated mood) was once thought to be characteristic of 
MS but is actually uncommon, occurring in <20% of patients. Cognitive 
dysfunction sufficient to impair activities of daily living is rare.

Depression,  experienced  by  approximately  half  of  patients,  can  be 
reactive, endogenous, or part of the illness itself and can contribute to 
fatigue.

Fatigue (Chap. 23) is experienced by 90% of patients; this symptom 
is the most common reason for work-related disability in MS. Fatigue 
can  be  exacerbated  by  elevated  temperatures,  depression,  expending 
exceptional effort to accomplish basic activities of daily living, or sleep 
disturbances (e.g., from frequent nocturnal awakenings to urinate).

DISEASE COURSE
Three clinical types of MS exist (Fig. 444-1):

3463

1.  Relapsing or bout onset MS (RMS) accounts for 90% of MS cases and 
is  characterized  by  discrete  attacks  of  neurologic  dysfunction  that 
generally evolve over days to weeks (rarely over hours). With initial 
attacks,  there  is  often  substantial  or  complete  recovery  over  the 
ensuing  weeks  to  months.  However,  as  attacks  continue,  recovery 
may  be  less  evident  (Fig.  444-1A).  Between  attacks,  patients  were 
traditionally thought to be neurologically stable; however it is now 
clear  that  many  patients  with  RMS  experience  subtle  “silent”  pro-
gression even when relapse-free.

2.  Secondary  progressive  MS  (SPMS)  always  begins  as  RMS 
(Fig. 444-1B). At some point, however, the clinical course changes 
so that the patient experiences progressive deterioration in function 
unassociated with acute attacks. SPMS produces a greater amount 
of fixed neurologic disability than RMS. For a patient with RMS, the 
risk of developing SPMS was approximately 3% each year in the pre-
treatment era, meaning that the great majority of RMS would ulti-
mately evolve into SPMS. However, recent case series have indicated 
a much lower rate of evolution to SPMS, estimated at slightly >1% 
each year, likely due to widespread use of effective therapies for MS.
3.  Primary progressive MS (PPMS) accounts for ~10% of cases. These 
patients  do  not  experience  attacks  but  rather  steadily  decline  in 
function from disease onset (Fig. 444-1C). Compared to RMS, the 
sex distribution is more even, the disease begins later in life (mean 
age ~40 years), and disability develops faster (relative to the onset of 
the first clinical symptom). Despite these differences, PPMS appears 
to represent the same underlying illness as RMS.

Progressive  MS  and  Disease  Activity  Patients  with  SPMS  or  even 
PPMS  will  occasionally  experience  relapses,  albeit  less  often  than  in 
RMS. Progressive MS patients experiencing relapses or who are found 
to  have  acute  new  lesions  on  MRI  are  considered  to  have  “active” 
progressive MS.
 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
MS  is  approximately  threefold  more  common  in  women  than  men. 
The age of onset is typically between 20 and 40 years (slightly later in 
men than in women), but the disease can present across the lifespan. 
Approximately  10%  of  cases  begin  before  the  age  of  18  years,  and  a 
small percentage of cases begin before the age of 10 years.

Geographic gradients are observed in MS, with the highest known 
prevalence  for  MS  (250  per  100,000)  in  the  Orkney  Islands,  located 
north  of  Scotland.  In  other  temperate  zone  areas  (e.g.,  northern 

RMS

PPMS

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
s
D

i

C

Time

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
s
D

i

A

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
s
D

i

B

SPMS

Time

Time

FIGURE 444-1  Clinical course of multiple sclerosis (MS). A. Relapsing MS (RMS). 
B. Secondary progressive MS (SPMS). C. Primary progressive MS (PPMS).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3463

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3464 North  America,  northern  Europe,  southern  Australia,  and  southern 
New Zealand), the prevalence of MS is 0.1–0.2%. By contrast, in the 
tropics (e.g., Asia, equatorial Africa, and the Middle East), the preva-
lence is often tenfold to twentyfold less.

The prevalence of MS has increased steadily (and dramatically) in 
several regions around the world over the past half-century, presum-
ably reflecting the impact of some environmental shift. Moreover, the 
fact  that  this  increase  appears  to  have  occurred  primarily  in  women 
indicates  that  women  are  more  responsive  to  this  environmental 
change.

Well-established risk factors for MS include a genetic predisposition, 
vitamin  D  deficiency,  Epstein-Barr  virus  (EBV)  exposure  after  early 
childhood, and cigarette smoking.

Vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increase in MS risk, and 
data suggest that ongoing deficiency also increases disease activity after 
MS begins. Immunoregulatory effects of vitamin D could explain these 
apparent  relationships.  Exposure  of  the  skin  to  ultraviolet-B  (UVB) 
radiation  from  the  sun  is  essential  for  the  biosynthesis  of  vitamin  D, 
and  this  endogenous  production  is  the  most  important  source  of 
vitamin  D  in  most  individuals.  A  diet  rich  in  fatty  fish  represents 
another  source  of  vitamin  D.  At  high  latitudes,  the  amount  of  UVB 
radiation reaching the earth’s surface is often insufficient, particularly 
during winter months, and consequently, low serum levels of vitamin D 
are common in temperate zones. The common practice to avoid direct 
sun exposure and the widespread use of sunblock would be expected to 
exacerbate any population-wide vitamin D deficiency (sun protection 
factor [SPF] 15 blocks 94% of incoming UVB radiation).

Evidence of a remote EBV infection playing some role in MS is sup-
ported  by  numerous  epidemiologic  and  laboratory  studies.  A  higher 
risk  of  infectious  mononucleosis  (associated  with  relatively  late  EBV 
infection) and higher antibody titers to latency-associated EBV nuclear 
antigen  have  been  repeatedly  associated  with  MS  risk,  although  a 
causal role for EBV is not established.

A  history  of  cigarette  smoking  also  is  associated  with  MS  risk. 
Interestingly, in an animal model of MS, the lung was identified as a 
critical site for activation of pathogenic T lymphocytes responsible for 
autoimmune demyelination.

GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS

Whites  are  inherently  at  higher  risk  for  MS  than  Africans  or 
Asians,  even  when  residing  in  a  similar  environment.  Recent 
studies in the United States, however, have shown that MS risk in 
persons  of  African  descent  is  as  high,  and  possibly  higher,  than  in 
whites.  MS  also  aggregates  within  some  families,  and  adoption, 
half-sibling, twin, and spousal studies indicate that familial aggregation 
is  primarily  due  to  genetic  factors.  Nonetheless,  family  studies  also 
support  a  contribution  of  environment,  as  fraternal  twins  of  MS 
patients are at higher risk than nontwin siblings (Table 444-2).

Susceptibility  to  MS  is  polygenic,  with  each  gene  contributing  a 
relatively small amount to the overall risk. The strongest susceptibility 
signal  genome-wide  maps  to  the  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)-
DRB1  gene  in  the  class  II  region  of  the  major  histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) and specifically to HLA-DR15 (formerly designated 
DR2), and this association accounts for ~10% of the disease risk. This 
HLA association, first described in the early 1970s, suggests that MS, 
at  its  core,  is  an  autoimmune  disease.  Whole-genome  association 
studies have now identified ~230 other MS susceptibility variants, each 
of  which  individually  has  only  a  very  small  effect  on  MS  risk.  Many 

TABLE 444-2  Risk of Developing Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
1 in 3
1 in 15
1 in 25
1 in 50
1 in 100
1 in 1000
1 in 1000

If an identical twin has MS
If a fraternal twin has MS
If a sibling has MS
If a parent or half-sibling has MS
If a first cousin has MS
If a spouse has MS
If no one in the family has MS

of  these  MS-associated  genes  have  known  roles  in  the  adaptive  and 
innate immune system, for example the genes for the interleukin (IL) 
7  receptor  (CD127),  IL-2  receptor  (CD25),  and  T-cell  costimulatory 
molecule LFA-3 (CD58); some variants also influence susceptibility to 
other autoimmune diseases in addition to MS. The variants identified 
so far all lack specificity and sensitivity for MS; thus, at present, they 
are not useful for diagnosis or prediction of the future disease course.

PATHOGENESIS
 ■ PATHOLOGY
Demyelination  New MS lesions begin with perivenular cuffing by 
inflammatory  mononuclear  cells,  predominantly  T  cells  and  macro-
phages, which also infiltrate the surrounding white matter. At sites of 
inflammation, the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is disrupted, but unlike 
in vasculitis, the vessel wall is preserved. At the leading edge of lesions, 
large  numbers  of  cytotoxic  CD8  cells  are  found.  Involvement  of  the 
humoral immune system is also evident; small numbers of B lympho-
cytes infiltrate the nervous system, myelin-specific autoantibodies are 
present on degenerating myelin sheaths, and complement is activated.
Sharply demarcated areas of demyelination are the pathologic hall-
mark of MS lesions, and evidence of myelin degeneration is found at 
the  earliest  time  points  of  tissue  injury.  Although  relative  sparing  of 
axons is typical, partial or total axonal destruction can also occur, espe-
cially within highly inflammatory lesions. In some lesions, surviving  oli-
godendrocytes or those that differentiate from precursor cells partially 
remyelinate  the  surviving  axons,  producing  so-called  shadow  plaques. 
However, in many lesions oligodendrocyte precursor cells are present 
but they fail to differentiate into mature myelin-producing cells. There-
fore, promoting remyelination to protect axons remains an important 
therapeutic goal. As lesions evolve, there is prominent astrocytic pro-
liferation (gliosis) and the term sclerosis refers to these gliotic plaques 
that have a rubbery or hardened texture at autopsy.

Neurodegeneration  Cumulative  axonal  and  neuronal  loss  is  the 
most  important  contributor  to  irreversible  neurologic  disability  and 
progressive  symptoms.  With  paraplegia  due  to  MS,  as  many  as  70% 
of axons are ultimately lost from the lateral corticospinal (e.g., motor) 
tracts. Demyelination can reduce trophic support for axons, redistrib-
ute ion channels, and destabilize action potential membrane potentials. 
Axons  can  adapt  initially  to  these  injuries,  but  over  time  distal  and 
retrograde degeneration (“dying-back” axonopathy) occurs.

Multiple pathologies appear to contribute to progressive symptoms 
in longstanding MS. Chronic active plaques are preexisting white mat-
ter lesions that show evidence of persistent inflammation, progressive 
axonal loss, and gradual concentric expansion, with large numbers of 
microglial  cells  at  the  leading  edge  of  enlarging  lesions  but  without 
BBB disruption. Recent studies have also highlighted the importance 
of  a  primary  injury  to  the  cerebral  cortex.  Cortical  plaques  are  fre-
quent  in  MS  but  are  generally  not  well  visualized  by  MRI;  these  can 
extend upward from adjacent white matter lesions, or may be located 
within the cortex or underneath the pia. Ectopic lymphoid follicles are 
aggregates of B, T, and plasma cells located in the superficial meninges, 
especially overlying deep cortical sulci; similar clusters are also present 
in perivascular spaces. Ectopic lymphoid follicles are topographically 
associated  with  underlying  demyelination  and  neuronal  loss  in  the 
cerebral  cortex,  and  diffusible  factors  from  these  lymphoid  cells  are 
believed to mediate subpial cortical demyelination and neurodegeneration. 
Neuronal  and  axonal  death  may  result  from  glutamate-mediated 
excitotoxicity,  oxidative  injury,  iron  accumulation,  and/or  mitochon-
drial failure.

In relapsing MS, inflammation is associated with focal perivenular 
parenchymal  infiltration  of  lymphocytes  and  monocytes  associated 
with  BBB  disruption  and  active  demyelination.  By  contrast,  inflam-
mation  in  progressive  MS  is  more  diffuse  and  is  characterized  by 
widespread  microglial  activation  across  large  areas  of  white  matter, 
associated  with  reduced  myelin  staining  and  axonal  injury  (“dirty 
white  matter”).  Activated  astrocytes  induced  by  microglia  may  also 
contribute  to  tissue  damage  (Chap.  425).  These  observations  imply 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3464

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders that  ongoing  inflammation  occurs  behind  an  intact  BBB  in  many 
patients with progressive MS, and this feature could explain the failure 
of immunotherapies not capable of crossing the BBB to benefit patients 
with progressive MS.
 ■ PHYSIOLOGY
Nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs in a saltatory manner, 
with the nerve impulse jumping from one node of Ranvier to the next 
without depolarization of the axonal membrane underlying the myelin 
sheath  between  nodes  (Fig.  444-2).  This  produces  faster  conduction 
velocities  (~70  m/s)  than  the  slow  velocities  (~1  m/s)  produced  by 
continuous  propagation  in  unmyelinated  nerves.  Conduction  block 
occurs when the nerve impulse is unable to traverse the demyelinated 
segment. This can happen when the resting axon membrane becomes 
hyperpolarized due to exposure of voltage-dependent potassium chan-
nels  that  are  normally  buried  underneath  the  myelin  sheath.  A  tem-
porary  conduction  block  often  follows  a  demyelinating  event  before 
sodium  channels  (originally  concentrated  at  the  nodes)  redistribute 
along  the  naked  axon  (Fig.  444-2).  This  redistribution  ultimately 
allows continuous propagation of nerve action potentials through the 
demyelinated segment. Conduction block may be incomplete, affecting 
high- but not low-frequency volleys of impulses. Variable conduction 
block can occur with raised body temperature or metabolic alterations 
and may explain clinical fluctuations that vary from hour to hour or 
appear  with  fever  or  exercise.  Conduction  slowing  occurs  when  the 
demyelinated  segments  of  the  axonal  membrane  are  reorganized  to 
support continuous (slow) nerve impulse propagation.
 ■ IMMUNOLOGY
A  proinflammatory  autoimmune  response  directed  against  a  com-
ponent  of  CNS  myelin,  and  perhaps  other  neural  elements  as  well, 
remains the cornerstone of current concepts of MS pathogenesis.
 ■ AUTOREACTIVE T LYMPHOCYTES
Myelin basic protein (MBP), an intracellular protein involved in myelin 
compaction,  is  an  important  T-cell  antigen  in  experimental  allergic 
encephalomyelitis  (EAE),  a  laboratory  model,  and  possibly  also  in 
human  MS.  Activated  MBP-reactive  T  cells  have  been  identified  in 
the  blood,  in  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF),  and  within  MS  lesions.  The 
MS associated HLA-DR15 protein binds with high affinity to a frag-
ment  of  MBP  (spanning  amino  acids  89–96),  potentially  stimulating 
T-cell  responses  to  this  self-protein.  Several  different  populations  of 
proinflammatory  T  cells  are  likely  to  mediate  autoimmunity  in  MS. 
T-helper  type  1  (TH1)  cells  producing  interferon  γ  (IFN-γ)  are  one 

Saltatory nerve impulse

Myelin sheath

Axon

Na+ channels

Node of Ranvier

A

Myelin sheath

Continuous nerve impulse

Myelin sheath

Axon

Na+ channels

B

FIGURE 444-2  Nerve conduction in myelinated and demyelinated axons. A. Saltatory 
nerve conduction in myelinated axons occurs with the nerve impulse jumping from 
one node of Ranvier to the next. Sodium channels (shown as breaks in the solid 
black  line)  are  concentrated  at  the  nodes  where  axonal  depolarization  occurs.  
B. Following demyelination, additional sodium channels are redistributed along the 
axon itself, thereby allowing continuous propagation of the nerve action potential 
despite the absence of myelin.

key effector population; TH1 cytokines, including IL-2, tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-α, and IFN-γ, also play key roles in activating and main-
taining  autoimmune  responses,  and  TNF-α  and  IFN-γ  may  directly 
injure  oligodendrocytes  or  the  myelin  membrane.  As  noted  above, 
CD8 cytotoxic T cells are present at the active edges of expanding MS 
lesions, and activated CD8 cells also appear to be enriched for reactiv-
ity against myelin antigens in MS patients.

3465

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

 ■ HUMORAL AUTOIMMUNITY
B-cell activation and antibody responses are centrally involved in the 
development of demyelinating lesions, as evidenced by the efficacy of 
B  cell–based  treatments  in  all  forms  of  MS  (see  “Treatment”  below). 
Clonally  restricted  populations  of  activated,  antigen-experienced, 
memory B cells and plasma cells are present in MS lesions, in menin-
geal lymphoid follicle-like structures overlying the cerebral cortex, and 
in the CSF. Similar populations are found in each compartment, indi-
cating that a highly focused B-cell response occurs locally within the 
CNS. Myelin-specific autoantibodies, some directed against an extra-
cellular myelin protein, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), 
have been detected bound to vesiculated myelin debris in MS plaques. 
In the CSF, elevated levels of locally synthesized immunoglobulins and 
oligoclonal antibodies, derived from clonally restricted CNS B cells and 
plasma cells, are also characteristic of MS. The pattern of oligoclonal 
banding is unique to each individual, and attempts to identify the tar-
gets of these antibodies have been largely unsuccessful; they appear to 
recognize a diverse array of antigens including intracellular ubiquitous 
proteins.  Therefore,  although  intrathecal  oligoclonal  antibodies  and 
elevated intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins are characteristic of 
MS, their role in disease pathogenesis remains uncertain.

Recent data suggest that the antigen presenting cell (APC) function 
of  B  cells  may  explain  their  role  in  MS  pathogenesis.  Remarkably, 
fragments of self-peptides derived from HLA-DR2 proteins themselves 
were found to bind intact DR2 molecules on B cells and serve as anti-
gens for presentation to T cells. Memory CD4+ T cells derived from 
CSF responded to these self-peptides bound to DR2 molecules and, in 
some  cases,  these  self-peptides  were  cross-reactive  with  myelin  anti-
gens,  RAS  guanyl-releasing  protein  2  (RASGRP2)  previously  found 
to  be  a  possible  T-cell  autoantigen  in  MS,  EBV,  and  Akkermansia 
muciniphila, a commensal gut bacterium associated with dysbiosis in 
MS patients. Thus, the MS-associated HLA proteins contain fragments 
that  might  trigger  autoimmunity  through  molecular  mimicry  with 
viral, bacterial, or cell-surface autoantigens.

DIAGNOSIS
There is no single diagnostic test for MS. Diagnostic criteria for clin-
ically definite MS require documentation of two or more episodes of 
symptoms  and  two  or  more  signs  that  reflect  pathology  in  anatom-
ically  noncontiguous  white  matter  tracts  of  the  CNS  (Table  444-3). 
Symptoms must last for >24 h and occur as distinct episodes that are 
separated by a month or more. In patients who have only one of the 
two  required  signs  on  neurologic  examination,  the  second  may  be 
documented by abnormal tests such as MRI or evoked potentials (EPs). 
Similarly,  in  the  most  recent  diagnostic  scheme,  the  second  clinical 
event (in time) may be supported solely by MRI findings, consisting of 
either the development of new focal white matter lesions on MRI or the 
simultaneous presence of both an enhancing lesion and a nonenhanc-
ing  lesion  in  an  asymptomatic  location.  In  patients  whose  course  is 
progressive from onset for ≥6 months without superimposed relapses, 
documentation of intrathecal IgG synthesis may be used to support a 
diagnosis of PPMS.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
 ■ MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI  has  revolutionized  the  diagnosis  and  management  of  MS 
(Fig.  444-3);  characteristic  abnormalities  are  found  in  >95%  of 
patients, although >90% of the lesions visualized by MRI are asymp-
tomatic. An increase in vascular permeability from a breakdown of 
the BBB is detected by leakage of intravenous gadolinium (Gd) into 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3465

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3466

None

TABLE 444-3  Diagnostic Criteria for Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
CLINICAL PRESENTATION ADDITIONAL DATA NEEDED FOR MS DIAGNOSIS
2 or more attacks; 
objective clinical evidence 
of 2 or more lesions or 
objective clinical evidence 
of 1 lesion with reasonable 
historical evidence of a 
prior attack
2 or more attacks; 
objective clinical evidence 
of 1 lesion

Dissemination in space, demonstrated by ≥1 T2 
lesion on MRI in at least 2 out of 4 MS-typical 
regions of the CNS (periventricular, juxtacortical, 
infratentorial, or spinal cord)
OR
•	 Await a further clinical attack implicating a 

1 attack; objective clinical 
evidence of 2 or more 
lesions

1 attack; objective  
clinical evidence of  
1 lesion (clinically isolated 
syndrome)

Insidious neurologic 
progression suggestive of 
MS (PPMS)

different CNS site

Dissemination in time, demonstrated by
•	 Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic 
gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time

OR
•	 A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion(s) 
on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its timing with 
reference to a baseline scan

OR
•	 Await a second clinical attack
Dissemination in space and time, demonstrated by:
For dissemination in space
•	 ≥1 T2 lesion in at least 2 out of 4 MS-typical 

regions of the CNS (periventricular, juxtacortical, 
infratentorial, or spinal cord)

OR
•	 Await a second clinical attack implicating a 

different CNS site

AND
•	 For dissemination in time
•	 Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic 
gadolinium-enhancing and nonenhancing 
lesions at any time

OR
•	 A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion(s) 
on follow-up MRI, irrespective of its timing with 
reference to a baseline scan

OR
•	 Await a second clinical attack
1 year of disease progression (retrospectively or 
prospectively determined)
PLUS
2 out of the 3 following criteria:
•	 Evidence for dissemination in space in the brain 
based on ≥1 T2+ lesions in the MS-characteristic 
periventricular, juxtacortical, or infratentorial 
regions

•	 Evidence for dissemination in space in the spinal 

cord based on ≥2 T2+ lesions in the cord

•	 Positive CSF (isoelectric focusing evidence of 
oligoclonal bands and/or elevated IgG index)

Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, 
magnetic resonance imaging; PPMS, primary progressive multiple sclerosis.
Source: Reproduced with permission from AJ Thompson et al: Diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis: 2017 revisions of the McDonald criteria. Lancet Neurol 17:162, 2018.

the  parenchyma.  Such  leakage  occurs  early  in  the  development  of 
an  MS  lesion  and  serves  as  a  useful  marker  of  inflammation.  Gd 
enhancement  typically  persists  for  <1  month,  and  the  residual  MS 
plaque  remains  visible  indefinitely  as  a  focal  area  of  hyperintensity 
(a  lesion)  on  T2-weighted  images.  Lesions  are  frequently  oriented 
perpendicular to the ventricular surface, corresponding to the patho-
logic pattern of perivenous demyelination (Dawson’s fingers). Lesions 

are multifocal within the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord. Lesions 
>6 mm located in the corpus callosum, periventricular white matter, 
brainstem,  cerebellum,  or  spinal  cord  are  particularly  helpful  diag-
nostically. Current criteria for the use of MRI in the diagnosis of MS 
are shown in Table 444-3.

Serial MRI studies in early relapsing-remitting MS reveal that bursts 
of focal inflammatory disease activity occur far more frequently than 
would have been predicted by the frequency of relapses. Thus, early in 
MS, most disease activity is clinically silent.

The  total  volume  of  T2-weighted  signal  abnormality  (the  “burden 
of disease”) shows a significant (albeit weak) correlation with clinical 
disability. Quantitative measures of brain and spinal cord atrophy are 
evidence of diffuse tissue injury and correlate more strongly with mea-
sures of disability or progressive MS. Serial MRI studies also indicate 
that progressive whole-brain atrophy occurs even in very early MS and 
continues throughout the disease course. Approximately one-third of 
T2-weighted  lesions  appear  as  hypointense  lesions  (black  holes)  on 
T1-weighted  imaging.  Black  holes  may  be  a  marker  of  irreversible 
demyelination  and  axonal  loss,  although  even  this  measure  depends 
on the timing of the image acquisition (e.g., most acute Gd-enhancing 
T2 lesions are T1 dark).

 ■ EVOKED POTENTIALS
EP  testing  assesses  function  in  afferent  (visual,  auditory,  and  soma-
tosensory)  or  efferent  (motor)  CNS  pathways.  EPs  use  computer 
averaging  to  measure  CNS  electric  potentials  evoked  by  repetitive 
stimulation  of  selected  peripheral  nerves  or  of  the  brain.  These  tests 
provide the most information when the pathways studied are clinically 
uninvolved. For example, in a patient with a relapsing spinal cord syn-
drome with sensory deficits in the legs, an abnormal somatosensory EP 
following  posterior  tibial  nerve  stimulation  provides  little  new  infor-
mation. By contrast, an abnormal visual EP in this circumstance would 
permit a diagnosis of clinically definite MS (Table 444-3). Abnormali-
ties on one or more EP modalities occur in 80–90% of MS patients. EP 
abnormalities are not specific to MS, although a marked delay in the 
latency of a specific EP component (as opposed to a reduced amplitude 
or distorted wave-shape) is suggestive of demyelination.

 ■ CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
CSF abnormalities found in MS include a mononuclear cell pleocyto-
sis  and  an  increased  level  of  intrathecally  synthesized  IgG.  The  total 
CSF  protein  is  usually  normal  or  mildly  elevated.  Various  formulas 
distinguish  intrathecally  synthesized  IgG  from  IgG  that  entered  the 
CNS passively from the serum. The CSF IgG index expresses the ratio 
of IgG to albumin in the CSF divided by the same ratio in the serum. 
The IgG synthesis rate uses serum and CSF IgG and albumin measure-
ments  to  calculate  the  rate  of  CNS  IgG  synthesis.  The  measurement 
of  oligoclonal  bands  (OCBs)  by  agarose  gel  electrophoresis  in  the 
CSF also assesses intrathecal production of IgG. Two or more discrete 
OCBs,  not  present  in  a  paired  serum  sample,  are  found  in  >90%  of 
patients with MS. OCBs may be absent at the onset of MS, and in indi-
vidual patients, the number of bands may increase with time.

A  mild  CSF  pleocytosis  (>5  cells/μL)  is  present  in  ~25%  of  cases, 
usually in young patients with RMS. A pleocytosis of >75 cells/μL, the 
presence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or a protein concentration 
>1 g/L (>100 mg/dL) in CSF should raise concern that the patient may 
not have MS.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The  possibility  of  an  alternative  diagnosis  should  always  be  consid-
ered  (Table  444-4),  particularly  when  (1)  symptoms  are  localized 
exclusively  to  the  posterior  fossa,  craniocervical  junction,  or  spinal 
cord; (2) the patient is <15 or >60 years of age; (3) the clinical course 
is progressive from onset; (4) the patient has never experienced visual, 
sensory,  or  bladder  symptoms;  or  (5)  laboratory  findings  (e.g.,  MRI, 
CSF, or EPs) are atypical. Similarly, uncommon or rare symptoms in 
MS  (e.g.,  aphasia,  parkinsonism,  chorea,  isolated  dementia,  severe 
muscular atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, episodic loss of conscious-
ness,  fever,  headache,  seizures,  or  coma)  should  increase  concern 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3466

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders A

B

3467

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

C

D

FIGURE 444-3  Magnetic resonance imaging findings in multiple sclerosis (MS). A. Axial first-echo image from T2-weighted sequence demonstrates multiple bright signal 
abnormalities in white matter, typical for MS. B. Sagittal T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image in which the high signal of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
has been suppressed. CSF appears dark, whereas areas of brain edema or demyelination appear high in signal, as shown here in the corpus callosum (arrows). Lesions in 
the anterior corpus callosum are frequent in MS and rare in vascular disease. C. Sagittal T2-weighted fast spin echo image of the thoracic spine demonstrates a fusiform 
high-signal-intensity lesion in the midthoracic spinal cord. D. Sagittal T1-weighted image obtained after the intravenous administration of gadolinium DTPA reveals focal 
areas of blood-brain barrier disruption, identified as high-signal-intensity regions (arrows).

about an alternative diagnosis. Diagnosis is also difficult in patients 
with a rapid or explosive (strokelike) onset or with mild symptoms 
and a normal neurologic examination. Rarely, intense inflammation 
and  swelling  may  produce  a  mass  lesion  that  mimics  a  primary  or 
metastatic tumor. Disorders possibly mistaken for MS include: neu-
romyelitis  optica  (Chap.  437),  sarcoidosis,  vascular  disorders  (anti-
phospholipid  syndrome  and  vasculitis),  rarely  CNS  lymphoma,  and 
still more rarely infections such as syphilis or Lyme disease. The spe-
cific tests required to exclude alternative diagnoses will vary with each 
clinical  situation;  however,  an  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate,  serum 
B12  level,  antinuclear  antibodies,  and  treponemal  antibody  should 
probably be obtained in all patients with suspected MS.

PROGNOSIS
Historically,  most  patients  with  MS  ultimately  experienced  pro-
gressive  neurologic  disability.  In  older  studies  conducted  before  
disease-modifying therapies for MS were available, 15 years after onset, 
only 20% of patients had no functional limitation, and between one-
third and one-half of RMS patients progressed to SPMS and required 

assistance with ambulation; furthermore, 25 years after onset, ~80% of 
MS  patients  reached  this  level  of  disability.  The  long-term  prognosis 
for MS has improved substantially in recent years, and transition from 
RMS  to  SPMS  now  occurs  at  approximately  a  1%  annual  rate  com-
pared with 2–3% in the pretreatment era. This improvement is almost 
certainly due, at least in part, to widespread use of disease-modifying 
therapies for RMS, and it is hoped that the prognosis will continue to 
improve as highly efficacious agents are increasingly employed early in 
the disease course.

Although the prognosis in an individual is difficult to establish, cer-
tain clinical features suggest a more favorable prognosis. These include 
ON or sensory symptoms at onset; fewer than two relapses in the first 
year  of  illness;  and  minimal  impairment  after  5  years.  Predictors  of 
an early aggressive course of the illness include older age at symptom 
onset and greater disability and the appearance of motor signs during 
the  first  year  of  the  illness.  By  contrast,  patients  with  truncal  ataxia, 
action  tremor,  pyramidal  symptoms,  or  a  progressive  disease  course 
are  more  likely  to  become  disabled.  Patients  with  a  long-term  favor-
able  course  are  likely  to  have  developed  fewer  MRI  lesions  and  have 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3467

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3468 TABLE 444-4  Disorders That Can Mimic Multiple Sclerosis (MS)

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Behçet’s disease
Cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy, subcortical infarcts, and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Congenital leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic 
leukodystrophy)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
Ischemic optic neuropathy (arteritic and nonarteritic)
Lyme disease
Mitochondrial encephalopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke (MELAS)
Neoplasms (e.g., lymphoma, glioma, meningioma)
Neuromyelitis optica
Sarcoidosis
Sjögren’s syndrome
Stroke and ischemic cerebrovascular disease
Syphilis
Systemic lupus erythematosus and related collagen vascular disorders
Tropical spastic paraparesis (HTLV-1/2 infection)
Vascular malformations (especially spinal dural AV fistulas)
Vasculitis (primary CNS or other)
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Abbreviations: AV, arteriovenous; CNS, central nervous system; HTLV, human T-cell 
lymphotropic virus.

less  brain  atrophy  during  the  early  years  of  disease,  and  vice  versa. 
Importantly, some MS patients have a benign variant of MS and never 
develop neurologic disability even when untreated. The likelihood of 
having  benign  MS  is  thought  to  be  <10%.  Patients  with  benign  MS  
15 years after onset who have entirely normal neurologic examinations 
are likely to maintain their benign course.

In  patients  with  their  first  demyelinating  event  (i.e.,  a  clinically 
isolated  syndrome),  the  brain  MRI  provides  prognostic  information. 
With three or more typical T2-weighted lesions, the risk of developing 
MS after 20 years is ~80%. Conversely, with a normal brain MRI, the 
likelihood of developing MS is <20%. Similarly, the presence of two or 
more  Gd-enhancing  lesions  at  baseline  is  highly  predictive  of  future 
MS, as is the appearance of either new T2-weighted lesions or new Gd 
enhancement ≥3 months after the initial episode.

 ■ EFFECT OF PREGNANCY
Pregnant  MS  patients  experience  fewer  attacks  than  expected  dur-
ing  gestation  (especially  in  the  last  trimester),  but  more  attacks  than 
expected  in  the  first  3  months  postpartum.  When  considering  the 
pregnancy year as a whole (i.e., 9 months of pregnancy plus 3 months 
postpartum), the overall disease course is unaffected. Decisions about 
childbearing should thus be made based on (1) the mother’s physical 
state, (2) her ability to care for the child, and (3) the availability of social 
support.  Disease-modifying  therapy  is  generally  discontinued  during 
pregnancy, although the actual risk from the interferons and glatiramer 
acetate (see below) appears to be low.

TREATMENT
Therapy for MS can be divided into several categories: (1) treatment of 
acute attacks, (2) treatment with disease-modifying agents that reduce 
the biologic activity of MS, and (3) symptomatic therapy. Treatments 
that promote remyelination or neural repair do not currently exist, but 
several promising approaches are being actively investigated.

The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) is a widely used mea-
sure  of  neurologic  impairment  in  MS  (Table  444-5).  Most  patients 
with EDSS scores <3.5 walk normally, and are generally not disabled; 
by contrast, patients with EDSS scores >4.0 have progressive MS (SPMS 
or PPMS), are gait-impaired, and often are occupationally disabled.

 ■ ACUTE ATTACKS OR INITIAL  
DEMYELINATING EPISODES
When  patients  experience  acute  deterioration,  it  is  important  to 
consider  whether  this  change  reflects  new  disease  activity  or  a 
“pseudoexacerbation”  resulting  from  an  increase  in  ambient  temper-
ature,  fever,  or  an  infection.  When  the  clinical  change  is  thought  to 
reflect a pseudoexacerbation, glucocorticoid treatment is inappropri-
ate.  Glucocorticoids  are  used  to  manage  either  first  attacks  or  acute 
exacerbations.  They  provide  short-term  clinical  benefit  by  reducing 
the severity and shortening the duration of attacks. Whether treatment 
provides any long-term benefit on the course of the illness is less clear. 
Therefore, mild attacks are often not treated. Physical and occupational 
therapy can help with mobility and manual dexterity.

Glucocorticoid  treatment  is  usually  administered  as  intravenous 
methylprednisolone,  500–1000  mg/d  for  3–5  days,  either  without  a 
taper or followed by a course of oral prednisone beginning at a dose of 
60–80 mg/d and gradually tapered over 2 weeks. Orally administered 
methylprednisolone,  prednisone,  or  dexamethasone  (in  equivalent 
dosages) can be substituted for the intravenous portion of the therapy. 
Outpatient treatment is almost always possible.

Side  effects  of  short-term  glucocorticoid  therapy  include  fluid 
retention, potassium loss, weight gain, gastric disturbances, acne, and 
emotional  lability.  Concurrent  use  of  a  low-salt,  potassium-rich  diet 
and  avoidance  of  potassium-wasting  diuretics  are  advisable.  Lithium 
carbonate  (300  mg  orally  bid)  may  help  manage  emotional  lability 
and insomnia associated with glucocorticoid therapy. Patients with a 
history of peptic ulcer disease may require cimetidine (400 mg bid) or 
ranitidine (150 mg bid). Proton pump inhibitors such as pantoprazole 
(40  mg  orally  bid)  may  reduce  the  likelihood  of  gastritis,  especially 
when  large  doses  are  administered  orally.  Plasma  exchange  (five  to 
seven  exchanges:  40–60  mL/kg  per  exchange,  every  other  day  for 
14 days) may benefit patients with fulminant attacks of demyelination 
that are unresponsive to glucocorticoids. However, the cost is high, and 
conclusive evidence of efficacy is lacking.

 ■ DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR 
RELAPSING FORMS OF MS (RMS, SPMS WITH 
EXACERBATIONS)
Regulatory bodies have approved more than a dozen immunomodu-
latory and immunosuppressive agents for treatment of RMS. In phase 
3  clinical  trials,  each  was  shown  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  clinical 
relapses  and  evolution  of  new  brain  MRI  lesions  in  relapsing  forms 
of  MS  (Table  444-6).  Each  can  also  be  used  in  SPMS  patients  who 
continue  to  experience  attacks,  both  because  SPMS  can  be  difficult 
to  distinguish  from  relapsing  MS  and  because  the  available  clinical 
trials, although not all definitive, suggest that such patients may some-
times  derive  therapeutic  benefit.  Moreover,  regulators  now  consider 
patients with recent relapses to be a “relapsing form of MS” regardless 
of  whether  these  patients  previously  had  progressive  disability  inde-
pendent  from  relapses.  When  considering  the  data  in  Table  444-6, 
however, it is important to note that the relative efficacy of the different 
agents  has  not  been  directly  tested  in  head-to-head  studies  and  that 
cross-trial comparisons are inaccurate. However, given the increasingly 
complex landscape of therapeutics for MS, for convenience the discus-
sion  of  these  agents  has  been  divided  into  those  used  more  and  less 
frequently; and also by an estimate of their relative (high, moderate, or 
modest) perceived level of efficacy. These are meant to serve as rough 
guides  only,  and  considerable  variance  exists  in  practice  patterns,  as 
well as availability of these agents, in different parts of the world.

FREQUENTLY USED AGENTS FOR RMS
 ■ ANTI-CD20 MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES  
(HIGHLY EFFECTIVE)
Ocrelizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the 
CD20 molecule present on the surface of mature B cells. CD20 is not 
expressed on early B-cell precursors or on antibody-producing plasma 
cells,  thus  treatment  with  ocrelizumab  selectively  depletes  mature  
B cells while preserving preexisting humoral immunity and the capacity 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3468

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3469

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

5.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~100 m
6.0 = Unilateral assistance required to walk about 100 m with or without resting
6.5 = Constant bilateral assistance required to walk about 20 m without resting
7.0 =  Unable to walk beyond about 5 m even with aid; essentially restricted to wheelchair; 

wheels self and transfers alone

7.5 = Unable to take more than a few steps; restricted to wheelchair; may need aid to transfer
8.0 =  Essentially restricted to bed or chair or perambulated in wheelchair, but out of bed most 

of day; retains many self-care functions; generally has effective use of arms

8.5 =  Essentially restricted to bed much of the day; has some effective use of arm(s); retains 

some self-care functions

9.0 = Helpless bed patient; can communicate and eat
9.5 = Totally helpless bed patient; unable to communicate or eat
10.0 = Death due to MS

5 =  Loss (essentially) of sensation in 1 or 2 limbs or moderate decrease in touch or pain and/or 

loss of proprioception for most of the body below the head

6 = Sensation essentially lost below the head
E. Bowel and bladder functions
0 = Normal
1 = Mild urinary hesitancy, urgency, or retention
2 = Moderate hesitancy, urgency, retention of bowel or bladder, or rare urinary incontinence
3 = Frequent urinary incontinence
4 = In need of almost constant catheterization
5 = Loss of bladder function
6 = Loss of bowel and bladder function
F. Visual (or optic) functions
0 = Normal
1 = Scotoma with visual acuity (corrected) better than 20/30
2 = Worse eye with scotoma with maximal visual acuity (corrected) of 20/30 to 20/59
3 =  Worse eye with large scotoma, or moderate decrease in fields, but with maximal visual 

acuity (corrected) of 20/60 to 20/99

4 =  Worse eye with marked decrease of fields and maximal acuity (corrected) of 20/100 to 

20/200; grade 3 plus maximal acuity of better eye of 20/60 or less

5 =  Worse eye with maximal visual acuity (corrected) <20/200; grade 4 plus maximal acuity of 

better eye of ≤20/60

6 = Grade 5 plus maximal visual acuity of better eye of ≤20/60
G. Cerebral (or mental) functions
0 = Normal
1 = Mood alteration only (does not affect EDSS score)
2 = Mild decrease in mentation
3 = Moderate decrease in mentation
4 = Marked decrease in mentation
5 = Chronic brain syndrome—severe or incompetent

TABLE 444-5  Scoring Systems for Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)

0.0 =  Normal neurologic examination (all grade 0 in functional status 

[FS])

1.0 = No disability, minimal signs in one FS (i.e., grade 1)
1.5 =  No disability, minimal signs in more than one FS (more than one 

grade 1)

2.0 = Minimal disability in one FS (one FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
2.5 = Minimal disability in two FS (two FS grade 2, others 0 or 1)
3.0 =  Moderate disability in one FS (one FS grade 3, others 0 or 1) or 

mild disability in three or four FS (three/four FS grade 2, others 0 
or 1) although fully ambulatory

3.5 =  Fully ambulatory but with moderate disability in one FS (one grade 3) 

and one or two FS grade 2; or two FS grade 3; or five FS grade 2 
(others 0 or 1)

4.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~500 m
4.5 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~300 m
5.0 = Ambulatory without aid or rest for ~200 m

Functional Status (FS) Score

A. Pyramidal functions
0 = Normal
1 = Abnormal signs without disability
2 = Minimal disability
3 =  Mild or moderate paraparesis or hemiparesis, or severe 

monoparesis

4 =  Marked paraparesis or hemiparesis, moderate quadriparesis, or 

monoplegia

5 = Paraplegia, hemiplegia, or marked quadriparesis
6 = Quadriplegia
B. Cerebellar functions
0 = Normal
1 = Abnormal signs without disability
2 = Mild ataxia
3 = Moderate truncal or limb ataxia
4 = Severe ataxia all limbs
5 = Unable to perform coordinated movements due to ataxia
C. Brainstem functions
0 = Normal
1 = Signs only
2 = Moderate nystagmus or other mild disability
3 =  Severe nystagmus, marked extraocular weakness, or moderate 

disability of other cranial nerves

4 = Marked dysarthria or other marked disability
5 = Inability to swallow or speak
D. Sensory functions
0 = Normal
1 = Vibration or figure-writing decrease only, in 1 or 2 limbs
2 =  Mild decrease in touch or pain or position sense, and/or moderate 
decrease in vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or vibratory decrease alone in 
3 or 4 limbs

3 =  Moderate decrease in touch or pain or position sense, and/or 

essentially lost vibration in 1 or 2 limbs, or mild decrease in touch 
or pain, and/or moderate decrease in all proprioceptive tests in 3 
or 4 limbs

4 =  Marked decrease in touch or pain or loss of proprioception, alone 
or combined, in 1 or 2 limbs or moderate decrease in touch or pain 
and/or severe proprioceptive decrease in >2 limbs

Source: Adapted from JF Kurtzke: Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: An expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology 33:1444, 1983.

for B-cell reconstitution by lymphoid stem cells. Ocrelizumab rapidly 
depletes  circulating  B  cells  through  antibody-dependent  cellular  tox-
icity  and  complement-dependent  cytotoxicity.  The  beneficial  effects 
of  B-cell  depletion  in  MS  may  involve  interruption  in  trafficking  of  
B cells from the periphery to the CNS and reduction in antigen presen-
tation and/or modulation of cytokine secretion by B cells (see “Immu-
nology”,  above).  In  two  phase  3  trials,  ocrelizumab  demonstrated  a 

high degree of efficacy against RMS, reducing annualized relapse rates 
by 47%, reducing new MRI lesions by 95%, and improving other mea-
sures of inflammatory and degenerative disease activity, compared with 
three times per week interferon β-1a (Rebif). Ocrelizumab 600 mg is 
administered by intravenous infusion every 24 weeks (administered as 
two 300-mg infusions spaced 2 weeks apart for the first dose, and as 
a single 600-mg infusion thereafter); intravenous methylprednisolone 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3469

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3470

TABLE 444-6  Outcomes for FDA-Approved Therapies for Multiple Sclerosisa

RELAPSING MS

DOSE, ROUTE, AND SCHEDULE
OCR, 600mg IV, Q6 mo
OFA
NTZ, 300 mg IV qmo
FNG, 0.5 mg PO qd
FNG, 0.5 mg PO qd
OZN, 1 mg PO qd
OZN, 1 mg PO qd
PNS, 20 mg
PO qd
DMF, 240 mg PO bid
IFN-β-1b, 250 μg SC qod
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
Peg- IFN-β-1a, 125 μg SC q2w
GA, 20 mg SC qd
TF, 14 mg PO qd
CLAD 3.5 mg/kg PO
ALEM, 12mg/m2 IV/5d
MTX, 12 mg/m2 IV q3mo

Secondary Progressive MS

STUDY DURATION 
(WEEKS)
96
20 months1
96
96
48
52
104
108

96
96
96
96
48
96
96
96
104
96

COMPARATOR
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
TF 14 mg PO qd
PBO
PBO
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
IFN-β-1a, 30 μg IM qw
Teriflunomide 14 mg 
PO qd

PBO
PBO
PBO
PBO
PBO
PBO
PBO
PBO
IFN-β-1a, 44 μg SC tiw
PBO

CLINICAL OUTCOMESb

MRI OUTCOMESc

ATTACK RATE, 
MEAN
−46%e,h
−55%e
−68%e
−55%e
−52%e
–48%e
–38%e
–30%e

CHANGE IN DISEASE 
SEVERITY
−33%e,h
−34%2
−42%e
−34%f
NS
NS
NS
NS

NEW T2 
LESIONSd
−80%e,h
−96%e
−83%e
−74%e
−35%e
–48%e
–42%e
–56%e

TOTAL BURDEN 
OF DISEASE
NR
NR
−18%e
−23%e
NS
NR
NR
NR

−52%e
−34%e
−18%g
−32%e
−36%e
−29%f
−31%e
−43%
−49%e
−66%e

−40%f
−29% (NS)
−37%g
−30%g
−38%g
−12% (NS)
−26%g
−23%
−42%f
−75%g

−71%e
−83%f
−36%f
−78%e
−67%e
−38%f
−70%e
−73%
−32%e
−79%g

−81%e

−92%e

NR
−17%e
NS
−15%e
−2%e
−8%f
−20%g
−24%
NS
NR

−22%e

−11%e

SIP, 2 mg PO qd

12–36 monthsi

PBO

−55%e

−21%f

Primary Progressive MS

OCR, 600 mg IV, Q6 mo

96

PBO

NR

−24%g

1Variable duration study with median time in randomized controlled period of 20 months.
2p = 0.002
aPercentage reductions (or increases) have been calculated by dividing the reported rates in the treated group by the comparable rates in the placebo group, except 
for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disease burden, which was calculated as the difference in the median percent change between the treated and placebo groups. 
bSeverity = 1 point Expanded Disability Status Scale score progression, sustained for 3 months (in the IFN-β-1a 30 μg qw trial, this change was sustained for 6 months; in 
the IFN-β-1b trial, this was over 3 years). cDifferent studies measured these MRI measures differently, making comparisons difficult (numbers for new T2 represent the best-
case scenario for each trial). dNew lesions seen on T2-weighted MRI. ep = .001. fp = .01. gp = .05. hPooled analysis from OPERA 1 and 2 studies. iVariable duration study with 
median time in randomized controlled period of 18 months.
Abbreviations: ALEM, alemtuzumab; CLAD, cladribine; DMF, dimethyl fumarate; FDA, food and drug administration; FNG, fingolimod; GA, glatiramer acetate; IFN-β, interferon 
β; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous;  MTX, mitoxantrone; NR, not reported; NS, not significant; NTZ, natalizumab; OFA, ofatumumab; OFR, ocrelizumab; OZN, ozanimod; 
PNS, ponesimod; PO, oral; q3mo, once every 3 months; qd, daily; qmo, once per month; qod, every other day; qw, once per week; qyr, once per year; SC, subcutaneous; SIP, 
siponimod; TF, teriflunomide; tiw, three times per week.

100 mg is given prior to each infusion and optional prophylaxis with 
analgesics/antipyretics and antihistamines is recommended, along with 
adjustment of the infusion rate to manage infusion-related reactions. 
Ocrelizumab is generally well tolerated with infusion-related reactions 
occurring in a minority of patients; these are most often observed with 
the first infusion and are usually mild in degree. Vaccination responses 
may be blunted in patients receiving ocrelizumab or other anti-CD20 
based therapies; whenever possible, immunizations should be admin-
istered  prior  to  initiating  treatment,  and  live  vaccines  should  not  be 
given in actively treated patients.

Ofatumumab  is  a  fully  human  anti-CD20  monoclonal  antibody 
that can be self-administered at home by monthly 20 mg subcutaneous 
injection, after initial 20-mg loading doses on days 1, 7, and 14. Two 
pivotal phase 3 trials demonstrated superiority of ofatumumab tested 
against teriflunomide with an efficacy profile against relapses similar 
to  ocrelizumab,  reduction  of  new  MRI  lesions  by  95%,  reduction  of 
disability,  and  lowering  of  serum  neurofilament  light  chain  levels, 
a  biomarker  of  neuronal  damage.  A  high  degree  of  safety  was  also 
observed in the trials.

Rituximab,  another  anti-CD20  antibody,  was  tested  against  MS 
in  preliminary  trials,  and  appears  also  to  be  highly  effective  based 
on numerous reports of real-world experience with this agent; ritux-
imab  (1g  IV  Q6  mo)  is  used  in  some  settings  despite  lack  of  pivotal 

trial  data.  Rituximab  is  associated  with  a  very  small  risk  (estimated 
at  <1:25,000/year)  of  progressive  multifocal  leukoencephalopathy 
(PML),  a  life-threatening  condition  resulting  from  infection  by  the 
John Cunningham (JC) virus, thus it is possible that ocrelizumab and 
ofatumumab will also carry a nonzero risk.

 ■ NATALIZUMAB (HIGHLY EFFECTIVE)
Natalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the 
α4 subunit of α4β1 integrin, a cellular adhesion molecule expressed on 
the surface of lymphocytes. It prevents lymphocytes from binding to 
endothelial cells, thereby preventing lymphocytes from penetrating the 
BBB and entering the CNS. Natalizumab is highly effective in reducing 
the attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease sever-
ity in MS (both clinical and MRI). Moreover, it is well tolerated, and the 
dosing schedule of monthly intravenous infusions makes it convenient 
for patients. Natalizumab, 300 mg, is administered by IV infusion each 
month.  Treatment  is,  in  general,  well  tolerated.  A  small  percentage 
(<10%)  of  patients  experience  hypersensitivity  reactions  (including 
anaphylaxis), and ~6% develop neutralizing antibodies to the molecule 
(only half of which persist).

The major concern is risk for PML, occurring in ~0.4% of patients 
treated with natalizumab. The incidence of PML is very low in the first 
year  of  treatment  but  then  rises  in  subsequent  years  of  treatment  to 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3470

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders reach a level of about 2 cases per 1000 patients per year. Nevertheless, 
the measurement of antibodies against the JC virus in the serum can 
be used to stratify this risk. Approximately half of the adult population 
is  JC  antibody  positive,  indicating  that  they  experienced  an  asymp-
tomatic infection with the JC virus at some time in the past. Thus, in 
patients who do not have these antibodies, the risk of PML is minimal 
(<1:10,000  as  long  as  they  remain  JC  antibody  free).  Conversely,  in 
patients  who  have  these  antibodies  (especially  those  who  have  them 
in  high  titer),  the  risk  may  be  as  high  as  ≥1.1%.  Up  to  2%  of  sero-
negative  MS  patients  undergoing  treatment  with  natalizumab  sero-
convert annually; thus, it is recommended that JC antibody status be 
assessed at 6-month intervals in all patients receiving natalizumab. In  
antibody-positive  patients,  a  change  to  another  disease-modifying 
therapy  should  be  strongly  considered.  The  risk  of  PML  is  also  high 
in  patients  who  previously  received  immunosuppressive  therapy. 
Natalizumab is generally recommended only for JC antibody-negative 
patients, unless they have failed alternative therapies or if they have a 
particularly aggressive disease course.

 ■ S1P RECEPTOR MODULATORS  
(MODERATELY EFFECTIVE)
Fingolimod  is  a  sphingosine-1-phosphate  (S1P)  modulator  that 
prevents the egress of lymphocytes from secondary lymphoid organs 
such as the lymph nodes and spleen. Fingolimod binds to S1P1, S1P3, 
S1P4,  and  S1P5  receptors.  Its  mechanism  of  action  is  probably  due 
to  sequestration  of  lymphocytes  in  the  periphery,  thereby  inhibiting 
their  trafficking  to  the  CNS.  Fingolimod  reduces  the  attack  rate  and 
significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS. It is well 
tolerated, and the daily oral dosing schedule makes it convenient for 
patients.  A  head-to-head  phase  3  randomized  study  demonstrated 
the  superiority  of  fingolimod  over  low-dose  (weekly)  IFN-β-1a.  Fin-
golimod, 0.5 mg, is administered orally each day. Mild abnormalities 
on routine laboratory evaluation (e.g., elevated liver function tests or 
lymphopenia) are more common than in controls, sometimes requir-
ing discontinuation of the medication. First- and second-degree heart 
block  and  bradycardia  can  also  occur  when  fingolimod  therapy  is 
initiated.  A  6-h  period  of  observation  (including  electrocardiogram 
monitoring) is recommended for all patients receiving their first dose. 
Other  side  effects  include  macular  edema  and,  rarely,  disseminated 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and cryptococcal infections; prior to ini-
tiating therapy with fingolimod, an ophthalmic examination and VZV 
vaccination for seronegative individuals are indicated. Fingolimod can 
also cause QT prolongation with the potential for drug–drug interac-
tions with other medications that also prolong the QT interval.

Ozanimod is a S1P1- and S1P5-selective S1P inhibitor that, like fin-
golimod, prevents the egress of lymphocytes from secondary lymphoid 
organs.  Ozanimod  was  shown  to  be  superior  to  low-dose  (weekly) 
IFN-β-1a  in  preventing  relapses  and  new  lesion  formation  on  brain 
MRI. Because ozanimod binds only weakly to S1P3 receptors, cardiac 
conduction-related side effects, such as QT prolongation and secondary- 
degree  heart  block  that  are  associated  with  modulation  of  myocardial 
S1P3  receptors,  are  not  associated  with  ozanimod.  An  up-titration 
scheme is used when starting this medication to reduce the risk of tran-
sient decreases in heart rate and atrioventricular conduction delays that 
may occur after the first dose. In contrast to fingolimod, cardiovascular 
monitoring  is  not  required  during  first-dose  administration  in  most 
patients. Ozanimod was not studied in patients with severe untreated 
sleep  apnea,  class  III/IV  heart  failure,  significant  cardiac  conduction 
disorders,  or  in  those  who  experienced  thromboembolic  events  in 
the  last  6  months,  and  is  relatively  contraindicated  in  these  patients. 
Patients  starting  ozanimod  should  undergo  a  CBC,  LFTs,  ECG,  and 
eye examination before starting therapy. Infections and hypertension 
should  be  monitored  for  during  treatment.  Live  vaccines  should  be 
avoided during treatment and for 3 months after discontinuation.

Ponesimod  is  a  S1P1-selective  modulator.  Ponesimod  was  shown 
to  be  superior  to  teriflunomide  in  preventing  relapses  and  new  MRI 
lesion  formation.  An  up-titration  scheme  is  used  when  starting  this 
medication to reduce the risk of transient decreases in heart rate and 
atrioventricular conduction delays that may occur after the first dose. 

3471

A 4-h first-dose observation period with cardiovascular monitoring is 
necessary in patients whose resting heart rate is <55 beats/min. Pone-
simod is contraindicated in patients who have in the prior 6 months 
experienced stroke, heart attack, unstable angina, class III or IV dec-
ompensated  heart  failure  or  have  a  Mobitz  type  II  or  greater  degree 
of heart block without a pacemaker. Patients should undergo a CBC, 
LFTs, ECG, and eye examination before starting therapy, and be mon-
itored for infections and hypertension during treatment. Live vaccines 
should be avoided during treatment.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

 ■ DIMETHYL FUMARATE (MODERATELY 
EFFECTIVE)
Dimethyl  fumarate  (DMF)  is  a  small-molecule  and  a  Krebs  cycle 
metabolite with anti-inflammatory effects. DMF is metabolized to the 
active compound monomethyl fumarate. Although the precise mech-
anisms  of  action  are  not  fully  understood,  it  seems  to  modulate  the 
expression of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Also, 
DMF  inhibits  the  ubiquitylation  and  degradation  of  nuclear  factor 
E2-related  factor  2  (Nrf2)—a  transcription  factor  that  binds  antioxi-
dant response elements (AREs) located on DNA and induces transcrip-
tion of several antioxidant proteins. DMF reduces the attack rate and 
significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS patients. 
However, its twice-daily oral dosing schedule makes it somewhat less 
convenient for patients than daily oral therapies. In addition, compli-
ance is likely to be less with a twice-daily dosing regimen—a factor that 
could be of concern given the observation (in a small clinical trial) that 
once-daily DMF lacks efficacy. A head-to-head trial provided evidence 
that DMF was superior to glatiramer acetate on some outcome mea-
sures. DMF, 240 mg, is administered orally twice each day. Gastroin-
testinal side effects (abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, flushing, 
and diarrhea) are common at the start of therapy but generally subside 
with continued administration. Other adverse events include flushing, 
mild  decreases  in  neutrophil  and  lymphocyte  counts,  and  elevations 
in liver enzymes. Nevertheless, in general, treatment with DMF is well 
tolerated after an initial period of adjustment. Following the release of 
DMF, several cases of PML were reported in patients receiving prod-
ucts that contained DMF. Most of these patients were lymphopenic and 
monitoring for lymphopenia every 6 months is recommended. Patients 
who are persistently lymphopenic (lymphocyte count <500 cells/mL) 
are  recommended  to  consider  alternate  treatments  due  to  the  PML 
risk.  Clinically  significant  liver  injury  has  been  reported  with  DMF 
treatment.  Liver  function  tests  should  be  assessed  before  treatment 
and when clinically indicated. Elevations in liver function tests resolve 
following treatment discontinuation.

Diroximel  fumarate  is,  like  DMF,  metabolized  to  monomethyl 
fumarate. The efficacy of diroximel fumarate is based upon bioavail-
ability studies in patients with RMS and healthy subjects. The adverse 
event profile and monitoring requirements are the same as with DMF.

 ■ GLATIRAMER ACETATE (MODESTLY EFFECTIVE)
Glatiramer  acetate  is  a  synthetic,  random  polypeptide  composed  of 
four  amino  acids  (l-glutamic  acid,  l-lysine,  l-alanine,  and  l-tyrosine). 
Its mechanism of action may include (1) induction of antigen-specific 
suppressor T cells; (2) binding to MHC molecules, thereby displacing 
bound  MBP;  or  (3)  altering  the  balance  between  proinflammatory 
and  regulatory  cytokines.  Glatiramer  acetate  reduces  the  attack  rate 
(whether measured clinically or by MRI) in RRMS. Glatiramer acetate 
also benefits disease-severity measures, although, for clinical disability, 
this  is  less  well  established  than  for  IFN-β.  Nevertheless,  two  head-
to-head  trials  demonstrated  that  the  impact  of  glatiramer  acetate  on 
clinical relapse rates and disability was comparable to high-dose, high-
frequency IFN-β. Therefore, glatiramer acetate should be considered as 
an equally effective alternative to IFN-β in RRMS patients. Its usefulness 
in progressive disease is unknown. Glatiramer acetate is administered 
by  subcutaneous  injection  of  either  20  mg  every  day  or  40  mg  thrice 
weekly. Injection-site reactions can occur. In addition, ~15% of patients 
experience one or more episodes of flushing, chest tightness, dyspnea, 
palpitations, and anxiety after injection. This systemic reaction is unpre-
dictable,  brief  (duration  <1  h),  and  tends  not  to  recur.  Finally,  some 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3471

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3472 patients experience lipoatrophy, which, on occasion, can be disfiguring 
and require cessation of treatment. Recently, glatiramer acetate was U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved as a biosimilar medica-
tion (Glatopa) and is dosed at 20 mg every day. Although clinical trials 
were not performed with biosimilar glatiramer acetate, the efficacy and 
safety are presumed to be similar to the branded product.

 ■ INTERFERON β (MODESTLY EFFECTIVE)
Interferon β (IFN-β) is a class I interferon originally identified by its 
antiviral  properties.  Efficacy  in  MS  probably  results  from  immuno-
modulatory  properties  including:  (1)  downregulating  expression  of 
MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells, (2) reducing proinflam-
matory and increasing regulatory cytokine levels, (3) inhibiting T-cell 
proliferation,  and  (4)  limiting  the  trafficking  of  inflammatory  cells 
in  the  CNS.  IFN-β  reduces  the  attack  rate,  and  slows  accumulation 
of  disability  and  MRI-documented  disease  burden.  IFN-β  should  be 
considered in patients with either relapsing forms of MS (either RRMS 
or SPMS with superimposed relapses). Head-to-head trials suggest that 
dosing IFN-β more frequently and at higher doses has better efficacy 
but is also more likely to induce neutralizing antibodies (see below). 
IFN-β-1a (Avonex), 30 μg, is administered by intramuscular injection 
once every week. IFN-β-1a (Rebif), 44 μg, is administered by subcuta-
neous injection three times per week. IFN-β-1b (Betaseron or Extavia), 
250  μg,  is  administered  by  subcutaneous  injection  every  other  day. 
Pegylated IFN-β-1a (Plegridy), 125 μg, is administered by subcutane-
ous injection once every 14 days. Pegylated IFN-β-1a is an interferon 
to  which  a  single,  linear  20,000  dalton  methoxy  poly(ethylenegly-
col)-O-2-methylproprionaldehyde molecule is covalently attached; the 
pegylated molecule contributes to reduced in vivo clearance allowing 
less  frequent  administration.  Common  side  effects  of  IFN-β  therapy 
include flulike symptoms (e.g., fevers, chills, and myalgias) and mild 
abnormalities  on  routine  laboratory  evaluation  (e.g.,  elevated  liver 
function tests or lymphopenia). Rarely, more severe hepatotoxicity may 
occur.  Subcutaneous  IFN-β  also  causes  reactions  at  the  injection  site 
(e.g., pain, redness, induration, or, rarely, skin necrosis). Side effects can 
usually be managed with concomitant nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
medications.  Depression,  increased  spasticity,  and  cognitive  changes 
have been reported, although these symptoms can also be due to the 
underlying disease. Side effects due to IFN-β therapy usually subside 
over time. Rates of serious infection are lower with IFN-β therapy than 
many other disease-modifying medications.

Approximately  2–10%  of  IFN-β-1a  (Avonex)  recipients,  15–25% 
of IFN-β-1a (Rebif) recipients, and 30–40% of IFN-β-1b (Betaseron/ 
Extavia)  recipients  develop  neutralizing  antibodies  to  IFN-β,  which 
may disappear over time. Less than 1% of patients treated with pegy-
lated  IFN-β-1a  develop  neutralizing  antibodies.  For  a  patient  doing 
well on therapy, the presence of antibodies should not affect treatment. 
Conversely, for a patient doing poorly on therapy, alternative treatment 
should be considered, even if there are no detectable antibodies.

LESS COMMONLY USED AGENTS FOR RMS
 ■ TERIFLUNOMIDE (MODESTLY EFFECTIVE)
Teriflunomide  inhibits  the  mitochondrial  enzyme  dihydro-orotate 
dehydrogenase, which is a key part of the pathway for de novo pyrim-
idine  biosynthesis  from  carbamoyl  phosphate  and  aspartate.  It  is  the 
active metabolite of the drug leflunomide (FDA-approved for rheuma-
toid  arthritis),  and  it  exerts  its  anti-inflammatory  effects  by  limiting 
the proliferation of rapidly dividing T and B cells. This enzyme is not 
involved in the so-called salvage pathway, by which existing pyrimidine 
pools are recycled for DNA and RNA synthesis in resting and homeo-
statically proliferating cells. Consequently, teriflunomide is considered 
to be cytostatic rather than cytotoxic. Teriflunomide reduces the attack 
rate and significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS 
patients. It is well tolerated, and its daily oral dosing schedule makes 
it  very  convenient  for  patients.  A  head-to-head  trial  suggested  the 
equivalence,  but  not  superiority,  of  teriflunomide  and  thrice-weekly 
IFN-β-1a. Teriflunomide, either 7 or 14 mg, is administered orally each 
day. In the pivotal clinical trials, mild hair thinning and gastrointestinal 

symptoms (nausea and diarrhea) were more common than in controls, 
but in general, treatment with teriflunomide was well tolerated. Teri-
flunomide rarely causes toxic epidermal necrolysis or Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome.  A  major  limitation,  especially  in  women  of  childbearing 
age, is its possible teratogenicity (pregnancy category X); teriflunomide 
can remain in the bloodstream for 2 years due to hepatobiliary reab-
sorption. Therefore, it is recommended that exposed men and women 
who wish to conceive receive cholestyramine or activated charcoal to 
eliminate residual drug.
 ■ CLADRIBINE (MODERATELY EFFECTIVE)
Cladribine  is  a  prodrug  that  when  phosphorylated  by  deoxycytidine 
kinase to its metabolite 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine becomes active and is 
incorporated into nuclear and mitochondrial DNA causing apoptosis. 
Because  deoxycytidine  kinase  is  expressed  at  high  levels  in  lympho-
cytes, cladribine can be administered as a relatively specific lympho-
toxic  therapy.  In  intravenous  or  subcutaneously  administered  forms, 
cladribine is indicated for treatment of hairy cell leukemia. Cladribine’s 
oral  formulation  is  indicated  for  treatment  of  relapsing  forms  of  MS 
including active SPMS. Cladribine reduces the attack rate and disabil-
ity measures in RMS patients. It is well tolerated, and is dosed based 
on  body  weight  (3.5  mg/kg  divided  into  2  yearly  treatment  courses). 
Patients are treated with 1 or 2 doses of cladribine daily for 4 or 5 con-
secutive days, receive a second similar cycle of treatment 23 to 27 days 
after the first cycle, and then are retreated after 1 year. Cladribine has 
beneficial effects in MS that are sustained beyond the 2-year course of 
administration. The basis for these benefits is poorly understood but 
is  presumably  related  to  immune  reconstitution  by  nonpathogenic 
lymphocytes.  Cladribine  is  associated  with  malignancy,  including 
in  the  MS  clinical  trials,  and  for  this  reason  is  not  recommended  in 
treatment-naïve  patients.  Cladribine  is  also  contraindicated  in  preg-
nant women because it is a known teratogen in animals and can cause 
embryolethality. Despite cladribine’s relatively short terminal half-life 
of 1 day, women and men treated with cladribine are recommended to 
not plan conception for 6 months after the last dose. Prior to treatment, 
patients should undergo a complete blood count including lymphocyte 
count and liver function tests; be screened for HIV, tuberculosis, and 
hepatitis B and C; be vaccinated for varicella zoster virus; and undergo 
a brain MRI within 3 months of treatment because of a presumed risk 
of treatment-emergent PML.
 ■ ALEMTUZUMAB (HIGHLY EFFECTIVE)
Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the 
CD52 antigen that is expressed on both monocytes and lymphocytes. It 
causes lymphocyte depletion (of both B and T cells) and a change in the 
composition of lymphocyte subsets. Both of these changes, particularly 
the impact on lymphocyte subsets, are long lasting. In two phase 3 tri-
als, which used the active comparator of thrice-weekly, high-dose IFN-
β-1a, alemtuzumab markedly reduced the attack rate and significantly 
improved  measures  of  disease  severity  in  MS  patients  although  its 
impact on clinical disability was found in only one of the two trials. The 
European  and  Canadian  drug  agencies  were  the  first  to  approve  this 
agent for use in RRMS; the FDA has also approved alemtuzumab, but 
only after an appeal following initial disapproval. The reasons for initial 
disapproval were based on a perceived lack of a convincing disability 
effect  and  concerns  over  potential  toxicity.  The  toxicities  of  concern 
were the occurrence of (1) autoimmune diseases including thyroiditis, 
Graves’  disease,  thrombocytopenia,  hemolytic  anemia,  pancytopenia, 
antiglomerular basement membrane disease, and membranous glom-
erulonephritis; (2) malignancies including thyroid cancer, melanoma, 
breast cancer, human papillomavirus (HPV)-related cancers, and lym-
phoproliferative disorders including lymphoma; (3) serious infections; 
and (4) infusion reactions. Because of its toxicity profile, alemtuzumab 
is indicated by the U.S. FDA only in patients who have tried and failed 
at least two other DMTs.
 ■ MITOXANTRONE HYDROCHLORIDE  
(HIGHLY EFFECTIVE)
Mitoxantrone,  an  anthracenedione,  exerts  its  antineoplastic  action 
by  (1)  intercalating  into  DNA  and  producing  both  strand  breaks 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3472

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders and  interstrand  cross-links,  (2)  interfering  with  RNA  synthesis,  and 
(3)  inhibiting  topoisomerase  II  (involved  in  DNA  repair).  The  FDA 
approved  mitoxantrone  on  the  basis  of  a  single  phase  3  clinical  trial 
in Europe, in addition to even smaller phase 2 studies. Mitoxantrone 
is  indicated  for  use  in  patients  with  rapidly  worsening  MS  (defined 
as  patients  whose  neurologic  status  remains  significantly  abnormal 
between  MS  attacks).  Despite  this  broad  indication,  however,  data 
supporting  its  efficacy  are  less  robust  compared  to  other  approved 
therapies. Mitoxantrone is cardiotoxic (e.g., cardiomyopathy, reduced 
left ventricular ejection fraction, and irreversible congestive heart fail-
ure). As a result, a cumulative dose >140 mg/m2 is not recommended. 
At currently approved doses (12 mg/m2 every 3 months), the maximum 
duration  of  therapy  can  be  only  2–3  years.  Furthermore,  >40%  of 
women will experience amenorrhea, which may be permanent. Finally, 
there is risk of acute leukemia from mitoxantrone, estimated as at least 
a 1.4% lifetime risk. Because of these risks, and the availability of alter-
native therapies, mitoxantrone is now rarely used for MS.
DECISION-MAKING FOR  
TREATMENT OF RMS
First-line therapy should be initiated in patients with a clinically iso-
lated syndrome at high risk for MS or in patients diagnosed with RMS 
(according to 2017 McDonald criteria).

We favor use of the most highly effective DMTs as first-line options 
for  most  patients  with  active  MS,  rather  than  the  more  traditional 
“treat to target” approach in which a treatment of modest or moderate 
effectiveness  is  first  used,  and  therapy  advanced  to  a  more  effective 
agent when breakthrough disease (evident clinically or by MRI) occurs. 
As noted above, observational studies suggest that early use of high- 
efficacy therapy could improve long-term outcomes. For many patients, 
we begin with an anti-CD20 agent, either ocrelizumab or ofatumumab, 
or  with  natalizumab  in  JCV-negative  patients.  Anti-CD20  agents  are 
attractive given their high level of efficacy, relative ease of use, favorable 
safety profile, and absence of rebound following discontinuation. For 
patients who prefer oral treatment, either an S1P modulator or fumar-
ate is also reasonable for first-line therapy.

Switching DMTs may be required in the following situations: subopti-
mal response, experiencing more than one relapse with active MRI scans 
while on treatment, and safety issues including development of persistent 
high-titer neutralizing antibodies in patients receiving IFN-β. Discontin-
uation of DMTs is required in cases of serious adverse events that may 
be drug-related and for many DMTs in women who become pregnant 
while on treatment. Exceptions to this practice include glatiramer acetate 
that can be continued during pregnancy, and in some cases prior use of 
ocrelizumab, alemtuzumab, and cladribine that have prolonged pharma-
codynamic effects that persist after the drug has been eliminated.

For  patients  who  present  with  a  mild  initial  course—e.g.,  normal 
examination  or  minimal  impairment  (EDSS  ≤2.5)  and  low  disease 
activity by MRI—either an oral (fumarates, S1P modulators, terifluno-
mide) or injectable (IFN-β or glatiramer acetate) agent can be consid-
ered. The injectable agents (IFN-β and glatiramer acetate) have a superb 
long-term track record for safety but have a high nuisance factor due to 
the need for frequent injections, as well as bothersome side effects that 
contribute to noncompliance.

The safety and value of combination therapy is also largely unknown 
and  is  generally  not  recommended.  One  clinical  trial  demonstrated 
no added benefit to the combination of glatiramer acetate with once-
weekly IFN-β-1a. The optimal duration of therapy is also unknown.

The  long-term  impact  of  these  treatments  on  the  disease  course 
remains  controversial,  although  as  noted  above  (“Prognosis”)  several 
observational  studies  showed  that  these  agents  improve  the  long-term 
outcome  of  MS  including  a  prolongation  of  the  time  to  reach  certain 
disability outcomes (e.g., SPMS and requiring assistance to ambulate) and 
reduction in MS-related mortality. These benefits seem most conspicuous 
when treatment begins early in the relapsing stage of the illness. It may 
be  reasonable  to  delay  initiating  treatment  in  patients  with  (1)  normal 
neurologic examinations, (2) a single attack or a low attack frequency, and 
(3) a low burden of disease as assessed by brain MRI. Untreated patients, 
however, should be followed closely with periodic brain MRI scans; the 

need for therapy is reassessed if scans reveal evidence of ongoing, sub-
clinical disease. Finally, vitamin D deficiency should be corrected in all 
patients with MS, and generally this requires oral supplementation with 
vitamin D3, 4000 IU daily. Several clinical trials showed that supplemen-
tation with vitamin D in relapsing MS patients reduces MRI measures 
of disease activity and may also reduce the relapse frequency in patients 
actively treated with either interferon or glatiramer acetate.

3473

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES  
FOR PROGRESSIVE MS
 ■ SPMS
Siponimod is a selective S1P1 S1P5 receptor modulator (see S1P recep-
tor modulators above) that was shown in a single phase 3 study to be 
superior to placebo in reducing the risk of progression in SPMS patients. 
Siponimod  also  reduced  the  risk  of  relapse  and  MRI  measures  of  the 
burden of disease. Subgroup analysis showed that patients with a relapse 
in  the  2  years  prior  to  treatment  and  those  with  contrast-enhancing 
lesions on brain MRI received the most therapeutic benefit. Siponimod 
was subsequently approved for patients with SPMS who had active dis-
ease. Siponimod is dosed based on CYP2C9 genotype. For patients with 
CYP2C9 1/*3 or 2/*3, siponimod is administered as 1 mg daily. Siponi-
mod  dosage  is  reduced  in  patients  with  the  CYP2C9  *3/*3  genotype 
(<0.5% of the population) due to substantially elevated drug levels. Prior 
to treatment patients should undergo a complete blood count, ophthal-
mic evaluation, electrocardiogram, liver function tests, and vaccination 
for  varicella  zoster  virus.  Unlike  fingolimod,  first-dose  monitoring  is 
required only in patients with sinus bradycardia, first- or second-degree 
heart block, or a history of myocardial infarction or heart failure.

Ocrelizumab, cladribine, and ponesimod are also indicated in active 
SPMS although none of these therapies were specifically studied in this 
patient population. High-dose IFN-β probably has a modest beneficial 
effect  in  patients  with  SPMS  with  active  disease  (see  above).  IFN-β 
is probably ineffective in patients with SPMS who do not have active 
disease.  Although  mitoxantrone  was  approved  for  patients  with  rap-
idly progressive MS, this is not the population studied in the pivotal 
trial; therefore, no evidence-based recommendation can be made with 
regard to its use in this setting.

 ■ PPMS
Ocrelizumab (see above) was shown in a phase 3 trial to reduce pro-
gression  of  clinical  disability  in  PPMS  by  24%,  and  also  to  improve 
other  clinical  and  MRI  markers  of  inflammatory  and  degenerative 
disease activity. Ocrelizumab represents the first agent to convincingly 
modify the course of PPMS. The dosing of ocrelizumab for PPMS is 
identical as for RMS (above).

 ■ OFF-LABEL TREATMENT OPTIONS  
FOR RMS AND SPMS
Azathioprine (2–3 mg/kg per day) has been used primarily in relaps-
ing  MS.  Meta-analysis  of  published  trials  suggests  that  azathioprine 
is marginally effective at lowering relapse rates, although a benefit on 
disability progression has not been demonstrated.

Methotrexate  (7.5–20  mg/week)  was  shown  in  one  study  to  slow 
the progression of upper-extremity dysfunction in SPMS. Because of 
the  possibility  of  developing  irreversible  liver  damage,  some  experts 
recommend a blind liver biopsy after 2 years of therapy.

Cyclophosphamide (700 mg/m2, every other month) may be helpful 
for treatment-refractory patients who are (1) otherwise in good health, 
(2) ambulatory, and (3) <40 years of age. Because cyclophosphamide 
can  be  used  for  periods  in  excess  of  3  years,  it  may  be  preferable  to 
mitoxantrone in these circumstances.

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), administered in monthly pulses 
(up to 1 g/kg) for up to 2 years, appears to reduce annual exacerbation 
rates.  However,  its  use  is  limited  because  of  its  high  cost,  questions 
about  optimal  dose,  and  uncertainty  about  its  having  any  impact  on 
long-term disability.

Methylprednisolone  in  one  study,  administered  as  monthly  high-

dose intravenous pulses, reduced disability progression (see above).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3473

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3474

Autologous  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation  appears  to  be 
highly  effective  in  reducing  the  occurrence  of  relapses  and  may 
improve  disability  in  relapsing  MS.  It  appears  to  be  ineffective  for 
patients  with  progressive  MS.  Stem  cell  transplantation  also  carries 
significant  risk,  and  randomized  trials  with  appropriate  comparators 
are needed in order to position this procedure with respect to available 
pharmacologic interventions.
 ■ PROMISING EXPERIMENTAL THERAPIES
Numerous clinical trials of promising experimental therapies are cur-
rently underway. These include studies of molecules to promote remy-
elination;  autologous  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation;  higher 
doses of ocrelizumab; and selective kinase inhibitors including Bruton’s 
tyrosine kinase (BTK).
OTHER THERAPEUTIC CLAIMS
Many purported treatments for MS have never been subjected to sci-
entific scrutiny. These include dietary therapies (e.g., the Swank diet, 
the  Paleo  diet,  the  Wahls  diet),  megadose  vitamins,  calcium  orotate, 
bee  stings,  cow  colostrum,  hyperbaric  oxygen,  procarin  (a  combina-
tion  of  histamine  and  caffeine),  chelation,  acupuncture,  acupressure, 
various  Chinese  herbal  remedies,  and  removal  of  mercury-amalgam 
tooth  fillings,  among  many  others.  Patients  should  avoid  costly  or 
potentially hazardous unproven treatments. Many such treatments lack 
biologic plausibility. No reliable case of mercury poisoning resembling 
typical  MS  has  ever  been  described,  therefore  challenging  the  notion 
that  removal  of  mercury-amalgam  tooth  fillings  would  be  beneficial. 
Although  potential  roles  for  EBV,  human  herpesvirus  (HHV)  6,  or 
chlamydia have been suggested for MS, treatment with antiviral agents 
or  antibiotics  is  not  recommended.  A  chronic  cerebrospinal  insuffi-
ciency (CCSVI) was proposed as a cause of MS with vascular-surgical 
intervention  recommended.  However,  multiple  independent  studies 
have failed to even approximate the initial claims, and patients should 
be strongly advised to avoid diagnostic procedures and potentially dan-
gerous surgery for this condition. A double-blind trial of high-dose bio-
tin to improve disability in progressive forms of MS found no benefit.
SYMPTOMATIC THERAPY
For all patients, it is important to encourage attention to a healthy life-
style, including maintaining an optimistic outlook, a healthy diet, and 
regular exercise as tolerated (swimming is often well-tolerated because 
of  the  cooling  effect  of  cold  water).  It  is  reasonable  also  to  correct 
vitamin D deficiency with oral vitamin D.

Ataxia/tremor  is  often  intractable.  Clonazepam,  1.5–20  mg/d; 
primidone, 50–250 mg/d; propranolol, 40–200 mg/d; or ondansetron, 
8–16 mg/d, may help. Wrist weights occasionally reduce tremor in the 
arm  or  hand.  Thalamotomy  and  deep-brain  stimulation  have  been 
tried with mixed success.

Spasticity  and  spasms  may  improve  with  physical  therapy,  regular 
exercise,  and  stretching.  Avoidance  of  triggers  (e.g.,  infections,  fecal 
impactions,  bed  sores)  is  extremely  important.  Effective  medications 
include  baclofen  (20–120  mg/d),  diazepam  (2–40  mg/d),  tizanidine 
(8–32 mg/d), dantrolene (25–400 mg/d), and cyclobenzaprine hydro-
chloride (10–60 mg/d). For severe spasticity, a baclofen pump (deliv-
ering medication directly into the CSF) can provide substantial relief.
Weakness  can  sometimes  be  improved  with  the  use  of  potas-
sium  channel  blockers  such  as  4-aminopyridine  (20  mg/d)  and 
3,4-di-aminopyridine (40–80 mg/d), particularly in the setting where 
lower-extremity weakness interferes with the patient’s ability to ambu-
late. The FDA approved extended-release 4-aminopyridine (at 10 mg 
twice daily), and this can be obtained either as dalfampridine (Ampyra) 
or through a compounding pharmacy. The principal concern with the 
use of these agents is the possibility of inducing seizures at high doses.
Pain is treated with anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, 100–1000 mg/d; 
phenytoin, 300–600 mg/d; gabapentin, 300–3600 mg/d; or pregabalin, 
50–300  mg/d),  antidepressants  (amitriptyline,  25–150  mg/d;  nor-
triptyline, 25–150 mg/d; desipramine, 100–300 mg/d; or venlafaxine, 
75–225  mg/d),  or  antiarrhythmics  (mexiletine,  300–900  mg/d).  If 
these approaches fail, patients should be referred to a comprehensive 
pain-management program.

Bladder  dysfunction  management  is  best  guided  by  urodynamic 
testing.  Evening  fluid  restriction  or  frequent  voluntary  voiding  may 
help  detrusor  hyperreflexia.  If  these  methods  fail,  propantheline 
bromide  (10–15  mg/d),  oxybutynin  (5–15  mg/d),  hyoscyamine  sul-
fate  (0.5–0.75  mg/d),  tolterodine  tartrate  (2–4  mg/d),  or  solifenacin  
(5–10  mg/d)  may  help.  Coadministration  of  pseudoephedrine  
(30–60 mg) is sometimes beneficial.

Detrusor/sphincter dyssynergia may respond to phenoxybenzamine 
(10–20 mg/d) or terazosin hydrochloride (1–20 mg/d). Loss of reflex 
bladder wall contraction may respond to bethanechol (30–150 mg/d). 
However, both conditions often require catheterization.

Urinary  tract  infections  should  be  treated  promptly.  Patients  with 
postvoid  residual  urine  volumes  >200  mL  are  predisposed  to  infec-
tions.  Prevention  by  urine  acidification  (with  cranberry  juice  or 
vitamin C) inhibits some bacteria. Prophylactic administration of anti-
biotics is sometimes necessary but may lead to colonization by resistant 
organisms. Intermittent catheterization may help to prevent recurrent 
infections and reduce overflow incontinence.

Treatment of constipation includes high-fiber diets and fluids. Nat-
ural or other laxatives may help. Fecal incontinence may respond to a 
reduction in dietary fiber.

Depression  should  be  treated.  Useful  drugs  include  the  selective 
serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  (fluoxetine,  20–80  mg/d,  or  sertraline, 
50–200 mg/d), the tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; 
nortriptyline, 25–150 mg/d; or desipramine, 100–300 mg/d), and the 
nontricyclic antidepressants (venlafaxine, 75–225 mg/d).

Fatigue  may  improve  with  assistive  devices,  help  in  the  home,  or 
successful  management  of  spasticity.  Patients  with  frequent  nocturia 
may  benefit  from  anticholinergic  medication  at  bedtime.  Excessive 
daytime  somnolence  caused  by  MS  may  respond  to  amantadine  
(200 mg/d), methylphenidate (5–25 mg/d), modafinil (100–400 mg/d), 
or armodafinil (150–250 mg/d).

Cognitive  problems  may  respond  marginally  to  lisdexamfetamine 

(40 mg/d).

Paroxysmal  symptoms  respond  dramatically  to  low-dose  anticon-
vulsants (acetazolamide, 200–600 mg/d; carbamazepine, 50–400 mg/d; 
phenytoin, 50–300 mg/d; or gabapentin, 600–1800 mg/d).

Heat sensitivity may respond to heat avoidance, air-conditioning, or 

cooling garments.

Sexual  dysfunction  may  be  helped  by  lubricants  to  aid  in  genital 
stimulation and sexual arousal. Management of pain, spasticity, fatigue, 
and bladder/bowel dysfunction may also help. Sildenafil (50–100 mg), 
tadalafil (5–20 mg), or vardenafil (5–20 mg), taken 1–2 h before sex, 
are standard treatments for erectile dysfunction.

CLINICAL VARIANTS OF MS
Acute  MS  (Marburg’s  variant)  is  a  fulminant  demyelinating  process 
that  in  some  cases  progresses  inexorably  to  death  within  1–2  years. 
Typically, there are no remissions. Marburg’s variant does not seem to 
follow infection or vaccination, and it is unclear whether this syndrome 
represents an extreme form of MS or another disease altogether. When 
an  acute  demyelinating  syndrome  presents  as  a  solitary  expansile 
lesion,  a  brain  tumor  is  often  suspected  (Fig.  444-4).  Such  cases  are 
designated  tumefactive  MS,  and  a  brain  biopsy  may  be  required  to 
establish the diagnosis.

Balo’s  concentric  sclerosis  is  another  fulminant  demyelinating  syn-
drome  characterized  by  concentric  brain  or  spinal  cord  lesions  with 
alternating  spheres  of  demyelination  and  remyelination  (Fig.  444-4). 
For these fulminant demyelinating states, no controlled trials of ther-
apy exist; high-dose glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and cyclophos-
phamide have been tried, with uncertain benefit.

ACUTE DISSEMINATED 
ENCEPHALOMYELITIS (ADEM)
ADEM  has  a  monophasic  course  and  is  most  frequently  associated 
with an antecedent infection (postinfectious encephalomyelitis); ~5% 
of ADEM cases follow immunization (postvaccinal encephalomyelitis). 
ADEM is far more common in children than adults, and many adult 
cases  initially  thought  to  represent  ADEM  subsequently  experience 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3474

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3475

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
4

M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
S
c
l
e
r
o
s
i
s

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 444-4  Magnetic resonance imaging findings in variants of MS. A and B. Acute tumefactive MS. In A, a sagittal T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR)  image  of  a  large  solitary  right  parieto-occipital  white  matter  lesion  is  shown,  with  effacement  of  overlying  cortical  sulci  consistent  with  mass  effect.  In  B, 
T1-weighted image obtained after the intravenous administration of gadolinium DTPA reveals a large serpiginous area of blood-brain barrier disruption consistent with 
acute inflammation. C and D. Balo’s concentric sclerosis. In C, an axial T2-weighted sequence shows multiple areas of abnormal ovoid bright signal in the supratentorial 
white matter bilaterally; some lesions reveal concentric layers, typical of Balo’s concentric sclerosis. In D, T1-weighted MR images postgadolinium demonstrate abnormal 
enhancement of all lesions with some lesions demonstrating concentric ring enhancement.

late relapses qualifying as either MS or another chronic inflammatory 
disorder such as vasculitis, sarcoidosis, or lymphoma. The hallmark of 
ADEM is the presence of widely scattered foci of perivenular inflam-
mation and demyelination that can involve both white matter and grey 
matter structures, in contrast to larger confluent white matter lesions 
typical of MS. In the most explosive form of ADEM, acute hemorrhagic 

leukoencephalitis, the lesions are vasculitic and hemorrhagic, and the 
clinical course is devastating.

Postinfectious encephalomyelitis is most frequently associated with 
the  viral  exanthems  of  childhood.  Infection  with  measles  virus  is 
the  most  common  antecedent  (1  in  1000  cases).  Worldwide,  measles 
encephalomyelitis  is  still  common,  although  use  of  the  live  measles 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3475

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3476 vaccine has dramatically reduced its incidence in developed countries. 
An  ADEM-like  illness  rarely  follows  vaccination  with  live  measles 
vaccine  (1–2  in  106  immunizations).  ADEM  is  now  most  frequently 
associated  with  varicella  (chickenpox)  infections  (1  in  4000–10,000 
cases).  It  may  also  follow  infection  with  rubella,  mumps,  influenza, 
parainfluenza,  EBV,  HHV-6,  HIV,  dengue,  Zika,  other  viruses,  and 
Mycoplasma  pneumoniae.  Recently,  cases  have  been  described  in 
association with COVID-19 infection. Some patients may have a non-
specific upper respiratory infection or no known antecedent illness. In 
addition  to  measles,  postvaccinal  encephalomyelitis  may  also  follow 
the administration of vaccines for smallpox (5 cases per million), the 
Semple rabies, and Japanese encephalitis. Modern vaccines that do not 
require viral culture in CNS tissue have reduced the ADEM risk.

All forms of ADEM presumably result from a cross-reactive immune 
response to the infectious agent or vaccine that then triggers an inflam-
matory demyelinating response. Autoantibodies to MBP and to other 
myelin  antigens  have  been  detected  in  the  CSF  from  some  patients 
with  ADEM,  and  approximately  half  of  children  with  ADEM  have 
circulating and CSF antibodies against MOG (Chap. 445). Attempts to 
demonstrate direct viral invasion of the CNS have been unsuccessful.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
In severe cases, onset is abrupt and progression rapid (hours to days). In 
postinfectious ADEM, the neurologic syndrome generally begins late 
in the course of the viral illness as the exanthem is fading. Fever reap-
pears, and headache, meningismus, and lethargy progressing to coma 
may develop. Seizures are common. Signs of disseminated neurologic 
disease  are  consistently  present  (e.g.,  hemiparesis  or  quadriparesis, 
extensor  plantar  responses,  lost  or  hyperactive  tendon  reflexes,  sen-
sory loss, and brainstem involvement). In ADEM due to chickenpox, 
cerebellar involvement is often conspicuous. CSF protein is modestly 
elevated  (0.5–1.5  g/L  [50–150  mg/dL]).  Lymphocytic  pleocytosis, 
generally ≥200 cells/μL, occurs in 80% of patients. Occasional patients 
have  higher  counts  or  a  mixed  polymorphonuclear-lymphocytic  pat-
tern  during  the  initial  days  of  the  illness.  Transient  CSF  oligoclonal 
banding has been reported. MRI usually reveals extensive changes in 
the brain and spinal cord, consisting of white matter hyperintensities 
on T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences with 
Gd enhancement on T1-weighted sequences.

DIAGNOSIS
The  diagnosis  is  most  reliably  established  when  there  is  a  history 
of  recent  vaccination  or  viral  exanthematous  illness.  In  severe  cases 
with  predominantly  cerebral  involvement,  acute  encephalitis  due  to 
infection  with  herpes  simplex  or  other  viruses  including  HIV  may 
be  difficult  to  exclude;  other  considerations  include  hypercoagulable 
states including the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, autoimmune 
(paraneoplastic) limbic encephalitis, vasculitis, neurosarcoid, primary 
CNS  lymphoma,  or  metastatic  cancer.  An  explosive  presentation  of 
MS can mimic ADEM, and, especially in adults, it may not be possible 
to  distinguish  these  conditions  at  onset.  The  simultaneous  onset  of 
disseminated  symptoms  and  signs  is  common  in  ADEM  and  rare  in 
MS.  Similarly,  meningismus,  drowsiness,  coma,  and  seizures  suggest 
ADEM rather than MS. Unlike MS, in ADEM, optic nerve involvement 
is  generally  bilateral  and  transverse  myelopathy  complete.  MRI  find-
ings that favor ADEM include extensive and relatively symmetric white 
matter  abnormalities,  basal  ganglia  or  cortical  gray  matter  lesions, 
and Gd enhancement of all abnormal areas. By contrast, OCBs in the 
CSF are more common in MS. In one study of adult patients initially 
thought  to  have  ADEM,  30%  experienced  additional  relapses  over  a 
follow-up period of 3 years, and they were reclassified as having MS. 
Other patients initially classified as ADEM are subsequently found to 
have neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (Chap. 445). Occasional 
patients  with  “recurrent  ADEM”  have  also  been  reported,  especially 
children; however, it is not possible to distinguish this entity from atyp-
ical MS. Because of the clinical overlap at presentation between ADEM 
and  MS,  it  is  crucial  that  routine  surveillance  imaging  be  performed 
following recovery from ADEM so that subclinical disease activity due 
to MS can be recognized and treatment for MS initiated.

TREATMENT
 ■ ACUTE DISSEMINATED ENCEPHALOMYELITIS
Initial treatment is with high-dose glucocorticoids; depending on the 
response,  treatment  may  need  to  be  continued  for  8  weeks.  Patients 
who  fail  to  respond  within  a  few  days  may  benefit  from  a  course  of 
plasma  exchange  or  intravenous  immunoglobulin.  The  prognosis 
reflects the severity of the underlying acute illness. In recent case series 
of presumptive ADEM in adults, mortality rates of 5–20% are reported, 
and many survivors have permanent neurologic sequelae.

GLIAL FIBRILLARY ACIDIC PROTEIN 
(GFAP) AUTOIMMUNITY
Autoimmunity  against  the  astrocyte  protein  GFAP  presents  with  a 
range  of  symptoms  referable  to  meningismus,  encephalitis,  myelitis, 
and  optic  neuritis.  MRI  shows  characteristic  patterns  of  gadolinium 
enhancement  localized  to  GFAP-enriched  CNS  regions  including 
venous structures in a periventricular radial orientation, the leptome-
ninges,  the  peri-ependymal  spinal  cord,  and  a  striking  serpiginous 
pattern  involving  brain  parenchyma.  These  enhancement  patterns 
share some similarities with patterns that can be observed in neurosa-
rcoidosis. The presence of these patterns should prompt consideration 
for either condition. A lymphocytic pleocytosis is commonly present 
in the CSF. Antibodies against GFAP can be measured in the CSF or 
serum.  GFAP  autoimmunity  is  found  as  a  paraneoplastic  syndrome 
in  25%  of  cases,  most  commonly  associated  with  ovarian  teratoma, 
and  can  coexist  with  anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate  receptor  (NMDAR) 
encephalitis  or  neuromyelitis  optica  spectrum  disorder  (NMOSD). 
T  cells  are  implicated  in  pathophysiology  based  on  histopathology 
and  association  with  checkpoint  inhibitor  treatment  for  cancer  or  in 
the  setting  of  HIV.  GFAP  autoimmunity  is  generally  glucocorticoid 
responsive.  Early  recognition  with  prompt  intervention  is  associated 
with more favorable outcomes. Relapses occur in approximately 20% 
of patients and require use of immune suppression therapy.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Absinta M et al: Mechanisms underlying progression in multiple scle-

rosis. Curr Opin Neurol 33:277, 2020.

Bevan RJ et al: Meningeal inflammation and cortical demyelination in 

acute multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 84:829, 2018.

Brown  JWL  et  al:  Association  of  initial  disease-modifying  therapy 
with  later  conversion  to  secondary  progressive  multiple  sclerosis. 
JAMA 321:175, 2019.

Cree  BAC  et  al:  Silent  progression  in  disease  activity-free  relapsing 

multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 85:653, 2019.

Giovannoni  G  et  al:  Alemtuzumab  improves  preexisting  disability 
in active relapsing-remitting MS patients. Neurology 87:1985, 2016.
Hauser  SL  et  al:  Ocrelizumab  versus  interferon  beta-1a  in  relapsing 

multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 376:221, 2017.

Hauser SL et al: Ofatumumab versus teriflunomide in multiple sclero-

sis. N Engl J Med 383:546, 2020.

Luna  G  et  al:  Infection  risks  among  patients  with  multiple  sclerosis 
treated with fingolimod, natalizumab, rituximab, and injectable ther-
apies. JAMA Neurol 77:184, 2020.

Malpas CB et al: Early clinical markers of aggressive multiple sclerosis. 

Brain 143:1400, 2020.

Naegelin Y et al: Association of rituximab treatment with disability 
progression  among  patients  with  secondary  progressive  multiple 
sclerosis. JAMA Neurol 76:274, 2019.

Montalban X et al: Ocrelizumab versus placebo in primary progres-

sive multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 376:209, 2017.

Pohl  D  et  al:  Acute  disseminated  encephalomyelitis:  Updates  on  an 
inflammatory CNS syndrome. Neurology 87(9 Suppl 2):S38, 2016.
Shan F et al: Autoimmune glial fibrillary acidic protein astrocytopathy: 

A review of the literature. Front Immunol 9:2802, 2018.

Thompson AJ et al: Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: 2017 revisions of 

the McDonald criteria. Lancet Neurol 17:162, 2018.

Zamvil  SS,  Hauser  SL:  Antigen  presentation  by  B  cells  in  multiple 

sclerosis. [Review] N Engl J Med 384:378, 2021.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3476

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 445

Neuromyelitis Optica
Bruce A. C. Cree, Stephen L. Hauser

INTRODUCTION
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO; Devic’s disease) is an aggressive inflam-
matory  disorder  characterized  by  recurrent  attacks  of  optic  neuritis 
(ON)  and  myelitis;  the  more  inclusive  term  NMO  spectrum  disorder 
(NMOSD) was proposed to include individuals with partial forms, and 
also  those  with  involvement  of  additional  regions  in  the  central  ner-
vous system (Table 445-1). NMO is more frequent in women than men 
(9:1), and typically begins in adulthood, with a mean age of onset of  
40 years, but can arise at any age. An important consideration, espe-
cially  early  in  its  presentation,  is  distinguishing  NMO  from  multiple 
sclerosis (MS; Chap. 444). In patients with NMO, attacks of ON can be 
bilateral and produce severe visual loss (uncommon in MS); myelitis 
can be severe and transverse (rare in MS) and is typically longitudinally 
extensive  (Fig.  445-1),  involving  three  or  more  contiguous  vertebral 
segments.  In  contrast  to  MS,  progressive  symptoms  typically  do  not 
occur  in  NMO.  The  brain  MRI  was  earlier  thought  to  be  normal  in 
NMO,  but  it  is  now  recognized  that  in  many  cases  brain  lesions  are 
present, including areas of nonspecific signal change as well as lesions 

TABLE 445-1  Diagnostic Criteria for Neuromyelitis Optica  
Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria for NMOSD with AQP4-IgG

1.  At least 1 core clinical characteristic
2.  Positive test for AQP4-IgG using best-available detection method (cell-based 

assay strongly recommended)
3.  Exclusion of alternative diagnoses

Diagnostic Criteria for NMOSD Without AQP4-IgG or NMOSD with 
Unknown AQP4-IgG Status

1.  At least 2 core clinical characteristics occurring as a result of one or more 

clinical attacks and meeting all of the following requirements:
a.  At least 1 core clinical characteristic must be optic neuritis, acute myelitis 

with LETM, or area postrema syndrome

b.  Dissemination in space (2 or more different clinical characteristics)
c.  Fulfillment of additional MRI requirements, as applicable

2.  Negative test for AQP4-IgG using best-available detection method or testing 

unavailable

3.  Exclusion of alternative diagnoses

Core Clinical Characteristics

1.  Optic neuritis
2.  Acute myelitis
3.  Area postrema syndrome: episode of otherwise unexplained hiccups or 

nausea or vomiting

4.  Acute brainstem syndrome
5.  Symptomatic narcolepsy or acute diencephalic clinical syndrome with 

NMOSD-typical diencephalic MRI lesions

6.  Symptomatic cerebral syndrome with NMOSD-typical brain lesions

Additional MRI Requirements for NMOSD Without AQP4-IgG and 
NMOSD with Unknown AQP4-IgG Status

1.  Acute optic neuritis: requires brain MRI showing (a) normal findings 
or only nonspecific white matter lesions, OR (b) optic nerve MRI with 
T2-hyperintense lesion of T1-weighted gadolinium-enhancing lesion 
extending over >1/2 optic nerve length or involving optic chiasm

2.  Acute myelitis: requires associated intramedullary MRI lesion extending ≥3 

contiguous segments (LETM) OR ≥3 contiguous segments of focal spinal cord 
atrophy in patients with history compatible with acute myelitis

3.  Area postrema syndrome requires associated dorsal medulla/area postrema 

lesions

4.  Acute brainstem syndrome requires periependymal brainstem lesions

Source: Reproduced with permission from DM Wingerchuk et al: International 
consensus diagnostic criteria for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. 
Neurology 85:177, 2015.

3477

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
5

N
e
u
r
o
m
y
e
l
i
t
i
s
O
p
t
i
c
a

associated with specific syndromes such as the hypothalamus causing 
an endocrinopathy; the area postrema in the lower medulla presenting 
as  intractable  hiccups  or  vomiting;  or  the  cerebral  hemispheres  pro-
ducing focal symptoms, encephalopathy, or seizures. Large MRI lesions 
in  the  cerebral  hemispheres  can  be  asymptomatic,  sometimes  have  a 
“cloudlike” appearance and, unlike MS lesions, are often not destructive 
and can resolve completely. Spinal cord MRI lesions typically consist of 
focal  enhancing  areas  of  swelling  and  tissue  destruction,  extending 
over three or more spinal cord segments, and on axial sequences, these 
are centered on the grey matter of the cord. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
findings  include  pleocytosis  greater  than  that  observed  in  MS,  with 
neutrophils  and  eosinophils  present  in  many  acute  cases;  oligoclonal 
bands (OCBs) are uncommon, occurring in <20% of NMO patients. 
The pathology of NMO is a distinctive astrocytopathy with inflamma-
tion, loss of astrocytes, and an absence of staining of the water channel 
protein AQP4 by immunohistochemistry, plus thickened blood vessel 
walls, demyelination, and deposition of antibody and complement.

IMMUNOLOGY
NMO is an autoimmune disease associated with a highly specific auto-
antibody directed against aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) that is present in the 
sera of ~90% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of NMO. AQP-4 is 
localized to the foot processes of astrocytes in close apposition to endo-
thelial surfaces, as well as at paranodal regions near nodes of Ranvier. 
It is likely that AQP-4 antibodies are pathogenic because their passive 
transfer  into  laboratory  animals  can  reproduce  histologic  features 
of  the  disease.  Antibody-mediated  complement  fixation  is  thought 
to  represent  the  primary  mechanism  of  astrocyte  injury  in  NMO. 
During  acute  attacks  of  myelitis,  CSF  levels  of  interleukin-6  (IL-6;  a 
proinflammatory cytokine) and astrocyte-specific glial fibrillary acidic 
protein  (GFAP)  levels  are  markedly  elevated,  consistent  with  active 
inflammation  and  astrocyte  injury.  Proinflammatory  T-lymphocytes 
of the Th17 type recognize an immunodominant epitope of AQP4 and 
may also contribute to pathogenesis. Because of the high specificity of 
the antibody, its presence is considered to be diagnostic when found 
in  conjunction  with  a  typical  clinical  presentation.  Anti-AQP4  sero-
positive patients have a high risk for future relapses; more than half of 
untreated patients will relapse within 1 year.

CLINICAL COURSE
NMO is typically a recurrent disease; the course is monophasic in <10% 
of patients. Individuals who test negative for AQP4 antibodies are some-
what more likely to have a monophasic course. Untreated NMO is usually 
quite disabling over time; in one series, respiratory failure from cervical 
myelitis  was  present  in  one-third  of  patients,  and  8  years  after  onset, 
60% of patients were blind and more than half had permanent paralysis 
of  one  or  more  limbs.  The  long-term  course  of  NMO  appears  to  have 
been substantially improved with the development of therapies to treat 
acute attacks and prevent relapses. Estimates of the 5-year survival rate 
increased from 68–75% in 1999 to 91–98% in 2017, a change likely due 
to improved diagnosis and widespread use of immunosuppressant drugs.

GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The  incidence  and  prevalence  of  NMO  show  considerable  variation 
between  populations  and  geographic  regions,  with  prevalence  esti-
mates that range from <1 to > 4 per 100,000. Although NMO can occur 
in people of any ethnic background, individuals of Asian and African 
origin are disproportionately affected. The highest reported prevalence 
is from Martinique. Among white populations, MS (Chap. 444) is far 
more common than NMO.

Interestingly,  when  MS  affects  individuals  of  African  or  Asian 
ancestry,  there  is  a  propensity  for  demyelinating  lesions  to  involve 
predominantly the optic nerve and spinal cord, an MS subtype termed 
opticospinal MS. Some individuals with opticospinal MS are seroposi-
tive for AQP4 antibodies, indicating that such cases represent NMOSD.

ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
Up to 40% of NMO patients have a systemic autoimmune disorder, such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, perinuclear antineu-
trophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA)–associated vasculitis, myasthenia 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3477

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3478

A

B

C

E

D

F

FIGURE 445-1  Imaging findings in neuromyelitis optica: longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis, optic neuritis, and brainstem involvement. A. Sagittal fluid attenuation 
inversion recovery (FLAIR) cervical-spine MRI showing an area of increased signal change on T2-weighted imaging spanning >3 vertebral segments in length. B. Sagittal 
T1-weighted cervical-spine MRI following gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DPTA) infusion showing enhancement. C. Coronal brain MRI shows hyperintense 
signal on FLAIR imaging within the left optic nerve. D. Coronal T1-weighted brain MRI following gadolinium-DPTA infusion shows enhancement of the left optic nerve. E. 
Axial brain MRI shows an area of hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging within the area postrema (arrow). F. Axial T1-weighted brain MRI following gadolinium-DPTA 
infusion shows punctate enhancement of the area postrema (arrow).

gravis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, or mixed connective tissue disease. This is 
another feature distinct from MS; MS patients rarely have other comorbid 
autoimmune  diseases  with  the  exception  of  hypothyroidism.  In  some 
NMO cases, onset may be associated with acute infection with varicella 
zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, or tuberculosis. Rare cases appear to 
be paraneoplastic and associated with breast, lung, or other cancers.

TREATMENT
Neuromyelitis Optica

Until  recently,  disease-modifying 
therapies  were  not  rig-
orously  studied  in  NMO.  Acute  attacks  are  usually  treated 
with  high-dose 

(e.g.,  methylprednisolone   

glucocorticoids 

1  g/d  for  5–10  days  followed  by  a  prednisone  taper).  Plasma 
exchange (typically 5–7 exchanges of 1.5 plasma volumes/exchange) 
is used empirically for acute episodes that do not respond to gluco-
corticoids. Given the unfavorable natural history of untreated NMO, 
prophylaxis  against  relapses  is  recommended  for  most  patients 
and  several  empiric  regimens  have  been  commonly  used  includ-
ing:  mycophenolate  mofetil  (1000  mg  bid);  the  B-cell  depleting 
anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab (2 g IV Q 6 months); or 
a combination of glucocorticoids (500 mg IV methylprednisolone 
daily for 5 days; then oral prednisone 1 mg/kg per day for 2 months, 
followed by slow taper) plus azathioprine (2 mg/kg per day started 
on  week  3).  Importantly,  some  therapies  with  efficacy  in  MS  do 
not appear to be useful for NMO. Available evidence suggests that 
interferon  beta  is  ineffective  and  paradoxically  may  increase  the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3478

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 445-2  Therapeutic Trials for NMO

Eculizumab (add-on to immune 
suppression)
Inolimomab (monotherapy)
Satralizumab (add-on to immune 
suppression)
Satralizumab (monotherapy)

RISK REDUCTION IN AQP4-
SEROPOSITIVE PATIENTS
94%, P<0.001

78%, P=0.01
74%, P=0.001

77%, P<0.001

risk of NMO relapses, and based on limited data glatiramer acetate,  
fingolimod, natalizumab, and alemtuzumab also appear to be inef-
fective. These differences highlight the importance of distinguish-
ing NMO from MS.

Three monoclonal antibody therapies have now received regula-
tory approval for attack prevention in NMO: eculizumab, a terminal 
complement inhibitor; inebilizumab, a B-cell depleter; and satrali-
zumab, an IL-6 receptor blocker (Table 445-2).

Eculizumab  is  a  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  to  the  com-
plement protein C5, inhibiting its cleavage into C5a and C5b and 
preventing generation of the terminal complement attack complex 
C5b-9. Investigated as add-on therapy in AQP4 seropositive NMO, 
eculizumab lengthened the time to first attack by 94%, reduced the 
attack rate by 96%, and reduced rates of hospitalization, glucocor-
ticoid,  and  plasma  exchange  use.  Eculizumab  is  dosed  as  follows:   
900 mg weekly for the first 4 weeks, followed by 1200 mg for the 
fifth dose 1 week later, then 1200 mg every 2 weeks thereafter.

Eculizumab is available only through a restricted program under 
a  Risk  Evaluation  and  Mitigation  Strategy  (REMS).  Life-threat-
ening  and  fatal  meningococcal  infections  have  occurred  in  ecu-
lizumab-treated  patients  (Boxed  Warning).  Eculizumab-treated 
patients  should  be  immunized  with  meningococcal  vaccines  at 
least  2  weeks  prior  to  administering  the  first  dose  unless  the 
risk  of  delaying  eculizumab  therapy  outweigh  the  risk  of  devel-
oping  a  meningococcal 
infection.  Vaccination  reduces,  but 
does  not  eliminate,  the  risk  of  meningococcal  infections.  All   
eculizumab-treated  patients  must  be  monitored  for  early  signs  of 
meningococcal  infections  and  evaluated  immediately  if  infection 
is suspected.

Inebilizumab  is  a  humanized  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds 
to  the  B-cell-specific  surface  antigen  CD19  and  depletes  a  wide 
range of B cells including some plasmablasts as well as a proportion 
of  plasma  cells  in  secondary  lymphoid  organs  and  bone  marrow. 
Inebilizumab used as monotherapy reduced time to the first NMO 
attack by 77% compared to placebo, and also reduced hospitaliza-
tions by 78%, disability worsening by 63%, and new MRI lesions by 
43%. Inebilizumab is dosed as follows: 300 mg IV infusion followed 
2 weeks later by a second 300 mg IV infusion with subsequent doses 
of 300 mg infusions every 6 months thereafter.

Inebilizumab  is  associated  with  a  dose-dependent  decline  in 

serum IgG levels and with neutropenia in some patients.

Satralizumab  is  a  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  to  the 
interleukin-6 receptor, blocking engagement of IL-6. Satralizumab 
was investigated in NMOSD in two trials: one as monotherapy and 
the  other  as  add-on  therapy.  Both  AQP4  seropositive  and  AQP4 
seronegative participants were enrolled. In both studies, the time to 
first attack was longer with satralizumab treatment compared with 
placebo. The risk of attack was reduced by 74% in the monotherapy 
study, and in the add-on study by 78%, with satralizumab. Although 
both  studies  recruited  substantial  numbers  of  AQP4  seronegative 
participants,  there  was  no  clinically  meaningful  impact  of  satral-
izumab  in  the  seronegative  participants.  Satralizumab  is  admin-
istered  as  follows:  a  loading  dosage  of  120  mg  by  subcutaneous 
injection at weeks 0, 2, and 4, followed by a maintenance dosage of 
120 mg every 4 weeks.

Screening  for  hepatitis  B  virus,  tuberculosis,  and  liver  tran-
saminase  elevations  is  required  before  starting  satralizumab. 
Hepatic  transaminases  should  be  monitored  during  treatment  for 

transaminase  elevation,  and  CBC  should  be  monitored  during 
treatment  for  neutropenia.  Satralizumab  is  also  associated  with 
weight gain.

3479

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
5

N
e
u
r
o
m
y
e
l
i
t
i
s
O
p
t
i
c
a

MYELIN OLIGODENDROCYTE 
GLYCOPROTEIN-ANTIBODY-ASSOCIATED 
DISEASE (MOGAD)
Although long considered to be a likely target for antibody-mediated 
demyelination, anti-MOG antibodies detected by a cell-based assay 
that  enables  recognition  of  myelin  oligodendrocyte  glycoprotein 
(MOG)  epitopes  in  a  lipid  bilayer  were  recently  found  to  be  asso-
ciated with cases of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) 
(Chap. 444) in children, and then with cases of AQP4 seronegative 
NMO. Further studies showed that patients who are seropositive for 
anti-MOG antibodies are at risk for bilateral, synchronous optic neu-
ritis and myelitis. A clinical feature that can help distinguish ON associ-
ated with MOGAD from NMO or MS is the presence of papillitis seen 
by funduscopy or orbital MRI. ON associated with MOGAD is typi-
cally longitudinally extensive on MRI, and brain MRI can be normal 
or show fluffy areas of increased signal change in white or grey matter 
structures, similar to NMO. MRI lesions that are typical for MS, includ-
ing finger-like lesions oriented perpendicular to the ventricular surface 
(Dawson fingers) and T1-hypointense lesions, are uncommon. Spinal 
cord  lesions  can  be  longitudinally  extensive  or  short  and  sometimes 
involve the conus medullaris. Demyelination associated with MOGAD 
is sometimes monophasic, as in ADEM, but can also be recurrent. The 
CSF  may  show  a  pleocytosis  with  occasional  neutrophils.  Elevated 
intrathecal synthesis of gammaglobulins is atypical: oligoclonal bands 
are present in ~6–13% of cases and intrathecal synthesis of anti-MOG 
antibodies does not occur. The mechanism of CNS injury in MOGAD 
is not established. Studies in MOG-induced experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis  suggest  that  anti-MOG  antibodies  may  opsonize 
traces  of  MOG  protein  in  secondary  lymphoid  tissues,  triggering  an 
encephalitogenic peripheral immune response.

Acute  episodes  are  managed  with  high-dose  glucocorticoids  fol-
lowed by a prednisone taper and sometimes by plasmapheresis, as with 
NMO. Brain lesions associated with MOGAD often respond rapidly to 
treatment with glucocorticoids and may resolve entirely. Some patients 
experience disease recurrence following discontinuation of prednisone 
and  can  become  glucocorticoid  dependent.  Clinical  trials  have  not 
been undertaken and there is limited data on other immune-suppressing 
medications  typically  used  in  NMO.  Off-label  empiric  treatments 
include daily prednisone, IVIg, rituximab, and mycophenolate mofetil. 
Anti-MOG antibody titers appear to decline either spontaneously or in 
the setting of treatment.

Rare cases of relapsing optic nerve and spinal cord disease resembling 
NMOSD have recently been recognized in patients with autoantibod-
ies against glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), an astrocyte-specific 
protein, although more commonly the disorder presents as a meningo-
encephalitis resembling acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.  GFAP 
astrocytopathy is discussed in Chap. 444.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Cree BAC et al: Inebilizumab for the treatment of neuromyelitis optica 
spectrum  disorder  (N-MOmentum):  A  double-blind,  randomised 
placebo-controlled phase 2/3 trial. Lancet 394:1352, 2019.

Hinson SR et al: Autoimmune AQP4 channelopathies and neuromy-
elitis optica spectrum disorders. Handb Clin Neurol 133:377, 2016.
Marignier  R  et  al:  Myelin-oligodendrocyte  glycoprotein  antibody- 

associated disease. Lancet Neurol 20:762, 2021.

Pittock  SJ  et  al:  Eculizumab  in  aquaporin-4-positive  neuromyelitis 

optica spectrum disorder. N Engl J Med 381:614, 2019.

Traboulsee  A  et  al:  Safety  and  efficacy  of  satralizumab  monother-
apy  in  neuromyelitis  optica  spectrum  disorder:  a  randomised, 
double-blind,  multicentre,  placebo-controlled  phase  3  trial.  Lancet 
Neurol 19:402, 2020.

Wingerchuk DM et al: International consensus diagnostic criteria for 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology 85:177, 2015.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3479

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3480

Section 3  Nerve and Muscle Disorders

446 Peripheral Neuropathy

Anthony A. Amato, Richard J. Barohn

Peripheral  nerves  are  composed  of  sensory,  motor,  and  autonomic 
elements. Diseases can affect the cell body of a neuron or its periph-
eral  processes,  namely  the  axons  or  the  encasing  myelin  sheaths. 
Most peripheral nerves are mixed and contain sensory and motor as 
well as autonomic fibers. Nerves can be subdivided into three major 
classes:  large  myelinated,  small  myelinated,  and  small  unmyeli-
nated. Motor axons are usually large myelinated fibers that conduct 
rapidly  (~50  m/s).  Sensory  fibers  may  be  any  of  the  three  types. 
Large-diameter sensory fibers conduct proprioception and vibratory 
sensation  to  the  brain,  while  the  smaller-diameter  myelinated  and 
unmyelinated fibers transmit pain and temperature sensation. Auto-
nomic nerves are also small in diameter. Thus, peripheral neuropa-
thies can impair sensory, motor, or autonomic function, either singly 
or  in  combination.  Peripheral  neuropathies  are  further  classified 
into those that primarily affect the cell body (e.g., neuronopathy or 
ganglionopathy),  myelin  (myelinopathy),  and  the  axon  (axonopa-
thy). These different classes of peripheral neuropathies have distinct 
clinical  and  electrophysiologic  features.  This  chapter  discusses  the 
clinical  approach  to  a  patient  suspected  of  having  a  peripheral 
neuropathy,  as  well  as  specific  neuropathies,  including  hereditary 
and  acquired  neuropathies.  The  inflammatory  neuropathies  are 
discussed in Chap. 447.

GENERAL APPROACH
In approaching a patient with a neuropathy, the clinician has three main 
goals: (1) identify where the lesion is, (2) identify the cause, and (3) deter-
mine the proper treatment. The first goal is accomplished by obtaining 
a  thorough  history,  neurologic  examination,  and  electrodiagnostic  and 
other laboratory studies (Fig. 446-1). While gathering this information, 
seven key questions are asked (Table 446-1), the answers to which help 
identify  the  pattern  of  involvement  and  the  cause  of  the  neuropathy 
(Table 446-2). Despite an extensive evaluation, in approximately half of 
patients, no etiology is ever found; these patients typically have a predom-
inately  sensory  polyneuropathy  and  have  been  labeled  as  having  idio-
pathic or cryptogenic sensory and sensorimotor polyneuropathy (CSPN).
 ■ INFORMATION FROM THE HISTORY AND 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION: SEVEN KEY  
QUESTIONS (TABLE 446-1)
1. What Systems Are Involved? 
It  is  important  to  determine  if 
the  patient’s  symptoms  and  signs  are  motor,  sensory,  autonomic,  or  a 
combination of these. If the patient has only weakness without any evi-
dence of sensory or autonomic dysfunction, a motor neuropathy, neu-
romuscular  junction  abnormality,  or  myopathy  should  be  considered. 
Some peripheral neuropathies are associated with significant autonomic 
nervous  system  dysfunction.  Symptoms  of  autonomic  involvement 
include fainting spells or orthostatic lightheadedness; heat intolerance; 
or  any  bowel,  bladder,  or  sexual  dysfunction  (Chap.  440).  There  will 
typically be an orthostatic fall in blood pressure without an appropriate 
increase in heart rate. Autonomic dysfunction in the absence of diabetes 
should alert the clinician to the possibility of amyloid polyneuropathy. 
Rarely, a pandysautonomic syndrome can be the only manifestation of 
a peripheral neuropathy without other motor or sensory findings. The 
majority of neuropathies are predominantly sensory in nature.

Patient Complaint: ? Neuropathy

History and examination compatible with neuropathy?

Yes

Mononeuropathy

Mononeuropathy multiplex

Polyneuropathy

EDx

EDx

EDx

No

Evaluation of other
 disorder or
 reassurance and
 follow-up

Is the lesion axonal
 or demyelinating?
Is entrapment or
 compression present?
Is a contributing systemic 
  disorder present?

Axonal

Consider
 vasculitis or 
 other multifocal
 process

Decision on need
 for surgery (nerve repair,
 transposition, or release
 procedure)

Possible
 nerve
 biopsy

Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis

Demyelinating
 with focal
 conduction block

Consider
 multifocal
 form of
 CIDP

Test for paraprotein,
 HIV, Lyme disease

If tests are
 negative, consider
 treatment for
 CIDP

Axonal

Demyelinating

Subacute
 course (months)

Chronic
 course (years)

Uniform slowing,
 chronic

Nonuniform slowing,
conduction block

Review history for toxins;
 test for associated
 systemic disease or
 intoxication

Treatment appropriate
 for specific diagnosis

Test for paraprotein,
   if negative

If chronic or
 subacute: CIDP

If acute: GBS

Review family
 history; examine
 family members;
 genetic testing

Treatment
  for CIDP;
  see Ch. 447

IVIg or
 plasmapheresis;
 supportive
 care including
 respiratory assistance

Genetic counseling if appropriate

FIGURE 446-1  Approach to the evaluation of peripheral neuropathies. CIDP, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; EDx, electrodiagnostic; GBS, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome; IVIg, intravenous immunoglobulin.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3480

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 446-1  Approach to Neuropathic Disorders:  
Seven Key Questions
1.  What systems are involved?

•	 Motor, sensory, autonomic, or combinations

2.  What is the distribution of weakness?
•	 Only distal versus proximal and distal
•	 Focal/asymmetric versus symmetric

3.  What is the nature of the sensory involvement?

•	 Temperature loss or burning or stabbing pain (e.g., small fiber)
•	 Vibratory or proprioceptive loss (e.g., large fiber)
4.  Is there evidence of upper motor neuron involvement?

•	 Without sensory loss
•	 With sensory loss

5.  What is the temporal evolution?
•	 Acute (days to 4 weeks)
•	 Subacute (4–8 weeks)
•	 Chronic (>8 weeks)
•	 Monophasic, progressive, or relapsing-remitting

6.  Is there evidence for a hereditary neuropathy?

•	 Family history of neuropathy
•	 Lack of sensory symptoms despite sensory signs

7.  Are there any associated medical conditions?

•	 Cancer, diabetes mellitus, connective tissue disease or other autoimmune 

diseases, infection (e.g., HIV, Lyme disease, leprosy)

•	 Medications including over-the-counter drugs that may cause a toxic 

neuropathy

•	 Preceding events, drugs, toxins

2.  What  Is  the  Distribution  of  Weakness?  Delineating  the 
pattern  of  weakness,  if  present,  is  essential  for  diagnosis,  and  in  this 
regard,  two  additional  questions  should  be  answered:  (1)  Does  the 
weakness only involve the distal extremity, or is it both proximal and 
distal?  and  (2)  Is  the  weakness  focal  and  asymmetric,  or  is  it  sym-
metric?  Symmetric  proximal  and  distal  weakness  is  the  hallmark  of 
acquired  immune  demyelinating  polyneuropathies,  both  the  acute 
form (Guillain-Barré syndrome [GBS]) and the chronic form (chronic 
inflammatory  demyelinating  polyneuropathy  [CIDP])  (Chap.  447). 
The importance of finding symmetric proximal and distal weakness in 
a patient who presents with both motor and sensory symptoms cannot 
be  overemphasized  because  this  identifies  the  important  subset  of 
patients who may have a treatable acquired demyelinating neuropathic 
disorder (i.e., GBS or CIDP).

Findings of an asymmetric or multifocal pattern of weakness narrow 
the  differential  diagnosis.  Some  neuropathic  disorders  may  present 
with  unilateral  extremity  weakness.  In  the  absence  of  sensory  symp-
toms and signs, such weakness evolving over weeks or months would 
be worrisome for motor neuron disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis  [ALS]),  but  it  would  be  important  to  exclude  multifocal  motor 
neuropathy that may be treatable (Chap. 447). In a patient presenting 
with asymmetric subacute or acute sensory and motor symptoms and 
signs,  radiculopathies,  plexopathies,  compressive  mononeuropathies, 
or multiple mononeuropathies (e.g., mononeuropathy multiplex) must 
be considered.

ALS can produce prominent neck extensor weakness (head drop), 
tongue  and  pharyngeal  weakness  (dysarthria  and  dysphagia),  or 
shortness  of  breath.  These  focal  symmetric  weakness  patterns  can 
also be seen in neuromuscular junction disorders (myasthenia gravis, 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome [LEMS] [Chap. 448]) and some 
myopathies, particularly isolated neck extensor myopathy (Chap. 449).

3.  What  Is  the  Nature  of  the  Sensory  Involvement?  The 
patient  may  have  loss  of  sensation  (numbness),  altered  sensation  to 
touch (hyperpathia or allodynia), or uncomfortable spontaneous sen-
sations (tingling, burning, or aching) (Chap. 25). Neuropathic pain can 
be burning, dull, and poorly localized (protopathic pain), presumably 
transmitted by polymodal C nociceptor fibers, or sharp and lancinating 

3481

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

TABLE 446-2  Patterns of Neuropathic Disorders
Pattern 1: Symmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss
  Consider: inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (GBS and CIDP)
Pattern 2: Symmetric distal sensory loss with or without distal weakness

 Consider: cryptogenic or idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy (CSPN), diabetes 
mellitus and other metabolic disorders, drugs, toxins, familial (HSAN), CMT, 
amyloidosis, and others

Pattern 3: Asymmetric distal weakness with sensory loss
  With involvement of multiple nerves

 Consider: multifocal CIDP, vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia, amyloidosis, sarcoid, 
infectious (leprosy, Lyme, hepatitis B, C, or E, HIV, CMV), HNPP, tumor infiltration

  With involvement of single nerves/regions

 Consider: may be any of the above but also could be compressive 
mononeuropathy, plexopathy, or radiculopathy

Pattern 4: Asymmetric proximal and distal weakness with sensory loss

 Consider: polyradiculopathy or plexopathy due to diabetes mellitus, meningeal 
carcinomatosis or lymphomatosis, sarcoid, amyloid, hereditary plexopathy (HNPP, 
HNA), idiopathic

Pattern 5: Asymmetric distal weakness without sensory loss
  With upper motor neuron findings
  Consider: motor neuron disease
  Without upper motor neuron findings

 Consider: progressive muscular atrophy, juvenile monomelic amyotrophy 
(Hirayama’s disease), multifocal motor neuropathy, multifocal acquired motor 
axonopathy

Pattern 6: Symmetric sensory loss and distal areflexia with upper motor neuron 
findings

 Consider: vitamin B12, vitamin E, and copper deficiency with combined system 
degeneration with peripheral neuropathy, chronic liver disease, hereditary 
leukodystrophies (e.g., adrenomyeloneuropathy) HSP-plus

Pattern 7: Symmetric weakness without sensory loss
  With proximal and distal weakness

  Consider: SMA
  With distal weakness

  Consider: hereditary motor neuropathy (“distal” SMA) or atypical CMT

Pattern 8: Focal midline proximal symmetric weakness
  Neck extensor weakness

  Consider: ALS
  Bulbar weakness

 Consider: ALS/PLS, isolated bulbar ALS (IBALS), Kennedy’s syndrome (X-linked, 
bulbospinal SMA), bulbar presentation GBS

  Diaphragm weakness (SOB)

  Consider: ALS

Pattern 9: Asymmetric proprioceptive sensory loss without weakness
  Consider causes of a sensory neuronopathy (ganglionopathy):
  Cancer (paraneoplastic)
  Sjögren’s syndrome

Idiopathic sensory neuronopathy (possible GBS variant)

  Cisplatin and other chemotherapeutic agents
  Vitamin B6 toxicity
  HIV-related sensory neuronopathy
Pattern 10: Autonomic symptoms and signs
  Consider neuropathies associated with prominent autonomic dysfunction:
  Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
  Amyloidosis (familial and acquired)
  Diabetes mellitus
  GBS

Idiopathic pandysautonomia (may be a variant of GBS)

  Porphyria
  HIV-related autonomic neuropathy
  Vincristine and other chemotherapeutic agents

Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CIDP, chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyneuropathy; CMT, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease; CMV, 
cytomegalovirus; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; HIV, human immunodeficiency 
virus; HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with 
liability to pressure palsies; HSAN, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy; 
HSP-plus, hereditary spastic paraplegia plus neuropathy; PLS, primary lateral 
sclerosis; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SOB, shortness of breath.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3481

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3482 (epicritic pain), relayed by A-delta fibers. If pain and temperature per-
ception are lost, while vibratory and position sense are preserved along 
with muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, and normal nerve conduc-
tion studies (NCS), a small-fiber neuropathy is likely. The most likely 
causes of small-fiber neuropathies, when one is identified, are diabetes 
mellitus (DM) or glucose intolerance. Amyloid neuropathy should be 
considered as well in such cases, but most of these small-fiber neurop-
athies remain idiopathic despite extensive evaluation.

Severe  proprioceptive  loss  also  narrows  the  differential  diagnosis. 
Affected  patients  will  note  imbalance,  especially  in  the  dark.  A  neu-
rologic examination revealing a dramatic loss of proprioception with 
vibration  loss  and  normal  strength  should  alert  the  clinician  to  con-
sider a sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy (Pattern 9, Table 446-2). 
In particular, if this loss is asymmetric or affects the arms more than 
the legs, this pattern suggests a non-length-dependent process as seen 
in sensory neuronopathies.

4. Is There Evidence of Upper Motor Neuron Involvement?  
If  the  patient  presents  with  symmetric  distal  sensory  symptoms  and 
signs suggestive of a distal sensory neuropathy, but there is additional 
evidence of symmetric upper motor neuron involvement (Chap. 24), 
the  physician  should  consider  a  combined  system  degeneration  with 
neuropathy.  The  most  common  cause  for  this  pattern  is  vitamin  B12 
deficiency, but other etiologies should also be considered (e.g., copper 
deficiency,  human  immunodeficiency  virus  [HIV]  infection,  severe 
hepatic  disease,  adrenomyeloneuropathy  [AMN]),  and  hereditary 
spastic paraplegia plus a neuropathy.

5.  What  Is  the  Temporal  Evolution? 
It  is  important  to  deter-
mine the onset, duration, and evolution of symptoms and signs. Does 
the disease have an acute (days to 4 weeks), subacute (4–8 weeks), or 
chronic (>8 weeks) course? Is the course monophasic, progressive, or 
relapsing?  Most  neuropathies  are  insidious  and  slowly  progressive  in 
nature.  Neuropathies  with  acute  and  subacute  presentations  include 
GBS,  vasculitis,  and  radiculopathies  related  to  diabetes  or  Lyme  dis-
ease. A relapsing course can be present in CIDP and porphyria.

6.  Is  There  Evidence  for  a  Hereditary  Neuropathy? 
In 
patients  with  slowly  progressive  distal  weakness  over  many  years 
with few sensory symptoms yet significant sensory deficits on clinical 
examination,  the  clinician  should  consider  a  hereditary  neuropathy 
(e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease [CMT]). On examination, the feet 
may  show  high  or  flat  arches  or  hammer  toes,  and  scoliosis  may  be 
present. In suspected cases, it may be necessary to perform neurologic 
and  electrophysiologic  studies  on  family  members  in  addition  to  the 
patient.

7. Does the Patient Have Any Other Medical Conditions? 
It 
is  important  to  inquire  about  associated  medical  conditions  (e.g., 
DM,  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  [SLE]);  preceding  or  concurrent 
infections (e.g. diarrheal illness preceding GBS); surgeries (e.g., gastric 
bypass and nutritional neuropathies); medications (toxic neuropathy), 
including over-the-counter vitamin preparations (B6); alcohol; dietary 
habits; and use of dentures (e.g., fixatives contain zinc that can lead to 
copper deficiency).

 ■ PATTERN RECOGNITION APPROACH TO 
NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Based  on  the  answers  to  the  seven  key  questions,  neuropathic  disor-
ders can be classified into several patterns based on the distribution or 
pattern of sensory, motor, and autonomic involvement (Table 446-2). 
Each pattern has a limited differential diagnosis, and information from 
laboratory studies usually permits a final diagnosis to be established.
 ■ ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
The  electrodiagnostic  (EDx)  evaluation  of  patients  with  a  suspected 
peripheral neuropathy consists of NCS and needle electromyography 
(EMG). In addition, studies of autonomic function can be valuable. The 
electrophysiologic data can confirm whether the neuropathic disorder 
is  a  mononeuropathy,  multiple  mononeuropathy  (mononeuropathy 
multiplex), radiculopathy, plexopathy, or generalized polyneuropathy. 

TABLE 446-3  Electrophysiologic Features: Axonal Degeneration versus 
Segmental Demyelination

AXONAL DEGENERATION

SEGMENTAL 
DEMYELINATION

Motor Nerve Conduction Studies

CMAP amplitude

Decreased

Distal latency
Conduction velocity
Conduction block
Temporal dispersion
F wave
H reflex

Normal
Normal
Absent
Absent
Normal or absent
Normal or absent

Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies

SNAP amplitude
Distal latency
Conduction velocity

Needle EMG

Spontaneous activity
  Fibrillations
  Fasciculations
Motor unit potentials
  Recruitment
  Morphology

Decreased
Normal
Normal

Present
Present

Decreased
Long duration, large 
amplitude, polyphasic  
(if there is reinnervation)

Normal (except with CB 
or distal dispersion)
Prolonged
Slow
Present
Present
Prolonged or absent
Prolonged or absent

Normal or decreased
Prolonged
Slow

Absent
Absent

Decreased
Normal

Abbreviations: CB, conduction block; CMAP, compound motor action potential; 
EMG, electromyography; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.

Similarly,  EDx  evaluation  can  ascertain  whether  the  process  involves 
only sensory fibers, motor fibers, autonomic fibers, or a combination 
of  these.  Finally,  the  electrophysiologic  data  can  help  distinguish 
axonopathies from myelinopathies as well as axonal degeneration sec-
ondary to ganglionopathies from the more common length-dependent 
axonopathies.

NCS are most helpful in classifying a neuropathy as due to axonal 
degeneration  or  segmental  demyelination  (Table  446-3).  In  general, 
low-amplitude  potentials  with  relatively  preserved  distal  latencies, 
conduction  velocities,  and  late  potentials,  along  with  fibrillations  on 
needle EMG, suggest an axonal neuropathy. On the other hand, slow 
conduction  velocities,  prolonged  distal  latencies  and  late  potentials, 
relatively  preserved  amplitudes,  and  the  absence  of  fibrillations  on 
needle EMG imply a primary demyelinating neuropathy. The presence 
of  nonuniform  slowing  of  conduction  velocity,  conduction  block,  or 
temporal dispersion further suggests an acquired demyelinating neur-
opathy (e.g., GBS or CIDP) as opposed to a hereditary demyelinating 
neuropathy (e.g., CMT type 1).

Autonomic  studies  are  used  to  assess  small  myelinated  (A-delta) 
or  unmyelinated  (C)  nerve  fiber  involvement.  Such  testing  includes 
heart rate response to deep breathing, heart rate, and blood pressure 
response to both the Valsalva maneuver and tilt-table testing and quan-
titative sudomotor axon reflex testing (Chap. 440). These studies are 
particularly useful in patients who have pure small-fiber neuropathy or 
autonomic neuropathy in which routine NCS are normal.

 ■ OTHER IMPORTANT LABORATORY 
INFORMATION
In patients with generalized symmetric peripheral neuropathy, a stan-
dard  laboratory  evaluation  should  include  a  complete  blood  count, 
basic  chemistries  including  serum  electrolytes  and  tests  of  renal  and 
hepatic  function,  fasting  blood  glucose  (FBS),  hemoglobin  (Hb)  A1c, 
urinalysis, thyroid function tests, B12, folate, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate  (ESR),  rheumatoid  factor,  antinuclear  antibodies  (ANA),  serum 
protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and immunoelectrophoresis or immu-
nofixation,  and  urine  for  Bence  Jones  protein.  Quantification  of  the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3482

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3483

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

concentration of serum-free light chains and the kappa/lambda ratio is 
more sensitive than SPEP, immunoelectrophoresis, or immunofixation 
to detect a monoclonal gammopathy and therefore should be done if 
amyloidosis  is  suspected.  A  skeletal  survey  should  be  performed  in 
patients  with  acquired  demyelinating  neuropathies  and  M-spikes  to 
look for osteosclerotic or lytic lesions. Patients with monoclonal gam-
mopathy  should  also  be  referred  to  a  hematologist  for  consideration 
of a bone marrow biopsy. An oral glucose tolerance test is indicated in 
patients with painful sensory neuropathies even if FBS and HbA1c are 
normal, as the test is abnormal in about one-third of such patients. In 
addition to the above tests, patients with a mononeuropathy multiplex 
pattern  of  involvement  should  have  a  vasculitis  workup,  including 
antineutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibodies  (ANCAs),  cryoglobulins,  hep-
atitis serology, Western blot for Lyme disease, HIV, and occasionally a 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) titer.

There are many autoantibody panels (various antiganglioside anti-
bodies) marketed for screening routine neuropathy patients for a treat-
able  condition.  These  autoantibodies  have  no  proven  clinical  utility 
or  added  benefit  beyond  the  information  obtained  from  a  complete 
clinical  examination  and  detailed  EDx.  A  heavy  metal  screen  is  also 
not  necessary  as  a  screening  procedure,  unless  there  is  a  history  of 
possible  exposure  or  suggestive  features  on  examination  (e.g.,  severe 
painful  sensorimotor  and  autonomic  neuropathy  and  alopecia—
thallium;  severe  painful  sensorimotor  neuropathy  with  or  without 
gastrointestinal  [GI]  disturbance  and  Mee’s  lines—arsenic;  wrist  or 
finger extensor weakness and anemia with basophilic stippling of red 
blood cells—lead).

In  patients  with  suspected  GBS  or  CIDP,  a  lumbar  puncture  is 
indicated to look for an elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein. In 
idiopathic cases of GBS and CIDP, CSF pleocytosis is usually absent. 
If cells are present, one should consider HIV infection, Lyme disease, 
sarcoidosis, or lymphomatous or leukemic infiltration of nerve roots. 
Recently, serum IgG4 antibodies to neurofascin and contactin-2 have 
been discovered in CIDP with severe sensory ataxia, tremor, and distal 
weakness (Chap. 447). These cases are difficult to treat with standard 
immunotherapies but may respond to rituximab. Some patients with 
GBS  and  CIDP  have  abnormal  liver  function  tests.  In  these  cases, 
it  is  important  to  also  check  for  hepatitis  B  and  C,  HIV,  CMV,  and 
Epstein-Barr  virus  (EBV)  infection.  In  patients  with  an  axonal  
GBS  (by  EMG/NCS)  or  those  with  a  suspicious  coinciding  history 
(e.g., unexplained abdominal pain, psychiatric illness, significant auto-
nomic dysfunction), it is reasonable to screen for porphyria.

In  patients  with  a  severe  sensory  ataxia,  a  sensory  ganglionopathy 
or  neuronopathy  should  be  considered.  The  most  common  causes  of 
sensory  ganglionopathies  are  Sjögren’s  syndrome  (Chap.  361)  and  a 
paraneoplastic  neuropathy  (Chap.  94).  Neuropathy  can  be  the  initial 
manifestation of Sjögren’s syndrome. Thus, one should always inquire 
about dry eyes and mouth in patients with sensory signs and symptoms. 
Further, some patients can manifest sicca complex without other man-
ifestations  of  Sjögren’s  syndrome.  Thus,  patients  with  sensory  ataxia 
should be tested for antibodies to SS-A/Ro and SS-B/La, in addition to 
the  routine  ANA.  To  evaluate  a  possible  paraneoplastic  sensory  gan-
glionopathy, antineuronal nuclear antibodies (e.g., anti-Hu antibodies) 
should  be  obtained.  These  antibodies  are  most  commonly  seen  in 
patients with small-cell carcinoma of the lung but are also present with 
breast, ovarian, lymphoma, and other cancers. Importantly, the parane-
oplastic neuropathy can precede the detection of the cancer, and detec-
tion of these autoantibodies should lead to a search for malignancy.

 ■ NERVE BIOPSIES
Nerve biopsies are now rarely performed in the evaluation of neuropa-
thies. The primary indication for nerve biopsy is suspicion for amyloid 
neuropathy or vasculitis. In most instances, the abnormalities present 
on biopsies do not help distinguish one form of peripheral neuropathy 
from another (beyond what is already apparent by clinical examination 
and the NCS). Nerve biopsies should only be performed when the NCS 
are  abnormal.  The  sural  nerve  is  most  commonly  biopsied  because 
it is a pure sensory nerve and biopsy will not result in loss of motor 
function. In suspected vasculitis, a combination biopsy of a superficial 

peroneal  nerve  (pure  sensory)  and  the  underlying  peroneus  brevis 
muscle obtained from a single small incision increases the diagnostic 
yield. Tissue can be analyzed to assess for evidence of inflammation, 
vasculitis,  or  amyloid  deposition.  Semithin  plastic  sections,  teased 
fiber  preparations,  and  electron  microscopy  are  used  to  assess  the 
morphology of the nerve fibers and to distinguish axonopathies from 
myelinopathies.
 ■ SKIN BIOPSIES
Skin biopsies are sometimes used to diagnose a small-fiber neuropathy. 
Following  a  punch  biopsy  of  the  skin  in  the  distal  lower  extremity, 
immunologic  staining  can  be  used  to  measure  the  density  of  small 
unmyelinated  fibers.  The  density  of  these  nerve  fibers  is  reduced  in 
patients with small-fiber neuropathies in whom NCS and routine nerve 
biopsies are often normal. This technique may allow for an objective 
measurement in patients with mainly subjective symptoms. However, 
it often adds little to what one already knows from the clinical exami-
nation and EDx.

SPECIFIC DISORDERS
 ■ HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES
CMT  disease  is  the  most  common  type  of  hereditary  neuropathy 
(Pattern 2, Table 446-2). Rather than one disease, CMT is a syndrome 
of  many  genetically  distinct  disorders  (Table  446-4).  The  various 
subtypes  of  CMT  are  classified  according  to  the  nerve  conduction 
velocities  (NCVs)  and  predominant  pathology  (e.g.,  demyelination 
or  axonal  degeneration),  inheritance  pattern  (autosomal  dominant, 
recessive, or X-linked), and the specific mutated genes. Type 1 CMT 
(or  CMT1)  refers  to  inherited  demyelinating  sensorimotor  neuropa-
thies, whereas the axonal sensory neuropathies are classified as CMT2. 
By definition, motor conduction velocities in the arms are slowed to 
<38 m/s in CMT1 and are >38 m/s in CMT2. However, most cases of 
CMT1 actually have motor NCVs between 20 and 25 m/s. CMT1 and 
CMT2  usually  begin  in  childhood  or  early  adult  life;  however,  onset 
later in life can occur, particularly in CMT2. Both are inherited in an 
autosomal dominant fashion, with a few exceptions. CMT3 is an auto-
somal dominant neuropathy that appears in infancy and is associated 
with severe demyelination or hypomyelination. CMT4 is an autosomal 
recessive neuropathy that typically begins in childhood or early adult 
life. There are no medical therapies for any of the CMTs, but physical 
and occupational therapy can be beneficial, as can bracing (e.g., ankle-
foot orthotics for foot drop) and other orthotic devices.
 ■ CMT1
CMT1 is the most common form of hereditary neuropathy. Affected 
individuals usually present in the first to third decade of life with distal 
leg  weakness  (e.g.,  foot  drop),  although  patients  may  remain  asymp-
tomatic even late in life. People with CMT generally do not complain 
of numbness or tingling, which can be helpful in distinguishing CMT 
from acquired forms of neuropathy in which sensory symptoms usu-
ally predominate. Although usually asymptomatic, reduced sensation 
to  all  modalities  is  apparent  on  examination.  Muscle  stretch  reflexes 
are unobtainable or reduced throughout. There is often atrophy of the 
muscles below the knee (particularly the anterior compartment), lead-
ing to so-called inverted champagne bottle legs.

Motor NCVs are generally in the 20–25 m/s range. Nerve biopsies 
usually  are  not  performed  on  patients  suspected  of  having  CMT1, 
because the diagnosis usually can be made by less invasive testing (e.g., 
NCS  and  genetic  studies).  However,  when  done,  the  biopsies  reveal 
reduced numbers of myelinated nerve fibers with a predilection for loss 
of large-diameter fibers and Schwann cell proliferation around thinly 
or demyelinated fibers, forming so-called onion bulbs.

CMT1A is the most common subtype of CMT1, representing 70% of 
cases, and is caused by a 1.5-megabase (Mb) duplication within chro-
mosome 17p11.2-12 encoding the gene for peripheral myelin protein-22 
(PMP-22). This results in patients having three copies of the PMP-22 
gene  rather  than  two.  This  protein  accounts  for  2–5%  of  myelin 
protein and is expressed in compact regions of the peripheral myelin 
sheath.  Approximately  20%  of  patients  with  CMT1  have  CMT1B, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3483

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3484 TABLE 446-4  Classification of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Related Neuropathies

INHERITANCE

GENE LOCATION

GENE PRODUCT

NAME
CMT1
  CMT1A
  CMT1B
  CMT1C
  CMT1D
  CMT1E (with deafness)
  CMT1F
  CMT1G
  CMT1X
HNPP

AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
X-linked dominant
AD

AR
AR
AR
AR

AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD

CMT dominant-intermediate (CMTDI)
  CMT-DIA
  CMT-DIB
  CMT-DIC
  CMT-DID
  CMT-DIE
  CMT-DIF
  CMT-DIG
CMT recessive-intermediate (CMT-RI)
  CMT-RIA
  CMT-RIB
  CMT-RIC
  CMT-RI D
CMT2
  CMT2A2 (allelic to HMSN VI with optic atrophy)
  CMT2B
  CMT2B1 (allelic to LGMD 1B)
  CMT2B2
  CMT2C (with vocal cord and diaphragm paralysis) AD
AD
  CMT2D (allelic to distal SMA5)
AD
  CMT2E (allelic to CMT 1F)
AD
  CMT2F
AD
  CMT2G
AD
  CMT2I (allelic to CMT1B)
AD
  CMT2J
AD
  CMT2H, CMT2K (allelic to CMT4A)
AD

 CMT2L (allelic to distal hereditary motor 
neuropathy type 2)

AD
AD
AR
AR and AD

  CMT2M
  CMT2N
  CMT2O
  CMT2P
  CMT2P-Okinawa (HSMN2P)
  CMT2Q
  CMT2U
  CMT2V
  CMT2W
  CMT2Y
  CMT2Z
CMT2X
CMT3

 (Dejerine-Sottas disease, congenital 
hypomyelinating neuropathy)

AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
X-linked
AD
AD

AR
AR

17p11.2
1q21-23
16p13.1-p12.3
10q21.1-22.1
17p11.2
8p13-21
8q21
Xq13
17p11.2
1q21-23

10q24.1-25.1
19.p12-13.2
1p35
1q22
14q32.33
3q26
8p31

8q21.1
6q23
1p36
12q24

1p36.2
3q13-q22
1q21.2
19q13
12q23-24
7p14
8p21
7q11-q21
9q31.3-34.2
1q22
1q22
8q13-q21
12q24

16q22
16q22.1
14q32.31
9q31.3-34.2
3q13-q14
10p14
12q13
17q11
5q31
9p13
22q12
Xq22-24
17p11.2
1q21-23

10q21.1-22.1
19q13

PMP-22 (usually duplication of gene)
MPZ
LITAF
ERG2
Point mutations in PMP-22 gene
Neurofilament light chain
PMP2
Connexin-32
PMP-22
MPZ

?
Dynamin 2
YARS
MPZ
IFN-2
GNB4
NEFL

GDAP1
KARS5
PLEKHG5
COX6A1

MFN2
RAB7
Lamin A/C
MED25 for AR; unknown for AD
TRPV4
Glycine tRNA synthetase
Neurofilament light chain
Heat-shock 27-kDa protein-1
LRSAM1
MPZ
MPZ
GDAP1
Heat-shock protein 8

Dynamin-2
AARS
DYNC1H1
LRSAM1
TFG
DHTKD1
MARS
NAGLU
HARS
VCP
MRC2
PRPS1
PMP-22
MPZ

ERG2
Periaxon

(Continued)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3484

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
TABLE 446-4  Classification of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease and Related Neuropathies
NAME

INHERITANCE

GENE LOCATION

(Continued)

3485

CMT4
  CMT4A
  CMT4B1
  CMT4B2
  CMT4C
  CMT4D (HMSN-Lom)
  CMT4E (congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy)
  CMT4F
  CMT4G
  CMT4H
  CMT4J
  CMT4K
HNA
HSAN1A
HSAN1B
HSAN1C
HSAN1D
HSAN1E
HSAN2A
HSAN2B
HSAN2C
HSAN2D
HSAN3A
HSAN3B
HSAN4
HSAN5

HSAN6

AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AD
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AR
AD or AR

AR

8q13-21.1
11q23
11p15
5q23-33
8q24
Multiple
19q13.1-13.3
10q23.2
12q12-q13
6q21
9q34
17q24
9q22
3q21
14q24.3
14q21.3
19p13.2
12p13.33
5p15.1
12q13.13
2q24.3
9q21
6p12.1
3q
1p11.2-p13.2
2q24.3
3p22.2
6p12.1

GENE PRODUCT

GDAP1
MTMR2
MTMR13
SH3TC2
NDRG1
Includes PMP-22, MPZ, and ERG-2
Periaxin
HK1
Frabin
FIG4
SURF1
SEPT9
SPTLC1
RAB7
SPTLC2
ATL1
DNMT1
PRKWNK1
FAM134B
KIF1A
SCN9A
IKAP
Dystonin
trkA/NGF receptor
NGFb
SCN9A
SCN11A
Dystonin

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

Abbreviations: AARS, alanyl-tRNA synthetase; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ATL, atlastin; CMT, Charcot-Marie-Tooth; DNMT1, DNA methyltransferase 1; 
DYNC1HI, cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1; ERG2, early growth response-2 protein; FAM134B, family with sequence similarity 134, member B; FIG4, FDG1-related F 
actin-binding protein; GDAP1, ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein-1; HK1, hexokinase 1; HMSN-P, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy proximal; 
HNA, hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy; HNPP, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies; HSAN, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy; IFN2, inverted 
formin-2; IKAP, kB kinase complex-associated protein; LGMD, limb girdle muscular dystrophy; LITAF, lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor α factor; LRSAM1, E3 
ubiquitin-protein ligase; MED25, mediator 25; MFN2, mitochondrial fusion protein mitofusin 2 gene; MPZ, myelin protein zero protein; MTMR2, myotubularin-related protein-2; 
NDRG1, N-myc downstream regulated 1; PMP-22, peripheral myelin protein-22; PRKWNK1, protein kinase, lysine deficient 1; PRPS1, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate 
synthetase 1; RAB7, Ras-related protein 7; SEPT9, Septin 9; SH3TC2, SH3 domain and tetratricopeptide repeats 2; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SPTLC, serine 
palmitoyltransferase long-chain base; TFG, TRK-fused gene; TrkA/NGF, tyrosine kinase A/nerve growth factor; tRNA, transfer ribonucleic acid; TRPV4, transient receptor 
potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 4; WNK1, WNK lysine deficient; YARS, tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase.
Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 11-1, pp 265–266.

caused  by  mutations  in  the  myelin  protein  zero  (MPZ).  CMT1B  is 
for  the  most  part  clinically,  electrophysiologically,  and  histologically 
indistinguishable from CMT1A. MPZ is an integral myelin protein and 
accounts for more than half of the myelin protein in peripheral nerves. 
Other forms of CMT1 are much less common and also indistinguish-
able from one another clinically and electrophysiologically.
 ■ CMT2
CMT2  occurs  approximately  half  as  frequently  as  CMT1,  and  CMT2 
tends to present later in life. Affected individuals usually become symp-
tomatic in the second decade; some cases present earlier in childhood, 
whereas others remain asymptomatic into late adult life. Clinically, CMT2 
is for the most part indistinguishable from CMT1. NCS are helpful in this 
regard;  in  contrast  to  CMT1,  the  velocities  are  normal  or  only  slightly 
slowed. The most common cause of CMT2 is a mutation in the gene for 
mitofusin 2 (MFN2), which accounts for ~20–30% of CMT2 cases overall. 
MFN2 localizes to the outer mitochondrial membrane, where it regulates 
the mitochondrial network architecture by participating in mitochondrial 
fusion. The other genes associated with CMT2 are much less common.
 ■ CMTDI
In dominant-intermediate CMTs (CMTDIs), the NCVs are faster than 
usually seen in CMT1 (e.g., >38 m/s) but slower than in CMT2.

 ■ CMT3
CMT3 was originally described by Dejerine and Sottas as a hereditary 
demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy presenting in infancy or 
early childhood. Affected children are severely weak. Motor NCVs are 
markedly slowed, typically ≤5–10 m/s. Most cases of CMT3 are caused 
by point mutations in the genes for PMP-22, MPZ, or ERG-2, which 
are also the genes responsible for CMT1.

 ■ CMT4
CMT4 is extremely rare and is characterized by a severe, childhood- 
onset  sensorimotor  polyneuropathy  that  is  usually  inherited  in  an 
autosomal recessive fashion. Electrophysiologic and histologic evalua-
tions can show demyelinating or axonal features. CMT4 is genetically 
heterogeneous (Table 446-4).

 ■ CMT1X
CMT1X is an X-linked dominant disorder with clinical features similar 
to CMT1 and CMT2, except that the neuropathy is much more severe 
in  males  than  in  females.  CMT1X  accounts  for  ~10–15%  of  CMT 
overall. Males usually present in the first two decades of life with atro-
phy and weakness of the distal arms and legs, areflexia, pes cavus, and 
hammer  toes.  Obligate  female  carriers  are  frequently  asymptomatic 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3485

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3486 but  can  develop  signs  and  symptoms  of  CMT.  Onset  in  females  is 
usually after the second decade of life, and the neuropathy is milder in  
severity.

NCS reveal features of both demyelination and axonal degeneration. 
In  males,  motor  NCVs  in  the  arms  and  legs  are  moderately  slowed 
(in the low to mid 30-m/s range). About 50% of males with CMT1X 
have motor NCVs between 15 and 35 m/s with ~80% of these falling 
between  25  and  35  m/s  (intermediate  slowing).  In  contrast,  ~80%  of 
females with CMT1X have NCVs in the normal range and 20% have 
NCVs in the intermediate range. CMT1X is caused by mutations in the 
connexin-32 gene. Connexins are gap junction structural proteins that 
are important in cell-to-cell communication.

Hereditary  Neuropathy  with  Liability  to  Pressure  Palsies 
(HNPP)  HNPP  is  an  autosomal  dominant  disorder  related  to 
CMT1A. While CMT1A is usually associated with a 1.5-Mb duplica-
tion in chromosome 17p11.2 that results in an extra copy of PMP-22 
gene,  HNPP  is  caused  by  inheritance  of  the  chromosome  with  the 
corresponding  1.5-Mb  deletion  of  this  segment,  and  thus,  affected 
individuals have only one copy of the PMP-22 gene. Patients usually 
manifest in the second or third decade of life with painless numbness 
and weakness in the distribution of single peripheral nerves, although 
multiple  mononeuropathies  can  occur  (Pattern  3,  Table  446-2). 
Symptomatic  mononeuropathy  or  multiple  mononeuropathies  are 
often  precipitated  by  trivial  compression  of  nerve(s)  as  can  occur 
with  wearing  a  backpack,  leaning  on  the  elbows,  or  crossing  one’s 
legs for even a short period of time. These pressure-related monon-
europathies may take weeks or months to resolve. In addition, some 
affected  individuals  manifest  with  a  progressive  or  relapsing,  gen-
eralized  and  symmetric,  sensorimotor  peripheral  neuropathy  that 
resembles CMT.

Hereditary  Neuralgic  Amyotrophy  (HNA)  HNA  is  an  auto-
somal  dominant  disorder  characterized  by  recurrent  attacks  of  pain, 
weakness,  and  sensory  loss  in  the  distribution  of  the  brachial  plexus 
often  beginning  in  childhood  (Pattern  4,  Table  446-2).  These  attacks 
are similar to those seen with idiopathic brachial plexitis (see below). 
Attacks  may  occur  in  the  postpartum  period,  following  surgery,  or 
at  other  times  of  stress.  Most  patients  recover  over  several  weeks  or 
months. Slightly dysmorphic features, including hypotelorism, epican-
thal folds, cleft palate, syndactyly, micrognathia, and facial asymmetry, 
are evident in some individuals. EDx demonstrate an axonal process. 
HNA is genetically heterogeneous but can be caused by mutations in 
septin 9 (SEPT9). Septins may be important in formation of the neu-
ronal cytoskeleton and have a role in cell division, but it is not known 
how mutations in SEPT9 lead to HNA.

Hereditary  Sensory  and  Autonomic  Neuropathy  (HSAN)  
The HSANs are a very rare group of hereditary neuropathies in which 
sensory  and  autonomic  dysfunction  predominates  over  muscle  weak-
ness, unlike CMT, in which motor findings are most prominent (Pattern 2,  
Table 446-2; Table 446-4). Nevertheless, affected individuals can develop 
motor weakness, and there can be overlap with CMT. There are no med-
ical therapies available to treat these neuropathies, other than preven-
tion and treatment of mutilating skin and bone lesions.

Of the HSANs, only HSAN1 typically presents in adults. HSAN1 
is the most common of the HSANs and is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant  fashion.  Affected  individuals  usually  manifest  in  the  sec-
ond  through  fourth  decades  of  life.  HSAN1  is  associated  with  the 
degeneration  of  small  myelinated  and  unmyelinated  nerve  fibers 
leading  to  severe  loss  of  pain  and  temperature  sensation,  deep  der-
mal  ulcerations,  recurrent  osteomyelitis,  Charcot  joints,  bone  loss, 
gross  foot  and  hand  deformities,  and  amputated  digits.  Although 
most people with HSAN1 do not complain of numbness, they often 
describe burning, aching, or lancinating pains. Autonomic neuropa-
thy is not a prominent feature, but bladder dysfunction and reduced 
sweating  in  the  feet  may  occur.  HSAN1A,  which  is  most  common, 
is caused by mutations in the serine palmitoyltransferase long-chain 
base 1 (SPTLC1) gene.

OTHER HEREDITARY NEUROPATHIES 
(TABLE 446-5)
 ■ FABRY’S DISEASE
Fabry’s  disease  (angiokeratoma  corporis  diffusum)  is  an  X-linked 
dominant disorder. Although men are more commonly and severely 
affected, women can also manifest symptoms and signs of the disease. 
Angiokeratomas  are  reddish-purple  maculopapular  lesions  that  are 
usually  found  around  the  umbilicus,  scrotum,  inguinal  region,  and 
perineum.  Burning  or  lancinating  pain  in  the  hands  and  feet  often 
develops  in  males  in  late  childhood  or  early  adult  life  (Pattern  2, 
Table  446-2).  However,  the  neuropathy  is  usually  overshadowed  by 
complications  arising  from  an  associated  premature  atherosclerosis 
(e.g., hypertension, renal failure, cardiac disease, and stroke) that often 
lead  to  death  by  the  fifth  decade  of  life.  Some  patients  also  manifest 
primarily with a dilated cardiomyopathy.

Fabry’s  disease  is  caused  by  mutations  in  the  α-galactosidase  gene 
that  leads  to  the  accumulation  of  ceramide  trihexoside  in  nerves 
and  blood  vessels.  A  decrease  in  α-galactosidase  activity  is  evident 
in  leukocytes  and  cultured  fibroblasts.  Glycolipid  granules  may  be 
appreciated in ganglion cells of the peripheral and sympathetic nervous 
systems  and  in  perineurial  cells.  Enzyme  replacement  therapy  with 
α-galactosidase  B  can  improve  the  neuropathy  if  patients  are  treated 
early, before irreversible nerve fiber loss develops.
 ■ ADRENOLEUKODYSTROPHY/
ADRENOMYELONEUROPATHY
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and AMN are allelic X-linked dominant 
disorders caused by mutations in the peroxisomal transmembrane ade-
nosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transporter gene. Patients 
with ALD manifest with central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities. 
However, ~30% of patients with mutations in this gene present with the 
AMN  phenotype  that  typically  manifests  in  the  third  to  fifth  decade 
of  life  as  mild  to  moderate  peripheral  neuropathy  combined  with 

TABLE 446-5  Rare Hereditary Neuropathies
Hereditary Disorders of Lipid Metabolism

Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Krabbe’s disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy)
Fabry’s disease
Adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy
Refsum’s disease
Tangier disease
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis

Hereditary Ataxias with Neuropathy

Friedreich’s ataxia
Vitamin E deficiency
Spinocerebellar ataxia
Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-Kornzweig disease)

Disorders of Defective DNA Repair

Ataxia-telangiectasia
Cockayne’s syndrome

Giant Axonal Neuropathy

Porphyria

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP)
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP)
Variegate porphyria (VP)

Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (FAP)

Transthyretin-related
Gelsolin-related
Apolipoprotein A1-related

Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed.  
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 12-1, p. 299.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3486

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3487

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

progressive  spastic  paraplegia  (Pattern  6,  Table  446-2)  (Chap.  442). 
Rare patients present with an adult-onset spinocerebellar ataxia or only 
with adrenal insufficiency.

EDx is suggestive of a primary axonopathy with secondary demy-
elination. Nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss of myelinated and unmy-
elinated  nerve  fibers  with  lamellar  inclusions  in  the  cytoplasm  of 
Schwann cells. Very-long-chain fatty acid (VLCFA) levels (C24, C25, 
and  C26)  are  increased  in  the  urine.  Laboratory  evidence  of  adrenal 
insufficiency  is  evident  in  approximately  two-thirds  of  patients.  The 
diagnosis can be confirmed by genetic testing.

Adrenal insufficiency is managed by replacement therapy; however, 
there is no proven effective therapy for the neurologic manifestations 
of ALD/AMN. Diets low in VLCFAs and supplemented with Lorenzo’s 
oil (erucic and oleic acids) reduce the levels of VLCFAs and increase 
the levels of C22 in serum, fibroblasts, and liver; however, several large, 
open-label trials of Lorenzo’s oil failed to demonstrate efficacy.

 ■ REFSUM’S DISEASE
Refsum’s disease can manifest in infancy to early adulthood with the 
classic  tetrad  of  (1)  peripheral  neuropathy,  (2)  retinitis  pigmentosa, 
(3)  cerebellar  ataxia,  and  (4)  elevated  CSF  protein  concentration. 
Most affected individuals develop progressive distal sensory loss and 
weakness in the legs leading to foot drop by their twenties (Pattern 2, 
Table  446-2).  Subsequently,  the  proximal  leg  and  arm  muscles  may 
become  weak.  Patients  may  also  develop  sensorineural  hearing  loss, 
cardiac conduction abnormalities, ichthyosis, and anosmia.

Serum  phytanic  acid  levels  are  elevated.  Sensory  and  motor  NCS 
reveal reduced amplitudes, prolonged latencies, and slowed conduction 
velocities. Nerve biopsy demonstrates a loss of myelinated nerve fibers, 
with  remaining  axons  often  thinly  myelinated  and  associated  with 
onion bulb formation.

Refsum’s disease is genetically heterogeneous but autosomal reces-
sive in nature. Classical Refsum’s disease with childhood or early adult 
onset is caused by mutations in the gene that encodes for phytanoyl-
CoA  α-hydroxylase  (PAHX).  Less  commonly,  mutations  in  the  gene 
encoding  peroxin  7  receptor  protein  (PRX7)  are  responsible.  These 
mutations  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  phytanic  acid  in  the  central 
and  peripheral  nervous  systems.  Treatment  is  removal  of  phytanic 
precursors (phytols: fish oils, dairy products, and ruminant fats) from 
the diet.

 ■ TANGIER DISEASE
Tangier  disease  is  a  rare  autosomal  recessive  disorder  that  can  pres-
ent  as  (1)  asymmetric  multiple  mononeuropathies,  (2)  a  slowly 
progressive  symmetric  polyneuropathy  predominantly  in  the  legs,  or  
(3)  a  pseudo-syringomyelia  pattern  with  dissociated  sensory  loss 
(i.e.,  abnormal  pain/temperature  perception  but  preserved  position/ 
vibration  in  the  arms  [Chap.  442]).  The  tonsils  may  appear  swollen 
and yellowish-orange in color, and there may also be splenomegaly and 
lymphadenopathy.

Tangier disease is caused by mutations in the ATP-binding cassette 
transporter 1 (ABC1) gene, which leads to markedly reduced levels of 
high-density  lipoprotein  (HDL)  cholesterol  levels,  whereas  triacylg-
lycerol levels are increased. Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degeneration 
with  demyelination  and  remyelination.  Electron  microscopy  demon-
strates abnormal accumulation of lipid in Schwann cells, particularly 
those encompassing unmyelinated and small myelinated nerves. There 
is no specific treatment.

 ■ PORPHYRIA
Porphyria is a group of inherited disorders caused by defects in heme 
biosynthesis  (Chap.  416).  Three  forms  of  porphyria  are  associated 
with  peripheral  neuropathy:  acute  intermittent  porphyria  (AIP), 
hereditary coproporphyria (HCP), and variegate porphyria (VP). The 
acute neurologic manifestations are similar in each, with the exception 
that  a  photosensitive  rash  is  seen  with  HCP  and  VP  but  not  in  AIP. 
Attacks of porphyria can be precipitated by certain drugs (usually those 
metabolized by the P450 system), hormonal changes (e.g., pregnancy, 
menstrual cycle), and dietary restrictions.

An  acute  attack  of  porphyria  may  begin  with  sharp  abdominal 
pain.  Subsequently,  patients  may  develop  agitation,  hallucinations, 
or  seizures.  Several  days  later,  back  and  extremity  pain  followed  by 
weakness ensues, mimicking GBS (Pattern 1, Table 446-2). Weakness 
can involve the arms or the legs and can be asymmetric, proximal, or 
distal in distribution, as well as affecting the face and bulbar muscula-
ture. Dysautonomia and signs of sympathetic overactivity are common 
(e.g., pupillary dilation, tachycardia, and hypertension). Constipation, 
urinary retention, and incontinence can also be seen.

The  CSF  protein  is  typically  normal  or  mildly  elevated.  Liver 
function tests and hematologic parameters are usually normal. Some 
patients  are  hyponatremic  due  to  inappropriate  secretion  of  antidi-
uretic hormone (Chap. 378). The urine may appear brownish in color 
secondary to the high concentration of porphyrin metabolites. Accu-
mulation  of  intermediary  precursors  of  heme  (i.e.,  d-aminolevulinic 
acid, porphobilinogen, uroporphobilinogen, coproporphyrinogen, and 
protoporphyrinogen) is found in urine. Specific enzyme activities can 
also be measured in erythrocytes and leukocytes. The primary abnor-
malities  on  EDx  are  marked  reductions  in  compound  motor  action 
potential (CMAP) amplitudes and signs of active axonal degeneration 
on needle EMG.

The  porphyrias  are  inherited  in  an  autosomal  dominant  fashion. 
AIP  is  associated  with  porphobilinogen  deaminase  deficiency,  HCP 
is caused by defects in coproporphyrin oxidase, and VP is associated 
with protoporphyrinogen oxidase deficiency. The pathogenesis of the 
neuropathy is not completely understood. Treatment with glucose and 
hematin  may  reduce  the  accumulation  of  heme  precursors.  Intrave-
nous glucose is started at a rate of 10–20 g/h. If there is no improve-
ment  within  24  h,  intravenous  hematin  2–5  mg/kg  per  day  for  3–14 
days should be administered.

 ■ FAMILIAL AMYLOID POLYNEUROPATHY
Familial  amyloid  polyneuropathy  (FAP)  is  phenotypically  and  genet-
ically  heterogeneous  and  is  caused  by  mutations  in  the  genes  for 
transthyretin (TTR), apolipoprotein A1, or gelsolin (Chap. 112). The 
majority of patients with FAP have mutations in the TTR gene. Amy-
loid deposition may be evident in abdominal fat pad, rectal, or nerve 
biopsies. The clinical features, histopathology, and EDx reveal abnor-
malities  consistent  with  a  generalized  or  multifocal,  predominantly 
axonal but occasionally demyelinating, polyneuropathy.

Patients  with  TTR-related  FAP  usually  develop  insidious  onset  of 
numbness and painful paresthesias in the distal lower limbs in the third 
to fourth decade of life, although some patients develop the disorder 
later in life (Pattern 2, Table 446-2). Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is 
common.  Autonomic  involvement  can  be  severe,  leading  to  postural 
hypotension, constipation or persistent diarrhea, erectile dysfunction, 
and impaired sweating (Pattern 10, Table 446-2). Amyloid deposition 
also  occurs  in  the  heart,  kidneys,  liver,  and  corneas.  Patients  usually 
die  10–15  years  after  the  onset  of  symptoms  from  cardiac  failure  or 
complications from malnutrition. Because the liver produces much of 
the body’s TTR, liver transplantation has been used to treat FAP related 
to  TTR  mutations.  Serum  TTR  levels  decrease  after  transplantation, 
and  improvement  in  clinical  and  EDx  features  has  been  reported. 
Both tafamidis meglumine (20 mg daily) and diflunisal (250 mg twice 
daily),  which  prevent  misfolding  and  deposition  of  mutated  TTR, 
appear  to  slow  the  rate  of  deterioration  in  patients  with  TTR-related 
FAP. Recently, two different modes of gene therapy that inhibit hepatic 
production of TTR have been shown to improve neurologic function 
and  quality  of  life  compared  to  placebo  in  clinical  trials.  Inotersen, 
an  antisense  oligonucleotide,  is  given  subcutaneously  once  a  week. 
The main side effects are thrombocytopenia and glomerulonephritis. 
Patisiran,  a  small  interfering  RNA,  is  give  at  a  dose  of  0.3  mg/kg  
(up to 30 mg) every 3 weeks. Infusion reactions are common; therefore, 
prophylactic  corticosteroids,  acetaminophen,  and  an  antihistamine 
should be administered.

Patients with apolipoprotein A1–related FAP (Van Allen type) usually 
present in the fourth decade with numbness and painful dysesthesias in 
the distal limbs. Gradually, the symptoms progress, leading to proximal 
and  distal  weakness  and  atrophy.  Although  autonomic  neuropathy  is 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3487

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3488 not severe, some patients develop diarrhea, constipation, or gastropare-
sis. Most patients die from systemic complications of amyloidosis (e.g., 
renal failure) 12–15 years after the onset of the neuropathy.

Gelsolin-related amyloidosis (Finnish type) is characterized by the 
combination  of  lattice  corneal  dystrophy  and  multiple  cranial  neu-
ropathies  that  usually  begin  in  the  third  decade  of  life.  Over  time,  a 
mild  generalized  sensorimotor  polyneuropathy  develops.  Autonomic 
dysfunction does not occur.

ACQUIRED NEUROPATHIES
 ■ PRIMARY OR AL AMYLOIDOSIS (SEE CHAP. 112)
Besides  FAP,  amyloidosis  can  also  be  acquired.  In  primary  or  AL 
amyloidosis, the abnormal protein deposition is composed of immuno-
globulin light chains. AL amyloidosis occurs in the setting of multiple 
myeloma (MM), Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, lymphoma, other 
plasmacytomas, or lymphoproliferative disorders, or without any other 
identifiable disease.

Approximately 30% of patients with AL primary amyloidosis pres-
ent  with  a  polyneuropathy,  most  typically  painful  dysesthesias  and 
burning sensations in the feet (Pattern 2, Table 446-2). However, the 
trunk can be involved, and some patients manifest with a mononeur-
opathy multiplex pattern. CTS occurs in 25% of patients and may be 
the  initial  manifestation.  The  neuropathy  is  slowly  progressive,  and 
eventually, weakness develops along with large-fiber sensory loss. Most 
patients  develop  autonomic  involvement  with  postural  hypertension, 
syncope,  bowel  and  bladder  incontinence,  constipation,  impotence, 
and impaired sweating (Pattern 10, Table 446-2). Patients generally die 
from their systemic illness (renal failure, cardiac disease).

The  monoclonal  protein  may  be  composed  of  IgG,  IgA,  IgM,  or 
only free light chain. Lambda (λ) is more common than κ light chain 
(>2:1)  in  AL  amyloidosis.  The  CSF  protein  is  often  increased  (with 
normal  cell  count),  and  thus,  the  neuropathy  may  be  mistaken  for 
CIDP  (Chap.  447).  Nerve  biopsies  reveal  axonal  degeneration  and 
amyloid deposition in either a globular or diffuse pattern infiltrating 
the  perineurial,  epineurial,  and  endoneurial  connected  tissue  and  in 
blood vessel walls.

The median survival of patients with primary amyloidosis is <2 years, 
with  death  usually  from  progressive  congestive  heart  failure  or  renal 

failure. Chemotherapy with melphalan, prednisone, and colchicine, to 
reduce the concentration of monoclonal proteins, and autologous stem 
cell transplantation may prolong survival, but whether the neuropathy 
improves is controversial.

 ■ DIABETIC NEUROPATHY
DM is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy in developed 
countries.  DM  is  associated  with  several  types  of  polyneuropathy: 
distal symmetric sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropathy, autonomic 
neuropathy, diabetic neuropathic cachexia, polyradiculoneuropathies, 
cranial neuropathies, and other mononeuropathies. Risk factors for the 
development  of  neuropathy  include  long-standing,  poorly  controlled 
DM and the presence of retinopathy and nephropathy.

Diabetic  Distal  Symmetric  Sensory  and  Sensorimotor 
Polyneuropathy  (DSPN)  DSPN  is  the  most  common  form  of 
diabetic  neuropathy  and  manifests  as  sensory  loss  beginning  in  the 
toes that gradually progresses over time up the legs and into the fingers 
and arms (Pattern 2, Table 446-2). When severe, a patient may develop 
sensory loss in the trunk (chest and abdomen), initially in the midline 
anteriorly and later extending laterally. Tingling, burning, deep aching 
pains  may  also  be  apparent.  NCS  usually  show  reduced  amplitudes 
and mild to moderate slowing of conduction velocities. Nerve biopsy 
reveals axonal degeneration, endothelial hyperplasia, and, occasionally, 
perivascular  inflammation.  Tight  control  of  glucose  can  reduce  the 
risk of developing neuropathy or improve the underlying neuropathy. 
A variety of medications have been used with variable success to treat 
painful symptoms associated with DSPN, including antiepileptic medi-
cations, antidepressants, sodium channel blockers, and other analgesics 
(Table 446-6).

Diabetic  Autonomic  Neuropathy  Autonomic  neuropathy  is 
typically seen in combination with DSPN. The autonomic neuropathy 
can  manifest  as  abnormal  sweating,  dysfunctional  thermoregulation, 
dry  eyes  and  mouth,  pupillary  abnormalities,  cardiac  arrhythmias, 
postural hypotension, GI abnormalities (e.g., gastroparesis, postpran-
dial  bloating,  chronic  diarrhea,  or  constipation),  and  genitourinary 
dysfunction  (e.g.,  impotence,  retrograde  ejaculation,  incontinence) 
(Pattern  10,  Table  446-2).  Tests  of  autonomic  function  are  generally 
abnormal,  including  sympathetic  skin  responses  and  quantitative 

TABLE 446-6  Treatment of Painful Sensory Neuropathies
DOSE
THERAPY

ROUTE

SIDE EFFECTS

First-Line

Lidoderm 5% patch
Tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., 
amitriptyline, nortriptyline)
Gabapentin
Pregabalin
Duloxetine

Second-Line

Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Venlafaxine

Tramadol

Third-Line

Mexiletine

Other Agents

EMLA cream
2.5% lidocaine
2.5% prilocaine
Capsaicin 0.025–0.075% cream

Apply to painful area
PO

Up to 3 patches qd
10–100 mg qhs

Skin irritation
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes and mouth, urinary retention, constipation

PO
PO
PO

PO
PO
PO

PO

PO

300–1200 mg tid
50–100 mg tid
30–60 mg qd

Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral edema
Cognitive changes, sedation, peripheral edema
Cognitive changes, sedation, dry eyes, diaphoresis, nausea, diarrhea, constipation

200–400 mg q 6–8 h
200–400 mg qhs
37.5–150 mg/d

50 mg qid

Cognitive changes, dizziness, leukopenia, liver dysfunction
Cognitive changes, dizziness, liver dysfunction
Asthenia, sweating, nausea, constipation, anorexia, vomiting, somnolence, dry 
mouth, dizziness, nervousness, anxiety, tremor, and blurred vision as well as 
abnormal ejaculation/orgasm and impotence
Cognitive changes, gastrointestinal upset

200–300 mg tid

Arrhythmias

Apply cutaneously

qid

Local erythema

Apply cutaneously

qid

Painful burning skin

Source: Modified from AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 22-3, p. 485.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3488

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders sudomotor  axon  reflex  testing.  Sensory  and  motor  NCS  generally 
demonstrate features described above with DSPN.

Diabetic Radiculoplexus Neuropathy (Diabetic Amyotrophy 
or Bruns-Garland Syndrome)  Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropa-
thy is the presenting manifestation of DM in approximately one-third 
of  patients.  Typically,  patients  present  with  severe  pain  in  the  low 
back, hip, and thigh in one leg. Rarely, the diabetic polyradiculoneu-
ropathy begins in both legs at the same time (Pattern 4, Table 446-2). 
Atrophy and weakness of proximal and distal muscles in the affected 
leg  become  apparent  within  a  few  days  or  weeks.  The  neuropathy 
is  often  accompanied  or  heralded  by  severe  weight  loss.  Weakness 
usually progresses over several weeks or months but can continue to 
progress for 18 months or more. Subsequently, there is slow recovery, 
but many are left with residual weakness, sensory loss, and pain. In 
contrast to the more typical lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy, 
some  patients  develop  thoracic  radiculopathy  or,  even  less  com-
monly,  a  cervical  polyradiculoneuropathy.  CSF  protein  is  usually 
elevated, while the cell count is normal. ESR is often increased. EDx 
reveals evidence of active denervation in affected proximal and distal 
muscles in the affected limbs and in paraspinal muscles. Nerve biop-
sies  may  demonstrate  axonal  degeneration  along  with  perivascular 
inflammation. Patients with severe pain are sometimes treated in the 
acute period with glucocorticoids, although a randomized controlled 
trial has yet to be performed, and the natural history of this neuropathy 
is gradual improvement.

Diabetic Mononeuropathies or Multiple Mononeuropathies  
The most common mononeuropathies are median neuropathy at the 
wrist  and  ulnar  neuropathy  at  the  elbow,  but  peroneal  neuropathy 
at  the  fibular  head  and  sciatic,  lateral  femoral,  cutaneous,  or  cranial 
neuropathies also occur (Pattern 3, Table 446-2). In regard to cranial 
mononeuropathies,  seventh  nerve  palsies  are  relatively  common  but 
may  have  other,  nondiabetic  etiologies.  In  diabetics,  a  third  nerve 
palsy  is  most  common,  followed  by  sixth  nerve  and,  less  frequently, 
fourth nerve palsies. Diabetic third nerve palsies are characteristically 
pupil-sparing (Chap. 32).

 ■ HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism is more commonly associated with a proximal myo-
pathy,  but  some  patients  develop  a  neuropathy,  most  typically  CTS. 
Rarely, a generalized sensory polyneuropathy characterized by painful 
paresthesias and numbness in both the legs and hands can occur. Treat-
ment is correction of the hypothyroidism.

 ■ SJÖGREN’S SYNDROME
Sjögren’s  syndrome,  characterized  by  the  sicca  complex  of  xeroph-
thalmia,  xerostomia,  and  dryness  of  other  mucous  membranes, 
can  be  complicated  by  neuropathy  (Chap.  361).  Most  common  is 
a  length-dependent  axonal  sensorimotor  neuropathy  character-
ized  mainly  by  sensory  loss  in  the  distal  extremities  (Pattern  2, 
Table  446-2).  A  pure  small-fiber  neuropathy  or  a  cranial  neurop-
athy,  particularly  involving  the  trigeminal  nerve,  can  also  be  seen. 
Sjögren’s  syndrome  is  also  associated  with  sensory  neuronopathy/
ganglionopathy.  Patients  with  sensory  ganglionopathies  develop 
progressive numbness and tingling of the limbs, trunk, and face in a 
non-length-dependent  manner  such  that  symptoms  can  involve  the 
face or arms more than the legs. The onset can be acute or insidious. 
Sensory examination demonstrates severe vibratory and proprioceptive 
loss leading to sensory ataxia.

Patients  with  neuropathy  due  to  Sjögren’s  syndrome  may  have 
ANAs, SS-A/Ro, and SS-B/La antibodies in the serum, but most do not. 
NCS demonstrate reduced amplitudes of sensory studies in the affected 
limbs.  Nerve  biopsy  demonstrates  axonal  degeneration.  Nonspecific 
perivascular  inflammation  may  be  present,  but  only  rarely  is  there 
necrotizing vasculitis. There is no specific treatment for neuropathies 
related  to  Sjögren’s  syndrome.  When  vasculitis  is  suspected,  immu-
nosuppressive  agents  may  be  beneficial.  Occasionally,  the  sensory 
neuronopathy/ganglionopathy  stabilizes  or  improves  with  immuno-
therapy, such as intravenous immunoglobulin.

3489

 ■ RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Peripheral  neuropathy  occurs  in  at  least  50%  of  patients  with  rheu-
matoid  arthritis  (RA)  and  may  be  vasculitic  in  nature  (Chap.  358). 
Vasculitic  neuropathy  can  present  with  a  mononeuropathy  multiplex 
(Pattern 3, Table 446-2), a generalized symmetric pattern of involve-
ment  (Pattern  2,  Table  446-2),  or  a  combination  of  these  patterns 
(Chap. 363). Neuropathies may also result from drugs used to treat RA 
(e.g., tumor necrosis blockers, leflunomide). Nerve biopsy often reveals 
thickening of the epineurial and endoneurial blood vessels as well as 
perivascular inflammation or vasculitis, with transmural inflammatory 
cell infiltration and fibrinoid necrosis of vessel walls. The neuropathy is 
usually responsive to immunomodulating therapies.

 ■ SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Between  2  and  27%  of  individuals  with  SLE  develop  a  peripheral 
neuropathy  (Chap.  356).  Affected  patients  typically  present  with  a 
slowly progressive sensory loss beginning in the feet. Some patients 
develop  burning  pain  and  paresthesias  with  normal  reflexes,  and 
NCS suggest a pure small-fiber neuropathy (Pattern 2, Table 446-2). 
Less  common  are  multiple  mononeuropathies  presumably  second-
ary to necrotizing vasculitis (Pattern 3, Table 446-2). Rarely, a gen-
eralized  sensorimotor  polyneuropathy  meeting  clinical,  laboratory, 
electrophysiologic,  and  histologic  criteria  for  either  GBS  or  CIDP 
may  occur.  Immunosuppressive  therapy  may  be  beneficial  in  SLE 
patients  with  neuropathy  due  to  vasculitis.  Immunosuppressive 
agents  are  less  likely  to  be  effective  in  patients  with  a  generalized 
sensory or sensorimotor polyneuropathy without evidence of vascu-
litis. Patients with a GBS or CIDP-like neuropathy should be treated 
accordingly (Chap. 447).

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

 ■ SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS (SCLERODERMA)
A  distal  symmetric,  mainly  sensory  polyneuropathy  complicates 
5–67%  of  scleroderma  cases  (Pattern  2,  Table  446-2)  (Chap.  360). 
Cranial  mononeuropathies  can  also  develop,  most  commonly  of  the 
trigeminal  nerve,  producing  numbness  and  dysesthesias  in  the  face. 
Multiple  mononeuropathies  also  occur  (Pattern  3,  Table  446-2).  The 
EDx  and  histologic  features  of  nerve  biopsy  are  those  of  an  axonal 
sensory greater than motor polyneuropathy.

 ■ MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE (MCTD)
A mild distal axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy occurs in ~10% of 
patients with MCTD.
 ■ SARCOIDOSIS
The peripheral nervous system or CNS is involved in ~5% of patients 
with sarcoidosis (Chap. 367). The most common cranial nerve involved 
is  the  seventh  nerve,  which  can  be  affected  bilaterally.  Some  patients 
develop  radiculopathy  or  polyradiculopathy  (Pattern  4,  Table  446-2). 
With  a  generalized  root  involvement,  the  clinical  presentation  can 
mimic GBS or CIDP. Patients can also present with multiple mononeu-
ropathies (Pattern 3, Table 446-2) or a generalized, slowly progressive, 
sensory  greater  than  motor  polyneuropathy  (Pattern  2,  Table  446-2). 
Some  have  features  of  a  pure  small-fiber  neuropathy.  EDx  reveals  an 
axonal neuropathy. Nerve biopsy can reveal noncaseating granulomas 
infiltrating the endoneurium, perineurium, or epineurium along with 
lymphocytic  necrotizing  angiitis.  Neurosarcoidosis  may  respond  to 
treatment with glucocorticoids or other immunosuppressive agents.
 ■ HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME
Hypereosinophilic  syndrome  is  characterized  by  eosinophilia  associ-
ated  with  various  skin,  cardiac,  hematologic,  and  neurologic  abnor-
malities.  A  generalized  peripheral  neuropathy  or  a  mononeuropathy 
multiplex occurs in 6–14% of patients (Pattern 2, Table 446-2).
 ■ CELIAC DISEASE (GLUTEN-INDUCED 
ENTEROPATHY OR NONTROPICAL SPRUE)
Neurologic  complications,  particularly  ataxia  and  peripheral  neur-
opathy, are estimated to occur in 10% of patients with celiac disease 
(Chap. 325). A generalized sensorimotor polyneuropathy, pure motor 
neuropathy,  multiple  mononeuropathies,  autonomic  neuropathy, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3489

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3490 small-fiber  neuropathy,  and  neuromyotonia  have  all  been  reported 
in  association  with  celiac  disease  or  antigliadin/antiendomysial  anti-
bodies (Patterns 2, 3, and 9; Table 446-2). Nerve biopsy may reveal a 
loss of large myelinated fibers. The neuropathy may be secondary to 
malabsorption of vitamins B12 and E. However, some patients have no 
appreciable vitamin deficiencies. The pathogenic basis for the neurop-
athy in these patients is unclear but may be autoimmune in etiology. 
The  neuropathy  does  not  appear  to  respond  to  a  gluten-free  diet.  In 
patients with vitamin B12 or vitamin E deficiency, replacement therapy 
may improve or stabilize the neuropathy.

 ■ INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Ulcerative  colitis  and  Crohn’s  disease  may  be  complicated  by  GBS, 
CIDP,  generalized  axonal  sensory  or  sensorimotor  polyneuropa-
thy,  small-fiber  neuropathy,  or  mononeuropathy  (Patterns  2  and  3, 
Table  446-2)  (Chap.  326).  These  neuropathies  may  be  autoimmune, 
nutritional (e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency), treatment related (e.g., met-
ronidazole), or idiopathic in nature. An acute neuropathy with demy-
elination resembling GBS, CIDP, or multifocal motor neuropathy may 
occur in patients treated with tumor necrosis factor α blockers.

 ■ UREMIC NEUROPATHY
Approximately  60%  of  patients  with  renal  failure  develop  a  polyneu-
ropathy  characterized  by  length-dependent  numbness,  tingling,  allo-
dynia,  and  mild  distal  weakness  (Pattern  2,  Table  446-2).  Rarely,  a 
rapidly progressive weakness and sensory loss very similar to GBS can 
occur that improves with an increase in the intensity of renal dialysis or 
with transplantation (Pattern 1, Table 446-2). Mononeuropathies can 
also occur, the most common of which is CTS. Ischemic monomelic 
neuropathy  (see  below)  can  complicate  arteriovenous  shunts  created 
in the arm for dialysis (Pattern 3, Table 446-2). EDx in uremic patients 
reveals features of a length-dependent, primarily axonal, sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy. Sural nerve biopsies demonstrate a loss of nerve fibers 
(particularly  large  myelinated  nerve  fibers),  active  axonal  degenera-
tion, and segmental and paranodal demyelination. The sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy can be stabilized by hemodialysis and improved with 
successful renal transplantation.

 ■ CHRONIC LIVER DISEASE
A  generalized  sensorimotor  neuropathy  characterized  by  numbness, 
tingling,  and  minor  weakness  in  the  distal  aspects  of  primarily  the 
lower  limbs  commonly  occurs  in  patients  with  chronic  liver  failure. 
EDx studies are consistent with a sensory greater than motor axonopa-
thy. Occasionally patients with severe liver disease develop a combined 
neuropathy and myopathy. Sural nerve biopsy reveals both segmental 
demyelination and axonal loss. It is not known if hepatic failure in iso-
lation can cause peripheral neuropathy, as the majority of patients have 
liver disease secondary to other disorders, such as alcoholism or viral 
hepatitis, which can also cause neuropathy.

 ■ CRITICAL ILLNESS POLYNEUROPATHY
The  most  common  causes  of  acute  generalized  weakness  leading  to 
admission to a medical intensive care unit (ICU) are GBS and myas-
thenia gravis (Pattern 1, Table 446-2) (Chaps. 447 and 448). However, 
weakness developing in critically ill patients while in the ICU is usually 
caused by critical illness polyneuropathy (CIP) or critical illness myo-
pathy  (CIM)  or,  much  less  commonly,  by  prolonged  neuromuscular 
blockade. From a clinical and EDx standpoint, it can be quite difficult 
to  distinguish  these  disorders.  Most  specialists  believe  that  CIM  is 
more common. Both CIM and CIP develop as a complication of sepsis 
and multiple organ failure. They usually present as an inability to wean 
a patient from a ventilator. A coexisting encephalopathy may limit the 
neurologic examination, in particular the sensory examination. Muscle 
stretch reflexes are absent or reduced.

Serum  creatine  kinase  (CK)  is  usually  normal;  an  elevated  serum 
CK  would  point  to  CIM  as  opposed  to  CIP.  NCS  reveal  absent  or 
markedly  reduced  amplitudes  of  motor  and  sensory  studies  in  CIP, 
whereas sensory studies are relatively preserved in CIM. Needle EMG 
usually reveals profuse positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials, 

and it is not unusual in patients with severe weakness to be unable to 
recruit  motor  unit  action  potentials.  The  pathogenic  basis  of  CIP  is 
not  known.  Perhaps  circulating  toxins  and  metabolic  abnormalities 
associated with sepsis and multiorgan failure impair axonal transport 
or mitochondrial function, leading to axonal degeneration.

 ■ LEPROSY (HANSEN’S DISEASE)
Leprosy,  caused  by  the  acid-fast  bacteria  Mycobacterium  leprae,  is 
the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy in Southeast Asia, 
Africa, and South America (Chap. 179). Clinical manifestations range 
from tuberculoid leprosy at one end of the spectrum to lepromatous 
leprosy at the other end, with borderline leprosy in between. Neuropa-
thies are most common in patients with borderline leprosy. Superficial 
cutaneous nerves of the ears and distal limbs are commonly affected. 
Mononeuropathies, multiple mononeuropathies, or a slowly progres-
sive symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy may develop (Patterns 2 
and 3, Table 446-2). Sensory NCS are usually absent in the lower limb 
and  are  reduced  in  amplitude  in  the  arms.  Motor  NCS  may  demon-
strate reduced amplitudes in affected nerves but occasionally can reveal 
demyelinating  features.  Leprosy  is  usually  diagnosed  by  skin  lesion 
biopsy.  Nerve  biopsy  can  also  be  diagnostic,  particularly  when  there 
are  no  apparent  skin  lesions.  The  tuberculoid  form  is  characterized 
by granulomas, and bacilli are not seen. In contrast, with lepromatous 
leprosy,  large  numbers  of  infiltrating  bacilli,  TH2  lymphocytes,  and 
organism-laden,  foamy  macrophages  with  minimal  granulomatous 
infiltration are evident. The bacilli are best appreciated using the Fite 
stain, where they can be seen as red-staining rods often in clusters free 
in the endoneurium, within macrophages, or within Schwann cells.

Patients are generally treated with multiple drugs: dapsone, rifampin, 
and clofazimine. Other medications that are used include thalidomide, 
pefloxacin,  ofloxacin,  sparfloxacin,  minocycline,  and  clarithromycin. 
Patients are generally treated for 2 years. Treatment is sometimes com-
plicated  by  the  so-called  reversal  reaction,  particularly  in  borderline 
leprosy. The reversal reaction can occur at any time during treatment 
and develops because of a shift to the tuberculoid end of the spectrum, 
with  an  increase  in  cellular  immunity  during  treatment.  The  cellular 
response is upregulated as evidenced by an increased release of tumor 
necrosis factor α, interferon γ, and interleukin 2, with new granuloma 
formation. This can result in an exacerbation of the rash and the neu-
ropathy as well as in appearance of new lesions. High-dose glucocor-
ticoids blunt this adverse reaction and may be used prophylactically at 
treatment  onset  in  high-risk  patients.  Erythema  nodosum  leprosum 
(ENL) is also treated with glucocorticoids or thalidomide.

 ■ LYME DISEASE
Lyme disease is caused by infection with Borrelia burgdorferi, a spiro-
chete usually transmitted by the deer tick Ixodes dammini (Chap. 186). 
Neurologic  complications  may  develop  during  the  second  and  third 
stages of infection. Facial neuropathy is most common and is bilateral 
in about half of cases, which is rare for idiopathic Bell’s palsy. Involve-
ment of nerves is frequently asymmetric. Some patients present with a 
polyradiculoneuropathy or multiple mononeuropathies (Pattern 3 or 4, 
Table 446-2). EDx is suggestive of a primary axonopathy. Nerve biop-
sies  can  reveal  axonal  degeneration  with  perivascular  inflammation. 
Treatment is with antibiotics.

 ■ DIPHTHERITIC NEUROPATHY
Diphtheria  is  caused  by  the  bacteria  Corynebacterium  diphtheriae 
(Chap.  150).  Infected  individuals  present  with  flulike  symptoms  of 
generalized myalgias, headache, fatigue, low-grade fever, and irritabil-
ity within a week to 10 days of the exposure. About 20–70% of patients 
develop  a  peripheral  neuropathy  caused  by  a  toxin  released  by  the 
bacteria. Three to 4 weeks after infection, patients may note decreased 
sensation in their throat and begin to develop dysphagia, dysarthria, 
hoarseness,  and  blurred  vision  due  to  impaired  accommodation.  A 
generalized polyneuropathy may manifest 2 or 3 months following the 
initial  infection,  characterized  by  numbness,  paresthesias,  and  weak-
ness of the arms and legs and occasionally ventilatory failure (Pattern 1, 
Table 446-2). CSF protein can be elevated with or without lymphocytic 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3490

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3491

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

pleocytosis. EDx suggests a diffuse axonal sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy. Antitoxin and antibiotics should be given within 48 h of symptom 
onset. Although early treatment reduces the incidence and severity of 
some complications (i.e., cardiomyopathy), it does not appear to alter 
the natural history of the associated peripheral neuropathy. The neur-
opathy usually resolves after several months.
 ■ COVID-19
GBS (Chap. 447) has been reported in the setting of acute COVID-19 
infection.
 ■ HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
HIV  infection  can  result  in  a  variety  of  neurologic  complications, 
including  peripheral  neuropathies  (Chap.  202).  Approximately  20% 
of HIV-infected individuals develop a neuropathy as a direct result of 
the virus itself or as a result of other associated viral infections (e.g., 
CMV) or neurotoxicity secondary to antiviral medications (see below). 
The  major  presentations  of  peripheral  neuropathy  associated  with 
HIV  infection  include  (1)  distal  symmetric  polyneuropathy  (DSP),  
(2) inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (including both GBS 
and  CIDP),  (3)  multiple  mononeuropathies  (e.g.,  vasculitis,  CMV- 
related), (4) polyradiculopathy (usually CMV-related), (5) autonomic 
neuropathy, and (6) sensory ganglionitis.
HIV-Related  Distal  Symmetric  Polyneuropathy  DSP  is  the 
most  common  form  of  peripheral  neuropathy  associated  with  HIV 
infection and usually is seen in patients with AIDS. It is characterized 
by numbness and painful paresthesias involving the distal extremities 
(Pattern 2, Table 446-2). The pathogenic basis for DSP is unknown but 
is not due to actual infection of the peripheral nerves. The neuropathy 
may be immune mediated, perhaps caused by the release of cytokines 
from  surrounding  inflammatory  cells.  Vitamin  B12  deficiency  may 
contribute  in  some  instances  but  is  not  a  major  cause  of  most  cases 
of  DSP.  Older  antiretroviral  agents  (e.g.,  dideoxycytidine,  dideoxy-
inosine, stavudine) are also neurotoxic and can cause a painful sensory 
neuropathy.
HIV-Related Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneu-
ropathy  Both  acute  inflammatory  demyelinating  polyneuropathy 
(AIDP)  and  CIDP  can  occur  as  a  complication  of  HIV  infection 
(Pattern 1, Table 446-2). AIDP usually develops at the time of serocon-
version, whereas CIDP can occur any time in the course of the infec-
tion.  Clinical  and  EDx  features  are  indistinguishable  from  idiopathic 
AIDP  or  CIDP  (Chap.  447).  In  addition  to  elevated  protein  levels, 
lymphocytic pleocytosis is evident in the CSF, a finding that helps dis-
tinguish this HIV-associated polyradiculoneuropathy from idiopathic 
AIDP/CIDP.

HIV-Related  Progressive  Polyradiculopathy  An  acute,  pro-
gressive  lumbosacral  polyradiculoneuropathy  usually  secondary 
to  CMV  infection  can  develop  in  patients  with  AIDS  (Pattern  4, 
Table  446-2).  Patients  present  with  severe  radicular  pain,  numbness, 
and weakness in the legs, which is usually asymmetric. CSF is abnor-
mal, demonstrating a high protein level, along with a reduced glucose 
concentration  and  notably  a  neutrophilic  pleocytosis.  EDx  studies 
reveal features of active axonal degeneration. The polyradiculoneurop-
athy may improve with antiviral therapy.
HIV-Related  Multiple  Mononeuropathies  Multiple  monon-
europathies  can  also  develop  in  patients  with  HIV  infection,  usually 
in  the  context  of  AIDS.  Weakness,  numbness,  paresthesias,  and  pain 
occur  in  the  distribution  of  affected  nerves  (Pattern  3,  Table  446-2). 
Nerve  biopsies  can  reveal  axonal  degeneration  with  necrotizing 
vasculitis  or  perivascular  inflammation.  Glucocorticoid  treatment  is 
indicated for vasculitis directly due to HIV infection.

HIV-Related Sensory Neuronopathy/Ganglionopathy  Dor-
sal  root  ganglionitis  is  a  very  rare  complication  of  HIV  infection, 
and  neuronopathy  can  be  the  presenting  manifestation.  Patients 
develop  sensory  ataxia  similar  to  idiopathic  sensory  neuronopathy/ 
ganglionopathy (Pattern 9, Table 446-2). NCS reveal reduced amplitudes 
or absence of sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs).

 ■ HERPES VARICELLA-ZOSTER VIRUS
Peripheral  neuropathy  from  herpes  varicella-zoster  (HVZ)  infection 
results  from  reactivation  of  latent  virus  or  from  a  primary  infection 
(Chap.  193).  Two-thirds  of  infections  in  adults  are  characterized  by 
dermal zoster in which severe pain and paresthesias develop in a der-
matomal region followed within a week or two by a vesicular rash in 
the  same  distribution  (Pattern  3,  Table  446-2).  Weakness  in  muscles 
innervated  by  roots  corresponding  to  the  dermatomal  distribution 
of  skin  lesions  occurs  in  5–30%  of  patients.  Approximately  25%  of 
affected patients have continued pain (postherpetic neuralgia [PHN]). 
A  large  clinical  trial  demonstrated  that  vaccination  against  zoster 
reduces the incidence of HVZ among vaccine recipients by 51% and 
reduces the incidence of PHN by 67%. Treatment of PHN is symptom-
atic (Table 446-6).
 ■ CYTOMEGALOVIRUS
CMV  can  cause  an  acute  lumbosacral  polyradiculopathy  and  multi-
ple  mononeuropathies  in  patients  with  HIV  infection  and  in  other 
immune deficiency conditions (Pattern 4, Table 446-2) (Chap. 195).
 ■ EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
EBV  infection  has  been  associated  with  GBS,  cranial  neuropathies, 
mononeuropathy  multiplex,  brachial  plexopathy,  lumbosacral  radic-
uloplexopathy,  and  sensory  neuronopathies  (Patterns  1,  3,  4,  and  9, 
Table 446-2) (Chap. 194).
 ■ HEPATITIS VIRUSES
Hepatitis  B  and  C  can  cause  multiple  mononeuropathies  related  to 
vasculitis, AIDP, or CIDP (Patterns 1 and 3, Table 446-2) (Chap. 341).

NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
MALIGNANCY
Patients  with  malignancy  can  develop  neuropathies  due  to  (1)  a 
direct  effect  of  the  cancer  by  invasion  or  compression  of  the  nerves,  
(2) remote or paraneoplastic effect, (3) a toxic effect of treatment, or 
(4) as a consequence of immune compromise caused by immunosup-
pressive  medications.  The  most  common  associated  malignancy  is 
lung cancer, but neuropathies also complicate carcinoma of the breast, 
ovaries, stomach, colon, rectum, and other organs, including the lym-
phoproliferative system.
 ■ PARANEOPLASTIC SENSORY NEURONOPATHY/
GANGLIONOPATHY
Paraneoplastic  encephalomyelitis/sensory  neuronopathy  (PEM/SN) 
usually  complicates  small-cell  lung  carcinoma  (Chap.  94).  Patients 
usually present with numbness and paresthesias in the distal extrem-
ities that are often asymmetric. The onset can be acute or insidiously 
progressive. Prominent loss of proprioception leads to sensory ataxia 
(Pattern 9; Table 446-2). Weakness can be present, usually secondary 
to  an  associated  myelitis,  motor  neuronopathy,  or  concurrent  LEMS. 
Many patients also develop confusion, memory loss, depression, hal-
lucinations  or  seizures,  or  cerebellar  ataxia.  Polyclonal  antineuronal 
antibodies (IgG) directed against a 35- to 40-kDa protein or complex 
of proteins, the so-called Hu antigen, are found in the sera or CSF in 
the  majority  of  patients  with  paraneoplastic  PEM/SN.  CSF  may  be 
normal or may demonstrate mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated 
protein. PEM/SN is probably the result of antigenic similarity between 
proteins expressed in the tumor cells and neuronal cells, leading to an 
immune  response  directed  against  both  cell  types.  Treatment  of  the 
underlying  cancer  generally  does  not  affect  the  course  of  PEM/SN. 
However, occasional patients may improve following treatment of the 
tumor.  Unfortunately,  plasmapheresis,  intravenous  immunoglobulin, 
and immunosuppressive agents have not shown benefit.
 ■ NEUROPATHY SECONDARY TO  
TUMOR INFILTRATION
Malignant  cells,  in  particular  leukemia  and  lymphoma,  can  infiltrate 
cranial and peripheral nerves, leading to mononeuropathy, mononeur-
opathy multiplex, polyradiculopathy, plexopathy, or even a generalized 
symmetric distal or proximal and distal polyneuropathy (Patterns 1, 2, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3491

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3492 3, and 4; Table 446-2). Neuropathy related to tumor infiltration is often 
painful; it can be the presenting manifestation of the cancer or the her-
alding symptom of a relapse. The neuropathy may improve with treat-
ment of the underlying leukemia or lymphoma or with glucocorticoids.

 ■ NEUROPATHY AS A COMPLICATION OF BONE 
MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Neuropathies  may  develop  in  patients  who  undergo  bone  marrow 
transplantation  (BMT)  because  of  the  toxic  effects  of  chemotherapy, 
radiation, infection, or an autoimmune response directed against the 
peripheral  nerves.  Peripheral  neuropathy  in  BMT  is  often  associated 
with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Chronic GVHD shares many 
features with a variety of autoimmune disorders, and it is possible that 
an  immune-mediated  response  directed  against  peripheral  nerves  is 
responsible. Patients with chronic GVHD may develop cranial neurop-
athies,  sensorimotor  polyneuropathies,  multiple  mononeuropathies, 
and  severe  generalized  peripheral  neuropathies  resembling  AIDP  or 
CIDP (Patterns 1, 2, and 3; Table 446-2). The neuropathy may improve 
by increasing the intensity of immunosuppressive or immunomodulat-
ing therapy and resolution of the GVHD.

 ■ LYMPHOMA
Lymphomas may cause neuropathy by infiltration or direct compres-
sion of nerves or by a paraneoplastic process. The neuropathy can be 
purely  sensory  or  motor  but  most  commonly  is  sensorimotor.  The 
pattern of involvement may be symmetric, asymmetric, or multifocal, 
and the course may be acute, gradually progressive, or relapsing and 
remitting  (Patterns  1,  2,  and  3;  Table  446-2).  EDx  can  be  compati-
ble  with  either  an  axonal  or  demyelinating  process.  CSF  may  reveal 
lymphocytic  pleocytosis  and  an  elevated  protein.  Nerve  biopsy  may 
demonstrate  endoneurial  inflammatory  cells  in  both  the  infiltrative 
and  the  paraneoplastic  etiologies.  A  monoclonal  population  of  cells 
favors lymphomatous invasion. The neuropathy may respond to treat-
ment of the underlying lymphoma or immunomodulating therapies.

 ■ MULTIPLE MYELOMA
MM usually presents in the fifth to seventh decade of life with fatigue, 
bone  pain,  anemia,  and  hypercalcemia  (Chap.  111).  Clinical  and 
EDx features of neuropathy occur in as many as 40% of patients. The 
most common pattern is that of a distal, axonal, sensory, or sensori-
motor  polyneuropathy  (Pattern  2;  Table  446-2).  Less  frequently,  a 
chronic  demyelinating  polyradiculoneuropathy  may  develop  (Pattern  1; 
Table  446-2)  (see  POEMS,  Chap.  447).  MM  can  be  complicated  by 
amyloid  polyneuropathy  and  should  be  considered  in  patients  with 
painful paresthesias, loss of pinprick and temperature discrimination, 
and  autonomic  dysfunction  (suggestive  of  a  small-fiber  neuropathy) 
and CTS. Expanding plasmacytomas can compress cranial nerves and 
spinal roots as well. A monoclonal protein, usually composed of γ or μ 
heavy chains or κ light chains, may be identified in the serum or urine. 
EDx  usually  shows  reduced  amplitudes  with  normal  or  only  mildly 
abnormal  distal  latencies  and  conduction  velocities.  A  superimposed 
median neuropathy at the wrist is common. Abdominal fat pad, rectal, 
or sural nerve biopsy can be performed to look for amyloid deposition. 
Unfortunately, the treatment of the underlying MM does not usually 
affect the course of the neuropathy.

 ■ NEUROPATHIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF UNCERTAIN 
SIGNIFICANCE (SEE CHAP. 447)
Toxic  Neuropathies  Secondary  to  Chemotherapy  Many  of 
the commonly used chemotherapy agents can cause a toxic neuropathy 
(Table  446-7).  The  mechanisms  by  which  these  agents  cause  toxic 
neuropathies vary, as does the specific type of neuropathy produced. 
The risk of developing a toxic neuropathy or more severe neuropathy 
appears  to  be  greater  in  patients  with  a  preexisting  neuropathy  (e.g., 
CMT  disease,  diabetic  neuropathy)  and  those  who  also  take  other 
potentially neurotoxic drugs (e.g., nitrofurantoin, isoniazid, disulfiram, 
pyridoxine). Chemotherapeutic agents usually cause a sensory greater 

than  motor  length-dependent  axonal  neuropathy  or  neuronopathy/
ganglionopathy (Patterns 2 and 9; Table 446-2).

OTHER TOXIC NEUROPATHIES
Neuropathies can develop as complications of toxic effects of various 
drugs  and  other  environmental  exposures  (Table  446-8).  The  more 
common neuropathies associated with these agents are discussed here.

 ■ CHLOROQUINE AND HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
Chloroquine  and  hydroxychloroquine  can  cause  a  toxic  myopathy 
characterized  by  slowly  progressive,  painless,  proximal  weakness 
and  atrophy,  which  is  worse  in  the  legs  than  the  arms.  In  addition, 
neuropathy  can  also  develop  with  or  without  the  myopathy  leading 
to  sensory  loss  and  distal  weakness.  The  “neuromyopathy”  usually 
appears in patients taking 500 mg daily for a year or more but has been 
reported with doses as low as 200 mg/d. Serum CK levels are usually 
elevated due to the superimposed myopathy. NCS reveal mild slowing 
of motor and sensory NCVs with a mild to moderate reduction in the 
amplitudes,  although  NCS  may  be  normal  in  patients  with  only  the 
myopathy.  EMG  demonstrates  myopathic  muscle  action  potentials 
(MUAPs), increased insertional activity in the form of positive sharp 
waves,  fibrillation  potentials,  and  occasionally  myotonic  potentials, 
particularly in the proximal muscles. Neurogenic MUAPs and reduced 
recruitment  are  found  in  more  distal  muscles.  Nerve  biopsy  demon-
strates  autophagic  vacuoles  within  Schwann  cells.  Vacuoles  may  also 
be evident in muscle biopsies. The pathogenic basis of the neuropathy 
is not known but may be related to the amphiphilic properties of the 
drug. These agents contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions 
that  allow  them  to  interact  with  the  anionic  phospholipids  of  cell 
membranes  and  organelles.  The  drug-lipid  complexes  may  be  resis-
tant  to  digestion  by  lysosomal  enzymes,  leading  to  the  formation  of 
autophagic vacuoles filled with myeloid debris that may in turn cause 
degeneration of nerves and muscle fibers. The signs and symptoms of 
the neuropathy and myopathy are usually reversible following discon-
tinuation of medication.

 ■ AMIODARONE
Amiodarone  can  cause  a  neuromyopathy  similar  to  chloroquine 
and  hydroxychloroquine.  The  neuromyopathy  typically  appears  after 
patients have taken the medication for 2–3 years. Nerve biopsy dem-
onstrates a combination of segmental demyelination and axonal loss. 
Electron microscopy reveals lamellar or dense inclusions in Schwann 
cells,  pericytes,  and  endothelial  cells.  The  inclusions  in  muscle  and 
nerve biopsies have persisted as long as 2 years following discontinua-
tion of the medication.

 ■ COLCHICINE
Colchicine  can  also  cause  a  neuromyopathy.  Patients  usually  present 
with  proximal  weakness  and  numbness  and  tingling  in  the  distal 
extremities. EDx reveals features of an axonal polyneuropathy. Muscle 
biopsy  reveals  a  vacuolar  myopathy,  whereas  sensory  nerves  demon-
strate  axonal  degeneration.  Colchicine  inhibits  the  polymerization  of 
tubulin  into  microtubules.  The  disruption  of  the  microtubules  prob-
ably leads to defective intracellular movement of important proteins, 
nutrients, and waste products in muscle and nerves.

 ■ THALIDOMIDE
Thalidomide  is  an  immunomodulating  agent  used  to  treat  MM, 
GVHD,  leprosy,  and  other  autoimmune  disorders.  Thalidomide  is 
associated  with  severe  teratogenic  effects  as  well  as  peripheral  neur-
opathy that can be dose-limiting. Patients develop numbness, painful 
tingling, and burning discomfort in the feet and hands and less com-
monly muscle weakness and atrophy. Even after stopping the drug for 
4–6 years, as many as 50% patients continue to have significant symp-
toms.  NCS  demonstrate  reduced  amplitudes  or  complete  absence  of 
SNAPs, with preserved conduction velocities when obtainable. Motor 
NCS are usually normal. Nerve biopsy reveals a loss of large-diameter 
myelinated fibers and axonal degeneration. Degeneration of dorsal root 
ganglion cells has been reported at autopsy.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3492

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 446-7  Toxic Neuropathies Secondary to Chemotherapy
DRUG
Vinca alkaloids 
(vincristine, 
vinblastine, vindesine, 
vinorelbine)
Cisplatin

MECHANISM OF NEUROTOXICITY CLINICAL FEATURES
Interfere with axonal microtubule 
assembly; impairs axonal transport

Symmetric, S-M, large-/small-
fiber PN; autonomic symptoms 
common; infrequent cranial 
neuropathies
Predominant large-fiber 
sensory neuronopathy; sensory 
ataxia

Preferential damage to dorsal root 
ganglia:
? binds to and cross-links DNA
? inhibits protein synthesis
? impairs axonal transport
Promotes axonal microtubule 
assembly; interferes with axonal 
transport

Unknown; ? inhibition of 
neurotrophic growth factor 
binding; ? neuronal lysosomal 
storage
Unknown; ? immunomodulating 
effects

Taxanes (paclitaxel, 
docetaxel)

Suramin
  Axonal PN

  Demyelinating PN

Symmetric, predominantly 
sensory PN; large-fiber 
modalities affected more than 
small-fiber

Subacute, S-M PN with diffuse 
proximal and distal weakness; 
areflexia; increased CSF protein

Cytarabine (ARA-C)

Etoposide (VP-16)

Unknown; ? selective Schwann 
cell toxicity; ? immunomodulating 
effects
Unknown; ? selective dorsal root 
ganglia toxicity

Bortezomib (Velcade)

Unknown

GBS-like syndrome; pure 
sensory neuropathy; brachial 
plexopathy
Length-dependent, sensory-
predominant PN; autonomic 
neuropathy
Length-dependent, sensory, 
predominantly small-fiber PN

3493

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY
Axonal degeneration of 
myelinated and unmyelinated 
fibers; regenerating clusters, 
minimal segmental demyelination
Loss of large > small myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers; axonal 
degeneration with small clusters 
of regenerating fibers; secondary 
segmental demyelination

Loss of large > small myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers; axonal 
degeneration with small clusters 
of regenerating fibers; secondary 
segmental demyelination

EMG/NCS
Axonal sensorimotor PN; distal 
denervation on EMG; abnormal 
QST, particularly vibratory 
perception
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal CMAPs and 
EMG; abnormal QST, particularly 
vibratory perception

Axonal sensorimotor PN; distal 
denervation on EMG; abnormal 
QST, particularly vibratory 
perception

Loss of large and small 
myelinated fibers with primary 
demyelination and secondary 
axonal degeneration; 
occasional epi- and endoneurial 
inflammatory cell infiltrates
Loss of myelinated nerve fibers; 
axonal degeneration; segmental 
demyelination; no inflammation
None described

Not reported

Features suggestive of an acquired 
demyelinating sensorimotor PN 
(e.g., slow CVs, prolonged distal 
latencies and F-wave latencies, 
conduction block, temporal 
dispersion)
Axonal, demyelinating, or mixed 
S-M PN; denervation on EMG

Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal S-M PN

Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal sensory neuropathy with 
early small-fiber involvement 
(abnormal autonomic studies)

Symmetric, length-dependent, 
sensory-predominant PN

None described

Abnormalities consistent with an 
axonal S-M PN

Abbreviations: CMAP, compound motor action potential; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; NCS, 
nerve conduction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; QST, quantitative sensory testing; S-M, sensorimotor; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
Source: From AA Amato, JA Russell (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, Table 19-3, p. 439; with permission.

 ■ PYRIDOXINE (VITAMIN B6) TOXICITY
Pyridoxine is an essential vitamin that serves as a coenzyme for tran-
samination and decarboxylation. However, at high doses (116 mg/d), 
patients can develop a severe sensory neuropathy with dysesthesias and 
sensory ataxia. NCS reveal absent or markedly reduced SNAP ampli-
tudes  with  relatively  preserved  CMAPs.  Nerve  biopsy  reveals  axonal 
loss  of  fiber  at  all  diameters.  Loss  of  dorsal  root  ganglion  cells  with 
subsequent  degeneration  of  both  the  peripheral  and  central  sensory 
tracts have been reported in animal models.
 ■ ISONIAZID
One of the most common side effects of isoniazid (INH) is peripheral 
neuropathy. Standard doses of INH (3–5 mg/kg per day) are associated 
with  a  2%  incidence  of  neuropathy,  whereas  neuropathy  develops  in 
at least 17% of patients taking in excess of 6 mg/kg per d. The elderly, 
malnourished, and “slow acetylators” are at increased risk for develop-
ing the neuropathy. INH inhibits pyridoxal phosphokinase, resulting in 
pyridoxine deficiency and the neuropathy. Prophylactic administration 
of pyridoxine 100 mg/d can prevent the neuropathy from developing.
 ■ ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS
The  nucleoside  analogues  zalcitabine  (dideoxycytidine  or  ddC), 
didanosine  (dideoxyinosine  or  ddI),  stavudine  (d4T),  lamivudine 
(3TC),  and  antiretroviral  nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitor 
(NRTI)  are  used  to  treat  HIV  infection.  One  of  the  major  dose- 
limiting side effects of these medications is a predominantly sensory, 
length-dependent,  symmetrically  painful  neuropathy  (Pattern  2; 
Table 446-2). Zalcitabine (ddC) is the most extensively studied of the 
nucleoside analogues, and at doses >0.18 mg/kg per d, it is associated 

with a subacute onset of severe burning and lancinating pains in the 
feet  and  hands.  NCS  reveal  decreased  amplitudes  of  the  SNAPs  with 
normal  motor  studies.  The  nucleoside  analogues  inhibit  mitochon-
drial  DNA  polymerase,  which  is  the  suspected  pathogenic  basis  for 
the neuropathy. Because of a “coasting effect,” patients can continue to 
worsen even 2–3 weeks after stopping the medication. Following dose 
reduction,  improvement  in  the  neuropathy  is  seen  in  most  patients 
after several months (mean time ~10 weeks).
 ■ HEXACARBONS (n-HEXANE, METHYL n-BUTYL 
KETONE)/GLUE SNIFFER’S NEUROPATHY
n-Hexane  and  methyl  n-butyl  ketone  are  water-insoluble  industrial 
organic solvents that are also present in some glues. Exposure through 
inhalation,  accidentally  or  intentionally  (glue  sniffing),  or  through 
skin  absorption  can  lead  to  a  profound  subacute  sensory  and  motor 
polyneuropathy (Pattern 2; Table 446-2). NCS demonstrate decreased 
amplitudes  of  the  SNAPs  and  CMAPs  with  slightly  slow  CVs.  Nerve 
biopsy reveals a loss of myelinated fibers and giant axons that are filled 
with  10-nm  neurofilaments.  Hexacarbon  exposure  leads  to  covalent 
cross-linking  between  axonal  neurofilaments  that  results  in  their 
aggregation,  impaired  axonal  transport,  swelling  of  the  axons,  and 
eventual axonal degeneration.
 ■ LEAD
Lead  neuropathy  is  uncommon,  but  it  can  be  seen  in  children  who 
accidentally ingest lead-based paints in older buildings and in indus-
trial workers exposed to lead-containing products. The most common 
presentation of lead poisoning is an encephalopathy; however, symp-
toms  and  signs  of  a  primarily  motor  neuropathy  can  also  occur. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3493

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3494 TABLE 446-8  Toxic Neuropathies

DRUG
Misonidazole

MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY
Unknown

Metronidazole

Unknown

Chloroquine and 
hydroxychloroquine

Amphiphilic properties may 
lead to drug-lipid complexes 
that are indigestible and 
result in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles

CLINICAL FEATURES
Painful paresthesias and loss of large- 
and small-fiber sensory modalities 
and sometimes distal weakness in 
length-dependent pattern
Painful paresthesias and loss of large- 
and small-fiber sensory modalities 
and sometimes distal weakness in 
length-dependent pattern
Loss of large- and small-fiber sensory 
modalities and distal weakness 
in length-dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopathy may lead to 
proximal weakness

NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY
Axonal degeneration of 
large, myelinated fibers; 
axonal swellings; segmental 
demyelination
Axonal degeneration

EMG/NCS
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or only slightly 
reduced CMAP amplitudes

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal CMAPs

Axonal degeneration with 
autophagic vacuoles in nerves 
as well as muscle fibers

Amiodarone

Amphiphilic properties may 
lead to drug-lipid complexes 
that are indigestible and 
result in accumulation of 
autophagic vacuoles

Paresthesias and pain with loss 
of large- and small-fiber sensory 
modalities and distal weakness 
in length-dependent pattern; 
superimposed myopathy may lead to 
proximal weakness

Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination with 
myeloid inclusions in nerves 
and muscle fibers

Colchicine

Inhibits polymerization of 
tubulin in microtubules and 
impairs axoplasmic flow

Numbness and paresthesias with loss 
of large-fiber modalities in a length-
dependent fashion; superimposed 
myopathy may lead to proximal in 
addition to distal weakness

Nerve biopsy demonstrates 
axonal degeneration; muscle 
biopsy reveals fibers with 
vacuoles

Podophyllin

Binds to microtubules and 
impairs axoplasmic flow

Thalidomide

Unknown

Disulfiram

Dapsone

Accumulation of 
neurofilaments and impaired 
axoplasmic flow
Unknown

Sensory loss, tingling, muscle 
weakness, and diminished muscle 
stretch reflexes in length-dependent 
pattern; autonomic neuropathy
Numbness, tingling, and burning pain 
and weakness in a length-dependent 
pattern
Numbness, tingling, and burning pain 
in a length-dependent pattern

Distal weakness that may progress to 
proximal muscles; sensory loss

Axonal degeneration

Axonal degeneration; autopsy 
studies reveal degeneration of 
dorsal root ganglia
Axonal degeneration with 
accumulation of neurofilaments 
in the axons
Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination

Leflunomide

Unknown

Paresthesias and numbness in a 
length-dependent pattern

Unknown

Nitrofurantoin

Unknown

Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) Unknown

Isoniazid

Inhibits pyridoxal 
phosphokinase leading to 
pyridoxine deficiency

Ethambutol

Unknown

Antinucleosides

Unknown

Phenytoin

Unknown

Numbness, painful paresthesias, and 
severe weakness that may resemble 
GBS

Dysesthesias and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory 
modalities on examination
Dysesthesias and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory 
modalities on examination

Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination
Dysesthesia and sensory ataxia; 
impaired large-fiber sensory 
modalities on examination
Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination

Axonal degeneration; autopsy 
studies reveal degeneration of 
dorsal root ganglia and anterior 
horn cells
Marked loss of sensory axons 
and cell bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia
Marked loss of sensory axons 
and cell bodies in dorsal root 
ganglia and degeneration of the 
dorsal columns
Axonal degeneration

Axonal degeneration and 
segmental demyelination

Lithium

Unknown

Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination

Axonal degeneration

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced 
CMAP amplitudes; distal denervation 
on EMG; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; can also have prominent 
slowing of CVs; distal denervation 
on EMG; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; irritability and myopathic-
appearing MUAPs proximally in 
patients with superimposed toxic 
myopathy
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
CMAPs with normal or reduced SNAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs

Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs 
and, to a lesser extent, CMAPs

Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

 (Continued)

Axonal degeneration

Reduced amplitudes or absent SNAPs

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3494

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 446-8  Toxic Neuropathies

 (Continued)

MECHANISM OF 
NEUROTOXICITY

CLINICAL FEATURES

NERVE HISTOPATHOLOGY

EMG/NCS

DRUG

Acrylamide

Unknown; may be caused by 
impaired axonal transport

Numbness with loss of large-fiber 
modalities on examination; sensory 
ataxia; mild distal weakness

Carbon disulfide

Unknown

Ethylene oxide

Organophosphates

Unknown; may act as 
alkylating agent and bind 
DNA
Bind and inhibit neuropathy 
target esterase

Hexacarbons

Unknown; may lead to 
covalent cross-linking 
between neurofilaments

Lead

Unknown; may interfere with 
mitochondria

Mercury

Unknown; may combine with 
sulfhydryl groups

Thallium

Unknown

Arsenic

Unknown; may combine with 
sulfhydryl groups

Length-dependent numbness and 
tingling with mild distal weakness

Length-dependent numbness 
and tingling; may have mild distal 
weakness
Early features are those of 
neuromuscular blockade with 
generalized weakness; later axonal 
sensorimotor PN ensues
Acute, severe sensorimotor PN that 
may resemble GBS

Encephalopathy; motor neuropathy 
(often resembles radial neuropathy 
with wrist and finger drop); autonomic 
neuropathy; bluish-black discoloration 
of gums
Abdominal pain and nephrotic 
syndrome; encephalopathy; ataxia; 
paresthesias

Encephalopathy; painful sensory 
symptoms; mild loss of vibration; 
distal or generalized weakness may 
also develop; autonomic neuropathy; 
alopecia
Abdominal discomfort, burning 
pain, and paresthesias; generalized 
weakness; autonomic insufficiency; 
can resemble GBS

3495

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

Degeneration of sensory 
axons in peripheral nerves 
and posterior columns, 
spinocerebellar tracts, 
mammillary bodies, optic tracts, 
and corticospinal tracts in the 
CNS
Axonal swellings with 
accumulation of neurofilaments

Axonal degeneration

Axonal degeneration along 
with degeneration of gracile 
fasciculus and corticospinal 
tracts
Axonal degeneration and 
giant axons swollen with 
neurofilaments

Axonal degeneration of motor 
axons

Axonal degeneration; 
degeneration of dorsal root 
ganglia, calcarine, and 
cerebellar cortex
Axonal degeneration

Axonal degeneration

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes
Early: repetitive firing of CMAPs and 
decrement with repetitive nerve 
stimulation; late: axonal sensorimotor 
PN
Features of a mixed axonal and/or 
demyelinating sensorimotor axonal 
PN—reduced amplitudes, prolonged 
distal latencies, conduction block, and 
slowing of CVs
Reduction of CMAP amplitudes with 
active denervation on EMG

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes

Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs with normal or reduced CMAP 
amplitudes; may have demyelinating 
features: prolonged distal latencies 
and slowing of CVs
Low-amplitude or unobtainable 
SNAPs

Gold

Unknown

Distal paresthesias and reduction of 
all sensory modalities

Axonal degeneration

Abbreviations: CMAP, compound motor action potential; CVs, conduction velocities; EMG, electromyography; GBS, Guillain-Barré syndrome; MUAP, muscle action potential; 
NCS, nerve conduction studies; PN, polyneuropathy; S-M, sensorimotor; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential.
Source: From AA Amato, JA Russell (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, Table 20-1, p. 449-451; with permission.

The neuropathy is characterized by an insidious and progressive onset 
of weakness usually beginning in the arms, in particular involving the 
wrist and finger extensors, resembling a radial neuropathy. Sensation 
is generally preserved; however, the autonomic nervous system can be 
affected (Patterns 2, 3, and 10; Table 446-2). Laboratory investigation 
can reveal a microcytic hypochromic anemia with basophilic stippling 
of  erythrocytes,  an  elevated  serum  lead  level,  and  an  elevated  serum 
coproporphyrin  level.  A  24-h  urine  collection  demonstrates  elevated 
levels  of  lead  excretion.  The  NCS  may  reveal  reduced  CMAP  ampli-
tudes, while the SNAPs are typically normal. The pathogenic basis may 
be  related  to  abnormal  porphyrin  metabolism.  The  most  important 
principle  of  management  is  to  remove  the  source  of  the  exposure. 
Chelation therapy with calcium disodium ethylene-diaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA), British anti-Lewisite (BAL), and penicillamine also dem-
onstrates variable efficacy.
 ■ MERCURY
Mercury  toxicity  may  occur  as  a  result  of  exposure  to  either  organic 
or inorganic mercurials. Mercury poisoning presents with paresthesias 
in  hands  and  feet  that  progress  proximally  and  may  involve  the  face 

and tongue. Motor weakness can also develop. CNS symptoms often 
overshadow the neuropathy. EDx shows features of a primarily axonal 
sensorimotor  polyneuropathy.  The  primary  site  of  neuromuscular 
pathology appears to be the dorsal root ganglia. The mainstay of treat-
ment is removing the source of exposure.
 ■ THALLIUM
Thallium can exist in a monovalent or trivalent form and is primarily 
used as a rodenticide. The toxic neuropathy usually manifests as burn-
ing paresthesias of the feet, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Increased 
thirst,  sleep  disturbances,  and  psychotic  behavior  may  be  noted. 
Within  the  first  week,  patients  develop  pigmentation  of  the  hair,  an 
acne-like rash in the malar area of the face, and hyperreflexia. By the 
second and third weeks, autonomic instability with labile heart rate and 
blood pressure may be seen. Hyporeflexia and alopecia also occur but 
may not be evident until the third or fourth week following exposure. 
With  severe  intoxication,  proximal  weakness  and  involvement  of  the 
cranial nerves can occur. Some patients require mechanical ventilation 
due to respiratory muscle involvement. The lethal dose of thallium is 
variable, ranging from 8 to 15 mg/kg body weight. Death can result in 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3495

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3496 <48 h following a particularly large dose. NCS demonstrate features of 
a primarily axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. With acute intoxica-
tion,  potassium  ferric  ferrocyanide  II  may  be  effective  in  preventing 
absorption of thallium from the gut. However, there may be no benefit 
once thallium has been absorbed. Unfortunately, chelating agents are 
not  very  efficacious.  Adequate  diuresis  is  essential  to  help  eliminate 
thallium from the body without increasing tissue availability from the 
serum.

 ■ ARSENIC
Arsenic  is  another  heavy  metal  that  can  cause  a  toxic  sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy. The neuropathy manifests 5–10 days after ingestion of 
arsenic and progresses for several weeks, sometimes mimicking GBS. 
The presenting symptoms are typically an abrupt onset of abdominal 
discomfort, nausea, vomiting, pain, and diarrhea followed within sev-
eral days by burning pain in the feet and hands. Examination of the skin 
can be helpful in the diagnosis as the loss of the superficial epidermal 
layer results in patchy regions of increased or decreased pigmentation 
on the skin several weeks after an acute exposure or with chronic low 
levels of ingestion. Mee’s lines, which are transverse lines at the base of 
the fingernails and toenails, do not become evident until 1 or 2 months 
after the exposure. Multiple Mee’s lines may be seen in patients with 
long fingernails who have had chronic exposure to arsenic. Mee’s lines 
are not specific for arsenic toxicity as they can also be seen following 
thallium poisoning. Because arsenic is cleared from blood rapidly, the 
serum concentration of arsenic is not diagnostically helpful. However, 
arsenic levels are increased in the urine, hair, and fingernails of patients 
exposed to arsenic. Anemia with stippling of erythrocytes is common, 
and  occasionally,  pancytopenia  and  aplastic  anemia  can  develop. 
Increased CSF protein levels without pleocytosis can be seen; this can 
lead to misdiagnosis as GBS. NCS are usually suggestive of an axonal 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy; however, demyelinating features can be 
present. Chelation therapy with BAL has yielded inconsistent results; 
therefore, it is not generally recommended.

NUTRITIONAL NEUROPATHIES
 ■ COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B12)
Pernicious anemia is the most common cause of cobalamin deficiency. 
Other  causes  include  dietary  avoidance  (vegetarians),  gastrectomy, 
gastric bypass surgery, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatic insuf-
ficiency, bacterial overgrowth, and possibly histamine-2 blockers and 
proton  pump  inhibitors.  An  underappreciated  cause  of  cobalamin 
deficiency is food-cobalamin malabsorption. This typically occurs in 
older  individuals  and  results  from  an  inability  to  adequately  absorb 
cobalamin in food protein. No apparent cause of deficiency is identi-
fied in a significant number of patients with cobalamin deficiency. The 
use  of  nitrous  oxide  as  an  anesthetic  agent  or  as  a  recreational  drug 
can  produce  acute  cobalamin  deficiency  neuropathy  and  subacute 
combined degeneration.

Complaints of numb hands typically appear before lower extremity 
paresthesias are noted. A preferential large-fiber sensory loss affecting 
proprioception  and  vibration  with  sparing  of  small-fiber  modalities 
is  present;  an  unsteady  gait  reflects  sensory  ataxia.  These  features, 
coupled with diffuse hyperreflexia and absent Achilles reflexes, should 
always  focus  attention  on  the  possibility  of  cobalamin  deficiency 
(Patterns  2  and  6;  Table  446-2).  Optic  atrophy  and,  in  severe  cases, 
behavioral  changes  ranging  from  mild  irritability  and  forgetfulness 
to severe dementia and frank psychosis may appear. The full clinical 
picture of subacute combined degeneration is uncommon. CNS mani-
festations, especially pyramidal tract signs, may be missing, and in fact, 
some patients may only exhibit symptoms of peripheral neuropathy.

EDx shows an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. CNS involvement 
produces abnormal somatosensory and visual evoked potential laten-
cies. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding reduced serum cobalamin 
levels.  In  up  to  40%  of  patients,  anemia  and  macrocytosis  are  lack-
ing.  Serum  methylmalonic  acid  and  homocysteine,  the  metabolites 
that  accumulate  when  cobalamin-dependent  reactions  are  blocked, 
are  elevated.  Antibodies  to  intrinsic  factor  are  present  in  ~60%  and 

antiparietal  cell  antibodies  in  ~90%  of  individuals  with  pernicious 
anemia.

Cobalamin  deficiency  can  be  treated  with  various  regimens  of 
cobalamin. One typical regimen consists of 1000 μg cyanocobalamin 
IM  weekly  for  1  month  and  monthly  thereafter.  Patients  with  food 
cobalamin malabsorption can absorb free cobalamin and therefore can 
be  treated  with  oral  cobalamin  supplementation.  An  oral  cobalamin 
dose of 1000 μg/d should be sufficient. Treatment for cobalamin defi-
ciency usually does not completely reverse the clinical manifestations, 
and at least 50% of patients exhibit some permanent neurologic deficit.

 ■ THIAMINE DEFICIENCY
Thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency is an uncommon cause of peripheral 
neuropathy in developed countries. It is now most often seen as a con-
sequence of chronic alcohol abuse, recurrent vomiting, total parenteral 
nutrition, and bariatric surgery. Thiamine deficiency polyneuropathy 
can  occur  in  normal,  healthy  young  adults  who  do  not  abuse  alco-
hol  but  who  engage  in  inappropriately  restrictive  diets.  Thiamine  is 
water-soluble.  It  is  present  in  most  animal  and  plant  tissues,  but  the 
greatest sources are unrefined cereal grains, wheat germ, yeast, soybean 
flour, and pork. Beriberi means “I can’t, I can’t” in Singhalese, the lan-
guage of natives of what was once part of the Dutch East Indies (now 
Sri Lanka). Dry beriberi refers to neuropathic symptoms. The term wet 
beriberi is used when cardiac manifestations predominate (in reference 
to edema). Beriberi was relatively uncommon until the late 1800s when 
it became widespread among people for whom rice was a dietary main-
stay. This epidemic was due to a new technique of processing rice that 
removed the germ from the rice shaft, rendering the so-called polished 
rice deficient in thiamine and other essential nutrients.

Symptoms of neuropathy follow prolonged deficiency. These begin 
with  mild  sensory  loss  and/or  burning  dysesthesias  in  the  toes  and 
feet and aching and cramping in the lower legs. Pain may be the pre-
dominant  symptom.  With  progression,  patients  develop  features of  a 
nonspecific generalized polyneuropathy, with distal sensory loss in the 
feet and hands.

Blood  and  urine  assays  for  thiamine  are  not  reliable  for  diagnosis 
of  deficiency.  Erythrocyte  transketolase  activity  and  the  percentage 
increase  in  activity  (in  vitro)  following  the  addition  of  thiamine 
pyrophosphate (TPP) may be more accurate and reliable. EDx shows 
nonspecific findings of an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. When 
a  diagnosis  of  thiamine  deficiency  is  made  or  suspected,  thiamine 
replacement  should  be  provided  until  proper  nutrition  is  restored. 
Thiamine is usually given intravenously or intramuscularly at a dose of 
100 mg/d. Although cardiac manifestations show a striking response 
to  thiamine  replacement,  neurologic  improvement  is  usually  more 
variable and less dramatic.

 ■ VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY
The term vitamin E is usually used for α-tocopherol, the most active 
of the four main types of vitamin E. Because vitamin E is present in 
animal fat, vegetable oils, and various grains, deficiency is usually due 
to factors other than insufficient intake. Vitamin E deficiency usually 
occurs secondary to lipid malabsorption or in uncommon disorders of 
vitamin E transport. One hereditary disorder is abetalipoproteinemia, 
a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by steatorrhea, pig-
mentary  retinopathy,  acanthocytosis,  and  progressive  ataxia.  Patients 
with  cystic  fibrosis  may  also  have  vitamin  E  deficiency  secondary  to 
steatorrhea.  There  are  genetic  forms  of  isolated  vitamin  E  deficiency 
not  associated  with  lipid  malabsorption.  Vitamin  E  deficiency  may 
also  occur  as  a  consequence  of  various  cholestatic  and  hepatobiliary 
disorders as well as short-bowel syndromes resulting from the surgical 
treatment of intestinal disorders.

Clinical features may not appear until many years after the onset of 
deficiency. The onset of symptoms tends to be insidious, and progres-
sion is slow. The main clinical features are spinocerebellar ataxia and 
polyneuropathy, thus resembling Friedreich’s ataxia or other spinocer-
ebellar ataxias. Patients manifest progressive ataxia and signs of poste-
rior column dysfunction, such as impaired joint position and vibratory 
sensation.  Because  of  the  polyneuropathy,  there  is  hyporeflexia,  but 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3496

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3497

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

plantar responses may be extensor as a result of the spinal cord involve-
ment (Patterns 2 and 6; Table 446-2). Other neurologic manifestations 
may include ophthalmoplegia, pigmented retinopathy, night blindness, 
dysarthria,  pseudoathetosis,  dystonia,  and  tremor.  Vitamin  E  defi-
ciency may present as an isolated polyneuropathy, but this is very rare. 
The yield of checking serum vitamin E levels in patients with isolated 
polyneuropathy  is  extremely  low,  and  this  test  should  not  be  part  of 
routine practice.

Diagnosis is made by measuring α-tocopherol levels in the serum. 
EDx shows features of an axonal neuropathy. Treatment is replacement 
with oral vitamin E, but high doses are not needed. For patients with 
isolated vitamin E deficiency, treatment consists of 1500–6000 IU/d in 
divided doses.
 ■ VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY
Vitamin  B6,  or  pyridoxine,  can  produce  neuropathic  manifestations 
from  both  deficiency  and  toxicity.  Vitamin  B6  toxicity  was  discussed 
above. Vitamin B6 deficiency is most commonly seen in patients treated 
with  isoniazid  or  hydralazine.  The  polyneuropathy  of  vitamin  B6  is  
nonspecific, manifesting as a generalized axonal sensorimotor polyneu-
ropathy.  Vitamin  B6  deficiency  can  be  detected  by  direct  assay.  
Vitamin  B6  supplementation  with  50–100  mg/d  is  suggested  for 
patients being treated with isoniazid or hydralazine. This same dose is 
appropriate for replacement in cases of nutritional deficiency.
 ■ PELLAGRA (NIACIN DEFICIENCY)
Pellagra is produced by deficiency of niacin. Although pellagra may be 
seen in alcoholics, this disorder has essentially been eradicated in most 
Western countries by means of enriching bread with niacin. Neverthe-
less, pellagra continues to be a problem in a number of underdeveloped 
regions, particularly in Asia and Africa, where corn is the main source 
of carbohydrate. Neurologic manifestations are variable; abnormalities 
can develop in the brain and spinal cord as well as peripheral nerves. 
When peripheral nerves are involved, the neuropathy is usually mild 
and resembles beriberi. Treatment is with niacin 40–250 mg/d.
 ■ COPPER DEFICIENCY
A syndrome that has only recently been described is myeloneuropathy 
secondary to copper deficiency. Most patients present with lower limb 
paresthesias,  weakness,  spasticity,  and  gait  difficulties  (Pattern  6; 
Table  446-2).  Large-fiber  sensory  function  is  impaired,  reflexes  are 
brisk,  and  plantar  responses  are  extensor.  In  some  cases,  light  touch 
and  pinprick  sensation  are  affected,  and  NCS  indicate  sensorimotor 
axonal polyneuropathy in addition to myelopathy.

Hematologic  abnormalities  are  a  known  complication  of  copper 
deficiency;  these  can  include  microcytic  anemia,  neutropenia,  and 
occasionally pancytopenia. Because copper is absorbed in the stomach 
and proximal jejunum, many cases of copper deficiency occur in the 
setting of prior gastric surgery. Excess zinc is an established cause of 
copper  deficiency.  Zinc  upregulates  enterocyte  production  of  metal-
lothionine, which results in decreased absorption of copper. Excessive 
dietary  zinc  supplements  or  denture  cream  containing  zinc  can  pro-
duce this clinical picture. Other potential causes of copper deficiency 
include  malnutrition,  prematurity,  total  parenteral  nutrition,  and 
ingestion of copper-chelating agents.

Following oral or IV copper replacement, some patients show neu-
rologic  improvement,  but  this  may  take  many  months  or  not  occur 
at all. Replacement consists of oral copper sulfate or gluconate 2 mg 
one to three times a day. If oral copper replacement is not effective, 
elemental copper in the copper sulfate or copper chloride forms can 
be given as 2 mg IV daily for 3–5 days, then weekly for 1–2 months 
until  copper  levels  normalize.  Thereafter,  oral  daily  copper  therapy 
can be resumed. In contrast to the neurologic manifestations, most of 
the hematologic indices normalize in response to copper replacement 
therapy.
 ■ NEUROPATHY ASSOCIATED WITH  
GASTRIC SURGERY
Polyneuropathy  may  occur  following  gastric  surgery  for  ulcer,  can-
cer,  or  weight  reduction.  This  usually  occurs  in  the  context  of  rapid, 

significant weight loss and recurrent, protracted vomiting. The clinical 
picture  is  one  of  acute  or  subacute  sensory  loss  and  weakness.  Neur-
opathy following weight loss surgery usually occurs in the first several 
months  after  surgery.  Weight  reduction  surgical  procedures  include 
gastrojejunostomy,  gastric  stapling,  vertical  banded  gastroplasty,  and 
gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis. The initial manifestations are 
usually numbness and paresthesias in the feet (Pattern 2; Table 446-2). 
In many cases, no specific nutritional deficiency factor is identified.

Management consists of parenteral vitamin supplementation, espe-
cially including thiamine. Improvement has been observed following 
supplementation,  parenteral  nutritional  support,  and  reversal  of  the 
surgical  bypass.  The  duration  and  severity  of  deficits  before  identifi-
cation and treatment of neuropathy are important predictors of final 
outcome.

CRYPTOGENIC (IDIOPATHIC) SENSORY 
AND SENSORIMOTOR POLYNEUROPATHY
Cryptogenic  (idiopathic)  sensory  and  sensorimotor  polyneuropathy 
(CSPN)  is  a  diagnosis  of  exclusion,  established  after  a  careful  medi-
cal,  family,  and  social  history;  neurologic  examination;  and  directed 
laboratory testing. Despite extensive evaluation, the cause of polyneu-
ropathy in as many as 50% of all patients is idiopathic. CSPN should 
be  considered  a  distinct  diagnostic  subset  of  peripheral  neuropathy. 
The onset of CSPN is predominantly in the sixth and seventh decades. 
Patients  complain  of  distal  numbness,  tingling,  and  often  burning 
pain that invariably begins in the feet and may eventually involve the 
fingers and hands (“burning feet syndrome”). Patients exhibit a distal 
sensory loss to pinprick, touch, and vibration in the toes and feet, and 
occasionally  in  the  fingers  (Pattern  2;  Table  446-2).  It  is  uncommon 
to  see  significant  proprioception  deficits,  even  though  patients  may 
complain  of  gait  unsteadiness.  However,  tandem  gait  may  be  abnor-
mal in a minority of cases. Neither subjective nor objective evidence 
of  weakness  is  a  prominent  feature.  Most  patients  have  evidence  of 
both large- and small-fiber loss on neurologic examination and EDx. 
Approximately  10%  of  patients  have  only  evidence  of  small-fiber 
involvement. The ankle muscle stretch reflex is frequently absent, but 
in  cases  with  predominantly  small-fiber  loss,  this  may  be  preserved. 
The  EDx  findings  range  from  isolated  SNAP  abnormalities  (usually 
with loss of amplitude), to evidence for an axonal sensorimotor neu-
ropathy,  to  a  completely  normal  study  (if  primarily  small  fibers  are 
involved). Therapy primarily involves the control of neuropathic pain 
(Table  446-6)  if  present.  Recently,  a  large  comparative  effectiveness 
study in CSPN showed that the drugs nortriptyline and duloxetine out-
performed pregabalin and mexiletine. These drugs should not be used 
if the patient has only numbness and tingling but no pain.

Although  no  treatment  is  available  that  can  reverse  an  idiopathic 
distal peripheral neuropathy, the prognosis is good. Progression often 
does not occur or is minimal, with sensory symptoms and signs pro-
gressing proximally up to the knees and elbows. The disorder does not 
lead  to  significant  motor  disability  over  time.  The  relatively  benign 
course of this disorder should be explained to patients.

MONONEUROPATHIES/PLEXOPATHIES/
RADICULOPATHIES (PATTERN 3;  
TABLE 446-2)
 ■ MEDIAN NEUROPATHY
CTS is a compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel at the 
wrist. The median nerve enters the hand through the carpal tunnel by 
coursing under the transverse carpal ligament. The symptoms of CTS 
consist  of  numbness  and  paresthesias  variably  in  the  thumb,  index, 
middle,  and  half  of  the  ring  finger.  At  times,  the  paresthesias  can 
include the entire hand and extend into the forearm or upper arm or 
can be isolated to one or two fingers. Pain is another common symp-
tom and can be located in the hand and forearm and, at times, in the 
proximal  arm.  CTS  is  common  and  often  misdiagnosed  as  thoracic 
outlet  syndrome.  The  signs  of  CTS  are  decreased  sensation  in  the 
median  nerve  distribution;  reproduction  of  the  sensation  of  tingling 
when a percussion hammer is tapped over the wrist (Tinel sign) or the 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3497

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3498 wrist is flexed for 30–60 s (Phalen sign); and weakness of thumb oppo-
sition  and  abduction.  EDx  is  extremely  sensitive  and  shows  slowing 
of sensory and, to a lesser extent, motor median potentials across the 
wrist. Ultrasound can show focal swelling of the median nerve at the 
wrist.  Treatment  options  consist  of  avoidance  of  precipitating  activi-
ties;  control  of  underlying  systemic-associated  conditions  if  present; 
nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  medications;  neutral  (volar)  position 
wrist splints, especially for night use; glucocorticoid/anesthetic injec-
tion into the carpal tunnel; and surgical decompression by dividing the 
transverse carpal ligament. The surgical option should be considered 
if there is a poor response to nonsurgical treatments; if there is thenar 
muscle atrophy and/or weakness; and if there are significant denerva-
tion potentials on EMG.

Other  proximal  median  neuropathies  are  very  uncommon  and 
include the pronator teres syndrome and anterior interosseous neurop-
athy. These often occur as a partial form of brachial plexitis.

 ■ ULNAR NEUROPATHY AT THE ELBOW— “CUBITAL 
TUNNEL SYNDROME”
The ulnar nerve passes through the condylar groove between the medial 
epicondyle  and  the  olecranon.  Symptoms  consist  of  paresthesias,  tin-
gling, and numbness in the medial hand and half of the fourth and the 
entire fifth fingers, pain at the elbow or forearm, and weakness. Signs 
consist  of  decreased  sensation  in  an  ulnar  distribution,  Tinel’s  sign  at 
the elbow, and weakness and atrophy of ulnar-innervated hand muscles. 
The Froment sign indicates thumb adductor weakness and consists of 
flexion  of  the  thumb  at  the  interphalangeal  joint  when  attempting  to 
oppose  the  thumb  against  the  lateral  border  of  the  second  digit.  EDx 
may show slowing of ulnar motor NCV across the elbow with prolonged 
ulnar sensory latencies. Ultrasound can show swelling of the ulnar nerve 
around  the  elbow  as  well.  Treatment  consists  of  avoiding  aggravating 
factors, using elbow pads, and surgery to decompress the nerve in the 
cubital tunnel. Ulnar neuropathies can also rarely occur at the wrist in 
the ulnar (Guyon) canal or in the hand, usually after trauma.

 ■ RADIAL NEUROPATHY
The  radial  nerve  winds  around  the  proximal  humerus  in  the  spiral 
groove  and  proceeds  down  the  lateral  arm  and  enters  the  forearm, 
dividing  into  the  posterior  interosseous  nerve  and  superficial  nerve. 
The  symptoms  and  signs  consist  of  wrist  drop;  finger  extension 
weakness; thumb abduction weakness; and sensory loss in the dorsal 
web between the thumb and index finger. Triceps and brachioradialis 
strength is often normal, and triceps reflex is often intact. Most cases 
of radial neuropathy are transient compressive (neuropraxic) injuries 
that recover spontaneously in 6–8 weeks. If there has been prolonged 
compression  and  severe  axonal  damage,  it  may  take  several  months 
to  recover.  Treatment  consists  of  cock-up  wrist  and  finger  splints, 
avoiding  further  compression,  and  physical  therapy  to  avoid  flexion 
contracture.  If  there  is  no  improvement  in  2–3  weeks,  an  EDx  study 
is recommended to confirm the clinical diagnosis and determine the 
degree of severity.

 ■ LATERAL FEMORAL CUTANEOUS NEUROPATHY 
(MERALGIA PARESTHETICA)
The  lateral  femoral  cutaneous  nerve  arises  from  the  upper  lumbar 
plexus (spinal levels L2/3), crosses through the inguinal ligament near 
its attachment to the iliac bone, and supplies sensation to the anterior 
lateral  thigh.  The  neuropathy  affecting  this  nerve  is  also  known  as 
meralgia  paresthetica.  Symptoms  and  signs  consist  of  paresthesias, 
numbness,  and  occasionally  pain  in  the  lateral  thigh.  Symptoms  are 
increased by standing or walking and are relieved by sitting. There is 
normal strength, and knee reflexes are intact. The diagnosis is clinical, 
and  further  tests  usually  are  not  performed.  EDx  is  only  needed  to 
rule  out  lumbar  plexopathy,  radiculopathy,  or  femoral  neuropathy.  If 
the symptoms and signs are classic, EMG is not necessary. Symptoms 
often resolve spontaneously over weeks or months, but the patient may 
be  left  with  permanent  numbness.  Treatment  consists  of  weight  loss 
and avoiding tight belts. Analgesics in the form of a lidocaine patch, 
nonsteroidal agents, and occasionally medications for neuropathic pain 

can be used (Table 446-6). Rarely, locally injecting the nerve with an 
anesthetic can be tried. There is no role for surgery.
 ■ FEMORAL NEUROPATHY
Femoral  neuropathies  can  arise  as  complications  of  retroperitoneal 
hematoma, lithotomy positioning, hip arthroplasty or dislocation, iliac 
artery occlusion, femoral arterial procedures, infiltration by hematoge-
nous  malignancy,  penetrating  groin  trauma,  pelvic  surgery  including 
hysterectomy and renal transplantation, and diabetes (a partial form of 
lumbosacral diabetic plexopathy); some cases are idiopathic. Patients 
with  femoral  neuropathy  have  difficulty  extending  their  knee  and 
flexing  the  hip.  Sensory  symptoms  occurring  either  on  the  anterior 
thigh and/or medial leg occur in only half of reported cases. A prom-
inent painful component is the exception rather than the rule, may be 
delayed, and is often self-limited in nature. The quadriceps (patellar) 
reflex is diminished.
 ■ SCIATIC NEUROPATHY
Sciatic  neuropathies  commonly  complicate  hip  arthroplasty,  pelvic 
procedures in which patients are placed in a prolonged lithotomy posi-
tion,  trauma,  hematomas,  tumor  infiltration,  and  vasculitis.  In  addi-
tion, many sciatic neuropathies are idiopathic. Weakness may involve 
all motions of the ankles and toes as well as flexion of the leg at the 
knee; abduction and extension of the thigh at the hip are spared. Sen-
sory loss occurs in the entire foot and the distal lateral leg. The ankle 
jerk and, on occasion, the internal hamstring reflex are diminished or 
more  typically  absent  on  the  affected  side.  The  peroneal  subdivision 
of the sciatic nerve is typically involved disproportionately to the tib-
ial  counterpart.  Thus,  patients  may  have  only  ankle  dorsiflexion  and 
eversion weakness with sparing of knee flexion, ankle inversion, and 
plantar flexion; these features can lead to misdiagnosis of a common 
peroneal neuropathy.

PERONEAL NEUROPATHY
The sciatic nerve divides at the distal femur into the tibial and pero-
neal nerve. The common peroneal nerve passes posterior and laterally 
around the fibular head, under the fibular tunnel. It then divides into 
the superficial peroneal nerve, which supplies the ankle evertor mus-
cles and sensation over the anterolateral distal leg and dorsum of the 
foot,  and  the  deep  peroneal  nerve,  which  supplies  ankle  dorsiflexors 
and toe extensor muscles and a small area of sensation dorsally in the 
area of the first and second toes.

Symptoms  and  signs  consist  of  foot  drop  (ankle  dorsiflexion,  toe 
extension,  and  ankle  eversion  weakness)  and  variable  sensory  loss, 
which  may  involve  the  superficial  and  deep  peroneal  pattern.  There 
is usually no pain. Onset may be on awakening in the morning. Pero-
neal neuropathy needs to be distinguished from L5 radiculopathy. In  
L5  radiculopathy,  ankle  invertors  and  evertors  are  weak  and  needle 
EMG reveals denervation. EDx can help localize the lesion. Peroneal 
motor conduction velocity shows slowing and amplitude drop across 
the fibular head. Management consists of rapid weight loss and avoid-
ing leg crossing. Foot drop is treated with an ankle brace. A knee pad 
can be worn over the lateral knee to avoid further compression. Most 
cases spontaneously resolve over weeks or months.

RADICULOPATHIES
Radiculopathies are most often due to compression from degenerative 
joint disease and herniated disks, but there are a number of unusual eti-
ologies (Table 446-9). Degenerative spine disease affects a number of 
different structures, which narrow the diameter of the neural foramen 
or  canal  of  the  spinal  column  and  compromise  nerve  root  integrity; 
these are discussed in detail in Chap. 17.

PLEXOPATHIES (PATTERN 4; TABLE 446-2)
 ■ BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The  brachial  plexus  is  composed  of  three  trunks  (upper,  middle, 
and lower), with two divisions (anterior and posterior) per trunk 
(Fig. 446-2). Subsequently, the trunks divide into three cords (medial, 
lateral,  and  posterior),  and  from  these,  arise  the  multiple  terminal 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3498

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 446-9  Causes of Radiculopathy
•	 Herniated nucleus pulposus
•	 Degenerative joint disease
•	 Rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Trauma
•	 Vertebral body compression fracture
•	 Pott’s disease
•	 Compression by extradural mass (e.g., meningioma, metastatic tumor, 

hematoma, abscess)

•	 Primary nerve tumor (e.g., neurofibroma, schwannoma, neurinoma)
•	 Carcinomatous meningitis
•	 Perineurial spread of tumor (e.g., prostate cancer)
•	 Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
•	 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Amyloidoma
•	 Diabetic radiculopathy
•	 Infection (Lyme disease, herpes zoster, HIV, cytomegalovirus, syphilis, 

schistosomiasis, Strongyloides)
•	 Arachnoiditis (e.g., postsurgical)
•	 Radiation

nerves innervating the arm. The anterior primary rami of C5 and C6 
fuse to form the upper trunk; the anterior primary ramus of C7 contin-
ues as the middle trunk, while the anterior rami of C8 and T1 join to 
form the lower trunk. There are several disorders commonly associated 
with brachial plexopathy.

Immune-Mediated  Brachial  Plexus  Neuropathy 
Immune-
mediated  brachial  plexus  neuropathy  (IBPN)  goes  by  various 
terms,  including  acute  brachial  plexitis,  neuralgic  amyotrophy,  and 
Parsonage-Turner syndrome. IBPN usually presents with an acute onset 
of  severe  pain  in  the  shoulder  region.  The  intense  pain  usually  lasts 
several  days  to  a  few  weeks,  but  a  dull  ache  can  persist.  Individuals 
who are affected may not appreciate weakness of the arm early in the 
course  because  the  pain  limits  movement.  However,  as  the  pain  dis-
sipates, weakness and often sensory loss are appreciated. Attacks can 
occasionally recur.

Clinical findings are dependent on the distribution of involvement 
(e.g.,  specific  trunk,  divisions,  cords,  or  terminal  nerves).  The  most 
common  pattern  of  IBPN  involves  the  upper  trunk  or  a  single  or 

multiple  mononeuropathies  primarily  involving  the  suprascapular, 
long  thoracic,  or  axillary  nerves.  Additionally,  the  phrenic  and  ante-
rior interosseous nerves may be concomitantly affected. Any of these 
nerves may also be affected in isolation. EDx is useful to confirm and 
localize the site(s) of involvement. Empirical treatment of severe pain 
with glucocorticoids is often used in the acute period.

3499

Brachial  Plexopathies  Associated  with  Neoplasms  Neo-
plasms  involving  the  brachial  plexus  may  be  primary  nerve  tumors, 
local cancers expanding into the plexus (e.g., Pancoast lung tumor or 
lymphoma),  and  metastatic  tumors.  Primary  brachial  plexus  tumors 
are  less  common  than  the  secondary  tumors  and  include  schwanno-
mas, neurinomas, and neurofibromas. Secondary tumors affecting the 
brachial  plexus  are  more  common  and  are  always  malignant.  These 
may arise from local tumors, expanding into the plexus. For example, a 
Pancoast tumor of the upper lobe of the lung may invade or compress 
the  lower  trunk,  whereas  a  primary  lymphoma  arising  from  the  cer-
vical or axillary lymph nodes may also infiltrate the plexus. Pancoast 
tumors typically present as an insidious onset of pain in the upper arm, 
sensory disturbance in the medial aspect of the forearm and hand, and 
weakness and atrophy of the intrinsic hand muscles along with an ipsi-
lateral Horner’s syndrome. Chest computed tomography (CT) scans or 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can demonstrate extension of the 
tumor  into  the  plexus.  Metastatic  involvement  of  the  brachial  plexus 
may occur with spread of breast cancer into the axillary lymph nodes 
and local spread into the nearby nerves.

Perioperative Plexopathies (Median Sternotomy)  The most 
common surgical procedures associated with brachial plexopathy as a 
complication are those that involve median sternotomies (e.g., open-
heart surgeries and thoracotomies). Brachial plexopathies occur in as 
many as 5% of patients following a median sternotomy and typically 
affect  the  lower  trunk.  Thus,  individuals  manifest  with  sensory  dis-
turbance affecting the medial aspect of forearm and hand along with 
weakness of the intrinsic hand muscles. The mechanism is related to 
the  stretch  of  the  lower  trunk,  so  most  individuals  who  are  affected 
recover within a few months.

Lumbosacral  Plexus  The  lumbar  plexus  arises  from  the  ven-
tral  primary  rami  of  the  first  to  the  fourth  lumbar  spinal  nerves 
(Fig.  446-3).  These  nerves  pass  downward  and  laterally  from  the 
vertebral column within the psoas major muscle. The femoral nerve 
derives from the dorsal branches of the second to the fourth lumbar 
ventral  rami.  The  obturator  nerve  arises  from  the  ventral  branches 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
6

P
e
r
i
p
h
e
r
a
l

N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
y

Upper
subscapular

Lateral
anterior
thoracic

Suprascapular

Musculocutaneous

Radial

Axillary

L

P

Subclavius

Median

Ulnar

Medial
antibrachial
cutaneous

Medial
brachial
cutaneous

M

Thoracodorsal

Lower
subscapular

Medial
anterior
thoracic

Dorsal scapular

C5

C6

C7

C8

T1

Long thoracic

PERIPHERAL NERVES

CORDS

DIVISIONS

TRUNKS

ROOTS

FIGURE 446-2  Brachial plexus anatomy. L, lateral; M, medial; P, posterior. (Reproduced with permission J Goodgold: Anatomical Correlates of Clinical Electromyography. 
Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1974.)

Anterior

Posterior

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3499

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
3500

Genitofemoral nerve

IIiohypogastric nerve

IIioinguinal nerve

Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh

To lliacus and psoas muscles

Obturator nerve

Femoral nerve

Lumbo-sacral trunk

Gluteal nerves

Pudendal nerve

Sciatic nerve

Post. cutaneous nerve of thigh

L1

L2

L3

L4

L5

S1

S2

S3

S4

DIVISIONS

(Posterior [black]
and anterior)

(To lumbar plexus)

(Lumbosacral
trunk)

TERMINAL AND
COLLATERAL BRANCHES

BRANCHES FROM 
POSTERIOR DIVISIONS

Superior gluteal nerve (L4, 5, S1)

Nerves to piriformis (S1, 2)

Inferior gluteal
nerve (L5, S1, 2)

BRANCH FROM BOTH
ANTERIOR AND
POSTERIOR DIVISIONS

Posterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
(S1, 2, 3)

PLEXUS ROOTS

(From anterior
primary divisions)

L4

L5

S1

S2

S3

FIGURE  446-3  Lumbosacral  plexus. 
(eds): 
Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, Figure 24-3, p. 542, 
with permission.)

(From  AA  Amato,  JA  Russell 

of the same lumbar rami. The lumbar plexus communicates with the 
sacral plexus by the lumbosacral trunk, which contains some fibers 
from  the  fourth  and  all  of  the  fibers  from  the  fifth  lumbar  ventral 
rami (Fig. 446-4).

The  sacral  plexus  is  the  part  of  the  lumbosacral  plexus  that  is 
formed by the union of the lumbosacral trunk with the ventral rami 
of the first to fourth sacral nerves. The plexus lies on the posterior and 
posterolateral wall of the pelvis with its components converging toward 
the sciatic notch. The lateral trunk of the sciatic nerve (which forms the 
common peroneal nerve) arises from the union of the dorsal branches 
of  the  lumbosacral  trunk  (L4,  L5)  and  the  dorsal  branches  of  the  S1 
and S2 spinal nerve ventral rami. The medial trunk of the sciatic nerve 
(which forms the tibial nerve) derives from the ventral branches of the 
same ventral rami (L4-S2).

 ■ LUMBOSACRAL PLEXOPATHIES
Plexopathies  are  typically  recognized  when  motor,  sensory,  and  if 
applicable,  reflex  deficits  occur  in  multiple  nerve  and  segmental 
distributions  confined  to  one  extremity.  If  localization  within  the 
lumbosacral  plexus  can  be  accomplished,  designation  as  a  lumbar 
plexopathy, a sacral plexopathy, a lumbosacral trunk lesion, or a pan-
plexopathy  is  the  best  localization  that  can  be  expected.  Although 
lumbar plexopathies may be bilateral, usually occurring in a stepwise 
and chronologically dissociated manner, sacral plexopathies are more 
likely  to  behave  in  this  manner  due  to  their  closer  anatomic  prox-
imity. The differential diagnosis of plexopathy includes disorders of 
the conus medullaris and cauda equina (polyradiculopathy). If there 
is a paucity of pain and sensory involvement, motor neuron disease 
should be considered as well.

The  causes  of  lumbosacral  plexopathies  are  listed  in  Table  446-
10.  Diabetic  radiculopathy  (discussed  above)  is  a  fairly  common 
cause of painful leg weakness. Lumbosacral plexopathies are a well- 
recognized  complication  of  retroperitoneal  hemorrhage.  Various 
primary  and  metastatic  malignancies  can  affect  the  lumbosacral 
plexus as well; these include carcinoma of the cervix, endometrium, 
and  ovary;  osteosarcoma;  testicular  cancer;  MM;  lymphoma;  acute 
myelogenous leukemia; colon cancer; squamous cell carcinoma of the 

Sciatic
nerve

Common peroneal
nerve

Tibial nerve

(To hamstring muscles)

(To pudendal plexus)

Inferior medial clunial nerve (S2, 3)

BRANCHES FROM ANTERIOR DIVISIONS

To quadratus femons and
gemellus inferior muscles

L4, 5, S1

To obturator internus and
gemellus superior muscles

L5, S1, 2

FIGURE 446-4  Lumbosacral trunk sacral plexus and sciatic nerve. (From AA Amato, 
JA Russell (eds): Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, 
Figure 24-4, p. 542, with permission.)

rectum; adenocarcinoma of unknown origin; and intraneural spread 
of prostate cancer.
 ■ RECURRENT NEOPLASTIC DISEASE OR 
RADIATION-INDUCED PLEXOPATHY
The treatment for various malignancies is often radiation therapy, the 
field of which may include parts of the brachial plexus. It can be dif-
ficult in such situations to determine if a new brachial or lumbosacral 
plexopathy  is  related  to  tumor  within  the  plexus  or  from  radiation- 
induced nerve damage. Radiation can be associated with microvascular 
abnormalities and fibrosis of surrounding tissues, which can damage 
the  axons  and  the  Schwann  cells.  Radiation-induced  plexopathy  can 
develop months or years following therapy and is dose dependent.

TABLE 446-10  Lumbosacral Plexopathies: Etiologies
•	 Retroperitoneal hematoma
•	 Psoas abscess
•	 Malignant neoplasm
•	 Benign neoplasm
•	 Radiation
•	 Amyloid
•	 Diabetic radiculoplexus neuropathy
•	 Idiopathic radiculoplexus neuropathy
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Aortic occlusion/surgery
•	 Lithotomy positioning
•	 Hip arthroplasty
•	 Pelvic fracture
•	 Obstetric injury

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3500

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Tumor invasion is usually painful and more commonly affects the 
lower trunk, whereas radiation injury is often painless and affects the 
upper trunk. Imaging studies such as MRI and CT scans are useful but 
can  be  misleading,  especially  when  there  is  small  microscopic  inva-
sion  of  the  plexus.  EMG  can  be  informative  if  myokymic  discharges 
are  appreciated,  as  this  finding  strongly  suggests  radiation-induced 
damage.
 ■ EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF 
PLEXOPATHIES
Most patients with plexopathies will undergo both imaging with MRI 
and  EDx  evaluations.  Severe  pain  from  acute  idiopathic  lumbosacral 
plexopathy may respond to a short course of glucocorticoids.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Adams D et al: Patisiran, an RNAi therapeutic, for hereditary transthy-

retin amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 379:11, 2018.

Amato  AA,  Ropper  AH:  Sensory  ganglionopathy.  N  Engl  J  Med 

383:1657, 2020.

Amato AA, Russell J: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, 

McGraw-Hill, 2016.

Barohn RJ, Amato AA: Pattern-recognition approach to neuropathy 

and neuronopathy. Neurol Clin 31:343, 2013.

Barohn RJ et al: Patient Assisted Intervention for Neuropathy: Com-
parison  of  Treatment  in  Real  Life  Situations  (PAIN-CONTRoLS) 
Bayesian adaptive comparative effectiveness randomized trial. JAMA 
Neurol 78:68, 2021.

Benson M et al: Inotersen treatment for patients with hereditary tran-

sthyretin amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 379:22, 2018.

Carroll AS et al: Inherited neuropathies. Semin Neurol 39:620, 2019.
England  JD  et  al:  Evaluation  of  distal  symmetric  polyneuropathy: 
The  role  of  autonomic  testing,  nerve  biopsy,  and  skin  biopsy  
(an evidence-based review). Muscle Nerve 39:106, 2009.

England JD et al: Evaluation of distal symmetric polyneuropathy: The 
role  of  laboratory  and  genetic  testing  (an  evidence-based  review). 
Muscle Nerve 39:116, 2009.

Feldman  EL  et  al:  Diabetic  neuropathy.  Nat  Rev  Dis  Primers  5:41, 

2019.

Hobson-Webb  LD,  Juel  VC:  Common  entrapment  neuropathies. 

Continuum (Minneap Minn) 23:487, 2017.

Jin PH, Shin SC: Neuropathy of connective tissue diseases and other 

systemic diseases. Semin Neurol 39:651, 2019.

Waldfogel  JM  et  al:  Pharmacotherapy  for  diabetic  peripheral  neu-
ropathy  pain  and  quality  of  life:  A  systematic  review.  Neurology 
87:978, 2016.

447 Guillain-Barré Syndrome  
and Other Immune-Mediated 
Neuropathies
Stephen L. Hauser, Anthony A. Amato

GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME
Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (GBS)  is  an  acute,  frequently  severe,  and 
fulminant  polyradiculoneuropathy  that  is  autoimmune  in  nature.  It 
occurs year-round at a rate of between 10 to 20 cases per million annu-
ally; in the United States, ~5000–6000 cases occur per year. Males are 
at slightly higher risk for GBS than females, and in Western countries, 
adults are more frequently affected than children.

Clinical  Manifestations  GBS  manifests  as  a  rapidly  evolving 
areflexic  motor  paralysis  with  or  without  sensory  disturbance.  The 
usual  pattern  is  an  ascending  paralysis  that  may  be  first  noticed  as 

3501

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
7

G
u
i
l
l
a
i
n
-
B
a
r
r
é
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

I

m
m
u
n
e
-
M
e
d
i
a
t
e
d
N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
i
e
s

rubbery legs. Weakness typically evolves over hours to a few days and 
is frequently accompanied by tingling dysesthesias in the extremities. 
The legs are usually more affected than the arms, and facial diparesis is 
present in 50% of affected individuals. The lower cranial nerves are also 
frequently involved, causing bulbar weakness with difficulty handling 
secretions and maintaining an airway; the diagnosis in these patients 
may  initially  be  mistaken  for  brainstem  ischemia.  Pain  in  the  neck, 
shoulder, back, or diffusely over the spine is also common in the early 
stages  of  GBS,  occurring  in  ~50%  of  patients.  Most  patients  require 
hospitalization,  and  in  different  series,  up  to  30%  require  ventilatory 
assistance  at  some  time  during  the  illness.  The  need  for  mechanical 
ventilation  is  associated  with  more  severe  weakness  on  admission,  a 
rapid tempo of progression, and the presence of facial and/or bulbar 
weakness during the first week of symptoms. Fever and constitutional 
symptoms  are  absent  at  the  onset  and,  if  present,  cast  doubt  on  the 
diagnosis.  Deep  tendon  reflexes  attenuate  or  disappear  within  the 
first  few  days  of  onset.  Cutaneous  sensory  deficits  (e.g.,  loss  of  pain 
and  temperature  sensation)  are  usually  relatively  mild,  but  functions 
subserved  by  large  sensory  fibers,  such  as  deep  tendon  reflexes  and 
proprioception,  are  more  severely  affected.  Bladder  dysfunction  may 
occur in severe cases but is usually transient. If bladder dysfunction is 
a prominent feature and comes early in the course or there is a sensory 
level  on  examination,  diagnostic  possibilities  other  than  GBS  should 
be considered, particularly spinal cord disease (Chap. 442). Once clin-
ical worsening stops and the patient reaches a plateau (almost always 
within 4 weeks of onset), further progression is unlikely.

Autonomic involvement is common and may occur even in patients 
whose  GBS  is  otherwise  mild.  The  usual  manifestations  are  loss  of 
vasomotor control with wide fluctuations in blood pressure, postural 
hypotension,  and  cardiac  dysrhythmias.  These  features  require  close 
monitoring and management and can be fatal. Pain is another common 
feature of GBS; in addition to the acute pain described above, a deep 
aching  pain  may  be  present  in  weakened  muscles  that  patients  liken 
to having overexercised the previous day. Other pains in GBS include 
dysesthetic pain in the extremities as a manifestation of sensory nerve 
fiber  involvement.  These  pains  are  self-limited  and  often  respond  to 
standard analgesics (Chap. 13).

Several subtypes of GBS are recognized, as determined primarily by 
electrodiagnostic (EDx) and pathologic distinctions (Table 447-1). The 
most common variant is acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneur-
opathy (AIDP). Additionally, there are two “axonal” or “nodal/paran-
odal” variants, which are often clinically severe: the acute motor axonal 
neuropathy  (AMAN)  and  acute  motor  sensory  axonal  neuropathy 
(AMSAN)  subtypes.  In  addition,  a  range  of  limited  or  regional  GBS 
syndromes  are  also  encountered.  Notable  among  these  is  the  Miller 
Fisher syndrome (MFS), which presents as rapidly evolving ataxia and 
areflexia of limbs without weakness, and ophthalmoplegia, often with 
pupillary  paralysis.  The  MFS  variant  accounts  for  ~5%  of  all  cases 
and  is  strongly  associated  with  antibodies  to  the  ganglioside  GQ1b 
(see  “Immunopathogenesis,”  below).  Other  regional  variants  of  GBS 
include (1) pure sensory forms; (2) ophthalmoplegia with anti-GQ1b 
antibodies as part of severe motor-sensory GBS; (3) GBS with severe 
bulbar  and  facial  paralysis,  sometimes  associated  with  antecedent 
cytomegalovirus  (CMV)  infection  and  anti-GM2  antibodies;  and  (4) 
acute pandysautonomia (Chap. 440).

Antecedent  Events  Approximately  70%  of  cases  of  GBS  occur 
1–3  weeks  after  an  acute  infectious  process,  usually  respiratory  or 
gastrointestinal. Culture and seroepidemiologic techniques show that 
20–30% of all cases occurring in North America, Europe, and Austra-
lia are preceded by infection or reinfection with Campylobacter jejuni. 
A similar proportion is preceded by a human herpes virus infection, 
often CMV or Epstein-Barr virus. Other viruses (e.g., HIV, hepatitis E, 
Zika) and also Mycoplasma pneumoniae have been identified as agents 
involved in antecedent infections, as have recent immunizations. The 
swine  influenza  vaccine,  administered  widely  in  the  United  States  in 
1976,  is  the  most  notable  example.  Influenza  vaccines  in  use  from 
1992 to 1994, however, resulted in only one additional case of GBS per 
million  persons  vaccinated,  and  the  more  recent  seasonal  influenza 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3501

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3502

TABLE 447-1  Subtypes of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)
SUBTYPE
Acute inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)

Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)

Acute motor sensory axonal neuropathy 
(AMSAN)

Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS)

FEATURES
Adults affected more than children; 90% 
of cases in Western world; recovery 
rapid; anti-GM1 antibodies (<50%)
Children and young adults; prevalent 
in China and Mexico; may be seasonal; 
recovery rapid; anti-GD1a antibodies
Mostly adults; uncommon; recovery 
slow, often incomplete; closely related 
to AMAN
Adults and children; ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia, and areflexia; anti-GQ1b 
antibodies (90%)

ELECTRODIAGNOSIS
Demyelinating

Axonal

Axonal

PATHOLOGY
First attack on Schwann cell surface; widespread myelin 
damage, macrophage activation, and lymphocytic 
infiltration; variable secondary axonal damage
First attack at motor nodes of Ranvier; macrophage 
activation, few lymphocytes, frequent periaxonal 
macrophages; extent of axonal damage highly variable
Same as AMAN, but also affects sensory nerves and 
roots; axonal damage usually severe

Axonal or 
demyelinating

Few cases examined; resembles AIDP

vaccines appear to confer a GBS risk of <1 per million. Epidemiologic 
studies  looking  at  H1N1  vaccination  demonstrated  at  most  only  a 
slight increased risk of GBS. Meningococcal vaccinations (Menactra) 
do  not  appear  to  carry  an  increased  risk.  Older-type  rabies  vaccine, 
prepared  in  nervous  system  tissue,  is  implicated  as  a  trigger  of  GBS 
in  developing  countries  where  it  is  still  used;  the  mechanism  is  pre-
sumably immunization against neural antigens. GBS also occurs more 
frequently than can be attributed to chance alone in patients with lym-
phoma (including Hodgkin’s disease), in HIV-seropositive individuals, 
and in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). GBS, other 
inflammatory neuropathies, and myositis can also occur as a compli-
cation of immune checkpoint inhibitors used to treat various cancers.
C. jejuni has also been implicated in summer outbreaks of AMAN 
among children and young adults exposed to chickens in rural China. 
Infection by Zika virus recently has been implicated in the increased 
incidence of GBS in Brazil and other endemic regions. Recently, GBS 
has been reported with SARS-CoV-2 infection during the COVID-19 
pandemic,  but  a  causal  relationship  has  not  been  established.  There 
appears  to  be  an  increased  risk  of  GBS  with  SARS-CoV-2  vaccines 
using adenovirus vectors, but not the messenger RNA vaccines.

Immunopathogenesis  Several lines of evidence support an auto-
immune basis for acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(AIDP), the most common and best-studied type of GBS; the concept 
extends to all of the subtypes of GBS (Table 447-1).

It  is  likely  that  both  cellular  and  humoral  immune  mechanisms 
contribute to tissue damage in AIDP. T-cell activation is suggested by 
the  finding  that  elevated  levels  of  cytokines  and  cytokine  receptors 
are present in serum (interleukin [IL] 2, soluble IL-2 receptor) and in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (IL-6, tumor necrosis factor α, interferon γ). 
AIDP  is  also  closely  analogous  to  an  experimental  T  cell–mediated 
immunopathy designated experimental allergic neuritis (EAN). EAN is 
induced in laboratory animals by immune sensitization against protein 
fragments  derived  from  peripheral  nerve  proteins  and,  in  particular, 
against  the  P2  protein.  Based  on  analogy  to  EAN,  it  was  initially 
thought that AIDP was likely to be primarily a T cell–mediated disor-
der; however, abundant data now suggest that autoantibodies directed 
against  T  cell–independent  nonprotein  determinants  may  be  central 
to many cases.

Circumstantial  evidence  suggests  that  all  GBS  results  from 
immune responses to nonself antigens (infectious agents, vaccines) 
that misdirect to host nerve tissue through a resemblance-of-epitope 
(molecular mimicry) mechanism (Fig. 447-1). The neural targets are 
likely to be glycoconjugates, specifically gangliosides (Table 447-2; 
Fig.  447-2).  Gangliosides  are  complex  glycosphingolipids  that 
contain  one  or  more  sialic  acid  residues;  various  gangliosides  par-
ticipate  in  cell-cell  interactions  (including  those  between  axons 
and  glia),  modulation  of  receptors,  and  regulation  of  growth.  They 
are  typically  exposed  on  the  plasma  membrane  of  cells,  rendering 
them  susceptible  to  an  antibody-mediated  attack.  Gangliosides  and 
other glycoconjugates are present in large quantity in human nervous 
tissues  and  in  key  sites,  such  as  nodes  of  Ranvier.  Antiganglioside 
antibodies,  most  frequently  to  GM1,  are  common  in  GBS  (20–50% 

of  cases),  particularly  in  AMAN  and  AMSAN,  and  in  those  cases, 
they  are  preceded  by  C.  jejuni  infection.  Some  AIDP  autoantibodies 
may recognize glycolipid heterocomplexes, rather than single species, 
present  on  cell  membranes.  Furthermore,  isolates  of  C.  jejuni  from 
stool cultures of patients with GBS have surface glycolipid structures 
that antigenically cross react with gangliosides, including GM1, con-
centrated  in  human  nerves.  Sialic  acid  residues  from  pathogenic  C. 
jejuni strains can also trigger activation of dendritic cells via signaling 
through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), promoting B-cell differentiation 
and  further  amplifying  humoral  autoimmunity.  Another  line  of  evi-
dence implicating humoral autoimmunity is derived from cases of GBS 
that followed intravenous administration of bovine brain gangliosides 
for treatment of various neuropathies; 5–15 days after injection, some 
recipients developed AMAN with high titers of anti-GM1 antibodies 
that  recognized  epitopes  at  nodes  of  Ranvier  and  motor  endplates. 
Experimentally,  anti-GM1  antibodies  can  trigger  complement- 
mediated injury at paranodal axon-glial junctions, disrupting the clus-
tering of sodium channels and likely contributing to conduction block 
(see “Pathophysiology,” below).

Anti-GQ1b  IgG  antibodies  are  found  in  >90%  of  patients  with 
MFS  (Table  447-2;  Fig.  447-2),  and  titers  of  IgG  are  highest  early  in 
the  course.  Anti-GQ1b  antibodies  are  not  found  in  other  forms  of 
GBS  unless  there  is  extraocular  motor  nerve  involvement.  A  possi-
ble  explanation  for  this  association  is  that  extraocular  motor  nerves 
are enriched in GQ1b gangliosides in comparison to limb nerves. In 
addition,  a  monoclonal  anti-GQ1b  antibody  raised  against  C.  jejuni 
isolated from a patient with MFS blocked neuromuscular transmission 
experimentally.

Taken  together,  these  observations  provide  strong  but  still  incon-
clusive  evidence  that  autoantibodies  play  an  important  pathogenic 
role  in  GBS.  Although  antiganglioside  antibodies  have  been  studied 
most intensively, other antigenic targets may also be important. Proof 
that  these  antibodies  are  pathogenic  requires  that  they  be  capable  of 
mediating disease following direct passive transfer to naïve hosts; this 
has not yet been demonstrated, although one case of possible maternal- 
fetal transplacental transfer of GBS has been described.

In AIDP, an early step in the induction of tissue damage appears 
to be complement deposition along the outer surface of the Schwann 
cell.  Activation  of  complement  initiates  a  characteristic  vesicular 
disintegration  of  the  myelin  sheath  and  also  leads  to  recruitment 
of  activated  macrophages,  which  participate  in  damage  to  myelin 
and axons. In AMAN, the pattern is different in that complement is 
deposited along with IgG at the nodes of Ranvier along large motor 
axons.  Interestingly,  in  cases  of  AMAN,  antibodies  against  GD1a 
appear to have a fine specificity that favors binding to motor rather 
than sensory nerve roots, even though this ganglioside is expressed 
on both fiber types.

Pathophysiology 
In  the  demyelinating  forms  of  GBS,  the  basis 
for flaccid paralysis and sensory disturbance is conduction block. This 
finding,  demonstrable  electrophysiologically,  implies  that  the  axonal 
connections remain intact. Hence, recovery can take place rapidly as 
remyelination occurs. In severe cases of demyelinating GBS, secondary 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3502

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders stnairavdnasepytbuS

otseidobitnaotuaGgI

3503

Guillain-Barré syndrome
     Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
          Facial variant: Facial diplegia and paresthesia
     Acute motor axonal neuropathy
          More and less extensive forms
               Acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy
               Acute motor-conduction-block neuropathy
          Pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness

Miller Fisher syndrome
     Incomplete forms
          Acute ophthalmoparesis (without ataxia)
          Acute ataxic neuropathy (without ophthalmoplegia)
     CNS variant: Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis

KEY

Cer

Galactose
Glucose
N-Acetylgalactosamine
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
Ceramide

GM1

GD1a

None
None
GM1, GD1a

GM1, GD1a
GM1, GD1a
GT1a>GQ1b>>GD1a

GQ1b, GT1a

GQ1b, GT1a
GQ1b, GT1a
GQ1b, GT1a

Cer

GT1a

Cer

GQ1b

Cer

Cer

FIGURE  447-1  Spectrum  of  disorders  in  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  and  associated  antiganglioside  antibodies.  IgG  autoantibodies  against  GM1  or  GD1a  are  strongly 
associated with acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN), as well as the more extensive acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN), and the less extensive acute 
motor-conduction-block neuropathy. IgG anti-GQ1b antibodies, which cross-react with GT1a, are strongly associated with Miller Fisher syndrome, its incomplete forms 
(acute  ophthalmoparesis  [without  ataxia]  and  acute  ataxic  neuropathy  [without  ophthalmoplegia]),  and  its  more  extensive  form,  Bickerstaff’s  brainstem  encephalitis. 
Pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness is categorized as a localized form of acute motor axonal neuropathy or an extensive form of Miller Fisher syndrome. Half of patients 
with pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness have IgG anti-GT1a antibodies, which often cross-react with GQ1b. IgG anti-GD1a antibodies have also been detected in a 
small percentage of patients. The anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome includes Miller Fisher syndrome, acute ophthalmoparesis, acute ataxic neuropathy, Bickerstaff’s brainstem 
encephalitis, and pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness. The presence of clinical overlap also indicates that Miller Fisher syndrome is part of a continuous spectrum with 
these conditions. Patients who have had Guillain-Barré syndrome overlapped with Miller Fisher syndrome or with its related conditions have IgG antibodies against GM1 
or GD1a as well as against GQ1b or GT1a, supporting a link between AMAN and anti-GQ1b syndrome. (From N Yuki, H-P Hartung: Guillain-Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med 
366:2294, 2012. Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.)

axonal degeneration usually occurs; its extent can be estimated electro-
physiologically. More secondary axonal degeneration correlates with a 
slower rate of recovery and a greater degree of residual disability. With 
AMAN and AMSAN, a primary axonal pattern is encountered electro-
physiologically  (low-amplitude  compound  muscle  action  potentials). 
The implication has been that axons have degenerated and become dis-
connected from their targets, specifically the neuromuscular junctions, 
and must therefore regenerate for recovery to take place. However, the 
rapid recover in many cases suggests the low amplitudes are often from 
reversible conduction block due to binding of antibodies to ion channel 
proteins in the nodes and paranodes. In severe cases, axonal degener-
ation can occur, and it is in these cases that recovery is much slower.

Laboratory  Features  CSF  findings  are  distinctive,  consisting  of 
an elevated CSF protein level (1–10 g/L [100–1000 mg/dL]) without 
accompanying pleocytosis. The CSF is often normal when symptoms 
have  been  present  for  ≤48  h;  by  the  end  of  the  first  week,  the  level 
of  protein  is  usually  elevated.  A  transient  increase  in  the  CSF  white 
cell count (10–100/μL) occurs on occasion in otherwise typical GBS; 
however, a sustained CSF pleocytosis suggests an alternative diagno-
sis  (viral  myelitis)  or  a  concurrent  diagnosis  such  as  unrecognized 
HIV infection, leukemia or lymphoma with infiltration of nerves, or 
neurosarcoidosis. EDx features are mild or absent in the early stages 
of GBS and lag behind the clinical evolution. In AIDP, the earliest fea-
tures are prolonged F-wave latencies, prolonged distal latencies, and 
reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs), 
probably  owing  to  the  predilection  for  involvement  of  nerve  roots 
and  distal  motor  nerve  terminals  early  in  the  course.  Later,  slowing 
of  conduction  velocity,  conduction  block,  and  temporal  dispersion 
may be appreciated (Table 447-1). Occasionally, sensory nerve action 

potentials (SNAPs) may be normal in the feet (e.g., sural nerve) when 
abnormal  in  the  arms.  This  is  also  a  sign  that  the  patient  does  not 
have  one  of  the  more  typical  “length-dependent”  polyneuropathies. 
As  mentioned,  in  AMAN  and  AMSAN,  the  principal  EDx  finding 
is  reduced  amplitude  of  CMAPs  (and  also  SNAPS  with  AMSAN) 
without conduction slowing or prolongation of distal latencies, which 
early on is caused by conduction block but later can be due to axonal 
degeneration.

Diagnosis  GBS  is  a  descriptive  entity.  The  diagnosis  of  AIDP  is 
made  by  recognizing  the  pattern  of  rapidly  evolving  paralysis  with 
areflexia,  absence  of  fever  or  other  systemic  symptoms,  and  char-
acteristic  antecedent  events.  In  2011,  the  Brighton  Collaboration 
developed a new set of case definitions for GBS in response to needs 
of  epidemiologic  studies  of  vaccination  and  assessing  risks  of  GBS 
(Table  447-3).  These  criteria  have  subsequently  been  validated. 
Other disorders that may enter into the differential diagnosis include 
acute myelopathies (especially with prolonged back pain and sphinc-
ter  disturbances);  diphtheria  (early  oropharyngeal  disturbances); 
Lyme  polyradiculitis  and  other  tick-borne  paralyses;  porphyria 
(abdominal  pain,  seizures,  psychosis);  vasculitic  neuropathy  (check 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, described below); poliomyelitis and 
acute flaccid myelitis (wild-type poliovirus, West Nile virus, entero-
virus D68, enterovirus A71, Japanese encephalitis virus, and the wild-
type  poliovirus);  CMV  polyradiculitis  (in  immunocompromised 
patients);  critical  illness  neuropathy  or  myopathy;  neuromuscular 
junction disorders such as myasthenia gravis and botulism (pupillary 
reactivity lost early); poisonings with organophosphates, thallium, or 
arsenic;  paralytic  shellfish  poisoning;  or  severe  hypophosphatemia 
(rare). Cases of acute flaccid myelitis may pose particular challenges 

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
7

G
u
i
l
l
a
i
n
-
B
a
r
r
é
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

I

m
m
u
n
e
-
M
e
d
i
a
t
e
d
N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
i
e
s

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3503

21/01/22   7:50 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3504

TABLE 447-2  Principal Antiglycolipid Antibodies Implicated in 
Immune Neuropathies
CLINICAL 
PRESENTATION

ANTIBODY TARGET

USUAL ISOTYPE

Acute Immune Neuropathies (Guillain-Barré Syndrome)

Acute inflammatory 
demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (AIDP)

Acute motor axonal 
neuropathy (AMAN)

Miller Fisher syndrome 
(MFS)
Acute pharyngeal 
cervicobrachial 
neuropathy (APCBN)

No clear patterns

IgG (polyclonal)

GM1 most common
GD1a, GM1, GM1b, 
GalNAc–GD1a (<50% 
for any)
GQ1b (>90%)

IgG (polyclonal)

IgG (polyclonal)

GT1a (? most)

IgG (polyclonal)

Chronic Immune Neuropathies

Chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating 
polyneuropathy  
(CIDP) (75%)

CIDP-M (MGUS 
associated) (25%)
Chronic sensory > motor 
neuropathy

Multifocal motor 
neuropathy (MMN)
Chronic sensory ataxic 
neuropathy

Approximately 10% to 
CNTN1 or NF155, less 
often to NF140/186 and 
Caspr1, and even more 
rarely to P0, myelin P2 
protein, or PMP22
Neural binding sites

IgG4 with CNTN1, NF155, 
NF140/186, Caspr1
Rare IgM with NF155

IgG, IgA (monoclonal)

SGPG, SGLPG (on MAG) 
(50%)
Uncertain (50%)
GM1, GalNAc–GD1a, 
others (25–50%)
GD1b, GQ1b, and other 
b-series gangliosides

IgM (monoclonal)

IgM (monoclonal)
IgM (polyclonal, 
monoclonal)
IgM (monoclonal)

Abbreviations: CIDP-M, CIDP with a monoclonal gammopathy; Caspr1, contactin 
associated protein-1; CNTN1, contactin-1; MAG, myelin-associated glycoprotein; 
MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance; NF140/186, 
neurofascin 140/186; NF155, neurofascin 155; SGPG, sulfoglucuronyl paragloboside; 
SGLPG, sulfoglucuronyl lactosaminyl paragloboside.
Source: Reproduced with permission from HJ Willison, N Yuki: Peripheral 
neuropathies and anti‐glycolipid antibodies. Brain 125:2591, 2002.

in distinguishing these from GBS because sphincter disturbances are 
often absent.

Laboratory  tests  are  helpful  primarily  to  exclude  mimics  of  GBS. 
CSF pleocytosis is seen with poliomyelitis, acute flaccid myelitis, and 
Lyme and CMV polyradiculitis. EDx features may be minimal early in 
GBS, and the CSF protein level may not rise until the end of the first 
week. If the diagnosis is strongly suspected, treatment should be initi-
ated without waiting for evolution of the characteristic EDx and CSF 
findings to occur. GBS patients with risk factors for HIV or with CSF 
pleocytosis should have a serologic test for HIV.

TREATMENT
Guillain-Barré Syndrome

In  the  vast  majority  of  patients  with  GBS,  treatment  should  be 
initiated  as  soon  after  diagnosis  as  possible.  Each  day  counts; 
~2 weeks after the first motor symptoms, it is not known whether 
immunotherapy is still effective. If the patient has already reached 
the  plateau  stage,  then  treatment  probably  is  no  longer  indicated, 
unless  the  patient  has  severe  motor  weakness  and  one  cannot 
exclude the possibility that an immunologic attack is still ongoing. 
Either high-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIg) or plasma-
pheresis  (PLEX)  can  be  initiated,  as  they  are  equally  effective  for 
typical GBS. A combination of the two therapies is not significantly 
better  than  either  alone.  IVIg  is  often  the  initial  therapy  chosen 
because of its ease of administration and good safety record. IVIg 
is  usually  administered  as  five  daily  infusions  for  a  total  dose  of   

2 g/kg body weight. There is some evidence that GBS autoantibod-
ies are neutralized by anti-idiotypic antibodies present in IVIg prep-
arations,  perhaps  accounting  for  the  therapeutic  effect.  A  course 
of PLEX usually consists of ~40–50 mL/kg plasma exchange (PE)  
4–5  times  over  7–10  days.  Meta-analysis  of  randomized  clinical 
trials indicates that treatment reduces the need for mechanical ven-
tilation by nearly half (from 27 to 14% with PLEX) and increases the 
likelihood of full recovery at 1 year (from 55 to 68%). Functionally 
significant  improvement  may  occur  toward  the  end  of  the  first 
week of treatment or may be delayed for several weeks. The lack of 
noticeable improvement following a course of IVIg or PLEX is not 
an indication to treat with the alternate treatment. However, there 
are occasional patients who are treated early in the course of GBS 
and improve, who then relapse within a month. Brief retreatment 
with the original therapy is usually effective in such cases. Gluco-
corticoids have not been found to be effective in GBS. Occasional 
patients with very mild forms of GBS, especially those who appear 
to have already reached a plateau when initially seen, may be man-
aged conservatively without IVIg or PLEX.

In the worsening phase of GBS, most patients require monitoring 
in a critical care setting, with particular attention to vital capacity, 
heart rhythm, blood pressure, nutrition, deep-vein thrombosis pro-
phylaxis,  cardiovascular  status,  early  consideration  (after  2  weeks 
of intubation) of tracheotomy, and chest physiotherapy. As noted, 
~30%  of  patients  with  GBS  require  ventilatory  assistance,  some-
times  for  prolonged  periods  of  time  (several  weeks  or  longer). 
Frequent turning and assiduous skin care are important, as are daily 
range-of-motion  exercises  to  avoid  joint  contractures  and  daily 
reassurance as to the generally good outlook for recovery.

Prognosis  and  Recovery  Approximately  85%  of  patients  with 
GBS  achieve  a  full  functional  recovery  within  several  months  to  a 
year, although minor findings on examination (such as areflexia) may 
persist and patients often complain of continued symptoms, including 
fatigue.  The  mortality  rate  is  <5%  in  optimal  settings;  death  usually 
results  from  secondary  pulmonary  complications.  The  outlook  is 
worst  in  patients  with  severe  proximal  motor  and  sensory  axonal 
damage. Such axonal damage may be either primary or secondary in 
nature  (see  “Pathophysiology,”  above),  but  in  either  case,  successful 
regeneration cannot occur. Other factors that worsen the outlook for 
recovery  are  advanced  age,  a  fulminant  or  severe  attack,  and  a  delay 
in  the  onset  of  treatment.  Between  5  and  10%  of  patients  with  typi-
cal GBS have one or more late relapses; many of these cases are then 
classified  as  chronic  inflammatory  demyelinating  polyneuropathy  
(CIDP).

CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY 
DEMYELINATING POLYNEUROPATHY
CIDP  is  distinguished  from  GBS  by  its  chronic  course.  In  other 
respects,  this  neuropathy  shares  many  features  with  the  common 
demyelinating  form  of  GBS,  including  elevated  CSF  protein  levels 
and the EDx findings of acquired demyelination. Most cases occur in 
adults,  and  males  are  affected  slightly  more  often  than  females.  The 
incidence of CIDP is lower than that of GBS, but due to the protracted 
course, the prevalence is greater. As with GBS, CIDP and its variants 
can be triggered by use of immune checkpoint inhibitors used to treat 
various cancers.

Clinical  Manifestations  Onset  is  usually  gradual  over  a  few 
months or longer, but in a few cases, the initial attack is indistinguish-
able from that of GBS. An acute-onset form of CIDP may mimic GBS 
but  should  be  considered  if  it  deteriorates  >9  weeks  after  onset  or 
relapses  at  least  three  times.  Symptoms  are  both  motor  and  sensory 
in most cases. Weakness of the limbs is usually symmetric but can be 
strikingly  asymmetric  in  multifocal  acquired  demyelinating  sensory 
and motor (MADSAM) neuropathy variant (Lewis-Sumner syndrome) 
in which discrete peripheral nerves are involved. There is considerable 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3504

21/01/22   7:50 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3505

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
7

G
u
i
l
l
a
i
n
-
B
a
r
r
é
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

I

m
m
u
n
e
-
M
e
d
i
a
t
e
d
N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
i
e
s

A

Motor
neuron

B

Unidentified antigen

Axon

MAC

Macrophage

Myelin

Macrophage

Axon

Myelin

Antibody
binding

Complement
activation

Nerve
injury

Macrophage
scavenging

MAC

Macrophage

Macrophage

Axon

Axon

Myelin

GM1,
GD1a

Schwann-cell
microvilli

Myelin

Axon

Juxtaparanode

Paranode

Node

Axon

KEY

KEY

Kv

Caspr

Nav

Cytoskeleton

IgG anti-GM1 or
anti-GD1a antibodies

C3

MAC

FIGURE 447-2  Possible immune mechanisms in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). Panel A shows the immunopathogenesis of AIDP. Although autoantigens have yet to be 
unequivocally identified, autoantibodies may bind to myelin antigens and activate complement. This is followed by the formation of membrane-attack complex (MAC) on 
the outer surface of Schwann cells and the initiation of vesicular degeneration. Macrophages subsequently invade myelin and act as scavengers to remove myelin debris. 
Panel B shows the immunopathogenesis of acute axonal forms of GBS (acute motor axonal neuropathy [AMAN] and acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy [AMSAN]). 
Myelinated axons are divided into four functional regions: the nodes of Ranvier, paranodes, juxtaparanodes, and internodes. Gangliosides GM1 and GD1a are strongly 
expressed at the nodes of Ranvier, where the voltage-gated sodium (Nav) channels are localized. Contactin-associated protein (Caspr) and voltage-gated potassium (Kv) 
channels are respectively present at the paranodes and juxtaparanodes. IgG anti-GM1 or anti-GD1a autoantibodies bind to the nodal axolemma, leading to MAC formation. 
This results in the disappearance of Nav clusters and the detachment of paranodal myelin, which can lead to nerve-conduction failure and muscle weakness. Axonal 
degeneration may follow at a later stage. Macrophages subsequently invade from the nodes into the periaxonal space, scavenging the injured axons. (From N Yuki, H-P 
Hartung: Guillain-Barré syndrome. N Engl J Med 366:2294, 2012. Copyright © 2012 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical 
Society.)

variability  from  case  to  case.  Some  patients  experience  a  chronic 
progressive  course,  whereas  others,  usually  younger  patients,  have  a 
relapsing and remitting course. A small proportion have cranial nerve 
findings, including external ophthalmoplegia. Some have only motor 
findings,  and  a  small  proportion  present  with  a  relatively  pure  syn-
drome of sensory ataxia. The latter can be seen in the chronic inflam-
matory  sensory  polyradiculopathy  (CISP)  variant  of  CIDP  in  which 
demyelination predominantly occurs at the sensory roots or with the 
distal acquired demyelinating symmetric (DADS) variant.

Approximately,  10%  of  cases  are  associated  with  IgG4  isotype 
antibodies  directed  against  contactin-1  (CNTN1)  or  neurofascin  155 
(NF155), with early axonal damage, severe distal motor involvement, 

or  sensory  ataxia  with  tremor.  Less  commonly,  IgM  anti-NF140/186 
CIDP associated with sensory ataxia but without tremor, low-amplitude 
CMAPs  (conduction  block  or  axonal  degeneration),  and  nephrotic 
syndrome have also been reported. Anti-contactin associated protein-1 
(Caspr1) antibodies occur in CIDP associated with severe neuropathic 
pain.

CIDP tends to ameliorate over time with treatment; the result is that 
many years after onset, nearly 75% of patients have reasonable func-
tional status. Death from CIDP is uncommon.

Diagnosis  The  diagnosis  rests  on  characteristic  clinical,  CSF,  and 
electrophysiologic  findings.  The  CSF  is  usually  acellular  with  an 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3505

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3506

TABLE 447-3  Brighton Criteria for Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) and Miller Fisher Syndrome
Clinical case definitions for diagnosis of GBS
Level 1 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral AND flaccid weakness of the limbs

  Absence of limb weakness

  AND

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of 
weakness between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs

  AND

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  AND

  Electrophysiologic findings consistent with GBS

  AND

 Cytoalbuminologic dissociation (i.e., elevation of CSF protein level above laboratory 
normal value AND CSF total white cell count <50 cells/μL)

  AND

  Absence of an identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Level 2 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral AND flaccid weakness of the limbs

  AND

  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  AND

 CSF total white cell count <50 cells/μL (with or without CSF protein elevation above 
laboratory normal value)

  OR

 If CSF not collected or results not available, electrophysiologic studies consistent 
with GBS
  AND

  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Level 3 of diagnostic certainty
  Bilateral and flaccid weakness of the limbs

  AND

  Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in weak limbs

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of weakness 
between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  AND

  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis for weakness
Clinical case definitions for diagnosis of Miller Fisher syndrome
Level 1 of diagnostic certainty

 Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes, and 
ataxia

  AND

 Cytoalbuminologic dissociation (i.e., elevation of cerebrospinal protein above 
the laboratory normal and total CSF white cell count <50 cells/μL)

  AND

 Nerve conduction studies are normal, OR indicate involvement of sensory 
nerves only
  AND

  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs

  AND

  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis
Level 2 of diagnostic certainty

 Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes 
and ataxia
  AND

  Absence of limb weakness

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of 
weakness between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  AND

 CSF with a total white cell count <50 cells/μL) (with or without CSF protein 
elevation above laboratory normal value)

  OR

 Nerve conduction studies are normal, OR indicate involvement of sensory 
nerves only
  AND

  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs

  AND

  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis
Level 3 of diagnostic certainty

 Bilateral ophthalmoparesis and bilateral reduced or absent tendon reflexes 
and ataxia
  AND

  Absence of limb weakness

  AND

 Monophasic illness pattern and interval between onset and nadir of 
weakness between 12 h and 28 days and subsequent clinical plateau

  AND

  No alterations in consciousness or corticospinal tract signs

  AND

  Absence of identified alternative diagnosis

Abbreviation: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Source: From JJ Sejvar et al: Guillain-Barré syndrome and Fisher syndrome: Case definitions and guidelines for collection, analysis, and presentation of immunization safety 
data. Vaccine 29:599, 2011. Validation study published by C Fokke et al: Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome and validation of Brighton criteria. Brain 137:33, 2014.

elevated protein level, sometimes several times normal. As with GBS, 
a CSF pleocytosis should lead to the consideration of HIV infection, 
leukemia  or  lymphoma,  and  neurosarcoidosis.  EDx  findings  reveal 
variable  degrees  of  conduction  slowing,  prolonged  distal  latencies, 
distal  and  temporal  dispersion  of  CMAPs,  and  conduction  block  as 
the principal features. In particular, the presence of conduction block 
is  a  certain  sign  of  an  acquired  demyelinating  process.  Evidence  of 
axonal  loss,  presumably  secondary  to  demyelination,  is  present  in 
>50% of patients. Serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation 
is  indicated  to  search  for  monoclonal  gammopathy  and  associated 
conditions  (see  “Monoclonal  Gammopathy  of  Undetermined  Signif-
icance,”  below).  MRI  can  demonstrate  enlarged  nerves,  clumping  of 
cauda equina, and enhancement. Ultrasound is cheaper and often more 
readily  available  and  can  likewise  show  enlargement  of  nerves  at  the 
roots or more distally. Studies have shown that imaging completements 

EDx findings and increases sensitivity. In all patients with presumptive 
CIDP, it is also reasonable to exclude vasculitis, collagen vascular dis-
ease  (especially  SLE),  chronic  hepatitis,  HIV  infection,  amyloidosis, 
and diabetes mellitus. Other associated conditions include inflamma-
tory bowel disease and lymphoma.

Pathogenesis  Biopsy  in  typical  CIDP  reveals  little  inflammation 
and onion-bulb changes (imbricated layers of attenuated Schwann cell 
processes surrounding an axon) that result from recurrent demyelina-
tion and remyelination (Fig. 447-1). The response to therapy suggests 
that  CIDP  is  immune-mediated;  CIDP  responds  to  glucocorticoids, 
whereas  GBS  does  not.  Passive  transfer  of  demyelination  into  exper-
imental  animals  has  been  accomplished  using  IgG  purified  from  the 
serum of some patients with CIDP, lending support for a humoral auto-
immune  pathogenesis.  A  minority  of  patients  have  serum  antibodies 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3506

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against  P0,  myelin  P2  protein,  or  PMP22  (proteins  whose  genes  are 
mutated in certain forms of hereditary Charcot-Marie-Tooth neurop-
athy).  As  previously  mentioned,  antibodies  of  IgG4  isotype  directed 
against CNTN1, NF155, NF140/186, and Caspr1 have been associated 
with early nodal and paranodal damage with and a poor response to 
IVIg.  CNTN1  and  its  partner  Caspr1  interact  with  NF155  at  paran-
odal  axoglial  junctions.  Passive  transfer  of  IgG4  CNTN1  antibodies 
produces paranodal damage and ataxia in rodents. It is also of interest 
that a CIDP-like illness developed spontaneously in the nonobese dia-
betic (NOD) mouse when the immune co-stimulatory molecule B7-2 
(CD86) was genetically deleted; this suggests that CIDP can result from 
altered triggering of T cells by antigen-presenting cells.

As many as 25% of patients with clinical features of CIDP also have 
a  monoclonal  gammopathy  of  undetermined  significance  (MGUS), 
discussed below. Cases associated with monoclonal IgA or IgG kappa 
usually  respond  to  treatment  as  favorably  as  cases  without  a  mono-
clonal  gammopathy.  Patients  with  IgM-kappa  monoclonal  gammop-
athy  and  antibodies  directed  against  myelin-associated  glycoprotein 
(MAG)  have  a  distinct  demyelinating  polyneuropathy  with  more 
sensory findings, usually only distal weakness, and a poor response to 
immunotherapy.

TREATMENT
Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating 
Polyneuropathy
Most  authorities  initiate  treatment  for  CIDP  when  progression  is 
rapid or walking is compromised. If the disorder is mild, manage-
ment can be expectant, awaiting spontaneous remission. Controlled 
studies  have  shown  that  high-dose  IVIg,  subcutaneous  Ig  (scIg), 
PLEX,  and  glucocorticoids  are  all  more  effective  than  placebo. 
Initial  therapy  is  usually  with  IVIg,  administered  as  2.0  g/kg 
body weight given in divided doses over 2–5 days; three monthly 
courses  are  generally  recommended  before  concluding  a  patient 
has failed treatment. If the patient responds, the infusion intervals 
can be gradually increased or the dosage decreased (e.g., starting at 
1 g/kg every 3–4 weeks). Patients who require more frequent IVIg, 
experience  side  effects  with  IVIg  (headaches),  have  poor  venous 
access, or find it more convenient are treated with scIg (2–3 times 
a week such that the total dosage per month is the same or slightly 
higher than the monthly dosage of IVIg). PLEX, which appears to 
be as effective as IVIg, is initiated at 2–3 treatments per week for  
6 weeks; periodic retreatment may also be required. Treatment with 
glucocorticoids is another option (60–80 mg prednisone PO daily 
for  1–2  months,  followed  by  a  gradual  dose  reduction  of  10  mg 
per  month  as  tolerated),  but  long-term  adverse  effects  including 
bone  demineralization,  gastrointestinal  bleeding,  and  cushingoid 
changes  are  problematic.  As  many  as  one-third  of  patients  with 
CIDP  fail  to  respond  adequately  to  the  initial  therapy  chosen;  a 
different treatment should then be tried. Patients who fail therapy 
with  IVIg,  scIg,  PLEX,  and  glucocorticoids  may  benefit  from 
treatment  with  immunosuppressive  agents  such  as  azathioprine, 
methotrexate, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide, either alone or 
as adjunctive therapy. CIDP associated with anti-CNTN1, NF155, 
NF140/186,  and  Caspr1  antibodies  (IgG4  subclass  antibodies)  is 
typically refractory to IVIg, but several studies suggest a response 
to rituximab. Use of these therapies requires periodic reassessment 
of their risks and benefits. In patients with a CIDP-like neuropathy 
who  fail  to  respond  to  treatment,  it  is  important  to  evaluate  for 
POEMS  syndrome  (polyneuropathy,  organomegaly,  endocrinopa-
thy, monoclonal gammopathy, skin changes; see below).

MULTIFOCAL MOTOR NEUROPATHY
Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) is a distinctive but uncommon 
neuropathy  that  presents  as  slowly  progressive  motor  weakness  and 
atrophy evolving over years in the distribution of selected nerve trunks, 

3507

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
7

G
u
i
l
l
a
i
n
-
B
a
r
r
é
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

I

m
m
u
n
e
-
M
e
d
i
a
t
e
d
N
e
u
r
o
p
a
t
h
i
e
s

associated with sites of persistent focal motor conduction block in the 
same nerve trunks. Sensory fibers are relatively spared. The arms are 
affected  more  frequently  than  the  legs,  and  >75%  of  all  patients  are 
male. Some cases have been confused with lower motor neuron forms 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 437). Less than 50% of patients 
present with high titers of polyclonal IgM antibody to the ganglioside 
GM1.  It  is  uncertain  how  this  finding  relates  to  the  discrete  foci  of 
persistent  motor  conduction  block,  but  high  concentrations  of  GM1 
gangliosides are normal constituents of nodes of Ranvier in peripheral 
nerve fibers. Pathology reveals demyelination and mild inflammatory 
changes at the sites of conduction block.

Most patients with MMN respond to high-dose IVIg or scIg (dos-
ages as for CIDP, above); periodic retreatment is required (usually at 
least monthly) to maintain the benefit. Some refractory patients have 
responded to rituximab or cyclophosphamide. Glucocorticoids and PE 
are not effective.

NEUROPATHIES WITH MONOCLONAL 
GAMMOPATHY
 ■ MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Clinically  overt  polyneuropathy  occurs  in  ~5%  of  patients  with  the 
commonly  encountered  type  of  multiple  myeloma,  which  exhibits 
either  lytic  or  diffuse  osteoporotic  bone  lesions.  These  neuropathies 
are sensorimotor, are usually mild and slowly progressive but may be 
severe, and generally do not reverse with successful suppression of the 
myeloma.  In  most  cases,  EDx  and  pathologic  features  are  consistent 
with a process of axonal degeneration.

In  contrast,  myeloma  with  osteosclerotic  features,  although  repre-
senting  only  3%  of  all  myelomas,  is  associated  with  polyneuropathy 
in one-half of cases. These neuropathies, which may also occur with 
solitary  plasmacytoma,  are  distinct  because  they  (1)  are  demyelinat-
ing  or  mixed  axonal  and  demyelinating  by  EDx,  have  elevated  CSF 
protein, and clinically resemble CIDP; (2) often respond to radiation 
therapy or removal of the primary lesion; (3) are associated with dif-
ferent monoclonal proteins and light chains (almost always lambda as 
opposed to primarily kappa in the lytic type of multiple myeloma); (4) 
are typically refractory to standard treatments of CIDP; and (5) may 
occur  in  association  with  other  systemic  findings  including  thicken-
ing  of  the  skin,  hyperpigmentation,  hypertrichosis,  organomegaly, 
endocrinopathy, anasarca, and clubbing of fingers. These are features 
of  POEMS  syndrome.  Levels  of  vascular  endothelial  growth  factor 
(VEGF) are increased in the serum, and this factor is thought to some-
how  play  a  pathogenic  role  in  this  syndrome.  Treatment  of  the  neu-
ropathy  is  best  directed  at  the  osteosclerotic  myeloma  using  surgery, 
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or autologous peripheral blood stem cell 
transplantation.

Neuropathies  are  also  encountered  in  other  systemic  conditions 
with  gammopathy,  including  Waldenström  macroglobulinemia,  pri-
mary systemic amyloidosis, and cryoglobulinemic states (mixed essen-
tial cryoglobulinemia, some cases of hepatitis C).

 ■ MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF 
UNDETERMINED SIGNIFICANCE
Chronic  polyneuropathies  occurring  in  association  with  MGUS  are 
usually  associated  with  the  immunoglobulin  isotypes  IgG,  IgA,  and 
IgM.  Most  patients  present  with  isolated  sensory  symptoms  in  their 
distal  extremities  and  have  EDx  features  of  an  axonal  sensory  or 
sensorimotor  polyneuropathy.  These  patients  otherwise  resemble 
idiopathic sensory polyneuropathy, and the MGUS might just be coin-
cidental.  They  usually  do  not  respond  to  immunotherapies  designed 
to reduce the concentration of the monoclonal protein. Some patients, 
however, present with generalized weakness and sensory loss and EDx 
studies  indistinguishable  from  CIDP  without  monoclonal  gammo-
pathy  (see  “Chronic  Inflammatory  Demyelinating  Polyneuropathy,” 
above), and their response to immunosuppressive agents is also similar. 
An  exception  is  the  syndrome  of  IgM-kappa  monoclonal  gammo-
pathy  associated  with  an  indolent,  long-standing,  sometimes  static 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3507

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3508 sensory neuropathy, frequently with tremor and sensory ataxia. Most 
patients are men and aged >50 years. In the majority, the monoclonal 
IgM  immunoglobulin  binds  to  a  normal  peripheral  nerve  constitu-
ent, MAG, found in the paranodal regions of Schwann cells. Binding 
appears to be specific for a polysaccharide epitope that is also found in 
other normal peripheral nerve myelin glycoproteins, P0 and PMP22, 
and also in other normal nerve-related glycosphingolipids (Fig. 447-1). 
In the MAG-positive cases, IgM paraprotein is incorporated into the 
myelin  sheaths  of  affected  patients  and  widens  the  spacing  of  the 
myelin  lamellae,  thus  producing  a  distinctive  ultrastructural  pattern. 
Demyelination and remyelination are the hallmarks of the lesions, but 
axonal loss develops over time. These anti-MAG polyneuropathies are 
typical refractory to immunotherapy. In a small proportion of patients 
(30%  at  10  years),  MGUS  will  in  time  evolve  into  frankly  malignant 
conditions such as multiple myeloma or lymphoma.

VASCULITIC NEUROPATHY
Peripheral  nerve  involvement  is  common  in  polyarteritis  nodosa 
(PAN),  appearing  in  half  of  all  cases  clinically  and  in  100%  of  cases 
at  postmortem  studies  (Chap.  363).  The  most  common  pattern  is 
multifocal (asymmetric) motor-sensory neuropathy (mononeuropathy 
multiplex) due to ischemic lesions of nerve trunks and roots; however, 
some  cases  of  vasculitic  neuropathy  present  as  a  distal,  symmetric 
sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Symptoms of neuropathy are a common 
presenting complaint in patients with PAN. The EDx findings are those 
of an axonal process. Small- to medium-sized arteries of the vasa ner-
vorum, particularly the epineural vessels, are affected in PAN, resulting 
in a widespread ischemic neuropathy. A high frequency of neuropathy 
occurs in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss 
syndrome [CSS]).

Systemic vasculitis should always be considered when a subacute or 
chronically evolving mononeuropathy multiplex occurs in conjunction 
with  constitutional  symptoms  (fever,  anorexia,  weight  loss,  loss  of 
energy, malaise, and nonspecific pains). Diagnosis of suspected vascu-
litic neuropathy is made by a combined nerve and muscle biopsy, with 
serial section or skip-serial techniques.

Approximately one-third of biopsy-proven cases of vasculitic neu-
ropathy are “nonsystemic” in that the vasculitis appears to affect only 
peripheral nerves. Constitutional symptoms are absent, and the course 
is more indolent than that of PAN. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
may be elevated, but other tests for systemic disease are negative. Nev-
ertheless, clinically silent involvement of other organs is likely, and vas-
culitis is frequently found in muscle biopsied at the same time as nerve.
Vasculitic  neuropathy  may  also  be  seen  as  part  of  the  vasculitis 
syndrome occurring in the course of other connective tissue disorders. 
The  most  frequent  is  rheumatoid  arthritis,  but  ischemic  neuropathy 
due to involvement of vasa nervorum may also occur in mixed cryo-
globulinemia,  Sjögren’s  syndrome,  granulomatosis  with  polyangiitis 
(formerly  known  as  Wegener’s),  hypersensitivity  angiitis,  SLE,  and 
progressive systemic sclerosis.

Some  vasculitides  are  associated  with  antineutrophil  cytoplasmic 
antibodies  (ANCAs),  which  in  turn  are  subclassified  as  cytoplasmic 
(cANCA)  or  perinuclear  (pANCA).  cANCAs  are  directed  against 
proteinase 3 (PR3), whereas pANCAs target myeloperoxidase (MPO). 
PR3/cANCAs  are  associated  with  eosinophilic  granulomatosis  with 
polyangiitis,  whereas  MPO/pANCAs  are  typically  associated  with 
microscopic  polyangiitis,  CSS,  and  less  commonly  PAN.  Of  note, 
MPO/pANCA has also been seen in minocycline-induced vasculitis.

Management  of  these  neuropathies,  including  the  “nonsystemic” 
vasculitic  neuropathy,  consists  of  treatment  of  the  underlying  condi-
tion  as  well  as  the  aggressive  use  of  glucocorticoids  and  cyclophos-
phamide.  Use  of  these  immunosuppressive  agents  has  resulted  in 
dramatic  improvements  in  outcome,  with  5-year  survival  rates  now 

>80%.  Clinical  trials  found  that  the  combination  of  rituximab  and 
glucocorticoids  is  not  inferior  to  cyclophosphamide  and  glucocorti-
coids. Thus, combination therapy with glucocorticoids and rituximab 
is  recommended  as  the  standard  initial  treatment,  particularly  for 
ANCA-associated  vasculitis.  Mepolizumab,  an  anti-IL-5  monoclonal 
antibody, when added to standard care, is also effective for treatment 
of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

ANTI-Hu PARANEOPLASTIC NEUROPATHY 
(CHAP. 94)
This  uncommon  immune-mediated  disorder  manifests  as  a  sensory 
neuronopathy  (i.e.,  selective  damage  to  sensory  nerve  bodies  in  dor-
sal  root  ganglia).  The  onset  is  often  asymmetric  with  dysesthesias 
and  sensory  loss  in  the  limbs  that  soon  progress  to  affect  all  limbs, 
the  torso,  and  the  face.  Marked  sensory  ataxia,  pseudoathetosis,  and 
inability to walk, stand, or even sit unsupported are frequent features 
and are secondary to the extensive deafferentation. Subacute sensory 
neuronopathy  may  be  idiopathic,  but  more  than  half  of  cases  are 
paraneoplastic,  primarily  related  to  lung  cancer,  and  most  of  those 
are small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). Diagnosis of the underlying SCLC 
requires  awareness  of  the  association,  testing  for  the  paraneoplastic 
antibody, and often positron emission tomography (PET) scanning for 
the tumor. The target antigens are a family of RNA-binding proteins 
(HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1) that in normal tissues are only expressed by 
neurons. The same proteins are usually expressed by SCLC, triggering 
in some patients an immune response characterized by antibodies and 
cytotoxic T cells that cross-react with the Hu proteins of the dorsal root 
ganglion  neurons,  resulting  in  immune-mediated  neuronal  destruc-
tion. An encephalomyelitis may accompany the sensory neuronopathy 
and  presumably  has  the  same  pathogenesis.  Neurologic  symptoms 
usually precede, by ≤6 months, the identification of SCLC. The sensory 
neuronopathy runs its course in a few weeks or months and stabilizes, 
leaving the patient disabled. Most cases are unresponsive to treatment 
with glucocorticoids, IVIg, PE, or immunosuppressant drugs.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Amato  AA,  Ropper  AH:  Sensory  ganglionopathy.  N  Engl  J  Med 

383:1657, 2020.

Amato  AA,  Russell  JA  (eds):  Neuromuscular  Disorders,  2nd  ed. 

New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, pp 320–383.

Beachy N et al: Vasculitic neuropathies. Semin Neurol 39:608, 2009.
Bunschoten C et al: Progress in diagnosis and treatment of chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. Lancet Neurol 
18:784, 2019.

Fatemi  Y  et  al:  Acute  flaccid  myelitis:  A  clinical  overview  for  2019. 

Mayo Clin Proc 94:875, 2019.

Guidon  AC,  Amato  AA:  COVID-19  and  neuromuscular  disorders. 

Neurology 94:959, 2020.

Leonard SE et al: Diagnosis and management of Guillain-Barré syn-

drome in ten steps. Nat Rev Neurol 15:671, 2019.

Maramattom  BV  et  al:  Guillain-Barre  Syndrome  following  

ChAdOx1-S/nCoV-19 vaccine. Ann Neurol 90:312, 2021.

Puwanant A et al: Clinical spectrum of neuromuscular complications 
after  immune  checkpoint  inhibition.  Neuromuscul  Disord  29:127, 
2019.

Toscano  G  et  al:  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  associated  with  SARS-

CoV-2. N Engl J Med 382:2574, 2020.

Uncini  A,  Vallat  J-M:  Autoimmune  nodo-paranodopathies  of 
peripheral nerve: The concept is gaining ground. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 89:627, 2018.

Wijdicks  EF,  Klein  CJ:  Guillain-Barré  syndrome.  Mayo  Clin  Proc 

92:467, 2017.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3508

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 448

Myasthenia Gravis and 
Other Diseases of the 
Neuromuscular Junction
Anthony A. Amato

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular junction (NMJ) disorder 
characterized  by  weakness  and  fatigability  of  skeletal  muscles.  The 
underlying defect is a decrease in the number of available acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs) at NMJs due to an antibody-mediated autoimmune 
attack. Treatment now available for MG is highly effective, although a 
specific cure has remained elusive.

 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
At  the  NMJ  (Fig.  448-1,  Video  448-1),  acetylcholine  (ACh)  is  syn-
thesized in the motor nerve terminal and stored in vesicles (quanta). 
When an action potential travels down a motor nerve and reaches the 

nerve terminal, ACh from 150 to 200 vesicles is released and combines 
with AChRs that are densely packed at the peaks of postsynaptic folds. 
The  AChR  consists  of  five  subunits  (2α,  1β,  1δ,  1γ,  or  ε)  arranged 
around a central pore. When ACh combines with the binding sites on 
the α subunits of the AChR, the channel in the AChR opens, permitting 
the rapid entry of cations, chiefly sodium, which produces depolariza-
tion at the end-plate region of the muscle fiber. If the depolarization is 
sufficiently large, it initiates an action potential that is propagated along 
the muscle fiber, triggering muscle contraction. This process is rapidly 
terminated  by  hydrolysis  of  ACh  by  acetylcholinesterase  (AChE), 
which  is  present  within  the  synaptic  folds,  and  by  diffusion  of  ACh 
away from the receptor.

In  MG,  the  fundamental  defect  is  a  decrease  in  the  number  of 
available  AChRs  at  the  postsynaptic  muscle  membrane.  In  addition, 
the  postsynaptic  folds  are  flattened,  or  “simplified.”  These  changes 
result in decreased efficiency of neuromuscular transmission. There-
fore,  although  ACh  is  released  normally,  it  produces  small  end-plate 
potentials that may fail to trigger muscle action potentials. Failure of 
transmission results in weakness of muscle contraction.

The  amount  of  ACh  released  per  impulse  normally  declines  on 
repeated  activity  (termed  presynaptic  rundown).  In  the  myasthenic 

SNARE proteins

Syntaxin-1

SNAP 25

Synaptotagmin

Synaptobrevin

Myelin
sheath

ChAT  Choline acetyltransferase

Acetylcholine receptor

Acetate
Choline

Ca+ ions

AChE

Axon

ChAT

Voltage-gated
K+ channel

Agrin

Active zone

Voltage-gated
Ca+ channel

Voltage-gated
Na+ channels

Myofibril

3509

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
8

M
y
a
s
t
h
e
n
i
a
G
r
a
v
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
N
e
u
r
o
m
u
s
c
u
l
a
r

J
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

A

FIGURE 448-1  Illustrations of (A) a normal presynaptic neuromuscular junction, (B) a normal postsynaptic terminal, and (C) a myasthenic neuromuscular junction. AChE, 
acetylcholinesterase. See text for description of normal neuromuscular transmission. The myasthenia gravis (MG) junction demonstrates a reduced number of acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs); flattened, simplified postsynaptic folds; and a widened synaptic space. See Video 448-1 also. (From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders,  
2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016, Figures 25-3 [p 588], 25-4 [p 589], and 25-5 [p 590]; with permission.)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3509

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3510

ACh
(acetylcholine)

Agrin

Vesicle

Vesicle
fusion

SNARE proteins

Syntaxin-1

SNAP 25
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin

Dystroglycan

β

δ

ACh
receptor

AChE

α

γ

α

Rapsyn

Dok-7

MuSK

Lrp4

Myofibril

Na+ channels

ACh

Vesicle

Vesicle
fusion

Agrin

SNARE proteins

Syntaxin-1
SNAP 25
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin

Dystroglycan

AChE

AChR autoantibody

Complement

Na+ channel

α

α α

α

Lysis of
ACh receptors

Myofibril

B

FIGURE 448-1  (Continued) 

C

patient, the decreased efficiency of neuromuscular transmission com-
bined with the normal rundown results in the activation of fewer and 
fewer muscle fibers by successive nerve impulses and hence increasing 
weakness, or myasthenic fatigue. This mechanism also accounts for the 
decremental response to repetitive nerve stimulation seen on electro-
diagnostic testing.

MG  is  an  autoimmune  disorder  most  commonly  caused  by  anti-
AChR  antibodies.  The  anti-AChR  antibodies  reduce  the  number  of 
available AChRs at NMJs by three distinct mechanisms: (1) accelerated 
turnover of AChRs by a mechanism involving cross-linking and rapid 
endocytosis  of  the  receptors;  (2)  damage  to  the  postsynaptic  muscle 
membrane  by  the  antibody  in  collaboration  with  complement;  and 
(3) blockade of the active site of the AChR (i.e., the site that normally 
binds Ach). An immune response to muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), 
a protein involved in AChR clustering at the NMJ, can also result in 
MG,  with  reduction  of  AChRs  demonstrated  experimentally.  Anti-
MuSK antibody occurs in ~10% of patients (~40% of AChR antibody–
negative patients), whereas 1–3% have antibodies to another protein at 
the NMJ—low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 (LRP4)—
that  is  also  important  for  clustering  of  AChRs.  The  pathogenic  anti-
bodies  are  IgG  and  are  T-cell  dependent.  Thus,  immunotherapeutic 
strategies  directed  against  either  the  antibody-producing  B  cells  or 
helper T cells are effective in this antibody-mediated disease.

How the autoimmune response is initiated and maintained in MG 
is not completely understood, but the thymus appears to play a role 
in  this  process.  The  thymus  is  abnormal  in  ~75%  of  patients  with 
AChR antibody–positive MG; in ~65%, the thymus is “hyperplastic,” 
with the presence of active germinal centers detected histologically, 
although  the  hyperplastic  thymus  is  not  necessarily  enlarged.  An 
additional 10% of patients have thymic tumors (thymomas). Muscle-
like cells within the thymus (myoid cells), which express AChRs on 

their  surface,  may  serve  as  a  source  of  autoantigen  and  trigger  the 
autoimmune reaction within the thymus gland.

 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
MG has a prevalence as high as 200 in 100,000. It affects individuals in 
all age groups, but peak incidences occur in women in their twenties and 
thirties and in men in their fifties and sixties. Overall, women are affected 
more frequently than men, in a ratio of ~3:2. The cardinal features are 
weakness  and  fatigability  of  muscles.  The  weakness  increases  during 
repeated use (fatigue) or late in the day and may improve following rest or 
sleep. The course of MG is often variable. Exacerbations and remissions 
may occur, particularly during the first few years after the onset of the 
disease. Unrelated infections or systemic disorders can lead to increased 
myasthenic weakness and may precipitate “crisis” (see below).

The distribution of muscle weakness often has a characteristic pat-
tern. The cranial muscles, particularly the lids and extraocular muscles 
(EOMs),  are  typically  involved  early  in  the  course  of  MG;  diplopia 
and ptosis are common initial complaints. Facial weakness produces a 
“snarling” expression when the patient attempts to smile. Weakness in 
chewing is most noticeable after prolonged effort, as in chewing meat. 
Speech may have a nasal timbre caused by weakness of the palate or 
a  dysarthric  “mushy”  quality  due  to  tongue  weakness.  Difficulty  in 
swallowing  may  occur  as  a  result  of  weakness  of  the  palate,  tongue, 
or pharynx, giving rise to nasal regurgitation or aspiration of liquids 
or  food.  Bulbar  weakness  and  more  frequent  episodes  of  respiratory 
depression  can  be  especially  prominent  in  MuSK  antibody–positive 
MG. In ~85% of patients, the weakness becomes generalized, affecting 
the limb muscles as well. If weakness remains restricted to the EOMs 
for  3  years,  it  is  likely  that  it  will  not  become  generalized,  and  these 
patients are said to have ocular MG. The limb weakness in MG is often 
proximal and may be asymmetric. Despite the muscle weakness, deep 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3510

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 448-1  Diagnosis of Myasthenia Gravis (MG)
History
  Diplopia, ptosis, dysarthria, dysphagia, dyspnea

 Weakness in characteristic distribution: proximal limbs, neck extensors, 
generalized

  Fluctuation and fatigue: worse with repeated activity, improved by rest
  Effects of previous treatments
Physical examination

 Evaluation for ptosis at rest and following 1 min of exercise, extraocular 
muscles and subjective diplopia, orbicularis oculi and oris strength, jaw 
opening and closure

  Assessment of muscle strength in neck and extremities
  Weakness following repeated shoulder abduction
  Vital capacity measurement
  Absence of other neurologic signs
Laboratory testing

 Anti-AChR radioimmunoassay: ~85% positive in generalized MG; 50% in ocular 
MG; definite diagnosis if positive; negative result does not exclude MG; ~40% 
of AChR antibody–negative patients with generalized MG have anti-MuSK 
antibodies and ~2% have LRP-4 antibodies

  Repetitive nerve stimulation: decrement of >10% at 3 Hz: highly probable

 Single-fiber electromyography: blocking and jitter, with normal fiber density; 
confirmatory, but not specific
 Edrophonium chloride (Enlon®) 2 mg + 8 mg IV; highly probable diagnosis if 
unequivocally positive

Ice-pack test looking for improvement in ptosis is very sensitive
For ocular or cranial MG: exclude intracranial lesions by CT or MRI

Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; CT, computed tomography; LRP4, 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MuSK, 
muscle-specific tyrosine kinase.

tendon reflexes are preserved. If ventilatory weakness becomes requires 
respiratory assistance, the patient is said to be in crisis.
 ■ DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION (TABLE 448-1)
The  diagnosis  is  suspected  on  the  basis  of  weakness  and  fatigability 
in the typical distribution described above, without loss of reflexes or 
impairment of sensation or other neurologic function. The suspected 
diagnosis should always be confirmed definitively before treatment is 
undertaken; this is essential because (1) other treatable conditions may 
closely resemble MG and (2) the treatment of MG may involve surgery 
and the prolonged use of drugs with potentially adverse side effects.

Ice-Pack  Test 
If  a  patient  has  ptosis,  application  of  a  pack  of  ice 
over a ptotic eye often results in improvement if the ptosis is due to an 
NMJ defect. This is hypothesized to be due to less depletion of quanta 
of AChR in the cold and reduced activity of AChE at the NMJ. It is a 
quick and easy test to do in the clinic or at the bedside of a hospitalized 
patient.

Autoantibodies Associated with MG  As previously mentioned, 
anti-AChR antibodies are detectable in the serum of ~85% of all myas-
thenic patients but in only ~50% of patients with weakness confined to 
the ocular muscles. The presence of anti-AChR antibodies is virtually 
diagnostic  of  MG,  but  a  negative  test  does  not  exclude  the  disease. 
The measured level of anti-AChR antibody does not correspond well 
with the severity of MG in different patients. Antibodies to MuSK are 
present in ~40% of AChR antibody–negative patients with generalized 
MG.  MuSK  antibodies  are  rarely  present  in  AChR  antibody–positive 
patients  or  in  patients  with  MG  limited  to  ocular  muscles.  These 
antibodies  may  interfere  with  clustering  of  AChRs  at  NMJs.  A  small 
proportion  of  MG  patients  without  antibodies  to  AChR  or  MuSK 
have  antibodies  to  LRP4.  Interestingly,  antibodies  against  agrin  also 
have been found in rare patients with MG. Agrin is a protein derived 
from motor nerves that normally binds to LRP4 and is important for 
normal clustering of AChRs at NMJ. Additionally, anti-striated muscle 
antibodies directed against titin and other skeletal muscle components 
are found in ~30% of myasthenics without thymoma, 24% of thymoma 

patients  without  myasthenia,  and  70–80%  of  patients  with  both 
myasthenia  and  thymoma.  Furthermore,  antibodies  directed  against  
Netrin-1  receptors  and  Caspr2  (contactin-associated  protein-like  2) 
often coexist and are associated in patients with thymoma who have 
MG and neuromyotonia or Morvan’s syndrome.

3511

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
8

M
y
a
s
t
h
e
n
i
a
G
r
a
v
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
N
e
u
r
o
m
u
s
c
u
l
a
r

J
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

Electrodiagnostic Testing  Repetitive nerve stimulation may pro-
vide helpful diagnostic evidence of MG. Anti-AChE medication should 
be  stopped  6–12  h  before  testing.  It  is  best  to  test  weak  muscles  or 
proximal muscle groups. Electrical stimulation is delivered at a rate of 
two or three per second to the appropriate nerves, and action potentials 
are recorded from the muscles. In normal individuals, the amplitude of 
the evoked muscle action potentials does not change by >10% at these 
rates of stimulation. However, in myasthenic patients, there is a rapid 
reduction of >10% in the amplitude of the evoked responses.

Anticholinesterase  Test  Drugs  that  inhibit  the  enzyme  AChE 
allow  ACh  to  interact  repeatedly  with  the  limited  number  of  AChRs 
in  MG,  producing  improvement  in  muscle  strength.  Edrophonium 
is  used  most  commonly  for  diagnostic  testing  because  of  the  rapid 
onset (30 s) and short duration (~5 min) of its effect. An objective end 
point must be selected to evaluate the effect of edrophonium, such as 
weakness of EOMs, impairment of speech, or the length of time that 
the  patient  can  maintain  the  arms  in  forward.  An  initial  IV  dose  of  
2  mg  of  edrophonium  is  given.  If  definite  improvement  occurs,  the 
test  is  considered  positive  and  is  terminated.  If  there  is  no  change, 
the  patient  is  given  an  additional  8  mg  IV.  The  dose  is  administered 
in  two  parts  because  some  patients  react  to  edrophonium  with  side 
effects  such  as  nausea,  diarrhea,  salivation,  fasciculations,  and  rarely 
with  severe  symptoms  of  syncope  or  bradycardia.  Atropine  (0.6  mg) 
should  be  drawn  up  in  a  syringe  and  ready  for  IV  administration  if 
these  symptoms  become  troublesome.  The  edrophonium  test  is  now 
reserved for patients with clinical findings that are suggestive of MG 
but who have negative antibody, electrodiagnostic testing, or ice-pack 
test. False-positive tests occur in occasional patients with other neuro-
logic disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 437), and 
in placebo-reactors. False-negative or equivocal tests may also occur.

Pulmonary Function Tests (Chap. 284)  Measurements of ven-
tilatory function are valuable because of the frequency and seriousness 
of respiratory impairment in myasthenic patients.

Differential Diagnosis  Other  conditions  that  cause  weakness  of 
the  cranial  and/or  somatic  musculature  include  the  nonautoimmune 
congenital  myasthenia,  drug-induced  myasthenia,  Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), neurasthenia, hyperthyroidism (Graves’ 
disease), botulism, intracranial mass lesions, oculopharyngeal dystro-
phy,  and  mitochondrial  myopathy  (Kearns-Sayre  syndrome,  progres-
sive  external  ophthalmoplegia).  Treatment  with  immune  checkpoint 
inhibitors for cancer may also result in autoimmune MG. Myositis and 
myocarditis are also often found in combination with MG as a compli-
cation of checkpoint inhibitors (Chap. 365). Symptoms typically begin 
after the first or second cycle of treatment, with ptosis, diplopia, and 
bulbar and occasionally extremity weakness. Patients usually improve 
when  the  immune  checkpoint  inhibitor  is  discontinued  and  a  short 
course  of  glucocorticoids  or  intravenous  immunoglobulin  (IVIg)  is 
administered. Treatment with penicillamine (used for scleroderma or 
rheumatoid  arthritis)  has  also  been  associated  with  MG.  Aminogly-
coside antibiotics or procainamide can cause exacerbation of weakness 
in  myasthenic  patients;  very  large  doses  can  cause  neuromuscular 
weakness in normal individuals.

The congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) comprise a rare hetero-
geneous group of disorders of the NMJ that are not autoimmune but 
rather are due to genetic mutations in which virtually any component 
of the NMJ may be affected. Alterations in function of the presynaptic 
nerve  terminal,  in  the  various  subunits  of  the  AChR,  AChE,  or  the 
other  molecules  involved  in  end-plate  development  or  maintenance, 
have  been  identified  in  the  different  forms  of  CMS.  These  disorders 
share  many  of  the  clinical  features  of  autoimmune  MG,  including 
weakness  and  fatigability  of  proximal  or  distal  extremity  muscles 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3511

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3512

TABLE 448-2  Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes (CMS)

CMS SUBTYPE

GENE

CLINICAL FEATURES

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC 
FEATURES

RESPONSE TO 
ACHE INHIBITORS TREATMENT

Presynaptic Disorders

CMS with paucity of ACh 
release

CHAT; CHT

Synaptic Disorders

AChE deficiency

COLQ

AR; early onset, respiratory failure at 
birth, episodic apnea, improvement 
with age

Decremental response 
to RNS

Improve

AChE inhibitors; 3,4-DAP

AR; early onset; variable severity; 
axial weakness with scoliosis; apnea; 
+/– EOM involvement, slow or absent 
pupillary responses

After discharges on 
nerve stimulation and 
decrement on RNS

Worsen

Albuterol; ephedrine; 3,4-
DAP; avoid AChE inhibitors

Improve

Worsen

Improve

Variable

Variable

Variable

Variable

Postsynaptic Disorders Involving AChR Deficiency or Kinetics

Primary AChR deficiency

AChR kinetic disorder: 
slow channel syndrome

AChR subunit 
genes
AChR subunit 
genes

AChR kinetic disorder: 
fast channel syndrome

AChR subunit 
genes

AR; early onset; variable severity; 
fatigue; typical MG features
AD; onset childhood to early adult; weak 
forearm extensors and neck; respiratory 
weakness; variable severity
AR; early onset; mild to severe; ptosis, 
EOM involvement; weakness and 
fatigue

Decremental response 
to RNS
After discharges on 
nerve stimulation and 
decrement on RNS
Decremental response 
to RNS

Postsynaptic Disorders Involving Abnormal Clustering/Function of AChR

DOK 7

Rapsyn

Agrin

MuSK

LRP4

Other Postsynaptic Disorders

Limb-girdle CMS with 
tubular aggregates

Congenital muscular 
dystrophy with 
myasthenia

GFPT1; DPAGT1; 
ALG2;
ALG14;
DPAGT1
Plectin

AR; limb girdle weakness with ptosis 
but no EOM involvement
AR; early onset with hypotonia, 
respiratory failure, and arthrogryposis 
at birth to early adult onset resembling 
MG
AR; limb girdle or distal weakness, 
apnea
AR; congenital or childhood onset of 
ptosis, EOM and progressive limb girdle 
weakness

Decremental response 
to RNS
Decremental response 
to RNS

Decremental response 
to RNS
Decremental response 
to RNS

AR; congenital onset with hypotonia; 
ventilatory failure, mild ptosis, and EOM 
weakness

Decremental response 
to RNS

Worsen

AR; limb-girdle weakness usually 
without ptosis or EOM weakness; onset 
in infancy or early adult

Decremental response 
to RNS

Variable

AChE inhibitors; 3,4-DAP

Fluoxetine and quinidine; 
avoid AChE inhibitors

AChE inhibitors; caution with 
3,4-DAP

Albuterol; ephedrine; may 
worsen with AChE inhibitors
Albuterol

Albuterol; may worsen with 
AChE inhibitors
Variable response to AChE 
inhibitors and 3,4-DAP
Positive response to 
albuterol
Worsen with AChE inhibitors

Albuterol; ephedrine; 
variable response to AChE 
inhibitors and 3,4-DAP; 
albuterol

AR; infantile or childhood onset of 
generalized weakness including 
ptosis and EOM; epidermolysis bullosa 
simplex; elevated CK

Decremental response 
to RNS

Variable

No response to AChE and 
3,4-DAP

Abbreviations: ACh, acetylcholine; AChE, acetylcholinesterase; AChR, acetylcholine receptor; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CHAT, choline acetyl 
transferase; CHT, sodium-dependent high-affinity choline transport 1; CK, creatine kinase; CMA, congenital myasthenic syndrome; COLQ, collaganic tail of endplate 
acetylcholinesterase; 3,4-DAP, 3,4-diaminopyridine; Dok7, downstream of tyrosine kinase 7; DPAGT1, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-dolichyl-phosphate N-acetylglucosamine 
phosphotransferase; EOM, extraocular muscle; GFPT1, glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase 1; LRP4, lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4; MG, myasthenia 
gravis; MuSK, muscle specific kinase; RNS, repetitive nerve stimulation.
Source: From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2016, Table 26-2, p. 627; with permission.

and often involving EOMs and the eyelids similar to the distribution 
in  autoimmune  MG.  CMS  should  be  suspected  when  symptoms  of 
myasthenia have begun in infancy or childhood, but they can present 
in early adulthood. As in acquired autoimmune MG, repetitive nerve 
stimulation  is  associated  with  a  decremental  response.  Some  forms 
(e.g., AChE deficiency, prolonged open channel syndrome) have a fea-
ture of after-discharges that are not seen in MG. An additional clue is 
the absence of AChR and MuSK antibodies, although these are absent 
in  ~10%  of  generalized  MG  patients  (so-called  double  seronegative 
MG).

The prevalence of CMS is estimated at ~3.8 per 100,000. The most 
common genetic defects occur in the ε subunit of the AChR, account-
ing for ~50% of CMS cases, with mutations in the genes encoding for 
rapsin, COLQ, DOK7, agrin, and GFPT together accounting for ~40%. 
In most of the recessively inherited forms of CMS, the mutations are 

heteroallelic; that is, different mutations affecting each of the two alleles 
are present. Features of the most common forms of CMS are summa-
rized in Table 448-2. Molecular analysis is required for precise elucida-
tion of the defect; this may lead to helpful treatment as well as genetic 
counseling. Some forms of CMS improve with AChE inhibitors, while 
others (e.g., slow channel syndrome, AChE deficiency, DOK7-related 
CMS) actually worsen. Fluoxetine and quinidine can be useful for slow 
channel syndrome, and albuterol for mutations affecting AChE, DOK7, 
rapsyn,  and  agrin.  Additionally,  ephedrine  and  3,4-diaminopyridine 
(3,4-DAP) may be of benefit in some forms of CMS.

LEMS is a presynaptic disorder of the NMJ that can cause weakness 
similar  to  that  of  MG.  The  proximal  muscles  of  the  lower  limbs  are 
most commonly affected, but other muscles may be involved as well. 
Cranial  nerve  findings,  including  ptosis  of  the  eyelids  and  diplopia, 
occur in up to 70% of patients and resemble features of MG. However, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3512

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders the  two  conditions  are  usually  readily  distinguished  because  patients 
with  LEMS  have  depressed  or  absent  reflexes  and  experience  auto-
nomic changes such as dry mouth and impotence. Nerve stimulation 
produces an initial low-amplitude compound muscle action potential 
and,  at  low  rates  of  repetitive  stimulation  (2–3  Hz),  a  decremental 
responses  as  seen  in  MG;  however,  at  high  rates  (20–50  Hz)  or  fol-
lowing  brief  exercise,  incremental  responses  occur.  LEMS  is  caused 
by  autoantibodies  directed  against  P/Q-type  calcium  channels  at  the 
motor  nerve  terminals  detected  in  ~85%  of  LEMS  patients.  These 
autoantibodies  impair  the  release  of  ACh  from  nerve  terminals.  In 
young  adults,  particularly  women,  LEMS  is  not  associated  with  an 
underlying cancer. However, in older adults, most LEMS is associated 
with malignancy, most commonly small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). The 
tumor  cells  may  express  calcium  channels  that  stimulate  the  auto-
immune  response.  Treatment  of  LEMS  involves  plasmapheresis  and 
immunotherapy, as for MG. 3,4-DAP and pyridostigmine can also help 
with symptoms. 3,4-DAP acts by blocking potassium channels, which 
results in prolonged depolarization of the motor nerve terminals and 
thus  enhances  ACh  release.  Pyridostigmine  prolongs  the  action  of 
ACh, allowing repeated interactions with AChRs.

Botulism  (Chap.  153)  is  due  to  potent  bacterial  toxins  produced 
by  any  of  eight  different  strains  of  Clostridium  botulinum.  The  tox-
ins  enzymatically  cleave  specific  proteins  essential  for  the  release  of 
ACh  from  the  motor  nerve  terminal,  thereby  interfering  with  neu-
romuscular  transmission.  Most  commonly,  botulism  is  caused  by 
ingestion  of  improperly  prepared  food  containing  toxin.  Rarely,  the 
nearly  ubiquitous  spores  of  C.  botulinum  may  germinate  in  wounds. 
In infants, the spores may germinate in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
and  release  toxin,  causing  muscle  weakness.  Patients  present  with 
myasthenia-like bulbar weakness (e.g., diplopia, dysarthria, dysphagia) 
and  lack  sensory  symptoms  and  signs.  Weakness  may  generalize  to 
the  limbs  and  may  result  in  respiratory  failure.  Reflexes  are  present 
early, but they may be diminished as the disease progresses. Mentation 
is  normal.  Autonomic  findings  include  paralytic  ileus,  constipation, 
urinary  retention,  dilated  or  poorly  reactive  pupils,  and  dry  mouth. 
The demonstration of toxin in serum by bioassay is definitive, but the 
results usually take a relatively long time to be completed and may be 
negative. Nerve stimulation studies reveal reduced compound muscle 
action  potential  (CMAP)  amplitudes  that  increase  following  high- 
frequency  repetitive  stimulation.  Treatment  includes  ventilatory  sup-
port and aggressive inpatient supportive care (e.g., nutrition, deep-vein 
thrombosis prophylaxis) as needed. Antitoxin should be given as early 
as possible to be effective and can be obtained through the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. A preventive vaccine is available for 
laboratory workers or other highly exposed individuals.

Neurasthenia  is  the  historic  term  for  a  myasthenia-like  fatigue 
syndrome without an organic basis. These patients may present with 
subjective  symptoms  of  weakness  and  fatigue,  but  muscle  testing 
usually reveals the “give-away weakness” characteristic of nonorganic 
disorders; the complaint of fatigue in these patients means tiredness or 
apathy rather than decreasing muscle power on repeated effort. Hyper-
thyroidism is readily diagnosed or excluded by tests of thyroid function, 
which should be carried out routinely in patients with suspected MG. 
Abnormalities  of  thyroid  function  (hyper-  or  hypothyroidism)  may 
increase  myasthenic  weakness.  Diplopia  resembling  that  in  MG  may 
occasionally  be  due  to  an  intracranial  mass  lesion  that  compresses 
nerves to the EOMs (e.g., sphenoid ridge meningioma), but magnetic 
resonance  imaging  (MRI)  of  the  head  and  orbits  usually  reveals  the 
lesion.

Progressive external ophthalmoplegia is a rare condition resulting in 
weakness  of  the  EOMs,  which  may  be  accompanied  by  weakness  of 
the  proximal  muscles  of  the  limbs  and  other  systemic  features.  Most 
patients with this condition have mitochondrial disorders that can be 
detected by genetic testing or with muscle biopsy (Chap. 449).

Search for Associated Conditions (Table 448-3)  Myasthenic 
patients  have  an  increased  incidence  of  several  associated  disorders. 
Thymic  abnormalities  occur  in  ~75%  of  AChR  antibody–positive 
patients, as noted above. Neoplastic change (thymoma) may produce 

3513

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
8

M
y
a
s
t
h
e
n
i
a
G
r
a
v
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
N
e
u
r
o
m
u
s
c
u
l
a
r

J
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

TABLE 448-3  Disorders Associated with Myasthenia Gravis and 
Recommended Laboratory Tests
Associated disorders
  Disorders of the thymus: thymoma, hyperplasia

 Other autoimmune neurologic disorders: chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy, neuromyelitis optica
 Other autoimmune disorders: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, 
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, skin disorders, family 
history of autoimmune disorder
 Disorders or circumstances that may exacerbate myasthenia gravis: 
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, occult infection, medical treatment for 
other conditions (see Table 448-4)
 Disorders that may interfere with therapy: tuberculosis, diabetes, peptic ulcer, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, renal disease, hypertension, asthma, osteoporosis, 
obesity

Recommended laboratory tests or procedures
  CT or MRI of chest
  Tests for antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor
  Thyroid function tests
  Testing for tuberculosis
  Fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c
  Pulmonary function tests
  Bone densitometry

Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

enlargement  of  the  thymus,  which  is  detected  by  chest  computed 
tomography  (CT).  A  thymic  shadow  on  CT  scan  may  normally  be 
present through young adulthood, but enlargement of the thymus in 
a  patient  age  >40  years  is  highly  suspicious  of  thymoma.  Hyperthy-
roidism occurs in 3–8% of patients and may aggravate the myasthenic 
weakness.  Thyroid  function  tests  should  be  obtained  in  all  patients 
with  suspected  MG.  Other  autoimmune  disorders,  most  commonly 
systemic  lupus  erythematosus  and  rheumatoid  arthritis,  can  coexist 
with  MG;  associations  also  occur  with  neuromyelitis  optica,  neuro-
myotonia,  Morvan’s  syndrome  (encephalitis,  insomnia,  confusion, 
hallucinations, autonomic dysfunction, and neuromyotonia), rippling 
muscle  disease,  granulomatous  myositis/myocarditis,  and  chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.

An infection of any kind can exacerbate typical MG and should be 
sought carefully in patients with relapses. Because of the side effects of 
glucocorticoids and other immunotherapies used in the treatment of 
MG, a thorough medical investigation should be undertaken, searching 
specifically for evidence of chronic or latent infection (such as tubercu-
losis or hepatitis), hypertension, diabetes, renal disease, and glaucoma.

TREATMENT
Myasthenia Gravis

The  prognosis  has  improved  strikingly  as  a  result  of  advances  in 
treatment.  Nearly  all  myasthenic  patients  can  be  returned  to  full 
productive lives with proper therapy. The most useful treatments 
for  MG  include  anticholinesterase  medications,  glucocorticoids 
and  other  immunosuppressive  agents,  thymectomy,  plasmapher-
esis,  IVIg,  rituximab,  and  complement  inhibitors  (eculizumab) 
(Fig. 448-2).
ANTICHOLINESTERASE MEDICATIONS
Anticholinesterase  medication  produces  at  least  partial  improve-
ment in most myasthenic patients, although improvement is com-
plete in only a few. Patients with anti-MuSK MG generally obtain 
less  benefit  from  anticholinesterase  agents  than  those  with  AChR 
antibodies  and  may  actually  worsen.  Pyridostigmine  is  the  most 
widely  used  anticholinesterase  drug  and  is  initiated  at  a  dosage 
of  30–60  mg  three  to  four  times  daily.  The  beneficial  action  of 
oral pyridostigmine begins within 15–30 min and lasts for 3–4 h, 
but  individual  responses  vary.  The  frequency  and  amount  of  the 
dose  should  be  tailored  to  the  patient’s  individual  requirements 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3513

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3514

Establish diagnosis unequivocally (see Table 448-1)

Search for associated conditions (see Table 448-3)

Ocular only

Generalized

Crisis

MRI of brain
  (if positive,
   reassess)

Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)

Anticholinesterase
  (pyridostigmine)

Evaluate for thymectomy
  (indications: thymoma or
  generalized MG with
  anti-AChR antibodies);
  evaluate surgical risk, FVC

Intensive care
  (tx respiratory
   infection; fluids)

Good risk
  (good FVC)

Poor risk
  (low FVC)

Plasmapheresis
  or intravenous Ig

If unsatisfactory

Thymectomy

Improved

If not
  improved

then

Evaluate clinical status; if indicated,
  go to immunosuppression

Immunosuppression

See text for short-term, intermediate,
and long-term treatments

FIGURE  448-2  Algorithm  for  the  management  of  myasthenia  gravis.  FVC,  forced 
vital capacity; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

throughout the day. For example, patients with weakness in chewing 
and swallowing may benefit by taking the medication before meals 
so that peak strength coincides with mealtimes. Long-acting pyri-
dostigmine  may  occasionally  be  useful  to  get  the  patient  through 
the night but should not be used for daytime medication because of 
variable absorption. The maximum useful dose of pyridostigmine 
rarely  exceeds  300  mg  daily.  Overdosage  with  anticholinesterase 
medication  may  cause  increased  weakness  and  other  side  effects. 
In some patients, muscarinic side effects of the anticholinesterase 
medication  (diarrhea,  abdominal  cramps,  salivation,  nausea)  may 
limit  the  dose  tolerated.  Atropine/diphenoxylate  or  loperamide  is 
useful for the treatment of GI symptoms. 

THYMECTOMY
Two separate issues should be distinguished: (1) surgical removal 
of thymoma, and (2) thymectomy as a treatment for MG. Surgical 
removal  of  a  thymoma  is  necessary  because  of  the  possibility  of 
local  tumor  spread,  although  most  thymomas  are  histologically 
benign. A large international trial of extended transternal thymec-
tomy  in  nonthymomatous,  AChR  antibody–positive,  generalized 
MG  demonstrated  that  participants  who  underwent  thymectomy 
had  improved  strength  and  function,  required  less  prednisone 
and fewer additions of second-line agents (e.g., azathioprine), and 
fewer  hospitalizations  for  exacerbations  lasting  at  least  5  years. 
Whether  or  not  less  invasive  thymectomy  may  be  beneficial  is 
unknown.  Also,  patients  with  ocular  myasthenia,  MuSK-positive, 
and seronegative MG were excluded from the study; retrospective 

and anecdotal evidence suggests that these patients may not benefit 
from thymectomy. Thymectomy should never be carried out as an 
emergency procedure, but only when the patient is adequately pre-
pared. If necessary, treatment with IVIg or plasmapheresis may be 
used before surgery to maximize strength in weak patients. 

IMMUNOTHERAPY
The  choice  of  immunotherapy  should  be  guided  by  the  relative 
benefits  and  risks  for  the  individual  patient  and  the  urgency  of 
treatment. It is helpful to develop a treatment plan based on short-
term, intermediate-term, and long-term objectives. For example, if 
immediate improvement is essential either because of the severity 
of weakness or because of the patient’s need to return to activity as 
soon  as  possible,  IVIg  should  be  administered  or  plasmapheresis 
should be undertaken. For the intermediate term, glucocorticoids 
and cyclosporine or tacrolimus generally produce clinical improve-
ment  within  a  period  of  1–3  months.  The  beneficial  effects  of 
azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil usually begin after many 
months  (as  long  as  a  year),  but  these  drugs  have  advantages  for 
the long-term treatment of patients with MG. There is a growing 
body of evidence that rituximab is effective in patients with MuSK 
antibody. Complement inhibition with intravenous eculizumab can 
improve  MG  within  1–3  months  but  is  expensive  and  requires  a 
loading  dose  of  4  weekly  infusions  followed  by  every-other-week 
infusions for maintenance. 

Glucocorticoid  Therapy  Glucocorticoids,  when  used  properly, 
produce improvement in myasthenic weakness in the great majority 
of  patients.  To  minimize  adverse  side  effects,  prednisone  should 
be given in a single dose rather than in divided doses throughout 
the day. In patients with only mild or moderate weakness, the ini-
tial dose should be relatively low (15–25 mg/d) to avoid the early 
weakening that occurs in 10–15% of patients treated initially with 
a  high-dose  regimen.  The  dose  is  increased  stepwise,  as  tolerated 
by  the  patient  (usually  by  5  mg/d  at  2-  to  3-day  intervals),  until 
there is marked clinical improvement or a dose of 50–60 mg/d is 
reached. In patients with more severe weakness and those already 
in  the  hospital,  starting  at  a  high  dose  is  reasonable.  Patients  are 
maintained  on  the  dose  that  controls  their  symptoms  for  about 
a  month,  and  then  the  dosage  is  slowly  tapered  (no  faster  than   
10 mg a month until on 20 mg daily and then by 2.5–5 mg a month) 
to  determine  the  minimum  effective  dose,  and  close  monitoring 
is  required.  Some  patients  can  be  managed  without  the  addition 
of  other  immunotherapies.  Patients  on  long-term  glucocorticoid 
therapy  must  be  followed  carefully  to  prevent  or  treat  adverse 
side  effects.  The  most  common  errors  in  glucocorticoid  treat-
ment of myasthenic patients include (1) insufficient persistence— 
improvement may be delayed and gradual; (2) tapering the dosage 
too  early,  too  rapidly,  or  excessively;  and  (3)  lack  of  attention  to 
prevention and treatment of side effects.

The  management  of  patients  treated  with  glucocorticoids  is 

discussed in Chap. 386. 

Other  Immunotherapies  Mycophenolate  mofetil,  azathioprine, 
cyclosporine,  tacrolimus,  rituximab,  eculizumab,  and  occasionally 
cyclophosphamide are effective in many patients, either alone or in 
various combinations.

Mycophenolate  mofetil  is  widely  used  because  of  its  presumed 
effectiveness and relative lack of side effects. A dose of 1–1.5 g bid 
is  recommended.  Its  mechanism  of  action  involves  inhibition  of 
purine synthesis by the de novo pathway. Since lymphocytes have 
only the de novo pathway, but lack the alternative salvage pathway 
that is present in all other cells, mycophenolate inhibits proliferation 
of lymphocytes but not proliferation of other cells. It does not kill 
or  eliminate  preexisting  autoreactive  lymphocytes,  and  therefore, 
clinical improvement may be delayed for many months to a year, 
until  the  preexisting  autoreactive  lymphocytes  die  spontaneously. 
The advantage of mycophenolate lies in its relative lack of adverse 
side effects, with only occasional production of GI symptoms, rare 
development of leukopenia, and very small risks of malignancy or 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3514

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders progressive  multifocal  leukoencephalopathy  inherent  in  nearly  all 
immunosuppressive  treatments.  Although  two  published  studies 
did not show positive outcomes, most experts attribute the negative 
results  to  flaws  in  the  trial  designs,  and  mycophenolate  is  widely 
used for long-term treatment of myasthenic patients.

Azathioprine  has  long  been  used  for  MG,  and  a  randomized, 
clinical  trial  demonstrated  that  it  was  effective  in  reducing  the 
dosage of prednisone necessary to control symptoms. However, the 
beneficial effect can take a year or more to become evident. Approx-
imately  10–15%  of  patients  are  unable  to  tolerate  azathioprine 
because  of  idiosyncratic  reactions  consisting  of  flulike  symptoms 
of  fever  and  malaise,  bone  marrow  suppression,  or  abnormalities 
of  liver  function.  An  initial  dose  of  50  mg/d  is  given  for  about 
a  week  to  test  for  these  side  effects.  If  this  dose  is  tolerated,  it  is 
increased gradually to ~2–3 mg/kg of total body weight or until the 
white blood count falls to 3000–4000/μL. Allopurinol should never  
be  used  in  combination  with  azathioprine  because  the  two  drugs 
share a common degradation pathway; the result may be severe bone 
marrow suppression due to increased effects of the azathioprine.

The calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus seem to 
be effective in MG and appear to work more rapidly than azathio-
prine and mycophenolate. However, they are associated with more 
frequent severe side effects including hypertension and nephrotox-
icity. The usual dose of cyclosporine is 4–5 mg/kg per d, and the 
average  dose  of  tacrolimus  is  0.07–0.1  mg/kg  per  d,  given  in  two 
equally  divided  doses.  “Trough”  blood  levels  are  measured  12  h 
after the evening dose. The therapeutic range for the trough level 
of cyclosporine is 150–200 ng/L, and for tacrolimus, it is 5–15 ng/L.
Rituximab  (Rituxan)  is  a  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  to 
the  CD20  molecule  on  B  lymphocytes.  It  is  widely  used  for  the 
treatment  of  B-cell  lymphomas  and  has  also  proven  successful  in 
the  treatment  of  several  autoimmune  diseases  including  rheuma-
toid  arthritis,  pemphigus,  and  some  IgM-related  neuropathies. 
There is a growing literature on the benefit of rituximab in MuSK  
antibody–positive MG, which was previously more difficult to treat 
than anti-AChR–positive MG. A large, randomized trial of AChR  
antibody–positive  generalized  MG  failed  to  demonstrate  efficacy. 
The  usual  dose  is  1  g  IV  on  two  occasions  2  weeks  apart.  Peri-
odically,  a  repeat  course  needs  to  be  administered;  some  MuSK 
patients go 2–3 years between infusions.

Eculizumab,  a  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  to  the  terminal 
complement  component  5  (C5),  demonstrated  efficacy  in  a  large 
phase 3 clinical trial. The drug is administered intravenously every 
2 weeks. Complement inhibition increases the risk of meningococ-
cal infection, so ideally, a first series of vaccinations is given prior to 
initiation, and many recommend antibiotic prophylaxis (penicillin) 
while  patients  receive  therapy.  A  benefit  of  eculizumab  is  that  it 
works  within  1–3  months  and  patients  can  often  wean  down  on 
other  immunotherapies.  There  are  promising  early  results  from 
other  complement  inhibitors,  including  subcutaneously  admin-
istered  drugs.  For  the  rare  refractory  MG  patient,  a  course  of 
high-dose  cyclophosphamide  may  induce  long-lasting  benefit.  At 
high doses, cyclophosphamide eliminates mature lymphocytes but 
spares hematopoietic precursors (stem cells), because they express 
the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase, which hydrolyzes cyclophos-
phamide.  This  procedure  is  reserved  for  refractory  patients  and 
should  be  administered  only  in  a  facility  fully  familiar  with  this 
approach.  Maintenance  immunotherapy  after  treatment  is  usually 
required to sustain the beneficial effect. 

PLASMAPHERESIS AND INTRAVENOUS 
IMMUNOGLOBULIN
Plasmapheresis has been used therapeutically in MG. Plasma, which 
contains the pathogenic antibodies, is mechanically separated from 
the blood cells, which are returned to the patient. A course of five 
exchanges  (3–4  L  per  exchange)  is  generally  administered  over  a 
10- to 14-day period. Plasmapheresis produces a short-term reduc-
tion in anti-AChR antibodies, with clinical improvement in many 
patients. It is useful as a temporary expedient in seriously affected 

patients or to improve the patient’s condition prior to surgery (e.g., 
thymectomy).

The  indications  for  the  use  of  IVIg  are  the  same  as  those  for 
plasma exchange: to produce rapid improvement to help the patient 
through a difficult period of myasthenic weakness or prior to sur-
gery.  This  treatment  has  the  advantages  of  not  requiring  special 
equipment  or  large-bore  venous  access.  The  usual  dose  is  2  g/kg, 
which is typically administered over 2–5 days. Improvement occurs 
in ~70% of patients, beginning during treatment or within a week 
and continuing for weeks to months. The mechanism of action of 
IVIg is not known; the treatment has no consistent long-term effect 
on the measurable amount of circulating AChR antibody. Adverse 
reactions are generally not serious but may include headache, fluid 
overload,  and  rarely  aseptic  meningitis  or  renal  failure.  IVIg  or 
plasma  exchange  is  occasionally  used  in  combination  with  other 
immunosuppressive therapy for maintenance treatment of difficult 
MG. 
INVESTIGATIONAL TREATMENTS
Early results of fragment crystalized neonatal receptor (FcRn) blockers 
also appear promising. FcRn bind immunoglobulins, thereby rescu-
ing them from lysosomal destruction. Blocking this receptor allows 
for  degradation  of  anti-AChR,  anti-MuSK,  anti-LR4,  and  other 
antibodies,  reducing  their  levels  to  60–85%  within  1–2  months. 
Several trials of different FcRn blockers are underway. 

MANAGEMENT OF MYASTHENIC CRISIS
Myasthenic crisis is defined as an exacerbation of weakness suffi-
cient to endanger life; it usually includes ventilatory failure caused by 
diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle weakness. Treatment should 
be carried out in intensive care units staffed with teams experienced 
in the management of MG. The possibility that deterioration could 
be  due  to  excessive  anticholinesterase  medication  (“cholinergic 
crisis”) is best excluded by temporarily stopping anticholinesterase 
drugs. The most common cause of crisis is intercurrent infection. 
This  should  be  treated  immediately  because  the  mechanical  and 
immunologic  defenses  of  the  patient  can  be  assumed  to  be  com-
promised.  The  myasthenic  patient  with  fever  and  early  infection 
should  be  treated  like  other  immunocompromised  patients.  Early 
and  effective  antibiotic  therapy,  ventilatory  assistance,  and  pul-
monary physiotherapy are essentials of the treatment program. As 
discussed  above,  plasmapheresis  or  IVIg  is  frequently  helpful  in 
hastening recovery. 

DRUGS TO AVOID IN MYASTHENIC PATIENTS
Many  drugs  can  potentially  exacerbate  weakness  in  patients  with 
MG  (Table  448-4).  As  a  rule,  the  listed  drugs  should  be  avoided 
whenever possible.

3515

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
8

M
y
a
s
t
h
e
n
i
a
G
r
a
v
i
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s
o
f

t
h
e
N
e
u
r
o
m
u
s
c
u
l
a
r

J
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

 ■ PATIENT ASSESSMENT
To evaluate the effectiveness of treatment as well as drug-induced side 
effects, it is important to assess the patient’s clinical status systemati-
cally at baseline and on repeated interval examinations. Following the 
patient with spirometry with determination of forced vital capacity and 
mean inspiratory and expiratory pressures is important.

PROGNOSIS
Approximately 20% of patients with MG achieve a sustained remission 
and  can  be  tapered  off  all  immunotherapies.  There  does  not  appear 
to  be  a  correlation  between  disease  severity  and  likelihood  of  remis-
sion.  Thymectomy  may  increase  the  chance  of  achieving  remission 
in  anti-AChR  MG,  but  the  large  randomized  trial  was  too  short  in 
duration  to  examine  this  endpoint;  rather,  the  results  revealed  only 
that thymectomy was efficacious and led to less use of glucocorticoids 
and second-line agents. Mortality from MG diminished greatly during 
the twentieth century, changing from a “grave” illness with mortality of 
nearly 70% a century ago, to 2–30% by the 1950s, with contemporary 
estimates in the 1–2% range. Anti-MuSK patients generally were more 
difficult to treat than anti-AChR MG in the past. However, recent series 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3515

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3516 TABLE 448-4  Drugs with Interactions in Myasthenia Gravis (MG)

Drugs That May Exacerbate MG

Antibiotics
Aminoglycosides: e.g., streptomycin, tobramycin, kanamycin
Quinolones: e.g., ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin, gatifloxacin
Macrolides: e.g., erythromycin, azithromycin
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants for surgery
d-Tubocurarine (curare), pancuronium, vecuronium, atracurium
Beta-blocking agents
Propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol
Local anesthetics and related agents
Procaine, Xylocaine in large amounts
Procainamide (for arrhythmias)
Botulinum toxin
Botox exacerbates weakness
Quinine derivatives
Quinine, quinidine, chloroquine, mefloquine (Lariam)
Magnesium
Decreases acetylcholine release
Penicillamine
May cause MG
Check point inhibitors
May cause MG and other autoimmune neuromuscular disorders (e.g., myositis, 
inflammatory neuropathy)

Drugs with Important Interactions in MG

Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
Broad range of drug interactions, which may raise or lower levels.
Azathioprine
Avoid allopurinol—combination may result in myelosuppression.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Amato AA, Russell JA: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, 

McGraw-Hill, 2016, pp. 581–655.

Ciafaloni  E:  Myasthenia  gravis  and  congenital  myasthenic  syn-

dromes. Continuum (Mineap Minn) 25:1767, 2009.

Evoli A et al: Myasthenia gravis with antibodies to MuSK: An update. 

Ann NY Acad Sci 1412:82, 2018.

Garg N et al: Late presentations of congenital myasthenic syndromes: 

How many do we miss? Muscle Nerve 54:721, 2016.

Gilhus NE: Myasthenia gravis. N Engl J Med 375:2570, 2016.
Guidon  AC:  Lambert-Eaton  myasthenic  syndrome,  botulism,  and 
immune checkpoint inhibitor-related myasthenia gravis. Continuum 
(Minneap Minn) 25:1785, 2019.

Howard  JF  Jr  et  al:  Safety  and  efficacy  of  eculizumab  in  anti- 
acetylcholine  receptor  antibody-positive  refractory  generalised 
myasthenia gravis (REGAIN): A phase 3, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, multicentre study. Lancet Neurol 16:976, 2017.
Howard  JF  Jr  et  al:  Randomized  phase  2  study  of  FcRn  antagonist 
efgartigimod in generalized myasthenia gravis. Neurology 92:e2661, 
2019.

International  MG/COVID-19  Working  Group  et  al:  Guidance 
for the management of myasthenia gravis (MG) and Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
J Neurol Sci 412:116803, 2020.

Tandan R et al: Rituximab treatment of myasthenia gravis: A system-

atic review. Muscle Nerve 56:185, 2017.

Wolfe GI et al: Randomized trial of thymectomy in myasthenia gravis. 

N Engl J Med 375:511, 2016.

Wolfe GI et al: Long-term effect of thymectomy plus prednisone ver-
sus prednisone alone in patients with non-thymomatous myasthenia 
gravis:  2-year  extension  of  the  MGTX  randomised  trial.  Lancet 
Neurol 18:259, 2019.

VIDEO 448-1  Myasthenia gravis and other diseases of the neuromuscular junction.

suggest that rituximab is effective in this subgroup, thereby reducing 
these  risks  and  improving  the  prognosis.  Nonparaneoplastic  LEMS 
is usually responsive to immunotherapy and symptomatic treatment 
with  pyridostigmine  and  3,4-DAP.  In  older  adults,  LEMS  is  most 
often paraneoplastic, and screening for an underlying tumor is indi-
cated (Chap. 94). Recent studies suggest that survival in patients with 
LEMS has improved, for uncertain reasons and likely not due to earlier 
diagnosis and treatment of the tumor. There is wide variability in age of 
onset, severity, and prognosis of the many types of CMS.

449 Muscular Dystrophies and 
Other Muscle Diseases
Anthony A. Amato, Robert H. Brown, Jr.

GLOBAL ISSUES
The incidence of MG and its subtypes varies in different populations, 
for  example,  occurring  in  ~2–10/106  individuals  in  the  United  States 
and the Netherlands and up to 20/106 individuals in Spain. Estimates of 
prevalence in different parts of the world range widely from 2–200/106. 
The age of onset may also be influenced by geographic and/or ethnic 
differences. Juvenile-onset MG is uncommon in Western populations 
but  may  represent  more  than  half  of  cases  in  Asians.  MuSK  MG 
appears  to  be  more  common  in  the  Mediterranean  area  of  Europe 
than  in  northern  Europe  and  is  also  more  common  in  the  northern 
regions of East Asia than in the southern regions. A concern during the 
COVID-19 pandemic is whether MG patients on immunosuppressive 
therapies might be at increased risk of infection or developing a more 
severe course. Furthermore, flares of MG can be triggered by infection, 
and  contracting  COVID-19  may  lead  to  an  exacerbation,  including 
MG crisis. I have not reduced the dosage of immunosuppressive medi-
cations in MG patients who are doing well but have been more likely to 
manage worsening disease by treating with IVIg rather than increasing 
the dosage of, or adding new, immunosuppressive agents. Patients are 
strongly  advised  to  wear  masks  and  maintain  social  distancing.  An 
international  panel  has  published  guidelines  for  management  of  MG 
patients during this crisis.

Myopathies are disorders with structural changes or functional impair-
ment  of  muscle  and  can  be  differentiated  from  other  diseases  of  the 
motor  unit  (e.g.,  lower  motor  neuron  or  neuromuscular  junction 
pathologies)  by  characteristic  clinical  and  laboratory  findings.  Myas-
thenia  gravis  and  related  disorders  are  discussed  in  Chap.  448; 
inflammatory myopathies are discussed in Chap. 365.
 ■ CLINICAL FEATURES
The  most  important  aspect  of  assessing  individuals  with  neuromus-
cular  disorders  is  taking  a  thorough  history  of  the  patient’s  symp-
toms,  disease  progression,  and  past  medical  and  family  history,  as 
well  as  performing  a  detailed  neurologic  examination.  Based  on  this 
and  additional  laboratory  workup  (e.g.,  serum  creatine  kinase  [CK], 
electromyography  [EMG]),  one  can  usually  localize  the  site  of  the 
lesion to muscle (as opposed to motor neurons, peripheral nerves, or 
neuromuscular junction) and the pattern of muscle involvement. It is 
this  pattern  of  muscle  involvement  that  is  most  useful  in  narrowing 
the  differential  diagnosis  (Table  449-1).  Most  myopathies  present 
with proximal, symmetric limb weakness with preserved reflexes and 
sensation.  However,  asymmetric  and  predominantly  distal  weakness 
can be seen in some myopathies. An associated sensory loss suggests a 
peripheral neuropathy or a central nervous system (CNS) abnormality 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3516

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 449-1  Myopathies by Pattern of Weakness/Muscle Involvement
Proximal (Limb-Girdle) Weakness

Most dystrophies (e.g., dystrophinophies, limb-girdle, myofibrillar myopathy, 
myotonic dystrophy type 2, rare FSHD)
Congenital myopathies (e.g., central core, multiminicore, centronuclear,  
nemaline rod)
Metabolic myopathies (e.g., glycogen and lipid storage diseases)
Mitochondrial myopathies
Inflammatory myopathies (DM, PM, IMNM, anti-synthetase syndrome)
Toxic myopathies (see Table 449-6)
Endocrine myopathies
Neuromuscular junction disorders (myasthenia gravis, LEMS, congenital 
myasthenia, botulism, see Chap. 448)

Distal Weakness

Distal muscular dystrophies/myofibrillar myopathy (see Table 449-5)
Congenital myopathies (e.g., late-onset centronuclear and nemaline rod 
myopathies)
Metabolic

 Glycogen storage disease (e.g., brancher and debrancher deficiency, rarely 
McArdle disease)
 Lipid storage disease (e.g., neutral lipid storage myopathy, 
multiacyldehydrogenase deficiency)

NMJ disorders (e.g., rare myasthenia gravis and congenital myasthenia)

Late-onset central core (RYR1 mutations)
Sporadic late-onset nemaline rod with or without a monoclonal gammopathy
Metabolic (late-onset Pompe, McArdle disease, lipid storage, mitochondrial)
Hyperparathyroidism/osteomalacia/vitamin D deficiency
Myasthenia gravis

Eye Muscle Weakness (Ptosis/Ophthalmoparesis)

Ptosis without ophthalmoparesis
  Myotonic dystrophy
  Congenital myopathies
  Neuromuscular junction disorders
Ptosis with ophthalmoparesis
  Oculopharyngeal dystrophy
  Mitochondrial myopathy
  hIBM type 3
  Neuromuscular junction disorders

Episodic Weakness or Myoglobinuria

Related to exercise
  Glycogenoses (e.g., McArdle disease, etc.)
  Lipid disorders (e.g., CPT2 deficiency)
  Mitochondrial myopathies (e.g., cytochrome B deficiency)
Not related to exercise

Proximal Arm/Distal Leg Weakness (Scapuloperoneal or 
Humeroperonal) Weakness

 RYR1 mutations can cause malignant hyperthermia, episodic rhabdomyolysis/
myoglobinuria, and atypical periodic paralysis

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)
Scapuloperoneal myopathy and neuropathy
Myofibrillar myopathies
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD)
Bethlem myopathy

Distal Arm/Proximal Leg Weakness

  Other causes of malignant hyperthermia
Drugs/toxins (e.g., statins)
  Prolonged/intensive eccentric exercise

Inflammatory (e.g., PM/DM—rare, viral/bacterial infections)

Delayed or unrelated to exercise

 Periodic paralysis (e.g., hereditary hyper- or hypokalemic, thyrotoxic, 
associated renal tubular acidosis, acquired electrolyte imbalance)

Inclusion body myositis (usually wrist and finger flexors in arms, hip flexors and 
knee extensors in legs, and asymmetric)
Myotonic dystrophy (uncommon presentation)

  NMJ disorders

Muscle Stiffness/Decreased Ability to Relax

Axial Muscle Weakness

Inflammatory (cervicobrachial myositis)
sIBM and hIBM
Myotonic dystrophy 2
Isolated neck extensor myopathy/bent spine syndrome
FSHD

Myotonic dystrophy 1 and 2
Myotonia congenita
Paramyotonia congenita
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis with myotonia
Potassium aggravated myotonia
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome
Other: rippling muscle disease (acquired and hereditary), acquired 
neuromyotonia (Isaacs’ syndrome), stiff-person syndrome, Brody’s disease

Abbreviations: DM, dermatomyositis; hIBM, hereditary inclusion body myopathy; IMNM, immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome; NMJ, neuromuscular junction; PM, polymyositis; sIBM, sporadic inclusion body myositis.

3517

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

(e.g.,  myelopathy)  rather  than  a  myopathy.  On  occasion,  disorders 
affecting the motor nerve cell bodies in the spinal cord (anterior horn 
cell  disease),  the  neuromuscular  junction,  or  peripheral  nerves  can 
mimic findings of myopathy.

Muscle  Weakness  Symptoms  of  muscle  weakness  can  be  either 
intermittent  or  persistent.  Disorders  causing  intermittent  weakness 
(Table 449-1 and Fig. 449-1) include myasthenia gravis, periodic paral-
yses (hypokalemic or hyperkalemic), and metabolic energy deficiencies 
of glycolysis (especially myophosphorylase deficiency), fatty acid uti-
lization  (carnitine  palmitoyltransferase  [CPT]  deficiency),  and  some 
mitochondrial myopathies. The states of energy deficiency cause activity- 
related muscle breakdown accompanied by myoglobinuria.

Most  muscle  disorders  cause  persistent  weakness  (Table  449-1  and 
Fig. 449-2). In the majority of these, including most types of muscular 
dystrophy  and  inflammatory  myopathies,  the  proximal  muscles  are 
weaker  than  the  distal  and  are  symmetrically  affected,  and  the  facial 
muscles are spared, a pattern referred to as limb-girdle weakness. The 

differential diagnosis is more restricted for other patterns of weakness. 
Facial weakness (difficulty with eye closure and impaired smile) and 
scapular  winging  (Fig.  449-3)  are  characteristic  of  facioscapulohu-
meral  dystrophy  (FSHD).  Facial  and  distal  limb  weakness  associated 
with hand grip myotonia is virtually diagnostic of myotonic dystrophy 
type 1. When other cranial nerve muscles are weak, causing ptosis or 
extraocular muscle weakness, the most important disorders to consider 
include  neuromuscular  junction  disorders,  oculopharyngeal  muscu-
lar  dystrophy,  mitochondrial  myopathies,  or  some  of  the  congenital 
myopathies (Table 449-1). A pathognomonic pattern characteristic of 
inclusion body myositis is atrophy and weakness of the flexor forearm 
(e.g.,  wrist  and  finger  flexors)  and  quadriceps  muscles  that  is  often 
asymmetric. Less frequently seen, but important diagnostically, are the 
axial myopathies that predominantly affect the paraspinal muscles and 
include dropped head syndrome indicative of selective neck extensor 
muscle weakness. The most important neuromuscular diseases associ-
ated with this axial muscle weakness include myasthenia gravis, amy-
otrophic  lateral  sclerosis,  late-onset  core  or  nemaline  rod  myopathy, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3517

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3518

Intermittent weakness

Myoglobinuria

No

Yes

Variable weakness includes
  EOMs, ptosis, bulbar and limb muscles

Exam normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks

Exam usually normal between attacks
Proximal > distal weakness during attacks

AChR or Musk AB positive

EKG

Yes

No

Abnormal

Normal

Forearm exercise

Acquired seropositive
MG

Check chest CT
for thymoma

Decrement on 2–3 Hz repetitive
nerve stimulation (RNS) or
increased jitter on single fiber
EMG (SFEMG)

Check for dysmorphic
features
Genetic testing for
Anderson-Tawil syndrome

Myotonia on exam

Reduced lactic acid rise
Consider glycolytic defect

No

Yes

Normal lactic acid rise
Consider CPT deficiency
or other fatty acid
metabolism disorders

Yes

No

Lambert-Eaton
myasthenic syndrome

Check:
  Voltage gated Ca
  channel Abs
  Chest CT for lung Ca

Consider:
  Seronegative MG
  Congenital
  myasthenia*
  Psychosomatic
  weakness**

*Genetic testing
  (Chap. 448)
**If Abs, RNS, SFEMG
  are all normal or negative

Low potassium
level

Normal or elevated
  potassium level

Hypokalemic PP

Hyperkalemic PP
Paramyotonia congenita

DNA test confirms diagnosis

Genetic testing

No diagnosis

Muscle biopsy

FIGURE 449-1  Diagnostic evaluation of intermittent weakness. AChR AB, acetylcholine receptor antibody; CPT, carnitine palmitoyltransferase; EKG, electrocardiogram; 
EMG, electromyogram; EOMs, extraocular muscles; MG, myasthenia gravis; PP, periodic paralysis.

hyperparathyroidism, focal myositis, and some forms of inclusion body 
myopathy.  A  final  pattern,  recognized  because  of  preferential  distal 
extremity weakness, is seen in the distal myopathies.

It is important to examine functional capabilities to help disclose 
certain  patterns  of  weakness  (Table  449-1  and  Table  449-2).  The 
Gower sign (Fig. 449-4) is particularly useful. Observing the gait of 
an individual may disclose a lordotic posture caused by combined 
trunk  and  hip  weakness,  frequently  exaggerated  by  toe  walking 
(Fig. 449-5). A waddling gait is caused by the inability of weak hip 
muscles to prevent hip drop or hip dip. Hyperextension of the knee 

(genu  recurvatum  or  back-kneeing)  is  characteristic  of  quadriceps 
muscle weakness; and a steppage gait, due to foot drop, accompanies 
distal weakness.

Any  disorder  causing  muscle  weakness  may  be  accompanied  by 
fatigue, referring to an inability to maintain or sustain a force (patho-
logic fatigability). This condition must be differentiated from asthenia, 
a type of fatigue caused by excess tiredness or lack of energy. Associated 
symptoms may help differentiate asthenia and pathologic fatigability. 
Asthenia is often accompanied by a tendency to avoid physical activi-
ties, complaints of daytime sleepiness, necessity for frequent naps, and 

Persistent Weakness

Patterns of Weakness on Neurologic Exam

Ptosis, EOMs
  OPMD;
  mitochondrial
  myopathy;
  myotubular
  myopathy

Facial weakness
and scapular
winging
  (FSHD)

Facial, distal, 
  quadriceps;
  handgrip myotonia
  Myotonic muscular
    dystrophy

Proximal & distal
(hand grip), and
quadriceps
  IBM

Distal
  Distal myopathy
  (see Table
  449-1)

Dropped head/
Axial
  MG; PM; ALS;
  hyperpara-
  thyroid;
  Axial myopathy

Proximal > distal
  IMNM; PM; DM;
  anti-synthetase
  syndrome;
  muscular
    dystrophies;
  mitochondrial
  and metabolic
  myopathies;

toxic, endocrine

  myopathies

Myopathic EMG confirms muscle disease and excludes ALS
Repetitive nerve stimulation abnormalities suggest a neuromuscular
junction disorder (e.g., MG, LEMS, botulism)
CK elevation supports myopathy

May need DNA testing for further distinction of inherited myopathies

Muscle biopsy will help distinguish many disorders

FIGURE 449-2  Diagnostic evaluation of persistent weakness. Examination reveals one of seven patterns of weakness. The pattern of weakness in combination with the 
laboratory evaluation leads to a diagnosis. ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CK, creatine kinase; DM, dermatomyositis; EMG, electromyography; EOMs, extraocular 
muscles;  FSHD,  facioscapulohumeral  dystrophy;  IBM,  inclusion  body  myositis;  IMNM,  immune-mediated  necrotizing  myopathy;  MG,  myasthenia  gravis;  OPMD, 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; PM, polymyositis.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3518

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
3519

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

FIGURE 449-4  Gower sign showing a patient using his arms to climb up the legs in 
attempting to get up from the floor.

relax  after  an  active  muscle  contraction.  The  EMG  shows  electrical 
silence.  Confusion  is  created  because  contracture  also  refers  to  a 
muscle  that  cannot  be  passively  stretched  to  its  proper  length  (fixed 
contracture) because of fibrosis. In some muscle disorders, especially in 
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) and Bethlem myopathy, 
fixed contractures occur early and represent distinctive features of the 
disease.

Myotonia is a condition of prolonged muscle contraction followed 
by slow muscle relaxation. It always follows muscle activation (action 
myotonia), usually voluntary, but may be elicited by mechanical stimu-
lation (percussion myotonia) of the muscle. Myotonia typically causes 
difficulty in releasing objects after a firm grasp. In myotonic muscular 
dystrophy type 1 (DM1), distal weakness usually accompanies myoto-
nia, whereas in DM2, proximal muscles are more affected. Myotonia 
also occurs with myotonia congenita (a chloride channel disorder), but 
in  this  condition,  muscle  weakness  is  not  prominent.  Myotonia  may 
also  be  seen  in  individuals  with  sodium  channel  mutations  (hyper-
kalemic  periodic  paralysis  or  potassium-sensitive  myotonia).  Another 
sodium channelopathy, paramyotonia congenita (PC), also is associated 
with  muscle  stiffness.  In  contrast  to  other  disorders  associated  with 
myotonia in which the myotonia is eased by repetitive activity, PC is 
named for a paradoxical phenomenon whereby the myotonia worsens 
with  repetitive  activity.  Potassium-aggravated  myotonia  is  an  allelic 

FIGURE 449-3  Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy with prominent scapular winging.

difficulty  concentrating  on  activities  such  as  reading.  There  may  be 
feelings of overwhelming stress and depression. In contrast, pathologic 
fatigability occurs in disorders of neuromuscular transmission and in 
disorders  altering  energy  production,  including  defects  in  glycolysis, 
lipid metabolism, or mitochondrial energy production. Pathologic fati-
gability also occurs in chronic myopathies because of difficulty accom-
plishing a task with less muscle. Pathologic fatigability is accompanied 
by  abnormal  clinical  or  laboratory  findings.  Fatigue  without  those 
supportive features almost never indicates a primary muscle disease.

Muscle Pain (Myalgias), Cramps, and Stiffness  Some myopa-
thies can be associated with muscle pain, cramps, contractures, stiff or 
rigid muscles, or inability to relax the muscles (e.g., myotonia) (Table 
449-1). Muscle cramps are abrupt in onset, short in duration, triggered 
by  voluntary  muscle  contraction,  and  may  cause  abnormal  postur-
ing  of  the  joint.  Muscle  cramps  often  occur  in  neurogenic  disorders, 
especially  motor  neuron  disease  (Chap.  437),  radiculopathies,  and 
polyneuropathies (Chap. 446), but are not a feature of most primary 
muscle diseases.

A  muscle  contracture  is  different  from  a  muscle  cramp.  In  both 
conditions, the muscle becomes hard, but a contracture is associated 
with  energy  failure  in  glycolytic  disorders.  The  muscle  is  unable  to 

TABLE 449-2  Observations on Examination That Disclose Muscle 
Weakness
FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT
Inability to forcibly close eyes
Impaired pucker
Inability to raise head from prone 
position
Inability to raise head from supine 
position
Inability to raise arms above head

MUSCLE WEAKNESS
Upper facial muscles
Lower facial muscles
Neck extensor muscles

Neck flexor muscles

Proximal arm muscles (may be only 
scapular stabilizing muscles)
Knee extensor muscles

Inability to walk without 
hyperextending knee (back-kneeing or 
genu recurvatum)
Inability to walk with heels touching 
the floor (toe walking)
Inability to lift foot while walking 
(steppage gait or foot drop)
Inability to walk without a waddling 
gait
Inability to get up from the floor without 
climbing up the extremities (Gowers’ 
sign)
Inability to get up from a chair without 
using arms

Shortening of the Achilles tendon

Anterior compartment of leg

Hip muscles

Hip, thigh, and trunk muscles

Hip muscles

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3519

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3520

is usually not affected. However, in many limb-girdle muscular dystro-
phies,  enlarged  calf  muscles  are  typical.  The  enlargement  represents 
true muscle hypertrophy; thus, the term pseudohypertrophy should be 
avoided when referring to these patients. The calf muscles remain very 
strong even late in the course of these disorders. Muscle enlargement 
can also result from infiltration by sarcoid granulomas, amyloid depos-
its,  bacterial  and  parasitic  infections,  and  focal  myositis.  In  contrast, 
muscle atrophy is characteristic of other myopathies. In Miyoshi myo-
pathy, which can be caused by mutations in the genes that encode for 
dysferlin and anoctamin 5, there is a predilection for early atrophy of 
the gastrocnemius muscles, particularly the medial aspect. Atrophy of 
the humeral muscles is characteristic of FSHD and EDMD.

 ■ LABORATORY EVALUATION
Various tests can be used to evaluate a suspected myopathy, including 
CK  levels,  endocrine  studies  (e.g.,  thyroid  function  tests,  parathyroid 
hormone and vitamin D levels), autoantibodies (associated with myo-
sitis and systemic disorders), forearm exercise test, muscle biopsy, and 
genetic testing. Electrodiagnostic studies can be useful to differentiate 
myopathies  from  other  neuromuscular  disorders  (motor  neuron  dis-
ease, peripheral neuropathies, neuromuscular junction disorders) but, 
in most instances, do not help distinguish the specific type of myopathy.

Serum  Enzymes  CK  is  the  most  sensitive  measure  of  muscle 
damage. The MM isoenzyme predominates in skeletal muscle, whereas 
CK-myocardial  bound  (CK-MB)  is  the  marker  for  cardiac  muscle. 
Serum CK can be elevated in normal individuals without provocation, 
presumably on a genetic basis or after strenuous activity, trauma, a pro-
longed muscle cramp, or a generalized seizure. Aspartate aminotrans-
ferase  (AST),  alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT),  aldolase,  and  lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) are enzymes sharing an origin in both muscle 
and liver. Problems arise when the levels of these enzymes are found 
to be elevated in a routine screening battery, leading to the erroneous 
assumption that liver disease is present when in fact muscle could be 
the cause. An elevated γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) helps to establish 
a liver origin because this enzyme is not found in muscle. Rarely, aldose 
can be elevated in an inflammatory myopathy when CK, AST, and ALT 
are  normal,  signifying  that  the  inflammation  predominantly  affects 
the  perimysium  (dermatomyositis,  graft-versus-host  disease)  or  the 
surrounding fascia (fasciitis).

Electrodiagnostic  Studies  EMG,  repetitive  nerve  stimulation, 
and  nerve  conduction  studies  (NCS)  (Chap.  446)  are  helpful  in  dif-
ferentiating  myopathies  from  motor  neuron  disease,  neuropathies, 
and  neuromuscular  junction  diseases.  Routine  NCS  are  typically 
normal in myopathies, but reduced amplitudes of compound muscle 
action potentials may be seen in atrophied muscles. The needle EMG 
may  reveal  irritability  on  needle  insertion  and  spontaneously  that  is 
suggestive  of  a  myopathy  with  active  necrosis  or  muscle  membrane 
instability  (inflammatory  myopathies,  dystrophies,  toxic  myopathies, 
myotonic myopathies), whereas a lack of irritability is characteristic of 
long-standing myopathic disorders (muscular dystrophies with severe 
fibrofatty  replacement,  endocrine  myopathies,  disuse  atrophy,  and 
many of the metabolic myopathies between bouts of rhabdomyolysis). 
In addition, the EMG may demonstrate myotonic discharges that will 
narrow  the  differential  diagnosis  (Table  449-1).  Another  important 
EMG  finding  is  the  presence  of  short-duration,  small-amplitude, 
polyphasic motor unit action potentials (MUAPs). In myopathies, the 
MUAPs  fire  early  but  at  a  normal  rate  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of 
individual muscle fibers, whereas in neurogenic disorders, the MUAPs 
fire faster. An EMG is usually normal in steroid or disuse myopathy, 
both of which are associated with type 2 fiber atrophy; this is because 
the  EMG  preferentially  assesses  the  physiologic  function  of  type  1 
fibers. The EMG can supplement the clinical examination in choosing 
an appropriately affected muscle to biopsy.

Imaging  Studies  Skeletal  MRI  and  ultrasound  are  increasing 
utilized  to  assess  the  pattern  of  muscle  involvement,  which  can  help 
in narrowing the diagnosis, and are often more sensitive than the clin-
ical examination and EMG, particularly early in a disease course. For 

FIGURE 449-5  Lordotic posture, exaggerated by standing on toes, associated with 
trunk and hip weakness.

disorder in which myotonia is brought on by consumption of too much 
potassium-containing foods.

Muscle  stiffness  can  refer  to  different  phenomena.  Some  patients 
with  inflammation  of  joints  and  periarticular  surfaces  feel  stiff.  This 
condition  is  different  from  the  disorders  of  hyperexcitable  motor 
nerves  causing  stiff  or  rigid  muscles.  In  stiff-person  syndrome,  spon-
taneous  discharges  of  the  motor  neurons  of  the  spinal  cord  cause 
involuntary muscle contractions mainly involving the axial (trunk) and 
proximal lower extremity muscles. The gait becomes stiff and labored, 
with hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine. Superimposed episodic muscle 
spasms are precipitated by sudden movements, unexpected noises, and 
emotional  upset.  The  muscles  relax  during  sleep.  Serum  antibodies 
against glutamic acid decarboxylase are present in approximately two-
thirds of cases. In acquired neuromyotonia (Isaacs’ syndrome), there is 
hyperexcitability  of  the  peripheral  nerves  manifesting  as  continuous 
muscle  fiber  activity  in  the  form  of  widespread  fasciculations  and 
myokymia with impaired muscle relaxation. Muscles of the leg are stiff, 
and the constant contractions of the muscle cause increased sweating 
of the extremities. This peripheral nerve hyperexcitability is mediated 
by antibodies that target voltage-gated potassium channels.

There are two painful muscle conditions of particular importance, 
neither of which is associated with muscle weakness. Fibromyalgia is a 
common, yet poorly understood myofascial pain syndrome in which 
patients complain of severe muscle pain and tenderness, severe fatigue, 
and often poor sleep. Serum CK, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 
EMG, and muscle biopsy are normal (Chap. 373). Polymyalgia rheu-
matica occurs mainly in patients aged >50 years and is characterized 
by  stiffness  and  pain  in  the  shoulders,  lower  back,  hips,  and  thighs 
(Chap. 363). The ESR and CRP are elevated, while serum CK, EMG, 
and muscle biopsy are normal.

Muscle Enlargement and Atrophy 
In most myopathies, muscle 
tissue is replaced by fat and connective tissue, but the size of the muscle 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3520

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders example, there is early predilection of the vastus lateralis and medialis 
muscles with relative sparing of the rectus femoris muscles on imaging 
of  thigh  muscles  in  patients  with  inclusion  body  myositis,  and  this 
can  be  appreciated  on  imaging  prior  to  weakness  being  detected  on 
manual  muscle  testing.  MRI  can  also  demonstrate  fasciitis  when  the 
clinical examination and EMG are normal. Imaging can also be used 
to  help  guide  what  muscle  to  biopsy  in  patients  with  weakness  on 
manual  muscle  testing  and  EMG  abnormalities  only  in  muscles  that 
are not typically biopsied (e.g., paraspinal or hip girdle). We have found 
imaging helpful in patients with presumed muscular dystrophy when 
the  muscle  biopsy  is  not  diagnostic  and  genetic  testing  shows  only  a 
variation of unclear significance. In this situation, the pattern of mus-
cle involvement on imaging can support the known pattern of muscle 
involvement of a specific hereditary myopathy. The cost and availabil-
ity  of  MRI  preclude  routine  use  in  some  settings,  but  ultrasound  is 
more readily available and less expensive.

Genetic  Testing  This  is  increasingly  available  and  is  the  gold 
standard  for  diagnosing  patients  with  hereditary  myopathies.  Next- 
generation  sequencing  panels  are  increasing  utilized,  but  clinicians 
need  to  know  their  limitations;  large  deletions  and  duplications  can 
be missed, as can mutations in noncoding (intronic) regions. Further-
more, testing often reveals sequence alterations of unclear significance.

Forearm  Exercise  Test  With  exercise-induced  muscle  pain  and 
myoglobinuria, there may be a defect in glycolysis. For safety, the test 
should not be performed under ischemic conditions to avoid an unnec-
essary  insult  to  the  muscle,  causing  rhabdomyolysis.  The  test  is  per-
formed by placing a small indwelling catheter into an antecubital vein. 
A baseline blood sample is obtained for lactic acid and ammonia. The 
forearm muscles are exercised by asking the patient to vigorously open 
and close the hand for 1 min. Blood is then obtained at intervals of 1, 
2, 4, 6, and 10 min for comparison with the baseline sample. A three- to 
fourfold rise of lactic acid is typical. The simultaneous measurement of 
ammonia serves as a control because it should also rise with exercise. 
In patients with myophosphorylase deficiency and certain other glyco-
lytic defects, the lactic acid rise will be absent or below normal, while 
the rise in ammonia will reach control values. If there is lack of effort, 
neither lactic acid nor ammonia will rise. Patients with selective failure 
to  increase  ammonia  may  have  myoadenylate  deaminase  deficiency. 
This condition has been reported to be a cause of myoglobinuria, but 
deficiency of this enzyme in asymptomatic individuals makes interpre-
tation controversial.

Muscle  Biopsy  Muscle  biopsy  is  extremely  helpful  in  evaluation 
of acquired myopathies but is performed less frequently in suspected 
hereditary  myopathies  as  genetic  testing  has  become  more  widely 
available. However, muscle biopsy can be helpful in cases of suspected 
hereditary  myopathy  in  which  genetic  testing  was  nondiagnostic. 
Almost any superficial muscle can be biopsied, but it is important to 
biopsy one that is affected clinically but not too severely (for example 
grade 4 out of 5 strength or movement against moderate resistance by 
manual muscle testing [Chap. 422]). A specific diagnosis can be estab-
lished in many disorders.

HEREDITARY MYOPATHIES
Muscular dystrophy refers to a group of hereditary progressive diseases, 
each with unique phenotypic and genetic features (Tables 449-3, 449-4, 
and 449-5, and Fig. 449-6). The prognosis of dystrophies is slow pro-
gressive weakness, though the severity and course are variable between 
and even within subtypes. Some are associated with cardiac and ven-
tilatory muscle involvement, which are the leading causes of mortality. 
Unfortunately, there are no specific medical therapies for most of the 
muscular dystrophies, and treatment is aimed at maintaining function 
with  physical  and  occupational  therapy.  Noninvasive  ventilation  and 
tracheostomy  may  be  warranted.  Those  with  cardiomyopathy  may 
require  afterload  reduction,  antiarrhythmic  agents,  pacemakers  or 
intracardiac  defibrillators,  and  occasionally  cardiac  transplantation. 
We will focus primarily on those that manifest in adulthood.

 ■ DUCHENNE AND BECKER MUSCULAR 
DYSTROPHY (DMD AND BMD)
DMD  and  BMD  are  X-linked  recessive  muscular  dystrophies  caused 
by mutations in the dystrophin gene. Affecting 1 in 3000 male births, 
DMD is the most common mutational disease affecting boys. The inci-
dence of BMD is ~5 per 100,000.

3521

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Clinical  Features  Proximal  muscles,  especially  of  the  lower 
extremities, are prominently involved in both disorders. This becomes 
evident in DMD very early; boys with DMD have difficulty climbing 
stairs and never run well. As the disease progresses, weakness becomes 
more generalized. Hypertrophy of muscles, particularly in the calves, 
is  an  early  and  prominent  finding.  Most  patients  with  BMD  first 
experience  difficulties  between  ages  5  and  15  years,  although  onset 
in the third or fourth decade or even later can occur. Life expectancy 
for DMD and BMD is reduced, but most BMD cases survive into the 
fourth  or  fifth  decade.  Intellectual  disability  may  occur  in  both  dis-
orders but is less common in BMD. Cardiac involvement is common 
in both DMD and BMD and may result in heart failure; some BMD 
patients manifest with only heart failure. Other less common presenta-
tions of dystrophinopathy are asymptomatic hyper-CK-emia, myalgias 
without weakness, and myoglobinuria.

Laboratory Features  Serum CK levels are usually elevated. Mus-
cle biopsies demonstrate dystrophic features. Western blot analysis of 
muscle  biopsy  samples  demonstrates  absent  dystrophin  in  DMD  or 
reduction  in  levels  or  size  of  dystrophin  in  BMD.  In  both  disorders, 
mutations  can  be  established  using  DNA  from  peripheral  blood  leu-
kocytes. In most cases, muscle biopsies are no longer performed when 
DMD or BMD is suspected, as genetic testing is less invasive, less costly, 
and routinely available. Deletions within or duplications of the dystrophin 
gene are common in both DMD and BMD; in ~95% of cases, the muta-
tion does not alter the translational reading frame of messenger RNA. 
These “in-frame” mutations allow for production of some dystrophin, 
which accounts for the presence of altered rather than absent dystro-
phin on Western blot analysis and a milder clinical phenotype.

TREATMENT
Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy
Glucocorticoids  slow  progression  in  DMD,  but  their  use  has  not 
been adequately studied in BMD. Physical and occupational ther-
apy are important in helping maintain function. As patients often 
die  from  the  associated  cardiomyopathy,  it  is  important  to  follow 
patients with a cardiologist and treat appropriately. Recent studies 
suggest that there is clinical benefit in selected cases of DMD from 
short oligonucleotides that permit skipping of mutant exons, lead-
ing to expression of a short but nonetheless functional dystrophin 
protein.  In  parallel,  other  studies  suggest  that  small  molecules 
may permit read-through of protein-truncating mutations in some 
DMD cases, again with clinical benefit.

 ■ LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
The  limb-girdle  muscular  dystrophies  (LGMDs)  are  a  genetically 
heterogenous  group  of  dystrophies  in  which  males  and  females  are 
affected equally, with typical onset ranging from late in the first decade 
to the fourth decade. The LGMDs typically manifest with progressive 
weakness of pelvic and shoulder girdle musculature and are often clini-
cally indistinguishable from DMD and BMD. Respiratory insufficiency 
from weakness of the diaphragm may occur, as may cardiomyopathy. 
Serum  CKs  are  elevated,  and  the  EMG  is  myopathic.  Muscle  biopsy 
reveal  dystrophic  features,  but  the  findings  are  not  specific  to  differ-
entiate  subtypes  from  one  another  unless  immunohistochemistry  is 
employed  (e.g.,  immunostaining  for  various  sarcoglycans,  dysferlin, 
alpha-dystroglycan,  merosin)  or  there  are  features  to  suggest  one  of 
the myofibrillar myopathies. Nonetheless, definitive diagnosis requires 
genetic testing.

The  traditional  classification  of  LGMD  is  based  on  autosomal 
dominant  (LGMD1)  and  autosomal  recessive  (LGMD2)  inheritance. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3521

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3522

TABLE 449-3  Autosomal Dominant Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs)
TRADITIONAL CLASSIFICATION/
PROPOSED NEW CLASSIFICATION 
(WHEN APPLICABLE)
LGMD1A/myofibrillar myopathy

CLINICAL FEATURES
Onset second to eighth decade
Muscle weakness affects proximal and distal limb 
muscles, vocal cords, and pharyngeal muscles

LGMD1B/EDMD2

LGMD1C/rippling muscle disease

LGMD1D/LGMDD1

Onset first or second decade
Proximal lower limb weakness and cardiomyopathy 
with conduction defects
Some cases indistinguishable from Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy (EDMD) with joint contractures
Onset in early childhood
Proximal weakness
Gower sign, calf hypertrophy, rippling muscles
Exercise-related muscle cramps
Onset second to sixth decade
Proximal and distal muscle weakness

LGMD1E/myofibrillar myopathy

Onset first to sixth decade
Proximal or distal muscle weakness

LGMD1F/LGMDD2

LGMD1G/LGMDD3

LGMD1I/LGMDD4

Bethlem myopathy/LGMD1D5

Cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias
Onset infancy to sixth decade
Proximal or distal weakness
May have early contractures resembling  
Emery-Dreifuss syndrome

Onset teens to sixth decade
Proximal weakness contractures of fingers and toes
Onset teens to ninth decade
Proximal weakness, scapular winging
Onset in childhood to adulthood
Contractures at elbows, distal fingers, knees, ankles
Hyperextensible fingers proximally
Keloids

LABORATORY FEATURES
Serum CK 2× normal
EMG myopathic and may have pseudomotonic 
discharges
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
Serum CK 3–5× normal
EMG myopathic

Serum CK 4–25× normal
EMG myopathic

Serum CK 2–3× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
Serum CK 2–4× normal
EMG myopathic and may have pseudomotonic 
discharges
Muscle biopsy: features of MFM
Serum CK normal to 20× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy may show enlarged nuclei 
with central pallor, rimmed vacuoles, and 
filamentous inclusions
Muscle biopsies show rimmed vacuoles
CK normal to 9× normal
CK normal to 50× normal
EMG myopathic
CK normal to 3× normal
MRI and ultrasound of muscle show a 
peripheral > central predilection for fibrofatty 
replacement in individual muscles

ABNORMAL 
PROTEIN
Myotilin

Lamin A/C

Caveolin-3

DNAJB6

Desmin

TNPO3

HNRNPDL

Calpain-3

Collagen VI alpha 1 
chain

Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; HNRNPDL, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D-like protein; MFM, myofibrillar myopathy.

Superimposed  on  the  backbone  of  LGMD1  and  LGMD2,  the  classi-
fication  uses  a  sequential  alphabetical  lettering  system  (LGMD1A, 
LGMD2A, etc.) based on genotype. However, ever-expanding discov-
eries of new genes have outgrown the alphabet. The European Neuro-
muscular  Centre  (ENMC)  recently  proposed  a  new  nomenclature  in 
which autosomal dominant cases are termed LGMD “D” and autoso-
mal recessive as LGMD “R,” followed by a numerical number based on 
genotype. Furthermore, this new classification only includes cases in 
which at least two unrelated families have been reported, the predom-
inant  weakness  at  onset  was  proximal,  independent  ambulation  was 
achieved at some time, CK is elevated, and muscle biopsies or imag-
ing  revealed  dystrophic  features.  Thus,  mutations  in  the  CPN3  gene 
leading to a deficiency in calpain-3, which traditionally were classified 
as  LGMD2A,  are  classified  as  LGMDR1  by  this  new  system.  In  con-
trast,  mutations  in  myotilin  (LGMD1A)  and  desmin  (LGMD1E  and 
LGMD2R) and that often have more distal weakness and have biopsies 
features of a myofibrillar myopathy are not classified as a LGMD in this 
new scheme but rather as subtypes of myofibrillar myopathy. Likewise, 
laminopathies (LGMD1B) are considered a subtype of EDMD rather 
than an LGMD. This new classification of LGMD and distal muscular 
dystrophies is summarized in Tables 449-3 and 449-4.

The prevalence of LGMD ranges from 80 to 700 per 100,000, while 
estimated prevalences of individual specific subtypes of LGMDs vary. 
The  most  common  types  of  adult-onset  LGMD  are  calpainopathy 
(LGMD2A/LGMDR1),  Fukutin-related  protein  (FKRP)  deficiency 
(LGMD2I/LGMDR9),  and  anoctaminopathy  (LGMD2L/LGMDR12). 

Calpainopathy  (LGMD2A/LGMDR1),  the  most  common  cause  of 
LGMD  in  those  with  ancestry  from  Spain,  France,  Italy,  and  Great 
Britain,  is  associated  with  marked  scapular  winging,  lack  of  calf 
muscle hypertrophy, and lack of cardiac and lung involvement. Of 
note, autosomal dominant mutations in an intron of the calpain-3 
gene  is  responsible  for  LGMD1I/LGMDD4.  LGMD2I/LGMDR9 
is  more  common  in  individuals  with  northern  European  ancestry, 
is  associated  with  calf  muscle  hypertrophy,  and  can  have  cardiac 
and  lung  involvement  out  of  proportion  to  extremity  weakness. 
LGMD2L/LGMDR12  accounts  for  ~7%  of  LGMD  in  the  United 
States, and the prevalence is higher in northern Europe; as seen in 
dysferlinopathies (LGMD2B/LGMDR2 and Miyoshi myopathy type 
1), anoctaminopathy has an early predilection for medial calf atrophy 
and weakness.

Importantly, immune-mediated necrotizing myopathies can mimic 
LGMD  clinically  and  histopathologically  (Chap.  365).  Anyone  sus-
pected  of  having  an  LGMD  but  without  definite  pathogenic  muta-
tion(s) identified on genetic testing should be screened for the presence 
of serum antibodies against HMGCR and SRP to assess for a treatable 
autoimmune cause.

 ■ EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
There  are  at  least  five  genetically  distinct  forms  of  EDMD.  Emerin 
mutations are the most common cause of X-linked EDMD, although 
mutations in FHL1 may also be associated with a similar phenotype, 
which is X-linked as well. Mutations involving the gene for Lamin A/C 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3522

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 449-4  Autosomal Recessive Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs)
DISEASE
LGMD2A/LGMDR1

LABORATORY FEATURES
Serum CK 3–15× normal
EMG myopathic

3523

ABNORMAL PROTEIN
Calpain-3

CLINICAL FEATURES
Onset first or second decade
Scapular winging; no calf hypertrophy; no cardiac or 
respiratory muscle weakness
Proximal and distal weakness; may have contractures at 
elbows, wrists, and fingers
Onset second or third decade
Proximal muscle weakness at onset, later distal (calf) muscles 
affected
Miyoshi myopathy is variant of LGMD2B with calf muscles 
affected at onset

Onset in childhood to teenage years
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne and Becker muscular 
dystrophies
Cognitive function normal
Onset age 10–15
Proximal and distal muscle weakness

Onset first to third decade
Allelic to sarcotubular congenital myopathy
Proximal muscle weakness
Onset first to third decade
Clinical condition similar to Duchenne or Becker dystrophies
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory failure may occur early 
before significant weakness
Cognitive function normal
Onset first to third decade
Proximal lower limb weakness
Mild distal weakness
Progressive weakness causes loss of ambulation
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-Warburg syndrome but 
can present in early adult life with proximal weakness and 
only minor CNS abnormalities
Presents in childhood or adult life
May manifest with quadriceps atrophy and myalgia
Some present with early involvement of the calves in the 
second decade of life, resembling Miyoshi myopathy type 1 
(dysferlinopathy)
Usually presents in infancy as Fukuyama congenital muscular 
dystrophy but can present in early adult life with proximal 
weakness and only minor CNS abnormalities
Usually presents in infancy as muscle-eye-brain disease but 
can present in early adult life with proximal weakness and 
only minor CNS abnormalities
Usually presents in infancy as Walker-Warburg syndrome but 
can present in early adult life with proximal weakness and 
only minor CNS abnormalities
One case reported presenting in early childhood
Onset in infancy to fourth decade; proximal weakness; may 
have ptosis and extraocular weakness; epidermolysis bullosa 
(also considered a congenital myasthenic syndrome)

See LGMD1E (see Table 449-6)

Onset in infancy to sixth decade of proximal weakness
Eye abnormalities common; truncal ataxia and chorea
Mild to moderate intellectual disability
Hutterite descent
Onset in early childhood to fourth decade
Proximal weakness
CNS abnormalities, cataracts, cardiomyopathy,  
and neuromuscular junction dysfunction

LGMD2B/LGMDR2

LGMD2C–F/LGMDR3–6

LGMD2G/LGMDR7

LGMD2H/LGMDR8

LGMD2I/LGMDR9

LGMD2Ja /LGMDR10

LGMD2K/LGMDR11

LGMD2L/LGMDR12

LGMD2M/LGMDR13

LGMD2N/LGMDR14

LGMD2O/LGMDR15

LGMD2P/LGMD R16
LGMD2Q/LGMDR17

LGMD2R/myofibrillar 
myopathy
LGMD2S/LGMDR18

LGMD2T/LGMDR19

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Muscle biopsy may show lobulated muscle 
fibers
Serum CK 3–100× normal
EMG myopathic

Dysferlin

Inflammation on muscle biopsy may 
simulate polymyositis; amyloid deposition 
in endomysium
Serum CK 5–100× normal
EMG myopathic

Serum CK 3–17× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy may show rimmed vacuoles
Serum CK 2–25× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy reveals dilated T-tubules
Serum CK 10–30× normal
EMG myopathic

γ, α, β, δ sarcoglycans

Telethonin

Tripartite motif-containing 32

Fukutin-related protein

Serum CK 1.5–2× normal
EMG myopathic
Muscle biopsy reveals rimmed vacuoles

Titin

CK 10–20× normal
EMG myopathic

CK 8–20× normal
EMG myopathic

CK 10–50× normal
EMG myopathic

CK 5–20× normal
EMG myopathic

CK 5–20× normal
EMG myopathic

CK >10× normal
CK variable, but usually only mildly 
elevated
EMG myopathic
Repetitive nerve stimulation may show 
decrement
See LGMD1E

CK 1.5–20× normal

CK 3 to >10× normal
EMG myopathic

POMT1

Anoctamin 5

Fukutin

POMGNT1

POMT2

α-Dystroglycan
Plectin 1

Desmin

TRAPC11

GMPPB

(Continued)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3523

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3524

TABLE 449-4  Autosomal Recessive Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs)
DISEASE

CLINICAL FEATURES

(Continued)
LABORATORY FEATURES

ABNORMAL PROTEIN

LGMD2U/LGMDR20

LGMD2V/late-onset 
Pompe disease

Onset typically in early childhood of proximal weakness
May have CNS and ocular abnormalities
Childhood or adult onset of proximal weakness
Ventilatory muscle weakness

LGMD2W/PINCH2-
related myopathy

LGMD2Y/TOR1AIP1-
related myopathy

LGMD2Z/LGMDR21

Bethlem myopathy 
(recessive)/LGMDR22

Reported in only one family
Childhood onset of proximal weakness
Macroglossia with broad-based, triangular tongue
Cardiomyopathy in third decade
Reported in only one family
Childhood onset of proximal weakness
Rigid spine and contractures
Adult-onset proximal weakness
Scapular winging
Onset in childhood to adulthood
Contractures at elbows, distal fingers, knees, ankles
Hyperextensible fingers proximally
Keloids

Laminin alpha-2 
muscular dystrophy/
LGMDR23
POMGNT-related 
muscular dystrophy/
LGMDR24
LGMD2X/LGMDR25

Congenital to adult onset
May have CNS abnormalities

Congenital to adult onset
May have CNS abnormalities

Adult onset of proximal weakness
Cardiac arrhythmias

CK 5 to >20× normal

ISPD

CK normal to mildly elevated
EMG myopathic (may have myotonic 
discharges)
CK 3 to >20× normal

Alpha-glucosidase

PINCH2

CK normal to 4× normal
EMG myopathic

Lamina-associated polypeptide 
1B

CK mildly elevated

POGLUT1

CK normal to 3× normal
MRI and ultrasound of muscle show 
a peripheral > central predilection for 
fibrofatty replacement in individual 
muscles
CK 2–5× normal

Collagen VI alpha 1, alpha 2, or 
alpha 3 chains

Laminin alpha 2 (merosin)

CK 5 to >20× normal

POMGNT2

CK 3 to >20× normal

Popeye domain containing 
protein 1

aUdd-type distal myopathy is a form of titin deficiency with only distal muscle weakness (see Table 449-5).
Abbreviations: CK, creatine kinase; CNS, central nervous system; EMG, electromyography; GMPPB; guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-mannose pyrophosphorylase 
B; ISPD, isoprenoid synthase domain containing; PINCH2, particularly interesting new cysteine-histidine rich protein 2; POGLUT1, protein O-glucosyltransferase 1; 
POMGNT1, O-linked mannose beta 1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase; POMGNT2, protein O-mannose beta-1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase-2; POMT1, protein-O-
mannosyltransferase 1; POMT2, protein-O-mannosyltransferase 2; TNPO3, transportin 3; TOR1AIP1, DNA sequencing of torsinA-interacting protein 1; TRAPC11, transport 
(trafficking) protein particle complex, subunit 11.

(LMNA) are the most common cause of autosomal dominant EDMD 
(also known as LGMD1B) and are also a common cause of hereditary 
cardiomyopathy.  Less  commonly,  autosomal  dominant  EDMD  has 
been  reported  with  mutations  in  SYNE1,  SYNE2,  TMEM43,  SUN1, 
SUN2, and TTN genes encoding nesprin-1, nesprin-2, LUMA, SUN1, 
SUN2, and titin, respectively.

Clinical  Features  Prominent  contractures  can  be  recognized  in 
early childhood and teenage years, often preceding muscle weakness. 
The  contractures  persist  throughout  the  course  of  the  disease  and 
are  present  at  the  elbows,  ankles,  and  neck.  Muscle  weakness  affects 
humeral  and  peroneal  muscles  at  first  and  later  spreads  to  a  limb- 
girdle  distribution  (Table  449-1).  The  cardiomyopathy  is  potentially 
life threatening and may result in sudden death. A spectrum of atrial 
rhythm and conduction defects includes atrial fibrillation and paralysis 
and atrioventricular heart block. Some patients have a dilated cardio-
myopathy. Female carriers of the X-linked variant may manifest with 
a cardiomyopathy.

Laboratory  Features  Serum  CK  is  usually  slightly  elevated,  and 
the  EMG  is  myopathic.  Muscle  biopsy  usually  shows  nonspecific 
dystrophic  features,  although  cases  associated  with  FHL1  mutations 
have features of myofibrillar myopathy. Immunohistochemistry reveals 
absent emerin staining of myonuclei in X-linked EDMD due to emerin 
mutations.  Electrocardiograms  (ECGs)  demonstrate  atrial  and  atrio-
ventricular rhythm disturbances.

X-linked  EDMD  usually  arises  from  defects  in  the  emerin  gene 
encoding a nuclear envelope protein. FHL1 mutations are also a cause 
of  X-linked  scapuloperoneal  dystrophy  but  can  also  present  with  an 
X-linked  form  of  EDMD.  The  autosomal  dominant  disease  can  be 
caused by mutations in the LMNA gene encoding Lamin A/C; in the 
synaptic nuclear envelope protein 1 (SYNE1) or 2 (SYNE2) encoding 

nesprin-1  and  nesprin-2,  respectively;  and  in  TMEM43  encoding 
LUMA.  These  proteins  are  essential  components  of  the  filamentous 
network  underlying  the  inner  nuclear  membrane.  Loss  of  structural 
integrity of the nuclear envelope from defects in emerin, Lamin A/C, 
nesprin-1, nesprin-2, and LUMA accounts for overlapping phenotypes.

TREATMENT
Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy
Supportive  care  should  be  offered  for  neuromuscular  disability, 
including ambulatory aids, if necessary. Stretching of contractures 
is difficult. Management of cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias (e.g., 
early use of a defibrillator or cardiac pacemaker) may be lifesaving.

 ■ MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY
There  are  two  distinct  forms  of  myotonic  dystrophy  (dystrophia 
myotonica [DM]), namely myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) and myotonic 
dystrophy  type  2  (DM2),  also  called  proximal  myotonic  myopathy 
(PROMM).

Clinical  Features  The  clinical  expression  of  DM1  varies  widely 
and involves many systems other than muscle. Affected patients may 
have  a  “hatchet-faced”  appearance  due  to  temporalis,  masseter,  and 
facial  muscle  atrophy  and  weakness.  Frontal  baldness  is  frequent. 
Weakness of wrist and fingers occurs early, as does foot drop. Proximal 
muscles are less affected. Palatal, pharyngeal, and tongue involvement 
can lead to dysarthria and dysphagia. Some patients have diaphragm 
and intercostal muscle weakness, resulting in ventilatory insufficiency. 
Myotonia is usually apparent by the age of 5 years and is best demon-
strable by percussion of the thenar eminence or asking patients to close 
their fingers very tightly and then relax.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3524

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 449-5  Distal Myopathies
DISEASE
Welander distal myopathy

Tibial muscular dystrophy 
(Udd)

Markesbery-Griggs distal 
myopathy

Laing distal myopathy

GNE myopathy (Nonaka 
distal myopathy and 
autosomal recessive 
hereditary inclusion body 
myopathy)

Miyoshi myopathya

Williams myopathy

Myofibrillar myopathies

CLINICAL FEATURES
Onset in fifth decade
Weakness begins in hands
Slow progression with spread to distal 
lower extremities
Life span normal
Onset fourth to eighth decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (tibial 
distribution)
Upper extremities usually normal
Life span normal

Onset fourth to eighth decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (tibial 
distribution) with progression to distal 
arms and proximal muscles

Onset childhood to third decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (anterior 
tibial distribution) and neck flexors 
affected early
May have cardiomyopathy

Onset second to third decade
Distal lower extremity weakness (anterior 
tibial distribution)
Mild distal upper limb weakness may be 
present early
Progression to other muscles sparing 
quadriceps
Ambulation may be lost in 10–15 years
Onset second to third decade
Lower extremity weakness in posterior 
compartment muscles
Progression leads to weakness in other 
muscle groups
Ambulation lost after 10–15 years in about 
one-third of cases
Distal lower extremity weakness (anterior 
tibial distribution)

LABORATORY FEATURES
Serum CK 2–3× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows dystrophic features and 
rimmed vacuoles
Serum CK 2–4× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows dystrophic features and 
rimmed vacuoles
Titin absent in M-line of muscle
Serum CK is usually mildly elevated
EMG reveals irritative myopathy
Muscle biopsies demonstrate rimmed vacuoles 
and features of MFM
Serum CK is normal or slightly elevated
Muscle biopsies do not typically show rimmed 
vacuoles, but may show hyaline bodies with 
accumulation of myosin
Large deposits of myosin heavy chain are seen in 
type 1 muscle fibers
Serum CK 3–10× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Dystrophic features on muscle biopsy plus rimmed 
vacuoles and 15- to 19-nm filaments within 
vacuoles

Serum CK 20–100× normal
EMG myopathic
NCS normal
Muscle biopsy shows nonspecific dystrophic 
features often with prominent inflammatory cell 
infiltration; no rimmed vacuoles

Muscle biopsy may show rimmed vacuoles and 
features of MFM

Onset from early childhood to late adult 
life
Weakness may be distal, proximal, or 
generalized
Cardiomyopathy and respiratory 
involvement are not uncommon

Serum CKs can be normal or moderately elevated
EMG is myopathic and often associated with 
myotonic discharges
Muscle biopsy demonstrates abnormal 
accumulation of desmin and other proteins, rimmed 
vacuoles, and myofibrillar degeneration

3525

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

ABNORMAL PROTEIN
AD
TIA1

AD
Titin
AR (associated with more proximal 
weakness—LGMD2J)

AD
Z-band alternatively spliced PDX motif-
containing protein (ZASP)

AD
Myosin heavy chain 7

AR
GNE gene: UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 
2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine 
kinase
Allelic to a form of hereditary inclusion 
body myopathy

AR
Dysferlin (allelic to LGMD2B)
ANO-5 (allelic to LGMD2L)

AD
Filamin-C
Genetically heterogeneous
AD

 Myotilin (also known as LGMD1A)
 ZASP (see Markesbery-Griggs distal 
myopathy)
  Filamin-C
  Desmin
  Alpha B crystallin
  Bag3
  Titin
  DNAJB6
  TNPO3
AR, AD
  Desmin
X-linked
  FHL1

aMiyoshi myopathy phenotype may also be seen with mutations in ANO-5 that encodes for anoctamin 5 (allelic to LGMD2L).
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CK, creatine kinase; EMG, electromyography; MFM, myofibrillar myopathy; NCS, nerve conduction 
studies.

ECG  abnormalities  include  first-degree  heart  block  and  more 
extensive  conduction  system  involvement.  Complete  heart  block 
and  sudden  death  can  occur.  Congestive  heart  failure  occurs  infre-
quently  but  may  result  from  cor  pulmonale  secondary  to  respi-
ratory 
intellectual 
impairment,  hypersomnia,  posterior  subcapsular  cataracts,  gonadal 

failure.  Other  associated 

features 

include 

atrophy,  insulin  resistance,  and  decreased  esophageal  and  colonic  
motility.

Congenital  myotonic  dystrophy  is  a  more  severe  form  of  DM1  and 
occurs  in  ~25%  of  infants  of  affected  mothers.  It  is  characterized  by 
severe facial and bulbar weakness, transient neonatal respiratory insuf-
ficiency, and intellectual disability.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3525

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3526

FIGURE 449-6  Proteins involved in the muscular dystrophies. This schematic shows the location of various sarcolemmal, sarcomeric, nuclear, and enzymatic proteins 
associated with muscular dystrophies. The diseases associated with mutations in the genes responsible for encoding these proteins are shown in boxes. Dystrophin, via 
its interaction with the dystroglycan complex, connects the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. Extracellularly, the sarcoglycan complex interacts with biglycan, 
which connects this complex to the dystroglycan complex and the extracellular matrix collagen. Various enzymes are important in the glycosylation of the α-dystroglycan 
and mediate its binding to the extracellular matrix and usually cause a congenital muscular dystrophy with severe brain and eye abnormalities but may cause milder LGMD 
phenotype. Mutations in genes that encode for sarcomeric and Z-disk proteins cause forms of LGMD and distal myopathies (including myofibrillar myopathy, forms of 
hereditary inclusion body myopathy) as well as nemaline rod myopathy and other “congenital” myopathies. Mutations affecting nuclear membrane proteins are responsible 
for most forms of EDMD. Mutations in other nuclear genes cause other forms of dystrophy. (From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disorders, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2016, Figure 27-1, p. 657; with permission.)

DM2 or PROMM involves mainly proximal muscles. Other features 
of the disease overlap with DM1, including cataracts, testicular atrophy, 
insulin  resistance,  constipation,  hypersomnia,  and  cognitive  defects. 
Cardiac  conduction  defects  occur  but  are  less  common.  The  hatchet 
face and frontal baldness are also less consistent features. A very striking 
difference is the failure to clearly identify a congenital form of DM2.

Laboratory  Features  The  diagnosis  of  myotonic  dystrophy  can 
usually be made on the basis of clinical findings. Serum CK levels may 
be  normal  or  mildly  elevated.  EMG  evidence  of  myotonia  is  present 
in  most  cases  of  DM1  but  is  more  patchy  in  DM2.  Muscle  biopsy  is 
not typically performed for diagnosis but is sometimes done when the 
clinical features and electrophysiologic features are not recognized. The 
major histopathologic features in both DM1 and DM2 are numerous 
internalized  nuclei  in  individual  muscle  fibers  combined  with  many 
atrophic fibers with pyknotic nuclear clumps.

DM1  and  DM2  are  autosomal  dominant  disorders.  DM1  is  trans-
mitted by an intronic mutation consisting of an unstable expansion of 
a CTG trinucleotide repeat in a serine-threonine protein kinase gene 
(named DMPK). An increase in the severity of the disease phenotype 
in successive generations (genetic anticipation) is accompanied by an 
increase  in  the  number  of  trinucleotide  repeats.  The  unstable  triplet 
repeat  in  myotonic  dystrophy  can  be  used  for  prenatal  diagnosis. 

Congenital disease occurs almost exclusively in infants born to affected 
mothers.

DM2 is caused by a DNA expansion mutation consisting of a CCTG 
repeat  in  intron  1  of  the  CNBP  gene  encoding  the  CCHC-type  zinc 
finger  nucleic  acid  binding  protein.  The  DNA  expansions  in  DM1 
and  DM2  impair  muscle  function  by  a  toxic  gain  of  function  of  the 
mutant mRNA. In both DM1 and DM2, the mutant RNA appears to 
form intranuclear inclusions composed of aberrant RNA. These RNA 
inclusions sequester RNA-binding proteins essential for proper splicing 
of a variety of other mRNAs. This leads to abnormal transcription of 
multiple proteins in a variety of tissues/organ systems, in turn causing 
the systemic manifestations of DM1 and DM2.

TREATMENT
Myotonic Dystrophy
The myotonia in DM1 and DM2 is usually not so bothersome to 
warrant  treatment,  but  when  it  is,  mexiletine  may  be  helpful.  A 
cardiac pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator should 
be  considered  for  patients  with  significant  arrhythmia.  Molded 
ankle-foot  orthoses  help  stabilize  gait  in  patients  with  foot  drop. 
Excessive daytime somnolence with or without sleep apnea is not 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3526

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders uncommon. Sleep studies, noninvasive respiratory support (bipha-
sic positive airway pressure [BiPAP]), and treatment with modafinil 
may be beneficial.

 ■ FACIOSCAPULOHUMERAL (FSHD)  
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
There  are  two  forms  of  FSHD  that  have  similar  pathogenesis.  Most 
patients  have  FSHD  type  1  (95%),  whereas  ~5%  have  FSHD2.  Both 
forms  are  clinically  and  histopathologically  identical.  The  prevalence 
FSHD is ~5 per 100,000 individuals.

Clinical Features  FSHD typically presents in childhood or young 
adulthood. In most cases, facial weakness is the initial manifestation, 
appearing as an inability to smile, whistle, or fully close the eyes. Loss 
of scapular stabilizer muscles makes arm elevation difficult. Scapular 
winging (Fig. 449-3) becomes apparent with attempts at abduction and 
forward  movement  of  the  arms.  Biceps  and  triceps  muscles  may  be 
severely affected, with relative sparing of the deltoid muscles. Weakness 
is invariably worse for wrist extension than for wrist flexion, and weak-
ness of the anterior compartment muscles of the legs may lead to foot 
drop. In 20% of patients, weakness progresses to involve the pelvic mus-
cles, and severe functional impairment and possible wheelchair depen-
dency  result.  The  heart  is  not  involved,  but  there  can  be  ventilatory 
muscle  weakness  in  5%  of  affected  individuals.  There  is  an  increased 
incidence  of  nerve  deafness.  Coats’  disease,  a  disorder  consisting  of 
telangiectasia, exudation, and retinal detachment, also occurs.

Laboratory  Features  The  serum  CK  level  may  be  normal  or 
mildly elevated. EMG and muscle biopsy show nonspecific abnormal-
ities  but  on  occasion  can  reveal  a  prominent  inflammatory  infiltrate 
leading to an incorrect diagnosis of myositis (Chap. 365).

FSHD1 is associated with deletions of tandem 3.3-kb repeats at 4q35. 
The deletion reduces the number of repeats to a fragment of <35 kb in 
most  patients.  Within  these  repeats  lies  the  DUX4  gene,  which  usu-
ally is not expressed after early muscle development. In patients with 
FSHD1, these deletions in the setting of a specific polymorphism lead 
to  hypomethylation  of  the  region  and  toxic  expression  of  the  DUX4 
gene. In cases of FSHD2, there is no deletion, but rather mutations in 
three different genes have been identified, each of which interestingly 
leads  to  hypomethylation  of  the  DUX4  region  and  the  permissive 
expression  of  the  DUX4  gene.  Dominant  mutations  in  the  structural 
maintenance of chromosomes hinge domain 1 (SMCHD1) gene is the 
most common cause of FSHD2, but recently, heterozygous mutations 
in  the  DNA  methyltransferase  3B  (DNMT3B)  gene  and  homozygous 
mutations in the ligand-dependent nuclear receptor-interacting factor 
1 (LRIF1) gene have been reported in rare cases of autosomal recessive 
FSHD2. These proteins normally interact with SMCHD1, and muta-
tions lead to hypomethylation of the DUX4 region and, as in FSHD1, 
to an overexpression of the DUX4 transcript.

TREATMENT
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy
No  specific  treatment  is  available;  ankle-foot  orthoses  are  helpful 
for  foot  drop.  Scapular  stabilization  procedures  improve  scapular 
winging but may not improve function.

 ■ OCULOPHARYNGEAL DYSTROPHY (OPMD)
OPMD represents one of several disorders characterized by progressive 
external ophthalmoplegia, which consists of slowly progressive ptosis 
and limitation of eye movements with sparing of pupillary reactions for 
light and accommodation. Patients usually do not complain of diplo-
pia, in contrast to patients having conditions with a more acute onset 
of ocular muscle weakness (e.g., myasthenia gravis).

Clinical Features  OPMD has a late onset; it usually presents in the 
fourth to sixth decade with ptosis or dysphagia. The extraocular muscle 
impairment is less prominent in the early phase but may become severe 
over time. The swallowing problem may lead to aspiration. Weakness 

of the neck and proximal extremities can develop but is usually mild 
in degree.

3527

Laboratory  Features  The  serum  CK  level  may  be  two  to  three 
times normal. EMG can identify myopathic changes in weak muscles. 
Muscle biopsies are no longer necessary for diagnosis in most cases but, 
when  performed,  demonstrate  muscle  fibers  with  rimmed  vacuoles. 
On electron microscopy, a distinctive feature of OPMD is the presence 
of 8.5-nm tubular filaments in some muscle cell nuclei.

OPMD is an autosomal dominant disorder that has a high incidence 
in certain populations (e.g., French-Canadians, individuals of Spanish 
ancestry, and Ashkenazi Jews). The molecular defect in OPMD is an 
expansion of a polyalanine repeat tract in a poly-RNA-binding protein 
(PABP2) gene.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

TREATMENT
Oculopharyngeal Dystrophy
Dysphagia  can  lead  to  significant  undernourishment  and  aspira-
tion.  Cricopharyngeal  myotomy  may  improve  swallowing.  Eyelid 
crutches  can  improve  vision  when  ptosis  obstructs  vision;  can-
didates  for  ptosis  surgery  must  be  carefully  selected—those  with 
severe facial weakness are not suitable.

 ■ DISTAL MYOPATHIES/DYSTROPHIES
The  distal  myopathies  are  notable  for  their  preferential  distal  distri-
bution  of  muscle  weakness  in  contrast  to  most  muscle  conditions 
associated  with  proximal  weakness.  The  major  distal  myopathies  are 
summarized in Tables 449-1 and 449-5.

Clinical  Features  Welander,  Udd,  and  Markesbery-Griggs  type 
distal  myopathies  are  all  late-onset,  dominantly  inherited  disorders  of 
distal  limb  muscles,  usually  beginning  after  age  40  years.  Welander 
distal myopathy preferentially involves the wrist and finger extensors, 
whereas the others are associated with anterior tibial weakness leading 
to  progressive  foot  drop.  Laing  distal  myopathy  is  also  a  dominantly 
inherited  disorder  heralded  by  tibial  weakness;  however,  it  is  distin-
guished by onset in childhood or early adult life. GNE myopathy (also 
known as Nonaka distal myopathy and autosomal recessive hereditary 
inclusion body myopathy) and Miyoshi myopathy are distinguished by 
autosomal  recessive  inheritance  and  onset  in  the  late  teens  or  twen-
ties.  GNE  and  Williams  myopathy  produce  prominent  anterior  tibial 
weakness, whereas Miyoshi myopathy is unique in that gastrocnemius 
muscles  are  preferentially  affected  at  onset.  Finally,  the  myofibrillar 
myopathies (MFMs) are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group 
of  muscular  dystrophies  that  can  be  associated  with  prominent  distal 
weakness; they can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or recessive 
pattern.  Of  note,  Markesbery-Griggs  myopathy  (caused  by  mutations 
in ZASP), LGMD1E and LGMD2R (caused by mutations in desmin), 
and LGMD1A (caused by mutations in myotilin) are subtypes of MFM.

Laboratory  Features  Serum  CK  levels  are  markedly  elevated 
in  Miyoshi  myopathy,  but  in  the  other  conditions,  serum  CK  is  only 
slightly increased. EMGs are myopathic and can be irritable with myo-
tonic discharges in MFM. Muscle biopsy shows nonspecific dystrophic 
features  and,  with  the  exception  of  Laing  and  Miyoshi  myopathies, 
often shows rimmed vacuoles. MFM is associated with the accumula-
tion of dense inclusions and amorphous material best seen on Gomori 
trichrome  staining  along  with  myofibrillar  disruption  on  electron 
microscopy.  Immune  staining  sometimes  demonstrates  accumulation 
of desmin and other proteins in MFM, large deposits of myosin heavy 
chain  in  the  subsarcolemmal  region  of  type  1  muscle  fibers  in  Laing 
myopathy, and reduced or absent dysferlin in Miyoshi myopathy type 1.

TREATMENT
Distal Myopathies
Occupational  therapy  is  offered  for  loss  of  hand  function;  ankle-
foot  orthoses  can  support  distal  lower  limb  muscles.  The  MFMs 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3527

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3528

can  be  associated  with  cardiomyopathy  (congestive  heart  failure 
or  arrhythmias)  and  respiratory  failure  that  may  require  medical 
management.  Laing-type  distal  myopathy  can  also  be  associated 
with a cardiomyopathy.

DISORDERS OF MUSCLE ENERGY 
METABOLISM
There  are  two  principal  sources  of  energy  for  skeletal  muscle—fatty 
acids and glucose. Abnormalities in either glucose or lipid utilization 
can  be  associated  with  distinct  clinical  presentations  that  can  range 
from an acute, painful syndrome with rhabdomyolysis and myoglobi-
nuria to a chronic, progressive muscle weakness simulating muscular 
dystrophy (Table 449-1). As with the muscular dystrophies, there are 
no specific medical treatments available.
 ■ GLYCOGEN STORAGE AND GLYCOLYTIC DEFECTS
Disorders of Glycolysis Causing Exercise Intolerance  Several 
glycolytic  defects  are  associated  with  recurrent  myoglobinuria.  The 
most  common  is  McArdle  disease  caused  by  mutations  in  the  PYGM 
gene  leading  to  myophosphorylase  deficiency.  Symptoms  of  muscle 
pain and stiffness usually begin in adolescence. With severe episodes, 
myoglobinuria can occur.

Certain  features  help  distinguish  some  enzyme  defects.  In  McAr-
dle  disease,  exercise  tolerance  can  be  enhanced  by  a  slow  induction 
phase (warm-up) or brief periods of rest, allowing for the start of the 
“second-wind”  phenomenon  (switching  to  utilization  of  fatty  acids). 
Varying degrees of hemolytic anemia accompany deficiencies of both 
phosphofructokinase (mild) and phosphoglycerate kinase (severe). In 
phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency, the usual clinical presentation is a 
seizure disorder associated with intellectual disability; exercise intoler-
ance is an infrequent manifestation.

In all of these conditions, the serum CK levels fluctuate widely and 
may  be  elevated  even  during  symptom-free  periods.  CK  levels  >100 
times  normal  are  expected  accompanying  myoglobinuria.  A  forearm 
exercise test reveals a blunted rise in venous lactate with a normal rise 
in ammonia. A definitive diagnosis of glycolytic disease can be made by 
muscle biopsy with appropriate staining and enzyme assays, but genetic 
testing is now done in lieu of biopsy in most cases.

Training  may  enhance  exercise  tolerance,  perhaps  by  increasing 
perfusion to muscle. Dietary intake of free glucose or fructose prior to 
activity may improve function, but care must be taken to avoid obesity 
from ingesting too many calories.

Disorders of Glycogen Storage Causing Progressive Weakness 
α-GLUCOSIDASE,  OR  ACID  MALTASE,  DEFICIENCY  (POMPE  DIS-
EASE)  Three  clinical  forms  of  α-glucosidase,  or  acid  maltase,  defi-
ciency (type II glycogenosis) can be distinguished. The infantile form is 
the most common, with onset of symptoms in the first 3 months of life. 
Infants develop severe muscle weakness, cardiomegaly, hepatomegaly, 
and  respiratory  insufficiency.  Glycogen  accumulation  in  motor  neu-
rons of the spinal cord and brainstem contributes to muscle weakness. 
Death usually occurs by 1.5 years of age. In the childhood form, the 
picture resembles DMD with delayed motor milestones resulting from 
proximal limb muscle weakness and involvement of respiratory mus-
cles. The heart may be involved, but the liver and brain are unaffected. 
The  adult  form  usually  begins  in  the  third  or  fourth  decade  but  can 
present as late as the seventh decade. Ventilatory weakness can be the 
initial and only manifestation in 20–30% of late-onset cases.

The  serum  CK  level  is  2–10  times  normal  in  infantile  or  
childhood-onset  Pompe  disease  but  can  be  normal  in  adult-onset 
cases.  EMG  can  demonstrate  muscle  membrane  irritability,  particu-
larly in the paraspinal muscles. The muscle biopsy in infants typically 
reveals vacuoles containing glycogen and the lysosomal enzyme acid 
phosphatase. Electron microscopy reveals membrane-bound and free 
tissue glycogen. However, muscle biopsies in late-onset Pompe disease 
may demonstrate only nonspecific abnormalities. Enzyme analysis of 
dried blood spots is a sensitive technique to screen for Pompe disease. 
A definitive diagnosis is established by genetic testing.

Pompe  disease  is  inherited  as  an  autosomal  recessive  disorder 
caused  by  mutations  of  the  α-glucosidase  gene.  Enzyme  replacement 
therapy (ERT) with IV recombinant human α-glucosidase is beneficial 
in infantile-onset Pompe disease. In late-onset cases, ERT has a more 
modest benefit.

OTHER  GLYCOGEN  STORAGE  DISEASES  WITH  PROGRESSIVE  WEAK-
NESS  In  debranching  enzyme  deficiency  (type  III  glycogenosis),  a 
slowly progressive form of muscle weakness can develop after puberty. 
Rarely, myoglobinuria may be seen. Patients are usually diagnosed in 
infancy, however, because of hypotonia and delayed motor milestones; 
hepatomegaly, growth retardation, and hypoglycemia are other mani-
festations. Branching enzyme deficiency (type IV glycogenosis) is a rare 
and  fatal  glycogen  storage  disease  characterized  by  failure  to  thrive 
and hepatomegaly. Hypotonia and muscle wasting may be present, but 
the skeletal muscle manifestations are minor compared to liver failure. 
Recently,  the  first  autosomal  dominant  glycogen  storage  disease  was 
reported in a family and was caused by a mutation in the PYGM gene 
that  typically  causes  autosomal  recessive  McArdle  disease.  Affected 
individuals presented with progressive proximal weakness, no exercise 
intolerance, normal CK, and a normal lactic acid increase with exercise.

 ■ LIPID AS AN ENERGY SOURCE  
AND ASSOCIATED DEFECTS
Lipid  is  an  important  muscle  energy  source  during  rest  and  during 
prolonged,  submaximal  exercise.  Oxidation  of  fatty  acids  occurs  in 
the mitochondria. To enter the mitochondria, a fatty acid must first be 
converted  to  an  “activated  fatty  acid,”  acyl-CoA.  The  acyl-CoA  must 
be  linked  with  carnitine  by  the  enzyme  CPT  for  transport  into  the 
mitochondria.

Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 2 Deficiency  CPT2 deficiency 
is  the  most  common  recognizable  cause  of  recurrent  myoglobinuria. 
Onset is usually in the teenage years or early twenties. Muscle pain and 
myoglobinuria  typically  occur  after  prolonged  exercise  but  can  also 
be precipitated by fasting or infections; up to 20% of patients do not 
exhibit  myoglobinuria,  however.  Strength  is  normal  between  attacks. 
In contrast to disorders caused by defects in glycolysis, in which mus-
cle cramps follow short, intense bursts of exercise, the muscle pain in 
CPT2 deficiency does not occur until the limits of utilization have been 
exceeded and muscle breakdown has already begun.

Serum CK levels and EMG findings are both usually normal between 
episodes. A normal rise of venous lactate during forearm exercise dis-
tinguishes this condition from glycolytic defects. Muscle biopsy does 
not  show  lipid  accumulation  and  is  usually  normal  between  attacks. 
The diagnosis requires direct measurement of muscle CPT or genetic 
testing.  Attempts  to  improve  exercise  tolerance  with  frequent  meals 
and a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet, or by substituting medium-chain 
triglycerides in the diet, have not proven to be beneficial.

MITOCHONDRIAL MYOPATHIES
Mitochondria play a key role in energy production. Oxidation of the 
major nutrients derived from carbohydrate, fat, and protein leads to the 
generation of reducing equivalents. The latter are transported through 
the respiratory chain in the process known as oxidative phosphorylation. 
The  energy  generated  by  the  oxidation-reduction  reactions  of  the 
respiratory  chain  is  stored  in  an  electrochemical  gradient  coupled  to 
ATP synthesis.

A novel feature of mitochondria is their genetic composition. Each 
mitochondrion possesses a DNA genome that is distinct from that of 
the nuclear DNA. Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) consists of a 
double-strand, circular molecule comprising 16,569 base pairs (bp). It 
codes  for  22  transfer  RNAs,  2  ribosomal  RNAs,  and  13  polypeptides 
of the respiratory chain enzymes. The genetics of mitochondrial dis-
eases differ from the genetics of chromosomal disorders. The DNA of 
mitochondria is directly inherited from the cytoplasm of the gametes, 
mainly from the oocyte. The sperm contributes very little of its mito-
chondria to the offspring at the time of fertilization. Thus, mitochon-
drial genes are derived almost exclusively from the mother, accounting 
for maternal inheritance of some mitochondrial disorders.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3528

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Patients  with  mitochondrial  myopathies  have  clinical  manifesta-
tions  that  usually  fall  into  three  groups:  chronic  progressive  external 
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), skeletal muscle–CNS syndromes, and pure 
myopathy  simulating  muscular  dystrophy  or  metabolic  myopathy. 
Unfortunately,  no  specific  medical  therapies  are  clearly  beneficial, 
although coenzyme Q10 supplements are often prescribed.

Kearns-Sayre Syndrome (KSS)  This is a widespread multiorgan 
system disorder with a defined triad of clinical findings: onset before 
age  20,  CPEO,  and  pigmentary  retinopathy,  plus  one  or  more  of  the 
following  features:  complete  heart  block,  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF) 
protein >1 g/L (100 mg/dL), or cerebellar ataxia. The cardiac disease 
includes syncopal attacks and cardiac arrest related to the abnormal-
ities  in  the  cardiac  conduction  system:  prolonged  intraventricular 
conduction time, bundle branch block, and complete atrioventricular 
block. Death attributed to heart block occurs in ~20% of the patients. 
Varying degrees of progressive limb muscle weakness and easy fatiga-
bility  affect  activities  of  daily  living.  Many  affected  individuals  have 
intellectual  disabilities.  Endocrine  abnormalities  are  also  common, 
including  gonadal  dysfunction  in  both  sexes  with  delayed  puberty, 
short stature, and infertility. Diabetes mellitus occurs in ~13% of KSS 
patients. Other less common endocrine disorders include thyroid dis-
ease, hyperaldosteronism, Addison’s disease, and hypoparathyroidism.
Serum CK and lactate levels are normal or slightly elevated. EMG 
is myopathic. NCS may be abnormal related to an associated neurop-
athy. Muscle biopsies reveal ragged red fibers and cytochrome oxidase 
(COX)–negative  fibers.  By  electron  microscopy,  there  are  increased 
numbers  of  mitochondria  that  often  appear  enlarged  and  contain 
paracrystalline inclusions.

KSS is a sporadic disorder caused by single mtDNA deletions that 
are presumed to arise spontaneously in the ovum or zygote. The most 
common  deletion,  occurring  in  about  one-third  of  patients,  removes 
4977  bp  of  contiguous  mtDNA.  Monitoring  for  cardiac  conduction 
defects  is  critical.  Prophylactic  pacemaker  implantation  is  indicated 
when ECGs demonstrate a bifascicular block.

Progressive  External  Ophthalmoplegia  (PEO)  PEO  can  be 
caused by nuclear DNA mutations affecting mtDNA and thus inherited 
in a Mendelian fashion or by mutations in mtDNA. Onset is usually 
after puberty. Fatigue, exercise intolerance, dysphagia, and complaints 
of muscle weakness are typical. The neurologic examination confirms 
the  ptosis  and  ophthalmoplegia,  usually  asymmetric  in  distribution. 
Patients  do  not  complain  of  diplopia.  Mild  facial,  neck  flexor,  and 
proximal weakness is typical. Rarely, respiratory muscles may be pro-
gressively affected and may be the direct cause of death.

Serum CK and lactate can be normal or mildly elevated. The EMG 
can  be  myopathic.  Ragged  red  and  COX-negative  fibers  are  promi-
nently displayed in the muscle biopsy.

This autosomal dominant form of CPEO is most commonly caused 
by mutations in the genes encoding adenine nucleotide translocator 1 
(ANT1), twinkle gene (C10orf2), and mtDNA polymerase 1 (POLG1). 
Autosomal recessive PEO can also be caused by mutations in POLG1. 
Point  mutations  have  been  identified  within  various  mitochondrial 
tRNA (Leu, Ile, Asn, Trp) genes in families with maternal inheritance 
of PEO.

There  is  no  specific  medical  treatment  available;  exercise  may 
improve  function,  but  this  will  depend  on  the  patient’s  ability  to 
participate.

Myoclonic Epilepsy with Ragged Red Fibers (MERRF)  The 
onset  of  MERRF  is  variable,  ranging  from  late  childhood  to  middle 
adult life. Characteristic features include myoclonic epilepsy, cerebellar 
ataxia, and progressive proximal muscle weakness. The seizure disor-
der is an integral part of the disease and may be the initial symptom. 
Cerebellar ataxia precedes or accompanies epilepsy. Other more vari-
able  features  include  dementia,  peripheral  neuropathy,  optic  atrophy, 
hearing loss, and diabetes mellitus.

Serum  CK  levels  and  lactate  may  be  normal  or  elevated.  EMG 
is  myopathic,  and  in  some  patients,  NCS  show  a  neuropathy.  The 

electroencephalogram  is  abnormal,  corroborating  clinical  findings  of 
epilepsy. Typical ragged red fibers are seen on muscle biopsy. MERRF 
is  caused  by  maternally  inherited  point  mutations  of  mitochondrial 
tRNA  genes.  The  most  common  mutation  found  in  80%  of  MERRF 
patients  is  an  A  to  G  substitution  at  nucleotide  8344  of  tRNA  lysine 
(A8344G tRNAlys). Only supportive treatment is possible, with special 
attention to epilepsy.

3529

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

Mitochondrial  Myopathy,  Encephalopathy,  Lactic  Acidosis, 
and Stroke-like Episodes (MELAS)  MELAS is the most com-
mon mitochondrial encephalomyopathy. The term stroke-like is appro-
priate because the cerebral lesions do not conform to a strictly vascular 
distribution.  The  onset  in  the  majority  of  patients  is  before  age  20. 
Seizures,  usually  partial  motor  or  generalized,  are  common  and  may 
represent  the  first  clearly  recognizable  sign  of  disease.  The  cerebral 
insults that resemble strokes cause hemiparesis, hemianopia, and cor-
tical blindness. A presumptive stroke occurring before age 40 should 
place  this  mitochondrial  encephalomyopathy  high  in  the  differential 
diagnosis.  Associated  conditions  include  hearing  loss,  diabetes  mel-
litus,  hypothalamic  pituitary  dysfunction  causing  growth  hormone 
deficiency, hypothyroidism, and absence of secondary sexual charac-
teristics. In its full expression, MELAS leads to dementia, a bedridden 
state, and a fatal outcome. Serum lactic acid is typically elevated.

The CSF protein is also increased but is usually ≤1 g/L (100 mg/dL). 
Muscle  biopsies  show  ragged  red  fibers.  Neuroimaging  demonstrates 
basal ganglia calcification in a high percentage of cases. Focal lesions 
that mimic infarction are present predominantly in the occipital and 
parietal lobes. Strict vascular territories are not respected, and cerebral 
angiography  fails  to  demonstrate  lesions  of  the  major  cerebral  blood 
vessels.

MELAS  is  usually  caused  by  maternally  inherited  point  muta-
tions  of  mitochondrial  tRNA  genes.  The  A3243G  point  mutation  in 
tRNALeu(UUR) is the most common, occurring in ~80% of MELAS cases. 
No specific treatment is available. Supportive treatment is essential for 
the stroke-like episodes, seizures, and endocrinopathies.

Mitochondrial  DNA  Depletion  Syndromes  Mitochondrial 
DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) is a heterogeneous group of disorders 
that are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and can present in 
infancy or in adults. MDS can be caused by mutations in several genes 
(TK2, DGUOK, RRM2B, TYMP, SUCLA1, and SUCLA2) that lead to 
depletion  of  mitochondrial  deoxyribonucleotides  (dNTP)  necessary 
for  mtDNA  replication.  The  other  major  cause  of  MDS  is  a  set  of 
mutations in genes essential for mtDNA replication (e.g., POLG1 and 
C10orf2). The clinical phenotypes associated with MDS vary. Patients 
may  develop  a  severe  encephalopathy  (e.g.,  Leigh’s  syndrome),  PEO, 
an  isolated  myopathy,  myo-neuro-gastrointestinal  encephalopathy 
(MNGIE), and a sensory neuropathy with ataxia.

DISORDERS OF MUSCLE MEMBRANE 
EXCITABILITY
Muscle  membrane  excitability  is  affected  in  a  group  of  disorders 
referred  to  as  channelopathies.  These  disorders  usually  present  with 
episodic muscle weakness (periodic paralysis) and sometimes myoto-
nia or paramyotonia (Table 449-1).

 ■ CALCIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF MUSCLE
Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis (HypoKPP)  This is an auto-
somal  dominant  disorder  with  onset  in  adolescence.  Males  are  more 
often  affected  because  of  decreased  penetrance  in  females.  Episodic 
weakness with onset after age 25 is almost never due to periodic paral-
yses,  with  the  exception  of  thyrotoxic  periodic  paralysis.  Attacks  are 
often  provoked  by  meals  high  in  carbohydrates  or  sodium  and  may 
accompany rest following prolonged exercise. Weakness usually affects 
proximal  limb  muscles  more  than  distal.  Ocular  and  bulbar  muscles 
are less likely to be affected. Respiratory muscles are usually spared, but 
when they are involved, the condition may prove fatal. Weakness may 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3529

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3530 take  as  long  as  24  h  to  resolve.  Life-threatening  cardiac  arrhythmias 
related  to  hypokalemia  may  occur  during  attacks.  As  a  late  compli-
cation,  patients  commonly  develop  severe,  disabling  proximal  lower 
extremity weakness.

Attacks of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis resemble those of primary 
HypoKPP.  Despite  a  higher  incidence  of  thyrotoxicosis  in  women, 
men, particularly those of Asian descent, are more likely to manifest 
this complication. Attacks abate with treatment of the underlying thy-
roid condition.

A low serum potassium level during an attack, excluding secondary 
causes,  establishes  the  diagnosis.  In  the  midst  of  an  attack  of  weak-
ness, motor conduction studies may demonstrate reduced amplitudes, 
whereas  EMG  may  show  electrical  silence  in  severely  weak  muscles. 
In between attacks, the EMG and routine NCS are normal. However, 
a long exercise NCS test may demonstrate decrementing amplitudes.

HypoKPP type 1 is the most common form and is caused by muta-
tions  in  the  voltage-sensitive,  skeletal  muscle  calcium  channel  gene, 
CALCL1A3. Approximately 10% of cases are HypoKPP type 2, arising 
from mutations in the voltage-sensitive sodium channel gene (SCN4A). 
In both forms, the mutations lead to an abnormal gating pore current 
that  predisposes  the  muscle  cell  to  depolarize  when  potassium  levels 
are low.

TREATMENT
Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis
Mild  attacks  usually  do  not  require  medical  treatment.  However, 
severe attacks of weakness can be improved by the administration 
of  potassium.  Oral  KCl  (0.2–0.4  mmol/kg)  can  be  given  every   
30 min. Only rarely is IV therapy necessary (e.g., when swallowing 
problems  or  vomiting  is  present).  The  long-term  goal  of  therapy 
is  to  avoid  attacks.  Patients  should  be  made  aware  of  the  impor-
tance of a low-carbohydrate, low-sodium diet and consequences of 
intense  exercise.  Prophylactic  administration  of  acetazolamide  or 
dichlorphenamide can reduce attacks of periodic weakness. How-
ever, in patients with HypoKPP type 2, attacks of weakness can be 
exacerbated with these medications.

 ■ SODIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS OF MUSCLE
Hyperkalemic  Periodic  Paralysis  (HyperKPP)  The  term 
hyperkalemic  is  misleading  because  patients  are  often  normokalemic 
during attacks. That attacks are precipitated by potassium administra-
tion best defines the disease. The onset is usually in the first decade; 
males and females are affected equally. Attacks are brief and mild, usu-
ally lasting 30 min to several hours. Weakness affects proximal mus-
cles, sparing bulbar muscles. Attacks are precipitated by rest following 
exercise and fasting.

Potassium may be slightly elevated or normal during an attack. As 
in  HypoKPP,  NCS  in  HyperKPP  muscle  may  demonstrate  reduced 
motor amplitudes and the EMG may be silent in very weak muscles. A 
long exercise NCS test can reveal diminished amplitudes as well. The 
EMG may demonstrate myotonic discharges. HyperKPP is caused by 
mutations of the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN4A gene. Acetazo-
lamide or dichlorphenamide can reduce the frequency and severity of 
attacks. Mexiletine may be helpful in patients with significant clinical 
myotonia.

Paramyotonia  Congenita 
In  PC,  the  attacks  of  weakness  are 
cold-induced  or  occur  spontaneously  and  are  mild.  Myotonia  is  a 
prominent  feature  but  worsens  with  muscle  activity  (paradoxical 
myotonia).  This  is  in  contrast  to  classic  myotonia  in  which  exercise 
alleviates the condition. Attacks of weakness are seldom severe enough 
to  require  emergency  room  treatment.  Over  time,  patients  develop 
inter-attack weakness as they do in other forms of periodic paralysis.

Serum CK is usually mildly elevated. Routine NCS are normal. Short 
exercise NCS tests may be abnormal, however, and cooling of the mus-
cle often dramatically reduces the amplitude of the compound muscle 

action  potentials.  EMG  reveals  diffuse  myotonic  potentials  in  PC. 
Upon local cooling of the muscle, the myotonic discharges disappear 
as the patient becomes unable to activate MUAPs.

PC is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition; voltage-gated 
sodium  channel  mutations  are  responsible,  and  thus,  this  disorder  is 
allelic with HyperKPP. Mexiletine is reported to be helpful in reducing 
the myotonia.

 ■ POTASSIUM CHANNEL DISORDERS
Andersen-Tawil  Syndrome  This  rare  disease  is  characterized 
by  episodic  weakness,  cardiac  arrhythmias,  and  dysmorphic  features 
(short  stature,  scoliosis,  clinodactyly,  hypertelorism,  small  or  prom-
inent  low-set  ears,  micrognathia,  and  broad  forehead).  The  cardiac 
arrhythmias are potentially serious and life threatening. They include 
long QT, ventricular ectopy, bidirectional ventricular arrhythmias, and 
tachycardia.  The  disease  is  most  commonly  caused  by  mutations  of 
the inwardly rectifying potassium channel (Kir 2.1) gene that heighten 
muscle cell excitability. The episodes of weakness may differ between 
patients because of potassium variability. Acetazolamide may decrease 
the attack frequency and severity.

 ■ CHLORIDE CHANNEL DISORDERS
Two  forms  of  this  disorder,  autosomal  dominant  (Thomsen  disease) 
and  autosomal  recessive  (Becker  disease),  are  both  caused  by  muta-
tions in the chloride channel 1 gene (CLCN1). Symptoms are noted in 
infancy and early childhood. The severity lessens in the third to fourth 
decade. Myotonia is worsened by cold and improved by activity. The 
gait may appear slow and labored at first but improves with walking. 
In Thomsen disease, muscle strength is normal, but in Becker disease, 
which is usually more severe, there may be muscle weakness. Muscle 
hypertrophy  is  usually  present.  Myotonic  discharges  are  prominently 
displayed by EMG recordings. Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. 
Mexiletine is helpful in relieving the myotonia.

ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC 
MYOPATHIES
Endocrinopathies  can  cause  weakness,  but  fatigue  is  more  common 
than  true  weakness.  The  serum  CK  level  is  often  normal  (except  in 
hypothyroidism) and the muscle histology is characterized by atrophy 
rather than destruction of muscle fibers. Nearly all endocrine myopa-
thies respond to treatment.

 ■ THYROID DISORDERS
Hypothyroidism  (Chap.  383)  Patients  with  hypothyroidism 
have frequent muscle complaints, and about one-third have proximal 
muscle  weakness.  Muscle  cramps,  pain,  and  stiffness  are  common. 
Some  patients  have  enlarged  muscles.  Features  of  slow  muscle  con-
traction and relaxation occur in 25% of patients; the relaxation phase 
of  muscle  stretch  reflexes  is  characteristically  prolonged  and  best 
observed at the ankle or biceps brachii reflexes. The serum CK level is 
often elevated (up to 10 times normal). EMG is typically normal. Mus-
cle biopsy shows no distinctive morphologic abnormalities.

Hyperthyroidism  (Chap.  384)  Patients  who  are  thyrotoxic 
commonly have proximal muscle weakness, but they rarely complain 
of  myopathic  symptoms.  Activity  of  deep  tendon  reflexes  may  be 
enhanced.  Fasciculations  may  be  apparent  and,  when  coupled  with 
increased muscle stretch reflexes, may lead to an erroneous diagnosis 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. A form of hypokalemic periodic paral-
ysis can occur in patients who are thyrotoxic. Mutations in the KCNJ18 
gene that encodes for the inwardly rectifying potassium channel, Kir 
2.6, have been discovered in up to a third of cases.
 ■ PARATHYROID DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 410)
Hyperparathyroidism  Proximal  muscle  weakness,  muscle  wast-
ing,  and  brisk  muscle  stretch  reflexes  are  the  main  features  of  this 
endocrinopathy. Some patients develop neck extensor weakness (part 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3530

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders of the dropped head syndrome). Serum CK levels are usually normal or 
slightly elevated. Serum parathyroid hormone levels are elevated, while 
vitamin  D  and  calcium  levels  are  usually  reduced.  Muscle  biopsies 
show only mild type 2 fiber atrophy.

Hypoparathyroidism  An  overt  myopathy  due  to  hypocalce-
mia  rarely  occurs.  Neuromuscular  symptoms  are  usually  related  to 
localized  or  generalized  tetany.  Serum  CK  levels  may  be  increased 
secondary  to  muscle  damage  from  sustained  tetany.  Hyporeflexia  or 
areflexia  is  usually  present  and  contrasts  with  the  hyperreflexia  in 
hyperparathyroidism.

 ■ ADRENAL DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 386)
Conditions  associated  with  glucocorticoid  excess  cause  a  myopathy; 
steroid  myopathy  is  the  most  commonly  diagnosed  endocrine  mus-
cle  disease.  Proximal  muscle  weakness  combined  with  a  cushingoid 
appearance are the key clinical features. Serum CK and EMG are nor-
mal. Muscle biopsy, not typically done for diagnostic purposes, reveals 
type 2b muscle fiber atrophy. In primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s 
syndrome), neuromuscular complications are due to potassium deple-
tion. The clinical picture is one of persistent muscle weakness. Long-
standing hyperaldosteronism may lead to proximal limb weakness and 
wasting. Serum CK levels may be elevated, and a muscle biopsy may 
demonstrate necrotic fibers. These changes relate to hypokalemia and 
are not a direct effect of aldosterone on skeletal muscle.
 ■ PITUITARY DISORDERS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 380)
Patients with acromegaly usually have mild proximal weakness. Mus-
cles often appear enlarged but exhibit decreased force generation. The 
duration of acromegaly, rather than the serum growth hormone levels, 
correlates with the degree of myopathy.
 ■ DIABETES MELLITUS (SEE ALSO CHAP. 405)
Neuromuscular  complications  of  diabetes  mellitus  are  most  often 
related to neuropathy. The only notable myopathy is ischemic infarc-
tion of leg muscles, usually involving one of the thigh muscles but on 
occasion affecting the distal leg. This condition occurs in patients with 
poorly controlled diabetes and presents with the abrupt onset of pain, 
tenderness, and edema of a thigh or calf. The area of muscle infarction 
is  hard  and  indurated.  The  muscles  most  often  affected  include  the 
vastus lateralis, thigh adductors, and biceps femoris. Computed tomog-
raphy (CT) or MRI can demonstrate focal abnormalities in the affected 
muscle. Diagnosis by imaging is preferable to muscle biopsy, if possible, 
as hemorrhage into the biopsy site can occur.

MYOPATHIES OF SYSTEMIC ILLNESS
Systemic  illnesses  such  as  chronic  respiratory,  cardiac,  or  hepatic 
failure are frequently associated with severe muscle wasting and com-
plaints of weakness. Fatigue is usually a more significant problem than 
weakness, which is typically mild.

DRUG-INDUCED OR TOXIC MYOPATHIES
The most common toxic myopathies are caused by the cholesterol-low-
ering  agents  and  glucocorticoids.  Others  impact  practice  to  a  lesser 
degree but are important to consider in specific situations. Table 449-6 
provides a comprehensive list of drug-induced myopathies with their 
distinguishing features.

 ■ MYOPATHY FROM LIPID-LOWERING AGENTS
All  classes  of  lipid-lowering  agents  have  been  implicated  in  muscle 
toxicity,  including  HMG-CoA  reductase  inhibitors  (statins)  and,  to 
a  much  lesser  extent,  fibrates,  niacin,  and  ezetimibe.  Myalgia  and 
elevated  CKs  are  the  most  common  manifestations.  Rarely,  patients 
exhibit proximal weakness or myoglobinuria. Concomitant use of sta-
tins with fibrates and cyclosporine increases the risk of severe myotox-
icity. EMG demonstrates irritability, and myopathic units and muscle 
biopsies reveal necrotic muscle fibers in weak muscles. Severe myalgia, 
weakness, marked elevations in serum CK (>3–5 times baseline), and 

TABLE 449-6  Drug-Induced Myopathies
DRUGS
Lipid-lowering agents
  HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
  Fibric acid derivatives
  Niacin (nicotinic acid)

Glucocorticoids

Nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking agents

Zidovudine

Drugs of abuse
  Alcohol
  Amphetamines
  Cocaine
  Heroin
  Phencyclidine
  Meperidine
Autoimmune myopathy
  Statins
  Check point inhibitors
  D-Penicillamine

Amphophilic cationic drugs
  Amiodarone
  Chloroquine
  Hydroxychloroquine
Antimicrotubular drugs
  Colchicine

3531

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
4
9

M
u
s
c
u
l
a
r
D
y
s
t
r
o
p
h
i
e
s
a
n
d
O
t
h
e
r

M
u
s
c
l
e
D
i
s
e
a
s
e
s

MAJOR TOXIC REACTION
Drugs belonging to all three of the 
major classes of lipid-lowering agents 
can produce a spectrum of toxicity: 
asymptomatic serum creatine kinase 
elevation, myalgias, exercise-induced pain, 
rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria.
Acute, high-dose glucocorticoid 
treatment can cause acute quadriplegic 
myopathy. These high doses of steroids 
are often combined with nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blocking agents, but the 
weakness can occur without their use. 
Chronic steroid administration produces 
predominantly proximal weakness.
Acute quadriplegic myopathy can 
occur with or without concomitant 
glucocorticoids.
Mitochondrial myopathy with ragged red 
fibers
All drugs in this group can lead to 
widespread muscle breakdown, 
rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria.
Local injections cause muscle necrosis, 
skin induration, and limb contractures.

Use of statins may cause an immune-
mediated necrotizing myopathy associated 
with HMG-CoA reductase antibodies. 
Checkpoint inhibitors can be complicated 
by myositis, myasthenia gravis, and 
immune-mediated neuropathies. 
Myasthenia gravis has also been reported 
with penicillamine.
All amphophilic drugs have the potential 
to produce painless, proximal weakness 
associated with necrosis and autophagic 
vacuoles in the muscle biopsy.

This drug produces painless, proximal 
weakness especially in the setting of renal 
failure. Muscle biopsy shows necrosis and 
fibers with autophagic vacuoles.

myoglobinuria are indications for stopping the drug. Patients usually 
improve  with  drug  cessation,  although  this  may  take  several  weeks. 
Rare cases continue to progress after the offending agent is discontin-
ued. It is possible that in such cases the statin may have triggered an 
immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy, as these individuals require 
immunotherapy  (e.g.,  intravenous  immunoglobulin  or  immunosup-
pressive agents) to improve and often relapse when these therapies are 
discontinued (Chap. 365). Autoantibodies directed against HMG-CoA 
reductase have been identified in many of these cases.

 ■ GLUCOCORTICOID-RELATED MYOPATHIES
Glucocorticoid myopathy occurs with chronic treatment or as “acute 
quadriplegic” myopathy secondary to high-dose IV glucocorticoid use. 
Chronic administration produces proximal weakness accompanied by 
cushingoid manifestations, which can be quite debilitating; the chronic 
use of prednisone at a daily dose of ≥30 mg/d is most often associated 
with  toxicity.  Patients  taking  fluorinated  glucocorticoids  (triamci-
nolone,  betamethasone,  dexamethasone)  appear  to  be  at  especially 
high risk for myopathy. In chronic steroid myopathy, the serum CK is 
usually  normal.  Serum  potassium  may  be  low.  The  muscle  biopsy  in 
chronic cases shows preferential type 2 muscle fiber atrophy; this is not 
reflected in the EMG, which is usually normal.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3531

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3532

Patients receiving high-dose IV glucocorticoids for status asthma-
ticus,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  organ  transplantation, 
or other indications may develop severe generalized weakness (critical 
illness  myopathy).  This  myopathy,  also  known  as  acute  quadriplegic 
myopathy, can also occur in the setting of sepsis. Involvement of the 
diaphragm and intercostal muscles causes ventilatory muscle weakness 
and is usually appreciated when patients are unable to be weaned off a 
ventilatory in the intensive care unit. NCS demonstrate reduced com-
pound  muscle  action  potentials  in  the  setting  of  relatively  preserved 
sensory  potentials.  EMG  can  demonstrate  abnormal  insertional  and 
spontaneous  activity  and  early  recruitment  of  myopathic  appearing 
units in those muscles that can be activated. Muscle biopsy can show 
a distinctive loss of thick filaments (myosin) by electron microscopy. 
Treatment  is  withdrawal  of  glucocorticoids  and  physical  therapy,  but 
the recovery is slow. Patients require supportive care and rehabilitation.

 ■ OTHER DRUG-INDUCED MYOPATHIES
Certain  drugs  produce  painless,  largely  proximal  muscle  weakness. 
These  drugs  include  the  amphophilic  cationic  drugs  (amiodarone, 
chloroquine,  hydroxychloroquine)  and  antimicrotubular  drugs 
(colchicine) (Table 449-6). Muscle biopsy can be useful in the identi-
fication of toxicity because autophagic vacuoles are prominent patho-
logic features of these toxins.

 ■ GLOBAL ISSUES
As previously discussed, certain dystrophies have an increased preva-
lence in different parts of the world. LGMD2A/LGMDR1 is the most 
common  LGMD  in  individuals  from  Spain,  France,  Italy,  and  Great 
Britain; LGMD2I/LGMDR9 is more common in those with northern 
European ancestry. GNE myopathy is the most common form of distal 
myopathy in Japan but is also prevalent in the Ashkenazi population. 
OPMD  is  most  common  in  those  with  ancestry  from  Spain  and 
French-Canada  as  well  as  among  Ashkenazi.  Epidemiologic  studies 
are lacking regarding other forms of myopathy and their prevalence in 
different areas of the world.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Amato  AA,  Russell  JA  (eds):  Neuromuscular  Disorders,  2nd  ed. 

New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2016.

Doughty CT, Amato AA: Toxic myopathies. Continuum (Minneap 

Minn) 25:1712, 2019.

Heller SA et al: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Muscle Nerve 

61:436, 2020.

Johnson NE: Myotonic muscular dystrophies. Continuum (Minneap 

Minn) 25:1682, 2019.

Narayanaswami P et al: Summary of evidence-based guideline: Diag-
nosis  and  treatment  limb-girdle  and  distal  muscular  dystrophies. 
Neurology 83:1453, 2014.

Rosow LK, Amato AA: The role of electrodiagnostic testing, imaging, 
and muscle biopsy in the investigation of muscle disease. Continuum 
(Minneap Minn) 22:1787, 2016.

Sacconi  S  et  al:  FSHD1  and  FSHD2  form  a  disease  continuum. 

Neurology 92:e2273, 2019.

Sansone  VA  et  al:  Randomized,  placebo-controlled  trials  of  dichlor-

phenamide in periodic paralysis. Neurology 86:1408, 2016.

Straub V et al: LGMD Workshop Study Group. 229th ENMC interna-
tional workshop: Limb girdle muscular dystrophies—Nomenclature 
and reformed classification Naarden, the Netherlands, 17-19 March 
2017. Neuromuscul Disord 28:702, 2018.

Tawil  R  et  al:  Evidence-based  guideline  summary:  Evaluation,  diag-
nosis, and management of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: 
Report  of  the  Guideline  Development,  Dissemination,  and  Imple-
mentation  Subcommittee  of  the  American  Academy  of  Neurology 
and  the  Practice  Issues  Review  Panel  of  the  American  Association 
of Neuromuscular & Electrodiagnostic Medicine. Neurology 85:357, 
2015.

Wicklund  MP:  The  limb-girdle  muscular  dystrophies.  Continuum 

(Minneap Minn) 25:1599, 2019.

Section 4  Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/ 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

450 Myalgic 

Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome
Elizabeth R. Unger, Jin-Mann S. Lin, 
Jeanne Bertolli

Myalgic  encephalomyelitis/chronic  fatigue  syndrome  (ME/CFS)  is  a 
chronic  complex  illness  with  multisystem  manifestations  and  long-
term impact on functional impairment comparable to multiple sclero-
sis, rheumatoid arthritis, and congestive heart failure. The hallmark of 
ME/CFS is persistent and unexplained fatigue resulting in significant 
impairment  in  daily  functioning  along  with  worsening  symptoms 
following physical or mental exertion that would have been tolerated 
before illness (post-exertional malaise). Besides intense fatigue, many 
patients  report  concomitant  symptoms  such  as  pain,  cognitive  dys-
function,  and  unrefreshing  sleep.  Additional  symptoms  can  include 
headache, sore throat, tender lymph nodes, muscle aches, joint aches, 
feverishness,  difficulty  sleeping,  psychiatric  problems,  allergies,  and 
abdominal cramps.

The  condition  has  been  known  by  many  names  and  debate  about 
the name and case definition continues. The composite name ME/CFS 
was adopted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in 
recognition of the limitations of either ME (absence of definitive inflam-
mation in brain and spinal cord) or CFS (trivializes an often devastating 
illness  through  confusion  with  fatigue  that  everyone  experiences). 
An  alternative  name,  systemic  exertion  intolerance  disease  (SEID), 
proposed  by  the  2015  Institute  of  Medicine  (IOM,  now  the  National 
Academy  of  Medicine)  committee  reviewing  ME/CFS,  has  not  gained 
acceptance.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Determining  how  frequently  ME/CFS  occurs  and  characteristics  of 
those affected has been complicated by variability in study design and 
application  of  case  definitions.  In  the  absence  of  a  simple  diagnostic 
test, evaluation by an experienced clinician is required for case iden-
tification.  Clinic-based  studies  most  accurately  identify  patients  with 
ME/CFS but overrepresent higher socioeconomic groups with access 
to  ME/CFS  clinics.  Population-based  surveys  that  included  a  clinical 
evaluation estimated a prevalence of 0.2–0.7%, suggesting ≥1 million 
Americans  have  ME/CFS.  However,  these  surveys  found  that  ≥80% 
of  those  meeting  criteria  for  ME/CFS  had  not  been  diagnosed  by  a 
health care provider. ME/CFS is three to four times more common in 
women  than  men.  The  highest  prevalence  of  illness  is  among  those 
40–50  years  of  age,  but  the  age  range  is  broad  and  includes  children 
and  adolescents.  Persons  of  all  race  and  ethnicities  are  affected,  and 
there  is  some  evidence  that  socioeconomically  disadvantaged  groups 
are at increased risk.

RISK FACTORS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A wide variety of infectious agents have been reported to be associated 
with  a  postinfectious  fatiguing  illness  resembling  ME/CFS.  These 
include both viral and nonviral pathogens, such as Epstein-Barr virus, 
Ross River virus, Coxiella burnetti (Q fever), Ebola virus, SARS-CoV-1, 
and Giardia. While recovery from these infections is the rule, approx-
imately 10% of those infected remain ill for ≥6 months. Most recently, 
published reports suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection is also associated 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3532

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3533

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
0

M
y
a
l
g
i
c
E
n
c
e
p
h
a
l
o
m
y
e
l
i
t
i
s
/
C
h
r
o
n
i
c
F
a
t
i
g
u
e
S
y
n
d
r
o
m
e

Fatigue
Post-Exertional Malaise

Genetics

Hypothalamic-
Pituitary-
Adrenal Axis

Diet/Nutrition
Lifestyle

Cognitive
Impairment
Sleep
Problems

Central
Nervous
System

Metabolism

Immune
System

Pain

Autonomic
Nervous System

Stress

Infection

Orthostatic
Intolerance

FIGURE 450-1  A multisystem model for ME/CFS. An example of a unifying model for 
ME/CFS demonstrating the interactions of multiple organ systems, environmental, 
genetic, and behavioral factors contributing to symptoms.

with prolonged fatiguing illness. Host and pathogen factors associated 
with recovery versus persistent disease remain elusive. In addition to 
infectious  insults,  a  variety  of  stressors,  including  physical  trauma, 
adverse  events,  and  allostatic  load  (or  “wear  and  tear”  on  the  body)  
have been found to be associated with ME/CFS. Twin studies and fam-
ily  histories  suggest  a  role  for  shared  environment  as  well  as  genetic 
factors.

Evidence  for  immunologic  dysfunction  is  inconsistent.  Modest 
elevations  in  titers  of  antinuclear  antibodies,  reductions  in  immu-
noglobulin  subclasses,  deficiencies  in  mitogen-driven  lymphocyte 
proliferation,  reductions  in  natural  killer  cell  activity,  disturbances 
in  cytokine  production,  and  altered  T-cell  metabolism  have  been 
described. None of these immune findings has been firmly established 
and none of these changes appear in most patients. In theory, symp-
toms of ME/CFS could result from excessive production of a cytokine, 
such  as  interleukin  1  or  interferon  alpha,  which  induces  fatigue  and 
other  flulike  symptoms;  however,  compelling  data  in  support  of  this 
hypothesis are lacking.

Other studies have reported various nonspecific changes in regional 
brain  structures  estimated  by  MRI;  dysfunction  of  the  autonomic 
nervous  system;  abnormalities  in  the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPA) axis; altered metabolism; and dysbiosis of the intestinal micro-
biome. Confirmatory studies are needed and none of the findings are 
consistent  enough  to  be  used  for  diagnosis.  It  is  clear  that  ME/CFS 
represents a complex disorder with alterations in multiple interrelated 
homeostatic systems. A variety of unifying models for the illness have 
been  proposed  and  discoveries  about  the  pathophysiology  of  ME/
CFS hold promise for elucidating novel mechanisms and interactions 
important in other illnesses (Fig. 450-1).

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
DIAGNOSIS
A diagnosis of ME/CFS is made based on patient-reported symp-
toms  that  fit  a  characteristic  profile.  After  a  careful  review  of  the 
literature  and  symptom-based  case  definitions  for  ME,  CFS,  or 
ME/CFS,  the  IOM  committee  recommended  in  2015  a  straight-
forward  clinical  case  definition  (Table  450-1).  This  includes  the 
symptoms  consistently  noted  in  prior  consensus  case  definitions: 
fatigue  limiting  the  patient’s  ability  to  participate  in  his/her  usual 
pre-illness  activities,  sleep  problems,  and  post-exertional  malaise 
(PEM). PEM is a relapse in symptoms triggered by physical, emo-
tional, or cognitive exertion that would not have been problematic 

TABLE 450-1  2015 Institute of Medicine Clinical Case Definition for 
ME/CFS
Substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in pre-illness 
levels of activity (occupational, educational, social, or personal life) that:
a. lasts for more than 6 months
b. is accompanied by fatigue that is often profound, of new or definite onset (not 
lifelong), not the result of ongoing excessive exertion, and is not substantially 
alleviated by rest

*Post-exertional malaise (PEM)—worsening of symptoms after physical, mental, 
or emotional exertion that would not have caused a problem before the illness
*Unrefreshing sleep
*Cognitive impairment or orthostatic intolerance
*Frequency and severity of symptoms should be assessed; should be present at
least half of the time and with at least moderate intensity

for the patient before onset of ME/CFS. The relapse lasts more than 
a day, and sometimes weeks. In addition, either difficulty thinking 
and concentrating (often referred to by patients as “brain fog”) or 
orthostatic intolerance should be present.

Patients with  ME/CFS  may  experience  a  wide  range  of  other 
symptoms  not  specified  in  the  IOM  clinical  case  definition 
(Table 450-2). As a result, patients meeting the case definition 
could  have  very  different  clinical  features  based  on  the  type, 
frequency, and severity of their symptoms. Patients may describe a 
precipitating cause for their illness, such as a known or presumed 
infection,  but  frequently  no  initiating  factor  is  recognized.  The 
symptoms may occur suddenly within a day or week or may occur 
gradually.

While  the  case  definition  indicates  illness  must  be  present  at 
least  6  months,  the  possibility  of  ME/CFS  should  be  considered 
for  patients  with  consistent  symptoms  persisting  >1  month,  and 
evaluation and supportive care can begin as early as 4–6 weeks after 
onset.  Listening  to  patients’  descriptions  of  what  they  are  experi-
encing is important. Asking questions can help patients accurately 
describe their experience with fatigue and PEM. These include ask-
ing about current activity levels compared with before they became 
ill, what happens when they are as active as they were pre-illness, 
and  how  long  it  takes  to  recover  after  exertion.  Whereas  patients 
recognize relapses, the relation of relapse to activity level may not be 
apparent, and as a result PEM may not be recognized. Patients may 
also  appear  well  during  an  office  visit,  only  to  relapse  afterwards 
from exertion surrounding the consultation.

Although  the  IOM  definition  does  not  list  medical  or  psycho-
logical conditions that exclude the diagnosis of ME/CFS, a careful 
clinical evaluation is required to identify and treat other illness that 
could  explain  or  contribute  to  the  patient’s  symptoms.  The  initial 
evaluation also requires reviewing family history; medical history 
(including infections, traumas/surgeries, occupational exposure to 
environmental  toxins);  a  review  of  medications  and  supplements; 
physical  examination,  including  lean  test  for  postural  orthostatic 
tachycardia  syndrome  (POTS;  Chap.  440);  mental  health  assess-
ment  (screen  for  depression  and  anxiety);  and  routine  screening 
laboratory  tests  (if  recent  results  are  not  on  record).  As  routine 

TABLE 450-2  Additional Symptoms Experienced by Patients with  
ME/CFS
Joint pain without swelling or redness
Muscle aches
New headaches
Tender lymph nodes
Sensitivity to sensory stimuli (e.g., light, noise, smells)
Sore throat
Alcohol intolerance
Difficulties with temperature regulation (feeling feverish or chilled)

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3533

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
3534

TABLE 450-3  ME/CFS Comorbid Conditions
Chronic overlapping pain conditions: fibromyalgia (FM), chronic migraine, 
temporomandibular joint disease (TMJ), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 
endometriosis, vulvodynia, urologic chronic pelvic pain syndromes (UCPPS)
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Allergies
Sjögren’s syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Mast-cell activation syndrome (MCAS)
Dysautonomia
Multiple chemical sensitivities

laboratory  tests  are  usually  within  normal  limits,  their  role  is  in 
identifying  other  illnesses  and  the  specific  panel  of  tests  should 
be adjusted based on the patient’s presentation. Typically the tests 
include  complete  blood  count,  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate, 
electrolytes, fasting glucose, renal function tests (blood urea nitro-
gen, glomerular filtration rate), calcium, phosphate, liver function 
(bilirubin,  alanine  aminotransferase,  alkaline  phosphatase,  aspar-
tate  aminotransferase,  gamma-glutamyl  transferase,  total  protein,   
albumin/globulin  ratio),  C-reactive  protein,  thyroid  function   
(thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine), iron studies to assess 
both  iron  overload  and  iron  deficiency  (serum  iron,  transferrin   
saturation, ferritin), celiac disease screening tests, and urinalysis. 

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND COMORBID CONDITIONS
While the differential diagnosis for fatigue is quite broad, further 
workups  and  referrals  should  be  chosen  carefully  based  on  the 
patient’s history, symptoms (particularly those that are new, wors-
ening, or unusual), and results of initial laboratory tests. Conditions 
reported to occur in association with ME/CFS (Table 450-3) should 
be kept in mind during the evaluation and follow-up, as manage-
ment and treatment modalities for these comorbidities could con-
tribute to an improved quality of life. 

MANAGEMENT
While  there  are  no  approved  drugs  to  treat  or  cure  ME/CFS, 
patients benefit from receiving a diagnosis and an individualized 
plan  that  addresses  the  symptoms  that  are  most  problematic 
for  the  patient.  Some  symptoms,  in  particular,  disturbed  sleep 
(Chap. 31) and pain (Chap. 13), may improve with nonpharma-
cologic  therapies  (such  as  sleep  hygiene,  massage,  acupuncture, 
hot  or  cold  packs)  or  medications.  Any  medications  should  be 
started at lower doses than usual and only slowly increased. Patients 
with ME/CFS have been reported to be more sensitive to medica-
tions than the general population, and benefits with fewer toxicities 
may be achieved at lower doses. Narcotics should be avoided, and 
referral to sleep centers or other specialists may be required.

Controlled therapeutic trials have not established significant ben-
efit for patients with ME/CFS from acyclovir, fludrocortisone, galan-
tamine,  modafinil,  and  IV  immunoglobulin,  among  other  agents. 
These studies have been limited by small numbers and lack power 
to investigate benefit in patient subgroups. Preliminary small studies 
reported the possible effectiveness of the B-cell targeting anti-CD20 
monoclonal antibody rituximab in ME/CFS, but a subsequent large, 
well-designed  prospective  double-blind  study  found  no  benefit. 
Numerous anecdotes circulate regarding other traditional and non-
traditional  therapies.  It  is  important  to  guide  patients  away  from 
therapeutic modalities that are toxic, expensive, or unreasonable.

Educating the patient and family about PEM can be helpful in 
avoiding  the  harmful  cycle  of  overexertion  during  “good  days” 
followed  by  relapse  that  can  negate  any  functional  gains.  This  is 
often referred to as “push and crash.” Recognizing limits and using 
activity management (pacing) can help limit PEM. It is important 
to  maintain  tolerated  activity  levels  to  minimize  deconditioning. 
Activity may be advanced very gradually as tolerated.

Counseling  may  help  patients  and  their  families  cope  with  the 
long-term consequences of living with a chronic illness. Consulta-
tion with a physical or occupational therapist may identify energy- 
saving  strategies  for  activities  of  daily  living  as  well  as  needed 
accommodations,  such  as  a  wheelchair  for  activities  that  require 
walking longer distances or prolonged standing. 

COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
The  illness  severity  varies  from  mild  or  moderate,  with  patients 
retaining  varying  degrees  of  pre-illness  function,  to  severe,  with 
patients  essentially  homebound.  Most  patients  experience  some 
improvement and stabilize, although return to their prior level of 
function is unusual. A continued decline in function should prompt 
evaluation  for  other  illnesses.  Patients  should  be  re-evaluated  at 
scheduled intervals to adjust treatments and detect any intercurrent 
disease. New or changing symptoms should be worked up to iden-
tify  any  new  illnesses.  Given  the  social  isolation  and  loss  of  hope 
associated with a debilitating chronic illness, serious depression and 
an increased risk of suicide is reported for patients with ME/CFS. 
Clinicians should be prepared to screen for this and refer patients 
as needed.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Bateman L et al: Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: 
Essentials  of  diagnosis  and  Management.  Mayo  Clin  Proc  2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2021.07.004

Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention:  Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic  Fatigue  Syndrome  (ME/CFS).  Available 
from https://www.cdc.gov/me-cfs/index.html. Accessed March 15, 2021.
Institute  of  Medicine:  Beyond  Myalgic  Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue  Syndrome:  Redefining  an  Illness.  Washington,  DC:  The 
National Academies Press, 2015.

Komaroff  AL:  Advances  in  understanding  the  pathophysiology  of 

chronic fatigue syndrome. JAMA 322:499, 2019.

Lapp CW: Initiating care of a patient with myalgic encephalomyelitis/

chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Front Pediatr 6:415, 2019.

Rowe  PC  et  al:  Myalgic  encephalomyelitis/chronic  fatigue  syndrome 
diagnosis and management in young people: A primer. Front Pediatr 5: 
121, 2017.

Section 5  Psychiatric and Addiction 
Disorders

451 Biology of Psychiatric 
Disorders
Robert O. Messing, Eric J. Nestler, 
Matthew W. State

Psychiatric disorders are central nervous system diseases characterized 
by disturbances in emotion, cognition, motivation, and socialization. 
They  are  highly  heritable,  with  genetic  risk  comprising  20–90%  of 
disease  vulnerability.  As  a  result  of  their  prevalence,  early  onset,  and 
persistence,  they  contribute  substantially  to  the  burden  of  illness 
worldwide.  All  psychiatric  disorders  are  broad  heterogeneous  syn-
dromes  that  currently  lack  well-defined  neuropathology  and  bona 
fide biologic markers. Therefore, diagnoses continue to be made solely 
from clinical observations using criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual  of  Mental  Disorders,  Fifth  Edition  (DSM-5),  of  the  American 
Psychiatric Association (see Chap. 452).

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3534

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3535

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
1

B
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f
P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

There  is  increasing  agreement  that  the  classification  of  psychiatric 
illnesses  in  DSM  does  not  accurately  reflect  the  underlying  biology  of 
these  disorders.  Uncertainties  in  diagnosis  complicate  efforts  to  study 
the genetic basis and attendant neurobiological mechanisms underlying 
mental  illness,  though  recent  advances  in  genomic  and  neuroscience 
technologies along with the consolidation of very large patient cohorts 
have,  for  multiple  disorders,  led  to  major  progress  in  these  realms.  In 
addition, there have been efforts to address the limitations of a categor-
ical nosology directly through the development of an alternative diag-
nostic scheme, termed Research Domain Criteria (RDoC). This system 
classifies  mental  illness  on  the  basis  of  core  behavioral  abnormalities 
shared across several syndromes—such as psychosis (loss of reality) or 
anhedonia  (decreased  ability  to  experience  pleasure)—and  the  associ-
ated brain circuitry that controls these behavioral domains. It is antici-
pated that such classifications will assist in defining the biologic basis of 
key symptoms. Other factors that have impeded progress in understand-
ing  mental  illness  include  the  lack  of  access  to  pathologic  brain  tissue 
except upon death and the inherent limitations of animal models for dis-
orders defined largely by behavioral abnormalities (e.g., hallucinations, 
delusions, guilt, suicidality) that are inaccessible in animals.

Despite these limitations, the past decade has been marked by real 
progress. Neuroimaging methods are beginning to provide evidence of 
brain pathology; genome-wide association studies and high-throughput 
sequencing are reliably identifying genes and genomic loci that confer 
risk  for  severe  forms  of  mental  illness;  and  investigations  of  better 
validated  animal  models,  leveraging  a  host  of  new  methods  to  study 
molecular, cellular, and circuit-level processes, are offering new insight 
into disease pathogenesis. There is also excitement in the utility of neu-
rons, glia, and brain organoids induced in vitro from patient-derived 
pluripotent  stem  cells,  providing  novel  ways  to  study  disease  patho-
physiology  and  screen  for  new  treatments.  There  is  consequently 
justified  optimism  that  the  field  of  psychiatry  will  better  integrate 
behaviorally  defined  syndromes  with  an  understanding  of  biological 
substrates in a way that will drive the development of improved treat-
ments  and  eventually  cures  and  preventive  measures.  This  chapter 
describes several examples of recent discoveries in basic neuroscience 
and genetics that have informed our current understanding of disease 
mechanisms in psychiatry.

 ■ NEUROGENETICS
Because the human brain can only be examined indirectly during life, 
genome analyses have been extremely important for obtaining molecu-
lar clues about the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders. Moreover, the 
identification of germline risk alleles and mutations provides potential 
traction on the question of cause versus effect. In other types of cross-
sectional  studies,  it  may  be  impossible  to  determine  whether  a  phe-
notype  or  biomarker  observed  in  affected  humans  or  model  systems 
reflects  an  etiologic  factor  or  a  compensatory  response.  In  contrast, 
germline  genetic  risk  is  present  before  the  brain  develops—at  least 
theoretically allowing for experiments to address temporal sequencing.
A  wealth  of  new  information  has  been  made  possible  by  recent 
technologic  developments  that  have  permitted  affordable,  large-scale 
genome-wide  association  studies  and  high-throughput  sequencing. 
As an example of the latter, there has been significant progress in the 
genetics  of  autism  spectrum  disorders  (ASDs),  which  are  a  hetero-
geneous  group  of  neurodevelopmental  diseases  that  share  clinical 
features of impaired social communication and restricted, repetitive 
patterns  of  behavior.  ASDs  are  highly  heritable;  concordance  rates 
in monozygotic twins (~60–90%) are five- to tenfold higher than in 
dizygotic twins and siblings, and first-degree relatives show approxi-
mately tenfold increased risk compared with the general population. 
ASDs  are  also  genetically  heterogeneous.  More  than  100  individual 
risk genes, along with dozens of submicroscopic deletions and dupli-
cations often containing multiple genes, have been identified, almost 
exclusively  through  the  study  of  rare,  large-effect,  new  (de  novo) 
mutations (Fig. 451-1). All told, genes and genomic regions vulner-
able  to  these  types  of  mutations  account  for  ~20–30%  of  formerly 
idiopathic cases that present in the clinic, although none individually 
accounts  for  >1%.  In  addition,  ~10%  of  individuals  with  ASD  have 

well-described  intellectual  disability  syndromes  including  fragile  X 
syndrome, Rett syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis (Chap. 90). However, 
it appears that most of the risk for ASD in the population involves true 
polygenic  inheritance.  There  is  considerable  evidence,  for  example, 
that >50% of the genetic liability is carried in common alleles of very 
small individual effect. To date, studies of tens of thousands of cases 
have  identified  five  reproducible  associations  of  loci  meeting  gold 
standard genome-wide association statistical thresholds. With contin-
ually increasing cohort sizes, and thus power, this number is certain to 
grow in the future.

Amid  the  genetic  heterogeneity  that  has  so  far  been  identified, 
common  themes  have  emerged  that  inform  pathogenesis  of  ASDs. 
For instance, many identified rare mutations are in genes that encode 
proteins  involved  in  synaptic  function  and  early  transcriptional  and 
chromatin  regulation  (Fig.  451-1)  and  have  a  clear  relationship  to 
activity-dependent  neural  responses  that  can  affect  the  development 
of  neural  systems  underlying  cognition  and  social  behaviors.  One 
particularly intriguing hypothesis is that these genes may lead to ASD 
risk  by  changing  the  balance  of  excitatory  versus  inhibitory  synaptic 
signaling  in  local  and  extended  circuits  and  by  altering  mechanisms 
that  control  brain  growth.  Some  mutations  affect  genes  (e.g.,  PTEN, 
TSC1,  and  TSC2)  that  negatively  regulate  signaling  from  several 
types  of  extracellular  stimuli,  including  those  transduced  by  recep-
tor  tyrosine  kinases.  Their  dysregulation  can  alter  neuronal  growth, 
resulting  in  altered  brain  size,  as  well  as  synaptic  development  and 
function. Finally, several recent studies have focused on the question 
of when and where multiple functionally diverse risk genes converge 
with respect to human brain development. Interestingly, these studies 
have thus far tended to overlap with expression patterns of glutama-
tergic neurons in mid-fetal cortex (Fig. 451-1). Given the pleiotropic 
biological effects of the ASD genes identified to date, an understanding 
of the developmental or “spatiotemporal” dimensions of risk is likely 
to serve as a useful complement to studies of the function of individual 
genes. In short, it may turn out that when and where genetic variation 
has its impact in the developing brain may be as important as the key 
processes that are identified.

With  further  understanding  of  pathogenesis  and  the  definition  of 
specific ASD subtypes, there is reason to believe that effective therapies 
will  be  identified.  Work  in  mouse  models  has  already  demonstrated 
that some autism-like behaviors can be reversed, even in fully devel-
oped adult animals, by modifying the underlying genetic or functional 
pathology.  These  results  suggest  that  key  phenotypes  arising  from 
some  ASD-related  large-effect  mutations  may  well  reflect  ongoing 
functional derangements, offering hope that interventions can be suc-
cessful well after the initial developmental insult and the emergence of 
symptoms.  Treatments  that  target  excitation-inhibition  imbalance  or 
altered mRNA translation are one area of early promise. For example, 
the genes TSC1, TSC2, and PTEN are negative regulators of signaling 
through the target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1), which regulates 
protein  synthesis.  Rapamycin,  a  selective  inhibitor  of  TORC1,  can 
reverse  several  behavioral  and  synaptic  defects  in  mice  carrying  null 
mutations in these genes.

Increasingly,  attention  has  turned  to  the  strategy  of  targeting  the 
genetic  “lesion”  early  in  development  to  treat  or  prevent  ASD  and 
related phenotypes in those cases in which a single, highly penetrant 
coding  mutation  is  present.  However,  even  with  the  relatively  large 
number of risk genes (>100) that have been identified carrying de novo 
putative  loss-of-function  coding  mutations,  there  is  a  much  smaller 
number of potential targets that carry sufficiently high and predictable 
risks for severe outcomes to consider directly targeting nucleic acids, 
for  example,  with  CRISPR-based  therapies  or  the  use  of  antisense 
oligonucleotides (ASOs). Clearly, however, recent successes with very 
early  intervention  in  spinal  muscular  atrophy,  using  both  strategies, 
are driving increased interest in their utility in a range of brain-based 
disorders.  Currently,  with  regard  to  neurodevelopmental  conditions, 
these  approaches  are  being  most  actively  pursued  for  well-known 
intellectual disability syndromes that may also carry elevated risk for 
ASD, such as Angelman syndrome, Rett and MECP2 duplication syn-
drome, and fragile X syndrome. Such efforts could be transformational 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3535

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
3536

cAMP

L1

ANK2

Spectrin
 Network

Ca2 + Ch.

AP2S1

Ca2 + Ch.

GRIN2B

MGluR

MINT

CASK

?+

1
X
N
R
N

s
N
G
L
N

DPYSL2

Microtubule 

KATNAL2**

MAP1A

DYRK1A

SCN2A

Presynaptic

DYNC1H1

CUL3**

RBX1

KCT13

Phos. localizes

CK2

Ub

RhoA

NMDARs

KCNQ3

Channels

Ubiquitin Ligases

Cell Adhesion Proteins

GABRB3

Scaffolding Proteins

SLC6A1

SCN2A

GABRB3

Actin
Cytoskeleton

Phosphatase

Kinases

Other 

Transcription Factors

Adaptor Proteins

FDR>0.01

Homer

CK2

5
9
D
S
P

S
H
A
N
K3

1
P
A
K
G

1
P
A
K
G

CAMKII

CNTNAP2

CAMKII

PSD95

SYNGAP1

PTEN

AKT

FMR1

CYFIP1

FMR1

SHANK2/3

Ras-GTP

Ras-GDP

MEK

TSC1 TSC2

CAMKII

PIKE-L

RAC1

PI3K

Endoplasmic
Reticulum
SRPR

DSCAM

Membrane/
Vessicle Targeting
A

C
T
N
N
B
1

KMT2C

KDM6B

KDM5B

AGO1-4

TNRC6B**

MAPK

mTORC1

GIGYF1 2EHP

Translation

ASH1L

SETD5

ARTKQTARKSTGGKAPRKQLATKAARKSAPATGGVK

CHD8

SGRGKGGKGLGKGGAKRHRKVLRDNIQGITKPAIR

SUV420H1

NCKAP1**

∆

WRC

CYFIP1

WAC

TTT-Pontin/
Reptin
complex

Postsynaptic

PAX5

BCL11A

TBR1*

MBD5

Nucleus

MKX

MYT1L

MED13L

TCF7L2*

POGZ

RORB

FOXP1 DEAF1

CTNNB1

Transcription

∆

∆

RNF20 RNF40
WAC

Ub

TRIP12*

RNF168

Ub

H3

H2B

H4

H2A

Methyl group

Lysine demethylase

Ubiquitine ligase

Reader

ARID1B

ADNP

RAI1

SIN3A

DNMT3A

ANKRD11

Other chromatin remodeler

Lysine methyltransferase

FDR > 0.01

TBL1XR1

TLK2

CHD2

B

FIGURE 451-1  Functional characteristics and developmental convergence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) associated genes: genes associated with ASD based on 
recurrent de novo and transmitted coding mutations are shown in A and B. Those genes encoding proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 in Sanders et al, Neuron 
2015, and Satterstrom et al, Cell 2020, are highlighted with respect to their putative functions. Genes meeting the highest confidence criteria in Sanders et al 2015 and 
showing either an FDR >0.01 or an FDR >0.3 in Satterstrom are noted (* and **, respectively). Additional interacting and functionally related molecules that do not meet 
the above criteria are shown in green. FMR1, TSC1, and TSC2 are syndromic ASD genes included in the figure (A). Multiple gene ontology analyses of ASD genes have 
highlighted both pre- and postsynaptic molecules (A) and chromatin modifiers (B) as points of enrichment. In C, an alternative strategy for grouping ASD risk genes is 
highlighted (Willsey et al, Cell 2013), based on their spatiotemporal expression patterns as opposed to putative functions. One analytic strategy, illustrated in C, leveraged 
only high-confidence ASD genes and examined their developmental expression patterns using the BrainSpan data set. Convergence for ASD risk was identified in deep 
layer (V and VI) excitatory neurons in mid-fetal human cortex. Multiple analyses have similarly found glutamatergic neurons in mid-fetal prefrontal cortex as one point of 
convergence, with somewhat less agreement on layer specificity and potential additional spatiotemporal points of convergence.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3536

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3537

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
1

B
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f
P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

Convergence of Autism Associated Genes
& Co-expression Network Analysis

Map of Gene Expression in the
Developing Human Brain

Co-expression of Autism
Associated Genes

C

Mid-fetal Development
Prefrontal and Primary
Motor-Somatosensory Cortex

FIGURE 451-1  (Continued)

for  very  small  numbers  of  individuals  and  may  well  yield  important 
insights into biology that have impact beyond those carrying rare very 
highly  penetrant  mutations.  They  will  undoubtedly  raise  significant 
practical as well as ethical challenges as treatments for more common 
forms of ASD.

The ability to catalog common genetic variants and assay them on 
array-based  platforms  and,  more  recently,  to  carry  out  whole  exome 
sequencing  has  allowed  investigators  to  leverage  very  large  patient 
cohorts to detect risk loci for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with 
genome-wide significance. In contrast to ASD, where the lion’s share of 
early success in gene identification has resulted from the study of rare, 
large-effect,  de  novo  mutations,  much  of  gene  discovery  to  date  for 
these syndromes has resulted from genome-wide association studies of 
common inherited polymorphisms. It is noteworthy that there is also 
striking overlap among the submicroscopic deletions and duplications, 
called  copy  number  variants  (CNVs),  that  have  been  found  to  carry 
large  risks  for  ASD,  schizophrenia,  and  bipolar  disorder,  as  well  as 
epilepsy and intellectual disability.

To date, >200 distinct genomic regions, marked by associated single 
nucleotide  polymorphisms,  have  been  identified  in  schizophrenia, 
some  of  which  show  risk  as  well  for  bipolar  disorder.  Several  of  the 
identified  genes  are  parts  of  molecular  complexes,  such  as  voltage-
gated  calcium  channels  (in  particular,  CACNA1C  and  CACNB2)  and 
the  postsynaptic  density  of  excitatory  synapses.  Genes  that  promote 
risk  for  addiction  and  depression  have  also  begun  to  emerge  from 
large studies. The best-established susceptibility locus for addiction is 
the  CHRNA5-A3-B4  nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptor  gene  cluster  on 
chromosome 15 associated with nicotine and alcohol addiction. Recent 
genome-wide association studies of depression have required hundreds 
of  thousands  of  cases  and  controls  to  identify  the  first  statistically 
significant loci using state-of-the-art approaches. These findings col-
lectively point to the tremendous heterogeneity of depressive disorders 
as  well  as  the  very  small  biologic  effects  conferred  by  any  individual 
common allele.

A  recurrent  theme  that  has  emerged  from  genetic  studies  of  psy-
chiatric  disorders  is  phenotypic  pleiotropy,  namely,  that  many  genes 
are  associated  with  multiple  psychiatric  syndromes.  For  example, 
mutations in MECP2, FMR1, and TSC1 and TSC2 can cause intellec-
tual  disability  without  ASD,  others  in  MECP2  can  cause  obsessive- 
compulsive and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders, some alleles 
of NRXN1 are associated with symptoms of both ASD and schizophre-
nia, and common polymorphisms in CACNA1C are strongly associated 
with both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Likewise, duplication of 
chromosome  16p  is  associated  with  both  schizophrenia  and  autism, 
whereas deletions in the DiGeorge’s (velocardiofacial) syndrome region 
are  associated  with  schizophrenia,  autism,  and  bipolar  disorder.  The 
association  of  genes  and  genomic  regions  with  multiple  syndromes 
attests  to  the  complexity  of  psychiatric  disorders,  the  very  large  gap 
between molecular mechanisms and the current categorical diagnos-
tic  schemes,  and  the  influence  of  additional  factors  that  combine  to 
specify  the  ultimate  phenotype.  The  latter  might  include  polygenic 

“background,”  variations  in  regulatory  regions  of  the  genome  that 
determine cell-type specificity and timing of gene expression, protec-
tive variants, stochastic events, and epigenetic effects. This pleiotropy 
of consequences for a given genetic mutation in psychiatry is akin to 
the  pleiotropy  seen  for  many  cancer-causing  mutations,  where  the 
same mutation can lead to many different types of cancers across the 
population.

 ■ SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
Studies  of  signal  transduction  have  revealed  numerous  intracellular 
signaling  pathways  that  are  perturbed  in  psychiatric  disorders,  and 
such  research  has  provided  insight  into  development  of  new  ther-
apeutic  agents.  For  example,  lithium  is  a  highly  effective  drug  for 
bipolar  disorder  and  competes  with  magnesium  to  inhibit  numerous 
magnesium-dependent  enzymes,  including  the  enzyme  GSK3β  and 
several  enzymes  involved  in  phosphoinositide  signaling  that  lead  to 
activation  of  protein  kinase  C.  These  findings  have  led  to  discovery 
programs focused on developing GSK3β or protein kinase C inhibitors 
as potential novel treatments for mood disorders, although none have 
demonstrated clinical efficacy to date.

The  observations  that  tricyclic  antidepressants  (e.g.,  imipramine) 
inhibit serotonin and/or norepinephrine reuptake and that monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors (e.g., tranylcypromine) are effective antidepressants 
initially  led  to  the  view  that  depression  is  caused  by  a  deficiency  of 
these  monoamines.  However,  this  hypothesis  has  not  been  substan-
tiated.  A  cardinal  feature  of  these  drugs  is  that  long-term  (weeks  to 
months) administration is needed for their antidepressant effects. This 
means  that  their  short-term  actions,  namely  promotion  of  serotonin 
or  norepinephrine  function,  are  not  per  se  antidepressant  but  rather 
induce a cascade of adaptations in the brain that underlie their slowly 
developing  clinical  effects.  The  nature  of  these  therapeutic  drug- 
induced  adaptations  has  not  been  identified  with  certainty.  One 
hypothesis  holds  that,  in  a  subset  of  depressed  patients  who  display 
upregulation  of  the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  (HPA)  axis  char-
acterized  by  increased  secretion  of  corticotropin-releasing  factor 
(CRF) and glucocorticoids, excessive glucocorticoids cause atrophy of 
hippocampal neurons, which is associated with reduced hippocampal 
volumes seen clinically. Chronic antidepressant administration might 
reverse  this  atrophy  by  increasing  brain-derived  neurotrophic  factor 
(BDNF) or a host of other neurotrophic factors in the hippocampus. 
A  role  for  stress-induced  decreases  in  the  generation  of  newly  born 
hippocampal granule cell neurons, and its reversal by antidepressants 
through BDNF or other growth factors, has also been suggested.

A  major  advance  in  recent  years  has  been  the  identification  of 
several  rapidly  acting  antidepressants  with  non–monoamine-based 
mechanisms  of  action.  The  best  established  is  ketamine,  a  non-
competitive  antagonist  of  N-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA)  glutamate 
receptors among other actions, which exerts rapid (hours) and robust 
antidepressant  effects  in  severely  depressed  patients  who  have  not 
responded  to  other  treatments.  Ketamine,  which  at  higher  doses  is 
psychotomimetic  and  anesthetic,  exerts  these  antidepressant  effects 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3537

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
3538 at  lower  doses  with  minimal  side  effects.  However,  the  response  to 
ketamine is transient, which has led to several approaches to maintain 
treatment  response,  such  as  repeated  ketamine  delivery.  The  mecha-
nism  underlying  ketamine’s  antidepressant  action  is  not  known,  and 
its  action  as  an  NMDA  receptor  antagonist  has  recently  been  called 
into  question.  Nevertheless,  ketamine’s  striking  clinical  efficacy  has 
stimulated animal research on the role of glutamate neurotransmission 
and synaptic plasticity in key limbic regions. Recent evidence supports 
a role for TORC1 or BDNF activation, as blockade of either blocks the 
antidepressant-like effects of ketamine in animal models. Mechanisms 
by which ketamine activates these signaling cascades are currently an 
active area of investigation.

AC

––

cAMP

+

-opioid
receptor

K+

Ca2+

Gi/o

+

––

Increased
excitability

A  major  goal  in  the  field  of  substance  use  disorders  has  been  to 
identify neuroadaptive mechanisms that lead from recreational use to 
addiction. Such research has determined that repeated intake of abused 
drugs induces specific changes in cellular signal transduction, leading 
to changes in synaptic strength (long-term potentiation or depression) 
and neuronal structure (altered dendritic branching or cell soma size) 
within  the  brain’s  reward  circuitry.  These  drug-induced  modifica-
tions  are  mediated  in  part  by  changes  in  gene  expression,  achieved 
by  regulation  of  transcription  factors  (e.g.,  CREB  [cAMP  response 
element-binding protein] and ΔFosB [a Fos family protein]) and their 
target  genes.  Such  alterations  in  gene  expression  are  associated  with 
lasting alterations in epigenetic modifications, including histone acety-
lation and methylation and DNA methylation. These adaptations pro-
vide opportunities for developing treatments targeted to drug-addicted 
individuals. The fact that the spectrum of these adaptations differs in 
part depending on the particular addictive substance used raises hope 
that treatments could be developed that are specific for different classes 
of addictive drugs and less likely to disturb basic mechanisms that gov-
ern normal motivation and reward.

Increasingly,  causal  relationships  are  being  established  between 
individual molecular and cellular adaptations and specific behavioral 
abnormalities that characterize the addicted state. For example, acute 
activation of μ-opioid receptors by morphine or other opiates activates 
Gi/o proteins, leading to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (AC), resulting 
in reduced cyclic AMP (cAMP) production, protein kinase A (PKA) 
activation, and activation of the transcription factor CREB. Repeated 
administration  of  these  drugs  (Fig.  451-2)  evokes  a  homeostatic 
response involving upregulation of ACs and PKA and increased acti-
vation of CREB. Such upregulation of cAMP-CREB signaling has been 
identified  in  the  locus  coeruleus  (LC),  periaqueductal  gray,  ventral 
tegmental  area  (VTA),  nucleus  accumbens  (NAc),  and  several  other 
central nervous system (CNS) regions and contributes to opiate crav-
ing  and  signs  of  opiate  withdrawal.  The  fact  that  endogenous  opioid 
peptides  do  not  produce  tolerance  and  dependence,  while  morphine 
and heroin do, may relate to the observation that, unlike endogenous 
opioids, morphine and heroin are weak inducers of μ-opioid receptor 
desensitization  and  endocytosis.  Therefore,  these  drugs  cause  pro-
longed  receptor  activation  and  inhibition  of  ACs,  which  provides  a 
powerful stimulus for the upregulation of cAMP-CREB signaling that 
characterizes the opiate-dependent state.

 ■ SYSTEMS NEUROSCIENCE
The study of interconnected brain circuits that drive behavior has been 
greatly advanced through newer methods in brain imaging that have 
documented  abnormalities  in  neural  function  and  connectivity  in 
psychiatric  disorders.  Electroceutical  devices,  which  use  electrical  or 
magnetic stimulation to control neuronal activity, have had some suc-
cess in depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, pain, and addiction. 
The past decade has also witnessed the development of revolutionary 
new  techniques—optogenetics,  designer  receptors,  and  ligands—that 
provide unprecedented temporal and spatial control of neural circuits. 
The  development  of  genetically  encoded  calcium  detectors  and  elec-
trode arrays has allowed in vivo monitoring of thousands of neurons 
in  multiple  brain  regions  simultaneously.  Advances  in  histology  and 
microscopy now permit three-dimensional imaging of specific proteins 
in  the  intact  brain,  while  advances  in  endoscopic  microscopy  allow 
imaging of hundreds of neurons within deep brain structures in awake, 

R R

C

C

PKA

C

C

Regulation of
proteins by PKA
phosphorylation

Nucleus

+

P

CREB

Altered gene expression

FIGURE 451-2  Opiate action in the locus coeruleus (LC). Binding of opiate agonists 
to μ-opioid receptors on LC neurons catalyzes nucleotide exchange on Gi and Go 
proteins, leading to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (AC), neuronal hyperpolarization 
via activation of K+ channels and perhaps inhibition of Ca2+ channels. Inhibition of 
AC  reduces  protein  kinase  A  (PKA)  activity  and  phosphorylation  of  several  PKA 
substrate  proteins,  thereby  altering  their  function.  For  example,  opiates  reduce 
phosphorylation  of  the  cAMP  response  element-binding  protein  (CREB),  which 
initiates longer term changes in neuronal function. Chronic administration of opiates 
increases levels of AC isoforms, PKA catalytic (C) and regulatory (R) subunits, and 
the phosphorylation of several proteins, including CREB (indicated by red arrows). 
These changes contribute to the altered phenotype of the drug-addicted state. For 
example, the excitability of LC neurons is increased by enhanced cAMP signaling. 
Activation of CREB causes upregulation of AC isoforms and tyrosine hydroxylase, 
the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine biosynthesis.

freely  moving  animals.  These  new  methods  are  revolutionizing  our 
ability to understand the circuit basis of brain function.

Positron  emission  tomography  (PET),  diffusion  tensor  imaging 
(DTI),  and  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (fMRI)  have 
identified  neural  circuits  that  contribute  to  psychiatric  disorders,  for 
example,  defining  the  neural  circuitry  of  mood  within  the  brain’s 
limbic system (Fig. 451-3). Integral to this system are the NAc (impor-
tant also for brain reward—see below), amygdala, hippocampus, and 
regions  of  prefrontal  cortex.  Recent  optogenetic  research  in  animals, 
where the activity of specific types of neurons in defined circuits can 
be controlled with light, has confirmed the importance of this limbic 
circuitry  in  controlling  depression-related  behavioral  abnormalities. 
Given  that  many  symptoms  of  depression  (so-called  neurovegetative 
symptoms) involve physiologic functions, a key role for the hypothal-
amus is presumed as well. A subset of depressed individuals shows a 
small reduction in hippocampal size, as noted above. In addition, brain 
imaging investigations have revealed increased activation of the amyg-
dala by negative stimuli and reduced activation of the NAc by reward-
ing  stimuli.  There  is  also  evidence  for  altered  activity  in  prefrontal 
cortex, such as hyperactivity of subgenual area 25 in anterior cingulate 
cortex. Such findings have led to trials of deep brain stimulation (DBS) 
of either the NAc or subgenual area 25 (see Fig. 30-1), which appears 
to be therapeutic in some severely depressed individuals.

In  schizophrenia,  structural  and  functional  imaging  studies  have 
confirmed earlier pathologic studies that show enlargement of the ven-
tricular system and reduction of cortical and subcortical gray matter 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3538

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders FC

NAc

Hyp

VTA

HP

DR

LC

Amy

Glutamatergic
GABAergic

Dopaminergic

Peptidergic

is  present  in  the  mouse,  preventing  any 
analysis of the putative effects of changing 
the ratio of C4A to C4B—the phenomenon 
associated  with  disease  risk  in  humans. 
Nonetheless,  all  the  aforementioned  find-
ings  support  the  notion  that  schizophre-
nia  is  a  developmental  neurodegenerative 
disorder  with  some  evidence  pointing  to 
loss of cortical interneurons in frontal and 
temporal lobes.

Work  in  rodent  and  nonhuman  pri-
mate  models  of  addiction  has  established 
the  brain’s  reward  regions  as  key  neural 
substrates for the acute actions of drugs of 
abuse and for addiction induced in vulner-
able  individuals  by  repeated  drug  admin-
istration (Fig. 451-3). Midbrain dopamine 
neurons in the VTA function normally as 
rheostats  of  reward:  they  are  activated  by 
natural  rewards  (food,  sex,  social  interac-
tion)  or  even  by  the  expectation  of  such 
rewards,  and  many  are  suppressed  by  the 
absence of an expected reward or by aver-
sive stimuli. These neurons thereby trans-
mit  crucial  survival  signals  to  the  rest  of 
the limbic brain to promote reward-related 
behavior,  including  motor  responses  to 
seek and obtain the rewards (NAc), mem-
ories  of  reward-related  cues  and  contexts 
(amygdala,  hippocampus),  and  executive 
control  of  obtaining  rewards  (prefrontal 
cortex).

3539

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
1

B
i
o
l
o
g
y
o
f
P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

FIGURE 451-3  Neural circuitry of depression and addiction. The figure shows a simplified summary of a series of 
limbic circuits in brain that regulate mood and motivation and are implicated in depression and addiction. Shown 
in  the  figure  are  the  hippocampus  (HP)  and  amygdala  (Amy)  in  the  temporal  lobe,  regions  of  prefrontal  cortex, 
nucleus accumbens (NAc), and hypothalamus (Hyp). Only a subset of the known interconnections among these brain 
regions is shown. Also shown is the innervation of several of these brain regions by monoaminergic neurons. The 
ventral tegmental area (VTA) provides dopaminergic input to each of the limbic structures. Norepinephrine (from the 
locus coeruleus [LC]) and serotonin (from the dorsal raphe [DR] and other raphe nuclei) innervate all of the regions 
shown. In addition, there are strong connections between the hypothalamus and the VTA-NAc pathway. Important 
peptidergic projections from the hypothalamus include those from the arcuate nucleus that release β-endorphin and 
melanocortin and from the lateral hypothalamus that release orexin.

in  frontal  and  temporal  lobes  and  in  the  limbic  system.  Functional 
imaging studies show reduced metabolic (presumably neural) activity 
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex at rest and when performing tests 
of  executive  function,  including  working  memory.  There  is  also  evi-
dence for impaired structural and task-related functional connectivity, 
mainly in frontal and temporal lobes. The reduction in cortical thick-
ness  seen  in  schizophrenia  is  associated  with  increased  cell  packing 
density  and  reduced  neuropil  (defined  as  axons,  dendrites,  and  glial 
cell  processes)  without  an  apparent  change  in  neuronal  cell  num-
ber.  Specific  classes  of  interneurons  in  prefrontal  cortex  consistently 
show  reduced  expression  of  the  gene  encoding  the  enzyme  glutamic 
acid  decarboxylase  1  (GAD1),  which  synthesizes  γ-aminobutyric 
acid  (GABA),  the  principal  inhibitory  neurotransmitter  in  the  brain. 
Recently, results from well-powered genome-wide association studies 
point to synaptic pruning, including the involvement of microglia, as 
a potential contributing mechanism. In the region of the genome most 
strongly  associated  with  schizophrenia  risk,  variations  in  the  relative 
expression of two isotypes of complement component 4, C4A and C4B, 
have been found to account for a significant proportion of this genetic 
signal. Studies of loss of C4 in mice show deficient synaptic pruning, 
leading to the hypothesis that increased expression of C4A in humans 
may  result  in  excessive  synaptic  pruning.  Such  results  point  to  the 
potential  for  a  gene-driven  understanding  of  pathophysiology;  how-
ever,  the  findings  also  leave  some  important  questions  unanswered. 
The strongest effect haplotype in humans still only accounts for a very 
small increase in risk, with an odds ratio of <1.3. In contrast, having 
a  sibling  with  schizophrenia  increases  risk  approximately  tenfold.  In 
short,  whether  this  allele  reflects  a  driving  pathophysiologic  mecha-
nism  remains  to  be  determined.  Moreover,  humans  have  diverged  at 
the C4 locus compared with rodents such that only a single C4 isotype 

Drugs  of  abuse  alter  neurotransmis-
sion  through  initial  actions  at  different 
classes  of  ion  channels,  neurotransmitter 
receptors, or neurotransmitter transporters 
(Table  451-1).  Studies  in  animal  mod-
els  have  demonstrated  that  although  the 
initial  targets  differ,  the  actions  of  these 
drugs converge on the brain’s reward circuitry by promoting dopamine 
neurotransmission in the NAc and other limbic targets of the VTA. In 
addition,  some  drugs  promote  activation  of  opioid  and  cannabinoid 
receptors, which modulate this reward circuitry. By these mechanisms, 
drugs  of  abuse  produce  powerful  rewarding  signals,  which,  after 
repeated  drug  administration,  corrupt  a  vulnerable  brain’s  reward 
circuitry in ways that promote addiction. Three major pathologic adap-
tations have been described. First, drugs produce tolerance in reward 
circuits and increased activity in stress circuits, which promote escalat-
ing drug intake and a negative emotional state during drug withdrawal 
that promotes relapse. Second, sensitization to the rewarding effects of 
the drugs and associated cues is seen during prolonged abstinence and 
also  triggers  relapse.  Third,  executive  function  is  impaired  in  such  a 
way as to increase impulsivity and compulsivity, both of which promote 
relapse.

Imaging  studies  in  humans  confirm  that  addictive  drugs,  as  well 
as craving for them, activate the brain’s reward circuitry. In addition, 
patients  who  abuse  alcohol  or  psychostimulants  show  reduced  gray 
matter  in  the  prefrontal  cortex  as  well  as  reduced  activity  in  ante-
rior  cingulate  and  orbitofrontal  cortex  during  tasks  of  attention  and 
inhibitory  control.  It  is  thought  that  damage  to  these  cortical  areas 
contributes to addiction by impairing decision-making and increasing 
impulsivity.

 ■ NEUROINFLAMMATION
There  is  increasing  evidence  for  the  involvement  of  inflammatory 
mechanisms in a wide range of psychiatric syndromes. For example, a 
subset of depressed patients displays elevated blood levels of interleu-
kin  6  (IL-6),  tumor  necrosis  factor  α  (TNF-α),  and  other  proinflam-
matory cytokines. Moreover, rodents exposed to chronic stress exhibit 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3539

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
3540 TABLE 451-1  Initial Actions of Drugs of Abuse

DRUG
Opiates

NEUROTRANSMITTER 
AFFECTED
Endorphins, enkephalins

Dopamine

Psychostimulants 
(cocaine, 
amphetamine, 
methamphetamine)

Nicotine

Ethanol

Acetylcholine

GABA

Glutamate

Acetylcholine

Serotonin

Others

Marijuana

Phencyclidine

Endocannabinoids 
(anandamide, 
2-arachidonoylglycerol)
Glutamate

DRUG TARGET (ACTION)
μ- and δ-opioid receptors 
(agonist)
Dopamine transporter 
(antagonist—cocaine; 
reverse transport—
amphetamine, 
methamphetamine)
Nicotinic cholinergic 
receptors (agonist)
GABAA receptors (positive 
allosteric modulator)
NMDA glutamate receptors 
(antagonist)
Nicotinic cholinergic 
receptors (allosteric 
modulator)
5-HT3 receptor (positive 
allosteric modulator)
Calcium-activated K+ channel 
(activator)
CB1 receptor (agonist)

NMDA glutamate receptor 
(antagonist)

Abbreviations: GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate

similar increases in peripheral levels of these cytokines, and peripheral 
or  central  delivery  of  those  cytokines  to  normal  rodents  increases 
their  susceptibility  to  chronic  stress.  These  findings  have  led  to  the 
novel idea of using peripheral cytokines as biomarkers of a subtype of 
depression and the potential utility of developing new antidepressants 
that oppose the actions of specific cytokines.

Recent  evidence  has  also  linked  proinflammatory  signaling  in 
the  brain  to  addiction,  particularly  to  alcohol.  Human  alcoholism  is 
associated  with  impaired  innate  immunity,  increases  in  circulating  
proinflammatory  cytokines,  and  increases  in  brain  expression  of 
several  immune-related  genes.  Many  of  these  genes  are  expressed  by 
astrocytes  and  microglia,  and  by  neurons  under  certain  pathologic 
conditions,  where  they  play  important  roles  in  modifying  neuronal 
function and plasticity. For example, cytokine monocyte chemotactic 
protein-1 (MCP-1) modulates the release of certain neurotransmitters 
and,  when  administered  into  the  VTA,  increases  neuronal  excitabil-
ity,  promotes  dopamine  release,  and  increases  locomotor  activity. 
Gene  expression  studies  of  alcohol  drinking  in  mice  have  identified 
a  network  of  regulated  neuroimmune  proteins  in  brain,  and  a  role 
in  regulation  of  alcohol  consumption  has  been  validated  for  several, 
including  chemokines  MCP-1  and  chemokine  (C-C  motif)  ligand  3 
(CCL3),  beta-2  microglobulin,  CD14,  IL-1  receptor  antagonist,  and 
cathepsins S and F. This work has led to discovery of anti-inflammatory 
medications that reduce alcohol intake in animals, such as antagonists 
of phosphodiesterase 4, which regulates cAMP availability, or agonists 
of  peroxisome  proliferator-activated  receptors  (PPARs),  which  are 
transcription  factors  that  repress  key  inflammatory  signaling  mole-
cules such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and nuclear factor of activated 
T cells (NFAT). A major focus of current research is to define the sites 
and  mechanisms  by  which  proinflammatory  cytokines  impair  brain 
function to elicit a depressive episode or promote drug abuse.
 ■ CONCLUSIONS
This brief narrative illustrates the substantial progress that is being made 
in understanding the genetic and neurobiological basis of mental illness. 
It is anticipated that biologic measures will be used increasingly to more 
accurately diagnose and subtype psychiatric disorders and that targeted 
therapeutics will become available for these complex conditions.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Gandal MJ et al: The road to precision psychiatry: Translating genet-

ics into disease mechanisms. Nat Neurosci 19:1397, 2016.

Koob GF, Volkow ND: Neurobiology of addiction: A neurocircuitry 

analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 3:760, 2016.

Rajasethupathy P et al: Targeting neural circuits. Cell 165:524, 2016.
Ron D, Barak S: Molecular mechanisms underlying alcohol-drinking 

behaviours. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:576, 2016.

Sanders  SJ  et  al:  Insights  into  autism  spectrum  disorder  genomic 
architecture and biology from 71 risk loci. Neuron 87:1215, 2015.
Satterstrom FK et al: Large-scale exome sequencing study implicates 
both  developmental  and  functional  changes  in  the  neurobiology  of 
autism. Cell 180:568, 2020.

Willsey JA et al: Coexpression networks implicate human mid-fetal 
deep cortical projection neurons in the pathogenesis of autism. Cell 
155:997, 2013.

Wohleb ES et al: Integrating neuroimmune systems in the neurobiol-

ogy of depression. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:497, 2016.

452 Psychiatric Disorders

Victor I. Reus

Psychiatric disorders are common in medical practice and may present 
either  as  a  primary  disorder  or  as  a  comorbid  condition.  The  prev-
alence  of  mental  or  substance  use  disorders  in  the  United  States  is 
~30%, but only one-third of affected individuals are currently receiving 
treatment. Global burden of disease statistics indicates that 4 of the 10 
most  important  causes  of  morbidity  and  attendant  health  care  costs 
worldwide are psychiatric in origin.

Changes  in  health  care  delivery  underscore  the  need  for  primary 
care  physicians  to  assume  responsibility  for  the  initial  diagnosis  and 
treatment  of  the  most  common  mental  disorders.  Prompt  diagnosis 
is essential to ensure that patients have access to appropriate medical 
services and to maximize the clinical outcome. Validated patient-based 
questionnaires have been developed that systematically probe for signs 
and symptoms associated with the most prevalent psychiatric diagno-
ses and guide the clinician into targeted assessment. The Primary Care 
Evaluation of Mental Disorders (PRIME-MD; and a self-report form, 
the Patient Health Questionnaire) and the Symptom-Driven Diagnos-
tic  System  for  Primary  Care  (SDDS-PC)  are  inventories  that  require 
only  10  min  to  complete  and  link  patient  responses  to  the  formal 
diagnostic criteria of anxiety, mood, somatoform, and eating disorders 
and to alcohol abuse or dependence. A variety of smart phone apps for 
assessment and monitoring of psychiatric conditions and for psycho-
logical and pharmacologic treatment interventions are also available.

A physician who refers patients to a psychiatrist should know not 
only when doing so is appropriate but also how to refer because societal 
misconceptions and the stigma of mental illness impede the process. 
Primary care physicians should base referrals to a psychiatrist on the 
presence of signs and symptoms of a mental disorder and not simply 
on the absence of a physical explanation for a patient’s complaint. The 
physician  should  discuss  with  the  patient  the  reasons  for  requesting 
the  referral  or  consultation  and  provide  reassurance  that  he  or  she 
will  continue  to  provide  medical  care  and  work  collaboratively  with 
the  mental  health  professional.  Consultation  with  a  psychiatrist  or 
transfer of care is appropriate when physicians encounter evidence of 
psychotic symptoms, mania, severe depression, or anxiety; symptoms 
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); suicidal or homicidal preoc-
cupation; or a failure to respond to first-order treatment. This chapter 
reviews  the  clinical  assessment  and  treatment  of  some  of  the  most 
common mental disorders presenting in primary care and is based on 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3540

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3541

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5),  the  framework  for  categorizing  psychiatric  illness  used  in 
the United States. Eating disorders are discussed later in this chapter, 
and the biology of psychiatric and addictive disorders is discussed 
in Chap. 451.
 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The DSM-5 and the tenth revision of the International Classification 
of Diseases (ICD-10), which is used more commonly worldwide, have 
taken somewhat differing approaches to the diagnosis of mental illness, 
but  considerable  effort  has  been  expended  to  provide  an  operational 
translation  between  the  two  nosologies.  Both  systems  are  in  essence 
purely  descriptive  and  emphasize  clinical  pragmatism,  in  distinction 
to  the  Research  Domain  Criteria  (RDOC)  proposed  by  the  National 
Institute of Mental Health, which aspires to provide a causal framework 
for  classification  of  behavioral  disturbance.  None  of  these  diagnostic 
systems has as yet achieved adequate validation. The Global Burden of 
Disease Study (2019), using available epidemiologic data, nevertheless 
has reinforced the conclusion that, regardless of nosologic differences, 
mental and substance abuse disorders are the major cause of life-years 
lost  to  disability  among  all  medical  illnesses,  affecting  >300  million 
individuals  worldwide.  There  is  general  agreement  that  high-income 
countries  will  need  to  build  capacity  in  professional  training  in 
low-  and  middle-income  countries  in  order  to  provide  an  adequate 
balanced  care  model  for  the  delivery  of  evidence-based  therapies  for 
mental disorders. Recent surveys that indicate a dramatic increase in 
mental  disorder  prevalence  in  rapidly  developing  countries,  such  as 
China, may reflect both an increased recognition of the issue, but also 
the consequence of social turmoil, stigma, and historically inadequate 
resources. A salient example of the ways in which societal disruption 
and  isolation  may  contribute  to  exacerbating  already  unmet  mental 
health  needs  can  be  seen  in  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  which  has 
resulted in an increased incidence of diagnosed psychiatric disorders 
in both affected and unaffected individuals, as well as caregivers. The 
need  for  improved  prevention  strategies  and  for  more  definitive  and 
effective interventional treatments remains a global concern.

ANXIETY DISORDERS
Anxiety disorders, the most prevalent psychiatric illnesses in the gen-
eral community, are present in 15–20% of medical clinic patients. Anx-
iety, defined as a subjective sense of unease, dread, or foreboding, can 
indicate a primary psychiatric condition or can be a component of, or 
reaction to, a primary medical disease. The primary anxiety disorders 
are classified according to their duration and course and the existence 
and nature of precipitants.

When evaluating the anxious patient, the clinician must first deter-
mine whether the anxiety antedates or postdates a medical illness or 
is due to a medication side effect. Approximately one-third of patients 
presenting  with  anxiety  have  a  medical  etiology  for  their  psychiatric 
symptoms, but an anxiety disorder can also present with somatic symp-
toms in the absence of a diagnosable medical condition.
 ■ PANIC DISORDER
Clinical Manifestations  Panic disorder is defined by the presence 
of  recurrent  and  unpredictable  panic  attacks,  which  are  distinct  epi-
sodes of intense fear and discomfort associated with a variety of physi-
cal symptoms, including palpitations, sweating, trembling, shortness of 
breath, chest pain, dizziness, and a fear of impending doom or death. 
Paresthesias, gastrointestinal distress, and feelings of unreality are also 
common.  Diagnostic  criteria  require  at  least  1  month  of  concern  or 
worry about the attacks or a change in behavior related to them. The 
lifetime  prevalence  of  panic  disorder  is  2–3%.  Panic  attacks  have  a 
sudden onset, developing within 10 min and usually resolving over the 
course of an hour, and they occur in an unexpected fashion. Some may 
occur  when  waking  from  sleep.  The  frequency  and  severity  of  panic 
attacks vary, ranging from once a week to clusters of attacks separated 
by months of well-being. The first attack is usually outside the home, 
and onset is typically in late adolescence to early adulthood. In some 
individuals,  anticipatory  anxiety  develops  over  time  and  results  in  a 

generalized  fear  and  a  progressive  avoidance  of  places  or  situations 
in which a panic attack might recur. Agoraphobia, which occurs com-
monly in patients with panic disorder, is an acquired irrational fear of 
being  in  places  where  one  might  feel  trapped  or  unable  to  escape.  It 
may, however, be diagnosed even if panic disorder is not present. Typ-
ically, it leads the patient into a progressive restriction in lifestyle and, 
in  a  literal  sense,  in  geography.  Frequently,  patients  are  embarrassed 
that  they  are  housebound  and  dependent  on  the  company  of  others 
to go out into the world and do not volunteer this information; thus, 
physicians will fail to recognize the syndrome if direct questioning is 
not pursued.

Differential  Diagnosis  A  diagnosis  of  panic  disorder  is  made 
after  a  medical  etiology  for  the  panic  attacks  has  been  ruled  out.  A 
variety of cardiovascular, respiratory, endocrine, and neurologic condi-
tions can present with anxiety as the chief complaint. Patients with true 
panic disorder will often focus on one specific feature to the exclusion 
of others. For example, 20% of patients who present with syncope as 
a  primary  medical  complaint  have  a  primary  diagnosis  of  a  mood, 
anxiety,  or  substance  abuse  disorder,  the  most  common  being  panic 
disorder. The differential diagnosis of panic disorder is complicated by 
a high rate of comorbidity with other psychiatric conditions, especially 
alcohol  and  benzodiazepine  abuse,  which  patients  initially  use  in  an 
attempt at self-medication. Some 75% of panic disorder patients will 
also satisfy criteria for major depression at some point in their illness.
When the history is nonspecific, physical examination and focused 
laboratory  testing  must  be  used  to  rule  out  anxiety  states  resulting 
from  medical  disorders  such  as  pheochromocytoma,  thyrotoxicosis, 
or hypoglycemia. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram may 
detect  some  cardiovascular  conditions  associated  with  panic  such  as 
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and mitral valve prolapse. In two studies, 
panic disorder was the primary diagnosis in 43% of patients with chest 
pain who had normal coronary angiograms and was present in 9% of 
all outpatients referred for cardiac evaluation. Panic disorder has also 
been diagnosed in many patients referred for pulmonary function test-
ing or with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome.

Etiology and Pathophysiology  The etiology of panic disorder is 
unknown but appears to involve a genetic predisposition, altered auto-
nomic responsivity, and social learning. Panic disorder shows familial 
aggregation;  the  disorder  is  concordant  in  30–45%  of  monozygotic 
twins,  and  genome-wide  screens  have  identified  suggestive  risk  loci. 
Acute panic attacks appear to be associated with increased noradrener-
gic discharges in the locus coeruleus. Intravenous infusion of sodium 
lactate evokes an attack in two-thirds of panic disorder patients, as do 
the α2-adrenergic antagonist yohimbine, cholecystokinin tetrapeptide 
(CCK-4), and carbon dioxide inhalation. It is hypothesized that each 
of these stimuli activates a pathway involving noradrenergic neurons 
in  the  locus  coeruleus  and  serotonergic  neurons  in  the  dorsal  raphe. 
Resting-state  fMRI  has  identified  abnormalities  in  the  default  mode 
network  involving  the  medial  temporal  lobe,  with  greater  activation 
in the sensorimotor cortex in panic disorder and in amygdala-frontal 
connectivity  in  social  anxiety  disorder.  Agents  that  block  serotonin 
reuptake  can  prevent  attacks.  Patients  with  panic  disorder  have  a 
heightened  sensitivity  to  somatic  symptoms,  which  triggers  increas-
ing  arousal,  setting  off  the  panic  attack;  accordingly,  therapeutic 
intervention  involves  altering  the  patient’s  cognitive  interpretation  of 
anxiety-producing experiences as well as preventing the attack itself.

TREATMENT
Panic Disorder

Achievable goals of treatment are to decrease the frequency of panic 
attacks and to reduce their intensity. The cornerstone of drug ther-
apy  is  antidepressant  medication  (Tables  452-1  through  452-3). 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) benefit the majority 
of  panic  disorder  patients  and  do  not  have  the  adverse  effects  of 
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). Fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, 
and  the  selective  serotonin-norepinephrine  reuptake  inhibitor 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3541

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3542

TABLE 452-1  Antidepressants

Headache; nausea and other GI effects; jitteriness; 
insomnia; sexual dysfunction; can affect plasma 
levels of other medicines (except sertraline); 
akathisia rare

USUAL DAILY  
DOSE (mg)

SIDE EFFECTS

10–80
50–200
20–60
100–300
20–60
10–30

NAME
SSRIs
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
Escitalopram (Lexapro)
TCAs and Tetracyclics
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
Nortriptyline (Pamelor)
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Desipramine (Norpramin)
Doxepin (Sinequan)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Maprotiline (Ludiomil)
Protriptyline (Vivactil)
Trimipramine (Surmontil)
Amoxapine (Asendin)
Mixed Norepinephrine/Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI) and Receptor Blockers
Venlafaxine (Effexor), XR

150–300
50–200
150–300
150–300
150–300
150–300
25–150
15–40
75–200
100–300

75–375

Nausea, anxiety, dry mouth

Drowsiness, constipation, dry mouth

Anticholinergic (dry mouth, tachycardia, 
constipation, urinary retention, blurred vision); 
sweating; tremor; postural hypotension; cardiac 
conduction delay; sedation; weight gain

Nausea; dizziness; dry mouth; headaches; increased 
blood pressure; anxiety and insomnia

Desvenlafaxine (Pristiq)

50–400

Nausea, dizziness, insomnia

COMMENTS

Once-daily dosing, usually in the morning; fluoxetine 
has very long half-life; must not be combined with 
MAOIs

Once-daily dosing, usually qhs; blood levels of most 
TCAs available; can be lethal in overdose (lethal 
dose = 2 g); nortriptyline best tolerated, especially 
by elderly

FDA-approved for OCD

TID or QID dosing required 

Lethality in OD, EPS possible

Bid–tid dosing (extended-release available); 
lower potential for drug interactions than SSRIs; 
contraindicated with MAOIs
Primary metabolite of venlafaxine; no increased 
efficacy with higher dosing

Duloxetine (Cymbalta)

Mirtazapine (Remeron)
Vilazodone (Viibryd)

Vortioxetine (Trintellix)

40–60

15–45
40

5–20

Levomilnacipran (Fetzima)

40–120

Mixed-Action Drugs
 Bupropion (Wellbutrin), CR, 
XR

Trazodone (Desyrel)

 Trazodone extended-release 
(Oleptro)
Nefazodone
MAOIs
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
 Transdermal selegiline 
(Emsam)

250–450

200–600

150–375

300–600

45–90
20–50

20–60
6–12

Nausea, dizziness, headache, insomnia, constipation May have utility in treatment of neuropathic pain and 

Somnolence, weight gain; neutropenia rare
Nausea, diarrhea, headache; dosage adjustment if 
given with CYP3A4 inhibitor/stimulator
Nausea, diarrhea, sweating, headache; low 
incidence of sedation or weight gain
Nausea, constipation, sweating; rare increase in 
blood pressure/pulse

stress incontinence
Once-a-day dosing; 5HT3 antagonist
Also 5-HT1a receptor partial agonist

No specific p450 effects; 5-HT3a and 5-HT7 receptor 
antagonist, 5-HT1b partial agonist, and 5-HT1a agonist
Most noradrenergic of SNRIs

Jitteriness; flushing; seizures in at-risk patients; 
anorexia; tachycardia; psychosis

Sedation; dry mouth; ventricular irritability; postural 
hypotension; priapism rare
Daytime somnolence, dizziness, nausea

Tid dosing, but sustained-release also available; 
fewer sexual side effects than SSRIs or TCAs; may 
be useful for adult ADD
Useful in low doses for sleep because of sedating 
effects with no anticholinergic side effects

Headache, nausea, dizziness

Rare risk of liver failure, priapism

Insomnia; hypotension; edema; anorgasmia; weight 
gain; neuropathy; hypertensive crisis; toxic reactions 
with SSRIs; narcotics

May be more effective in patients with atypical 
features or treatment-refractory depression

Local skin reaction, hypertension

Less weight gain and hypotension than phenelzine
No dietary restrictions with 6-mg dose

Abbreviations: ADD, attention deficit disorder; EPS, extrapyramidal symptoms; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastrointestinal; MAOIs, monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors; OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.

(SNRI) venlafaxine have received approval from the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication. These drugs should 
be started at one-third to one-half of their usual antidepressant dose 
(e.g., 5–10 mg fluoxetine, 25–50 mg sertraline, 10 mg paroxetine, 
venlafaxine  37.5  mg).  Monoamine  oxidase  inhibitors  (MAOIs) 
are  also  effective  and  may  specifically  benefit  patients  who  have 
comorbid  features  of  atypical  depression  (i.e.,  hypersomnia  and 
weight  gain).  Insomnia,  orthostatic  hypotension,  and  the  need  to 
maintain a low-tyramine diet (avoidance of cheese and wine) have 
limited their use, however. Antidepressants typically take 2–6 weeks 

to become effective, and doses may need to be adjusted based on the 
clinical response.

Because  of  anticipatory  anxiety  and  the  need  for  immediate 
relief  of  panic  symptoms,  benzodiazepines  are  useful  early  in  the 
course  of  treatment  and  sporadically  thereafter  (Table  452-4). 
FDA-approved agents include alprazolam and clonazepam. A recent 
Cochrane  review  found  no  difference  between  antidepressants 
and  benzodiazepines  in  response  rate,  although  benzodiazepines 
were  somewhat  better  tolerated  by  patients.  In  treatment- 
resistant  cases,  short-term  augmentation  with  aripiprazole, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3542

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
TABLE 452-2  Management of Antidepressant Side Effects
SYMPTOMS
Gastrointestinal
  Nausea, loss of appetite

COMMENTS AND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

  Diarrhea
  Constipation

Sexual dysfunction

 Anorgasmia/impotence; 
impaired ejaculation

Orthostasis

Anticholinergic
Dry mouth, eyes

Tremor/jitteriness

Insomnia

Sedation

Headache

Weight gain

Loss of therapeutic benefit 
over time

Usually short-lived and dose-related; consider 
temporary dose reduction or administration with 
food and antacids
Famotidine, 20–40 mg/d
Wait for tolerance; try diet change, stool softener, 
exercise; avoid laxatives
Consider dose reduction; drug holiday
Bethanechol, 10–20 mg, 2 h before activity, or 
cyproheptadine, 4–8 mg, 2 h before activity, or 
bupropion, 100 mg bid, or amantadine, 100 mg 
bid/tid
Tolerance unlikely; increase fluid intake, use calf 
exercises/support hose; fludrocortisone,  
0.025 mg/d
Wait for tolerance
Maintain good oral hygiene; use artificial tears, 
sugar-free gum
Antiparkinsonian drugs not effective; use dose 
reduction/slow increase; lorazepam, 0.5 mg bid, or 
propranolol, 10–20 mg bid
Schedule all doses for the morning; trazodone, 
50–100 mg qhs
Caffeine; schedule all dosing for bedtime; 
bupropion, 75–100 mg in afternoon
Evaluate diet, stress, other drugs; try dose 
reduction; amitriptyline, 50 mg/d
Decrease carbohydrates; exercise; consider 
fluoxetine
Related to tolerance? Increase dose or drug 
holiday; add amantadine, 100 mg bid, buspirone, 
10 mg tid, or pindolol, 2.5 mg bid

divalproex  sodium,  or  pindolol  has  some  evidence  for  efficacy. 
There  also  is  no  clear  difference  in  short-term  efficacy  between 
psychological therapies and antidepressant or benzodiazepine treat-
ment, alone or in combination.

Early  psychotherapeutic  intervention  and  education  aimed  at 
symptom  control  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  drug  treatment. 
Patients  can  be  taught  breathing  techniques,  be  educated  about 
physiologic changes that occur with panic, and learn to expose them-
selves  voluntarily  to  precipitating  events  in  a  treatment  program 
spanning  12–15  sessions.  Homework  assignments  and  monitored 
compliance  are  important  components  of  successful  treatment. 
Once patients have achieved a satisfactory response, drug treatment 
should be maintained for 1–2 years to prevent relapse. Controlled 

TABLE 452-3  Possible Drug Interactions with Selective Serotonin 
Reuptake Inhibitors
AGENT
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

EFFECT
Serotonin syndrome—absolute 
contraindication
Potential serotonin syndrome

Serotonergic agonists, e.g., tryptophan, 
fenfluramine, triptans
Drugs that are metabolized by P450 
isoenzymes: tricyclics, other SSRIs, 
antipsychotics, beta blockers, codeine, 
triazolobenzodiazepines, calcium 
channel blockers
Drugs that are bound tightly to plasma 
proteins, e.g., warfarin
Drugs that inhibit the metabolism 
of SSRIs by P450 isoenzymes, e.g., 
quinidine

Delayed metabolism resulting in 
increased blood levels and potential 
toxicity

Increased bleeding secondary to 
displacement
Increased SSRI side effects

Abbreviation: SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

trials indicate a success rate of 75–85%, although the likelihood of 
complete remission is somewhat lower.

3543

 ■ GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Clinical Manifestations  Patients with generalized anxiety disor-
der (GAD) have persistent, excessive, and/or unrealistic worry associ-
ated with muscle tension, impaired concentration, autonomic arousal, 
feeling  “on  edge”  or  restless,  and  insomnia  (Table  452-5).  Onset  is 
usually before age 20 years, and a history of childhood fears and social 
inhibition  may  be  present.  The  lifetime  prevalence  of  GAD  is  5–6%; 
the risk is higher in first-degree relatives of patients with the diagnosis. 
Interestingly,  family  studies  indicate  that  GAD  and  panic  disorder 
segregate  independently.  More  than  80%  of  patients  with  GAD  also 
suffer from major depression, dysthymia, or social phobia. Comorbid 
substance abuse is common in these patients, particularly alcohol and/
or sedative/hypnotic abuse. Patients with GAD worry excessively over 
minor  matters,  with  life-disrupting  effects;  unlike  in  panic  disorder, 
complaints  of  shortness  of  breath,  palpitations,  and  tachycardia  are 
relatively rare.

Etiology and Pathophysiology  Most anxiogenic and anxiolytic 
agents  act  on  the  γ-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA)A  receptor/chloride 
ion  channel  complex,  implicating  this  neurotransmitter  system  in 
the  pathogenesis  of  anxiety  and  panic  attacks.  Benzodiazepines  are 
thought to bind two separate GABAA receptor sites: type I, which has 
a  broad  neuroanatomic  distribution,  and  type  II,  which  is  concen-
trated  in  the  hippocampus,  striatum,  and  neocortex.  The  antianxiety 
effects  of  the  various  benzodiazepines  are  influenced  by  their  rela-
tive  binding  to  alpha  2  and  3  subunits  of  the  GABAA  receptor,  and 
sedation  and  memory  impairment  to  the  alpha  1  subunit.  Serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine  [5-HT]),  and  3α-reduced  neuroactive  steroids 
(allosteric modulators of GABAA) also appear to have a role in anxiety, 
and buspirone, a partial 5-HT1A receptor agonist, and certain 5-HT2A 
and  5-HT2C  receptor  antagonists  (e.g.,  mirtazapine  and  nefazodone) 
may have beneficial effects.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TREATMENT
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

A combination of pharmacologic and psychotherapeutic interven-
tions is most effective in GAD, but complete symptomatic relief is 
rare. A short course of a benzodiazepine is usually indicated, pref-
erably lorazepam, oxazepam, clonazepam or, alprazolam, although 
only the last two are FDA approved. (The first two of these agents are 
metabolized via conjugation rather than oxidation and thus do not 
accumulate if hepatic function is impaired; the latter also has limited 
active metabolites.) Treatment should be initiated at the lowest dose 
possible and prescribed on an as-needed basis as symptoms warrant. 
Benzodiazepines  differ  in  their  milligram  per  kilogram  potency, 
half-life, lipid solubility, metabolic pathways, and presence of active 
metabolites. Agents that are absorbed rapidly and are lipid soluble, 
such as diazepam, have a rapid onset of action and a higher abuse 
potential. Benzodiazepines should generally not be prescribed for 
>4–6 weeks because of the development of tolerance and the seri-
ous  risk  of  abuse  and  dependence.  Withdrawal  must  be  closely 
monitored  as  relapses  can  occur.  It  is  important  to  warn  patients 
that concomitant use of alcohol or other sedating drugs may exac-
erbate side effects and impair their ability to function. An optimistic 
approach that encourages the patient to clarify environmental pre-
cipitants, anticipate his or her reactions, and plan effective response 
strategies is an essential element of therapy.

Adverse  effects  of  benzodiazepines  generally  parallel  their  rel-
ative  half-lives.  Longer-acting  agents,  such  as  diazepam,  chlor-
diazepoxide,  flurazepam,  and  clonazepam,  tend  to  accumulate 
active metabolites, with resultant sedation, impairment of cognition, 
and poor psychomotor performance. Shorter-acting compounds, 
such as alprazolam, lorazepam, and oxazepam, can produce day-
time anxiety, early-morning insomnia, and, with discontinuation, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3543

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
3544

TABLE 452-4  Anxiolytics

NAME
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam (Valium)
Flurazepam (Dalmane)
Triazolam (Halcion)
Lorazepam (Ativan)

Alprazolam (Xanax)

 Chlordiazepoxide (Librium)
Oxazepam (Serax)
Temazepam (Restoril)
 Clonazepam (Klonopin)
Clorazepate (Tranxene)
Nonbenzodiazepines
Buspirone (BuSpar)

EQUIVALENT PO 
DOSE (mg)

ONSET OF ACTION HALF-LIFE (h) COMMENTS

5
15
0.25
1

0.5

10
15
15
0.5
15

7.5

Fast
Fast
Intermediate
Intermediate

20–70
30–100
1.5–5
10–20

Intermediate

12–15

Intermediate
Slow
Slow
Slow
Fast

5–30
5–15
9–12
18–50
40–200

2 weeks

2–3

Active metabolites; quite sedating
Flurazepam is a prodrug; metabolites are active; quite sedating
No active metabolites; can induce confusion and delirium, especially in elderly
No active metabolites; direct hepatic glucuronide conjugation; quite sedating; 
FDA-approved for anxiety with depression
Active metabolites; not too sedating; FDA-approved for panic disorder and 
anxiety with depression; tolerance and dependence develop easily; difficult to 
withdraw
Active metabolites; moderately sedating
No active metabolites; direct glucuronide conjugation; not too sedating
No active metabolites; moderately sedating
No active metabolites; moderately sedating; FDA-approved for panic disorder
Low sedation; unreliable absorption

Active metabolites; tid dosing—usual daily dose 10–20 mg tid; nonsedating; 
no additive effects with alcohol; useful for controlling agitation in demented or 
brain-injured patients

Abbreviation: FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

rebound  anxiety  and  insomnia.  Although  patients  develop  toler-
ance to the sedative effects of benzodiazepines, they are less likely 
to habituate to the adverse psychomotor effects. Withdrawal from 
the longer half-life benzodiazepines can be accomplished through 
gradual,  stepwise  dose  reduction  (by  10%  every  1–2  weeks)  over   
6–12 weeks. It is usually more difficult to taper patients off short-
er-acting benzodiazepines. Physicians may need to switch the patient 
to a benzodiazepine with a longer half-life or use an adjunctive med-
ication such as a beta blocker or carbamazepine, before attempting 
to  discontinue  the  benzodiazepine.  Withdrawal  reactions  vary  in 
severity and duration; they can include depression, anxiety, lethargy, 
diaphoresis, autonomic arousal, and, rarely, seizures.

Buspirone is a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic agent. It is nonse-
dating, does not produce tolerance or dependence, does not inter-
act with benzodiazepine receptors or alcohol, and has no abuse or 
disinhibition potential. However, it requires several weeks to take 

TABLE 452-5  Diagnostic Criteria for Generalized Anxiety Disorder
A.  Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more 
days than not for at least 6 months, about a number of events or activities 
(such as work or school performance).

B.  The individual finds it difficult to control the worry.
C.  The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six 
symptoms (with at least some symptoms present for more days than not for 
the past 6 months): (1) restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge; (2) being 
easily fatigued; (3) difficulty concentrating or mind going blank; (4) irritability; 
(5) muscle tension; (6) sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or 
restless, unsatisfying sleep).

D.  The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress 
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E.  The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance 
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., 
hyperthyroidism).

F.  The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., 
anxiety or worry about having panic attacks in panic disorder, negative 
evaluation in social anxiety disorder [social phobia], contamination or other 
obsessions in obsessive-compulsive disorder, separation from attachment 
figures in separation anxiety disorder, reminders of traumatic events in 
posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining weight in anorexia nervosa, physical 
complaints in somatic symptom disorder, perceived appearance flaws in body 
dysmorphic disorder, having a serious illness in illness anxiety disorder, or the 
content of delusional beliefs in schizophrenia or delusional disorder).

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association. All 
Rights Reserved.

effect  and  requires  thrice-daily  dosing.  Patients  who  were  previ-
ously responsive to a benzodiazepine are unlikely to rate buspirone 
as equally effective, but patients with head injury or dementia who 
have symptoms of anxiety and/or agitation may do well with this 
agent.  Escitalopram,  paroxetine,  duloxetine,  and  venlafaxine  are 
FDA  approved  for  the  treatment  of  GAD,  usually  at  doses  that 
are comparable to their efficacy in major depression, and may be 
preferable to usage of benzodiazepines in the treatment of chronic 
anxiety. Benzodiazepines are contraindicated during pregnancy and 
breast-feeding.

Anticonvulsants with GABAergic properties may also be effec-
tive  against  anxiety.  Gabapentin,  oxcarbazepine,  tiagabine,  prega-
balin,  and  divalproex  have  all  shown  some  degree  of  benefit  in  a 
variety of anxiety-related syndromes in off-label usage.

 ■ PHOBIC DISORDERS
Clinical Manifestations  The cardinal feature of phobic disorders 
is  a  marked  and  persistent  fear  of  objects  or  situations,  exposure  to 
which results in an immediate anxiety reaction. The patient avoids the 
phobic  stimulus,  and  this  avoidance  usually  impairs  occupational  or 
social functioning. Panic attacks may be triggered by the phobic stim-
ulus  or  may  occur  spontaneously.  Unlike  patients  with  other  anxiety 
disorders,  individuals  with  phobias  usually  experience  anxiety  only 
in specific situations. Common phobias include fear of closed spaces 
(claustrophobia),  fear  of  blood,  and  fear  of  flying.  Social  phobia  is 
distinguished by a specific fear of social or performance situations in 
which the individual is exposed to unfamiliar individuals or to possible 
examination and evaluation by others. Examples include having to con-
verse at a party, use public restrooms, and meet strangers. In each case, 
the affected individual is aware that the experienced fear is excessive 
and  unreasonable  given  the  circumstance.  The  specific  content  of  a 
phobia may vary across gender, ethnic, and cultural boundaries.

Phobic  disorders  are  common,  affecting  ~7–9%  of  the  popula-
tion. Twice as many females are affected than males. Full criteria for 
diagnosis are usually satisfied first in early adulthood, but behavioral 
avoidance of unfamiliar people, situations, or objects dating from early 
childhood is common.

In  one  study  of  female  twins,  concordance  rates  for  agoraphobia, 
social phobia, and animal phobia were found to be 23% for monozy-
gotic twins and 15% for dizygotic twins. A twin study of fear condition-
ing, a model for the acquisition of phobias, demonstrated a heritability 
of  35–45%.  Animal  studies  of  fear  conditioning  have  indicated  that 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3544

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3545

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

processing of the fear stimulus occurs through the lateral nucleus of the 
amygdala, extending through the central nucleus and projecting to the 
periaqueductal gray region, lateral hypothalamus, and paraventricular 
hypothalamus.

TREATMENT
Phobic Disorders

Beta  blockers  (e.g.,  propranolol,  20–40  mg  orally  2  h  before  the 
event)  are  particularly  effective  in  the  treatment  of  “performance 
anxiety”  (but  not  general  social  phobia)  and  appear  to  work  by 
blocking the peripheral manifestations of anxiety such as perspira-
tion, tachycardia, palpitations, and tremor. MAOIs alleviate social 
phobia independently of their antidepressant activity, and paroxe-
tine, sertraline, fluvoxamine CR, and venlafaxine XR have received 
FDA approval for treatment of social anxiety. Benzodiazepines can 
be helpful in reducing fearful avoidance, but the chronic nature of 
phobic disorders limits their usefulness.

Behaviorally focused psychotherapy is an important component 
of treatment because relapse rates are high when medication is used 
as  the  sole  treatment.  Cognitive-behavioral  strategies  are  based 

on  the  finding  that  distorted  perceptions  and  interpretations  of 
fear-producing stimuli play a major role in perpetuation of phobias. 
Individual and group therapy sessions teach the patient to identify 
specific  negative  thoughts  associated  with  the  anxiety-producing 
situation and help to reduce the patient’s fear of loss of control. In 
desensitization  therapy,  hierarchies  of  feared  situations  are  con-
structed, and the patient is encouraged to pursue and master grad-
ual exposure to the anxiety-producing stimuli.

Patients  with  social  phobia,  in  particular,  have  a  high  rate  of 
comorbid alcohol abuse, as well as of other psychiatric conditions 
(e.g., eating disorders), necessitating the need for parallel manage-
ment of each disorder if anxiety reduction is to be achieved.

 ■ STRESS DISORDERS
Clinical Manifestations  Patients may develop anxiety after expo-
sure to extreme traumatic events such as the threat of personal death 
or injury or the death of a loved one. The reaction may occur shortly 
after  the  trauma  (acute  stress  disorder)  or  be  delayed  and  subject  to 
recurrence  (PTSD)  (Table  452-6).  In  both  syndromes,  individuals 
experience associated symptoms of detachment and loss of emotional 
responsivity. The patient may feel depersonalized and unable to recall 

TABLE 452-6  Diagnostic Criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
A.  Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:

1.  Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2.  Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3.  Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the 

event(s) must have been violent or accidental.

4.  Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains; police officers 

repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).

B.  Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:

1.  Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s).
2.  Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).
3.  Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a 

continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings.)

4.  Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5.  Marked physiologic reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).

C.  Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the following:

1.  Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
2.  Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or 

feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).

D.  Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred as evidenced by 

two (or more) of the following:
1.  Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically due to dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury,  

alcohol, or drugs).

2.  Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” “The world is 

completely dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is permanently ruined”).

3.  Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic event(s) that lead the individual to blame himself/herself or others.
4.  Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).
5.  Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.
6.  Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7.  Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).

E.  Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by 

two (or more) of the following:
1.  Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
2.  Reckless or self-destructive behavior.
3.  Hypervigilance.
4.  Exaggerated startle response.
5.  Problems with concentration.
6.  Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).

F.  Duration of the disturbance (criteria B, C, D, and E) is >1 month.
G.  The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
H.  The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol) or another medical condition.

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association. All Rights 
Reserved.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3545

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3546 specific  aspects  of  the  trauma,  although  typically  it  is  reexperienced 
through  intrusions  in  thought,  dreams,  or  flashbacks,  particularly 
when cues of the original event are present. Patients often actively avoid 
stimuli that precipitate recollections of the trauma and demonstrate a 
resulting  increase  in  vigilance,  arousal,  and  startle  response.  Patients 
with stress disorders are at risk for the development of other disorders 
related  to  anxiety,  mood,  and  substance  abuse  (especially  alcohol). 
Between 5 and 10% of Americans will at some time in their life satisfy 
criteria for PTSD, with women more likely to be affected than men. A 
validated four-item screen for PTSD (PC-PTSD) is available.

Risk  factors  for  the  development  of  PTSD  include  a  past  psychi-
atric  history  and  personality  characteristics  of  high  neuroticism  and 
extroversion. Twin studies show a substantial genetic influence on all 
symptoms  associated  with  PTSD,  with  less  evidence  for  an  environ-
mental effect.

Etiology and Pathophysiology 
It is hypothesized that in PTSD 
there is excessive release of norepinephrine from the locus coeruleus 
in response to stress and increased noradrenergic activity at projection 
sites  in  the  hippocampus  and  amygdala.  These  changes  theoretically 
facilitate  the  encoding  of  fear-based  memories.  Greater  sympathetic 
responses to cues associated with the traumatic event occur in PTSD, 
although  pituitary  adrenal  responses  are  blunted.  In  addition  to  fear 
learning,  changes  in  threat  detection  (insula  overactivity),  executive 
function,  emotional  regulation,  and  contextual  learning  have  been 
documented.  Predictive  biomarkers  include  increased  heart  rate  and 
serum lactate, decreased coagulation, insulin resistance, and alterations 
in glycolysis and fatty acid uptake.

TREATMENT
Stress Disorders
Acute stress reactions are usually self-limited, and treatment typi-
cally involves the short-term use of benzodiazepines and supportive/ 
expressive  psychotherapy.  The  chronic  and  recurrent  nature  of 
PTSD, however, requires a more complex approach using drug and 
behavioral treatments. PTSD is highly correlated with peritraumatic 
dissociative symptoms and the development of an acute stress disor-
der at the time of the trauma. The SSRIs (paroxetine and sertraline 
are  FDA  approved  for  PTSD),  venlafaxine,  fluoxetine,  and  topira-
mate can all reduce anxiety, symptoms of intrusion, and avoidance 
behaviors.  Recently,  the  psychedelic  agent  MDMA  demonstrated 
efficacy  as  an  adjunct  to  intensive  psychotherapeutic  intervention, 
as did stellate ganglion block. Low-dose trazodone and mirtazapine, 
sedating  antidepressants,  are  frequently  used  at  night  to  help  with 
insomnia. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs, however, should not be given 
in  the  early  aftermath  of  trauma.  Psychotherapeutic  strategies  for 
PTSD  help  the  patient  overcome  avoidance  behaviors  and  demor-
alization and master fear of recurrence of the trauma; therapies that 
encourage  the  patient  to  dismantle  avoidance  behaviors  through 
stepwise focusing on the experience of the traumatic event, such as 
trauma-focused  cognitive-behavioral  and  processing  therapy  and 
prolonged  exposure  therapy  utilizing  augmented  or  virtual  reality 
are the most effective. Debriefing after the traumatic event does not 
prevent PTSD and may exacerbate symptoms.

 ■ OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
Clinical  Manifestations  Obsessive-compulsive  disorder  (OCD) 
is characterized by obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors that 
impair  everyday  functioning.  Fears  of  contamination  and  germs  are 
common, as are handwashing, counting behaviors, and having to check 
and recheck such actions as whether a door is locked. The degree to 
which  the  disorder  is  disruptive  for  the  individual  varies,  but  in  all 
cases,  obsessive-compulsive  activities  take  up  >1  h  per  day  and  are 
undertaken  to  relieve  the  anxiety  triggered  by  the  core  fear.  Patients 
often conceal their symptoms, usually because they are embarrassed by 
the content of their thoughts or the nature of their actions. Physicians 

must  ask  specific  questions  regarding  recurrent  thoughts  and  behav-
iors, particularly if physical clues such as chafed and reddened hands or 
patchy hair loss (from repetitive hair pulling, or trichotillomania) are 
present.  Comorbid  conditions  are  common,  the  most  frequent  being 
depression,  other  anxiety  disorders,  eating  disorders,  and  tics.  OCD 
has a lifetime prevalence of 2–3% worldwide. Onset is usually gradual, 
beginning  in  early  adulthood,  but  childhood  onset  is  not  rare.  The 
disorder usually has a waxing and waning course, but some cases may 
show a steady deterioration in psychosocial functioning.

Etiology and Pathophysiology  A genetic contribution to OCD 
is  suggested  by  twin  studies,  but  no  susceptibility  gene  for  OCD  has 
been identified to date. Insulin signaling has been implicated in some 
recent  reports.  Family  studies  show  an  aggregation  of  OCD  with 
Tourette’s disorder, and both are more common in males and in first-
born children.

The anatomy of obsessive-compulsive behavior is thought to include 
the  orbital  frontal  cortex,  caudate  nucleus,  and  globus  pallidus.  The 
caudate nucleus appears to be involved in the acquisition and mainte-
nance of habit and skill learning, and interventions that are successful 
in  reducing  obsessive-compulsive  behaviors  also  decrease  metabolic 
activity measured in the caudate.

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Clomipramine,  fluoxetine,  fluvoxamine,  paroxetine,  and  sertraline 
are approved for the treatment of OCD in adults (and all but parox-
etine are also approved for children). Clomipramine is a TCA that 
is often tolerated poorly owing to anticholinergic and sedative side 
effects at the doses required to treat the illness (25–250 mg/d); its 
efficacy in OCD is unrelated to its antidepressant activity. Fluoxetine 
(5–60 mg/d), fluvoxamine (25–300 mg/d), paroxetine (40–60 mg/d), 
and sertraline (50–150 mg/d) are as effective as clomipramine and 
have a more benign side-effect profile. Venlafaxine and duloxetine 
also have shown efficacy but are not FDA approved. Only 50–60% 
of patients with OCD show adequate improvement with pharmaco-
therapy alone. In treatment-resistant cases, augmentation with other 
serotonergic agents such as buspirone, or with a neuroleptic or ben-
zodiazepine, may be beneficial, and in severe cases, deep-brain stim-
ulation has been found to be effective. When a therapeutic response 
is achieved, long-duration maintenance therapy is usually indicated.
For  many  individuals,  particularly  those  with  time-consuming 
compulsions,  behavior  therapy  and  exposure  response  prevention 
will result in as much improvement as that afforded by medication. 
Effective  techniques  include  the  gradual  increase  in  exposure  to 
stressful situations, maintenance of a diary to clarify stressors, and 
homework  assignments  that  substitute  new  activities  for  compul-
sive behaviors.

MOOD DISORDERS
Mood  disorders  are  characterized  by  a  disturbance  in  the  regulation 
of mood, behavior, and affect. Mood disorders are subdivided into (1) 
depressive disorders, (2) bipolar disorders, and (3) depression in associ-
ation with medical illness or alcohol and substance abuse (Chaps. 453 
through 457). Major depressive disorder (MDD) is differentiated from 
bipolar disorder by the absence of a manic or hypomanic episode. The 
relationship between pure depressive syndromes and bipolar disorders 
is  not  well  understood;  MDD  is  more  frequent  in  families  of  bipolar 
individuals, but the reverse is not true. In the most recent Global Bur-
den  of  Disease  Study  conducted  by  the  World  Health  Organization 
(2019), depression was the single largest factor contributing to disability, 
which had increased 61% as measured by disability-adjusted life-years 
(DALYs) since 1990. Moreover, the COVID pandemic has been associ-
ated with a major increase in reported symptoms of depression and anx-
iety worldwide. In the United States, lost productivity directly related to 
mood disorders has been estimated at $55.1 billion per year.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3546

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  ■ DEPRESSION IN ASSOCIATION  
WITH MEDICAL ILLNESS
Depression  occurring  in  the  context  of  medical  illness  is  difficult  to 
evaluate.  Depressive  symptomatology  may  reflect  the  psychological 
stress of coping with the disease, may be caused by the disease process 
itself or by the medications used to treat it, or may simply coexist in 
time with the medical diagnosis.

Virtually  every  class  of  medication  includes  some  agent  that  can 
induce depression. Antihypertensive drugs, anticholesterolemic agents, 
and  antiarrhythmic  agents  are  common  triggers  of  depressive  symp-
toms.  Iatrogenic  depression  should  also  be  considered  in  patients 
receiving  glucocorticoids,  antimicrobials,  systemic  analgesics,  anti-
parkinsonian  medications,  and  anticonvulsants.  To  decide  whether 
a  causal  relationship  exists  between  pharmacologic  therapy  and  a 
patient’s change in mood, it may sometimes be necessary to undertake 
an empirical trial of an alternative medication.

Between 20–30% of cardiac patients manifest a depressive disorder; 
an  even  higher  percentage  experience  depressive  symptomatology 
when  self-reporting  scales  are  used.  Depressive  symptoms  following 
unstable  angina,  myocardial  infarction,  cardiac  bypass  surgery,  or 
heart  transplant  impair  rehabilitation  and  are  associated  with  higher 
rates  of  mortality  and  medical  morbidity.  Depressed  patients  often 
show decreased variability in heart rate (an index of reduced parasym-
pathetic  nervous  system  activity),  which  may  predispose  individuals 
to  ventricular  arrhythmia  and  increased  morbidity.  Depression  also 
appears to increase the risk of coronary heart disease, possibly through 
increased  platelet  aggregation.  TCAs  are  contraindicated  in  patients 
with  bundle  branch  block,  and  TCA-induced  tachycardia  is  an  addi-
tional concern in patients with congestive heart failure. SSRIs appear 
not  to  induce  ECG  changes  or  adverse  cardiac  events  and  thus  are 
reasonable first-line drugs for patients at risk for TCA-related compli-
cations. SSRIs may interfere with hepatic metabolism of anticoagulants, 
however, causing increased anticoagulation.

In patients with cancer, the mean prevalence of depression is 25%, 
but  depression  occurs  in  40–50%  of  patients  with  cancers  of  the 
pancreas  or  oropharynx.  This  association  is  not  due  to  the  effect  of 
cachexia alone, as the higher prevalence of depression in patients with 
pancreatic cancer persists when compared to those with advanced gas-
tric cancer. Initiation of antidepressant medication in cancer patients 
has been shown to improve quality of life as well as mood. Psychother-
apeutic approaches, particularly group therapy, may have some effect 
on short-term depression, anxiety, and pain symptoms.

Depression occurs frequently in patients with neurologic disorders, 
particularly  cerebrovascular  disorders,  Parkinson’s  disease,  dementia, 
multiple  sclerosis,  and  traumatic  brain  injury.  One  in  five  patients 
with  left-hemisphere  stroke  involving  the  dorsolateral  frontal  cortex 
experiences major depression. Late-onset depression in otherwise cog-
nitively normal individuals increases the risk of a subsequent diagnosis 
of Alzheimer’s disease. All classes of antidepressant agents are effective 
against these depressions, as are, in some cases, stimulant compounds. 
SNRIs such as duloxetine or levomilnacipran may be more effective in 
depression associated with chronic pain.

The  reported  prevalence  of  depression  in  patients  with  diabetes 
mellitus  varies  from  8–27%,  with  the  severity  of  the  mood  state  cor-
relating  with  the  level  of  hyperglycemia  and  the  presence  of  diabetic 
complications. Treatment of depression may be complicated by effects 
of antidepressive agents on glycemic control. MAOIs can induce hypo-
glycemia and weight gain, whereas TCAs can produce hyperglycemia 
and carbohydrate craving. SSRIs and SNRIs, like MAOIs, may reduce 
fasting  plasma  glucose,  but  are  easier  to  use  and  may  also  improve 
dietary and medication compliance.

Hypothyroidism  is  frequently  associated  with  features  of  depres-
sion,  most  commonly  depressed  mood  and  memory  impairment. 
Hyperthyroid  states  may  also  present  in  a  similar  fashion,  usually  in 
geriatric populations. Improvement in mood usually follows normal-
ization of thyroid function, but adjunctive antidepressant medication 
is  sometimes  required.  Patients  with  subclinical  hypothyroidism  can 
also experience symptoms of depression and cognitive difficulty that 
respond to thyroid replacement.

3547

The lifetime prevalence of depression in HIV-positive individuals has 
been  estimated  at  22–45%.  The  relationship  between  depression  and 
disease progression is multifactorial and likely to involve psychological 
and social factors, alterations in immune function, and central nervous 
system (CNS) disease. Chronic hepatitis C infection is also associated 
with depression, which may worsen with interferon-α treatment.

Some chronic disorders of uncertain etiology, such as chronic fatigue 
syndrome  (Chap.  450)  and  fibromyalgia  (Chap.  373),  are  strongly 
associated  with  depression  and  anxiety;  patients  may  benefit  from 
antidepressant treatment or anticonvulsant agents such as pregabalin.

 ■ DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS
Clinical Manifestations  Major depression is defined as depressed 
mood on a daily basis for a minimum duration of 2 weeks (Table 452-7). 
An episode may be characterized by sadness, indifference, apathy, or 
irritability  and  is  usually  associated  with  changes  in  sleep  patterns, 
appetite, and weight; motor agitation or retardation; fatigue; impaired 
concentration  and  decision-making;  feelings  of  shame  or  guilt;  and 
thoughts of death or dying. Patients with depression have a profound 
loss of pleasure in all enjoyable activities, exhibit early-morning awak-
ening, feel that the dysphoric mood state is qualitatively different from 
sadness, and often notice a diurnal variation in mood (worse in morn-
ing  hours).  Patients  experiencing  bereavement  or  grief  may  exhibit 
many of the same signs and symptoms of major depression, although 
the emphasis is usually on feelings of emptiness and loss, rather than 
anhedonia and loss of self-esteem, and the duration is usually limited. 
In  certain  cases,  however,  the  diagnosis  of  major  depression  may  be 
warranted even in the context of a significant loss.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

TABLE 452-7  Criteria for a Major Depressive Episode
A.  Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 
2-week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least 
one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or 
pleasure. (Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to 
another medical condition.)
1.  Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either 
subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by 
others (e.g., appears tearful).

2.  Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities 
most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective 
account or observation).

3.  Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of 

>5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly 
every day.

4.  Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5.  Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by 
others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed 
down).

6.  Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7.  Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may 
be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about 
being sick).

8.  Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every 

day (either by subjective account or as observed by others).

9.  Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal 

ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for 
committing suicide.

B.  The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, 

occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

C.  The episode is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance or to 

another medical condition.

D.  The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better explained 

by seasonal affective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, 
delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia 
spectrum and other psychotic disorders.

E.  There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association. All 
Rights Reserved.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3547

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3548

Approximately 15% of the population experiences a major depres-
sive  episode  at  some  point  in  life,  and  6–8%  of  all  outpatients  in 
primary  care  settings  satisfy  diagnostic  criteria  for  the  disorder. 
Depression  is  often  undiagnosed,  and  even  more  frequently,  it  is 
treated  inadequately.  If  a  physician  suspects  the  presence  of  a  major 
depressive episode, the initial task is to determine whether it represents 
unipolar  or  bipolar  depression  or  is  one  of  the  10–15%  of  cases  that 
are secondary to general medical illness or substance abuse. Physicians 
should also assess the risk of suicide by direct questioning, as patients 
are  often  reluctant  to  verbalize  such  thoughts  without  prompting.  If 
specific plans are uncovered or if significant risk factors exist (e.g., a 
past  history  of  suicide  attempts,  profound  hopelessness,  concurrent 
medical illness, substance abuse, or social isolation), the patient must 
be referred to a mental health specialist for immediate care. The phy-
sician should specifically probe each of these areas in an empathic and 
hopeful  manner,  being  sensitive  to  denial  and  possible  minimization 
of  distress.  The  presence  of  anxiety,  panic,  or  agitation  significantly 
increases near-term suicidal risk. Approximately 4–5% of all depressed 
patients will commit suicide; most will have sought help from physi-
cians within 1 month of their deaths.

In some depressed patients, the mood disorder does not appear to 
be episodic and is not clearly associated with either psychosocial dys-
function or change from the individual’s usual experience in life. Per-
sistent depressive disorder (dysthymic disorder) consists of a pattern of 
chronic (at least 2 years), ongoing depressive symptoms that are usually 
less severe and/or less numerous than those found in major depression, 
but the functional consequences may be equivalent to or even greater; 
the two conditions are sometimes difficult to separate and can occur 
together (“double depression”). Many patients who exhibit a profile of 
pessimism, disinterest, and low self-esteem respond to antidepressant 
treatment. Persistent and chronic depressive disorders occur in ~2% of 
the general population.

Depression  is  approximately  twice  as  common  in  women  as  in 
men, and the incidence increases with age in both sexes. Twin studies 
indicate that the liability to major depression of early onset (before age  
25 years) is largely genetic in origin. Negative life events can precipitate 
and contribute to depression, but genetic factors influence the sensitiv-
ity of individuals to these stressful events. In most cases, both biologic 
and psychosocial factors are involved in the precipitation and unfold-
ing of depressive episodes. The most potent stressors appear to involve 
death of a relative, assault, or severe marital or relationship problems.

Unipolar  depressive  disorders  usually  begin  in  early  adulthood  and 
recur episodically over the course of a lifetime. The best predictor of 
future  risk  is  the  number  of  past  episodes;  50–60%  of  patients  who 
have a first episode have at least one or two recurrences. Some patients 
experience  multiple  episodes  that  become  more  severe  and  frequent 
over time. The duration of an untreated episode varies greatly, ranging 
from  a  few  months  to  ≥1  year.  The  pattern  of  recurrence  and  clini-
cal  progression  in  a  developing  episode  are  also  variable.  Within  an 
individual, the nature of episodes (e.g., specific presenting symptoms, 
frequency,  and  duration)  may  be  similar  over  time.  In  a  minority  of 
patients, a severe depressive episode may progress to a psychotic state 
and  in  elderly  patients,  depressive  symptoms  can  be  associated  with 
cognitive deficits mimicking dementia (“pseudodementia”). A seasonal 
pattern of depression, called seasonal affective disorder, may manifest 
with onset and remission of episodes at predictable times of the year. 
This disorder is more common in women, with symptoms of anergy, 
fatigue, weight gain, hypersomnia, and episodic carbohydrate craving. 
The prevalence increases with distance from the equator, and improve-
ment may occur by altering light exposure.

Etiology  and  Pathophysiology  Although  evidence  for  genetic 
transmission of unipolar depression is not as strong as in bipolar dis-
order, monozygotic twins have a higher concordance rate (46%) than 
dizygotic siblings (20%), with little support for any effect of a shared 
family  environment.  Large-scale  genome-wide  association  studies 
(GWAS) involving hundreds of thousands of cases and controls have 
identified several hundred loci across the genome, some of which are 
unique to major depression, but others of which overlap with findings 

from  disparate  psychiatric  disorders,  indicating  possible  pleiotropy. 
Epigenetic changes are also likely to contribute to risk.

Neuroendocrine  abnormalities  that  reflect  the  neurovegetative  signs 
and symptoms of depression include increased cortisol and corticotropin- 
releasing  hormone  (CRH)  secretion,  a  decreased  inhibitory  response 
of  glucocorticoids  to  dexamethasone,  and  a  blunted  response  of  
thyroid-stimulating  hormone  (TSH)  level  to  infusion  of  thyroid- 
releasing hormone (TRH). Antidepressant treatment leads to normal-
ization of these abnormalities. Major depression is also associated with 
changes  in  levels  of  proinflammatory  cytokines  and  neurotrophins, 
an  increase  in  measures  of  oxidative  stress  and  cellular  aging,  telo-
mere shortening, epigenetic changes, and mitochondrial dysfunction. 
Alterations in the gut microbiome may also be involved.

Diurnal variations in symptom severity and alterations in circadian 
rhythmicity of a number of neurochemical and neurohumoral factors 
suggest that a primary defect may be present in regulation of biologic 
rhythms. Patients with major depression show consistent findings of a 
decrease in rapid eye movement (REM)–sleep onset (REM latency), an 
increase in REM density, and, in some subjects, a decrease in stage IV 
delta slow-wave sleep.

Although  antidepressant  drugs  inhibit  neurotransmitter  uptake 
within  hours,  their  therapeutic  effects  typically  emerge  over  several 
weeks,  implicating  adaptive  changes  in  second  messenger  systems 
and  neurotrophic  and  transcription  factors  as  possible  mechanisms 
of action.

TREATMENT
Depressive Disorders

Treatment  planning  requires  coordination  of  short-term  strate-
gies to induce remission combined with longer-term maintenance 
designed  to  prevent  recurrence.  The  most  effective  intervention 
for achieving remission and preventing relapse is medication, but 
combined  treatments,  incorporating  psychotherapy  to  help  the 
patient  cope  with  decreased  self-esteem  and  demoralization, 
improve  outcomes,  as  do  self-help  strategies  such  as  exercise 
(Fig.  452-1).  Approximately  40%  of  primary  care  patients 
with  depression  drop  out  of  treatment  and  discontinue  medi-
cation if symptomatic improvement is not noted within a month, 
unless  additional  support  is  provided.  Outcome  improves  with 
(1)  increased  intensity  and  frequency  of  visits  during  the  first   
4–6  weeks  of  treatment,  (2)  supplemental  educational  materials, 
and  (3)  psychiatric  consultation  as  indicated.  Despite  the  wide-
spread  use  of  SSRIs  and  other  second-generation  antidepressant 
drugs, there is no convincing evidence that these classes of antide-
pressants are more efficacious than TCAs. Between 60–70% of all 
depressed  patients  respond  to  any  drug  chosen,  if  it  is  given  in  a 
sufficient dose for 6–8 weeks.

A  rational  approach  to  selecting  which  antidepressant  to  use 
(Table 452-1) involves matching the patient’s preference and med-
ical  history  with  the  metabolic  and  side-effect  profile  of  the  drug 
(Tables 452-2 and 452-3). A previous response, or a family history 
of  a  positive  response,  to  a  specific  antidepressant  often  suggests 
that  drug  should  be  tried  first.  Before  initiating  antidepressant 
therapy, the physician should evaluate the possible contribution of 
comorbid  illnesses  and  consider  their  specific  treatment.  In  indi-
viduals with suicidal ideation, particular attention should be paid 
to  choosing  a  drug  with  low  toxicity  if  taken  in  overdose.  Newer 
antidepressant drugs are distinctly safer in this regard; nevertheless, 
the advantages of TCAs have not been completely superseded. The 
existence of generic equivalents makes TCAs relatively cheap, and 
for secondary tricyclics, particularly nortriptyline and desipramine, 
well-defined  relationships  among  dose,  plasma  level,  and  thera-
peutic response exist. The steady-state plasma level achieved for a 
given drug dose can vary more than tenfold between individuals, 
and  plasma  levels  may  help  in  interpreting  apparent  resistance 
to  treatment  and/or  unexpected  drug  toxicity.  The  principal  side 
effects of TCAs are antihistaminergic (sedation) and anticholinergic 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3548

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Determine whether there is a history of good response to a medication 
in the patient or a first-degree relative; if yes, consider treatment with 
this agent if compatible with considerations in step 2.

Evaluate patient characteristics and match to drug; consider health 
status, side effect profile, convenience, cost, patient preference, drug 
interaction risk, suicide potential, and medication compliance history.

Begin new medication at 1/3 to 1/2 target dose if drug is a TCA, 
bupropion, venlafaxine, or mirtazapine, or full dose as tolerated if drug 
is an SSRI. 

If problem side effects occur, evaluate possibility of tolerance; consider 
temporary decrease in dose or adjunctive treatment.

If unacceptable side effects continue, taper drug over 1 week and 
initiate new trial; consider potential drug interactions in choice. 

Evaluate response after 6 weeks at target dose; if response is 
inadequate, increase dose in stepwise fashion as tolerated.

If inadequate response after maximal dose, consider tapering and 
switching to a new drug vs adjunctive treatment; if drug is a TCA, obtain 
plasma level to guide further treatment.

FIGURE  452-1  A  guideline  for  the  medical  management  of  major  depressive 
disorder. SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.

(constipation, dry mouth, urinary hesitancy, blurred vision). TCAs 
are  contraindicated  in  patients  with  serious  cardiovascular  risk 
factors, and overdoses of tricyclic agents can be lethal, with desip-
ramine carrying the greatest risk. It is judicious to prescribe only a 
10-day supply when suicide is a risk. Most patients require a daily 
dose of 150–200 mg of imipramine or amitriptyline or its equiva-
lent to achieve a therapeutic blood level of 150–300 ng/mL and a 
satisfactory remission; some patients show a partial effect at lower 
doses. Geriatric patients may require a low starting dose and slow 
escalation.  Ethnic  differences  in  drug  metabolism  are  significant, 
with Hispanic, Asian, and black patients generally requiring lower 
doses to achieve a comparable blood level.

Second-generation  antidepressants  are  similar  to  tricyclics  in 
their  effect  on  neurotransmitter  reuptake,  although  some  also 
have specific actions on catecholamine and indolamine receptors 
as  well.  Amoxapine  is  a  dibenzoxazepine  derivative  that  blocks 
norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake and has a metabolite that 
shows a degree of dopamine blockade. Long-term use of this drug 
carries a risk of tardive dyskinesia. Maprotiline is a potent norad-
renergic reuptake blocker that has little anticholinergic effect but 
may produce seizures. Bupropion is a novel antidepressant whose 
mechanism of action is thought to involve enhancement of norad-
renergic  function.  It  has  no  anticholinergic,  sedating,  or  orthos-
tatic side effects and has a low incidence of sexual side effects. It 
may, however, be associated with stimulant-like side effects, may 
lower  seizure  threshold,  and  has  an  exceptionally  short  half-life, 
requiring  frequent  dosing.  An  extended-release  preparation  is 
available.

SSRIs such as fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram, and 
escitalopram cause a lower frequency of anticholinergic, sedating, 
and cardiovascular side effects but a possibly greater incidence of 
gastrointestinal complaints, sleep impairment, and sexual dysfunc-
tion than do TCAs. Akathisia, involving an inner sense of restless-
ness and anxiety in addition to increased motor activity, may also be 
more common, particularly during the first week of treatment. One 
concern  is  the  risk  of  “serotonin  syndrome,”  which  is  thought  to 

3549

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

result from hyperstimulation of brainstem 5-HT1A receptors and is 
characterized by myoclonus, agitation, abdominal cramping, hyper-
pyrexia, hypertension, and potentially death. Serotonergic agonists 
taken in combination should be monitored closely for this reason. 
Considerations  such  as  half-life,  compliance,  toxicity,  and  drug-
drug interactions may guide the choice of a particular SSRI. Fluox-
etine and its principal active metabolite, norfluoxetine, for example, 
have a combined half-life of almost 7 days, resulting in a delay of  
5 weeks before steady-state levels are achieved and a similar delay for 
complete drug excretion once their use is discontinued; paroxetine 
appears to incur a greater risk of withdrawal symptoms with abrupt 
discontinuation. All the SSRIs may impair sexual function, resulting 
in diminished libido, impotence, or difficulty in achieving orgasm. 
Sexual dysfunction frequently results in noncompliance and should 
be  asked  about  specifically.  Sexual  dysfunction  can  sometimes  be 
ameliorated by lowering the dose, by instituting weekend drug holi-
days (two or three times a month), or by treatment with amantadine 
(100  mg  tid),  bethanechol  (25  mg  tid),  buspirone  (10  mg  tid),  or 
bupropion (100–150 mg/d). Paroxetine appears to be more anticho-
linergic than either fluoxetine or sertraline, and sertraline carries a 
lower risk of producing an adverse drug interaction than the other 
two. Rare side effects of SSRIs include angina due to vasospasm and 
prolongation  of  the  prothrombin  time.  Escitalopram  is  the  most 
specific of currently available SSRIs and appears to have no signifi-
cant inhibitory effects on the P450 system.

Venlafaxine,  desvenlafaxine,  duloxetine,  and  levomilnacipran 
block  the  reuptake  of  both  norepinephrine  and  serotonin  but 
produce  relatively  little  in  the  way  of  traditional  tricyclic  side 
effects. Vortioxetine, also a 5HT1a agonist, and vilazodone block 
reuptake of serotonin but have negligible effects on norepineph-
rine reuptake, although vortioxetine may increase norepinephrine 
levels through wide effects on serotonergic receptors, as a 5HT1a 
agonist,  5HT1b  partial  agonist,  and  a  5HT1d,  5HT3,  and  5HT7 
antagonist.  Unlike  the  SSRIs,  venlafaxine  and  vortioxetine  have 
relatively linear dose-response curves. Patients on immediate-re-
lease  venlafaxine  should  be  monitored  for  a  possible  increase  in 
diastolic  blood  pressure,  and  multiple  daily  dosing  is  required 
because of the drug’s short half-life. An extended-release form is 
available and has a somewhat lower incidence of gastrointestinal 
side  effects.  Mirtazapine  is  a  tetracyclic  that  has  a  unique  spec-
trum  of  activity,  as  it  increases  noradrenergic  and  serotonergic 
neurotransmission  through  a  blockade  of  central  α2-adrenergic 
receptors and postsynaptic 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors. It is also 
strongly antihistaminic and, as such, may produce sedation. Lev-
omilnacipran  is  the  most  noradrenergic  of  the  SNRIs  and  theo-
retically may be appropriate for patients with more severe fatigue 
and anergia.

With the exception of citalopram and escitalopram, each of the 
SSRIs may inhibit one or more cytochrome P450 enzymes. Depend-
ing on the specific isoenzyme involved, the metabolism of a number 
of  concomitantly  administered  medications  can  be  dramatically 
affected. Fluoxetine and paroxetine, for example, by inhibiting 2D6, 
can cause dramatic increases in the blood level of type 1C antiar-
rhythmics,  whereas  sertraline,  by  acting  on  3A4,  may  alter  blood 
levels of carbamazepine or digoxin. Depending on drug specificity 
for a particular CYP enzyme for its own metabolism, concomitant 
medications or dietary factors, such as grapefruit juice, may in turn 
affect the efficacy or toxicity of the SSRI.

The  MAOIs  are  highly  effective,  particularly  in  atypical 
depression,  but  the  risk  of  hypertensive  crisis  following  intake 
of  tyramine-containing  food  or  sympathomimetic  drugs  makes 
them inappropriate as first-line agents. Transdermal selegiline may 
avert  this  risk  at  low  dose.  Common  side  effects  include  orthos-
tatic hypotension, weight gain, insomnia, and sexual dysfunction. 
MAOIs  should  not  be  used  concomitantly  with  SSRIs,  because  of 
the risk of serotonin syndrome, or with TCAs, because of possible 
hyperadrenergic effects.

Electroconvulsive therapy is at least as effective as medication, 
but its use is reserved for treatment-resistant cases and delusional 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3549

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3550

depressions. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) 
is  approved  for  treatment-resistant  depression  and  has  been 
shown  to  have  efficacy  in  several  controlled  trials.  Vagus  nerve 
stimulation (VNS) has also recently been approved for treatment- 
resistant  depression,  but  its  degree  of  efficacy  is  controversial. 
Some meta-analyses of low-intensity transcranial current stimu-
lation (tCS) have shown a positive benefit over sham treatment, 
but  whether  this  is  comparable  to  or  synergistic  with  antide-
pressant  treatment  is  unclear.  In  off-label  usage,  intravenous 
ketamine,  a  dissociative  anesthetic,  and  intranasal  esketamine 
(an  isomer  that  has  FDA  approval  in  treatment-resistant  cases) 
have  been  shown  to  have  short-term  antidepressant  efficacy, 
often after a single administration, suggesting a possible utility in 
addressing suicidality. Questions remain, however, about the risk/
benefit  ratio  over  the  longer  term.  Psilocybin,  a  hallucinogen, 
has also shown some potential benefit in controlled administra-
tion.  Lastly,  deep  brain  stimulation  of  the  ventral  anterior  limb 
of  the  internal  capsule  and  of  the  subcallosal  cingulate  region 
have demonstrable efficacy in randomized experimental trials of  
treatment-resistant depression.

Postpartum depression may respond to any of the above inter-
ventions, but the FDA has recently approved the specific usage of 
brexanolone (Zulresso), administered in a continuous intravenous 
infusion  over  60  h  and  found  to  result  in  symptomatic  relief  for 
at  least  30  days.  Sedation  and  loss  of  consciousness  are  possible 
adverse effects.

Regardless  of  the  treatment  undertaken,  the  response  should 
be  evaluated  after  ~2  months.  Three-quarters  of  patients  show 
improvement by this time, but if remission is inadequate, the patient 
should be questioned about compliance, and an increase in medica-
tion dose should be considered if side effects are not troublesome. If 
this approach is unsuccessful, referral to a mental health specialist 
is  advised.  Strategies  for  treatment  resistance  include  selection 
of  an  alternative  drug,  combinations  of  antidepressants,  and/or 
adjunctive treatment with other classes of drugs, including lithium, 
thyroid  hormone,  l-methylfolate,  s-adenosylmethionine,  n-acetyl 
cysteine, atypical antipsychotic agents, and dopamine agonists. In 
switching  to  a  different  monotherapy,  other  drugs  from  the  same 
class appear to be as likely to be efficacious as choosing a drug from 
a different class. A large randomized trial (STAR-D) was unable to 
show preferential efficacy, but the addition of certain atypical anti-
psychotic  drugs  (quetiapine  extended-release;  aripiprazole;  brex-
piprazole) has received FDA approval, as has usage of a combined 
medication,  olanzapine  and  fluoxetine  (Symbyax).  Patients  whose 
response to an SSRI wanes over time may benefit from the addition 
of buspirone (10 mg tid) or pindolol (2–5 mg tid) or small amounts 
of  a  TCA  such  as  nortriptyline  (25  mg  bid  or  tid).  Most  patients 
will show some degree of response, but aggressive treatment should 
be pursued until remission is achieved, and drug treatment should 
be continued for at least 6–9 months to prevent relapse. In patients 
who have had two or more episodes of depression, indefinite main-
tenance treatment should be considered. Pharmacogenomic testing 
focusing  on  cytochrome  p450  allelic  variation  may  sometimes  be 
helpful  in  identifying  individuals  who  are  poor  or  rapid  metabo-
lizers, but assessing pharmacodynamic gene variants has not been 
shown to be cost-effective or affect clinical outcomes.

It is essential to educate patients both about depression and the 
benefits and side effects of medications they are receiving. Advice 
about  stress  reduction  and  cautions  that  alcohol  may  exacerbate 
depressive symptoms and impair drug response are helpful. Patients 
should  be  given  time  to  describe  their  experience,  their  outlook, 
and  the  impact  of  the  depression  on  them  and  their  families. 
Occasional  empathic  silence  may  be  as  helpful  for  the  treatment 
alliance  as  verbal  reassurance.  Controlled  trials  have  shown  that 
cognitive-behavioral  and  interpersonal  therapies  are  effective  in 
improving  psychological  and  social  adjustment  and  that  a  com-
bined treatment approach is more successful than medication alone 
for many patients.

 ■ BIPOLAR DISORDER
Clinical  Manifestations  Bipolar  disorder  is  characterized  by 
unpredictable swings in mood from mania (or hypomania) to depres-
sion. Some patients suffer only from recurrent attacks of mania, which 
in  its  pure  form  is  associated  with  increased  psychomotor  activity; 
excessive social extroversion; decreased need for sleep; impulsivity and 
impaired judgment; and expansive, elated, grandiose, and sometimes 
irritable mood (Table 452-8). In severe mania, patients may experience 
delusions and paranoid thinking indistinguishable from schizophrenia. 
One-half of patients with bipolar disorder present not with euphoria 
but  with  a  mixture  of  psychomotor  agitation  and  activation,  accom-
panied by dysphoria, anxiety, and irritability. It may be difficult to dis-
tinguish such a mixed state from agitated depression. In some bipolar 
patients (bipolar II disorder), the full criteria for mania are lacking, and 
the  requisite  recurrent  depressions  are  separated  by  periods  of  mild 
activation and increased energy (hypomania). In cyclothymic disorder, 
there  are  numerous  hypomanic  periods,  usually  of  relatively  short 
duration,  alternating  with  clusters  of  depressive  symptoms  that  fail, 
either in severity or duration, to meet the criteria of major depression. 
The mood fluctuations are chronic and should be present for at least  
2 years before the diagnosis is made.

Manic episodes typically emerge over a period of days to weeks, but 
onset within hours is possible, usually in the early-morning hours. An 
untreated episode of either depression or mania can be as short as several 
weeks or last as long as 8–12 months, and rare patients have an unremit-
ting chronic course. The term rapid cycling is used for patients who have 
four or more episodes of either depression or mania in a given year. This 
pattern occurs in 15% of all patients, most of whom are women. In some 
cases, rapid cycling is linked to an underlying thyroid dysfunction, and 
in others, it is iatrogenically triggered by prolonged antidepressant treat-
ment. Approximately one-half of patients have sustained difficulties in 
work performance and psychosocial functioning, with depressive phases 
being more responsible for impairment than mania.

Bipolar  disorder  is  common,  affecting  ~1.5%  of  the  population 
in  the  United  States.  Onset  is  typically  between  20–30  years  of  age, 
but  many  individuals  report  premorbid  symptoms  in  late  childhood 
or  early  adolescence.  The  prevalence  is  similar  for  men  and  women; 
women  are  likely  to  have  more  depressive  and  men  more  manic 

TABLE 452-8  Criteria for a Manic Episode
A.  A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or 
irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed 
activity or energy, lasting at least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly 
every day (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary).

B.  During the period of the mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, 
three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) 
are present to a significant degree and represent a noticeable change from 
usual behavior:
1.  Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2.  Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 h of sleep).
3.  More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4.  Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5.  Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant 

external stimuli), as reported or observed.

6.  Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or 
sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless non-goal-directed 
activity).

7.  Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful 
consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual 
indiscretions, or foolish business investments).

C.  The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in 

social or occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent 
harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.

D.  The episode is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance 

(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment) or another medical 
condition.

Source: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (Copyright © 2013). American Psychiatric Association. All 
Rights Reserved.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3550

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders episodes  over  a  lifetime.  Recognizing  a  bipolar  diathesis  in  an  indi-
vidual who presents with a depressive episode but no history of mania 
is  difficult  but  essential  in  optimizing  treatment  planning,  because 
antidepressants may be contraindicated and result in symptom wors-
ening and cycle acceleration. Suggestive features of bipolarity include a 
childhood onset, a history of antidepressant treatment failure, atypical 
features of hypersomnolence and weight gain, and marked irritability 
or impulsivity.

Differential  Diagnosis  The  differential  diagnosis  of  mania 
includes secondary mania induced by stimulant or sympathomimetic 
drugs, hyperthyroidism, AIDS, neurologic disorders such as Hunting-
ton’s  or  Wilson’s  disease,  frontotemporal  dementia,  and  cerebrovas-
cular  accidents.  Comorbidity  with  alcohol  and  substance  abuse  is 
common, either because of poor judgment and increased impulsivity 
or because of an attempt to self-treat the underlying mood symptoms 
and sleep disturbances.

Etiology and Pathophysiology  Genetic predisposition to bipolar 
disorder is evident from family studies; the concordance rate for mono-
zygotic twins approaches 80%. A number of risk genes that have been 
identified to date overlap with those conveying risk for other psychiat-
ric disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism, implying some degree 
of  shared  pathophysiology.  Replicated  loci  include  the  alpha  subunit 
of the L-type calcium channel (CACNA1C), teneurin transmembrane 
protein 4 (ODZ4), ankyrin 3 (ANK3), neurocan (NCAN), and tetrat-
ricopeptide repeat and ankyrin repeat containing 1 (TRANK1). Com-
mon variants convey little individual risk, but collectively account for 
25% of heritability. A few rarer, more penetrant variants have also been 
reported, but no causative mutations have as yet been confirmed. Sim-
ilarly, no clear biomarkers have been identified, but there is evidence 
for circadian rhythm dysregulation and oxidative stress, mitochondrial, 
and  endoplasmic  reticulum  abnormalities.  Reported  MRI  findings 
include grey matter thinning in frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex.

TREATMENT
Bipolar Disorder

(Table  452-9)  Lithium  carbonate  is  the  mainstay  of  treatment  in 
bipolar  disorder,  although  sodium  valproate  and  carbamazepine, 
as  well  as  a  number  of  second-generation  antipsychotic  agents 
(aripiprazole,  asenapine,  cariprazine,  olanzapine,  quetiapine,  risp-
eridone, ziprasidone), also have FDA approval for the treatment of 
acute mania. Oxcarbazepine is not FDA approved, but appears to 
enjoy  carbamazepine’s  spectrum  of  efficacy.  The  response  rate  to 
lithium carbonate is 70–80% in acute mania, with beneficial effects 
appearing in 1–2 weeks. Lithium also has a prophylactic effect in 
prevention of recurrent mania and, to a lesser extent, in the preven-
tion of recurrent depression, which is more difficult to treat than 
unipolar  depression.  A  simple  cation,  lithium  is  rapidly  absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract and remains unbound to plasma or 
tissue  proteins.  Some  95%  of  a  given  dose  is  excreted  unchanged 
through the kidneys within 24 h.

Serious side effects from lithium are rare, but minor complaints 
such  as  gastrointestinal  discomfort,  nausea,  diarrhea,  polyuria, 
weight gain, skin eruptions, alopecia, and edema are common. Over 
time, urine-concentrating ability may be decreased, but significant 
nephrotoxicity is relatively rare. Lithium exerts an antithyroid effect 
by interfering with the synthesis and release of thyroid hormones. 
More  serious  side  effects  include  tremor,  poor  concentration  and 
memory, ataxia, dysarthria, and incoordination.

In the treatment of acute mania, lithium is initiated at 300 mg 
bid or tid, and the dose is then increased by 300 mg every 2–3 days 
to achieve blood levels of 0.8–1.2 meq/L. Because the therapeutic 
effect of lithium may not appear until after 7–10 days of treatment, 
adjunctive usage of lorazepam (1–2 mg every 4 h) or clonazepam 
(0.5–1 mg every 4 h) may be beneficial to control agitation. Antipsy-
chotics are indicated in patients with severe agitation who respond 
only partially to benzodiazepines. Patients using lithium should be 

TABLE 452-9  Clinical Pharmacology of Mood Stabilizers
AGENT AND DOSING
Lithium
Starting dose: 300 mg bid or tid
Therapeutic blood level:  
0.8–1.2 meq/L

3551

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

SIDE EFFECTS AND OTHER EFFECTS
Common Side Effects
Nausea/anorexia/diarrhea, fine tremor, 
thirst, polyuria, fatigue, weight gain, acne, 
folliculitis, neutrophilia, hypothyroidism
Blood level is increased by thiazides, 
tetracyclines, and NSAIDs
Blood level is decreased by bronchodilators, 
verapamil, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Rare side effects: Neurotoxicity, renal 
toxicity, hypercalcemia, ECG changes
Common Side Effects
Nausea/anorexia, weight gain, sedation, 
tremor, rash, alopecia
Inhibits hepatic metabolism of other 
medications
Rare side effects: Pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
Common Side Effects
Nausea/anorexia, sedation, rash, dizziness/
ataxia

Carbamazepine, but not oxcarbazepine, 
induces hepatic metabolism of other 
medications
Rare side effects: Hyponatremia, 
agranulocytosis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome
Common Side Effects
Rash, dizziness, headache, tremor, sedation, 
nausea
Rare side effect: Stevens-Johnson syndrome

Valproic Acid
Starting dose: 250 mg tid
Therapeutic blood level:  
50–125 μg/mL

Carbamazepine/Oxcarbazepine
Starting dose: 200 mg bid for 
carbamazepine, 150 mg bid for 
oxcarbazepine
Therapeutic blood level:  
4–12 μg/mL for carbamazepine

Lamotrigine
Starting dose: 25 mg/d

Abbreviations: ECG, electrocardiogram; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

monitored  closely,  because  the  blood  levels  required  to  achieve  a 
therapeutic benefit are close to those associated with toxicity.

Valproic  acid  may  be  more  effective  than  lithium  for  patients 
who experience rapid cycling (i.e., more than four episodes a year) 
or  who  present  with  a  mixed  or  dysphoric  mania.  Tremor  and 
weight gain are the most common side effects; hepatotoxicity and 
pancreatitis are rare toxicities.

The  recurrent  nature  of  bipolar  mood  disorder  necessitates 
maintenance treatment. A sustained blood lithium level of at least 
0.8 meq/L is important for optimal prophylaxis and has been shown 
to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide,  a  finding  not  yet  apparent  for  other 
mood stabilizers. Combinations of mood stabilizers together or with 
atypical  antipsychotic  drugs  are  sometimes  required  to  maintain 
mood stability. Quetiapine extended release, olanzapine, risperidone, 
and lamotrigine have been approved for maintenance treatment as 
sole agents, in combination with lithium and with aripiprazole and 
ziprasidone as adjunctive drugs. Lurasidone, olanzapine/fluoxetine, 
and quetiapine are also approved to treat acute depressive episodes 
in  bipolar  disorder.  Compliance  is  frequently  an  issue  and  often 
requires  enlistment  and  education  of  concerned  family  members. 
Efforts to identify and modify psychosocial factors that may trigger 
episodes  are  important,  as  is  an  emphasis  on  lifestyle  regularity 
(social rhythm therapy). Mobile apps for smartphones that alert the 
individual and clinician to changes in activity and speech are prov-
ing useful in early detection of behavioral change and in delivering 
clinical  interventions  and  education.  Antidepressant  medications 
are  sometimes  required  for  the  treatment  of  severe  breakthrough 
depressions, but their use should generally be avoided during main-
tenance treatment because of the risk of precipitating mania or accel-
erating the cycle frequency. Alternative off-label agents for bipolar 
depression  include  pramipexole,  modafinil,  omega-3  fatty  acids, 
and  N-acetyl  cysteine;  interventions  such  as  ECT,  light  therapy, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3551

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3552

and rTMS may also be effective. Loss of efficacy over time may be 
observed with any of the mood-stabilizing agents. In such situations, 
an alternative agent or combination therapy is usually helpful.

SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER
Many patients presenting in general medical practice, perhaps as many 
as  5–7%,  will  experience  a  somatic  symptom(s)  as  particularly  dis-
tressing and preoccupying, to the point that it comes to dominate their 
thoughts, feelings, and beliefs and interferes to a varying degree with 
everyday functioning. Although the absence of a medical explanation 
for  these  complaints  was  historically  emphasized  as  a  diagnostic  ele-
ment, it has been recognized that the patient’s interpretation and elab-
oration of the experience is the critical defining factor and that patients 
with well-established medical causation may qualify for the diagnosis. 
Multiple complaints are typical, but severe single symptoms can occur 
as well. Comorbidity with depressive and anxiety disorders is common 
and may affect the severity of the experience and its functional conse-
quences. Personality factors may be a significant risk factor, as may a 
low level of educational or socioeconomic status or a history of recent 
stressful  life  events.  Cultural  factors  are  relevant  as  well  and  should 
be  incorporated  into  the  evaluation.  Individuals  who  have  persistent 
preoccupations  about  having  or  acquiring  a  serious  illness,  but  who 
do  not  have  a  specific  somatic  complaint,  may  qualify  for  a  related 
diagnosis—illness  anxiety  disorder.  The  diagnosis  of  conversion  dis-
order (functional neurologic symptom disorder) is used to specifically 
identify  those  individuals  whose  somatic  complaints  involve  one  or 
more  symptoms  of  altered  voluntary  motor  or  sensory  function  that 
cannot  be  medically  explained  and  that  cause  significant  distress  or 
impairment or require medical evaluation.

In  factitious  illnesses,  the  patient  consciously  and  voluntarily  pro-
duces physical symptoms of illness. The term Munchausen’s syndrome 
is  reserved  for  individuals  with  particularly  dramatic,  chronic,  or 
severe factitious illness. In true factitious illness, the sick role itself is 
gratifying. A variety of signs, symptoms, and diseases have been either 
simulated or caused by factitious behavior, the most common includ-
ing chronic diarrhea, fever of unknown origin, intestinal bleeding or 
hematuria,  seizures,  and  hypoglycemia.  Factitious  disorder  is  usually 
not  diagnosed  until  5–10  years  after  its  onset,  and  it  can  produce 
significant  social  and  medical  costs.  In  malingering,  the  fabrication 
derives from a desire for some external reward such as a narcotic med-
ication or disability reimbursement.

TREATMENT
Somatic Symptom Disorder and Related Disorders

Patients  with  somatic  symptom  disorder  are  frequently  subjected 
to  many  diagnostic  tests  and  exploratory  surgeries  in  an  attempt 
to find their “real” illness. Such an approach is doomed to failure 
and  does  not  address  the  core  issue.  Successful  treatment  is  best 
achieved  through  behavior  modification,  in  which  access  to  the 
physician  is  tightly  regulated  and  adjusted  to  provide  a  sustained 
and predictable level of support that is less clearly contingent on the 
patient’s level of presenting distress. Visits can be brief and should 
not be associated with a need for a diagnostic or treatment action. 
Although the literature is limited, some patients may benefit from 
antidepressant treatment.

Any  attempt  to  confront  the  patient  usually  creates  a  sense  of 
humiliation and causes the patient to abandon treatment from that 
caregiver. A better strategy is to introduce psychological causation 
as  one  of  a  number  of  possible  explanations  in  the  differential 
diagnoses that are discussed. Without directly linking psychother-
apeutic intervention to the diagnosis, the patient can be offered a 
face-saving  means  by  which  the  pathologic  relationship  with  the 
health care system can be examined and alternative approaches to 
life  stressors  developed.  Specific  medical  treatments  also  may  be 
indicated  and  effective  in  treating  some  of  the  functional  conse-
quences of conversion disorder.

FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS
 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Feeding and eating disorders constitute a group of conditions in which 
there is a persistent disturbance of eating or associated behaviors that 
significantly  impair  an  individual’s  physical  health  or  psychosocial 
functioning.  In  DSM-5  the  described  categories  (with  the  exception 
of pica) are defined to be mutually exclusive in a given episode, based 
on the understanding that although they are phenotypically similar in 
some  ways,  they  differ  in  course,  prognosis,  and  effective  treatment 
interventions.  Compared  with  DSM-IV-TR,  three  disorders  (i.e., 
avoidant/restrictive  food  intake  disorder,  rumination  disorder,  pica) 
that  were  previously  classified  as  disorders  of  infancy  or  childhood 
have been grouped together with the disorders of anorexia and bulimia 
nervosa. Binge-eating disorder is also now included as a formal diagno-
sis; the intent of each of these modifications is to encourage clinicians 
to be more specific in their codification of eating and feeding pathology.
 ■ PICA
Pica is diagnosed when the individual, aged >2 years, eats one or more 
nonnutritive,  nonfood  substances  for  a  month  or  more  and  requires 
medical attention as a result. There is usually no specific aversion to 
food in general but a preferential choice to ingest substances such as 
clay, starch, soap, paper, or ash. The diagnosis requires the exclusion 
of specific culturally approved practices and has not been commonly 
found to be caused by a specific nutritional deficiency. Onset is most 
common in childhood, but the disorder can occur in association with 
other major psychiatric conditions in adults. An association with preg-
nancy  has  been  observed,  but  the  condition  is  only  diagnosed  when 
medical risks are increased by the behavior.
 ■ RUMINATION DISORDER
In  this  condition,  individuals  who  have  no  demonstrable  associated 
gastrointestinal or other medical condition repeatedly regurgitate their 
food after eating and then either rechew or swallow it or spit it out. The 
behavior typically occurs on a daily basis and must persist for at least  
1  month.  Weight  loss  and  malnutrition  are  common  sequelae,  and 
individuals may attempt to conceal their behavior, either by covering 
their mouth or through social avoidance while eating. In infancy, the 
onset  is  typically  between  3  and  12  months  of  age,  and  the  behavior 
may remit spontaneously, although in some it appears to be recurrent.
 ■ AVOIDANT/RESTRICTIVE FOOD  
INTAKE DISORDER
The cardinal feature of this disorder is avoidance or restriction of food 
intake, usually stemming from a lack of interest in or distaste of food 
and associated with weight loss, nutritional deficiency, dependency on 
nutritional  supplementation,  or  marked  impairment  in  psychosocial 
functioning, either alone or in combination. Culturally approved prac-
tices, such as fasting or a lack of available food, must be excluded as 
possible causes. The disorder is distinguished from anorexia nervosa 
by the presence of emotional factors, such as a fear of gaining weight 
and distortion of body image in the latter condition. Onset is usually 
in infancy or early childhood, but avoidant behaviors may persist into 
adulthood. The disorder is equally prevalent in males and females and 
is frequently comorbid with anxiety and cognitive and attention-deficit 
disorders  and  situations  of  familial  stress.  Developmental  delay  and 
functional deficits may be significant if the disorder is long-standing 
and unrecognized.
 ■ ANOREXIA NERVOSA
Individuals are diagnosed with anorexia nervosa if they restrict their 
caloric intake to a degree that their body weight deviates significantly 
from  age,  gender,  health,  and  developmental  norms  and  if  they  also 
exhibit a fear of gaining weight and an associated disturbance in body 
image. The condition is further characterized by differentiating those 
who achieve their weight loss predominantly through restricting intake 
or  by  excessive  exercise  (restricting  type)  from  those  who  engage  in 
recurrent binge eating and/or subsequent purging, self-induced vomit-
ing, and usage of enemas, laxatives, or diuretics (binge-eating/purging 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3552

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders type). Such subtyping is more state- than trait-specific, as individuals 
may transition from one profile to the other over time. Determination 
of whether an individual satisfies the primary criterion of significant 
low weight is complex and must be individualized, using all available 
historical information and comparison of body habitus to international 
body-mass norms and guidelines.

Individuals with anorexia nervosa frequently lack insight into their 
condition and are in denial about possible medical consequences; they 
often  are  not  comforted  by  their  achieved  weight  loss  and  persist  in 
their  behaviors  despite  having  met  previously  self-designated  weight 
goals.  Alterations  in  the  circuitry  of  reward  sensitivity  and  executive 
function have been reported in anorexia, implicating disturbances in 
frontal cortex and anterior insula regulation of interoceptive awareness 
of  satiety  and  hunger.  Neurochemical  findings,  including  the  role  of 
ghrelin, remain controversial.

Onset is most common in adolescence, although onset in later life can 
occur. Many more females than males are affected, with a lifetime preva-
lence in women of up to 4%. The disorder appears most prevalent in post-
industrialized and urbanized countries and is frequently comorbid with 
preexisting  anxiety  disorders.  The  medical  consequences  of  prolonged 
anorexia nervosa are multisystemic and can be life-threatening in severe 
presentations.  Changes  in  laboratory  values  may  be  present,  including 
leukopenia  with  lymphocytosis,  elevations  in  blood  urea  nitrogen,  and 
metabolic  alkalosis  and  hypokalemia  when  purging  is  present.  History 
and physical examination may reveal amenorrhea in females, skin abnor-
malities  (petechiae,  lanugo  hair,  dryness),  and  signs  of  hypometabolic 
function,  including  hypotension,  hypothermia,  and  sinus  bradycardia. 
Endocrine  effects  include  hypogonadism,  growth  hormone  resistance, 
and hypercortisolemia. Osteoporosis is a longer-term concern.

The course of the disorder is variable, with some individuals recov-
ering after a single episode, while others exhibit recurrent episodes or 
a chronic course. Untreated anorexia has a mortality of 5.1/1000, the 
highest  among  psychiatric  conditions.  Maudsley  Anorexia  Nervosa 
Treatment for Adults (MANTRA) and eating disorder–focused cogni-
tive behavior therapy have proven to be effective therapies, with strict 
behavioral contingencies used when weight loss becomes critical. No 
pharmacologic  intervention  has  proven  to  be  specifically  beneficial, 
but comorbid depression and anxiety should be treated. Weight gain 
should be undertaken gradually with a goal of 0.5–1 pound per week 
to  prevent  refeeding  syndrome.  Most  individuals  are  able  to  achieve 
remission within 5 years of the original diagnosis.

 ■ BULIMIA NERVOSA
Bulimia  nervosa  describes  individuals  who  engage  in  recurrent  and 
frequent (at least once a week for 3 months) periods of binge eating and 
who then resort to compensatory behaviors, such as self-induced purg-
ing, enemas, use of laxatives, or excessive exercise, to avoid weight gain. 
Binge eating itself is defined as excessive food intake in a prescribed 
period of time, usually <2 h. As in anorexia nervosa, disturbances in 
body image occur and promote the behavior, but unlike in anorexia, 
individuals are of normal weight or even somewhat overweight. Sub-
jects typically describe a loss of control and express shame about their 
actions,  and  often  relate  that  their  episodes  are  triggered  by  feelings 
of  negative  self-esteem  or  social  stresses.  The  lifetime  prevalence  in 
women  is  ~2%,  with  a  10:1  female-to-male  ratio.  The  disorder  typi-
cally  begins  in  adolescence  and  may  be  persistent  over  a  number  of 
years.  Transition  to  anorexia  occurs  in  only  10–15%  of  cases.  Many 
of the medical risks associated with bulimia nervosa parallel those of 
anorexia nervosa and are a direct consequence of purging, including 
fluid  and  electrolyte  disturbances  and  cardiac  conduction  abnormal-
ities.  Physical  examination  often  results  in  no  specific  findings,  but 
dental erosion and parotid gland enlargement may be present. Effective 
treatment approaches include SSRI antidepressants, usually in combi-
nation with cognitive-behavioral, emotion regulation, or interpersonal- 
based psychotherapies.

 ■ BINGE-EATING DISORDER
Binge-eating  disorder  is  distinguished  from  bulimia  nervosa  by  the 
absence  of  compensatory  behaviors  to  prevent  weight  gain  after  an 

3553

episode  and  by  a  lack  of  effort  to  restrict  weight  gain  between  epi-
sodes. Other features are similar, including distress over the behavior 
and the experience of loss of control, resulting in eating more rapidly 
or in greater amounts than intended or eating when not hungry. The 
12-month prevalence in females is 1.6%, with a much lower female-to-
male ratio than bulimia nervosa. Little is known about the course of 
the disorder, given its recent categorization, but its prognosis is mark-
edly better than for other eating disorders, both in terms of its natural 
course and response to treatment. Transition to other eating disorder 
conditions is thought to be rare.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

PERSONALITY DISORDERS
 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Personality  disorders  are  characteristic  patterns  of  thinking,  feeling, 
and  interpersonal  behavior  that  are  relatively  inflexible  and  cause 
significant functional impairment or subjective distress for the indi-
vidual. The observed behaviors are not secondary to another mental 
disorder,  nor  are  they  precipitated  by  substance  abuse  or  a  general 
medical  condition.  This  distinction  is  often  difficult  to  make  in 
clinical practice, because personality change may be the first sign of 
serious neurologic, endocrine, or other medical illness. Patients with 
frontal-lobe tumors, for example, can present with changes in motiva-
tion and personality while the results of the neurologic examination 
remain  within  normal  limits.  Individuals  with  personality  disorders 
are  often  regarded  as  “difficult  patients”  in  clinical  medical  practice 
because  they  are  seen  as  excessively  demanding  and/or  unwilling  to 
follow  recommended  treatment  plans.  Although  DSM-5  portrays 
personality  disorders  as  qualitatively  distinct  categories,  there  is  an 
alternative  and  emerging  perspective  that  personality  characteristics 
vary as a continuum between normal functioning and formal mental 
disorder, the essential features being moderate or greater impairment 
in  self/interpersonal  functioning  and  one  or  more  pathological  per-
sonality traits.

Personality  disorders  have  been  grouped  into  three  overlapping 
clusters.  Cluster  A  includes  paranoid,  schizoid,  and  schizotypal 
personality  disorders.  It  includes  individuals  who  are  odd  and 
eccentric  and  who  maintain  an  emotional  distance  from  others. 
Individuals have a restricted emotional range and remain socially iso-
lated.  Patients  with  schizotypal  personality  disorder  frequently  have 
unusual perceptual experiences and express magical beliefs about the 
external  world.  The  essential  feature  of  paranoid  personality  disor-
der is a pervasive mistrust and suspiciousness of others to an extent 
that  is  unjustified  by  available  evidence.  Cluster  B  disorders  include 
antisocial,  borderline,  histrionic,  and  narcissistic  types  and  describe 
individuals  whose  behavior  is  impulsive,  excessively  emotional,  and 
erratic.  Cluster  C  incorporates  avoidant,  dependent,  and  obsessive-
compulsive  personality  types;  enduring  traits  are  anxiety  and  fear. 
The  boundaries  between  cluster  types  are  to  some  extent  artificial, 
and many patients who meet criteria for one personality disorder also 
meet  criteria  for  aspects  of  another.  The  risk  of  a  comorbid  major 
mental disorder is increased in patients who qualify for a diagnosis of 
personality disorder.
 ■ ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Genetic  studies  have  increasingly  suggested  a  genetic  contribution 
to  the  development  of  personality  disorders.  One  study  of  106,000 
subjects  identified  nine  loci  significantly  linked  to  aspects  of 
neuroticism.

TREATMENT
Personality Disorders
Dialectical  behavior  therapy  (DBT)  is  a  cognitive-behavioral 
approach that focuses on behavioral change while providing accep-
tance, compassion, and validation of the patient. Several random-
ized trials have demonstrated the efficacy of DBT in the treatment 
of personality disorders. Antidepressant medications and low-dose 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3553

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3554

antipsychotic  drugs  have  some  efficacy  in  cluster  A  personal-
ity disorders, whereas anticonvulsant mood-stabilizing agents and 
MAOIs  may  be  considered  for  patients  with  cluster  B  diagnoses 
who  show  marked  mood  reactivity,  behavioral  dyscontrol,  and/
or rejection hypersensitivity. Anxious or fearful cluster C patients 
often  respond  to  medications  used  for  axis  I  anxiety  disorders 
(see above). It is important that the physician and the patient have 
reasonable expectations vis-à-vis the possible benefit of any med-
ication  used  and  its  side  effects.  Improvement  may  be  subtle  and 
observable only over time.

SCHIZOPHRENIA
 ■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous syndrome characterized by perturba-
tions of language, perception, thinking, social activity, affect, and voli-
tion. There are no pathognomonic features. The syndrome commonly 
begins in late adolescence, has an insidious (and less commonly, acute) 
onset, and, often, a poor outcome, progressing from social withdrawal 
and  perceptual  distortions  to  recurrent  delusions  and  hallucinations. 
Patients  may  present  with  positive  symptoms  (such  as  conceptual 
disorganization,  delusions,  or  hallucinations)  or  negative  symptoms 
(loss of function, anhedonia, decreased emotional expression, impaired 
concentration,  and  diminished  social  engagement)  and  must  have  at 
least two of these for a 1-month period and continuous signs for at least 
6 months to meet formal diagnostic criteria. Disorganized thinking or 
speech  and  grossly  disorganized  motor  behavior,  including  catatonia, 
may also be present. As individuals age, positive psychotic symptoms 
tend to attenuate, and some measure of social and occupational func-
tion may be regained. “Negative” symptoms predominate in one-third 
of  the  schizophrenic  population  and  are  associated  with  a  poor  long-
term outcome and a poor response to drug treatment. However, marked 
variability in the course and individual character of symptoms is typical.
The  term  schizophreniform  disorder  describes  patients  who  meet 
the  symptom  requirements  but  not  the  duration  requirements  for 
schizophrenia,  and  schizoaffective  disorder  is  used  for  those  who 
manifest  symptoms  of  schizophrenia  and  independent  periods  of 
mood disturbance. The terms schizotypal and schizoid refer to specific 
personality disorders and are discussed in that section. The diagnosis 
of  delusional  disorder  is  used  for  individuals  who  have  delusions  of 
various  content  for  at  least  1  month  but  who  otherwise  do  not  meet 
criteria  for  schizophrenia.  Patients  who  experience  a  sudden  onset 
of a brief (<1 month) alteration in thought processing, characterized 
by  delusions,  hallucinations,  disorganized  speech,  or  gross  motor 
behavior, are most appropriately designated as having a brief psychotic 
disorder. Catatonia is recognized as a nonspecific syndrome that can 
occur as a consequence of other severe psychiatric/medical disorders 
and is diagnosed by the documentation of three or more of a cluster of 
motor and behavioral symptoms, including stupor, cataplexy, mutism, 
waxy flexibility, and stereotypy, among others. Prognosis depends not 
on symptom severity but on the response to antipsychotic medication. 
A  permanent  remission  without  recurrence  does  occasionally  occur. 
About 10% of schizophrenic patients commit suicide.

Schizophrenia is present in 0.85% of individuals worldwide, with a 
lifetime prevalence of ~1–1.5%. An estimated 300,000 episodes of acute 
schizophrenia occur annually in the United States, resulting in direct 
and indirect costs of $155.7 billion.
 ■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis is principally one of exclusion, requiring the absence of 
significant associated mood symptoms, any relevant medical condition, 
and  substance  abuse.  Drug  reactions  that  cause  hallucinations,  para-
noia,  confusion,  or  bizarre  behavior  may  be  dose-related  or  idiosyn-
cratic;  parkinsonian  medications,  clonidine,  quinacrine,  and  procaine 
derivatives are the most common prescription medications associated 
with  these  symptoms.  Drug  causes  should  be  ruled  out  in  any  case 
of  newly  emergent  psychosis.  The  general  neurologic  examination 
in  patients  with  schizophrenia  is  usually  normal,  but  motor  rigidity, 
tremor, and dyskinesias are noted in one-quarter of untreated patients.

 ■ EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Epidemiologic surveys identify several risk factors for schizophrenia, 
including  genetic  susceptibility,  early  developmental  insults,  winter 
birth, and increasing parental age. Genetic factors are involved in at 
least a subset of individuals who develop schizophrenia. Schizophre-
nia  is  observed  in  ~6.6%  of  all  first-degree  relatives  of  an  affected 
proband.  If  both  parents  are  affected,  the  risk  for  offspring  is  40%. 
The  concordance  rate  for  monozygotic  twins  is  50%,  compared  to 
10% for dizygotic twins. Schizophrenia-prone families are also at risk 
for other psychiatric disorders, including schizoaffective disorder and 
schizotypal and schizoid personality disorders, the latter terms desig-
nating individuals who show a lifetime pattern of social and interper-
sonal deficits characterized by an inability to form close interpersonal 
relationships,  eccentric  behavior,  and  mild  perceptual  distortions. 
Large-scale  genomewide  association  studies  have  identified  >100 
small  effect  risk  loci  and  a  few  larger  effect  copy  number  variants, 
along with epigenetic effects and have led to initial exploration in the 
clinical use of polygenic risk scores in diagnosis and prognosis. Path-
ways identified include ones involved in immunity, inflammation, and 
cell signaling.

TREATMENT
Schizophrenia

Antipsychotic  agents  (Table  452-10)  are  the  cornerstone  of  acute 
and  maintenance  treatment  of  schizophrenia  and  are  effective  in 
the  treatment  of  hallucinations,  delusions,  and  thought  disorders, 
regardless of etiology. The mechanism of action involves, at least in 
part, binding to dopamine D2/D3 receptors in the ventral striatum; 
the  clinical  potencies  of  traditional  antipsychotic  drugs  parallel 
their  affinities  for  the  D2  receptor,  and  even  the  newer  “atypical” 
agents exert some degree of D2 receptor blockade. All neuroleptics 
induce expression of the immediate-early gene c-fos in the nucleus 
accumbens, a dopaminergic site connecting prefrontal and limbic 
cortices. The clinical efficacy of newer atypical neuroleptics, how-
ever,  may  involve  N-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA)  receptor  block-
ade,  α1-  and  α2-noradrenergic  activity,  altering  the  relationship 
between 5-HT2 and D2 receptor activity, and faster dissociation of 
D2 binding and effects on neuroplasticity.

Conventional neuroleptics differ in their potency and side-effect 
profile.  Older  agents,  such  as  chlorpromazine  and  thioridazine, 
are  more  sedating  and  anticholinergic  and  more  likely  to  cause 
orthostatic  hypotension,  whereas  higher-potency  antipsychotics, 
such as haloperidol, perphenazine, and thiothixene, are more likely 
to  induce  extrapyramidal  side  effects.  The  model  “atypical”  anti-
psychotic agent is clozapine, a dibenzodiazepine that has a greater 
potency  in  blocking  the  5-HT2  than  the  D2  receptor  and  a  much 
higher affinity for the D4 than the D2 receptor. Its principal disad-
vantage  is  a  risk  of  blood  dyscrasias.  Paliperidone  is  a  metabolite 
of  risperidone  and  shares  many  of  its  properties.  Unlike  other 
antipsychotics,  clozapine  does  not  cause  a  rise  in  prolactin  levels. 
Approximately  30%  of  patients  who  do  not  benefit  from  conven-
tional antipsychotic agents will have a better response to this drug, 
which  also  has  a  demonstrated  superiority  to  other  antipsychotic 
agents in preventing suicide; however, its side-effect profile makes 
it  most  appropriate  for  treatment-resistant  cases.  Risperidone,  a 
benzisoxazole derivative, is more potent at 5-HT2 than D2 receptor 
sites,  like  clozapine,  but  it  also  exerts  significant  α2  antagonism, 
a property that may contribute to its perceived ability to improve 
mood and increase motor activity. Risperidone is not as effective as 
clozapine in treatment-resistant cases but does not carry a risk of 
blood dyscrasias. Olanzapine is similar neurochemically to clozap-
ine  but  has  a  significant  risk  of  inducing  weight  gain.  Quetiapine 
is distinct in having a weak D2 effect but potent α1 and histamine 
blockade. Ziprasidone causes minimal weight gain and is unlikely 
to  increase  prolactin  but  may  increase  QT  prolongation.  Aripip-
razole  also  has  little  risk  of  weight  gain  or  prolactin  increase  but 
may increase anxiety, nausea, and insomnia as a result of its partial 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3554

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 452-10  Antipsychotic Agents
NAME
First-Generation Antipsychotics
Low potency
  Chlorpromazine (Thorazine)
  Thioridazine (Mellaril)

100–1000
100–600

USUAL PO DAILY DOSE (mg)

Midpotency
  Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
  Perphenazine (Trilafon)

  Loxapine (Loxitane)
  Molindone (Moban)
High potency
  Haloperidol (Haldol)

2–50
4–64

30–100
30–100

5–20

  Fluphenazine (Prolixin)
  Thiothixene (Navane)
Second-Generation Antipsychotics
Clozapine (Clozaril)

1–20
2–50

150–600

Risperidone (Risperdal)

2–8

Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Ziprasidone (Geodon)

Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Paliperidone (Invega)

Iloperidone (Fanapt)

Asenapine (Saphris)

Lurasidone (Latuda)
Brexpiprazole (Rexulti)
Pimavanserin (Nuplazid)

Cariprazine (Vraylar)
Lumateperone (Caplyta)

10–30
350–800
120–200

10–30
3–12

12–24

10–20

40–80
1–4
34

1.5–6
42

3555

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
2

P
s
y
c
h
i
a
t
r
i
c
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

SIDE EFFECTS

SEDATION

COMMENTS

Anticholinergic effects; orthostasis; 
photosensitivity; cholestasis; QT 
prolongation

+++

EPSEs usually not prominent; can 
cause anticholinergic delirium in 
elderly patients

Fewer anticholinergic side effects
Fewer EPSEs than with higher-potency 
agents
Frequent EPSEs
Frequent EPSEs

No anticholinergic side effects; EPSEs 
often prominent

Frequent EPSEs
Frequent EPSEs

Agranulocytosis (1%); weight gain; 
seizures; drooling; hyperthermia
Orthostasis

Weight gain
Sedation; weight gain; anxiety
Orthostatic hypotension

Nausea, anxiety, insomnia
Restlessness, EPSEs, increased 
prolactin, headache
Dizziness, hypotension

Dizziness, anxiety, EPSEs, minimal 
weight gain
Nausea, EPSEs
Anxiety, dizziness, fatigue
Edema, confusion, sedation

EPSEs, vomiting
Fatigue, dry mouth; no apparent 
metabolic/motor effects

++
++

++
0

0/+

0/+
0/+

+ +

+

++
+++
+/++

0/+
+

0/+

++

++
++
++

++
++

Well tolerated by most patients

Little weight gain

Often prescribed in doses that are too 
high; long-acting injectable forms of 
haloperidol and fluphenazine available

Requires weekly WBC count for first  
6 months, then biweekly if stable
Requires slow titration; EPSEs 
observed with doses >6 mg qd
Mild prolactin elevation
Bid dosing
Minimal weight gain; increases QT 
interval
Mixed agonist/antagonist; ER available
Active metabolite of risperidone

Requires dose titration; long-acting 
injectable available
Sublingual tablets; bid dosing

Uses CYP3A4
CYP3A4 and 2D6 interactions
Approved for Parkinson’s disease 
psychosis
Preferential D3 receptor affinity
5HTa>D2 receptor affinity

Abbreviations: EPSEs, extrapyramidal side effects; WBC, white blood cell.

agonist  properties.  Asenapine  is  associated  with  minimal  weight 
gain and anticholinergic effect but may have a higher than expected 
risk  of  extrapyramidal  symptoms  (EPSs).  Cariprazine,  a  D2/D3 
partial agonist, has no QT or prolactin elevation risk, but can result 
in EPS as well.

Antipsychotic agents are effective in 70% of patients presenting 
with  a  first  episode.  Improvement  may  be  observed  within  hours 
or days, but full remission usually requires 6–8 weeks. The choice 
of agent depends principally on the side-effect profile and cost of 
treatment  or  on  a  past  personal  or  family  history  of  a  favorable 
response to the drug in question. Atypical agents appear to be more 
effective  in  treating  negative  symptoms  and  improving  cognitive 
function. An equivalent treatment response can usually be achieved 
with  relatively  low  doses  of  any  drug  selected  (i.e.,  4–6  mg/d  of 
haloperidol, 10–15 mg of olanzapine, or 4–6 mg/d of risperidone). 
Doses in this range result in >80% D2 receptor blockade, and there 
is  little  evidence  that  higher  doses  increase  either  the  rapidity  or 
degree of response. Maintenance treatment requires careful atten-
tion  to  the  possibility  of  relapse  and  monitoring  for  the  develop-
ment of a movement disorder. Intermittent drug treatment is less 
effective  than  regular  dosing,  but  gradual  dose  reduction  is  likely 

to improve social functioning in many schizophrenic patients who 
have been maintained at high doses. If medications are completely 
discontinued,  however,  the  relapse  rate  is  60%  within  6  months. 
Long-acting  injectable  preparations  (risperidone,  paliperidone, 
olanzapine, aripiprazole) are considered when noncompliance with 
oral therapy leads to relapses but should not be considered inter-
changeable, because the agents differ in their indications, injection 
intervals and sites/volumes, and possible adverse reactions, among 
other factors. In treatment-resistant patients, a transition to clozap-
ine usually results in rapid improvement, but a prolonged delay in 
response in some cases necessitates a 6- to 9-month trial for maxi-
mal benefit to occur.

Antipsychotic  medications  can  cause  a  broad  range  of  side 
effects, including lethargy, weight gain, postural hypotension, con-
stipation, and dry mouth. Extrapyramidal symptoms such as dysto-
nia, akathisia, and akinesia are also frequent with first-generation 
agents  and  may  contribute  to  poor  adherence  if  not  specifically 
addressed.  Anticholinergic  and  parkinsonian  symptoms  respond 
well to trihexyphenidyl, 2 mg bid, or benztropine mesylate, 1–2 mg 
bid.  Akathisia  may  respond  to  beta  blockers.  In  rare  cases,  more 
serious  and  occasionally  life-threatening  side  effects  may  emerge, 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3555

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3556

including  hyperprolactinemia,  ventricular  arrhythmias,  gastroin-
testinal obstruction, retinal pigmentation, obstructive jaundice, and 
neuroleptic  malignant  syndrome  (characterized  by  hyperthermia, 
autonomic  dysfunction,  muscular  rigidity,  and  elevated  creatine 
phosphokinase levels). The most serious adverse effects of clozapine 
are agranulocytosis, which has an incidence of 1%, and induction 
of  seizures,  which  has  an  incidence  of  10%.  Weekly  white  blood 
cell  counts  are  required,  particularly  during  the  first  3  months  of 
treatment.

The  risk  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  appears  to  be  increased  in 
schizophrenia, and second-generation agents as a group, with the 
exception of lumateperone, produce greater adverse effects on glu-
cose regulation, independent of effects on obesity, than traditional 
agents. Clozapine, olanzapine, and quetiapine seem more likely to 
cause  hyperglycemia,  weight  gain,  and  hypertriglyceridemia  than 
other  atypical  antipsychotic  drugs.  Close  monitoring  of  plasma 
glucose and lipid levels is indicated with the use of these agents.

A serious side effect of long-term use of first-generation and, to a 
lesser  extent,  second-generation  antipsychotic  agents  is  tardive  dys-
kinesia, characterized by repetitive, involuntary, and potentially irre-
versible movements of the tongue and lips (bucco-linguo-masticatory 
triad) and, in approximately half of cases, choreoathetosis. Tardive 
dyskinesia  has  an  incidence  of  2–4%  per  year  of  exposure  and  a 
prevalence  of  20%  in  chronically  treated  patients.  The  prevalence 
increases with age, total dose, and duration of drug administration 
and may involve formation of free radicals and perhaps mitochon-
drial  energy  failure.  Valbenazine,  a  vesicular  monoamine  trans-
porter 2 inhibitor that depletes presynaptic dopamine, has recently 
received FDA approval for treatment of tardive dyskinesia.

The CATIE study, a large-scale investigation of the effectiveness 
of antipsychotic agents in “real-world” patients, revealed a high rate 
of  discontinuation  of  treatment  >18  months.  Olanzapine  showed 
greater effectiveness than quetiapine, risperidone, perphenazine, or 
ziprasidone but also a higher discontinuation rate due to weight gain 
and metabolic effects. Surprisingly, perphenazine, a first-generation 
agent, showed little evidence of inferiority to newer drugs.

Drug  treatment  of  schizophrenia  is  by  itself  insufficient.  Edu-
cational  efforts  directed  toward  families  and  relevant  community 
resources  have  proved  to  be  necessary  to  maintain  stability  and 
optimize outcome. A treatment model using social cognition inter-
ventions and involving a multidisciplinary case-management team 
that seeks out and closely follows the patient in the community has 
proved  particularly  effective.  Attempts  to  prevent  schizophrenia 
through early identification and treatment (both psychosocial and 
psychopharmacologic)  of  high-risk  children  and  adolescents  are 
currently being evaluated.

ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION  
OF VIOLENCE
Primary  care  physicians  may  encounter  situations  in  which  family, 
domestic,  or  societal  violence  is  discovered  or  suspected.  Such  an 
awareness  can  carry  legal  and  moral  obligations;  many  state  laws 
mandate  reporting  of  child,  spousal,  and  elder  abuse.  Physicians 
are  frequently  the  first  point  of  contact  for  both  victim  and  abuser. 
Approximately 2 million older Americans and 1.5 million U.S. children 
are  thought  to  experience  some  form  of  physical  maltreatment  each 
year. Spousal abuse is thought to be even more prevalent. An interview 
study of 24,000 women in 10 countries found a lifetime prevalence of 
physical or sexual violence that ranged from 15–71%; these individu-
als  are  more  likely  to  suffer  from  depression,  anxiety,  and  substance 
abuse and to have attempted suicide. In addition, abused individuals 
frequently  express  low  self-esteem,  vague  somatic  symptomatology, 
social isolation, and a passive feeling of loss of control. Although it is 
essential to treat these elements in the victim, the first obligation is to 
ensure that the perpetrator has taken responsibility for preventing any 
further violence. Substance abuse and/or dependence and serious men-
tal illness in the abuser may contribute to the risk of harm and require 
direct  intervention.  Depending  on  the  situation,  law  enforcement 

agencies,  community  resources  such  as  support  groups  and  shelters, 
and individual and family counseling can be appropriate components 
of a treatment plan. A safety plan should be formulated with the vic-
tim,  in  addition  to  providing  information  about  abuse,  its  likelihood 
of recurrence, and its tendency to increase in severity and frequency. 
Antianxiety and antidepressant medications may sometimes be useful 
in treating the acute symptoms, but only if independent evidence for 
an appropriate psychiatric diagnosis exists.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Breilman J et al: Benzodiazepines versus placebo for panic disorder in 

adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD010677, 2019.

Cipriani A et al: Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antide-
pressant drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major depressive 
disorder:  a  systematic  review  and  network  meta-analysis.  Lancet 
391:1357, 2018.

Crespo-Facorro  B  et  al:  The  burden  of  disease 

in  early  
schizophrenia—a  systematic  literature  review.  Curr  Med  Res  Opin 
37:109, 2020.

Cyr S et al: Posttraumatic stress disorder prevalence in medical popu-
lations: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 
69:81, 2021.

Guidi  J,  Fava  G:  Sequential  combination  of  pharmacotherapy  and 
psychotherapy in major depressive disorder: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 78:261, 2021.

Himmerich  H  et  al:  Pharmacological  treatment  of  eating  disorders, 
comorbid mental health problems, malnutrition and physical conse-
quences. Pharmacol Ther 217:107667, 2021.

Huhn M et al: Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 32 antipsychot-
ics for the acute treatment of adults with multi-episode schizophrenia: 
A systematic review and network meta-analysis Lancet 394:939, 2019.
Huprich  S:  Personality  disorders  in  the  ICD-11:  Opportunities  and 
challenges for advancing the diagnosis of personality disorders. Curr 
Psychiatry 22:40, 2020.

Lee  Y  et  al:  Development  and  implementation  of  guidelines  for  the 
management of depression: A systematic review. Bull World Health 
Organ 98:683, 2020.

Mcintyre R et al: Bipolar disorders. Lancet 396:10265, 2020.
Pennix B et al: Anxiety disorders. Lancet 397:914, 2021.

453 Alcohol and Alcohol Use 

Disorders
Marc A. Schuckit

Alcohol (beverage ethanol) has diverse and widespread effects on the 
body and impacts directly or indirectly on almost every neurochem-
ical system in the brain. A large majority of patients in most clinical 
settings consume alcohol, with the highest proportions of drinkers of 
at  least  modest  levels  of  alcohol  seen  in  more  educated  and  affluent 
patient groups. At even relatively low doses, this drug can exacerbate 
most  medical  problems  and  affect  medications  metabolized  in  the 
liver,  and  at  higher  doses,  it  can  temporarily  mimic  many  medical 
(e.g.,  diabetes)  and  psychiatric  (e.g.,  depression)  conditions.  The 
lifetime  risk  for  repetitive  serious  alcohol  problems  (e.g.,  alcohol  use 
disorders as described below) in patients is at least 20% for men and 
10%  for  women,  regardless  of  a  person’s  education  or  income,  and 
U.S.  yearly  costs  for  these  disorders  exceed  $249  billion.  Although 
low  doses  of  alcohol  might  have  healthful  benefits,  drinking  more 
than  three  standard  drinks  per  day  enhances  the  risk  for  cancer  and 
vascular  disease,  and  alcohol  use  disorders  decrease  the  life  span  by  
~10  years.  Unfortunately,  most  clinicians  have  had  only  limited 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3556

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders training  regarding  identifying  and  treating  alcohol-related  disorders. 
This chapter presents a brief overview of clinically useful information 
about alcohol use and associated problems.
 ■ PHARMACOLOGY AND NUTRITIONAL  
IMPACT OF ETHANOL
Ethanol blood levels are expressed as milligrams or grams of ethanol 
per deciliter (e.g., 100 mg/dL = 0.10 g/dL), with values of ~0.02 g/dL 
resulting  from  the  ingestion  of  one  typical  drink.  In  round  figures, 
a standard drink is 10–12 g of ethanol, as seen in 340 mL (12 oz) of 
beer, 115 mL (4 oz) of nonfortified wine, and 43 mL (1.5 oz) (a shot) 
of  80-proof  (40%  ethanol  by  volume)  beverage  (e.g.,  whisky);  0.5  L  
(1 pint) of 80-proof beverage contains ~160 g of ethanol (~16 standard 
drinks), and 750 mL of wine contains ~60 g of ethanol. These beverages 
also have additional components (congeners) that affect the drink’s taste 
and might contribute to adverse effects on the body. Congeners include 
methanol, butanol, acetaldehyde, histamine, tannins, iron, and lead. As 
a depressant drug, alcohol acutely decreases neuronal activity and has 
similar behavioral effects and cross-tolerance with other depressants, 
including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and some anticonvulsants.

Alcohol  is  absorbed  from  mucous  membranes  of  the  mouth  and 
esophagus  (in  small  amounts),  from  the  stomach  and  large  bowel 
(in  modest  amounts),  and  from  the  proximal  portion  of  the  small 
intestine (the major site). The rate of absorption is increased by rapid 
gastric  emptying  (as  seen  with  carbonation);  by  the  absence  of  pro-
teins,  fats,  or  carbohydrates  (which  interfere  with  absorption);  and 
by dilution to a modest percentage of ethanol (maximum at ~20% by 
volume).

Between 2% (at low blood alcohol concentrations) and 10% (at high 
blood alcohol concentrations) of ethanol is excreted directly through 
the  lungs,  urine,  or  sweat,  but  most  is  metabolized  to  acetaldehyde, 
primarily in the liver. The most important pathway occurs in the cell 
cytosol where alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) produces acetaldehyde, 
which is then rapidly destroyed by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 
in  the  cytosol  and  mitochondria  (Fig.  453-1).  A  second  pathway 
occurs in the microsomes of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (the 
microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system [MEOS]) that is responsible for 
≥10% of ethanol oxidation at high blood alcohol concentrations.

Although a standard drink contains ~300 kJ, or 70–100 kcal, these 
are  devoid  of  minerals,  proteins,  and  vitamins.  In  addition,  alcohol 
interferes  with  absorption  of  vitamins  in  the  small  intestine  and 
decreases their storage in the liver with modest effects on folate (folacin 
or folic acid), pyridoxine (B6), thiamine (B1), nicotinic acid (niacin, B3), 
and vitamin A.

Heavy  drinking  in  a  fasting,  healthy  individual  can  produce  tran-
sient  hypoglycemia  within  6–36  h,  secondary  to  the  acute  actions  of 
ethanol  that  decrease  gluconeogenesis.  This  can  result  in  temporary 
abnormal  glucose  tolerance  tests  (with  a  resulting  erroneous  diag-
nosis  of  diabetes  mellitus)  until  the  heavy  drinker  has  abstained  for  

20%

MEOS

Acetaldehyde

Ethanol

80%

Alcohol

dehydrogenase

Acetaldehyde

Acetyl CoA

Aldehyde
dehydrogenase

Acetate

Citric acid
cycle

Fatty acids

CO2 + Water

FIGURE  453-1  The  metabolism  of  alcohol.  CoA,  coenzyme  A;  MEOS,  microsomal 
ethanol oxidizing system.

3557

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
3

A
l
c
o
h
o
l
a
n
d
A
l
c
o
h
o
l

U
s
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

2–4 weeks. Alcohol ketoacidosis, probably reflecting a decrease in fatty 
acid oxidation coupled with poor diet or persistent vomiting, can be 
misdiagnosed  as  diabetic  ketosis.  With  alcohol-related  ketoacidosis, 
patients show an increase in serum ketones along with a mild increase 
in glucose but a large anion gap, a mild to moderate increase in serum 
lactate,  and  a  β-hydroxybutyrate/lactate  ratio  of  between  2:1  and  9:1 
(with normal being 1:1).

In  the  brain,  alcohol  affects  almost  all  neurotransmitter  systems, 
with acute effects that are often the opposite of those seen following 
desistance  after  a  period  of  heavy  drinking.  The  most  prominent 
acute actions relate to boosting γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity, 
especially at GABAA receptors. Enhancement of this complex chloride 
channel  system  contributes  to  anticonvulsant,  sleep-inducing,  anti-
anxiety,  and  muscle  relaxation  effects  of  all  GABA-boosting  drugs. 
Acutely  administered  alcohol  produces  a  release  of  GABA,  and  con-
tinued  use  increases  density  of  GABAA  receptors,  whereas  alcohol 
withdrawal  states  are  characterized  by  decreases  in  GABA-related 
activity.  Equally  important  is  the  ability  of  acute  alcohol  to  inhibit 
postsynaptic  N-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA)  excitatory  glutamate 
receptors, whereas chronic drinking and desistance are associated with 
an upregulation of these excitatory receptor subunits. The relationships 
between greater GABA and diminished NMDA receptor activity dur-
ing acute intoxication and diminished GABA with enhanced NMDA 
actions  during  alcohol  withdrawal  explain  much  of  intoxication  and 
withdrawal phenomena.

As with all pleasurable activities, alcohol acutely increases dopamine 
levels  in  the  ventral  tegmentum  and  related  brain  regions,  and  this 
effect  plays  an  important  role  in  continued  alcohol  use,  craving,  and 
relapse. The changes in dopamine pathways are also linked to increases 
in “stress hormones,” including cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH), during intoxication and in the context of the stresses 
of withdrawal. Such alterations are likely to contribute to both feelings 
of  reward  during  intoxication  and  depression  during  falling  blood 
alcohol concentrations. Also closely linked to alterations in dopamine 
(especially in the nucleus accumbens) are alcohol-induced changes in 
opioid receptors, with acute alcohol causing release of β-endorphins.

Additional  neurochemical  changes  include  increases  in  synaptic 
levels of serotonin during acute intoxication and subsequent upregula-
tion of serotonin receptors. Acute increases in nicotinic acetylcholine 
systems  contribute  to  the  impact  of  alcohol  in  the  ventral  tegmental 
region, which occurs in concert with enhanced dopamine activity. In 
the same regions, alcohol impacts on cannabinol receptors, with result-
ing release of dopamine, GABA, and glutamate as well as subsequent 
effects on brain reward circuits.

 ■ BEHAVIORAL EFFECTS, TOLERANCE, 
 AND WITHDRAWAL
The  acute  effects  of  a  drug  depend  on  the  dose,  the  rate  of  increase 
in plasma, the concomitant presence of other drugs, and past experi-
ence with the agent. “Legal intoxication” with alcohol in most states 
is  based  on  a  blood  alcohol  concentration  of  0.08  g/dL,  some  states 
are considering lowering acceptable levels to <0.05 g/dL, and levels 
of 0.04 g/dL are cited for pilots in the United States and automobile 
drivers  in  some  other  countries.  However,  behavioral,  psychomotor, 
and  cognitive  changes  are  seen  at  0.02–0.04  g/dL  (i.e.,  after  one  to 
two  drinks)  (Table  453-1).  Deep  but  disturbed  sleep  can  be  seen  at 
0.15 g/dL in individuals who have not developed tolerance, and death 
can occur with levels between 0.30 and 0.40 g/dL. Beverage alcohol is 
probably responsible for more overdose deaths than any other drug.

Repeated use of alcohol contributes to the need for a greater number 
of  standard  drinks  to  produce  effects  originally  observed  with  fewer 
drinks  (acquired  tolerance),  a  phenomenon  involving  at  least  three 
compensatory  mechanisms.  (1)  After  1–2  weeks  of  daily  drinking, 
metabolic  or  pharmacokinetic  tolerance  can  be  seen,  with  up  to  30% 
increases  in  the  rate  of  hepatic  ethanol  metabolism.  This  alteration 
disappears almost as rapidly as it develops. (2) Cellular or pharmacody-
namic  tolerance  develops  through  neurochemical  changes  that  main-
tain relatively normal physiologic functioning despite the presence of 
alcohol. Subsequent decreases in blood levels contribute to symptoms 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3557

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3558

TABLE 453-1  Effects of Blood Alcohol Levels in the Absence of 
Tolerance
BLOOD LEVEL, g/dL
0.02
0.08

USUAL EFFECT
Decreased inhibitions, a slight feeling of intoxication
Decrease in complex cognitive functions and motor 
performance
Obvious slurred speech, motor incoordination, irritability, 
and poor judgment
Light coma and depressed vital signs
Death

0.20

0.30
0.40

of  withdrawal.  (3)  Individuals  learn  to  adapt  their  behavior  so  that 
they can function better than expected under the influence of the drug 
(learned or behavioral tolerance).

The cellular changes caused by chronic ethanol exposure may not 
resolve  for  several  weeks  or  longer  following  cessation  of  drinking. 
Rapid decreases in blood alcohol levels before that time can produce a 
withdrawal syndrome, which is most intense during the first 5 days, but 
with some symptoms (e.g., disturbed sleep and anxiety) lasting up to 
4–6 months as part of a “protracted withdrawal” syndrome.

THE EFFECTS OF ETHANOL ON  
ORGAN SYSTEMS
Relatively low doses of alcohol (one or two drinks per day) may have 
potential  beneficial  effects  of  increasing  high-density  lipoprotein 
cholesterol  and  decreasing  aggregation  of  platelets,  with  a  resulting 
possible  decrease  in  risk  for  occlusive  coronary  disease  and  embolic 
strokes. Red wine has additional potential health-promoting qualities 
at  relatively  low  doses  due  to  flavinols  and  related  substances.  Such 
modest  drinking  might  also  decrease  the  risk  for  vascular  dementia 
and,  possibly,  Alzheimer’s  disease.  However,  any  potential  healthful 
effects disappear with the regular consumption of three or more drinks 
per  day,  and  knowledge  about  the  deleterious  effects  of  alcohol  can 
both help the physician to identify patients with alcohol use disorders 
and supply them with information that might help motivate changes 
in behavior.
 ■ NERVOUS SYSTEM
Approximately 35% of drinkers overall, including as many as 50% of 
drinking  college  students  and  a  much  higher  proportion  of  individ-
uals  with  alcohol  use  disorders,  ever  experience  a  blackout.  This  is 
an  episode  of  temporary  anterograde  amnesia,  in  which  the  person 
was  awake  but  forgot  all  (en  bloc  blackouts  at  blood  alcohol  levels 
>0.20 mg/dL) or part (fragmentary blackouts at >0.12 mg/dL) of what 
occurred during a drinking period.

Another  common  problem,  one  seen  after  as  few  as  one  or  two 
drinks  shortly  before  bedtime,  is  disturbed  sleep.  Although  alcohol 
might  initially  help  a  person  fall  asleep,  it  disrupts  sleep  throughout 
the rest of the night. The stages of sleep are altered, and times spent 
in  rapid  eye  movement  (REM)  and  deep  sleep  early  in  the  night  are 
reduced.  Alcohol  relaxes  muscles  in  the  pharynx,  which  can  cause 
snoring  and  exacerbate  sleep  apnea;  symptoms  of  the  latter  occur  in 
75% of men with alcohol use disorders aged ≥60 years. Patients may 
also experience prominent and sometimes disturbing dreams later in 
the  night.  All  these  sleep  impairments  can  contribute  to  relapses  to 
drinking in persons with alcohol use disorders.

Other common consequences of alcohol use even at relatively low 
alcohol levels are impaired judgment and coordination, which increase 
the risk of injuries. In the United States, ~40% of drinkers have at some 
time driven while intoxicated. Heavy drinking can also be associated 
with headache, thirst, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue the following day, 
a  hangover  syndrome  that  is  responsible  for  much  missed  work  and 
school time and temporary cognitive deficits.

Chronic  high  alcohol  doses  cause  peripheral  neuropathy  in  ~10% 
of individuals with alcohol use disorders: similar to diabetes, patients 
experience  bilateral  limb  numbness,  tingling,  and  paresthesias,  all 
of  which  are  more  pronounced  distally.  Approximately  1%  of  those 

with alcohol use disorders develop cerebellar degeneration or atrophy, 
producing  a  syndrome  of  progressive  unsteady  stance  and  gait  often 
accompanied by mild nystagmus; neuroimaging studies reveal atrophy 
of  the  cerebellar  vermis.  Perhaps  1  in  500  individuals  with  alcohol 
use  disorders  develop  full  Wernicke’s  (ophthalmoparesis,  ataxia,  and 
encephalopathy)  and  Korsakoff ’s  (severe  retrograde  and  anterograde 
amnesia)  syndromes,  although  a  higher  proportion  has  one  or  more 
neuropathologic  findings  related  to  these  conditions.  These  result 
from low levels of thiamine, especially in predisposed individuals with 
transketolase  deficiencies.  Repeated  heavy  drinking  can  contribute 
to  cognitive  problems  and  temporary  memory  impairment  lasting  for 
weeks to months after abstinence. Brain atrophy, evident as ventricular 
enlargement and widened cortical sulci on magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans, occurs in ~50% of 
individuals  with  long-term  alcohol  use  disorders;  these  changes  are 
usually  reversible  if  abstinence  is  maintained.  Adolescents  may  be 
especially vulnerable to alcohol-related brain changes, as indicated by 
preclinical studies and prospective investigations in humans suggesting 
that  alcohol  exposure  in  the  developing  brain  may  adversely  impact 
future  cognitive  processes  related  to  cognition,  reward  recognition, 
and cue processing. There is no single “alcoholic dementia” syndrome; 
rather,  this  label  describes  patients  who  have  irreversible  cognitive 
changes (possibly from diverse causes) in the context of chronic alco-
hol use disorders.

Psychiatric Comorbidity  As many as two-thirds of individuals 
with  alcohol  use  disorders  meet  criteria  for  another  independent 
or temporary substance-induced psychiatric syndrome as defined 
in  the  fifth  edition  of  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of 
Mental  Disorders  (DSM-5)  of  the  American  Psychiatric  Associa-
tion (Chap. 452). A substantial proportion of those with indepen-
dent psychiatric conditions (i.e., not just temporary symptoms only 
seen during intoxication or withdrawal) relate to a preexisting antiso-
cial personality disorder (ASPD) manifesting as severe impulsivity and 
disinhibition  that  contribute  to  both  alcohol  and  drug  use  disorders. 
The lifetime ASPD risk is 3% in males, and ≥80% of such individuals 
demonstrate  alcohol-  and/or  drug-related  conditions.  Another  com-
mon  psychiatric  comorbidity  occurs  with  problems  regarding  other 
substances  of  abuse.  The  remainder  of  individuals  with  alcohol  use 
disorders  who  have  an  independent  psychiatric  syndrome  relate  to 
preexisting  conditions  such  as  schizophrenia,  manic-depressive  dis-
ease, posttraumatic stress disorder, or anxiety syndromes such as panic 
disorder. The comorbidities of alcohol use disorders with independent 
psychiatric disorders might represent an overlap in genetic vulnerabil-
ities, impaired judgment regarding the use of alcohol from the inde-
pendent psychiatric condition, or an attempt to use alcohol to alleviate 
symptoms of the disorder or side effects of medications.

Many alcohol-related psychiatric syndromes can be seen temporarily 
during  heavy  drinking  and  subsequent  withdrawal.  These  alcohol- 
induced  conditions  include  an  intense  sadness  lasting  for  days  to 
weeks in the midst of heavy drinking seen in 40% of individuals with 
alcohol use disorders, which tends to disappear over several weeks of 
abstinence (alcohol-induced mood disorder); 10–30% have temporary 
severe  anxiety,  often  beginning  during  alcohol  withdrawal,  which 
can persist for a month or more after cessation of drinking (alcohol- 
induced  anxiety  disorder);  and  3–5%  have  auditory  hallucinations 
and/or paranoid delusions while they are otherwise alert and oriented 
(alcohol-induced psychotic disorder).

Treatment of all forms of alcohol-induced psychopathology includes 
helping  patients  achieve  abstinence  and  offering  supportive  care,  as 
well  as  reassurance  and  “talk  therapy”  such  as  cognitive-behavioral 
approaches. However, with the exception of short-term antipsychotic 
medications for substance-induced psychoses, substance-induced psy-
chiatric conditions only rarely require medications. Recovery is likely 
within  several  days  to  4  weeks  of  abstinence.  Conversely,  because 
alcohol-induced conditions are temporary and do not indicate a need 
for long-term pharmacotherapy, a history of heavy alcohol intake is an 
important part of the workup for any patient who presents with any of 
these psychiatric symptoms.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3558

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3559

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
3

A
l
c
o
h
o
l
a
n
d
A
l
c
o
h
o
l

U
s
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

 ■ THE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Esophagus and Stomach  Alcohol can cause inflammation of the 
esophagus and stomach causing epigastric distress and gastrointestinal 
bleeding, making alcohol one of the most common causes of hemor-
rhagic gastritis. Violent vomiting can produce severe bleeding through 
a Mallory-Weiss lesion, a longitudinal tear in the mucosa at the gas-
troesophageal junction.

Pancreas and Liver  The incidence of acute pancreatitis (~25 per 
1000 per year) is almost threefold higher in individuals with alcohol 
use  disorders  than  in  the  general  population,  accounting  for  an  esti-
mated 10% or more of the total cases. Alcohol impairs gluconeogenesis 
in the liver, resulting in a fall in the amount of glucose produced from 
glycogen,  increased  lactate  production,  and  decreased  oxidation  of 
fatty acids. These contribute to an increase in fat accumulation in liver 
cells.  In  healthy  individuals,  these  changes  are  reversible,  but  with 
repeated  exposure  to  ethanol,  especially  daily  heavy  drinking,  more 
severe changes in the liver occur, including alcohol-induced hepatitis, 
perivenular  sclerosis,  and  cirrhosis,  with  the  latter  observed  in  an 
estimated 15% of individuals with alcohol use disorders (Chap. 342). 
Perhaps  through  an  enhanced  vulnerability  to  infections,  individuals 
with  alcohol  use  disorders  have  an  elevated  rate  of  hepatitis  C,  and 
drinking in the context of that disease is associated with more severe 
liver deterioration.

 ■ CANCER
As few as 1.5 drinks per day increases a woman’s risk of breast cancer 
1.4-fold. For both sexes, four drinks per day increases the risk for oral 
and  esophageal  cancers  approximately  threefold  and  rectal  cancers 
by a factor of 1.5; seven to eight or more drinks per day produces an 
approximately  fivefold  increased  risk  for  many  other  cancers.  These 
consequences  may  result  directly  from  cancer-promoting  effects  of 
alcohol  and  acetaldehyde  or  indirectly  by  interfering  with  immune 
homeostasis.

 ■ HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
Ethanol  causes  an  increase  in  red  blood  cell  size  (mean  corpuscular 
volume  [MCV]),  which  reflects  its  effects  on  stem  cells.  If  heavy 
drinking  is  accompanied  by  folic  acid  deficiency,  there  can  also  be 
hypersegmented  neutrophils,  reticulocytopenia,  and  a  hyperplastic 
bone marrow; if malnutrition is present, sideroblastic changes can be 
observed.  Chronic  heavy  drinking  can  decrease  production  of  white 
blood cells, decrease granulocyte mobility and adherence, and impair 
delayed-hypersensitivity  responses  to  novel  antigens  (with  a  possible 
false-negative  tuberculin  skin  test).  Associated  immune  deficiencies 
can  contribute  to  vulnerability  toward  infections,  including  hepatitis 
and HIV, and interfere with their treatment. Finally, many individuals 
with alcohol use disorders have mild thrombocytopenia, which usually 
resolves within a week of abstinence unless there is hepatic cirrhosis or 
congestive splenomegaly.

 ■ CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Acutely, ethanol decreases myocardial contractility and causes periph-
eral vasodilation, with a resulting mild decrease in blood pressure and 
a compensatory increase in cardiac output. Exercise-induced increases 
in cardiac oxygen consumption are higher after alcohol intake. These 
acute  effects  have  little  clinical  significance  for  the  average  healthy 
drinker  but  can  be  problematic  when  persisting  cardiac  disease  is 
present.

The  consumption  of  three  or  more  drinks  per  day  results  in  a 
dose-dependent  increase  in  blood  pressure,  which  returns  to  normal 
within  weeks  of  abstinence.  Thus,  heavy  drinking  is  an  important 
factor in mild to moderate hypertension. Chronic heavy drinkers also 
have a sixfold increased risk for coronary artery disease, related, in part, 
to increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and carry an increased 
risk  for  cardiomyopathy  through  direct  effects  of  alcohol  on  heart 
muscle. Symptoms of the latter include unexplained arrhythmias in the 
presence of left ventricular impairment, heart failure, hypocontractility 
of heart muscle, and dilation of all four heart chambers with associated 

potential mural thrombi and mitral valve regurgitation. Atrial or ven-
tricular arrhythmias, especially paroxysmal tachycardia, can also occur 
temporarily  after  heavy  drinking  in  individuals  showing  no  other 
evidence of heart disease—a syndrome known as the “holiday heart.”
 ■ GENITOURINARY SYSTEM CHANGES, SEXUAL 
FUNCTIONING, AND FETAL DEVELOPMENT
Heavy drinking in adolescence can affect normal sexual development 
and reproductive onset. At any age, modest ethanol doses (e.g., blood 
alcohol concentrations of 0.06 g/dL) can increase sexual drive but also 
decrease erectile capacity in men. Even in the absence of liver impair-
ment, a significant minority of chronic heavy drinking men show irre-
versible testicular atrophy with shrinkage of the seminiferous tubules, 
decreases in ejaculate volume, and a lower sperm count (Chap. 391).

The  repeated  ingestion  of  high  doses  of  ethanol  by  women  can 
result  in  amenorrhea,  a  decrease  in  ovarian  size,  absence  of  corpora 
lutea with associated infertility, and an increased risk of spontaneous 
abortion.  Drinking  during  pregnancy  results  in  the  rapid  placental 
transfer  of  both  ethanol  and  acetaldehyde,  which  may  contribute  to 
a  range  of  consequences  known  as  fetal  alcohol  spectrum  disorder 
(FASD). One severe result is the fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), seen in 
~5% of children born to heavy-drinking mothers, which can include 
any  of  the  following:  facial  changes  with  epicanthal  eye  folds;  poorly 
formed  ear  concha;  small  teeth  with  faulty  enamel;  cardiac  atrial  or 
ventricular septal defects; an aberrant palmar crease and limitation in 
joint movement; and microcephaly with intellectual impairment. Less 
pervasive FASD conditions include combinations of low birth weight, 
a  lower  intelligence  quotient  (IQ),  hyperactive  behavior,  and  some 
modest  cognitive  deficits.  The  amount  of  ethanol  required  and  the 
time of vulnerability during pregnancy have not been defined, making 
it advisable for pregnant women to abstain from alcohol completely.
 ■ OTHER EFFECTS
Between  one-half  and  two-thirds  of  individuals  with  alcohol  use 
disorders  have  skeletal  muscle  weakness  caused  by  acute  alcoholic 
myopathy,  a  condition  that  improves  but  that  might  not  fully  remit 
with  abstinence.  Effects  of  repeated  heavy  drinking  on  the  skeletal 
system  include  changes  in  calcium  metabolism,  lower  bone  density, 
and  decreased  growth  in  the  epiphyses,  leading  to  an  increased  risk 
for fractures and osteonecrosis of the femoral head. Hormonal changes 
include  an  increase  in  cortisol  levels,  which  can  remain  elevated 
during  heavy  drinking;  inhibition  of  vasopressin  secretion  at  rising 
blood alcohol concentrations and enhanced secretion at falling blood 
alcohol concentrations (with the final result that most individuals with 
alcohol use disorders are likely to be slightly overhydrated); a modest 
and reversible decrease in serum thyroxine (T4); and a more marked 
decrease in serum triiodothyronine (T3). Hormone irregularities may 
disappear after a month or more of abstinence.
 ■ ALCOHOL USE DISORDERS
Because  many  drinkers  occasionally  imbibe  to  excess,  temporary 
alcohol-related  problems  are  common,  especially  in  the  late  teens  to 
the late twenties. However, repeated problems in multiple life areas can 
indicate an alcohol use disorder as defined in DSM-5.
 ■ DEFINITIONS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
An  alcohol  use  disorder  (also  called  alcoholism  or  alcohol  dependence 
in  prior  diagnostic  manuals)  is  defined  as  repeated  alcohol-related 
difficulties  in  at  least  2  of  11  life  areas  that  cluster  together  in  the 
same 12-month period (Table 453-2). Ten of the 11 items in DSM-5 
(published  in  2013)  were  taken  directly  from  the  7  dependence  and 
4 abuse criteria in DSM-IV, after deleting legal problems and adding 
craving. Severity of an alcohol use disorder is based on the number of 
items  endorsed:  mild  is  two  or  three  items;  moderate  is  four  or  five; 
and severe is six or more of the criterion items. The 2013 diagnostic 
approach is similar enough to DSM-IV that the following descriptions 
of associated phenomena are still accurate.

The lifetime risk for an alcohol use disorder in most Western coun-
tries is ~10–20% for men and 5–10% for women; higher rates are seen 
in individuals who seek help from health care deliverers. Between 2001 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3559

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3560

TABLE 453-2  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth 
Edition, Classification of Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD)
Criteria

Two or more of the following items occurring in the same 12-month period must 
be endorsed for the diagnosis of an alcohol use disordera:
  Drinking resulting in recurrent failure to fulfill role obligations
  Recurrent drinking in hazardous situations
  Continued drinking despite alcohol-related social or interpersonal problems
  Tolerance
  Withdrawal, or substance use for relief/avoidance of withdrawal
  Drinking in larger amounts or for longer than intended
  Persistent desire/unsuccessful attempts to stop or reduce drinking
  Great deal of time spent obtaining, using, or recovering from alcohol

Important activities given up/reduced because of drinking
 Continued drinking despite knowledge of physical or psychological problems 
caused by alcohol

  Alcohol craving

aMild AUD: 2–3 criteria required; moderate AUD: 4–5 items endorsed; severe AUD: 6 
or more items endorsed.

and  2013,  the  proportion  of  the  U.S.  population  with  a  current  (i.e., 
past 12 months) alcohol use disorder increased by 49% with increases 
of  almost  100%  in  women,  African  Americans,  and  individuals  aged 
≥45. Rates are similar in the United States, Canada, Germany, Australia, 
and  the  United  Kingdom;  tend  to  be  lower  in  most  Mediterranean 
countries,  such  as  Italy,  Greece,  and  Israel;  and  may  be  higher  in 
Ireland,  France,  Eastern  Europe  (e.g.,  Russia),  and  Scandinavia.  An 
even  higher  lifetime  prevalence  has  been  reported  for  most  native 
cultures,  including  Native  Americans,  Eskimos,  Maori  groups,  and 
aboriginal  tribes  of  Australia.  These  differences  in  prevalence  reflect 
both  cultural  and  genetic  influences,  as  described  below.  In  Western 
countries, the typical person with an alcohol use disorder is more often 
a blue- or white-collar worker or homemaker. The lifetime risk for this 
disorder among physicians is similar to that of the general population.
 ■ GENETICS

Approximately 60% of the risk for alcohol use disorders is attrib-
uted to genes, as indicated by the fourfold higher risk in children 
with an alcohol use disorder parent (even if adopted early in life 
and raised by nonalcoholics) and a higher risk in identical twins com-
pared to fraternal twins of affected individuals. Like most medical and 
psychiatric conditions that are referred to as complex genetically influ-
enced  disorders,  the  risk  for  alcohol  use  disorders  is  related  to  hun-
dreds of gene variations, each of which explains <1% of the vulnerability. 
These genetic variations operate primarily through intermediate char-
acteristics that subsequently combine with environmental influences to 
alter the risk for heavy drinking and alcohol problems. These include 
genes relating to a high risk for all substance use disorders that operate 
through  impulsivity,  schizophrenia,  and  bipolar  disorder.  Another 
characteristic,  an  intense  skin  flushing  response  when  drinking, 
decreases the risk for only alcohol use disorders through gene varia-
tions  for  several  alcohol-metabolizing  enzymes,  especially  ALDH  (a 
mutation only seen in Japanese, Chinese, and Korean individuals), and 
to a lesser extent, variations in ADH.

An  additional  genetically  influenced  characteristic  that  increases 
the risk for heavy drinking, a low level of response or low sensitivity 
to  alcohol,  can  be  seen  very  early  in  the  drinking  career  and  before 
acquired tolerance or alcohol used disorders develop. The low response 
per  drink  operates,  in  part,  through  variations  in  genes  relating  to 
calcium  and  potassium  channels,  GABA,  nicotinic,  dopamine,  and 
serotonin  systems.  Prospective  studies  have  demonstrated  that  this 
need for higher doses of alcohol to achieve effects predicts future heavy 
drinking, alcohol problems, and alcohol use disorders, but not prob-
lems with drugs other than alcohol. The impact of a low response to 
alcohol on adverse drinking outcomes is partially mediated by a range 
of environmental and attitudinal influences, including the selection of 
heavier-drinking  friends,  more  positive  expectations  of  the  effects  of 

high  doses  of  alcohol,  and  using  alcohol  to  cope  with  stress.  Several 
studies  of  college  freshmen  demonstrated  that  helping  students  who 
have a low sensitivity to alcohol modify these influences was associated 
with lower drinking quantities and fewer alcohol-related problems over 
the subsequent year.

 ■ NATURAL HISTORY
Although  the  average  age  of  the  first  drink  (~15  years)  is  similar  in 
individuals who do and do not go on to develop alcohol use disorders, 
an earlier onset of regular drinking and drunkenness, especially in the 
context of conduct problems, is associated with a higher risk for later 
alcohol-related diagnoses. By the mid-twenties, most nonalcoholic men 
and women begin to moderate their drinking (perhaps learning from 
negative consequences), whereas those with alcohol use disorders are 
likely to escalate their drinking despite difficulties. The first major life 
problem from alcohol often appears in the late teens to early twenties, 
and a pattern of multiple alcohol difficulties by the mid-twenties. Once 
established, the course is likely to include exacerbations and remissions, 
with little difficulty in temporarily stopping or controlling alcohol use 
when problems develop, but without help, desistance usually gives way 
to  escalations  in  alcohol  intake  and  subsequent  problems.  Following 
treatment, between half and two-thirds of those with alcohol use disor-
ders maintain abstinence for at least a year and often permanently. Even 
without  formal  treatment  or  self-help  groups,  there  is  at  least  a  20% 
chance of spontaneous remission with long-term abstinence. However, 
should the individual continue to drink heavily, the life span is short-
ened  by  ~10  years  on  average,  with  the  leading  causes  of  early  death 
being enhanced rates of heart disease, cancer, accidents, and suicide.

 ■ TREATMENT
The  approach  to  treating  alcohol-related  conditions  is  relatively 
straightforward:  (1)  recognize  that  at  least  20%  of  patients  have 
an  alcohol  use  disorder;  (2)  learn  how  to  identify  and  treat  acute  
alcohol-related conditions (e.g., severe intoxication); (3) know how to 
help  patients  begin  to  address  their  alcohol  problems;  and  (4)  know 
how to treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms and to appropriately refer 
patients for additional help.

 ■ IDENTIFICATION OF PATIENTS WITH ALCOHOL 
USE DISORDERS
Even in affluent locales, the ~20% of patients who have an alcohol use 
disorder can be identified by asking questions about alcohol problems 
and noting laboratory test results that can reflect regular consump-
tion of six to eight or more drinks per day. The two blood tests with 
≥60%  sensitivity  and  specificity  for  heavy  alcohol  consumption  are 
γ-glutamyl  transferase  (GGT)  (>35  U)  and  carbohydrate-deficient 
transferrin (CDT) (>20 U/L or >2.6%); the combination of the two 
tests  is  likely  to  be  more  accurate  than  either  alone.  The  values  for 
these  serologic  markers  are  likely  to  return  toward  normal  within 
several weeks of abstinence. Other useful blood tests include high-normal 
MCVs (≥91 μm3) and serum uric acid (>416 mol/L, or 7 mg/dL).

The diagnosis of an alcohol use disorder ultimately rests on the doc-
umentation of a pattern of repeated difficulties associated with alcohol 
(Table 453-2). Thus, in screening, it is important to probe for marital 
or  job  problems,  legal  difficulties,  histories  of  accidents,  medical 
problems, evidence of tolerance, and so on, and then attempt to relate 
these  issues  to  use  of  alcohol.  Some  standardized  questionnaires  can 
be helpful, including the 10-item Alcohol Use Disorders Identification 
Test (AUDIT) (Table 453-3), but these are only screening tools, and a 
face-to-face interview is still required for a meaningful diagnosis.

TREATMENT
Alcohol-Related Conditions

ACUTE INTOXICATION
The  first  priority  in  treating  severe  intoxication  is  to  assess  vital 
signs and manage respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmias, and 
blood pressure instability, if present. The possibility of intoxication 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3560

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  
 
TABLE 453-3  The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)a

ITEM
1.  How often do you have a drink containing 

alcohol?

2.  How many drinks containing alcohol do you have 

on a typical day?

3.  How often do you have six or more drinks on one 

occasion?

4.  How often during the last year have you found 

that you were not able to stop drinking once you 
had started?

5.  How often during the last year have you failed 
to do what was normally expected from you 
because of drinking?

6.  How often during the last year have you needed 
a first drink in the morning to get yourself going 
after a heavy drinking session?

7.  How often during the last year have you had a 

feeling of guilt or remorse after drinking?

8.  How often during the last year have you been 
unable to remember what happened the night 
before because you had been drinking?

9.  Have you or someone else been injured as a 

result of your drinking?

10.  Has a relative, friend, doctor, or other health 

worker been concerned about your drinking or 
suggested that you should cut down?

5-POINT SCALE (LEAST TO 
MOST)
Never (0) to 4+ per week 
(4)
1 or 2 (0) to 10+ (4)

Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)
Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)

Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)

Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)

Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)
Never (0) to daily or almost 
daily (4)

No (0) to yes, during the 
last year (4)
No (0) to yes, during the 
last year (4)

aThe AUDIT is scored by simply summing the values associated with the endorsed 
response. A score ≥8 may indicate harmful alcohol use.

with  other  drugs  should  be  considered  by  obtaining,  if  needed, 
toxicology screens for other central nervous system (CNS) depres-
sants such as benzodiazepines and for opioids. Aggressive behavior 
should  be  handled  by  offering  reassurance  but  also  by  calling  for 
help from an intervention team. If the aggressive behavior contin-
ues, relatively low doses of a short-acting benzodiazepine such as 
lorazepam (e.g., 1–2 mg PO or IV) may be used and can be repeated 
as needed, but care must be taken not to destabilize vital signs or 
worsen  confusion.  An  alternative  approach  is  to  use  an  antipsy-
chotic medication (e.g., olanzapine 2.5–10 mg IM repeated at 2 and 
6 h, if needed). 
INTERVENTION
There  are  two  main  elements  to  highlighting  the  need  for  com-
pliance  with  treatment  in  a  person  with  an  alcohol  use  disorder: 
motivational interviewing and brief interventions. During motiva-
tional interviewing, the clinician helps the patient to think through 
the  assets  (e.g.,  comfort  in  social  situations)  and  liabilities  (e.g., 
health-  and  interpersonal-related  problems)  of  the  current  pat-
tern of drinking. The clinician should listen empathetically to the 
responses, help the patient weigh options, and encourage the taking 
of responsibility for needed changes. Patients should be reminded 
that only they can decide to avoid the consequences that will occur 
if  heavy  drinking  continues.  The  process  of  brief  intervention,  a 
similar approach, has been summarized by the acronym FRAMES: 
Feedback to the patient; Responsibility to be taken by the patient; 
Advice,  rather  than  orders,  on  what  needs  to  be  done;  Menus  of 
options that might be considered; Empathy for understanding the 
patient’s thoughts and feelings; and Self-efficacy, i.e., offering sup-
port for the capacity of the patient to make changes.

Once the patient begins to consider change, the discussions can 
focus  more  on  the  consequences  of  high  alcohol  consumption, 
suggested approaches to stopping drinking, and help in recogniz-
ing  and  avoiding  situations  likely  to  lead  to  heavy  drinking  such 
as going to night clubs or associating with heavy drinking friends. 
Both  motivational  interviewing  and  brief  interventions  can  be 
carried  out  in  15-min  sessions,  but  because  patients  often  do  not 
change behavior immediately, multiple meetings are often required 

to explore the problem and possible options, discuss optimal treat-
ments, and explain the benefits of abstinence. 

3561

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
3

A
l
c
o
h
o
l
a
n
d
A
l
c
o
h
o
l

U
s
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL
If the patient agrees to stop drinking, sudden decreases in alcohol 
intake  can  produce  withdrawal  symptoms,  most  of  which  are  the 
opposite of those produced by intoxication. Features include tremor 
of  the  hands  (shakes);  agitation  and  anxiety;  autonomic  nervous 
system overactivity including an increase in pulse, respiratory rate, 
sweating,  and  body  temperature;  and  insomnia.  These  symptoms 
usually begin within 5–10 h of decreasing ethanol intake, peak on 
day 2 or 3, and improve by day 4 or 5, although mild levels of these 
problems  may  persist  for  4–6  months  as  a  protracted  abstinence 
syndrome.

About 2% of individuals with alcohol use disorders experience a 
withdrawal seizure, with the risk increasing in the context of older 
age,  concomitant  medical  problems,  misuse  of  additional  drugs, 
and higher alcohol quantities. The same risk factors also contribute 
to  the  ~1%  rate  of  withdrawal  delirium,  also  known  as  delirium 
tremens  (DTs),  where  the  withdrawal  includes  delirium  (men-
tal  confusion,  agitation,  and  fluctuating  levels  of  consciousness) 
associated with a tremor and autonomic overactivity (e.g., marked 
increases in pulse, blood pressure, and respirations). The risks for 
seizures  and  DTs  can  be  diminished  by  identifying  and  treating 
underlying  medical  conditions  early  in  the  course  of  withdrawal 
and  by  instituting  adequate  doses  of  depressant  medications  such 
as benzodiazepines.

Thus, the first step in dealing with possible withdrawal phenom-
ena is a thorough physical examination in all heavy drinkers who 
are  considering  abstinence.  This  includes  evaluation  of  possible 
liver  impairment,  gastrointestinal  bleeding,  cardiac  arrhythmias, 
infection, and glucose or electrolyte imbalances. It is also important 
to offer adequate nutrition and oral multiple B vitamins, including 
50–100  mg  of  oral  thiamine  daily  for  a  week  or  more.  Because 
most patients with alcohol use disorders who enter withdrawal are 
either normally hydrated or mildly overhydrated, IV fluids should 
be avoided unless there is a relevant medical problem or significant 
recent bleeding, vomiting, or diarrhea.

The next step is to recognize that because withdrawal symptoms 
reflect the rapid removal of a CNS depressant, alcohol, the symp-
toms  can  be  controlled  by  administering  any  depressant  in  doses 
that decrease symptoms (e.g., a rapid pulse and tremor) and then 
tapering  the  dose  over  3–5  days.  Although  most  depressants  are 
effective,  benzodiazepines  (Chap.  452)  have  the  most  supportive 
data for use in this situation, combining a high level of safety and 
low  cost.  Short-half-life  benzodiazepines  can  be  considered  for 
patients  with  serious  liver  impairment  or  evidence  of  significant 
brain  damage,  but  they  must  be  given  every  4  h  to  avoid  abrupt 
blood-level  fluctuations  that  may  increase  the  risk  for  seizures. 
Therefore,  most  clinicians  use  drugs  with  longer  half-lives  (e.g., 
chlordiazepoxide),  adjusting  the  dose  if  signs  of  withdrawal  esca-
late  and  withholding  the  drug  if  the  patient  is  sleeping  or  has 
orthostatic  hypotension.  The  average  patient  requires  25–50  mg 
of  chlordiazepoxide  or  10  mg  of  diazepam  given  PO  every  4–6  h 
on  the  first  day,  with  doses  then  decreased  to  zero  over  the  next 
5 days. Although alcohol withdrawal can be treated in a hospital, 
patients in good physical condition who demonstrate mild signs of 
withdrawal despite low blood alcohol concentrations and who have 
no prior history of DTs or withdrawal seizures can be considered 
for outpatient detoxification. For the next 4 or 5 days, these patients 
should receive only 1 or 2 days of medications at a time and return 
daily for evaluation of vital signs. They can be hospitalized if signs 
and symptoms of withdrawal markedly escalate.

Treatment of patients with DTs can be challenging, and the con-
dition is likely to run a course of 3–5 days regardless of the therapy 
used. However, conditions that meet the criteria for DTs outlined 
above represent medical emergencies that carry an estimated mor-
tality as high as 5%, and treatment is best carried out in an intensive 
care unit by well-trained clinicians who closely monitor vital signs. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3561

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3562 Medications can include high-dose benzodiazepines (e.g., as much 
as  800  mg/d  of  chlordiazepoxide  has  been  reported)  or,  for  those 
who  do  not  respond  to  that  regimen,  closely  monitored  doses  of 
propofol or dexmedetomidine. The focus of care is to identify and 
correct  medical  problems  and  to  control  behavior  and  prevent 
injuries. Antipsychotic medications are not recommended for treat-
ment of alcohol withdrawal symptoms; although antipsychotics are 
less likely than benzodiazepines to exacerbate confusion, they may 
increase the risk of seizures.

Generalized  withdrawal  seizures  rarely  require  more  than  the 
administration  of  an  adequate  dose  of  benzodiazepines.  There  is 
little evidence that anticonvulsants such as phenytoin or gabapentin 
are more effective than benzodiazepines for alcohol-withdrawal sei-
zures, and the risk of seizures has usually passed by the time effec-
tive drug levels are reached. The rare patient with status epilepticus 
must be treated aggressively (Chap. 425). 
HELPING INDIVIDUALS WITH ALCOHOL USE DISORDERS 
TO STOP DRINKING: THE REHABILITATION PHASE
An Overview  After completing alcoholic rehabilitation, ≥60% of 
individuals with alcohol use disorders, especially highly functioning 
patients, maintain abstinence for at least a year; many also achieve 
long-term  sobriety.  The  core  components  of  the  rehabilitation 
phase of treatment include cognitive-behavioral approaches to help 
patients recognize the need to change, while working with them to 
alter their behaviors to enhance compliance. A key step is to opti-
mize motivation toward abstinence through education of patients 
and  their  significant  others  about  alcohol  use  disorders  and  their 
likely course over time. It is important to recognize that contrary 
to  what  some  physicians  might  think,  the  typical  person  with  an 
alcohol use disorder is likely to have a job and a family and not fit 
the inaccurate “down and out” stereotype. However, after years of 
heavy  drinking,  some  patients  require  vocational  or  avocational 
counseling to help to structure their days, and all patients should try 
self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) to assist them 
in developing a sober peer group and to learn how to deal with life’s 
stresses while remaining sober. Relapse prevention education helps 
patients  identify  situations  in  which  a  return  to  drinking  is  likely 
(e.g., stopping in a bar to meet friends but planning to only have a 
nonalcoholic beverage), formulate ways to avoid the risky situation, 
and  if  not  possible,  mitigate  the  risks  to  which  they  are  exposed. 
It  is  also  important  to  develop  coping  strategies  that  increase  the 
chances of a quick return to abstinence after an episode of drinking.
Although  many  patients  can  be  treated  as  outpatients,  more 
intense  interventions  are  more  effective,  and  some  individuals 
with alcohol use disorders do not respond to just AA or outpatient 
groups.  Whatever  the  setting,  ongoing  contact  with  outpatient 
treatment staff should be maintained for at least 6 months and pref-
erably  for  a  year  after  abstinence.  Counseling  focuses  on  areas  of 
improved functioning in the absence of alcohol (i.e., why it is a good 
idea to continue abstinence), helping patients to manage free time 
without alcohol, encouraging them to develop a nondrinking peer 
group, and discussions of ways to handle stress without drinking.

The physician serves an important role in identifying the alcohol 
problem,  diagnosing  and  treating  associated  medical  and  inde-
pendent  or  substance-induced  psychiatric  syndromes,  oversee-
ing  detoxification,  referring  the  patient  to  outpatient  or  inpatient 
rehabilitation programs, providing counseling, and, if appropriate, 
selecting which (if any)  medication might be needed.  For insom-
nia,  patients  should  be  reassured  that  troubled  sleep  is  tempo-
rary  after  alcohol  withdrawal  and  will  begin  to  improve  over 
subsequent  weeks.  They  should  be  taught  the  elements  of  “sleep 
hygiene”  including  maintaining  consistent  schedules  for  bedtime 
and  awakening,  avoiding  exercise  or  consumption  of  large  meals 
before bedtime, and keeping the bedroom cool, dark, and quiet at 
night  (Chap.  31).  Depressant  sleep  medications  are  not  the  opti-
mal  approach  for  this  type  of  insomnia  that  often  continues  for 
several  weeks  or  months.  Patients  are  likely  to  develop  rebound 
insomnia  when  the  depressant  dose  is  decreased  or  stopped.  The 

rebound  increases  the  chance  they  will  increase  the  dose  and 
potentially develop problems controlling the prescribed depressant 
drug. Sedating antidepressants (e.g., trazodone) should not be used 
because they interfere with cognitive functioning the next morning 
and  disturb  the  normal  sleep  architecture,  but  occasional  use  of 
over-the-counter  sleeping  medications  (sedating  antihistamines) 
can be considered. An additional problem, anxiety symptoms, can 
be  addressed  by  increasing  patients’  insights  into  the  temporary 
nature  of  the  symptoms  and  helping  them  develop  strategies  to 
achieve relaxation by using forms of cognitive therapy. 

Medications  for  the  Alcohol  Rehabilitation  Treatment  Phase   
Several  medications  have  modest  benefits  when  used  in  the  first 
6–12  months  of  recovery.  The  opioid  antagonist  naltrexone  may 
shorten  subsequent  relapses,  whether  used  in  the  oral  form 
(50–150  mg/d)  or  as  a  once-per-month  380-mg  injection.  By 
blocking  opioid  receptors,  naltrexone  decreases  activity  in  the 
dopamine-rich  ventral  tegmental  reward  system  and  decreases 
the feeling of pleasure if alcohol is imbibed. A second medication, 
acamprosate (Campral) (~2 g/d divided into three oral doses), has 
similar  modest  effects.  Acamprosate  inhibits  NMDA  receptors, 
decreasing mild symptoms of protracted withdrawal. Several trials 
of  combined  naltrexone  and  acamprosate  have  reported  that  the 
combination is well tolerated and the efficacy might be superior to 
either drug alone, although not all studies agree.

It  is  more  difficult  to  establish  the  asset-to-liability  ratio  of  a 
third drug, disulfiram, an ALDH inhibitor, used clinically at doses 
of 250 mg/d, a dose usually selected to avoid the side effects of the 
more effective 500 mg/d regimen. This drug produces vomiting and 
autonomic nervous system instability in the presence of alcohol as 
a result of rapidly rising blood levels of acetaldehyde. This reaction 
can be dangerous, especially for patients with heart disease, stroke, 
diabetes mellitus, or hypertension. The drug itself carries potential 
risks  of  temporary  depressive  or  psychotic  symptoms,  peripheral 
neuropathy, and liver damage. Disulfiram is best given under super-
vision by someone (such as a spouse), especially during high-risk 
drinking situations (such as the Christmas holidays).

A  16-week,  placebo-controlled  trial  in  patients  with  relatively 
severe  acute  withdrawal  reported  better  outcomes  with  use  of  a 
depressant  medication  (gabapentin  1200  mg/d),  but  those  results 
have  not  yet  been  replicated.  Additional  drugs  under  investiga-
tion  include  another  opioid  antagonist,  nalmefene;  the  nicotinic 
receptor agonist varenicline; the serotonin antagonist ondansetron; 
the  α-adrenergic  agonist  prazosin;  the  GABAB  receptor  agonist 
baclofen;  the  anticonvulsant  topiramate;  and  cannabinol  receptor 
antagonists. At present, there are insufficient data to determine the 
asset-to-liability ratio for these medications in treating alcohol use 
disorders, and therefore, few data yet offer solid support for their 
routine use in clinical settings.

 ■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
As  described  above,  rates  of  alcohol  use  disorders  differ  across  sex, 
age, ethnicity, and country. There are also differences across countries 
regarding the definition of a standard drink (e.g., 10–12 g of ethanol in 
the United States and 8 g in the United Kingdom) and the definition of 
being legally drunk. The preferred alcoholic beverage also varies across 
groups, even within countries. That said, regardless of sex, ethnicity, or 
country, the actual drug in the drink is still ethanol, and the risks for 
problems, course of alcohol use disorders, and approaches to treatment 
are similar across the world.

 ■ FURTHER READING
Anton RF et al: Efficacy of gabapentin for the treatment of alcohol use 
disorder in patients with alcohol withdrawal symptoms: A random-
ized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 180:728, 2020.

Coutney  KE  et  al:  The  effect  of  alcohol  use  on  neuroimaging  cor-
relates of cognitive and emotional processing in human adolescents. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 33:781, 2019.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3562

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders Grant BF et al: Prevalence of 12-month alcohol use, high-risk drink-
ing,  and  DSM-IV  alcohol  use  disorder  in  the  United  States,  2001-
2002 to 2012-2013: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey 
on Alcohol and Related Conditions. JAMA Psychiatry 74:911, 2017.
Schuckit MA: Recognition and management of withdrawal delirium 

(delirium tremens). N Engl J Med 371:2109, 2014.

Schuckit MA: A critical review of methods and results in the search 
for genetic contributors to alcohol sensitivity. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 
42:822, 2018.

Schuckit MA et al: The low level of response to alcohol-based heavy 
drinking  prevention  program:  One-year  follow-up.  J  Stud  Alcohol 
Drugs 77:25, 2016.

Sullivan FP, Geschwind DH: Defining the genetic, genomic, cellular, 
and  diagnostic  architecture  of  psychiatric  disorders.  Cell  177:162, 
2019.

Witkiewitz K et al: Advances in the science and treatment of alcohol 

use disorder. Sci Adv 5:1, 2019.

454 Nicotine Addiction

David M. Burns

The  use  of  tobacco  leaf  to  create  and  satisfy  nicotine  addiction  was 
introduced  to  Columbus  by  Native  Americans  and  spread  rapidly  to 
Europe.  Use  of  tobacco  as  cigarettes,  however,  only  became  popular 
in  the  twentieth  century  and  so  is  a  modern  phenomenon,  as  is  the 
epidemic of disease caused by this form of tobacco use.

Nicotine  is  the  principal  constituent  of  tobacco  responsible  for  its 
addictive character, but other smoke constituents and behavioral asso-
ciations contribute to the strength of the addiction. Addicted smokers 
regulate their nicotine intake by adjusting the frequency and intensity 
of their tobacco use both to obtain the desired psychoactive effects and 
avoid withdrawal.

Unburned cured tobacco used orally contains nicotine, carcinogens, 
and other toxicants capable of causing gum disease, oral and pancreatic 
cancers, and an increase in the risk of heart disease. When tobacco is 
burned,  the  resultant  smoke  contains,  in  addition  to  nicotine,  >7000 
other compounds that result from volatilization, pyrolysis, and pyro-
synthesis of tobacco leaf and various chemical additives used in mak-
ing different tobacco products. Tobacco smoke is composed of a fine 
aerosol and a vapor phase; the aerosol is of a size range that results in 
deposition in the airways and alveolar surfaces of the lungs. The aggre-
gate  of  particulate  matter,  after  subtracting  nicotine  and  moisture,  is 
referred to as tar.

The alkaline pH of smoke from blends of tobacco used for pipes and 
cigars allows sufficient absorption of nicotine across the oral mucosa 
to satisfy the smoker’s need for this drug. Therefore, those who smoke 
pipes and cigars exclusively tend not to inhale the smoke into the lung, 
confining the toxic and carcinogenic exposure (and the increased rates 
of disease) largely to the upper airway. The acidic pH of smoke gener-
ated by the tobacco used in cigarettes dramatically reduces absorption 
of  nicotine  in  the  mouth,  necessitating  inhalation  of  the  smoke  into 
the larger surface of the lungs in order to absorb quantities of nicotine 
sufficient to satisfy the smoker’s addiction. The shift to using tobacco as 
cigarettes, with resultant increased deposition and absorption of smoke 
in  the  lung,  has  created  the  epidemic  of  heart  disease,  lung  disease, 
and lung cancer that dominates the current disease manifestations of 
tobacco use.

Several  genes  have  been  associated  with  nicotine  addiction.  Some 
reduce  the  clearance  of  nicotine,  and  others  have  been  associated 
with an increased likelihood of becoming dependent on tobacco and 
other drugs as well as a higher incidence of depression. It is likely that 

3563

genetic  susceptibility  can  influence  the  probability  that  adolescent 
experimentation with tobacco will lead to addiction as an adult. Rates 
of  smoking  cessation  have  increased,  and  rates  of  nicotine  addiction 
have decreased dramatically, since the mid-1950s, suggesting that fac-
tors other than genetics are more important influences for tobacco use.
Adult  cigarette  smoking  prevalence  has  declined  to  below  14%  in 
the  United  States,  with  only  75%  of  the  cigarette  smokers  smoking 
every day. The rapidly rising smoking rate observed in the developing 
world  is  of  concern,  and  the  World  Health  Organization  Framework 
Convention on Tobacco Control is encouraging effective tobacco con-
trol approaches in these countries with the hope of preventing a future 
epidemic of tobacco-related illness.

DISEASE MANIFESTATIONS OF CIGARETTE 
SMOKING
More  than  480,000  individuals  die  prematurely  each  year  in  the 
United  States  from  cigarette  use;  this  represents  almost  one  of  every 
five deaths in the United States. Approximately 40% of cigarette smokers 
will die prematurely due to cigarette smoking unless they are able to quit.
The  major  diseases  caused  by  cigarette  smoking  are  listed  in 
Table 454-1. The ratio of smoking-related disease rates in smokers 
compared  to  never  smokers  (relative  risk)  increases  with  advancing 
age  for  most  cancers  and  for  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease 
(COPD).  However,  relative  risk  declines  with  advancing  age  for  car-
diovascular  diseases  due  to  the  increasing  contribution  of  other  risk 
factors as age advances. Nevertheless, even for cardiovascular disease, 
the  absolute  difference  in  mortality  rate  between  smokers  and  never 
smokers, called excess death rate, continues to increase with advancing 
age, as one would expect from a process of cumulative injury.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
4

N
i
c
o
t
i
n
e
A
d
d
i
c
t
i
o
n

TABLE 454-1  Relative Risks for Current Smokers of Cigarettes
35–44
AGE

45–64

65–74

Males

Lung cancer
Coronary heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Other vascular diseases
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)
All causes

Females

Lung cancer
Other tobacco-related cancers
Coronary heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
Other vascular diseases
COPD
All causes

14.33
3.88
2.17

19.03
2.99
1.48

28.29
2.76
1.23
7.25
29.69

2.55

2.97

3.02

13.30
1.28
4.98
2.27

18.95
2.08
3.25
1.70

1.79

2.63

≥75

22.51
1.98
1.12
4.93
23.01

2.40

23.08
1.93
2.25
1.10
5.77
20.96
2.47

Relative Risks for Selected Other Cancers

Other cancers
Larynx
Lip, oral cavity, pharynx
Esophagus
Bladder
Kidney
Pancreas
Stomach
Liver
Colorectal
Cervix
Acute myeloid leukemia

Male
14.6
10.9
6.8
3.3
2.7
2.3
2
1.7
1.2

1.4

23.65
2.06
3.29
1.24
6.81
38.89
2.87

Female
13
5.1
7.8
2.2
1.3
2.3
1.4
1.7
1.2
1.6
1.4

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3563

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
3564

 ■ CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
Cigarette  smokers  are  more  likely  than  nonsmokers  to  develop  both 
large-vessel  atherosclerosis  and  small-vessel  disease.  Approximately 
90% of peripheral vascular disease in the nondiabetic population can 
be attributed to cigarette smoking, as can ~50% of aortic aneurysms. 
In contrast, 24% of coronary artery disease and ~11% of ischemic and 
hemorrhagic strokes are caused by cigarette smoking. There is a multi-
plicative interaction between cigarette smoking and other cardiac risk 
factors  such  that  the  increment  in  risk  produced  by  smoking  among 
individuals with hypertension or elevated serum lipids is substantially 
greater than the increment in risk produced by smoking for individuals 
without these risk factors.

In addition to its role in promoting atherosclerosis, cigarette smok-
ing also increases the likelihood of myocardial infarction and sudden 
cardiac  death  by  promoting  platelet  aggregation  and  vascular  occlu-
sion.  Reversal  of  these  effects  on  coagulation  may  explain  the  rapid 
benefit of smoking cessation for a new coronary event demonstrable 
among  those  who  have  survived  a  first  myocardial  infarction.  This 
effect may also explain the substantially higher rates of graft occlusion 
among continuing smokers following vascular bypass surgery for car-
diac or peripheral vascular disease.

Cessation of cigarette smoking reduces the risk of a second coronary 
event  within  6–12  months.  Rates  of  first  myocardial  infarction  and 
death from coronary heart disease decline within 2–4 years following 
cessation  among  those  with  no  prior  cardiovascular  history.  After  
15 years of abstinence, the risk of a new myocardial infarction or death 
from  coronary  heart  disease  in  former  smokers  is  similar  to  that  for 
those who have never smoked.

 ■ CANCER
Tobacco smoking causes cancer of the lung; lip; oral cavity; naso-, oro-, 
and  hypopharynx;  nasal  cavity  and  paranasal  sinuses;  larynx;  esoph-
agus;  stomach;  pancreas;  liver  (hepatocellular);  colon  and  rectum; 
kidney (body and pelvis); ureter; urinary bladder; uterine cervix; and 
acute  myeloid  leukemia.  There  is  evidence  suggesting  that  cigarette 
smoking may play a role in increasing the risk of breast cancer, partic-
ularly for premenopausal women. There does not appear to be a causal 
link between cigarette smoking and cancer of the endometrium, and 
there is a lower risk of uterine cancer among postmenopausal women 
who smoke. The risks of cancer increase with the increasing number 
of  cigarettes  smoked  per  day  and  with  increasing  duration  of  smok-
ing.  Additionally,  there  are  synergistic  interactions  between  cigarette 
smoking and alcohol use for cancer of the oral cavity and esophagus. 
Several  occupational  exposures  synergistically  increase  lung  cancer 
risk among cigarette smokers, most notably occupational asbestos and 
radon exposure.

Cessation of cigarette smoking reduces the risk of developing cancer 
relative  to  continuing  smoking  after  about  4  years  of  abstinence,  but 
even  20  years  after  cessation,  there  is  a  persistent  two-  to  threefold 
increased risk of developing lung cancer.

 ■ RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Cigarette smoking is responsible for 80% of COPD. Within 1–2 years 
of  beginning  to  smoke  regularly,  many  young  smokers  will  develop 
inflammatory changes in their small airways, although lung function 
measures  of  these  changes  do  not  predict  development  of  chronic 
airflow  obstruction.  Pathophysiologic  changes  in  the  lungs  manifest 
and progress over longer durations of smoking proportional to smok-
ing intensity and duration. Chronic mucous hyperplasia of the larger 
airways  results  in  a  chronic  productive  cough  in  as  many  as  80%  of 
smokers >60 years of age. Chronic inflammation and narrowing of the 
small  airways  and/or  enzymatic  digestion  of  alveolar  walls  resulting 
in  pulmonary  emphysema  can  reduce  expiratory  airflow  sufficiently 
to produce clinical symptoms of respiratory limitation in ~15–25% of 
smokers.

Changes in the small airways of young smokers will reverse after 
1–2 years of cessation. There is also a small increase in measures of 
expiratory  airflow  following  cessation  among  many  individuals  who 
have  developed  chronic  airflow  obstruction,  but  the  major  change 

following  cessation  is  a  slowing  of  the  rate  of  decline  in  lung  func-
tion with advancing age rather than a return of lung function toward 
normal.
 ■ PREGNANCY
Cigarette smoking is associated with several maternal complications of 
pregnancy: premature rupture of membranes, abruptio placentae, and 
placenta previa; there is also a small increase in the risk of spontaneous 
abortion among smokers. Infants of smoking mothers are more likely 
to experience preterm delivery, have a higher perinatal mortality rate, 
be small for their gestational age, and have higher rates of infant respi-
ratory distress syndrome. They are more likely to die of sudden infant 
death syndrome and appear to have a developmental lag for at least the 
first several years of life.
 ■ OTHER CONDITIONS
Smoking  delays  healing  of  peptic  ulcers;  increases  the  risk  of  devel-
oping  periodontal  disease,  diabetes,  active  tuberculosis,  rheumatoid 
arthritis, osteoporosis, senile cataracts, and neovascular and atrophic 
forms of macular degeneration; and results in premature menopause, 
wrinkling  of  the  skin,  gallstones,  and  cholecystitis  in  women,  and 
male  impotence.  Patients  who  continue  to  smoke  during  treatment 
for cancer with chemotherapy or radiation have poorer outcomes and 
reduced survival.
 ■ ENVIRONMENTAL TOBACCO SMOKE
Long-term  exposure  to  environmental  tobacco  smoke  increases  the 
risk  of  lung  cancer  and  coronary  artery  disease  among  nonsmokers. 
It also increases the incidence of respiratory infections, chronic otitis 
media, and asthma in children and causes exacerbation of asthma in 
children.  Some  evidence  suggests  that  environmental  tobacco  smoke 
exposure may increase the risk of premenopausal breast cancer.

PHARMACOLOGIC INTERACTIONS
Cigarette  smoking  may  interact  with  a  variety  of  other  drugs 
(Table  454-2). Cigarette smoking induces the cytochrome P450 sys-
tem, which may alter the metabolic clearance of drugs such as warfarin. 
This  may  result  in  inadequate  serum  levels  in  smokers  as  outpatients 
when  the  dosage  is  established  in  the  hospital  under  nonsmoking 
conditions. Correspondingly, serum levels may rise when smokers are 
hospitalized and not allowed to smoke. Smokers may also have higher 
first-pass clearance for drugs such as lidocaine, and the stimulant effects 
of nicotine may reduce the effect of benzodiazepines or beta blockers.

OTHER FORMS OF TOBACCO USE
Other major forms of tobacco use are moist snuff deposited between 
the  cheek  and  gum,  chewing  tobacco,  pipes  and  cigars,  and  recently 
bidi (tobacco wrapped in tendu or temburni leaf; commonly used in 
India), clove cigarettes, and water pipes. Oral tobacco use leads to gum 
disease  and  can  result  in  oral  and  pancreatic  cancer  as  well  as  heart 
disease. There are dramatic differences in the risks evident for products 
used in Africa or Asia as compared to those in the United States and 
Europe.

The  risk  of  upper  airway  cancers  is  similar  among  cigarette,  pipe, 
and  cigar  smokers,  whereas  those  who  have  smoked  only  pipes  and 
cigars have a much lower risk of lung cancer, heart disease, and COPD. 
Cigarette smokers who switch to pipes or cigars do tend to inhale the 
smoke, increasing their risk. Use of combusted tobacco in forms resem-
bling and smoking like a cigarette, but classified as a cigar, represents a 
growing fraction of combusted tobacco use and likely has disease risks 
similar to those of cigarette smoking.

A resurgence of cigar, bidi, and water pipe use among adolescents of 
both genders has raised concerns that these older forms of tobacco use 
are once again causing a public health problem.

ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are devices with a heating element 
that  produces  an  inhalable  aerosol  from  a  liquid  usually  containing 
nicotine.  Multiple  different  designs  exist,  but  there  are  three  general 
categories.  Disposable  devices  that  look  like  cigarettes  or  ball  point 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3564

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 454-2  Interactions of Smoking and Prescription Drugs
INTERACTION
DRUG

Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Drugs

β blockers
Flecainide
Heparin
Lidocaine
Mexiletine
Propranolol
Theophylline
Verapamil
Warfarin

Neuropsychiatric Drugs

Amitriptyline
Benzodiazepines
Clomipramine, Imipramine
Chlorpromazine
Clozapine
Duloxetine
Fluphenazine
Fluvoxamine
Haloperidol
Naratriptan
Olanzapine
Trazodone

Anticancer Drugs

Erlotinib

Gefitinib

Irinotecan

Other Drugs

Dextropropoxyphene
Estrogens (oral)
Fentanyl
Insulin
Rivastigmine

Reduced lowering of heart rate and blood pressure
Increased first-pass clearance
Faster clearance
Increased first-pass clearance
Increased first-pass clearance
Increased first-pass clearance
Faster metabolic clearance
Increased clearance
Increased metabolism lowers serum levels

Increased clearance
Less sedation
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Decreased serum concentrations
Increased clearance
Faster clearance
Decreased serum concentrations

Increased clearance, higher response rate, and 
improved survival in nonsmokers
Higher response rate and improved survival in 
nonsmokers
Increased clearance

Less analgesia
Increased hepatic clearance
Increased clearance
Delayed absorption due to skin vasoconstriction
Increased clearance

pens are the oldest products, but they generally do not deliver levels of 
nicotine comparable to a cigarette. Later vaping devices utilize a larger 
power source and a bulky refillable tank to store the nicotine-containing 
liquid. These devices deliver aerosolized nicotine at levels comparable 
to cigarette smoking. Liquids to refill the tanks come in different con-
centrations of nicotine, but liquids with high concentrations of nicotine 
create throat irritation, deterring their use. More recent designs include 
smaller devices that resemble computer USB flash drives and deliver 
nicotine  as  the  salt  of  a  mild  acid.  The  nicotine  salt  aerosol  leaving 
the  device  is  mildly  acidic,  markedly  lowering  the  percentage  of  the 
nicotine that is in the free base form. This reduces the irritation in the 
upper airway. However, as the aerosol moves down the airway, its pH 
rapidly  converts  to  the  lung  tissue  pH  of  ~7.4,  releasing  substantial 
amounts  of  free  base  nicotine,  which  is  readily  absorbed  across  the 
alveolar  capillary  wall.  As  the  absorbed  nicotine  is  carried  away  by 
the pulmonary blood flow, the remaining nicotine salt converts to the 
free base form, further enhancing the amount of nicotine that can be 
delivered to the brain. Limited data suggest that the nicotine intake is 
higher for users of devices delivering nicotine salts. It is likely that the 
transition to use of nicotine salts substantially contributed to the rise in 
use of e-cigarettes and addiction to nicotine among adolescents.

The  role  of  e-cigarettes  in  smoking  cessation  remains  conflicted. 
There  is  convincing  randomized  controlled  evidence  that  the  use  of 
refillable-tank e-cigarettes is twice as effective as nicotine-replacement 

3565

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
4

N
i
c
o
t
i
n
e
A
d
d
i
c
t
i
o
n

medications in achieving sustained abstinence from conventional ciga-
rettes. However, 80% of those who achieved abstinence were still using 
e-cigarettes  at  12  months,  suggesting  continued  nicotine  addiction. 
Evidence  on  exposure  to  toxicants  in  smoke  demonstrates  markedly 
lower  exposures  among  those  using  e-cigarettes  exclusively,  but  evi-
dence on e-cigarette use in the United States shows that approximately 
one-half of adult e-cigarette users continue to also smoke conventional 
cigarettes, negating the benefits of reduced toxicant exposure. Rates of 
relapse back to smoking among those with persistent nicotine addic-
tion and the effectiveness of devices containing nicotine salts remain 
to be demonstrated.

E-cigarette use among U.S. adolescents has risen dramatically over 
recent  years,  becoming  the  most  common  form  of  nicotine  delivery 
among  adolescents.  Adolescents  who  ever  use  an  inhaled  nicotine 
product are more likely to be a conventional cigarette smoker 1 year 
later (three times more likely with ever e-cigarette use and four times as 
likely with ever conventional cigarette use). These data show that ado-
lescents who experiment with nicotine in any form are likely to become 
continuing  users;  nevertheless,  the  steeply  rising  level  of  adolescent 
e-cigarette  prevalence  has  been  accompanied  by  an  independently 
driven  dramatic  fall  in  adolescent  conventional  cigarette  prevalence. 
Concerns about e-cigarette use becoming a meaningful gateway to con-
ventional cigarette use among adolescents and young adults are thus far 
not borne out by prevalence data for both product types.

Refillable or reloadable e-cigarette devices can be used to aerosolize 
a  variety  of  liquids  other  than  those  provided  by  the  manufacturer. 
Disposable  “pods”  and  liquids  for  these  devices  can  be  purchased 
from the manufacturer but are also available from other sources that 
may  use  poor-quality  manufacturing  practices  and  control  of  con-
taminants.  They  may  also  contain  marijuana  oils,  other  drugs,  and 
flavors not evaluated for potential lung injury with inhalation. Many 
of these liquids are provided on the black market with little oversight 
of the production process. Beginning in the spring of 2019, a rapidly 
accelerating  epidemic  of  severe  hypoxic  lung  injury  was  associated 
with  e-cigarette  use.  The  lung  pathology  includes  diffuse  alveolar 
damage, acute fibrinous pneumonitis, and organizing pneumonia. The 
closest  associations  were  for  cannabinoid  products  and  vitamin  E  in 
the aerosolized liquid, but ~15% of those affected reported using only 
nicotine-containing  liquids.  Following  widespread  publicity  of  this 
toxicity  and  its  association  with  irregular  product  sources,  there  has 
been a reduction in the incidence of this form of lung injury. Given the 
capacity of e-cigarettes to produce small particles that readily penetrate 
to the alveolar level, multiple toxicants may contribute to the epidemic. 
Nevertheless, vitamin E has the strongest evidence to support its role 
as a major contributor. Vitamin E is sometimes used as a thickening 
agent in tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-containing products. Given the 
difficulty in controlling the illicit market for e-liquids, it is likely that 
episodic exposure to pulmonary toxicants will continue to occur. Reg-
ulatory control may need to focus on the delivery devices.

LOWER TAR AND NICOTINE CIGARETTES
Filtered  cigarettes  with  lower  machine-measured  yields  of  tar  and 
nicotine  commonly  use  ventilation  holes  in  the  filters  and  other 
engineering  designs  to  artificially  lower  the  machine  measurements. 
Smokers compensate for the lowered nicotine delivery resulting from 
these design changes by changing the manner in which they puff on 
the cigarette or the number of cigarettes smoked per day. Actual tar and 
nicotine deliveries are not reduced with use of these products, negating 
any reduction in disease risks with their use.

The  amount  of  carcinogenic  tobacco-specific  nitrosamines  in  the 
tobacco used in cigarettes has increased over time, and cigarette design 
changes  that  reduce  machine-measured  tar  and  nicotine  also  led  to 
deeper  inhalation  of  the  smoke.  Presentation  of  more  carcinogenic 
smoke to the alveolar portions of the lung increases the risk of adeno-
carcinoma  of  the  lung.  The  increased  adenocarcinoma  risk  produces 
a  substantively  greater  overall  risk  for  lung  cancer  among  current 
smokers  compared  with  smokers  of  cigarettes  manufactured  prior  to 
the 1960s. This increased risk may also be present for COPD. It is the 
changes in cigarette design and composition of cigarettes over the past 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3565

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3566 six decades that caused the dramatic rise in rates of adenocarcinoma 
of  the  lung  observed  over  the  past  half  century.  There  has  been  no 
increase in risk of lung cancer or adenocarcinoma of the lung over the 
same period among never smokers.

CESSATION
The process of stopping smoking is commonly a cyclical one, with the 
smoker sometimes making multiple attempts to quit and failing before 
finally being successful. Approximately 70–80% of smokers would like 
to quit smoking. More than one-half of current smokers attempted to 
quit in the last year, but only 6% quit for 6 months, and only 3% remain 
abstinent  for  2  years.  Clinician-based  smoking  interventions  should 
repeatedly encourage smokers to try to quit and to use different forms 
of  cessation  assistance  with  each  new  cessation  attempt,  rather  than 
focusing exclusively on immediate cessation at the time of the first visit.
Advice from a physician to quit smoking, particularly at the time of 
an  acute  illness,  is  a  powerful  trigger  for  cessation  attempts,  with  up 
to half of patients who are advised to quit making a cessation effort. 
Other  triggers  that  may  be  enhanced  by  timely  physician  advice  to 
quit include increases in the tax on cigarettes, media campaigns, and 
changes in rules to restrict smoking in the workplace.

PHYSICIAN INTERVENTION (TABLE 454-3)
All  patients  should  be  asked  whether  they  smoke,  how  much  they 
smoke, how long they have smoked, their past experience with quit-
ting, and whether they are currently interested in quitting. The number 
of cigarettes smoked per day and smoking within 30 min of waking are 
useful measures of the intensity of nicotine addiction. Even those who 
are not interested in quitting should be encouraged and motivated to 
quit; provided a clear, strong, and personalized message by the clinician 
that  smoking  is  an  important  health  concern;  and  offered  assistance 
if they become interested in quitting in the future. Many of those not 
currently expressing an interest in quitting may nevertheless make an 

TABLE 454-3  Clinical Practice Guidelines
Physician Actions

Ask: Systematically identify all tobacco users at every visit
Advise: Strongly urge all smokers to quit
Identify smokers willing to quit
Assist the patient in quitting
Arrange follow-up contact

Effective Pharmacologic Interventionsa

First-line therapies
  Nicotine gum (1.5)
  Nicotine patch (1.9)
  Nicotine nasal inhaler (2.3)
  Nicotine oral inhaler (2.1)
  Nicotine lozenge (2 mg: 2.0, 4 mg: 2.8)
  Bupropion (2.0)
  Varenicline (3.1)
Second-line therapies
  Clonidine (2.1)
  Nortriptyline (1.8)

Other Effective Interventionsa

Physician or other medical personnel counseling (10 min) (1.84)
Intensive group smoking cessation programs (at least 4–7 sessions of 20- to 
30-min duration lasting at least 2 and preferably 8 weeks) (1.3)
Intensive individual counseling (1.7)
Clinic-based smoking status identification system (3.1)
Telephone counseling (1.6)
Exclusive E-cigarette use (3.0)

aNumerical value following the intervention is the multiple for cessation success 
compared to no intervention.

attempt  to  quit  in  the  subsequent  year.  For  those  interested  in  quit-
ting, a quit date should be negotiated, usually not the day of the visit 
but within the next few weeks, and a follow-up contact by office staff 
around the time of the quit date should be provided. There is a rela-
tionship between the amount of assistance a patient is willing to accept 
and the success of the cessation attempt.

There  are  a  variety  of  nicotine-replacement  products,  including 
over-the-counter nicotine patches, gum, and lozenges, as well as nico-
tine nasal and oral inhalers available by prescription. These products 
can be used for up to 3–6 months, and some products are formulated 
to  allow  a  gradual  step-down  in  dosage  with  increasing  duration  of 
smoking  abstinence.  Antidepressants  such  as  bupropion  (300  mg  in 
divided doses for up to 6 months) have also been shown to be effec-
tive, as has varenicline, a partial agonist for the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor  (initial  dose  0.5  mg  daily  increasing  to  1  mg  twice  daily  at 
day 8; treatment duration up to 6 months). Combined use of nicotine- 
replacement  therapy  (NRT)  and  antidepressants  as  well  as  the  use 
of  gum  or  lozenges  for  acute  cravings  in  patients  using  patches  can 
increase  cessation  outcomes.  Pretreatment  with  antidepressants  or 
varenicline  is  recommended  for  1–2  weeks  prior  to  the  quit  date. 
Pretreatment  with  nicotine-replacement  products  is  also  useful  prior 
to  a  cessation  date.  Longer  duration  of  nicotine  replacement  as  a 
maintenance therapy for those who are unsuccessful in quitting with a 
shorter duration of use is a useful strategy. NRT is provided in differ-
ent dosages, with higher doses being recommended for more intense 
smokers. Clonidine or the tricyclic antidepressant nortriptyline should 
be  reserved  for  patients  who  have  failed  on  first-line  pharmacologic 
treatment or who are unable to use other therapies. Antidepressants are 
more effective among smokers with a history of depression symptoms.
Current  recommendations  are  to  offer  pharmacologic  treatment, 
usually  with  nicotine  patches  or  varenicline,  to  all  who  will  accept  it 
and  to  provide  counseling  and  other  support  as  a  part  of  the  cessa-
tion attempt. Cessation advice alone by a physician or his or her staff 
is  likely  to  increase  success  compared  with  no  intervention;  a  more 
comprehensive  approach  with  advice,  pharmacologic  assistance,  and 
counseling can increase cessation success nearly threefold.

For adult addicted smokers, switching to exclusive use of e-cigarettes, 
but  not  dual  use  with  combusted  cigarettes,  can  promote  combusted 
cigarette  cessation,  particularly  for  those  unlikely  to  try  to  quit  with 
other proven cessation modalities.

Incorporation  of  cessation  assistance  into  a  practice  requires  a 
change  of  the  care  delivery  infrastructure.  Simple  changes  include 
(1)  adding  questions  about  smoking  and  interest  in  cessation  on 
patient-intake questionnaires, (2) asking patients whether they smoke 
as part of the initial vital sign measurements made by office staff, (3) 
listing smoking as a problem in the medical record, and (4) automating 
follow-up contact with the patient on the quit date. These changes are 
essential to institutionalizing smoking intervention within the practice 
setting; without this institutionalization, the best intentions of physi-
cians to intervene with their patients who smoke are often lost in the 
time crush of a busy practice.

PREVENTION
Approximately  85%  of  individuals  who  become  cigarette  smokers 
initiate the behavior during adolescence. Factors that promote adoles-
cent initiation are parental or older-sibling cigarette smoking, tobacco 
advertising and promotional activities, the availability of cigarettes, and 
the social acceptability of smoking. The need for an enhanced self-image 
and to imitate adult behavior is greatest for those adolescents who have 
the least external validation of their self-worth, which may explain in 
part  the  enormous  differences  in  adolescent  smoking  prevalence  by 
socioeconomic and school performance strata.

Prevention of smoking initiation must begin early, preferably in the 
elementary  school  years.  Physicians  who  treat  adolescents  should  be 
sensitive to the prevalence of this problem even in the preteen popu-
lation. Physicians should ask all adolescents whether they have experi-
mented with nicotine or currently use nicotine products, reinforce the 
fact that most adolescents and adults do not smoke or use nicotine, and 
explain that all forms of nicotine intake are both addictive and harmful.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3566

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders  ■ FURTHER READING
Eisenberg MJ et al: Effect of e-cigarettes plus counseling vs counsel-
ing alone on smoking cessation: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
324:1844, 2020.

Hajek  P  et  al:  A  randomized  trial  of  e-cigarettes  versus  nicotine- 

replacement therapy. N Engl J Med 380:629, 2019.

Leone  FT  et  al:  Initiating  pharmacologic  treatment  in  tobacco- 
dependent  adults.  An  official  American  Thoracic  Society  Clinical 
Practice Guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 202:e5, 2020.

Sohn  HS  et  al:  Evidence  supporting  the  need  for  considering  the 
effects of smoking on drug disposition and effectiveness in medica-
tion  practices:  A  systematic  narrative  review.  Int  J  Clin  Pharmacol 
Ther 53:621, 2015.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: U.S. Department 
of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Smoking  Cessation.  A  Report  of  the 
Surgeon  General.  Atlanta,  GA,  2020.  Available  from  https://www.
hhs.gov/sites/default/files/2020-cessation-sgr-full-report.pdf. Accessed 
May 2, 2020.

U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services:  The  Health 
Consequences of Smoking: 50 Years of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon 
General.  Atlanta,  GA,  2014.  Available  from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK179276/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK179276.pdf.  Accessed 
May 2, 2020.

455 Marijuana and Marijuana  
Use Disorders
Nora D. Volkow, Aidan Hampson, Ruben Baler

Marijuana  is  the  most  widely  used  illicit  drug,  with  ~192  million 
users worldwide and with >43 million Americans having used it in 
2018.  Cannabis  strains  fall  into  those  grown  for  their  euphorigenic 
and  medical  properties  (i.e.,  for  their  Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
[THC]  content),  and  “hemp,”  which  is  grown  for  seed,  fiber,  and 
cannabidiol  (CBD).  As  of  August  2020,  Canada  and  43  U.S.  states 
have  decriminalized  and/or  “medicalized”  marijuana  or  marijuana- 
derived  products,  which  has  increased  the  availability  of  cannabis 
strains  and  derived  products.  Between  2008  and  2017,  the  average 
THC  content  in  marijuana  increased  from  8.9%  to  17.1%.  Today, 
THC concentrations in marijuana flowers found in dispensaries can 
exceed  25%,  while  oil  extracts  used  for  “vaping”  can  contain  >95% 
THC. Similar high THC concentrations are found in solid cannabis 
concentrates (e.g., wax or shatter) used for “dabbing,” which involves 
vaporization with a propane torch. Vaping and dabbing both provide 
very  high  THC  levels  with  a  rapid  absorption  and  speed  of  effect 
onset, a phenomenon that increases addiction risk. Cannabis-infused 
“edibles”  (e.g.,  gummy  bears,  cookies,  chocolates,  and  drinks)  are 
also widely available and valued for their discreet administration and 
perception of reduced harm.
 ■ PHARMACOLOGIC EFFECTS
Cannabis  is  used  recreationally  because  it  enhances  the  subjective 
sense of well-being, provides rewarding sensations, and can decrease 
stress responses. However, consumption of high THC doses can induce 
anxiety, paranoia, and panic. THC is primarily an agonist (activator) 
of G protein–coupled cannabinoid receptors (CB1R and CB2R), with 
the  euphoric  effects  mediated  through  CB1Rs  located  on  excitatory 
glutamatergic and inhibitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic inter-
neurons  and  glial  cells  in  brain  regions  that  process  stress,  mood, 
and reward. These receptors are the effectors of the endocannabinoid 
system  (ECS),  which  is  physiologically  activated  by  2-arachido-
noylglycerol  (2-AG,  a  full  agonist)  and  anandamide  (a  partial  ago-
nist).  According  to  current  understanding,  2-AG  modulates  synaptic 

3567

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
5

M
a
r
i
j
u
a
n
a
a
n
d
M
a
r
i
j
u
a
n
a
U
s
e
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

signaling by inhibiting overstimulated synapses. Endocannabinoids are 
synthesized and eliminated on demand and thus provide a temporally 
and regionally specific control signal. In contrast, the effect of THC is 
not defined by synaptic necessity but by the dose taken and pharma-
cokinetics,  and  so  it  disrupts  ECS  neuroregulation.  THC  is  a  partial 
CB1/2R agonist (it produces less signal per receptor bound) and thus 
does not inhibit glutamate release as effectively as 2-AG but can out-
compete endocannabinoids by mass action. However, GABA-releasing 
interneurons have more CB1R than they have connecting intracellular 
signaling components, and so THC and 2-AG inhibit GABA release to 
a similar degree. This may explain the subjective similarity of THC and 
GABA inhibitors such as benzodiazepines.

The  rewarding  effects  of  THC  are  thought  to  be  mediated  by 
modulation  of  glutamatergic  and  GABAergic  activity  in  the  ventral 
tegmental area in the midbrain, the nucleus that contains the dopamin-
ergic neurons projecting into the nucleus accumbens, which integrates 
glutamate  and  dopamine  signals  to  produce  reward  responses.  The  
anxiety-reducing effects of THC are mediated by its effects in the amyg-
dala, a region critical for threat perception and emotional reactivity.

 ■ CANNABIS PHARMACOKINETICS
Traditional smoking (e.g., joints and water pipes) is the main route of 
administration, but the rise of e-cigarette–derived vaping concentrates 
(vape pens) has led to a move to small dosing and more regular admin-
istration,  also  known  as  micro-dosing.  Vape  pens  use  concentrate 
liquids  and  offer  both  an  easier  dose  control  mechanism  and  more 
discreet consumption. The subjective effects of marijuana are affected 
by  dose,  route  of  administration,  (smoked,  vaped,  ingested),  and  the 
subject’s  prior  experience.  Smoked  THC  exhibits  a  bioavailability  of 
10–35%,  with  interindividual  differences  stemming  from  individual 
variations  in  the  capacity  to  hold  smoke  in  the  lungs  long  enough 
for  maximal  absorption.  The  pharmacokinetics  (PKs)  of  heated  (not 
burnt) marijuana is similar to that of the smoked flower, but no data 
are available to address the PKs of oils and solid concentrates. When 
smoked, THC is rapidly absorbed (Tmax within 5–10 min) and displays 
three  phases  of  elimination.  After  Tmax,  plasma  levels  drop  rapidly 
(alpha  half-life  [t1/2]  ~6  min)  due  to  redistribution  from  plasma  to 
lipophilic tissues such as adipose and brain. As a result, the brain con-
tinues  to  accumulate  THC  while  plasma  levels  decline,  so  subjective 
effects max out at ~20–30 min. This “hysteresis” phase continues for 
several  hours,  wherein  subjective  effects  decline  more  slowly  than 
plasma  levels.  Most  of  the  pharmacologic  effects  (i.e.,  subjective, 
cardiovascular,  and  conjunctival  reddening)  occur  during  the  initial 
20–30 min and last for 4–8 h. Finally, there is a terminal elimination 
phase, during which relatively low concentrations of THC and metab-
olites (primarily THC 11-COOH) leach out from adipose tissues with 
a t1/2 ranging from 20–35+ h. Generally, metabolite levels drop below 
100 ng/mL within 3–5 days, although considerable variation exists, and 
in frequent marijuana users, urinary metabolites can remain detectable 
for  weeks.  High  metabolite  levels  during  long  leach-out  periods  in 
frequent users typically do not indicate impairment, even when similar 
concentrations in occasional users might indicate recent marijuana use 
and substantial impairment. This difficulty in correlating THC levels 
in  biological  matrices  with  behavioral  effect  has  hampered  efforts  to 
regulate marijuana-impaired driving.

PK  studies  using  cannabis  edibles  have  demonstrated  only  6–12% 
bioavailability.  Lipophilic  cannabinoids  are  poorly  absorbed  in  the 
water/mucus-rich intestinal environment and are rapidly metabolized 
by intestinal and hepatic systems, even before they reach the systemic 
circulation.  Interestingly,  cannabinoids  consumed  with  fatty  food 
display 200–400% improved bioavailability. Fatty foods stimulate bile 
release, which emulsifies fats (and dissolved cannabinoids) to increase 
the  surface  area  for  absorption.  However,  fats  are  not  absorbed  into 
hepatic portal blood but secreted as chylomicrons into lymphatic lacte-
als, which allows dissolved cannabinoids to bypass hepatic elimination. 
Since lymphatic flow is slower than portal blood transport, the higher 
cannabinoid bioavailability and slower effect onset in the presence of 
fat  are  overdose  risks  for  the  unwary  who  may  consume  additional 
doses when failing to perceive effects as quickly as expected.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3567

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
 
3568

 ■ HARMFUL EFFECTS
The  frequency  and  severity  of  marijuana’s  adverse  effects  are  influ-
enced by the user’s age, dose, frequency of use, route of administra-
tion, underlying health status, and genetics. Especially concerning are 
the potential negative effects of marijuana on the brain during early 
life stages. Perturbation of ECS signaling during early fetal develop-
ment affects neuronal development, migration, and connectivity. The 
relevant studies, which are few and confounded by the frequent use of 
other drugs, suggested an association between maternal marijuana use 
and fetal growth restriction and preterm delivery but yielded substan-
tial evidence of lower birth weight. As a consequence, the American 
College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  recommends  discourag-
ing the use of marijuana by women who are pregnant or planning a 
pregnancy. Children and adolescents are also more vulnerable to the 
harmful  effects  of  marijuana  use,  which  increases  markedly  during 
adolescence and has been associated with lower grades, lower IQ, and 
higher risk of dropping out of school, although causality associations 
are hindered by poor control of confounding variables. Brain imaging 
studies have revealed that use of marijuana at this stage is associated 
with structural and functional brain changes often (but findings are 
not always replicated) in the form of reduced brain connectivity and 
cortical  thickness.  It  is  not  clear  whether  these  are  caused  by  early 
exposure to marijuana, a question that the Adolescent Brain and Child 
Development  study,  a  longitudinal  neuroimaging,  behavioral,  and 
genetic study of close to 12,000 children in the United States, may be 
able to answer. Finally, there is increasing evidence of cardiovascular 
adverse effects, including higher risk of myocardial infarction among 
cannabis smokers.

Cannabis Use Disorder  Repeated marijuana use, especially dur-
ing adolescence, can result in cannabis use disorder (CUD), which the 
fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders (DSM-5) defines as “a problematic pattern of cannabis use leading 
to clinically significant impairment or distress.” Use becomes problem-
atic when at least two of the criteria (which include craving, failure to 
fulfill role obligations due to recurrent use, tolerance, and withdrawal) 
have  manifested  themselves  in  a  12-month  period.  In  regular  mari-
juana  users,  abstinence  results  in  a  withdrawal  syndrome  that  mani-
fests within 1–3 days of drug discontinuation as anxiety, restlessness, 
insomnia,  depression,  and  reduced  appetite.  Many  of  the  withdrawal 
symptoms  resolve  within  approximately  2  weeks  of  discontinuation, 
but symptoms such as insomnia can persist longer and contribute to 
drug taking as a means to combat the symptoms of withdrawal. The 
risk of CUD increases with earlier age of initiation, frequency of use, 
and exposure to marijuana with high THC content.

PREVENTION  Preventing  marijuana  use  during  adolescence  reduces 
the risk for CUD and also the risk for other substance use disorders. 
There  are  several  evidence-based  prevention  strategies  focused  in 
children  and  adolescents  that  have  shown  benefits  in  decreasing 
marijuana use during adolescence or in delaying its age of initiation. 
Evidence-based  prevention  interventions  target  the  individual  (e.g., 
Keepin’  It  Real,  Life  Skills,  InShape),  the  family  (e.g.,  Brief  Strategic 
Family  Therapy,  Coping  Power  Program  [CPP],  Familia  Adelante), 
and the community (e.g., The Abecedarian Project, Midwestern Pre-
vention  Project,  Caring  School  Community).  School-based  preven-
tion programs are the most widely implemented, and the cumulative 
evidence  (from  randomized  controlled  trials  and  prospective  cohort 
and  longitudinal  studies)  indicates  that  comprehensive  interventions 
that include antidrug information with refusal skills, self-management  
skills,  and  social  skills  training  appear  to  be  the  most  effective 
approaches for long-term reduction of marijuana (and alcohol) use in 
adolescents.

TREATMENT  The  treatment  of  CUD  is  managed  by  tapering  mar-
ijuana  use  and,  in  severe  cases,  by  providing  support  to  combat 
withdrawal  symptoms.  The  treatment  of  severe  CUD  is  much  more 
challenging and requires continuous care. Although there are no U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved medications for the 
treatment of CUD, there are several behavioral interventions, including 

contingency  management  and  cognitive-behavioral  and  motivational 
enhancement therapies for which there is evidence of benefit. Several 
studies have found a broad reduction in cannabinoid receptors in the 
brain of cannabis users when compared to healthy controls, but recep-
tors  recover  rapidly,  returning  to  values  similar  to  those  of  nonusers 
after 28 days of abstinence.

Mental Illness  An area of major concern is the association between 
marijuana  use  and  increased  risk  for  mental  illnesses,  particularly 
psychosis, the risk of which increases with the frequent consumption 
of high-THC-content marijuana (>10% content). High-potency mar-
ijuana can trigger acute psychotic episodes, which is one of the main 
causes for emergency department (ED) visits associated with cannabis 
use  that  can  occur  even  upon  first  exposure.  While  most  of  these 
psychotic episodes are transient, with regular marijuana use, they can 
become chronic, and in those who are vulnerable, they might trigger 
or  exacerbate  the  presentation  of  schizophrenia.  Multiple  studies, 
although  not  all,  have  linked  adolescent  marijuana  use  with  higher 
risk and earlier onset of chronic psychosis, particularly for those using 
marijuana at higher frequency or with higher THC content. Further-
more,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  the  difference  in  the  prevalence 
of  psychosis  across  different  countries  may  be  attributable  in  part  to 
the differences in the prevalence of regular use of high-THC-content 
marijuana.  Concerns  have  also  been  raised  regarding  an  association 
between  marijuana  use  during  adolescence  and  a  higher  risk  for 
depression and suicidality, although these associations have been much 
less studied.

Accidents  Marijuana use increases the risk of injuries when driving 
under its influence. THC impairs judgment, motor coordination, and 
reaction time, all of which are necessary for safe driving. Laboratory 
studies have found a direct relationship between blood THC levels and 
impaired driving ability. Not surprisingly, marijuana use while driving 
increases  the  risk  of  fatal  and  nonfatal  accidents,  and  its  use  while 
flying aircraft may have also contributed to increased fatalities among 
pilots.  However,  roadside  surveillance  of  marijuana  intoxication  has 
been difficult to implement because circulating cannabinoid levels do 
not correlate with the degree of impairment.

Acute  and  Chronic  Toxicity  The  increased  availability  of 
high-THC-content products over the past decade has been paralleled 
by  increased  marijuana-related  ED  visits  and  hospital  admissions. 
Such  illnesses  can  be  caused  by  acute  toxicity  (inappropriate  dosing) 
and  chronic  use  syndromes.  Cannabis  edibles  represent  a  significant 
portion  of  acute  cannabis  toxicity  events.  Patients  include  children 
accidentally  consuming  sweet  treats  and  infrequent  users  such  as 
“cannabis tourists” with limited experience with consumed products. 
As described in the PK section, edibles have a slow onset of effect, and 
THC bioavailability can differ greatly when taken on an empty stomach 
or with fatty foods. For a variety of reasons, actual dose is also more 
difficult to envisage, so naïve or infrequent users are at increased risk 
of  overdosing.  Cannabis  toxicity  is  frequently  manifested  by  severe 
anxiety, tachycardia, and even acute psychoses.

Chronic high-dose cannabis use can also induce a cannabis hyper-
emesis syndrome (CHS), a growing cause for ED and hospital admis-
sions.  CHS  presents  in  the  ED  as  severe  cycles  of  nausea,  vomiting, 
and  abdominal  pain,  but  has  a  prodromal  phase  of  abdominal  pain 
and nausea that can last several years. CHS does not respond to CB1R 
agonist  medications  such  as  dronabinol  and  nabilone  that  are  FDA 
approved to treat nausea and vomiting. CHS treatment includes intra-
venous  hydration  and  proton  pump  inhibitors  for  gastritis.  Very  hot 
showers and capsaicin creams are popularly used, but efficacy data are 
limited. Droperidol reduces hospital stay times and antiemetic use, but 
only cannabis abstinence leads to long-term recovery.

The  widespread  medicalization  of  marijuana  and  its  dispensation 
outside of the pharmacy system is exposing patients to possible drug-
drug interactions (DDIs), potentially without their physician’s or phar-
macist’s knowledge. However, the long history of population exposure 
has  not  provided  much  evidence  for  cannabis  (i.e.,  THC)–related 
DDIs, except for a couple of case studies where THC (metabolized by 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3568

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders cytochrome  P450  [CYP3A,  2C9])  affected  a  patient’s  warfarin  levels. 
In contrast, the legalization of hemp-derived CBD has made it avail-
able at doses never experienced with marijuana. CBD in the Epidiolex 
formulation  has  been  FDA  approved  as  a  high-dosage  (see  below) 
add-on  drug  against  childhood  epilepsies.  Recent  reports  of  possible 
interactions  between  CBD  and  benzodiazepines,  methadone,  and 
the antirejection drug tacrolimus suggest more research is needed to 
ensure safety of CBD medications.
 ■ THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL
Currently,  no  FDA-approved  medications  contain  cannabis-derived 
THC, although synthetic THC (or dronabinol) is approved for treat-
ment  of  chemotherapy-induced  nausea  and  appetite  stimulation. 
Several  countries  have  approved  the  cannabis-derived  THC:CBD 
formulation  Sativex  for  treating  chronic  pain  and  multiple  sclerosis 
(MS)–induced  spasticity.  However,  evidence  of  Sativex  efficacy  in 
MS  is  largely  based  on  patient  reports,  with  little  electromyographic 
evidence  or  physician-scored  improvement.  Chronic  pain  is  one  of 
the  most  frequent  indications  for  which  medical  marijuana  is  used, 
although  the  effect  is  generally  modest  and  possibly  related  to  its 
mood-enhancement effects.

High-dose  Epidiolex  is  an  FDA-approved  oil  formulation  of  CBD 
for use as an add-on treatment for Dravet’s and Lennox-Gastaut syn-
dromes and tuberous sclerosis epilepsies. There is clinical evidence for 
CBD, at lower doses, as an anxiolytic for the treatment of posttraumatic 
stress, anxiety, and relapse of substance use disorders. Animal studies 
suggest that this effect of CBD may be mediated by the 5-hydroxytryp-
tamine 1A receptor.
 ■ FURTHER READING
American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists 
Committee  on  Obstetric  Practice:  Committee  Opinion  No. 
637: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol 
126:234, 2015.

Hagler  DJ  Jr  et  al:  Image  processing  and  analysis  methods  for 
the  Adolescent  Brain  Cognitive  Development  Study.  Neuroimage 
202:116091, 2019.

Monte AA et al: Acute illness associated with cannabis use, by route 
of exposure: An observational study. Ann Intern Med 170:531, 2019.
Patel  J,  Marwaha  R:  Cannabis  Use  Disorder.  StatPearls.  Treasure 

Island, FL, 2020.

Volkow  ND  et  al:  Don’t  worry,  be  happy:  Endocannabinoids  and 
cannabis at the intersection of stress and reward. Annu Rev Pharmacol 
Toxicol 57:285, 2017.

456 Opioid-Related Disorders

Thomas R. Kosten, Colin N. Haile

Opioid  analgesics  have  been  used  since  at  least  300  b.c.  Nepenthe 
(Greek  for  “free  from  sorrow”)  helped  the  hero  of  the  Odyssey,  but 
widespread  opium  smoking  in  China  and  the  Near  East  has  caused 
harm  for  centuries.  Since  the  first  chemical  isolation  of  opium  and 
codeine  200  years  ago,  a  wide  range  of  synthetic  opioids  have  been 
developed, and opioid receptors were cloned in the 1990s. Two of the 
most important adverse effects of all these agents are the development 
of opioid use disorder and overdose. Prescription opioids are primarily 
used for pain management, but due to ease of availability, individuals 
procure and misuse these drugs with dire consequences. In 2015, for 
example,  3.8  million  individuals  in  the  United  States  were  current 
misusers  of  pain  relievers.  More  concerning,  during  2015,  >20,000 
overdose deaths involved opioids with an additional 12,990 overdose 
deaths  related  to  heroin  alone.  These  numbers  continue  to  increase 

3569

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
6

O
p
i
o
i
d
-
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

and have accelerated due to mixing high-potency fentanyl derivatives 
with heroin. The accelerating death rates are partially because reversal 
of fentanyl overdoses can require severalfold larger doses of naloxone 
than  the  doses  in  the  intranasal  devices  used  for  nonmedical  street 
resuscitations.  An  additional  spike  in  fentanyl-associated  deaths  has 
also  been  associated  with  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  According  to 
the most recent World Drug Report, opioid misuse causes the great-
est  global  burden  of  morbidity  and  mortality;  disease  transmission; 
increased health care, crime, and law enforcement costs; and less tan-
gible costs of family distress and lost productivity.

The terms dependence and addiction are no longer used to describe 
substance  use  disorders.  Opioid-related  disorders  encompass  opioid 
use  disorder,  opioid  intoxication,  and  opioid  withdrawal.  The  diag-
nosis of opioid use disorder, as defined in the Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), requires the 
repeated use of the opiate while producing problems in two or more 
areas in a 12-month period. The areas include tolerance, withdrawal, 
use  of  greater  amounts  of  opioids  than  intended,  craving,  and  use 
despite adverse consequences. This new definition of opioid use dis-
order, reducing the criteria for diagnosis from three problem areas to 
two, is not expected to change the rates of these disorders because most 
individuals using these substances meet more than three criteria.

A  striking  recent  aspect  of  illicit  opioid  use  has  been  its  marked 
increase as the gateway to illicit drugs in the United States. Since 2007, 
prescription  opiates  have  surpassed  marijuana  as  the  most  common 
illicit drug that adolescents initially use, although overall rates of opioid 
use are far lower than marijuana. The most commonly used opioids are 
diverted  prescriptions  for  oxycodone  and  hydrocodone,  followed  by 
heroin and morphine, and—among health professionals—meperidine 
and fentanyl. Heroin is metabolized into 6-monoacetylmorphine and 
morphine  thus  acting  as  a  prodrug  that  more  readily  penetrates  the 
brain  and  is  converted  rapidly  to  morphine  in  the  body.  Two  opioid 
maintenance  treatment  agents—methadone  and  buprenorphine—are 
also  misused,  but  at  substantially  lower  rates,  and  the  partial  opioid 
agonists such as butorphanol, tramadol, and pentazocine are misused 
even less frequently. Because the chemistry and general pharmacology 
of these agents are covered in major pharmacology texts, this chapter 
focuses  on  the  neurobiology  and  pharmacology  relevant  to  opioid 
use disorder and its treatments. Although the neurobiology of misuse 
involves all four of the known opioid receptors—mu, kappa, delta, and 
nociceptin/orphanin—this discussion focuses on the mu receptor tar-
geted by most of the clinically used opioids.
 ■ NEUROBIOLOGY
The neurobiology of opioids and their effects not only include opioid 
receptors,  but  also  downstream  intracellular  messenger  systems  and 
ion channels that the receptors regulate. The different functional activ-
ities of opioid receptors are summarized in Table 456-1. Abuse liability 
of  opioids  is  primarily  associated  with  the  mu  receptor.  All  opioid 
receptors  are  G  protein–linked  and  coupled  to  the  cyclic  adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) second messenger system and to G protein–
coupled,  inwardly  rectifying  potassium  channels  (GIRKs).  Opioids 

TABLE 456-1  Actions of Opioid Receptors
RECEPTOR TYPE
Mu (μ) (e.g., morphine, 
buprenorphine)

ACTIONS
Analgesia, reinforcement euphoria, cough and 
appetite suppression, decreased respirations, 
decreased GI motility, sedation, hormone 
changes, dopamine and acetylcholine release
Dysphoria, decreased GI motility, decreased 
appetite, decreased respiration, psychotic 
symptoms, sedation, diuresis, analgesia
Analgesia, euphoria, physical dependence, 
hormone changes, appetite suppression, 
dopamine release
Analgesia, appetite, anxiety, tolerance to 
opioids, hypotension, decreased GI motility, 
5-HT and NE release

Kappa (κ) (e.g., butorphanol)

Delta (δ) (e.g., etorphine)

Nociceptin/orphanin (e.g., 
buprenorphine)

Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; 5-HT, serotonin; NE, norepinephrine.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3569

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3570

activate  GIRKs,  increasing  permeability  to  potassium  ions  to  cause 
hyperpolarization, which inhibits the production of action potentials. 
Thus,  opioids  inhibit  the  activity  of  diverse  and  widely  distributed 
neuronal types. The major effects of opioids, such as analgesia, seda-
tion, and drug reinforcement, are produced through this inhibition of 
neurons that belong to specific brain pathways.

Many opioid actions are related to the specific neuroanatomic loca-
tions of mu receptors. Reinforcing and euphoric effects of opioids relate 
primarily to activation of the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway from 
the  ventral  tegmental  area  (VTA)  to  the  nucleus  accumbens  (NAc), 
where  opioids  increase  synaptic  levels  of  dopamine.  This  increase  is 
due  to  inhibition  of  GABAergic  neurons  that  inhibit  the  activity  of 
neurons  within  both  the  VTA  and  the  NAc.  The  positive  subjective 
effects  of  opioid  drugs  also  include  mu  receptor  desensitization  and 
internalization, potentially related to stimulation of β-arrestin signal-
ing pathways. However, the “high” only occurs when the rate of change 
in dopamine is fast. Large, rapidly administered doses of opioids block 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibition and produce a burst of VTA 
dopamine neuron activity that is associated with a “high” in commonly 
misused  substances.  Therefore,  routes  of  administration  that  slowly 
increase  opioid  blood  and  brain  levels,  such  as  oral  and  transdermal 
routes, are effective for analgesia and sedation but do not produce an 
opioid “high” that follows smoking and intravenous routes. Other acute 
effects  such  as  analgesia  and  respiratory  depression  involve  opioid 
receptors located in other brain areas such as the locus coeruleus (LC).
Opioid tolerance and withdrawal are chronic effects related to the 
cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA)-cAMP response-element binding pro-
tein (CREB) intracellular cascade (Fig. 456-1). These effects are also 
reflective  of  genetic  risk  factors  for  developing  opioid  use  disorder, 
with estimates of up to 50% of the risk due to polygenic inheritance. 
Specific  functional  polymorphisms  in  the  mu  opiate  receptor  gene 
appear to be associated with this risk for opioid misuse, including one 
producing a threefold increase in this receptor’s affinity for opiates and 
the  endogenous  ligand  β-endorphin.  Epigenetic  methylation  changes 
also occur on DNA in the region of the mu receptor gene in individuals 
with opioid use disorder, inhibiting gene transcription. This molecular 
cascade links acute intoxication and sedation to opioid tolerance and 
withdrawal  mediated  by  the  LC.  Noradrenergic  (NE)  neurons  in  the 
LC mediate activation of the cortical hemispheres. When large opioid 
doses  saturate  and  activate  all  of  its  mu  receptors,  action  potentials 
cease. When this direct inhibitory effect is sustained over weeks and 
months of opioid use, a secondary set of adaptive changes occur that 
lead to tolerance and withdrawal symptoms (Fig. 456-1). Withdrawal 
symptoms reflect, in part, overactivity of NE neurons in the LC. This 

molecular model of NE neuronal activation during withdrawal has had 
important  treatment  implications,  such  as  the  use  of  the  α2-agonist 
clonidine to treat opioid withdrawal. Other contributors to withdrawal 
include deficits within the dopamine reward system.

 ■ PHARMACOLOGY
Tolerance  and  withdrawal  commonly  occur  with  chronic  daily  use, 
developing as quickly as 6–8 weeks depending on dose concentration 
and dosing frequency. Tolerance appears to be primarily a pharmaco-
dynamic  rather  than  pharmacokinetic  effect,  with  relatively  limited 
induction of cytochrome P450 or other liver enzymes. The metabolism 
of opioids occurs in the liver, primarily through the cytochrome P450 
systems of 2D6 and 3A4. They then are conjugated to glucuronic acid 
and excreted in small amounts in feces. The plasma half-lives generally 
range  from  2.5  to  3  h  for  morphine  and  >22  h  for  methadone.  The 
shortest  half-lives  of  several  minutes  are  for  fentanyl-related  opioids, 
and  the  longest  are  for  buprenorphine  and  its  active  metabolites, 
which can block opioid withdrawal for up to 3 days after a single dose. 
Tolerance to opioids leads to the need for increasing amounts of drugs 
to sustain the desired euphoric effects—as well as to avoid the discom-
fort  of  withdrawal.  This  combination  has  the  expected  consequence 
of  strongly  reinforcing  misuse  once  it  has  started.  Methadone  taken 
chronically  at  maintenance  doses  is  stored  in  the  liver,  which  may 
reduce the occurrence of withdrawal between daily doses. The role of 
endogenous opioid peptides in tolerance and withdrawal is uncertain.
The clinical features of opioid misuse are tied to route of adminis-
tration  and  rapidity  of  the  drug  reaching  the  brain.  Intravenous  and 
smoked administration rapidly produces high drug concentrations in 
the  brain.  This  produces  a  “rush,”  followed  by  euphoria,  a  feeling  of 
tranquility, and sleepiness (“the nod”). Heroin produces effects that last 
3–5 h, and several doses a day are required to forestall manifestations 
of withdrawal in chronic users. Symptoms of opioid withdrawal begin 
8–10 h after the last dose; lacrimation, rhinorrhea, yawning, and sweat-
ing appear first. Restless sleep followed by weakness, chills, gooseflesh 
(“cold turkey”), nausea and vomiting, muscle aches, involuntary move-
ments (“kicking the habit”), hyperpnea, hyperthermia, and hyperten-
sion occur in later stages of the withdrawal syndrome. The acute course 
of  withdrawal  may  last  7–10  days.  A  secondary  phase  of  protracted 
abstinence lasts for 26–30 weeks and is characterized by hypotension, 
bradycardia, hypothermia, mydriasis, and decreased responsiveness of 
the respiratory center to carbon dioxide.

Besides  the  brain  effects  of  opioids  on  sedation  and  euphoria  and 
the combined brain and peripheral nervous system effects on analge-
sia, a wide range of other organs can be affected. The release of several 

β-endorphin
enkephalins

K+

Morphine

H

N CH3

K+

HO

O

H

HO

µ

AC

Gi/o

Na+

PKA

Nucleus

cAMP

BDNF

TH

CREB

µ

AC

Gi/o

PKA

cAMP

Na+

Modified gene
expression,
neuroplasticity,
genetic effects

Nucleus

CREB

BDNF

TH

A

B

FIGURE  456-1  Normal  mu-receptor  activation  by  endogenous  opioids  inhibits  the  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate  (cAMP)-protein  kinase  A  (PKA)-cAMP  response-
element  binding  protein  (CREB)  cascade  in  noradrenergic  neurons  within  the  locus  coeruleus  (A)  through  inhibitory  Gi/o  protein  influence  on  adenylyl  cyclase  (AC). 
Similarly, acute exposure to opioids (e.g., morphine) inhibits this system, whereas chronic exposure to opiates (B) leads to upregulation of the cAMP pathway in an attempt 
to  oppose  opioid-induced  inhibitory  influence.  Upregulation  of  this  system  is  involved  in  opioid  tolerance,  and  when  the  opioid  is  removed,  unopposed  noradrenergic 
neurotransmission is involved in opioid withdrawal. Upregulated PKA phosphorylates CREB, initiating the expression of various genes such as tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF is implicated in long-term neuroplastic changes in response to chronic opioids.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3570

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3571

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
6

O
p
i
o
i
d
-
R
e
l
a
t
e
d
D
i
s
o
r
d
e
r
s

pituitary  hormones  is  inhibited,  including  corticotropin-releasing 
factor (CRF) and luteinizing hormone, which reduces levels of corti-
sol and sex hormones and can lead to impaired stress responses and 
reduced libido. An increase in prolactin also contributes to the reduced 
sex  drive  in  males.  Two  other  hormones  affected  are  thyrotropin, 
which is reduced, and growth hormone, which is increased. Respira-
tory depression results from opioid-induced insensitivity of brainstem 
neurons to increases in carbon dioxide, and in patients with pulmonary 
disease, this can result in clinically significant complications. In over-
doses, aspiration pneumonia is common due to loss of the gag reflex. 
Opioids  reduce  gut  motility,  which  is  helpful  for  treating  diarrhea, 
but  can  lead  to  nausea,  constipation,  and  anorexia  with  weight  loss. 
Deaths  occurred  in  early  methadone  maintenance  programs  due  to 
severe constipation and toxic megacolon. Opioids such as methadone 
may prolong QT intervals and lead to sudden death in some patients. 
Orthostatic  hypotension  may  occur  due  to  histamine  release  and 
peripheral  blood  vessel  dilation,  which  is  an  opioid  effect  usefully 
applied  to  managing  acute  myocardial  infarction.  During  opioid 
maintenance, interactions with other medications are of concern; these 
include  inducers  of  the  cytochrome  P450  system  (usually  CYP3A4) 
such as rifampin and carbamazepine.

Heroin users in particular tend to use opioids intravenously and are 
likely to be polydrug users, also using alcohol, sedatives, cannabinoids, 
and stimulants. None of these other drugs are substitutes for opioids, 
but they have desired additive effects. Therefore, one needs to be sure 
that the person undergoing a withdrawal reaction is not also withdraw-
ing  from  alcohol  or  sedatives,  which  might  be  more  dangerous  and 
more difficult to manage.

Intravenous  opioid  use  carries  with  it  the  risk  of  serious  compli-
cations.  The  common  sharing  of  hypodermic  syringes  can  lead  to 
infections  with  hepatitis  B  and  HIV/AIDS,  among  others.  Bacterial 
infections can lead to septic complications such as meningitis, osteo-
myelitis, and abscesses in various organs. Off-target effects of opioids 
synthesized in illicit drug labs can lead to serious toxicity. For example, 
attempts  to  illicitly  manufacture  meperidine  in  the  1980s  resulted  in 
the production of a highly specific neurotoxin, MPTP, which produced 
parkinsonism in users (Chap. 435).

Lethal  overdose  is  a  relatively  common  complication  of  opioid 
use  disorder.  Rapid  recognition  and  treatment  with  naloxone,  a 
highly specific reversal agent that is relatively free of complications, 
are essential. The diagnosis is based on recognition of characteristic 
signs and symptoms, including shallow and slow respirations, pupil-
lary  miosis  (mydriasis  does  not  occur  until  significant  brain  anoxia 
supervenes),  bradycardia,  hypothermia,  and  stupor  or  coma.  Blood 
or  urine  toxicology  studies  can  confirm  a  suspected  diagnosis,  but 
immediate management must be based on clinical criteria. If nalox-
one is not administered, progression to respiratory and cardiovascu-
lar collapse leading to death occurs. At autopsy, cerebral edema and 
sometimes  frothy  pulmonary  edema  are  generally  found.  Opioids 
generally  do  not  produce  seizures  except  for  unusual  cases  of  poly-
drug use with the opioid meperidine, with high doses of tramadol, or 
in the newborn.

TREATMENT
Opioid Overdose

Beyond  the  acute  treatment  of  opioid  overdose  with  naloxone, 
clinicians have two general treatment options: opioid maintenance 
or detoxification. Opioid agonist and partial agonist medications 
are  commonly  used  for  both  maintenance  and  detoxification 
purposes.  α2-Adrenergic  agonists  are  primarily  used  for  detox-
ification.  Antagonists  are  used  to  accelerate  detoxification  and 
then  continued  after  detoxification  to  prevent  relapse.  Only  the 
residential medication-free programs have had success that comes 
close to matching that of the medication-based programs. Success 
of  the  various  treatment  approaches  is  assessed  as  retention  in 
treatment  and  reduced  opioid  and  other  drug  use;  secondary 

TABLE 456-2  Management of Opioid Overdose
Establish airway. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be necessary.
Naloxone 0.4–2.0 mg (IV, IM, or endotracheal tube). Onset of action with IV is 
~1–2 min.
Repeat doses of naloxone if needed to restore adequate respiration or a 
continuous infusion of naloxone can be used.
One-half to two-thirds of the initial naloxone dose that reversed the respiratory 
depression is administered on an hourly basis (note: naloxone dosing is not 
necessary if the patient has been intubated).

outcomes,  such  as  reduced  HIV  risk  behaviors,  crime,  psychiat-
ric  symptoms,  and  medical  comorbidity,  also  indicate  successful 
treatment.

Stopping  opioid  use  is  much  easier  than  preventing  relapse. 
Long-term relapse prevention for individuals with opioid use disor-
der requires combined pharmacologic and psychosocial approaches. 
Chronic users tend to prefer pharmacologic approaches; those with 
shorter  histories  of  drug  use  are  more  amenable  to  detoxification 
and psychosocial interventions. 

OPIOID OVERDOSE
Managing  overdose  requires  naloxone  and  support  of  vital  func-
tions, including intubation if needed (Table 456-2). If the overdose 
is due to buprenorphine, then naloxone might be required at total 
doses  of  10  mg  or  greater,  but  primary  buprenorphine  overdose 
is nearly impossible because this agent is a partial opioid agonist, 
meaning that as the dose of buprenorphine is increased it has greater 
opioid antagonist than agonist activity. Thus, a 0.2-mg buprenorphine 
dose leads to analgesia and sedation, while a hundred times greater 
20-mg  dose  produces  profound  opioid  antagonism,  precipitating 
opioid  withdrawal  in  a  person  who  had  opioid  use  disorder  on 
morphine or methadone. It is important to recognize that the goal is 
to reverse the respiratory depression and not to administer so much 
naloxone  that  it  precipitates  opiate  withdrawal.  Because  naloxone 
only lasts a few hours and most opioids last considerably longer, an 
IV naloxone drip with close monitoring is frequently employed to 
provide  a  continuous  level  of  antagonism  for  24–72  h  depending 
on the opioid used in the overdose (e.g., morphine vs methadone). 
Whenever naloxone has only a limited effect, other sedative drugs 
that  produce  significant  overdoses  must  be  considered.  The  most 
common are benzodiazepines, which have produced overdoses and 
deaths in combination with buprenorphine. A specific antagonist 
for benzodiazepines—flumazenil at 0.2 mg/min—can be given to 
a maximum of 3 g/h, but it may precipitate seizures and increase 
intracranial  pressure.  Like  naloxone,  administration  for  a  pro-
longed  period  is  usually  required  because  most  benzodiazepines 
remain active for considerably longer than flumazenil. Support of 
vital functions may include oxygen and positive-pressure breath-
ing,  IV  fluids,  pressor  agents  for  hypotension,  and  cardiac  mon-
itoring  to  detect  QT  prolongation,  which  might  require  specific 
treatment.  Activated  charcoal  and  gastric  lavage  may  be  helpful 
for oral ingestions, but intubation will be needed if the patient is 
stuporous. 
OPIOID WITHDRAWAL
The principles of detoxification are the same for all drugs: to sub-
stitute  a  longer-acting,  orally  active,  pharmacologically  equivalent 
medication  for  the  substance  being  used,  stabilize  the  patient  on 
that medication, and then gradually withdraw the substituted med-
ication.  Methadone  and  buprenorphine  are  the  two  medications 
used  to  treat  opioid  use  disorder.  Clonidine,  a  centrally  acting 
sympatholytic  agent,  has  also  been  used  for  detoxification  in  the 
United  States.  By  reducing  central  sympathetic  outflow,  clonidine 
mitigates many of the signs of sympathetic overactivity but typically 
requires augmentation with other agents. Clonidine has no narcotic 
action and is not addictive. Lofexidine, a clonidine analogue with 
less hypotensive effect, is not yet approved in the United States. 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3571

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
3572 Methadone for Detoxification  Dose-tapering regimens for detox-
ification  using  methadone  range  from  2–3  weeks  to  as  long  as 
180 days, but this approach is controversial given the relative effec-
tiveness  of  methadone  maintenance  and  the  low  success  rates  of 
detoxification. Unfortunately, the vast majority of patients tend to 
relapse to heroin or other opioids during or after the detoxification 
period, indicative of the chronic and relapsing nature of opioid use 
disorder. 

Buprenorphine for Detoxification  Buprenorphine does not appear 
to lead to better outcomes than methadone but is superior to cloni-
dine in reducing symptoms of withdrawal, in retaining patients in a 
withdrawal protocol, and in completing treatment. 
`2-Adrenergic  Agonists  for  Detoxification  Several  α2-adrenergic 
agonists  have  relieved  opioid  withdrawal  by  suppressing  brain  NE 
hyperactivity. Clonidine relieves some signs and symptoms of opi-
oid withdrawal such as lacrimation, rhinorrhea, muscle pain, joint 
pain, restlessness, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Related agents are 
lofexidine,  guanfacine,  and  guanabenz  acetate.  Lofexidine  can  be 
dosed up to ~2 mg/d and appears to be associated with fewer adverse 
effects.  Clonidine  or  lofexidine  is  typically  administered  orally,  in 
three or four doses per day, with dizziness, sedation, lethargy, and 
dry mouth as the primary adverse side effects. Outpatient-managed 
withdrawal  will  require  close  follow-up,  often  with  naltrexone 
maintenance to prevent relapse. 

Rapid  and  Ultrarapid  Opioid  Detoxification  The  opioid  antago-
nist  naltrexone  typically  combined  with  an  α2-adrenergic  agonist 
has  been  purported  to  shorten  the  duration  of  withdrawal  with-
out  significantly  increasing  patient  discomfort.  Completion  rates 
using  naltrexone  and  clonidine  range  from  75  to  81%  compared 
to 40 to 65% for methadone or clonidine alone. Ultrarapid opioid 
detoxification  is  an  extension  of  this  approach  using  anesthetics 
but is highly controversial due to the medical risks and mortality 
associated with it. 

Opioid  Agonist  Medications  For  Maintenance  Methadone 
maintenance substitutes a once-daily oral opioid dose for three to four 
times daily heroin. Methadone saturates the opioid receptors and, by 
inducing  a  high  level  of  opioid  tolerance,  blocks  the  euphoria  from 
additional opioids. Buprenorphine, a partial opioid agonist, also can be 
given once daily at sublingual doses of 4–32 mg daily, and in contrast 
to methadone, it can be given in an office-based primary care setting. 

METHADONE MAINTENANCE  Methadone’s slow onset of action when 
taken  orally,  long  elimination  half-life  (24–36  h),  and  production  of 
cross-tolerance at doses from 80 to 150 mg are the basis for its efficacy 
in treatment retention and reductions in IV drug use, criminal activity, 
and HIV risk behaviors and mortality. Methadone can prolong the QT 
interval  at  rates  as  high  as  16%  above  the  rates  in  non-methadone-
maintained, drug-injecting patients, but it has been used safely in the 
treatment of opioid use disorder for 40 years. 

BUPRENORPHINE  MAINTENANCE  While  France  and  Australia  have 
had  sublingual  buprenorphine  maintenance  since  1996,  it  was  first 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2002 as 
a Schedule III drug for managing opioid use disorder. Unlike the full 
agonist methadone, buprenorphine is a partial agonist of mu-opioid 
receptors with a slow onset and long duration of action. Its partial ago-
nism reduces the risk of unintentional overdose but limits its efficacy 
to patients who need the equivalent of only 60–70 mg of methadone, 
and many patients in methadone maintenance require higher doses of 
up to 150 mg daily. Buprenorphine is combined with naloxone at a 4:1 
ratio in order to reduce its abuse liability. Because of pediatric expo-
sures and diversion of buprenorphine to illicit use, a new formulation, 
using mucosal films rather than sublingual pills that were crushed and 
snorted,  is  now  marketed.  A  subcutaneous  buprenorphine  implant 

that lasts up to 6 months has FDA approval as a formulation to prevent 
pediatric exposures and illicit diversion and to enhance compliance.

In the United States, the ability of primary care physicians to pre-
scribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder represents an important 
opportunity  to  improve  access  and  quality  of  treatment  as  well  as 
reduce  social  harm.  Europe,  Asia,  and  Australia  have  found  reduced 
opioid-related  deaths  and  drug-injection-related  medical  morbidity 
with  buprenorphine  available  in  primary  care.  Retention  in  office-
based buprenorphine treatment has been as high as 70% at 6-month 
follow-ups. 

Opioid Antagonist Medications  The rationale for using narcotic 
antagonist therapy is that blocking the action of self-administered opi-
oids should eventually extinguish the habit, but this therapy is poorly 
accepted by patients. Naltrexone, a long-acting orally active pure opi-
oid antagonist, can be given three times a week at doses of 100–150 mg. 
Because  it  is  an  antagonist,  the  patient  must  first  be  detoxified  from 
opioids  before  starting  naltrexone.  It  is  safe  even  when  taken  chron-
ically for years, is associated with few side effects (headache, nausea, 
abdominal pain), and can be given to patients infected with hepatitis 
B  or  C  without  producing  hepatotoxicity.  However,  most  providers 
refrain  from  prescribing  naltrexone  if  liver  function  tests  are  three 
times  above  normal  levels.  Naltrexone  maintenance  combined  with 
psychosocial therapy is effective in reducing heroin use, but medication 
adherence is low. Depot injection formulations lasting up to 4 weeks 
markedly improve adherence, retention, and drug use. Subcutaneous 
naltrexone  implants  in  Russia,  China,  and  Australia  have  doubled 
treatment retention and reduced relapse to half that of oral naltrexone. 
In  the  United  States,  a  depot  naltrexone  formulation  is  available  for 
monthly use and maintains blood levels equivalent to 25 mg of daily 
oral use. 

Medication-Free  Treatment  Most  opioid  users  enter  medica-
tion-free treatments in inpatient, residential, or outpatient settings, but 
1-  to  5-year  outcomes  are  very  poor  compared  to  pharmacotherapy 
except  for  residential  settings  lasting  6–18  months.  The  residential 
programs  require  full  immersion  in  a  regimented  system  with  pro-
gressively increasing levels of independence and responsibility within 
a  controlled  community  of  fellow  drug  users.  These  medication-free 
programs,  as  well  as  the  pharmacotherapy  programs,  also  include 
counseling and behavioral treatments designed to teach interpersonal 
and cognitive skills for coping with stress and for avoiding situations 
leading to easy access to drugs or to craving. Relapse is prevented by 
having  the  individual  very  gradually  reintroduced  to  greater  respon-
sibilities  and  to  the  working  environment  outside  of  the  protected 
therapeutic community.
 ■ PREVENTION
Preventing the development of opioid use disorder represents a criti-
cally important challenge for physicians. Opioid prescriptions are the 
most  common  source  of  drugs  accessed  by  adolescents  who  begin  a 
pattern of illicit drug use. The major sources of these drugs are family 
members, not drug dealers or the Internet. Pain management involves 
providing sufficient opioids to relieve the pain over as short a time as 
the pain warrants (Chap. 13). The patient then needs to dispose of any 
remaining opioids, not save them in the medicine cabinet, because this 
behavior leads to diversion by adolescents. Finally, physicians should 
never prescribe opioids for themselves.
 ■ FURTHER READING
Blanco C, Volkow ND: Management of opioid use disorder in the 
USA: Present status and future directions. Lancet 393:1760, 2019.
Griesler PC et al: Medical use and misuse of prescription opioids in 
the  US  adult  population:  2016-2017.  Am  J  Public  Health  109:1258, 
2019.

Wakeman  SE  et  al:  Comparative  effectiveness  of  different  treatment 
pathways  for  opioid  use  disorder.  JAMA  Netw  Open  3:e1920622, 
2020.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3572

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 457

Cocaine, Other 
Psychostimulants, and 
Hallucinogens
Karran A. Phillips, Wilson M. Compton

The  use  of  cocaine,  methamphetamine,  other  psychostimulants,  and 
hallucinogens reflects a complex interaction between the pharmacol-
ogy of the drug, the personality and expectations of the user, and the 
environmental  context  in  which  the  drug  is  used.  These  substances 
cause  significant  harm,  although  they  are  less  commonly  used  than 
other  addictive  substances  such  as  alcohol  (Chap.  453),  nicotine 
(Chap. 454), cannabis (Chap. 455), and opioids (Chap. 456). It is also 
important  to  recognize  that  polydrug  use,  involving  the  concurrent 
use of several drugs with different pharmacologic effects, is common. 
Sometimes one drug is used to enhance the effects of another, as with 
the  combined  use  of  cocaine  and  nicotine,  or  cocaine  and  heroin  in 
methadone-treated patients. Some forms of polydrug use, such as the 
combined  use  of  intravenous  (IV)  heroin  and  cocaine,  are  especially 
dangerous  and  account  for  many  hospital  emergency  department 
visits.  Cocaine  and  psychostimulant  use  (especially  chronic  patterns 
of use) may cause adverse health consequences and exacerbate preex-
isting disorders such as hypertension and cardiac disease. In addition, 
the combined use of two or more drugs may accentuate medical com-
plications associated with use of one drug. Chronic use is often asso-
ciated  with  immune  system  dysfunction  and  increased  vulnerability 
to infections, including risk for HIV infection. The concurrent use of 
cocaine and opiates (“speedball”) is frequently associated with needle 
sharing by people using drugs intravenously. People who use IV drugs 
represent  the  largest  single  group  of  individuals  with  HIV  infection 
in several major metropolitan areas in the United States as well as in 
many parts of Europe and Asia. Furthermore, several outbreaks of HIV 
in the United States since 2015 in rural and suburban areas have been 
attributed to clusters of injection drug use.

Psychostimulants and hallucinogens have been used for centuries to 
induce euphoria and alter consciousness. Hallucinogens have become 
popular  recently,  and  new  drugs  are  continually  being  developed. 
This  chapter  describes  the  subjective  and  adverse  medical  effects 
of  cocaine,  other  psychostimulants  including  methamphetamine, 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine  (MDMA),  and  cathinones; 
hallucinogens  such  as  phencyclidine  (PCP),  d-lysergic  acid  diethyl-
amide (LSD), and Salvia divinorum; and emerging drugs.

PSYCHOSTIMULANTS
Psychostimulants  include  cocaine  and  methamphetamine,  as  well  as 
drugs with stimulant-like properties such as MDMA and cathinones. 
In  addition,  prescribed  psychostimulants  such  as  methylphenidate, 
dextroamphetamine, and amphetamine are considered here.
 ■ COCAINE
Cocaine  is  a  powerful  psychostimulant  drug  made  from  the  cocoa 
plant. It has local anesthetic, vasoconstrictor, and stimulant properties. 
Cocaine is a Schedule II drug, which means that it has high potential 
for abuse but can be administered by a physician for legitimate medical 
uses, such as local anesthesia for some eye, ear, and throat surgeries.

Pharmacology  Cocaine comes in a variety of forms, the most-used 
being the hydrochloride salt, sulfate, and a base. The salt is an acidic, 
water-soluble powder with a high melting point, used by snorting or 
sniffing intranasally or by dissolving it in water and injecting it. When 
used intranasally the bioavailability of cocaine is about 60%. Cocaine 
sulfate (“paste”) has a melting point of almost 200°C, so it has limited 
use,  but  is  sometimes  smoked  with  tobacco.  The  base  form  can  be 
freebase or crystallized as crack. Cocaine freebase is made by adding 
a  strong  base  to  an  aqueous  solution  of  cocaine  and  extracting  the 
alkaline freebase precipitate. It has a melting point of 98°C and can be 

3573

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
7

C
o
c
a
i
n
e
,

O
t
h
e
r
P
s
y
c
h
o
s
t
i

m
u
l
a
n
t
s
,
a
n
d
H
a
l
l
u
c
i
n
o
g
e
n
s

vaporized and inhaled. Freebase cocaine can also be crystallized and 
sold as crack or rock, which is also smoked or inhaled. Street dealers 
often dilute (or “cut”) cocaine with nonpsychoactive substances such as 
cornstarch, talcum powder, flour, or baking soda, or adulterate it with 
other substances with similar effects (like procaine or amphetamine) 
to  increase  their  profits.  A  recent  concern  has  been  the  adulteration 
of cocaine (and other psychostimulants) with fentanyl-related opioids, 
resulting in overdose deaths due to opioid effects or polydrug use.

Given  the  extensive  pulmonary  vasculature,  smoked  or  vaporized 
cocaine  reaches  the  brain  very  quickly,  similar  in  speed  of  onset  to 
injected  cocaine.  The  result  is  a  rapid,  intense,  transient  high,  which 
enhances its addictive potential. Cocaine binds to the dopamine (DA) 
transporter  and  blocks  DA  reuptake,  which  increases  synaptic  levels 
of  the  monoamine  neurotransmitters  DA,  norepinephrine  (NE),  and 
serotonin  (5HT),  in  both  the  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  and  the 
peripheral nervous system (PNS). Use of cocaine, like other drugs of 
abuse,  induces  long-term  changes  in  the  brain.  Animal  studies  have 
shown adaptations in neurons that release the excitatory neurotrans-
mitter glutamate after cocaine exposure.

Epidemiology  According  to  the  National  Survey  on  Drug  Use 
and  Health  (NSDUH),  in  2019  an  estimated  5.5  million  people  aged  
12 years or older (2.0% of the population) were past-year consumers of 
cocaine, including about 778,000 (0.3% of the population) consumers 
of crack. Among those, 671,000 used cocaine for the first time (1800 
cocaine initiates/day) including 59,000 adolescents aged 12–17 years. 
About 1 million people aged 12 years or older (0.4% of the population) 
in  2019  had  a  cocaine  use  disorder,  but  fewer  than  1  in  5  received 
treatment, in the past year. According to the CDC National Center for 
Health  Statistics,  drug  overdose  deaths  involving  cocaine  rose  from 
3822  in  1999  to  15,833  in  2019,  with  continued  increases  projected 
in 2020. Cocaine was involved in more than 1 in 5 overdose deaths in 
2019. The number of deaths in combination with any opioid has been 
increasing steadily since 2014 and is mainly driven by the involvement 
of synthetic opioids including fentanyl and fentanyl analogs.

 ■ METHAMPHETAMINE
Methamphetamine is a psychostimulant drug usually used as a white, 
bitter-tasting powder or a pill. Crystal methamphetamine is a form of 
the drug that looks like glass fragments or shiny, bluish-white rocks. 
It can be inhaled/smoked, swallowed (pill), snorted, or injected (after 
being dissolved in water or alcohol).

Pharmacology  When  smoked,  methamphetamine  exhibits  90.3% 
bioavailability, compared to 67.2% for oral ingestion. Methamphetamine 
exists in two stereoisomers, the l- and d-forms. d-Methamphetamine, 
or the dextrorotatory enantiomer, is a more powerful psychostimulant, 
with  3–5  times  the  CNS  activity  as  compared  with  l-methamphet-
amine.  Methamphetamine  is  a  cationic  lipophilic  molecule,  which 
stimulates  the  release,  and  partially  blocks  the  reuptake,  of  newly 
synthesized  catecholamines  in  the  CNS.  Methamphetamine  has  a 
similar structure to the DA, NE, 5HT, and vesicular monoamine trans-
porters  and  reverses  their  endogenous  function,  resulting  in  release 
of  monoamines  from  storage  vesicles  into  the  synapse.  Methamphet-
amine  also  attenuates  the  metabolism  of  monoamines  by  inhibiting 
monoamine oxidase.

Methamphetamine is more potent than amphetamine, resulting in 
much  higher  concentrations  of  synaptic  DA  and  more  toxic  effects 
on nerve terminals. Outside the medical context, methamphetamine’s 
pharmacokinetics and low cost often result in a chronic and continu-
ous, high-dose self-administered use pattern.

Epidemiology  According  to  the  NSDUH,  in  2019  approximately 
2 million people aged 12 years or older (0.7% of the population) used 
methamphetamine  in  the  past  year,  of  those  184,000  used  metham-
phetamine  for  the  first  time  (510  people  per  day),  and  about  25% 
reported injecting methamphetamine. In 2019, an estimated 1 million 
people aged 12 years or older (0.4% of the population and 50% of those 
with past-year use) had a methamphetamine use disorder. High rates 
of  co-occurring  substance  use  or  mental  illness  exist  in  adults  who 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3573

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3574 use methamphetamine and only about one-third of adults with past-
year  methamphetamine  use  disorder  received  addiction  treatment. 
Methamphetamine availability and methamphetamine-related harms 
(overdose deaths, treatment admissions, infectious disease transmis-
sion,  etc.)  continue  to  increase  in  the  United  States.  According  to 
CDC  data,  psychostimulants  with  abuse  potential  (primarily  meth-
amphetamine)  caused  16,167  overdose  deaths  in  2019.  These  sub-
stances were the second leading cause of overdose death nationwide 
accounting for 23% of overdose deaths (compared to 49,860 deaths 
from an opioid in 2019). Of note there is significant geographic vari-
ation  in  the  role  of  methamphetamine  in  overdose  deaths;  in  four 
western  regions  methamphetamine  was  the  #1  cause  of  overdose 
death  accounting  for  21–38%  of  all  overdose  deaths.  Geographic 
variation  is  also  apparent  in  overall  psychostimulant-involved  mor-
tality  rates;  from  2015–2018  the  highest  increase  was  observed  in 
West Virginia for psychostimulant use alone. Mortality associated with 
psychostimulants combined with opioids ranged from 15% in Hawaii 
to 91% in New Hampshire.
 ■ MDMA AND CATHINONES
MDMA also known as Molly, ecstasy, or X, is an illegal synthetic drug 
that  has  stimulant  and  psychedelic  effects.  Khât  is  a  plant  found  in 
East  Africa  and  the  Middle  East;  it  has  been  used  for  centuries  for 
its mild stimulant-like effect. Synthetic cathinones or “bath salts” are 
manufactured psychostimulants that are chemically similar to the nat-
urally occurring substance cathinone found in the khât plant and are 
discussed under “Emerging Drugs” below.

MDMA  Molly, slang for “molecular,” refers to the crystalline pow-
der form of MDMA usually sold as powder or in capsules. The con-
tent of Molly varies and is often not MDMA at all but rather contains 
methylone  or  ethylone,  which  are  synthetic  substances  commonly 
found  in  so-called  bath  salts  and  pose  significant  health  risks.  The 
clinician should always consider the possibility that the drug reported 
by the user may be incorrect or contaminated with other substances.
With  MDMA  use,  individuals  experience  increased  physical  and 
mental energy, distortions in time and perception, emotional warmth, 
empathy toward others, a general sense of well-being, decreased anxi-
ety, and an enhanced enjoyment of tactile experiences. MDMA is usu-
ally taken orally in a tablet, capsule, or liquid form with first effect at 
45 min on average, peak effect at 1–2 h, and duration ~3–6 h. MDMA 
binds to serotonin transporters and increases the release of serotonin, 
NE, and DA. Research in animals has shown that MDMA in moderate 
to  high  doses  can  cause  loss  of  serotonin-containing  nerve  endings 
and permanent damage. MDMA is a Schedule I drug, along with other 
substances  with  no  proven  therapeutic  value.  MDMA  is  currently  in 
clinical trials as a possible treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder 
and anxiety and for patients with terminal illness including cancer. The 
evidence on MDMA’s therapeutic effects is quite limited to date, and 
research is ongoing.

Adulteration of MDMA tablets with methamphetamine, ketamine, 
caffeine,  the  over-the-counter  cough  suppressant  dextromethorphan 
(DXM), the diet drug ephedrine, and cocaine is common. MDMA is 
rarely  used  alone  and  is  often  mixed  with  other  substances,  such  as 
alcohol and marijuana, making the scope of its use difficult to ascer-
tain. According to the NSDUH, >18 million people in the United States 
have tried MDMA at least once in their life. MDMA is predominantly 
used  by  men  18–25  years  of  age,  with  use  typically  beginning  at  
age 21 years. There is evidence that gay or bisexual men and women are 
more likely than their heterosexual counterparts to have used MDMA 
in the last 30 days.

Cathinone 
Is  an  alkaloid  psychostimulant  structurally  similar  to 
amphetamine found in the khât (Catha edulis) plant, which grows at 
high altitudes in East Africa and the Middle East and whose leaves are 
chewed for their mild stimulant-like effect. The extraction of cathinone 
and other alkaloids from the leaves by chewing is very effective leaving 
little as unabsorbed residue. The leaves and twigs can also be smoked, 
infused  in  tea,  or  sprinkled  on  food.  Cathinone  increases  dopamine 
release and reduces dopamine reuptake.

Originally limited to its area of cultivation, with advances in rapid 
transportation  and  postal  delivery  khât  is  now  available  in  several 
continents  including  Europe  and  North  America.  Worldwide  it  is 
estimated  that  10  million  people  chew  khât,  including  up  to  80%  of 
all  adults  in  some  areas  where  the  evergreen  shrub  is  indigenous.  In 
regions  where  the  plant  is  indigenous,  there  have  also  been  reports 
of  khât  use  as  a  study  aid  among  university  students.  Cathinone  is  a 
Schedule I drug in the United States, making its use illegal; however, 
the khât plant itself is not controlled.

 ■ PRESCRIBED PSYCHOSTIMULANTS
Methylphenidate,  dextroamphetamine,  and  dextroamphetamine/
amphetamine combination products are psychostimulants approved in 
the United States for treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disor-
der (ADHD), weight control, and narcolepsy. Prescription psychostim-
ulants increase alertness, attention, and energy. Phenylpropanolamine, 
a psychostimulant used primarily for weight control, was found to be 
related to hemorrhagic stroke in women and removed from the market 
in  2005.  Nonprescribed  amphetamines  or  methylphenidate  is  used 
quite frequently by college students, and as an energy and productivity 
booster by others. According to the 2019 NSDUH, past-year prescrip-
tion stimulant misuse was reported by 4.9 million (1.8%) people aged 
12 years or older. Past-year initiates of prescription stimulant misuse 
totaled  901,000,  which  averages  to  about  2500  people  misusing  pre-
scription stimulants for the first time each day, including 1000 young 
adults each day. Among people aged 12 years or older, 0.2% (558,000 
people) had a prescription stimulant use disorder in the past year.

 ■ PSYCHOSTIMULANT CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Psychostimulants  produce  the  same  acute  CNS  effects:  euphoria/
elevated mood, increased energy/decreased fatigue, reduced need for 
sleep, decreased appetite, heightened sense of alertness, decreased dis-
tractibility, dosed-dependent effects on focus, attention, and curiosity, 
increased  self-confidence,  increased  libido,  and  prolonged  orgasm, 
independent  of  the  specific  psychostimulant  or  route  of  administra-
tion.  Peripheral  effects  may  include  tremor,  diaphoresis,  hypertonia, 
tachypnea,  hyperreflexia,  and  hyperthermia.  Many  of  the  effects  are 
biphasic;  for  example,  low  doses  improve  psychomotor  performance, 
while higher doses may cause tremors or convulsions. α-adrenergically 
mediated  cardiovascular  effects  are  also  biphasic,  with  low  doses 
resulting  in  increased  vagal  tone  and  decreased  heart  rate,  and  high 
doses causing increased heart rate and blood pressure. Psychostimulant 
use can result in restlessness, irritability, and insomnia and, at higher 
doses,  suspiciousness,  repetitive  stereotyped  behaviors,  and  bruxism. 
Endocrine effects resulting from chronic use may include impotence, 
gynecomastia,  menstrual  function  disruptions,  and  persistent  hyper-
prolactinemia (Table 457-1).

Overdose presents as sympathetic nervous system overactivity with 
psychomotor  agitation,  hypertension,  tachycardia,  headache,  and 
mydriasis, and can lead to convulsions, cerebral hemorrhage or infarc-
tion, cardiac arrhythmias or ischemia, respiratory failure, or rhabdo-
myolysis. It is a medical emergency; treatment is largely symptomatic 
and should occur in an intensive care or telemetry unit. Inhalation of 
crack cocaine that is vaporized at high temperatures can cause airway 
burns,  bronchospasm,  and  other  symptoms  of  pulmonary  disease. 
MDMA has also been shown to raise body temperature and can occa-
sionally result in liver, kidney, or heart failure, or even death.

Psychostimulants are often used with other drugs, including opioids 
and alcohol, whose CNS-depressant effects tend to attenuate psycho-
stimulant-induced  CNS  stimulation.  These  combinations  often  have 
additive deleterious effects, increasing the risk of morbidity and mor-
tality. An example of this risk is the use of cocaine with alcohol, which 
results  in  the  metabolite,  cocaethylene.  Cocaethylene’s  effects  on  the 
cardiovascular system are additive to that of cocaine’s effects, resulting 
in intensified pathophysiologic consequences.

Adulteration  of  psychostimulants,  particularly  cocaine,  with 
other  drugs  is  common  and  can  have  additional  potential  health 
consequences.  In  addition  to  contamination  with  fentanyl-related 
compounds,  potentially  resulting  in  fatal  overdose,  multiple  other 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3574

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders TABLE 457-1  Complications of Psychostimulant Use
Cardiovascular

Acute
•	 Arterial vasoconstriction
•	 Thrombosis
•	 Tachycardia
•	 Hypertension
•	 Increased myocardial oxygen demand
•	 Increased vascular shearing forces
•	 Coronary vasoconstriction
•	 Cardiac ischemia
•	 Left ventricular dysfunction/heart failure (high blood 

Central and Peripheral 
Nervous Systems

Pulmonary

Gastrointestinal

Renal

Endocrine

Other

concentrations)

•	 Supraventricular and ventricular dysrhythmias
•	 Aortic dissection/rupture
Chronic
•	 Accelerated atherogenesis
•	 Left ventricular hypertrophy
•	 Dilated cardiomyopathy
•	 Hyperthermia
•	 Psychomotor agitation
•	 Tremor
•	 Hyperreflexia
•	 Hypertonia
•	 Headache
•	 Seizures
•	 Coma
•	 Intracranial hemorrhage
•	 Focal neurologic symptoms
•	 Angioedema (inhaled)
•	 Pharyngeal burns (inhaled)
•	 Pneumothorax
•	 Pneumomediastinum
•	 Pneumopericardium
•	 Reversible airway disease exacerbations
•	 Bronchospasm
•	 Shortness of breath (“crack lung”)
•	 Tachypnea
•	 Pulmonary infarction
•	 Perforated ulcers
•	 Ischemic colitis
•	 Bowel infarction
•	 Impaction (body packing)
•	 Hepatic enzyme elevation
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Renal infarction
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
•	 Impotence
•	 Gynecomastia
•	 Menstrual function disruptions
•	 Hyperprolactinemia
•	 Diaphoresis
•	 Irritability
•	 Insomnia
•	 Bruxism
•	 Stereotypy
•	 Splenic infarction
•	 Acute angle-closure glaucoma
•	 Vasospasm of the retinal vessels (unilateral or 

bilateral vision loss)

•	 Mydriasis
•	 Madarosis
•	 Abruptio placentae

3575

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
7

C
o
c
a
i
n
e
,

O
t
h
e
r
P
s
y
c
h
o
s
t
i

m
u
l
a
n
t
s
,
a
n
d
H
a
l
l
u
c
i
n
o
g
e
n
s

substances  have  been  noted  as  contaminants  of  psychostimulants. 
Levamisole, an anthelminthic and immunomodulator used primarily 
in veterinary medicine, has been found in cocaine and can cause agran-
ulocytosis, leukoencephalopathy, and cutaneous vasculitis, which has 
resulted in cutaneous necrosis. Clenbuterol, a sympathomimetic amine 
used clinically as a bronchodilator, has also been found in cocaine and 
can  result  in  tachycardia,  hyperglycemia,  palpitations,  and  hypoka-
lemia.  Studies  in  Europe  have  found  that,  in  addition  to  levamisole, 
some of the most common adulterants in cocaine include phenacetin, 
lidocaine, caffeine, diltiazem, hydroxyzine, procaine, tetracaine, para-
cetamol, creatine, and benzocaine.

Withdrawal  from  psychostimulants  often  includes  hypersomnia, 
increased  appetite,  and  depressed  mood.  Acute  withdrawal  typically 
lasts 7–10 days, but residual symptoms, possibly associated with neuro-
toxicity, may persist for several months. Debate remains whether psy-
chostimulant withdrawal symptoms decline monotonically or occur in 
discrete phases, becoming worse before they improve. Psychostimulant 
withdrawal is not thought to be a major driver of ongoing use. Most 
current theories of psychostimulant addiction emphasize the primary 
role of conditioned craving, which can persist long after physiological 
withdrawal has abated. Conditioned craving includes the urge to use 
drugs  in  response  to  cues  in  the  environment  associated  with  drug 
use,  such  as  drug-using  associates,  drug  paraphernalia,  drug-using 
locations, etc.

Injection  of  psychostimulants  places  people  at  increased  risk 
of  contracting  infectious  diseases  from  exposure  to  HIV  and  hep-
atitis  B  or  C  in  blood  or  other  bodily  fluids,  as  well  as  with  skin 
abscesses  and  endocarditis.  Psychostimulant  use  can  also  increase 
risk for infection by causing altered judgment and decision-making, 
leading  to  risky  behaviors,  such  as  unprotected  sex.  There  is  some 
evidence  that  psychostimulant  use  may  worsen  the  progression  of 
HIV/AIDS via increased injury to nerve cells exacerbating cognitive  
problems.

The actions and effects of khât are like those of other psychostim-
ulants.  Short-term  effects  include  euphoria,  increased  alertness  and 
arousal, loss of appetite, insomnia, headaches, and tremors. Long-term 
use may result in gastrointestinal disorders such as constipation, ulcers, 
and stomach inflammation as well as increased risk for acute myocar-
dial infarction and stroke, due to inotropic and chronotropic effects on 
the heart, vasospasm of coronary arteries, and catecholamine-induced 
platelet aggregation. There is evidence that, rarely, heavy khât use may 
cause  mild  to  moderate  psychological  dependence.  Compulsive  use 
has been described, with resulting grandiose delusions, paranoia, and 
hallucinations.  Mild  withdrawal  from  khât  has  been  described  and 
can  include  depression,  nightmares,  low  blood  pressure,  and  lack  of 
energy.

 ■ DIAGNOSIS
The  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Psychiatric  Disorders,  5th 
edition (DSM-5) defines a stimulant use disorder (SUD) as a pattern 
of use of amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, or other stimulants 
leading  to  clinically  significant  impairment  or  distress,  as  mani-
fested  by  at  least  2  of  the  following  11  problems  within  a  12-month 
period: taking larger amounts, or over a longer period of time, than 
intended;  persistent  desire  or  unsuccessful  efforts  to  reduce  or  con-
trol  use;  a  great  deal  of  time  spent  in  activities  necessary  to  obtain, 
use,  or  recover;  craving;  use  resulting  in  failure  to  fulfill  major  role 
obligations;  continued  use,  despite  recurrent  social  or  interpersonal 
problems;  giving  up  social,  occupational,  or  recreational  activities; 
recurrent use in physically hazardous situations; continued use despite 
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problems; tolerance; 
and withdrawal symptoms, or avoidance of withdrawal symptoms, by 
continued use.

The  International  Classification  of  Diseases  (ICD)  10th  Revision 
(ICD-10) recognizes “stimulant dependence syndrome” and “stimulant 
withdrawal state” and the ICD 11th Revision (ICD-11) further speci-
fies the definition to “stimulant dependence including amphetamines, 
methamphetamines, or methcathinone.”

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3575

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3576 TREATMENT

Acute Intoxication

As with all emergency situations the first task is to check a patient’s 
airway,  breathing,  and  circulation.  With  cocaine  use,  succinyl-
choline  is  relatively  contraindicated  in  rapid-sequence  intubation; 
consider  rocuronium  (1  mg/kg  IV)  or  another  nondepolarizing 
agent  as  an  alternative.  If  psychomotor  agitation  occurs,  rule  out 
hypoglycemia and hypoxemia first, and then administer benzodi-
azepines  (e.g.,  diazepam  10  mg  IV  and  then  5–10  mg  IV  every 
3–5  min  until  agitation  controlled).  Benzodiazepines  are  usually 
sufficient to address cardiovascular side effects. Severe or symptom-
atic hypertension can be treated with phentolamine, nitroglycerin, 
or  nitroprusside.  Hyperthermic  patients  should  be  cooled  within 
≤30 min with the goal to achieve a core body temperature of <39°C 
(102°F). Evaluation of chest pain in someone using cocaine should 
include  an  electrocardiogram,  chest  radiograph,  and  biomarkers 
to  exclude  myocardial  infarction.  The  treatment  approach  is  sim-
ilar  to  nonstimulant-induced  chest  pain;  however,  it  is  recom-
mended that whenever possible beta blockers not be used in people 
who  use  cocaine.  The  concern  arises  from  the  potential  unop-
posed  alpha-adrenergic  stimulation  that  results  from  beta  block-
ade  possibly  causing  coronary  arterial  vasoconstriction,  ischemia,   
and  infarction  and  limited  data  supporting  the  benefit  of  beta 
blockers  in  cocaine-related  cardiovascular  complications.  If  beta 
blockers are to be given, it is suggested that mixed alpha/beta block-
ers, e.g., labetalol and carvedilol, be used rather than nonselective 
beta  blockers,  and  only  in  situations  where  the  benefits  outweigh 
the risks. Because many instances of psychostimulant-related mor-
tality have been associated with concurrent use of other illicit drugs 
(particularly opioids), the physician must be prepared to institute 
effective emergency treatment for multiple drug toxicities.
Psychostimulant Use Disorders

Treatment of stimulant use disorders requires the combined efforts 
of primary care physicians, psychiatrists, and psychosocial care pro-
viders. Early abstinence from psychostimulant use is often compli-
cated by symptoms of depression and guilt, insomnia, and anorexia, 
which may be as severe as those observed in major affective disor-
ders and can last for months and even years after use has stopped.

Behavioral  therapies,  including  cognitive-behavioral  therapy 
(CBT),  the  community  reinforcement  approach  (CRA),  contin-
gency management (CM; providing rewards to patients who remain 
substance free), motivational enhancement therapy (MET), combi-
nations of these, and others remain the mainstay of treatment for 
stimulant  use  disorders  and  show  modest  benefit.  These  behav-
ioral therapies are designed to help modify the patient’s thinking, 
expectancies, and behaviors, and to increase life-coping skills, with 
behavioral interventions to support long-term, drug-free recovery. 
Based  on  systematic  reviews,  contingency  management  has  been 
noted  to  be  particularly  effective.  However,  the  effect  of  these 
behavioral  therapies  is  often  not  sustained,  and  they  may  be  less 
effective in individuals with severe use disorder.

There  are  no  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)- 
approved  medications  for  psychostimulant  addiction.  Current 
research includes several neurotransmitter-based strategies, includ-
ing  DA  agonist-,  serotonin-,  γ-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA)-,  and 
glutamate-based approaches. Trials of agonist therapy with longer- 
acting psychostimulant medications such as dexamphetamine and 
methylphenidate  have  not  been  conclusive.  Studies  with  the  anti-
depressants  mirtazapine,  bupropion,  sertraline,  imipramine,  and 
atomoxetine  have  been  equivocal  as  have  studies  with  the  atypi-
cal antipsychotic, aripiprazole, and the anticonvulsant, topiramate. 
Other therapies being studied for the treatment of psychostimulant 
use  disorder  include:  acamprosate  (possibly  via  a  role  in  Ca2+   
supply),  galantamine  (reversible  acetylcholine  esterase  inhibitor, 
which may strengthen impulse control, as well as cognitive and social 

abilities  depleted  by  long-term  psychostimulant  use),  naltrexone 
(opiate  receptor  antagonist),  doxazosin  (alpha-adrenergic  antago-
nist), and varenicline (partial agonist at the α4β2 nicotinic acetyl-
choline receptors and DA neurotransmission enhancer). Overall, it 
is promising that some of the medications studied showed statisti-
cally significant outcome improvement over placebo, but many of 
these studies were underpowered due to issues of small sample size, 
sample  bias,  low  participant  retention,  and  low  treatment  adher-
ence  rates.  Ongoing  studies  are  investigating  lisdexamfetamine   
(a dexamphetamine pro-drug), a combination of extended-release 
naltrexone  with  bupropion,  pomaglumetad  (a  glutamate  agonist), 
and  monoclonal  antibodies.  Special  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to 
the  inclusion  of  underrepresented  populations  including  women 
in  future  stimulant  use  disorder  medication  trials.  Vaccines  for 
cocaine and methamphetamine use disorders are also being devel-
oped. Finally, recent preliminary studies have brought attention to 
the potential use of brain stimulation techniques such as transcra-
nial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS),  theta-burst  stimulation  (TBS), 
and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to treat psycho-
stimulant use disorders, although further studies will be required to 
determine their value, if any, in this situation.

HALLUCINOGENS
Hallucinogens  are  a  diverse  group  of  drugs  causing  alteration  of 
thoughts,  feelings,  sensations,  and  perceptions.  Some  hallucinogens 
are  found  naturally  in  plants  and  mushrooms,  while  others  are  syn-
thetic.  They  include:  ayahuasca  (a  tea  made  from  Amazonian  plants 
containing  dimethyltryptamine  (DMT),  the  primary  mind-altering 
ingredient);  DMT  (aka  Dimitri,  can  also  be  synthesized  in  a  lab); 
LSD (clear or white odorless material made from lysergic acid found 
in  rye  and  other  grain  fungus);  peyote  (mescaline,  derived  from  a 
small,  spineless  cactus  or  made  synthetically);  and  4-phosphoryloxy- 
N,N-dimethyltryptamine  (psilocybin,  comes  from  certain  South  and 
North American mushrooms).

A subgroup of hallucinogens produces the added sensation of feeling 
out of control or disconnected from one’s body or surroundings. These 
dissociative drugs include: DXM (an over-the-counter cough suppres-
sant,  when  used  in  high  doses);  ketamine  (a  human  and  veterinary 
anesthetic as well as an antidepressant medication recently approved by 
the FDA); phencyclidine (PCP; a cyclohexylamine derivative and dis-
sociative anesthetic); and Salvia divinorum (salvia, a Mexican, Central, 
and South American plant). Dissociative drugs distort the way the user 
perceives time, motion, color, sound, and self, and their use can lead to 
bizarre and dangerous behavior and cause respiratory depression, heart 
rate abnormalities, and a withdrawal syndrome including drug craving, 
confusion, headache, and sweating.

Use  of  hallucinogens  in  religious  and  spiritual  rituals  goes  back 
centuries,  and  they  are  ingested  in  a  wide  variety  of  ways,  including 
orally, by smoking, intranasally, and transmucosally. Especially when 
taken orally, the onset of action of hallucinogens is within 20–90 min 
and the duration of action can be as long as 6–12 h, except for salvia, 
whose  effects  generally  last  about  30  min.  Hallucinogens  specifically 
disrupt the neurotransmitters serotonin and glutamate. Effects on the 
serotonin system can disturb mood, sensory perception, sleep, appetite, 
body temperature, sexual behavior, and muscle control. Glutamate sys-
tem effects include perturbations in pain perception, responses to the 
environment, emotion, and learning and memory.

According  to  the  NSDUH,  in  2019  1.9  million  adults  reported 
past-month hallucinogen use and 6 million (2.2% of the population) 
reported  past-year  hallucinogen  use,  an  increase  from  4.7  million 
(1.8%) in 2015. Of these, 1.2 million used hallucinogens for the first 
time.  These  estimates  are  similar  to  2015  and  2018  estimates  for 
those aged 12–17 years but reflect an increase in past-year use among 
those aged 26 years and older. Of note, these statistics include ecstasy 
(MDMA  or  “Molly”)  in  the  overall  hallucinogen  use  as  well  as  LSD, 
PCP,  peyote,  mescaline,  psilocybin  mushrooms,  ketamine,  DMT/
AMT/”Foxy”, and Salvia divinorum. New initiates to drug use per day 

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3576

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 3577

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
5
7

C
o
c
a
i
n
e
,

O
t
h
e
r
P
s
y
c
h
o
s
t
i

m
u
l
a
n
t
s
,
a
n
d
H
a
l
l
u
c
i
n
o
g
e
n
s

among people age 12 years and older include 2421 for LSD, 83 for PCP, 
and 2039 for ecstasy. According to 2019 Monitoring the Future Data, 
the  annual  prevalence  of  use  among  12th  graders  was  1.1%  for  PCP, 
2.2% for ecstasy, and 0.7% for salvia, which was similar to 2018.

Clinical  manifestations  of  hallucinogen  use  include  false  sensory 
experiences (i.e., hallucinations), intensified feelings, heightened sen-
sory  experiences,  and  time  perturbations.  Additional  physiologic 
responses include nausea; increased heart rate, blood pressure, respi-
ratory  rate,  or  body  temperature;  loss  of  appetite;  xerostomia;  sleep 
problems;  synesthesia;  impaired  coordination;  and  hyperhidrosis. 
Extremely negative experiences with hallucinogen use (the “bad trip”) 
can include panic, paranoia, and psychosis, which may persist for up 
to 24 h. Such experiences are best treated with supportive reassurance, 
but  benzodiazepines  (e.g.,  diazepam  10  mg  or  lorazepam,  if  liver 
damage  is  present)  may  be  administered  if  agitation  is  severe.  There 
is  some  evidence  that  chronic  effects  of  hallucinogen  use  can  occur, 
including persistent psychosis, memory loss, anxiety, depression, and 
flashbacks. Long-term effects of PCP and other dissociative drug use 
can  include  persistent  speech  difficulties,  memory  loss,  depression, 
suicidal thoughts, anxiety, and social withdrawal that may persist for a 
year or more after chronic use stops.

Psilocybin  is  under  active  investigation  for  its  possible  benefit  in 

treatment of depression and some anxiety disorders.

Hallucinogen addiction is atypical, as use patterns are generally not 
chronic, and there are currently no FDA-approved medications for the 
treatment  of  hallucinogen  addiction.  Research  on  behavioral  treat-
ments for hallucinogen addiction is underway.

EMERGING DRUGS
With  the  aid  of  the  Internet,  and  some  basic  over-the-counter  (and 
other)  ingredients,  the  rise  of  the  “kitchen  chemist”  is  upon  us.  The 
production of new psychoactive substances (NPSs), such as synthetic 
cathinones  (bath  salts)  and  synthetic  cannabinoids  (spice),  is  on  the 
rise and has resulted in the use of unregulated psychoactive substances 
that are intended to copy the effects of more expensive illegal drugs, 
such as methamphetamine and cocaine.

Synthetic  cathinones  (bath  salts)  are  human-made  drugs  chemi-
cally similar to khât and are often stronger and more dangerous than 
the natural product. They usually take the form of a white or brown 
crystal-like  powder,  packaged  in  small  plastic  or  foil  bundles  labeled 
“not  for  human  consumption,”  or  as  “plant  food,”  “jewelry  cleaner,” 
or “phone screen cleaner,” and sold online and in drug paraphernalia 
stores.  The  popular  nickname  Molly  (slang  for  “molecular”)  often 
refers  to  the  purported  “pure”  crystalline  powder  form  of  MDMA, 
usually  sold  in  capsules.  However,  people  who  purchase  powder  or 
capsules sold as Molly often actually receive other drugs, such as syn-
thetic cathinones. The uncertainty of what is actually in these synthetic 
products, whose components might change from batch to batch, makes 
them even more dangerous as anyone using them is unaware of what 
the products contain and how their bodies will react.

The  three  most  common  synthetic  cathinones  are  mephedrone, 
methylone,  and  MDPV  (3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone).  With  oral 
ingestion,  these  drugs  have  an  onset  of  action  from  15–45  min,  and 
a duration that varies from 2–7 h. A recent study found that MDPV 
affects the brain in a manner similar to cocaine but is at least 10 times 
more potent. MDPV is the most common synthetic cathinone found 
in the blood and urine of patients admitted to EDs after taking “bath 
salts.” High doses, or chronic use, of synthetic cathinones can lead to 
dangerous medical consequences, including psychosis, violent behav-
iors, tachycardia, hyperthermia, and even death.

The  ability  to  synthesize  addictive  and  dangerous  drugs  relatively 
simply  and  rapidly,  changing  just  a  few  molecules,  yet  retaining  the 
effects, has allowed many of these emerging drugs to outpace efforts to 
regulate them, resulting in a developing global public health concern.

SUBSTANCE USE AND MENTAL HEALTH
According to the NSDUH, in 2019, among adults with no mental illness 
16.6%  consumed  illicit  drugs,  compared  to  49.4%  with  severe  mental 
illness and 38.8% with any mental illness. In 2019, among adults 18 years 

of age or older, 61.2 million people had either mental illness or a sub-
stance  use  disorder  in  the  past  year,  42  million  had  mental  illness  in 
the absence of a substance use disorder, 9.7 million had a substance use 
disorder and no mental illness, and 9.5 million (3.8% of the population) 
had  both.  Furthermore,  based  on  2018  NSDUH  data  it  is  estimated 
that more than 1 in 10 adults (27.5 million) in the United States reported 
ever  having  a  substance  use  problem.  Among  those  with  a  problem, 
nearly 75% (20.5 million) reported being in recovery, which was asso-
ciated  with  lower  prevalence  of  past-year  substance  use  and  having 
received  substance  use  treatment.  Self-reported  prevalence  of  ever 
having a substance use problem was 31.9% among adults with a lifetime 
mental health problem but not in recovery, followed by 29.7% among 
adults in recovery, compared with 7.0% among adults without a lifetime 
mental health problem. Taken together, these data all point to the sig-
nificant overlap of substance-related and other mental health problems.

GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
After  nicotine,  alcohol,  and  cannabis,  stimulants  are  the  next  most 
commonly  used  drugs  globally,  accounting  for  68  million  past-year 
consumers.  Past-year  stimulant  use  worldwide  for  individuals  aged 
15–65  years  approaches  29  million.  Globally  7.4  million  individuals 
have a stimulant use disorder and it is thought that 11% of all people 
who use stimulants develop such a disorder. The United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) estimates that 1 in 7 people with sub-
stance  use  disorders  receives  treatment,  and  this  number  is  thought 
much lower in individuals with stimulant use disorder due to the lack 
of pharmacologic treatments. Cocaine use globally had remained stable 
until  2010  when  it  began  to  rise,  driven  by  an  increase  in  its  use  in 
South America. Amphetamine use in Western Europe is still well below 
5%  lifetime  prevalence  for  most  countries,  and  methamphetamine 
problems  have  been  largely  restricted  to  the  Czech  Republic;  how-
ever,  evidence  indicates  growing  spread  through  Europe.  Over  three- 
quarters  of  the  world’s  production  of  amphetamine-type  stimulants 
occurs in Southeast Asia and in recent years there has been a dramatic 
increase in use in this region, particularly Thailand. In Japan and the 
Philippines, methamphetamine use predominates. Lifetime experience 
with ecstasy among the general population is still well below 5% in most 
European countries, which is slightly lower than levels seen in Australia 
(6%).  Ecstasy  is  more  prevalent  in  the  West;  however,  over  the  past 
decade use has increasingly become evident in other regions, including 
Africa, South and Central America, the Caribbean, and parts of Asia. 
Globally, psychostimulant use has been associated with elevated mortal-
ity, increased incidence of HIV and hepatitis C infection, poor mental 
health (suicidality, psychosis, depression, and violence), and increased 
risk  of  cardiovascular  events.  Globally,  stigma  and  marginalization 
make treatment of drug use disorders difficult and hinder sustainable 
inclusive development incorporating gender and racial equity and the 
empowerment of women and underrepresented minorities.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Despite their prevalence and public health impact, psychostimulant and 
hallucinogen use disorders have no FDA-approved treatment medica-
tions.  While  behavioral  therapies,  such  as  contingency  management 
and CBT, have been shown effective in psychostimulant use disorders, 
further research needs to be done regarding their utility for hallucino-
gen use disorders. Furthermore, based upon experience with opioid and 
alcohol use disorders, it is likely that the most efficacious treatments will 
employ a combination of behavioral and pharmacologic therapy.

Additionally,  new  approaches  that  utilize  emerging  technologies 
have  considerable  potential  for  future  treatment  of  psychostimu-
lant  use  disorders.  These  include  neurostimulation/neuromodulation 
(TMS,  TBS,  tDCS),  wearable  biosensors,  and  mobile  technology, 
including  ecologic  and  geographic  momentary  assessment  (EMA/
GMA) as well as real-time interventions delivered via smartphone or 
other mobile devices.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Antonello 
Bonci to this chapter in previous editions.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3577

21/01/22   7:51 AM

 
 
 
 
 
3578

 ■ FURTHER READING
Compton WM: Polysubstance use in the U.S. Opioid Crisis. Mol Psy-

 ■ WEBSITES
American Society of Addiction Medicine: https://www.asam.org/

chiatry 26:41, 2021.

public-resources

Farrell M et al: Responding to global stimulant use: challenges and 

National  Institute  on  Drug  Abuse:  https://www.drugabuse.gov/

opportunities. Lancet 394:1652, 2019.

drugs-abuse

Trivedi MH et al: Bupropion and naltrexone in methamphetamine use 

World Health Organization: http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/en/

disorder. N Engl J Med 384:140, 2021.

Volkow  ND  et  al:  Neurobiologic  advances  from  the  brain  disease 

model of addiction. N Engl J Med 374:363, 2016.

HPIM21e_Part13_p3277-p3578.indd   3578

21/01/22   7:51 AM

PART 13Neurologic Disorders 