S U P P L E M E N T   T O

 kidney

I N T E R N A T I O N A L

KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the  
Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease

VOLUME 99 | ISSUE 3S | MARCH 2021

www.kidney-international.org

EDITOR
Pierre Ronco, Paris
Clinical Investigation

DEPUTY EDITOR
Brad Rovin, Columbus
Translational Nephrology

PAST EDITORS
Detlef Schlöndorff, New York
Qais Al-Awqati, New York
Saulo Klahr, St. Louis
Thomas E. Andreoli, Little Rock
Roscoe R. Robinson, Durham

EDITORIAL BOARD
Anupam Agarwal, Birmingham
Evren Azeloglu, New York
Sean Barbour, Vancouver
Jonathan Barratt, Leicester
David Basile, Indianapolis
John Bertram, Clayton
Peter Boor, Aachen
Frank Bridoux, Portiers
Kirk Campbell, New York
Daniel Cattran, Toronto
Christos Chatziantoniou, Paris
Yi-pu Chen, Beijing
Philip Clayton, Adelaide
Steven Coca, New York
Terence Cook, London
Vivette D’Agati, New York
Farhad Danesh, Chicago
John Daugirdas, Chicago
Andrew Davenport, London
Marc De Broe, Antwerp
Vikas Dharnidharka, St. Louis
Kent Doi, Tokyo
Jie Dong, Beijing
Zheng Dong, Augusta
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, Berlin
Somchai Eiam-Ong, Bangkok
Michael Emmett, Dallas
Roger Evans, Melbourne
Pieter Evenepoel, Leuven
Robert Fairchild, Cleveland
Sarah Faubel, Denver
Christian Faul, Birmingham
Fernando Fervenza, Rochester
Steven Fishbane, Mineola
Danilo Fliser, Homburg
Josephine Forbes, Brisbane
Alessia Fornoni, Miami
Barry Freedman, Winston-Salem
Masafumi Fukagawa, Isehara
Amit Garg, London, Ontario
Vesna Garovic, Rochester
Richard Glassock, Laguna Niguel
David S. Goldfarb, New York
Mark Haas, Los Angeles
Volker Haase, Nashville
Jan Halbritter, Leipzig
Peter C. Harris, Rochester
John (Cijiang) He, New York

NEPHROLOGY DIGEST EDITOR
Christina Wyatt, New York

STATISTICIANS
Vic Hasselblad, Jacksonville
Zhezhen Jin, New York
Joseph Kim, Toronto
Yi-Ju Li, Durham
Dorothea Nitsch, London
Rajasekhar Ramakrishnan, New York

KI FELLOWSHIP INTERNS
Anna Francis, Brisbane
Sethu Madhavan, Columbus

Michelle Hladunewich, Toronto
Fan Fan Hou, Guangzhou
Pascal Houillier, Paris
Chi-yuan Hsu, San Francisco
Tobias B. Huber, Hamburg
Benjamin Humphreys, St. Louis
Reiko Inagi, Tokyo
Kenar Jhaveri, Great Neck
Jaap Joles, Utrecht
Kamyar Kalantar-Zadeh, Orange
Roberto Kalil, Iowa City
Frederick Kaskel, New York
Krzysztof Kiryluk, New York
A. Richard Kitching, Clayton
Anna Koettgen, Freiburg
Jeffrey Kopp, Bethesda
Matthias Kretzler, Ann Arbor
Christian Kurts, Bonn
David Leaf, Boston
Christophe Legendre, Paris
Kevin Lemley, Los Angeles
Emmanuel Letavernier, Paris
Adeera Levin, Vancouver
Philip K.T. Li, Hong Kong
Christoph Licht, Toronto
John Lieske, Rochester
Adrian Liew, Singapore
Melissa Little, Brisbane
Wai Lim, Perth
Kathleen Liu, San Francisco
Youhua Liu, Pittsburgh
Alexandre Loupy, Paris
Christopher Lu, Dallas
Friedrich Luft, Berlin
Johannes Mann, München
Peter J. Margetts, Hamilton
Glen Markowitz, New York
Ziad Massy, Paris
Kunihiro Matsushita, Baltimore
Mignon McCulloch, Cape Town
Timothy W. Meyer, Palo Alto
Imari Mimura, Tokyo
Jeffrey Miner, St. Louis
Marcus Moeller, Aachen
Jeremiah Morrissey, St. Louis
Rosa Moysés, São Paulo
David Nikolic-Paterson, Clayton
Marina Noris, Ranica
Ikechi Okpechi, Cape Town

ASSOCIATE EDITORS
P. Toby Coates, Adelaide
Transplant and Immunology
Olivier Devuyst, Zurich
Physiology, Genetics, Kidney Cancer
Tilman B. Drueke, Paris
CKD, Hypertension, Nephrolithiasis
Jürgen Floege, Aachen
Glomerulonephritis, CKD-MBD
Agnes B. Fogo, Nashville
Clinical and Experimental Renal Pathology
T. Alp Ikizler, Nashville
Dialysis, Acute Kidney Injury, Nutrition, Metabolism
Masaomi Nangaku, Tokyo
Clinical and Experimental CKD
and Diabetic Kidney Disease
Jai Radhakrishnan, New York
Editor KIR, Clinical Studies, Images in Nephrology,
Make Your Diagnosis
Germaine Wong, Sydney
Life Course Epidemiology, Health Economics
and Onconephrology

Mark Okusa, Charlottesville
Juan Oliver, New York
Cristian Pattaro, Bolzano
Aldo Peixoto, West Haven
Mark Perazella, New Haven
Janos Peti-Peterdi, Los Angeles
Martin Pollak, Boston
Ambra Pozzi, Nashville
Susan Quaggin, Chicago
W. Brian Reeves, San Antonio
Heather Reich, Toronto
Giuseppe Remuzzi, Bergamo
Connie Rhee, Orange
Mariano Rodriguez, Cordoba
Paola Romagnani, Firenze
Avi Rosenberg, Bethesda
Michael Ross, New York
Robert Saﬁrstein, New Haven
Simone Sanna-Cherchi, New York
Mario Schiffer, Erlangen
Johannes Schlondorff, Boston
Kai Schmidt-Ott, New York
Stephan Segerer, Aarau
Kumar Sharma, La Jolla
Natalie Staplin, Oxford
Katalin Susztak, Philadelphia
Yoshio Terada, Nankoku
Tetsuhiro Tanaka, Tokyo
Sydney C.W. Tang, Hong Kong
Ravi Thadhani, Boston
Pierre-Louis Tharaux, Paris
Joshua Thurman, Denver
Jens Titze, Singapore
Marcello Tonelli, Edmonton
Hernan Trimarchi, Buenos Aires
Frank van der Sande, Maastricht
Marc Vervloet, Amsterdam
Marina Vivarelli, Rome
Carsten Wagner, Zurich
Angela Wang, Hong Kong
Donald Wesson, Temple
Jack Wetzels, Nijmegen
Adam Whaley-Connell, Columbia
Keng-Thye Woo, Singapore
Motoko Yanagita, Kyoto
Xueqing Yu, Guangzhou
Suzuki Yusuke, Tokyo

www.kidney-international.org

Scope
Kidney International is devoted to kidney research. It aims to inform the
researcher, the clinical investigator, and the practicing nephrologist on all aspects
of kidney research. These include the latest clinical studies on emerging
developments in nephrology and the highest level of original research studies in
clinical and basic kidney research. The journal reﬂects the ﬁeld through critical
reviews, commentaries, original articles, remarkable images, news features,
guidelines, and problem-focused articles for the diagnosis and treatment of
kidney patients.

This journal is covered by BIOSIS, Chemical Abstracts, EMBASE/Excerpta
Medica, Index Medicus/Medline, Science Citation Index, Current Contents/Life
Sciences, Current Contents/Clinical Medicine, SciSearch, Reference Update,
CABS, Biological Abstracts, Global Health, EBSCO, Adonis, and PASCAL.

Editorial
Manuscripts should be submitted online at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.
com/ki. Detailed instructions for authors submitting online are available
at the above website address. For online submission problems, consult
the help section on the submission site or call +1 434 817 2040 x167.

Executive Managing Editor: Patricia Morrissey. Tel: +1 314 454 8919.
E-mail: pmorriss@wustl.edu

Managing Editor: Susan L. Small. E-mail: small_s@wustl.edu

Assistant Managing Editor, Kidney International Supplements: Christine
Burgos-Clavel. E-mail: christine.burgos@krctnn.com (questions regarding
Kidney International Supplements should be addressed to Christine)

Customer Service
Please visit our Support Hub page https://service.elsevier.com for
assistance or contact: United States and Canada: Telephone (800)
654-2452. E-mail: JournalsCustomerService-usa@elsevier.com (for print
support); journalsonlinesupport-usa@elsevier.com (for online support).
Europe, Africa, Middle East: Telephone 44 (0) 1865 843434; E-mail:
JournalsCustomerServiceEMEA@elsevier.com. Asia and Australia:
Telephone 65 6349-0222; E-mail: asiainfo@elsevier.com.

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION RATES:

Kidney International is published in 12 issues per year. Personal subscription
prices for 2021 are: US Print & Online: $1,571; International Print & Online: $1,736.

For institutional and other pricing options, including access information and
terms and conditions, please visit https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/
journal-pricing. Personal and institutional subscriptions include Kidney
International Supplements, Volume 11, 2021.

Current prices are in effect for back volumes and back issues.

Further information on this journal is available from the Publisher or from
this journal’s website (www.kidney-international.org). Information on other
Elsevier products is available through Elsevier’s website (http://www.elsevier.com).

Society
All members of ISN receive Kidney International as part of their membership. For
information about membership and the society, address correspondence to:
International Society of Nephrology, Global Operations Center, Avenue des Arts
1-2, B-1210 Brussels, Belgium. Tel: +32 2 808 0420, Fax: +32 2 808 4454. E-mail:
info@theisn.org, www.theisn.org

CONTACT INFORMATION
ISN Members
Please direct queries about print issue orders or online journal access to the ISN
(see above for address).

Advertising
Inquiries concerning display advertising should be addressed to: USA/Canada:
Jane Liss, Tel: +1 732-890-9812, E-mail: jliss@triplethreatmedia.com and Jen
Callow, Tel: +1 732-580-8884, E-mail: jcallow@triplethreatmedia.com;
International: Robert Bayliss, Tel: 44 20 7424 4454, E-mail: r.bayliss@elsevier.com.

Inquiries concerning recruitment/classiﬁed advertising should be addressed to:
USA/Canada: Rob Issler, Tel: +1 321-400-8279, E-mail: robert.isslerjr@
therapeuticsol.com; International: Elsevier Classiﬁed, Tel: 44 1425 462 736, E-mail:
elsevierclassiﬁed@elsevier.dbfactory.co.uk.
Supplements
Inquiries concerning Kidney International Supplements should be addressed to:
Craig Smith. Tel:+1 212-462-1933, E-mail: c.smith@elsevier.com
ª 2021 International Society of Nephrology.

This journal and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under
copyright by the International Society of Nephrology, and the following terms and
conditions apply to their use in addition to the terms of any Creative Commons or
other use license that has been applied by the publisher to an individual article:
Photocopying
Single photocopies of single articles may be made for personal use as allowed by
national copyright laws. Permission is not required for photocopying of articles
published under the CC BY license nor for photocopying for noncommercial
purposes in accordance with any other user license applied by the publisher.
Permission of the publisher and payment of a fee is required for all other
photocopying, including multiple or systematic copying, copying for advertising
or promotional purposes, resale, and all forms of document delivery. Special rates
are available for educational institutions that wish to make photocopies for
nonproﬁt educational classroom use.
Derivative Works
Users may reproduce tables of contents or prepare lists of articles including
abstracts for internal circulation within their institutions or companies. Other than
for articles published under the CC BY license, permission of the publisher is
required for resale or distribution outside the subscribing institution or company.
For any subscribed articles or articles published under a CC BY-NC-ND license,
permission of the publisher is required for all other derivative works, including
compilations and translations.
Storage or Usage
Except as outlined above or as set out in the relevant user license, no part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions
For information on how to seek permission visit www.elsevier.com/permissions
or call: (þ1) 800-523-4069 x 3808.
AUTHOR RIGHTS
Author(s) may have additional rights in their articles as set out in their agreement
with the publisher (more information at http://www.elsevier.com/authorsrights).

REPRINTS: For queries about author offprints, e-mail authorsupport@elsevier.com.
To order 100 or more reprints for educational, commercial, or promotional use,
contact Derrick Imasa at 212-633-3874, Elsevier Inc., 230 Park Avenue, Suite 800,
New York, NY 10169-0901, USA. Fax: 212-462-1935; e-mail: reprints@elsevier.com.
NOTICE
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and
knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds or
experiments described herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical
sciences, in particular, independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages
should be made. To the fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by
the publisher and the International Society of Nephrology for any injury and/or
damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or
otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or
ideas contained in the material herein.

Although all advertising material is expected to conform to ethical (medical)
standards, inclusion in this publication does not constitute a guarantee or
endorsement of the quality or value of such product or of the claims made of it by
its manufacturer.

Printed on acid-free paper, effective with Volume 69, Issue 1, 2006. Printed and
bound in the USA by Publisher’s Press, Inc., Lebanon Junction, KY, USA.

KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the

Management of Blood Pressure

in Chronic Kidney Disease

Publication of this supplement is sponsored by
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)

The opinions or views expressed in this supplement are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the
opinions or recommendations of the International Society of Nephrology or Elsevier.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid advances in
the medical sciences, in particular, independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.
To the fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO), the International Society of Nephrology, or Elsevier for any injury and/or damage to persons or
property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Ofﬁcial Journal of the
International Society of Nephrology

Elsevier

www.kidney-international.org

c o n t e n t s

VOL 99 | ISSUE 3S | MARCH 2021

KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease

S1

KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Blood
Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Blood Pressure Work Group OPEN

KDIGO 2021 CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF BLOOD PRESSURE
IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S1

c o n t e n t s

KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Blood
Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease

www.kidney-international.org

VOL 99 | ISSUE 3S | MARCH 2021

S3

S7

S8

S9

S10

S11

S12

S13

S14

S18

S20

S21

S23

S26

S32

Tables, ﬁgures, and supplementary material
KDIGO Executive Committee

Reference keys

CKD nomenclature

Conversion factors and Glossary of terms for blood pressure management

Abbreviations and acronyms

Notice

Foreword

Updates to the KDIGO guideline format

Work Group membership

Abstract

Introduction

Summary of recommendation statements and practice points

Chapter 1: Blood pressure measurement

Chapter 2: Lifestyle interventions for lowering blood pressure in patients with

CKD not receiving dialysis

S37

Chapter 3: Blood pressure management in patients with CKD, with or without

diabetes, not receiving dialysis

S55

S59

S62

S71

S78

S79

Chapter 4: Blood pressure management in kidney transplant recipients (CKD

G1T–G5T)

Chapter 5: Blood pressure management in children with CKD

Methods for guideline development

Biographic and disclosure information

Acknowledgments

References

The development and publication of this guideline were supported by KDIGO. The opinions or views expressed in this
professional education supplement are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions or recommendations of
the International Society of Nephrology or Elsevier. Dosages, indications, and methods of use for products that are referred to
in the supplement by the authors may reﬂect their clinical experience or may be derived from the professional literature or
other clinical sources. Because of the differences between in vitro and in vivo systems and between laboratory animal models
and clinical data in humans, in vitro and animal data may not necessarily correlate with clinical results.

S2

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c o n t e n t s

S63

S64

S68

S69

S69

S69

S14
S26
S28

S29

S47
S48
S56
S68

TABLES

Table 1. Hierarchy of outcomes

Table 2. Clinical questions and systematic review topics in the PICOM format
Table 3. Classiﬁcation for certainty and quality of the evidence
Table 4. GRADE system for grading quality of evidence

Table 5. KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Table 6. Determinants of the strength of recommendation

FIGURES
Figure 1. Updates to the KDIGO guideline format
Figure 2. Checklist for standardized ofﬁce blood pressure measurement
Figure 3. Blood pressure measurement method and device used in select RCTs and prospective observational

studies

Figure 4. Blood pressure patterns informed by out-of-ofﬁce blood pressure measurements in addition to

standardized ofﬁce blood pressure measurement

Figure 5. SPRINT research treatment algorithm for the intensive group (goal SBP <120 mm Hg)
Figure 6. Cardiovascular events in patients with CKD G3–G4, A3 without diabetes
Figure 7. CCB versus placebo/no treatment for the outcome of graft loss
Figure 8. Search yield and study ﬂow diagram

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplementary File (PDF)

Appendix A. Search strategies

Table S1. Search strategies for systematic review topics

Appendix B. Concurrence with Institute of Medicine (IOM) standards for guideline development

Table S2. Guideline development checklist – IOM standards for development of trustworthy clinical practice

guidelines

Table S3. Adapted systematic review reporting standards checklist – IOM standards for systematic reviews

Appendix C. Data supplement - Summary of ﬁndings (SoF) tables cited in the guideline text

Table S4. General population studies comparing auscultatory versus oscillometric blood pressure

measurement devices

Table S5. Adults with CKD without diabetes, low-salt diet versus usual or normal-salt diet

Table S6. Adults with type 1 diabetes and CKD, low-salt diet versus normal-salt diet

Table S7. Adults with type 2 diabetes and CKD, low-salt diet versus usual diet

Table S8. Adults with diabetes and CKD with moderately increased albuminuria, low-salt diet versus normal-

salt diet

Table S9. Adults with diabetes and CKD with severely increased albuminuria, low-salt diet versus normal-salt

diet

Table S10. Adults with CKD, any exercise to improve blood pressure versus control (no exercise/placebo

exercise)

Table S11. Adults with CKD, low blood pressure target (£120 mm Hg) versus standard blood pressure target
Table S12. Adults with CKD and increased proteinuria/albuminuria, low blood pressure target versus standard

diastolic blood pressure target

Table S13. Adults with CKD, low blood pressure target versus standard blood pressure target

Table S14. Adults with CKD without diabetes, low blood pressure target versus standard blood pressure target

Table S15. Adults with CKD without diabetes, ACEi versus placebo or standard of care

Table S16. Adults with CKD without diabetes, ARB versus placebo or standard of care

Table S17. Adults with CKD without diabetes, aldosterone antagonist versus placebo or standard care

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S3

c o n t e n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Table S18. Adults with CKD without diabetes, beta-blockers versus RASi

Table S19. Adults with CKD without diabetes, calcium channel blocker versus placebo

Table S20. Adults with CKD without diabetes, direct renin inhibitors versus RASi

Table S21. Adults with diabetes and CKD, ACEi versus placebo or standard care

Table S22. Adults with diabetes and CKD, ARB versus placebo or standard care

Table S23. Adults with diabetes and CKD, ARB versus ACEi

Table S24. Adults with diabetes and CKD, aldosterone antagonists versus placebo or standard care

Table S25. Adults with diabetes and CKD, beta-blocker versus ACEi

Table S26. Adults with diabetes and CKD, calcium channel blocker versus placebo
Table S27. Adults with diabetes and CKD, diuretics D ACEi or ARB versus placebo, standard of care, or no

treatment

Table S28. Adults with diabetes and CKD, aliskiren versus ACEi or ARB.
Table S29. Adults with type 2 diabetes and CKD, aliskiren D ACEi or ARB versus placebo D ACEi or ARB
Table S30. Adults with diabetes and CKD, calcium channel blocker versus ACEi or ARB

Table S31. Adults with CKD, dual RASi therapy versus single RASi therapy

Table S32. Network meta-analysis of adults with CKD, dual RASi therapy versus single RASi therapy

Table S33. Kidney transplant recipients, calcium channel blockers versus placebo or no treatment

Table S34. Kidney transplant recipients, ARB versus placebo or no treatment

Table S35. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi versus placebo, no treatment, or non-antihypertensive treatment

Table S36. Kidney transplant recipients, alpha-blocker versus placebo or no treatment

Table S37. Kidney transplant recipients, beta-blocker versus placebo or no treatment

Table S38. Kidney transplant recipients, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists versus placebo

Table S39. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi or ARB versus placebo, no treatment, or standard of care
Table S40. Children with CKD, intensiﬁed blood pressure control (MAP <50th percentile) versus conventional

blood pressure control (MAP 50th–99th percentile)

Appendix D. Data supplement - Additional SoF tables developed as part of the evidence review

Table S41. Correlation of blood pressure measurement techniques in patients with CKD

Table S42. Accuracy of blood pressure measurement techniques in the general population

Table S43. Systematic reviews of approaches to blood pressure measurement in the general population and

associations with clinical outcomes

Table S44. Systematic reviews of economic evaluations of differing approaches to BP measurement in the

general population

Table S45. Adults with diabetes and CKD and habitual low-salt intake, higher dietary salt intake (through NaCl

supplement) versus regular-salt intake

Table S46. Adults with diabetes and habitual high-salt intake, higher dietary salt intake (through NaCl

supplement) versus regular salt intake

Table S47. Adults with CKD, aerobic exercise to improve blood pressure versus control (no exercise/placebo)

Table S48. Adults with CKD, mix of resistance and cardiovascular exercise versus control (no exercise/placebo)

Table S49. Adults with CKD without diabetes, low-protein versus normal-protein diet
Table S50. Adults with CKD without diabetes, very low–protein versus normal-protein diet
Table S51. Adults with CKD, high base (non-acidic) fruit and vegetable diet versus usual diet with bicarbonate

supplement

Table S52. Adults with CKD and diabetes, carbohydrate-restricted low-iron–available polyphenol-enriched (CR-
LIPE) diet versus usual diet (standard protein–restricted diet [0.8 g/kg/d], isocaloric for ideal body
weight maintenance)

Table S53. Adults with CKD, intensive dietary counselling versus usual (health) care

S4

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c o n t e n t s

Table S54. Adults with diabetes and CKD, low blood pressure target versus standard blood pressure target
Table S55. Adults with diabetes and CKD, low blood pressure target (£120 systolic mm Hg) versus standard

blood pressure target (£140 systolic mm Hg)

Table S56. Adults with diabetes and CKD, low blood pressure target (<80 diastolic mm Hg) versus standard

blood pressure target (80-89 diastolic mm Hg)

Table S57. Adults with diabetes and CKD, low blood pressure target (<130/80 mm Hg) plus multifactorial care

versus usual care

Table S58. Adults with CKD and low proteinuria (PCR £0.22 g/g and PE <0.3 g/d), low MAP target (<92 mm Hg)

versus standard MAP target (102–107 mm Hg)

Table S59. Adults with CKD and high proteinuria (PCR >0.22 g/g and PE >0.3 g/d), low MAP target (<92

mm Hg) versus standard MAP target (102–107 mm Hg)

Table S60. Adults with CKD, ACEi versus placebo or standard of care

Table S61. Adults with CKD, ARB versus placebo or standard of care

Table S62. Adults with CKD, aldosterone antagonist versus placebo or standard of care

Table S63. Adults with CKD, beta-blocker versus placebo or standard of care

Table S64. Adults with CKD, beta-blocker versus RASi

Table S65. Adults with CKD, calcium channel blockers versus placebo

Table S66. Adults with CKD, calcium channel blockers versus RASi

Table S67. Adults with CKD, direct renin inhibitor versus placebo

Table S68. Adults with CKD, direct renin inhibitor versus RASi
Table S69. Adults with CKD, direct renin inhibitor D ACEi or ARB versus placebo or standard of care
Table S70. Adults with CKD, diuretics versus RASi
Table S71. Older adults with CKD (65–85 years old), high-dose ARB versus calcium channel blocker combined

with ARB

Table S72. Adults with CKD, type 2 diabetes, and moderately increased albuminuria, calcium channel

blockers D RAS blockade versus RAS blockade

Table S73. Adults with CKD and chronic hyperkalemia, potassium binder versus placebo

Table S74. Adults with CKD and chronic hyperkalemia, calcium polystyrene sulphonate (CPS) versus sodium

polystyrene sulphonate (SPS)

Table S75. Adults with CKD without diabetes, lower MAP (<92 mm Hg) target versus higher MAP (102–107 mm Hg)

target

Table S76. Adults with CKD and proteinuria (>1g/24 h for at least 3 months) without diabetes, low blood

pressure target (<130/80 mm Hg) versus standard diastolic blood pressure target (<90 mm Hg)

Table S77. Adults with CKD without diabetes, lower blood pressure target (£120 mm Hg) versus standard blood

pressure target

Table S78. Adults ‡75 years of age with CKD without diabetes, lower blood pressure target (£120 mm Hg)

versus standard blood pressure target

Table S79. Adults with CKD without diabetes, calcium channel blockers versus RASi
Table S80. Adults with diabetes and CKD, ACEi or ARB monotherapy versus dual (ACEi D ARB) therapy
Table S81. Adults with diabetes and CKD, diuretics D ACEi or ARB versus ACEi or ARB
Table S82. Adults with diabetes and CKD, diuretics D calcium channel blockers versus ACEi or ARB D calcium

channel blockers

Table S83. Adults with diabetes and CKD, diuretics D ACEi or ARB versus ACEi or ARB D calcium channel

blockers

Table S84. Adults with diabetes and CKD, diuretics D ACEi or ARB D beta-blockers versus placebo plus

standard of care

Table S85. Adults with CKD, type 2 diabetes, and moderately increased albuminuria, calcium channel blocker

versus ARB plus diuretics

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S5

c o n t e n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Table S86. Adults with CKD, type 2 diabetes and albuminuria (AER >100 mg/24 h), direct renin inhibitor versus

placebo

Table S87. Adults with diabetes and CKD, aliskiren versus ACEi or ARB

Table S88. Adults with diabetes, chronic hyperkalemia, and CKD, high-dose potassium binder versus low-dose

potassium binder

Table S89. Kidney transplant recipients, low-salt diet versus usual or normal-salt diet

Table S90. Kidney transplant recipients, Mediterranean diet versus low-fat diet

Table S91. Kidney transplant recipients, any exercise to control blood pressure versus control (no exercise/

placebo exercise)

Table S92. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi versus calcium channel blockers

Table S93. Kidney transplant recipients, ARB versus calcium channel blockers

Table S94. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi versus ARB
Table S95. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi D calcium channel blockers versus ACEi alone
Table S96. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi D calcium channel blockers versus calcium channel blockers alone
Table S97. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi D ARB versus ACEi alone
Table S98. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi D ARB versus ARB alone
Table S99. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi D ARB versus placebo or no treatment
Table S100. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi versus alpha-blocker

Table S101. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi versus beta-blocker

Table S102. Kidney transplant recipients, ARB versus beta-blocker

Table S103. Kidney transplant recipients, calcium channel blockers versus beta-blocker

Table S104. Kidney transplant recipients, ARB versus direct renin inhibitor

Table S105. Kidney transplant recipients, calcium channel blockers versus thiazide

Table S106. Kidney transplant recipients, ACEi or ARB versus placebo, no treatment, or standard of care

Table S107. Children with CKD, ACEi versus standard treatment

S6

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

K D I G O e x e c u t i v e c o m m i t t e e

KDIGO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

Garabed Eknoyan, MD
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Founding KDIGO Co-Chairs

David C. Wheeler, MD, FRCP
Immediate Past Co-Chair

Michel Jadoul, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Mustafa Arici, MD
Tara I. Chang, MD, MS
Jennifer E. Flythe, MD, MPH
Masafumi Fukagawa, MD, PhD
Morgan E. Grams, MD, MPH, PhD
Fan Fan Hou, MD, PhD
Meg Jardine, MBBS, PhD
Markus Ketteler, MD, FERA
Magdalena Madero, MD

Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, MD, MPH, ScD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Jolanta Małyszko, MD, PhD
Ikechi G. Okpechi, MBBS, FWACP, PhD
Rukshana Shroff, MD, FRCPCH, PhD
Laura Solá, MD
Paul E. Stevens, MB, FRCP
Sydney C.W. Tang, MD, PhD, FRCP, FACP, FHKCP, FHKAM
Marcello A. Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc, FRCPC
Christina M. Wyatt, MD

KDIGO Staff
John Davis, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
Danielle Green, Executive Director
Michael Cheung, Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer
Melissa Thompson, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer
Amy Earley, Guideline Development Director
Kathleen Conn, Director of Communications
Tanya Green, Events Director
Coral Cyzewski, Events Coordinator

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S7

r e f e r e n c e k e y s

www.kidney-international.org

Reference keys

NOMENCLATURE AND DESCRIPTION FOR RATING GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS

Within each recommendation, the strength of recommendation is indicated as Level 1 or Level 2, and the quality of the supporting
evidence is shown as A, B, C, or D.

Grade

Level 1 ‘Strong’
“We recommend”

Level 2 ‘Weak’
“We suggest”

Patients

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of
action, and only a small proportion
would not.

The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course
of action, but many would not.

Implications

Clinicians

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

Policy

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy
or a performance measure.

Different choices will be appropriate
for different patients. Each patient
needs help to arrive at a management
decision consistent with her or his
values and preferences.

The recommendation is likely to
require substantial debate and
involvement of stakeholders before
policy can be determined.

Grade

Quality of evidence

Meaning

A
B
C
D

High
Moderate
Low
Very low

We are conﬁdent that the true effect is close to the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often it will be far from the true effect.

S8

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

C K D n o m e n c l a t u r e

CURRENT CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) NOMENCLATURE
USED BY KDIGO

CKD is deﬁned as abnormalities of kidney structure or function, present for > 3 months, with implications for health. CKD is classiﬁed
based on Cause, GFR category (G1–G5), and Albuminuria category (A1-A3), abbreviated as CGA.

Green, low risk (if no other markers of kidney disease, no CKD); yellow, moderately increased risk; orange, high risk; red, very high risk.
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S9

c o n v e r s i o n f a c t o r s

www.kidney-international.org

CONVERSION FACTORS OF CONVENTIONAL UNITS TO SI UNITS

Conventional unit

Conversion factor

Creatinine
Creatinine clearance

mg/dl
ml/min

88.4
0.01667

Note: Conventional unit (cid:1) conversion factor ¼ SI unit.

SI Unit

mmol/l
ml/s

ALBUMINURIA CATEGORIES IN CKD

ACR (approximate equivalent)

Category

AER (mg/24 h)

(mg/mmol)

A1
A2
A3

<30
30–300
>300

<3
3–30
>30

(mg/g)

<30
30–300
>300

Termsa

Normal to mildly increased
Moderately increasedb
Severely increasedc

ACR, albumin-creatinine ratio; AER, albumin excretion rate; CKD, chronic kidney disease.
aFormerly known as “normoalbuminuria,” “microalbuminuria,” and “macroalbuminuria.”
bRelative to young adult level.
cIncluding nephrotic syndrome (albumin excretion usually >2200 mg/24 h [ACR >2200 mg/g; >220 mg/mmol]).

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT

Terms

Standardized ofﬁce blood pressure

Routine ofﬁce blood pressure

Manual blood pressure

Automated ofﬁce blood pressure (AOBP)

Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM)

Home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM)

Deﬁnition

This is the recommended method for measuring blood pressure in the
current revised guideline. Blood pressure measurement following all
guideline-recommended preparations as presented in Figure 2. The device
used is not part of the deﬁnition.

Blood pressure measured in the provider’s ofﬁce. Preparation before
measurement and the device used are not part of the deﬁnition. The
values are often inconsistent between providers performing the
measurements. In addition, it does not bear a reliable relationship with
standardized ofﬁce blood pressure.

Blood pressure obtained using a manual auscultatory blood pressure cuff,
instead of an automated method, with either a mercury or aneroid
sphygmomanometer. Preparation before the measurement is not part of
the deﬁnition.

Blood pressure obtained in the provider’s ofﬁce using an automated
device that is programmed to start only after a set resting period and
measured several times with ﬁxed intervals between measurements. An
average reading is then provided as the output. Preparation before
measurement and attendance by the provider are not part of the
deﬁnition.

Blood pressure obtained on a frequent intermittent basis (i.e., 15–30 min
per 24 h) using an automated wearable device, usually outside the
provider’s ofﬁce or medical facilities.

Blood pressure obtained at the patient’s home with an automated
oscillometric or manual auscultatory device, usually excluding ABPM.
Preparation before measurement, person taking the measurement, and
the device used are not part of the deﬁnition, although they are often
performed by the patient herself/himself with an automated device.

S10

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

a b b r e v i a t i o n s a n d a c r o n y m s

Abbreviations and acronyms

ABPM
ACEi
ACR
AOBP
AKI
ARB
BP
CCB
CI
CKD
CV
DBP
DRI
eGFR
ERT
ESKD
GFR
GI
GRADE

HBPM
HF

ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor(s)
albumin-creatinine ratio
automated ofﬁce blood pressure
acute kidney injury
angiotensin II receptor blocker
blood pressure
calcium channel blocker
conﬁdence interval
chronic kidney disease
cardiovascular
diastolic blood pressure
direct renin inhibitor
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
Evidence Review Team
end-stage kidney disease
glomerular ﬁltration rate
gastrointestinal
Grading of Recommendations Assessment,

Development, and Evaluation
home blood pressure monitoring
heart failure

HR
i.v.
KDIGO
MACE
MAP
MI
MRA
NSAID
OR
PCR
p.o.
RAS
RASi
RCT
RR
SBP
SGLT2
T1D
T2D
UKPDS

hazard ratio
intravenous
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
major adverse cardiovascular events
mean arterial pressure
myocardial infarction
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug(s)
odds ratio
protein-creatinine ratio
oral
renin-angiotensin system
renin-angiotensin system inhibitor(s)
randomized controlled trial
relative risk
systolic blood pressure
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2
type 1 diabetes
type 2 diabetes
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study

Group

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S11

n o t i c e

Notice

www.kidney-international.org

SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon literature searches last conducted in October 2018, supplemented with
additional evidence through September 2019. The search was updated in April 2020 with additional analyses conducted as
required. It is designed to assist decision-making. It is not intended to deﬁne a standard of care and should not be interpreted as
prescribing an exclusive course of management. Variations in practice will inevitably and appropriately occur when clinicians
consider the needs of individual patients, available resources, and limitations unique to an institution or type of practice. Health
care professionals using these recommendations should decide how to apply them to their own clinical practice.

SECTION II: DISCLOSURE
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual or reasonably perceived conﬂicts
of interest that may arise from an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work
Group. All members of the Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form showing
all such relationships that might be perceived as or are actual conﬂicts of interest. This document is updated annually, and
information is adjusted accordingly. All reported information is published in its entirety at the end of this document in the
Work Group members’ Disclosure section and is kept on ﬁle at KDIGO.

Copyright (cid:1) 2021, KDIGO. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the International Society of Nephrology. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Single copies may be
made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws. Special rates are available for educational institutions that wish
to make photocopies for nonproﬁt educational use. No part of this publication may be reproduced, amended, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without explicit permission in writing from KDIGO. Details on how to seek reprints, permission for
reproduction or translation, and further information about KDIGO’s permissions policies can be obtained by contacting
Melissa Thompson, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer, at melissa.thompson@kdigo.org.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither KDIGO, Kidney International, nor the authors, contributors, or editors assume any
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or
from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

S12

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

Foreword

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2020.11.003

With the growing awareness that chronic kidney disease
(CKD) is a major global health problem, Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) was established in
2003 with its stated mission to “improve the care and out-
comes of patients with kidney disease worldwide through
promoting coordination, collaboration, and integration of
initiatives
clinical practice
guidelines.”

to develop and implement

Since 2003, KDIGO has developed a catalog of clinical
practice guidelines informing the care of patients with, or at
risk of, developing kidney diseases. Currently, KDIGO is
updating 2 existing guidelines on the Management of Blood
Pressure in CKD and Glomerular Diseases, respectively. In
addition, KDIGO has recently published its ﬁrst guideline
related to Diabetes Management in CKD.

High blood pressure (BP) is closely related to adverse
kidney and cardiovascular outcomes in CKD. Thus, KDIGO
published its ﬁrst guideline for the management of BP in
CKD in 2012. The guideline was derived from a signiﬁcant
effort by the Work Group to summarize the evidence on this
topic available through 2011. Since 2011, new evidence has
emerged, which has important implications to be considered
for future guideline updates. To this end, KDIGO convened a
Controversies Conference to examine this new evidence as it
relates to the management and treatment of high BP in CKD.
The KDIGO Controversies Conference on Blood Pressure
in CKD assembled a global panel of multidisciplinary clinical
and scientiﬁc experts to identify key issues relevant to the
updating of the KDIGO 2012 Blood Pressure guideline. The
objective of this conference was to assess the current state of
knowledge related to the optimal means for measuring BP,
management of high BP in CKD patients, with and without
diabetes (including older adults), as well as the pediatric and
kidney transplant subpopulations. A guideline update was
recommended and commissioned following this Contro-
versies Conference.

In keeping with KDIGO’s policy for transparency and
rigorous public review during the guideline development
process, the guideline scope was made available for open
commenting prior to the start of the evidence review. The
feedback received on the Scope of Work draft was carefully
considered by the Work Group members. The guideline draft
was also released for public review by external stakeholders.
The Work Group has critically reviewed the feedback from
the public input and revised the guideline as appropriate for
the ﬁnal publication.

We thank Alfred K. Cheung, MD and Johannes F.E. Mann,
MD for leading this important initiative, and we are especially

f o r e w o r d

grateful to the Work Group members who provided their
time and expertise to this endeavor. In addition, this Work
Group was ably assisted by colleagues from the independent
Evidence Review Team (ERT) led by Jonathan Craig, MBChB,
DipCH, FRACP, M Med (Clin Epi), PhD; Martin Howell,
PhD; and David Tunnicliffe, PhD, who made this guideline
possible.

KDIGO recently appointed Marcello Tonelli, MD, SM,
MSc, FRCPC as its ﬁrst Guideline Methods Chair. He was
tasked with improving KDIGO guideline methodology by
reinforcing the linkage between the recommendations and the
corresponding evidence, standardizing the guideline format,
reducing unnecessary length, and enhancing the utility of the
guideline for its users.

To meet these goals, Dr. Tonelli suggested KDIGO work
with MAGICapp, a web-based publishing platform for
evidence-based guidelines. The program uses a predeﬁned
format and allows for both direct linkage of the evidence to
the recommendation statement, and the generation of patient
decision aids directly from the evidence syntheses used to
support the guideline. In addition, he also introduced the
concept of practice points, a new form of guidance in addi-
tion to recommendations. For cases in which a systematic
review was not done, or was performed but did not ﬁnd
sufﬁcient evidence to warrant a recommendation, a practice
point was used to provide guidance to clinicians. Practice
points do not necessarily follow the same format as recom-
mendations—for example, they may be formatted as tables,
ﬁgures, or algorithms—and are not graded for strength or
evidence quality.

With Dr. Tonelli’s guidance and expertise, and through the
use of MAGICapp, and the adoption of practice points,
KDIGO has aligned the update of the Blood Pressure in CKD
Guideline with the current state of the evidence, creating a
highly useful document that is rich in guidance while main-
taining the high-quality standards and rigor for which
KDIGO is best known. The update to the KDIGO guideline
format is discussed below in greater detail by Dr. Tonelli
(Figure 1).

In summary, we are conﬁdent that this guideline will prove
useful to clinicians around the world who are treating people
with high BP and kidney disease. Once again, we thank the
Work Group members and all those who contributed to this
very important KDIGO activity.

Michel Jadoul, MD
Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, MD, ScD
KDIGO Co-Chairs

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S13

f o r e w o r d

www.kidney-international.org

Figure 1 | Updates to the KDIGO guideline format. CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; FAQ, frequently
asked questions; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; GI, gastrointestinal; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

S14

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

f o r e w o r d

Figure 1 | (Continued)

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S15

f o r e w o r d

www.kidney-international.org

Figure 1 | (Continued)

S16

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

f o r e w o r d

Figure 1 | (Continued)

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S17

W o r k G r o u p m e m b e r s h i p

www.kidney-international.org

Work Group membership

WORK GROUP CO-CHAIRS

Alfred K. Cheung, MD
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, USA

WORK GROUP

Tara I. Chang, MD, MS
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA, USA

William C. Cushman, MD, FAHA, FACP
University of Tennessee Health Science Center
Memphis, TN, USA

Susan L. Furth, MD, PhD
Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Fan Fan Hou, MD, PhD
Nanfang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Joachim H. Ix, MD, MAS
University of California San Diego
Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System
San Diego, CA, USA

Gregory A. Knoll, MD, MSc, FRCPC
The Ottawa Hospital
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute
Ottawa, Canada

Johannes F.E. Mann, MD
KfH Kidney Center
University Hospital, Friedrich Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany

Paul Muntner, PhD, MHS, FASH, FAHA
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL, USA

Roberto Pecoits-Filho, MD, PhD, FASN, FACP
Arbor Research Collaborative for Health
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Paraná
Curitiba PR, Brazil

Mark J. Sarnak, MD, MS
Tufts University
Boston, MA, USA

Sheldon W. Tobe, MD, FRCPC, FRCP, FACP, FAHA, MScCH

(HPTE)

University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Northern Ontario School of Medicine
Sudbury, Ontario, Canada

Charles R.V. Tomson, MA, BM, Bch, DM, FRCP
Consultant Nephrologist
Freeman Hospital
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK

METHODS CHAIR
Marcello A. Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc, FRCPC

S18

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

W o r k G r o u p m e m b e r s h i p

j (Continued)

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM

Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, Sydney, Australia
Jonathan C. Craig, MBChB, DipCH, FRACP, M Med (Clin Epi), PhD, Evidence Review Team Director
Suetonia C. Palmer, MBChB, FRACP, PhD, Evidence Review Team Co-Director
Giovanni F.M. Strippoli, MD, MPH, M Med (Clin Epi), PhD, Evidence Review Team Co-Director
Martin Howell, PhD, Assistant Project Director
David J. Tunnicliffe, PhD, Evidence Review Project Team Leader and Project Manager
Fiona Russell, PhD, Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, Managing Editor
Gail Y. Higgins, BA, Grad Ed, Grad Dip LibSc, Information Specialist
Tess E. Cooper, MPH, MSc (Evidence-based Health Care), Research Associate
Nicole Evangelidis, MPH, MPhil, Research Associate
Brydee Cashmore, MPH, Research Associate
Rabia Khalid, MND, Research Associate
Claris Teng, BPsych (Hons), Research Associate
Cochrane Kidney and Transplant recognizes the contribution of authors (Elisabeth Hodson, Emma McMahon, Patrizia Natale,
Narelle Willis) who have updated their reviews for this guideline.

MAGICAPP LIAISON
Lyubov Lytvyn, BSc, MSc

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S19

a b s t r a c t

Abstract

www.kidney-international.org

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) represents an update to the 2012
KDIGO guideline on this topic. The scope includes topics covered in the original guideline, such
as optimal blood pressure targets, lifestyle interventions, and antihypertensive therapies in CKD
patients not receiving dialysis, including special populations such as kidney transplant recipients
and children. In addition, this guideline introduces a chapter dedicated to proper blood pressure
measurement. The goal of the guideline is to serve as a useful resource for clinicians and patients
by providing actionable recommendations with useful infographics based on a rigorous formal
systematic review. Another aim is to propose research recommendations for areas in which there
are gaps in knowledge. The guideline targets clinicians treating high blood pressure and CKD,
while taking into account policy and resource implications. Development of this guideline update
followed an explicit process of evidence review. Treatment approaches and guideline recom-
mendations are based on systematic reviews of relevant studies, and appraisal of the quality of the
evidence and the strength of recommendations followed the Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. Limitations of the evidence are
discussed, and areas of future research are presented.

Keywords: albuminuria; ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor; angiotensin II receptor blocker; antihypertensive agents; automated ofﬁce blood
pressure; blood pressure measurement; blood pressure targets; children; chronic kidney disease;
creatinine; diabetes; dietary sodium; evidence-based; guideline; home blood pressure monitoring;
hyperkalemia; KDIGO; kidney transplant recipient; lifestyle; mineralocorticoid receptor antag-
onist; ofﬁce blood pressure; physical activity; potassium; proteinuria; renin-angiotensin system;
standarized ofﬁce blood pressure; systematic review; weight loss

CITATION

In citing this document, the following format should be used: Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Blood Pressure Work Group. KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney Int.
2021;99(3S):S1–S87.

This guideline, including all statements and evidence, will be published simultaneously on
MAGICapp (https://kdigo.org/guidelines/blood-pressure-in-ckd/). This online format will facil-
itate rapid updates as new evidence emerges.

S20

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

Introduction

The original KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease in
the chronic kidney disease (CKD) population not receiving
dialysis was published in 2012. Since then, completion of the
SPRINT trial and the revision of blood pressure (BP) guide-
lines by many guideline task forces around the world have
prompted the re-examination of the KDIGO 2012 Guideline
for the Management of Blood Pressure. Upon invitation by
the KDIGO Executive Committee, a Work Group consisting
of a subset of the members of the original guideline panel and
some new members was formed in 2018. The Cochrane
Kidney and Transplant group from Australia was selected as
the Evidence Review Team (ERT) for the update, and a new
online publishing software, MAGICapp, was introduced with
the aim to create a “living” guideline that is consistently kept
up-to-date.

A Controversies Conference was held in Edinburgh in
September 2017 to help better identify the emerging evidence,
ongoing controversies, and unsettled questions in relation to
BP management in CKD. The conclusions from this confer-
ence helped to frame the Scope of Work for the Guideline
update. It was decided that since the deﬁnition, management,
and nuances of high BP in the maintenance dialysis popula-
tion are signiﬁcantly different from those in the CKD popu-
lation not receiving dialysis, the Work Group should conﬁne
its purview to the latter population in keeping with the 2012
guideline.

The chapters from the original guidelines have been reor-
ganized. The section on pharmacologic agents in the original
chapter on “Lifestyle and pharmacologic treatments
for
lowering blood pressure in CKD ND patients” has been
signiﬁcantly streamlined and separated. The lifestyle chapter,
Chapter 2, now focuses on dietary sodium restriction and
physical activities. The use of renin-angiotensin inhibitors
(RASi) is now included in the current Chapter 3 under the
broad topic of BP management in CKD patients, while readers
are referred to standard textbooks for descriptions of various
BP-lowering drugs. The original Chapter 3 on BP management
in CKD patients without diabetes and the original Chapter 4
on CKD patients with diabetes are now consolidated into the
current Chapter 3, which covers both subgroups, with the
literature on patients with diabetes and without, combined and
synthesized. The current Chapter 3 also includes guidance
related to older adults with CKD, which was in a separate
chapter in the original guideline. Since older adults comprised
a substantial proportion of the cohort in the SPRINT trial, it
forms a major basis for the current recommendation of the BP
target. Finally, the respective chapters on kidney transplant
recipients and children with CKD have both been retained and
updated.

i n t r o d u c t i o n

The Work Group has identiﬁed 2 major areas that
warrant particular attention in this guideline update
because of new evidence and interests that have emerged
since the publication of the original guideline. These 2 areas
are: (i) BP measurement (Chapter 1) and (ii) BP targets
within the domain of BP management in CKD patients not
receiving dialysis (Chapter 3). These 2 issues are closely
related as the systolic BP (SBP) target of <120 mm Hg
recommended in Chapter 3 is contingent upon proper BP
measurement technique following recommended rigorous
procedures.
This

largely based on its car-
is
dioprotective, survival, and potential cognitive beneﬁts. There
are no new data supporting the renoprotective beneﬁts of
targeting SBP <120 mm Hg. The overall evidence for kidney
protection at this low SBP level is almost non-existent, but it
is somewhat more convincing for CKD patients with pro-
teinuria and long-term follow-up.

lower SBP target

There are certain subpopulations in CKD in which the
evidence supporting the SBP target of <120 mm Hg is
less rigorous; hence, the risk–beneﬁt ratios in those instances
are less certain. These subpopulations include those with
diabetes, advanced CKD (G4 and G5), signiﬁcant protein-
uria, very low diastolic blood pressure (DBP), “white-coat”
hypertension, and at extreme ages (younger or older). Thus,
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in these subpopulations
are necessary.

The term “high BP” is used throughout the document to
denote BP above the target. For most patients with CKD not
receiving dialysis, the target is SBP <120 mm Hg. For kidney
transplant recipients (Chapter 4), the target SBP is <130
mm Hg, and target diastolic BP (DBP) is <80 mm Hg. For
children with CKD (Chapter 5), a mean arterial pressure
(MAP, calculated as DBP þ 1/3 (cid:1) pulse pressure) #50th
percentile for age, sex, and height is the primary target.

The Work Group fully emphasizes that individualization
including consideration of the patient’s
of management,
characteristics, tolerability, and preferences is crucial, as it is
in other areas of medical management. However, the Work
Group also feels that some guidance should be provided to
practitioners and that these practitioners should be aware of
the strengths and weaknesses of the evidence underlying the
recommendations. Evidence in all chapters has been care-
fully gathered and scrutinized by the ERT, including areas in
which the Work Group decided that update or revision of
the guideline is unnecessary. This guideline focuses exclu-
sively on high BP and does not discuss other health-related
issues of CKD, such as smoking or obesity. We also do not
discuss beneﬁts and harms of physical activity or diet
beyond their effects on BP. As in many other KDIGO
guidelines, recommendations for further research are an
integral component as it will
facilitate the update and
revision of future guidelines on BP management in CKD.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S21

i n t r o d u c t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

The Co-Chairs would like to recognize all the efforts of the
Work Group, ERT, and KDIGO staff. We greatly appreciate
the dedication and work of the entire team, as well as the
public comments, and the collaboration of the KDIGO Dia-
betes guideline team. Our goal is to help improve the care of
patients with high BP and CKD, and we hope this update to

the guideline will
nephrology community.

succeed in doing so for

the global

Alfred K. Cheung, MD
Johannes F.E. Mann, MD
Blood Pressure Guideline Update Co-Chairs

S22

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

Summary of recommendation statements and practice
points

The term “high BP” is used throughout the document to denote BP above the target for a particular population under
consideration. For most adult patients with CKD not receiving dialysis, the target is SBP <120 mm Hg (Chapter 3). For adult
kidney transplant recipients, the target remains SBP <130 mm Hg/DBP <80 mm Hg (Chapter 4). For pediatric populations,
MAP (calculated as DBP þ 1/3 (cid:1) pulse pressure) targets are age-dependent (Chapter 5). Given that these targets vary according
to the subpopulation of interest, we have avoided the term “hypertension” when referring to treatment decisions, as the term
“hypertension” requires a single numerical deﬁnition and does not necessarily facilitate BP management.

Chapter 1: Blood pressure measurement

Recommendation 1.1: We recommend standardized ofﬁce BP measurement in preference to routine ofﬁce BP

measurement for the management of high BP in adults (1B).

Practice Point 1.1: An oscillometric BP device may be preferable to a manual BP device for standardized ofﬁce BP
measurement; however, standardization emphasizes adequate preparations for BP measurement, not
the type of equipment.

Practice Point 1.2: Automated ofﬁce BP (AOBP), either attended or unattended, may be the preferred method of stan-

dardized ofﬁce BP measurement.

Practice Point 1.3: Oscillometric devices can be used to measure BP among patients with atrial ﬁbrillation.

Recommendation 1.2: We suggest that out-of-ofﬁce BP measurements with ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM)
or home BP monitoring (HBPM) be used to complement standardized ofﬁce BP readings
for the management of high BP (2B).

Chapter 2: Lifestyle interventions for lowering blood pressure in patients with CKD not receiving
dialysis

2.1. Sodium intake

Recommendation 2.1.1: We suggest targeting a sodium intake <2 g of sodium per day (or <90 mmol of sodium
per day, or <5 g of sodium chloride per day) in patients with high BP and CKD (2C).

Practice Point 2.1.1: Dietary sodium restriction is usually not appropriate for patients with sodium-wasting nephropathy.
Practice Point 2.1.2: The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)–type diet or use of salt substitutes that are rich
in potassium may not be appropriate for patients with advanced CKD or those with hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism or other causes of impaired potassium excretion because of the potential for
hyperkalemia.

2.2. Physical activity

Recommendation 2.2.1: We suggest that patients with high BP and CKD be advised to undertake moderate-
intensity physical activity for a cumulative duration of at least 150 minutes per week,
or to a level compatible with their cardiovascular and physical tolerance (2C).

Practice Point 2.2.1: Consider the cardiorespiratory ﬁtness status, physical limitations, cognitive function, and risk of falls
when deciding on the implementation and intensity of physical activity interventions in individual
patients.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S23

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Practice Point 2.2.2: The form and intensity of physical activity should be considered and modiﬁed as necessary in in-
dividual patients. There may still be important health beneﬁts even if physical activity falls below
targets proposed for the general population.

Chapter 3: Blood pressure management in patients with CKD, with or without diabetes, not receiving
dialysis

3.1. Blood pressure targets

Recommendation 3.1.1: We suggest that adults with high BP and CKD be treated with a target systolic blood pressure

(SBP) of <120 mm Hg, when tolerated, using standardized ofﬁce BP measurement (2B).

Practice Point 3.1.1: It is potentially hazardous to apply the recommended SBP target of <120 mm Hg to BP mea-

surements obtained in a non-standardized manner.

Practice Point 3.1.2: Clinicians can reasonably offer less intensive BP-lowering therapy in patients with very limited life

expectancy or symptomatic postural hypotension.

3.2 Treatment with antihypertensive drugs, including RAS inhibitors (RASi)

Recommendation 3.2.1: We recommend starting renin-angiotensin-system inhibitors (RASi) (angiotensin-con-
verting enzyme inhibitor [ACEi] or angiotensin II receptor blocker [ARB]) for people with
high BP, CKD, and severely increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A3) without diabetes (1B).

Recommendation 3.2.2: We suggest starting RASi (ACEi or ARB) for people with high BP, CKD, and moderately

increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A2) without diabetes (2C).

Recommendation 3.2.3: We recommend starting RASi (ACEi or ARB) for people with high BP, CKD, and

moderately-to-severely increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A2 and A3) with diabetes (1B).

Practice Point 3.2.1: It may be reasonable to treat people with high BP, CKD, and no albuminuria, with or without

diabetes, with RASi (ACEi or ARB).

Practice Point 3.2.2: RASi (ACEi or ARB) should be administered using the highest approved dose that is tolerated to

achieve the beneﬁts described because the proven beneﬁts were achieved in trials using these doses.
Practice Point 3.2.3: Changes in BP, serum creatinine, and serum potassium should be checked within 2-4 weeks of
initiation or increase in the dose of a RASi, depending on the current GFR and serum potassium.

Practice Point 3.2.4: Hyperkalemia associated with use of RASi can often be managed by measures to reduce the serum

potassium levels rather than decreasing the dose or stopping RASi.

Practice Point 3.2.5: Continue ACEi or ARB therapy unless serum creatinine rises by more than 30% within 4 weeks

following initiation of treatment or an increase in dose.

Practice Point 3.2.6: Consider reducing the dose or discontinuing ACEi or ARB in the setting of either symptomatic
hypotension or uncontrolled hyperkalemia despite medical treatment, or to reduce uremic symptoms
while treating kidney failure (estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR] <15 ml/min per 1.73 m2).
Practice Point 3.2.7: Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists are effective for management of refractory hypertension but
may cause hyperkalemia or a reversible decline in kidney function, particularly among patients with
low eGFR.

3.3. Role of dual therapy with RASi

Recommendation 3.3.1: We recommend avoiding any combination of ACEi, ARB, and direct renin inhibitor

(DRI) therapy in patients with CKD, with or without diabetes (1B).

S24

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

Chapter 4: Blood pressure management in kidney transplant recipients (CKD G1T–G5T)

Practice Point 4.1: Treat adult kidney transplant recipients with high BP to a target BP of <130 mm Hg systolic and <80

mm Hg diastolic using standardized ofﬁce BP measurement (see Recommendation 1.1).

Recommendation 4.1: We recommend that a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB) or an ARB be used

as the ﬁrst-line antihypertensive agent in adult kidney transplant recipients (1C).

Chapter 5: Blood pressure management in children with CKD

Recommendation 5.1: We suggest that in children with CKD, 24-hour mean arterial pressure (MAP) by ABPM

should be lowered to £50th percentile for age, sex, and height (2C).

Practice Point 5.1: We suggest monitoring BP once a year with ABPM, and monitoring every 3–6 months with stan-

dardized auscultatory ofﬁce BP in children with CKD.

Practice Point 5.2: In children with high BP and CKD, when ABPM is not available, manual auscultatory ofﬁce BP obtained
in a protocol-driven standardized setting targeting achieved SBP <90th percentile for age, sex, and
height of normal children is a reasonable approach.

Practice Point 5.3: Use ACEi or ARB as ﬁrst-line therapy for high BP in children with CKD. These drugs lower proteinuria
and are usually well tolerated, but they carry the risk of hyperkalemia and have adverse fetal risks for
pregnant women.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S25

c h a p t e r 1

www.kidney-international.org

Chapter 1: Blood pressure measurement

This chapter makes recommendations on how to measure BP
among adults aged $18 years with CKD. Please refer to
Chapter 5 for details of BP measurement in children.

The evidence review for this chapter encompassed only a
search for existing systematic reviews on BP measurement in
the general population. An independent systematic review
was not undertaken by the ERT.

Throughout this chapter, standardized ofﬁce BP refers to
measurements obtained according to recommended prepa-
ration procedures (Figure 21,2), regardless of the type of
equipment used. In contrast, routine ofﬁce BP refers to
measurements obtained without
following these recom-
mended preparation procedures and is often also called casual
ofﬁce BP.

Once the appropriate preparations for standardized ofﬁce
BP have been made, BP may be measured by an automated
oscillometric device or manually using an auscultatory
method. An oscillometric BP device may be preferable to a
manual BP device for standardized ofﬁce BP measurement
(see Practice Point 1.1.), but the main emphasis is on the
importance of measuring BP according to recommended
preparation procedures (Figure 2). Manual BP may be
measured with either a mercury or aneroid sphygmoma-
nometer. However, aneroid devices require frequent calibra-
tion: every 6 months for wall-mounted and every 2–4 weeks
for handheld devices.3,4 Oscillometric devices generally
require less-frequent calibration (e.g., every 1–2 years, based
on manufacturer recommendations), than aneroid devices.3

1

Properly prepare the
patient

2

Use proper technique
for BP measurements

3

Take the proper
measurements needed
for diagnosis and
treatment of elevated
BP

1  Have the patient relax, sitting in a chair (feet on floor, back supported) for > 5 min
2  The patient should avoid caffeine, exercise, and smoking for at least 30 min
    before measurement
3  Ensure patient has emptied his/her bladder
4  Neither the patient nor the observer should talk during the rest period or during
    the measurement
5  Remove all clothing covering the location of cuff placement
6  Measurements made while the patient is sitting or lying on an examining table
    do not fulfill these criteria

1  Use a BP measurement device that has been validated, and ensure that the
    device is calibrated periodically
2  Support the patient’s arm (e.g., resting on a desk)
3  Position the middle of the cuff on the patient’s upper arm at the level of the right
    atrium (the midpoint of the sternum)
4  Use the correct cuff size, such that the bladder encircles 80% of the arm, and note
    if a larger- or smaller-than-normal cuff size is used
5  Either the stethoscope diaphragm or bell may be used for auscultatory readings

1  At the first visit, record BP in both arms. Use the arm that gives the higher reading
    for subsequent readings
2  Separate repeated measurements by 1–2 min
3  For auscultatory determinations, use a palpated estimate of radial pulse
    obliteration pressure to estimate SBP. Inflate the cuff 20–30 mm Hg above this
    level for an auscultatory determination of the BP level
4  For auscultatory readings, deflate the cuff pressure 2 mm Hg per second, and
    listen for Korotkoff sounds

4

Properly document
accurate BP readings

1  Record SBP and DBP. If using the auscultatory technique, record SBP and DBP as
    onset of the first Korotkoff sound and disappearance of all Korotkoff sounds,
    respectively, using the nearest even number
2  Note the time of most recent BP medication taken before measurements

5

Average the readings

Use an average of ≥ 2 readings obtained on ≥ 2 occasions to estimate the
individual’s level of BP

6

Provide BP readings
to patient

Provide patients with the SBP/DBP readings verbally and in writing

Figure 2 | Checklist for standardized ofﬁce blood pressure measurement. BP, blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic
blood pressure. Modiﬁcation for pediatrics: BP in infants should be taken while supine and the use of the bell is recommended.1 Reprinted from
the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, Volume 71, Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/
APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines, Pages e127–e248, ª 2018 with
permission from the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Association, Inc.2

S26

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 1

Some oscillometric devices can be programmed to auto-
matically provide a period of rest followed by multiple BP
readings with a single activation, a method known as auto-
mated ofﬁce BP (AOBP). AOBP can be performed either with
the patient alone (i.e., unattended) or with a healthcare
provider/technician present (i.e., attended), whereas the other
ofﬁce BP methods all require a healthcare provider to be
present to perform the measurement. We suggest that AOBP
is the preferred method of standardized ofﬁce BP measure-
ment (see Practice Point 1.2), but we have no preference for
unattended versus attended measurement.

Recommendation 1.1: We recommend standardized
ofﬁce BP measurement in preference to routine of-
ﬁce BP measurement for the management of high
BP in adults (1B).

This recommendation places a relatively higher value on con-
sistency with the BP measurement methods used to deﬁne BP
targets in prior large clinical outcome trials. It also places a
higher value on avoidance of misclassiﬁcation to prevent over-
treatment or undertreatment of high BP. This recommendation
places a lower value on the increased burden to patients, pro-
viders, and staff. This recommendation is strong because, in the
Work Group’s opinion, the importance of ofﬁce BP measured
using a standardized versus a routine, non-standardized
approach outweighs any potential burden to its implementation.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. This recommendation relies
heavily on the importance of standardized ofﬁce BP mea-
surement protocols that are consistent with large randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) with clinically important outcomes
that have been used to deﬁne BP targets. Standardized ofﬁce
BP measurements allow for extrapolation of the RCT ﬁndings
to clinical practice and avoid overtreatment or undertreat-
ment of high BP that may occur if non-standardized mea-
surements are used. The negative aspects of standardized
ofﬁce BP measurement, including the increased burden on
patient, provider, staff time, and clinic space, are outweighed
by the beneﬁts.

it

Quality of evidence. There is moderate-quality evidence that
routine ofﬁce BP is generally, but not invariably, higher than
standardized ofﬁce BP, regardless of whether manual or
oscillometric devices are used. However,
there is strong
evidence that the relationship between routine ofﬁce BP and
standardized ofﬁce BP is highly variable among individuals.
Thus,
is not possible to apply a correction factor to
translate a given routine BP value to standardized ofﬁce BP.
Values and preferences. Appropriate BP management re-
quires proper BP measurements. All large randomized BP
outcome trials used standardized ofﬁce BP measurements. In
the opinion of the Work Group, the importance of measuring
BP in a manner that is consistent with the RCTs far outweighs
the additional burdens and costs for providers, staff, and

patients. Increased costs are due to personnel and clinic time
utilization.

Routine ofﬁce BP measurements are generally higher than
standardized ofﬁce BP measurements.5,6 Therefore, the use of
routine ofﬁce BP measurements for BP management could lead
to overtreatment of BP and possibly result in a higher incidence
of hypotension-related adverse events. Conversely, for some
persons for whom routine ofﬁce BP is lower than standardized
ofﬁce BP, use of routine ofﬁce BP could lead to undertreatment of
high BP and result in a higher risk of future cardiovascular (CV)
events. Routine and standardized BP measurements have poor
agreement, including those in the CKD population.5,6 It is
therefore not possible to convert a routine ofﬁce BP into a
standardized ofﬁce BP using a correction factor in an individual.
Thus, in the opinion of the Work Group, most well-informed
patients would accept the additional time required for stan-
dardized ofﬁce BP measurement.

Resource use and costs. Standardized ofﬁce BP does not
necessarily require additional equipment beyond the existing
BP measurement devices. However, standardized ofﬁce BP
takes longer to perform than routine ofﬁce BP, given the need
to follow proper preparatory procedures (Figure 2). There-
fore, there may be an increased time burden on patients,
providers, and staff. This approach also requires staff training
and retraining to ensure that a standardized BP measurement
approach is followed. Adequate access to a quiet clinic space
that allows for an adequate rest period prior to BP mea-
surement may also be an issue in certain settings. However, in
the opinion of the Work Group, this recommendation is likely
to be cost-effective as it may avert consequences of over-
treatment and undertreatment, though an economic analysis
has not been published.

Considerations for implementation. The use of standardized
ofﬁce BP over routine ofﬁce BP holds true for all patients,
regardless of age, sex, race, or CKD severity.

Rationale
This chapter is an addition since the KDIGO 2012 BP guide-
line. This recommendation places a relatively higher value on
consistency with BP measurement methods used in prior
outcome trials examining different BP targets, and on mini-
mizing overtreatment or undertreatment of BP that may result
from routine, non-standardized ofﬁce BP measurements. This
recommendation places a lower value on the increased time
required to perform standardized BP measurements.

This recommendation is consistent with other recent
guidelines that also underscore the importance of standard-
ized ofﬁce BP measurement (e.g., American College of Car-
diology [ACC]/American Heart Association [AHA],2,7 and
European Society of Cardiology [ESC]8).

Practice Point 1.1: An oscillometric BP device may be
preferable to a manual BP device for standardized ofﬁce BP
measurement;
emphasizes
adequate preparations for BP measurement, not the type of
equipment.

standardization

however,

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S27

c h a p t e r 1

www.kidney-international.org

Oscillometric BP devices may be preferred over manual BP
devices, as the former minimizes potential sources of inac-
curacies in BP measurements that can occur with human
errors associated with manual BP measurement such as those
resulting from hearing impairment, an improper deﬂation
rate, or terminal-digit bias.9

Manual BP devices are also acceptable when oscillometric
devices are unavailable. The main emphasis is on the importance
of obtaining standardized BP measurements that are made ac-
cording to recommended preparation procedures (Figure 2).

RCTs and prospective cohort studies used standardized
ofﬁce BP measured with either oscillometric (in newer
studies) or manual devices (in older studies; Figure 310–13).
that directly compared standardized ofﬁce BP
Studies
measured using an oscillometric device versus a manual de-
vice do not suggest overt differences in readings between these
2 types of devices (Supplementary Table S414–16). Moreover,
all BP measurement devices are validated and calibrated
against mercury sphygmomanometers, so they would be ex-
pected to give similar BP readings. Therefore, BP levels from
trials that have used different types of standardized ofﬁce BP
measurements should, in general, be comparable.

The negative aspects of oscillometric BP devices are the
potentially higher cost of the device compared with a manual
device, the requirement of an electric power source, and lack
of availability in some settings. In choosing a device, one that
has been validated for accuracy and precision against a mer-
cury sphygmomanometer should be selected. Several national
medical or hypertension associations have established a vali-
dated device listing that has information on oscillometric
devices that are suitable for use.17–19 Providers working in
areas where oscillometric BP devices are not available may use

a manual BP device, but proper calibration of these BP de-
vices is required as noted above.

Regardless of the type of BP device used, proper prepa-
techniques are paramount

ration and BP measurement
(Figure 2).

Practice Point 1.2: Automated ofﬁce BP (AOBP), either
attended or unattended, may be the preferred method of
standardized ofﬁce BP measurement.

In the opinion of the Work Group, AOBP may increase the
likelihood of adherence to proper preparation measures, as
the AOBP devices can be programmed to include a rest
period. AOBP devices can also automatically take multiple BP
measurements and provide an average BP measurement.
Thus, BP measured with AOBP can be either attended (i.e.,
with a healthcare provider in the room) or unattended (i.e.,
without a provider in the room). Although a recent meta-
analysis suggested that unattended AOBP measurements
result in lower average BPs than attended measurements,20
the differences were notably small when restricted to studies
that randomized the order in which unattended and attended
standardized measurements were made.18,21–25

Several

large trials,

including Systolic Blood Pressure
Intervention Trial (SPRINT), Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and
in Combination with Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial
(ONTARGET), and Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes (ACCORD), used AOBP as the BP measurement
method (Figure 3). Of note, the SPRINT protocol did not
specify whether AOBP should be performed while attended or
unattended. A post hoc analysis of SPRINT data found that
while a majority of sites did perform unattended AOBP, many
combination of
performed attended AOBP or

some

Study

Year

Population

Type of study

Method/device

Framingham
MDRD
UKPDS
AASK
ADVANCE
CRIC
ACCORD
SPS3

1970s
1994
1998
2002
2007
2009
2010
2011

ONTARGET†

2012

CKD–JAC
SPRINT

2013
2015

General
CKD (eGFR < 55 ml/min/1.73 m2)
T2D (baseline SCr 1.06 mg/dl [94 μmol/l])
CKD (GFR 20–65 ml/min/1.73 m2)
T2D (baseline SCr 0.97 mg/dl [86 μmol/l]; 19% CKD)‡
CKD (eGFR < 70 ml/min/1.73 m2)
T2D (baseline SCr 0.9 mg/dl [80 μmol/l]; 37% CKD)
Recent lacunar stroke (baseline eGFR 80
ml/min/1.73 m2; 16% CKD)§
CVD or T2D (baseline SCr 1.05 mg/dl [93 μmol/l];
24% CKD, eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m2)
CKD (eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m2)
High CVD risk (baseline SCr 1.07 mg/dl [95 μmol/l];
28% CKD, eGFR 20–< 60 ml/min/1.73 m2)

Observational
Clinical trial
Clinical trial
Clinical trial
Clinical trial
Observational
Clinical trial
Clinical trial

Clinical trial

Manual
Manual
Automated
Manual
Manual
Manual and automated
Automated/Omron™
Automated/Colin
electronic device
Automated/Omron™

Observational
Clinical trial

Manual
Automated/Omron™

Figure 3 | Blood pressure measurement method and device used in select RCTs and prospective observational studies. AASK, African
American Study of Kidney Disease and Hypertension; ACCORD, Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes; ADVANCE, Action in Diabetes
and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron Modiﬁed Release Controlled Evaluation; CKD-JAC, Chronic Kidney Disease Japan Cohort; CRIC,
Chronic Renal Insufﬁciency Cohort; MDRD, Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease; ONTARGET, Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination
with Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial; SPRINT, Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial; SPS3, Secondary Prevention of Small Subcortical Strokes
Trial; UKPDS, United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study. Adapted with modiﬁcations with permission of the American Society of Nephrology
from BP measurement in clinical practice: time to SPRINT to guideline-recommended protocols. Drawz PE, Ix JH, volume 29, Copyright ª 2018,
permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.10 †ONTARGET was published in 2008.11 The BP measurement approach used in
the trial was subsequently published in the 2012 article referenced above. ‡de Galan et al.12 §Peralta et al.13 CKD, chronic kidney disease;
CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; RCT, randomized controlled trial; SCr, serum creatinine; T2D, type 2
diabetes.

S28

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 1

unattended and attended measurements.26 Nonetheless,
similar BP levels and CV disease risk reduction were observed
in the intensive group in SPRINT participants, whether the
measurement
technique used was primarily attended or
unattended.

Unattended AOBP measurements may have some practical
advantages over attended standardized BP measurements,
such as discouraging talking by the patients and freeing clinic
staff to complete other duties during the BP measurement
process.

Practice Point 1.3: Oscillometric devices can be used to
measure BP among patients with atrial ﬁbrillation.

It is a misperception that oscillometric devices do not
measure BP accurately among patients with atrial ﬁbrillation.
Prior studies comparing BP measured using oscillometric
devices versus auscultatory techniques suggest that oscillo-
metric devices provide a valid systolic BP (SBP) assessment in
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation.27 Although oscillometric de-
vices may be less accurate for estimating diastolic BP (DBP)
than auscultatory techniques,
the population with atrial
ﬁbrillation is, on average, older, and the emphasis in older
adults has been on SBP.28

Recommendation 1.2: We suggest that out-of-ofﬁce
BP measurements with ambulatory BP monitoring
(ABPM) or home BP monitoring (HBPM) be used to
complement standardized ofﬁce BP readings for the
management of high BP (2B).

This
recommendation places a relatively higher value on
detecting a potential difference in BP status based on ofﬁce versus
out-of-ofﬁce BP (Figure 4). In the judgment of the Work Group,
the potential beneﬁts of additional information obtained from
out-of-ofﬁce BP measurements outweigh the additional costs and
increased patient burden that these measurements impose. We
suggest using an initial ABPM to supplement standardized ofﬁce
BP and HBPM for ongoing management of BP. Although ABPM
may be the better measurement method, HBPM is more prac-
routine out-of-ofﬁce assessment. HBPM may be
tical
particularly important for the management of BP when a clinic

for

visit is not practical, for example, in the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic. For individuals not taking antihyper-
tensive medication identiﬁed as having “white-coat” hyperten-
sion, annual out-of-ofﬁce BP assessments may be useful. For
individuals taking antihypertensive medication, 1 week of daily
HBPM prior to each ofﬁce visit may be useful to complement
standardized ofﬁce BP for clinical management decisions.

This is a weak recommendation according to GRADE,
since there are no large RCTs comparing the effects of lower
versus higher BP goals on clinical outcomes in adults that used
out-of-ofﬁce measurements to guide the BP intervention.
the BP target using out-of-ofﬁce measurements is
Hence,
unknown. Furthermore, it may not be feasible to implement
ABPM and HBPM in many settings. Providers working in
areas where ABPM is not available may choose to use HBPM
instead of an initial ABPM procedure. Patients who ﬁnd
ABPM and HBPM to be uncomfortable and inconvenient
may prefer not to use such devices.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. This recommendation places
a relatively higher value on assessing a patient’s broader BP
proﬁle than relying solely on standardized ofﬁce BP mea-
surements. Observational studies indicate that the diagnosis
of high BP and BP control status differs for a high proportion
of adults when BP is measured in the ofﬁce versus outside the
ofﬁce, which can lead to detection of masked hypertension,
masked uncontrolled hypertension, “white-coat” hyperten-
sion, and the “white-coat” effect (Figure 4). Further, obser-
vational studies indicate a stronger association of out-of-ofﬁce
BP measurements with CV and kidney outcomes than ofﬁce
BP measurements in the general population and CKD.29–31
Masked hypertension and masked uncontrolled hyper-
tension are present among 9%–30% of adults without high
BP based on ofﬁce measurements and are associated with
higher risk for CV disease and kidney outcomes compared
with sustained normotension and sustained controlled hy-
pertension, respectively. “White-coat” hypertension and the
“white-coat” effect are present among 15%–30% of adults
with high BP based on ofﬁce measurements. In a recent meta-
analysis, “white-coat” hypertension was associated with a

n
o
d
e
s
a
b
n
o
i
s
n
e
t
r
e
p
y
H

P
B
e
c
ffi
o
d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

Not taking antihypertensive medication

Yes

White-coat
hypertension

Sustained
hypertension

No

Normotension

Masked
hypertension

No

Yes

Hypertension based on
out-of-office BP

n
o
d
e
s
a
b
n
o
i
s
n
e
t
r
e
p
y
H

P
B
e
c
ffi
o
d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

Yes

No

Taking antihypertensive medication

White-coat
effect

Sustained uncontrolled
hypertension

Sustained controlled
hypertension

Masked uncontrolled
hypertension

No

Yes

Hypertension based on
out-of-office BP

Figure 4 | Blood pressure patterns informed by out-of-ofﬁce blood pressure measurements in addition to standardized ofﬁce blood
pressure measurement.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c h a p t e r 1

www.kidney-international.org

modest increased risk for CV disease, compared to sustained
normotension.29 However, this risk was substantially lower
than the risk for participants with sustained hypertension.31
Additionally, the “white-coat” effect was not associated with
increased risk for CV disease when compared to the risk for
people with sustained controlled hypertension.29

The prevalences of “white-coat” hypertension, masked
hypertension, the “white-coat” effect, and masked uncon-
trolled hypertension are each high among patients with
CKD.5,32–35 Identiﬁcation of “white-coat” hypertension and
masked hypertension for patients not taking antihypertensive
medication, and the “white-coat” effect and masked uncon-
trolled hypertension for patients taking antihypertensive
medication may have potential treatment implications (see
Rationale section). However, it remains to be determined
whether initiation of antihypertensive medication among
patients with “white-coat” hypertension and masked hyper-
tension, or intensiﬁcation of antihypertensive medication
among patients with the “white-coat” effect and masked
uncontrolled hypertension improves outcomes (see Research
Recommendations).

This recommendation places a relatively lower value on the
potential lack of device availability, costs, and patient and staff
burden.

Quality of evidence. There are systematic reviews in the
general population showing that high out-of-ofﬁce BP is
associated with CV disease risk independent of ofﬁce BP.36
Although there are no systematic reviews in CKD patients,
the results from individual studies in CKD are generally
consistent with the general population data in that BP differs
when measured outside the ofﬁce versus in the ofﬁce setting,
and out-of-ofﬁce readings provide additional prognostic
information.32,34 Therefore, there is no reason to suspect that
ﬁndings
in the general population would not apply to
patients with CKD also. The systematic reviews and meta-
analyses of general population studies provide moderate-
quality evidence because of
limitations of
observational studies, but the evidence quality is upgraded
from low because of the strength of associations of out-of-
ofﬁce BP measurements with critically important outcomes.
However, no single outcome trial targeting out-of-ofﬁce BP
has been reported so far in CKD populations.

the inherent

Values and preferences. This recommendation places a
relatively higher value on providing complementary infor-
mation to standardized ofﬁce BP that may affect clinical de-
cisions. There is a modest correlation between BP measured
in the ofﬁce and outside of the ofﬁce using ABPM or HBPM.
However, these BP measurements should not be considered
interchangeable. Importantly, there have been no large RCTs
with clinical outcomes using ABPM or HBPM to deﬁne BP
targets. Therefore, at present, ABPM and HBPM cannot be
used alone to guide therapy. The recommendation places a
relatively lower value on the potential lack of device avail-
ability, costs, and patient burden. In the opinion of the Work
Group, many but not all patients and providers will value the
information provided by ABPM and HBPM. Prior studies

have found that a majority of patients prefer HBPM to
ABPM. HBPM has been reported by patients to result in
fewer disturbances in their daily activities and to be more
comfortable than ABPM.37–39 The Work Group recognizes
that some patients will ﬁnd both ABPM and HBPM to be
uncomfortable and/or inconvenient, and such patients may
choose to forgo measurement using these devices.

Resource use and costs. This recommendation stems from
studies showing that ABPM is cost-saving and cost-effective
for the management of high BP in the general population.
Although studies were not conducted in CKD, there is no
reason to expect
the cost-savings would be any
different in the CKD population.40,41 In contrast, the cost-
effectiveness of HBPM for management of high BP is
unclear.40,41 Persons with limited ﬁnancial resources, or
those treated in health systems where ABPM and HBPM
are less available or affordable, may be less inclined to
follow this recommendation.

that

Consideration for implementation. The use of ABPM or
HBPM will depend on the resources available. Staff should be
trained to conduct ABPM and to teach patients proper HBPM
techniques. This recommendation holds true for all patients,
regardless of age, sex, race, or CKD severity.

ABPM requires recalibration every 1–2 years, based on
manufacturer recommendations.3 There are no standardized
protocols for calibrating HBPM devices; however, when it is
suspected that home measurements are inaccurate, providers
should ask their patients to bring their HBPM device to the
ofﬁce to compare BP values on these devices with those ob-
tained from a calibrated device.42

Rationale
This recommendation places a high value on informing an
individual’s overall BP proﬁle and identifying persons with
high CV disease risks related to high BP. This recommenda-
tion places a relatively lower value on the potential lack of
device availability, cost, and patient burden.

Observational studies indicate that the diagnosis of high
BP and BP control status differs for a high proportion of
adults when BP is measured in the ofﬁce versus outside the
ofﬁce. Also, observational studies indicate a stronger associ-
ation of out-of-ofﬁce BP measurements with CV and kidney
outcomes than ofﬁce BP measurements in the general pop-
ulation and CKD.

Identiﬁcation of “white-coat” hypertension, masked hy-
pertension, the “white-coat” effect, and masked uncontrolled
hypertension has potential treatment implications. Antihy-
pertensive medication initiation and intensiﬁcation may be
considered for patients with substantial masked hypertension
and masked uncontrolled hypertension, respectively, whereas
for those with substantial “white-coat” hypertension and the
“white-coat” effect the choice may be made to defer initiation
and defer intensiﬁcation of antihypertensive medication,
respectively, especially in individuals with symptoms associ-
ated with documented out-of-ofﬁce hypotension. However,
that
the Work Group acknowledges

the lack of RCTs

S30

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 1

speciﬁcally address whether and how best to treat BP proﬁles
identiﬁed by out-of-ofﬁce BP measurements. HBPM also has
the advantage of empowering individuals to take ownership
of their medical care, hence promoting adherence to therapy.

Research recommendations
There are several areas in which more research is needed
speciﬁcally for the CKD population:
(cid:3) Identify if procedures for standardized BP measurement
can be simpliﬁed, such as using a shorter rest period (e.g., 1
or 2 minutes) or a shorter interval between BP measure-
ments (e.g., 15 or 30 seconds).

(cid:3) Compare standardized unattended versus
attended AOBP in routine clinical practice.

standardized

(cid:3) Determine the optimal interval for repeating ABPM and
HBPM among individuals not taking and taking antihy-
pertensive medications.

(cid:3) Determine the proportion of CKD patients with “white-
coat” hypertension, masked hypertension, the “white-coat”
effect, and masked uncontrolled hypertension using a BP
threshold of 120 mm Hg instead of 140 mm Hg, and
whether these phenotypes are associated with increased risk
for CV disease.

(cid:3) Assess the cost-effectiveness of ABPM and HBPM, sepa-
rately, for identifying “white-coat” hypertension, masked
hypertension, the “white-coat” effect, and masked uncon-
trolled hypertension.

(cid:3) Conduct RCTs comparing treatment based on ABPM or
standardized ofﬁce BP measurements.
HBPM versus
Treatment based on ABPM or HBPM includes not treating
patients with “white-coat” hypertension, not intensifying
treatment for the “white-coat” effect, treatment of masked
hypertension, and intensifying treatment for masked un-
controlled hypertension.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S31

c h a p t e r 2

www.kidney-international.org

Chapter 2: Lifestyle interventions for lowering blood
pressure in patients with CKD not receiving dialysis

2.1 Sodium intake

Recommendation 2.1.1: We suggest targeting a
sodium intake <2 g of sodium per day (or <90 mmol
of sodium per day, or <5 g of sodium chloride per
day) in patients with high BP and CKD (2C).

This recommendation places a relatively high value on data from
both the CKD population and the general population demon-
strating that reductions in dietary sodium intake induce short-
term reductions in BP and other evidence suggesting that these
beneﬁts will reduce the need for antihypertensive medications.
The Work Group placed lower value on the limited available
data evaluating the effects of dietary sodium intake on clinical
outcomes, including kidney failure, mortality, and CV disease
endpoints in CKD patients. The recommendation is weak ac-
cording to GRADE because of the low-quality evidence sup-
porting the beneﬁts of
low-sodium intake speciﬁcally in the
hypertensive CKD population; yet, many well-informed patients
would agree to follow the guidance. This represents a change
from the recommendation (1C) in the 2012 guideline based on
the opinion of the current Work Group members, but it is
consistent with the KDIGO 2020 Guideline for the Management
of Patients with Diabetes and CKD.

Key information

in sodium intake.

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. In most populations
worldwide, estimated average sodium intake is much higher
than the proposed target of sodium intake <2 g (<90 mmol)
per day for the general population. Recent meta-analyses of
in non-CKD populations demonstrate a graded
RCTs
beneﬁt
in both BP and CV disease risk reduction with
reductions
Importantly, even more-
modest reductions in sodium intake that did not reach
the <2 g per day target were associated with these
beneﬁts.43 Indeed, achieved mean sodium intake typically was
in the 3.0–3.5 g/d range, and the low target of <2 g/d was
this
reached in few participants.
recommendation is driven by short-term studies of moderate-
quality evidence evaluating SBP and DBP, but not CV events,
as endpoints. It is unknown whether sodium intakes far below
2 g per day are safe or not.

In CKD populations,

The Work Group notes that there are instances in which
recommendations in the general population may not apply to
the CKD population. For example, rarely, CKD patients may
have salt-wasting kidney disease in which case this recom-
mendation may not apply. In some instances, salt substitutes

are used for the purpose of maintaining food-taste prefer-
ences in people practicing dietary sodium restriction. These
substitutes often replace sodium with potassium salts. Clinical
trials of potassium-containing salt substitutes systematically
so beneﬁts and harms of
exclude patients with CKD,
potassium-containing salt substitutes in CKD are not avail-
able. Potassium-containing salt substitutes differ from foods
rich in potassium, as such foods may have other health
beneﬁts, thus extrapolating data from potassium intake in the
diet may not be informative to potassium-containing salt
substitutes. Although there is still controversy about the risk–
beneﬁt ratio of potassium intake, observational studies often
found that a higher potassium intake may be associated with a
lower risk for all-cause death, CV disease, and CV death.
However, at advanced stages of CKD (G4 and G5), a high
potassium intake may be associated with higher risk.44–46 The
Work Group suggests caution in using potassium-containing
salt substitutes in CKD populations, especially in those with
advanced CKD, hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, or
hyperkalemia from other causes until more data on the safety
and efﬁcacy of their use in CKD become available (see
Practice Point 2.1.2).

Quality of evidence. The Cochrane systematic reviews upda-
ted for this guideline found low-to-moderate-quality evidence
demonstrating that dietary sodium reduction results in short-
term reductions in BP in CKD populations.47,48 This was
evident for both SBP and DBP in CKD without diabetes
(moderate; Supplementary Table S549–58); Type 1 diabetes
(T1D) and CKD (low; Supplementary Table S659–63); Type 2
diabetes (T2D) and CKD (low; Supplementary Table S764–69);
and diabetes and severely increased albuminuria (low;
Supplementary Tables S8 and S9,63,66,68,69). These data were
considered in the context of a substantial body of evidence
conﬁrming short-term beneﬁts in SBP and DBP reduction in
the general population.
the
magnitude of BP lowering may be greater in persons with high
BP, which is more prevalent in CKD patients.43

In the general population,

There is also moderate strength of evidence from sys-
tematic reviews that lowering of sodium intake reduces CV
disease in the general population.43 The systematic review
conducted for this guideline found no RCT data evaluating
the effects of dietary sodium reduction on clinical outcomes,
including kidney failure (formerly known as end-stage kidney
disease [ESKD]), CV disease, or mortality in CKD pop-
ulations. However, the Work Group agrees that there is no
reason to believe that the epidemiologic ﬁndings in the gen-
eral population would be different in CKD populations.

S32

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 2

Further, persons with CKD frequently take angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) or angiotensin II re-
ceptor blockers (ARB) compared to non-RASi therapy, and
the kidney and CV beneﬁts of these medications may be
enhanced if accompanied by a low-sodium diet compared to a
high-sodium diet.70

Values and preferences. This recommendation places a
relatively high value on the beneﬁts of using a non-
pharmacologic method to lower BP and minimize additional
medications. The recommendation places a relatively high
value on data from the general population, demonstrating
that reductions in dietary sodium intake induce short-term
reductions in BP, and other evidence suggests that these
beneﬁts likely extend to people with CKD. The Work
Group placed lower value on the limited available data
evaluating the effects of dietary sodium reduction on
clinical outcomes,
including kidney failure, mortality, and
CV disease endpoints in CKD patients. The Work Group
also considered the secondary beneﬁts of dietary sodium
reduction in reducing pill burden and medication-related
side effects. However, in the judgment of the Work Group,
some individuals may prefer additional medications to the
burden and decreased palatability of foods when following a
low-sodium diet. Although fortiﬁed salt is an important
treatment for iodine deﬁciency in some countries, the Work
the beneﬁts of
implementing this
Group judged that
recommendation in CKD patients likely outweigh its risks.
The recommendation is weak because, in controlled trials,
only a minority of patients reached a target intake of <2 g
(<90 mmol) of sodium per day, and effects on important
clinical outcomes in CKD are uncertain. However, the Work
Group believes that the beneﬁts of the recommendation
likely exceed the harms and that many well-informed
patients would try to follow the advice.

Resource use and costs. Processed foods are generally higher
in salt and often are less expensive than fresh food alterna-
tives. Yet, a higher sodium intake associated with processed
foods is likely to necessitate additional antihypertensive
medications, greater pill burden, and associated healthcare
costs. The Work Group also recognizes that, although feasible,
following a low-sodium diet is challenging in many Western
food environments. However,
this recommendation may
not only beneﬁt individual patients, but also may inﬂuence
public health interventions and policymakers to consider
targeting
food supply.
Although this may require buy-in from key stakeholders,
policy changes, and investment of public health resources,
the Work Group believes that the health beneﬁts of such
changes are also likely to be experienced by a wider
population than those with CKD alone.

sodium in the

reductions of

Considerations for implementation. This recommendation
places high value on evidence linking short-term changes in
sodium intake with reductions in BP in CKD populations,
and extrapolation of long-term beneﬁts from the general
population. Although there is limited evidence from RCTs
about the long-term beneﬁts or harms of sodium reduction

commonly hypertensive,

in CKD populations per se, the Work Group agrees, with
few exceptions, that there is little evidence or likelihood
that health beneﬁts observed in the general population
should not apply to CKD patients. On the contrary, there is
reason to believe that the health beneﬁts of dietary sodium
reduction may be particularly beneﬁcial in CKD patients.
Persons with CKD are
and
systematic reviews have suggested that the magnitude of BP
reduction for a given degree of reduction in dietary sodium
intake is magniﬁed in hypertensive individuals, particularly
if usual sodium intake is high.43 CKD populations also have
high risk of CV disease and may therefore have a greater
absolute risk reduction of such events with dietary sodium
reduction, if the relative beneﬁts in the general population
are indeed applicable to CKD. Finally, ACEi and ARBs are
commonly used in CKD patients, and post hoc analyses of
RCTs demonstrate that low-sodium intake may enhance the
effects of these medications on kidney and CV outcomes.70
The Work Group agrees that decreasing dietary sodium
intake is likely to also be appropriate in children with CKD,
albeit with modiﬁed targets. Speciﬁc targets are not available
from prior studies for children with CKD, but the Work
Group believes that adjusting the <2 g (<90 mmol) daily
target for body weight in children would be reasonable.71

The Work Group considered the speciﬁc target of sodium
intake of <2 g (<90 mmol) daily and found no evidence
showing different health beneﬁts or harms at different sodium
intake targets in CKD populations per se. Existing interven-
tion studies targeting BP in CKD populations typically
targeted <2 g or <2.3 g daily in the low-sodium arms, which
are similar to targets recommended for the general popula-
tion.43,71,72 Therefore, the present guideline was created in the
absence of data suggesting superiority or inferiority of other
targets in CKD populations. Further, for concordance across
guidelines from various organizations that might facilitate
policy decisions, Work Group members agree a target of <2.0
g per day should be recommended for CKD populations.

Rationale
This recommendation places a relatively higher value on studies
in CKD populations demonstrating that short-term dietary
sodium reduction interventions lower BP, and consistency with
ﬁndings of similar interventions in the general population. The
recommendation also places a higher value on dietary sodium-
reduction strategies as a readily available, non-pharmacologic
intervention to lower BP in CKD populations. Relatively lower
value was placed on the challenges in following a low-sodium
diet in many current food environments. This recommenda-
tion is made despite low-to-moderate-quality evidence in CKD
populations per se, especially for hard clinical endpoints,
because in the judgment of the Work Group, relative beneﬁts of
efforts to lower dietary sodium intake will outweigh risks and
healthcare costs in most patients.

Although there is a lack of RCT data on use of potassium-
containing salt substitutes in CKD populations, Work Group
members are concerned about the risk of hyperkalemia that

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S33

c h a p t e r 2

www.kidney-international.org

these salt substitutes may pose to persons with advanced
CKD, as well as observational data suggesting that higher
dietary potassium intake may be associated with increased
risk of CV and kidney outcomes in CKD populations.45,46 The
Work Group acknowledges that there is also evidence to the
contrary in people at high CV risk in the general popula-
tion.73,74 Therefore, the present recommendation for sodium
reduction refers to dietary sodium reduction without substi-
tution with potassium until further studies can discern risks
and beneﬁts of salt-substitution strategies speciﬁcally in CKD.

Practice Point 2.1.1: Dietary sodium restriction is usually not
appropriate for patients with sodium-wasting nephropathy.

Practice Point 2.1.2: The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hy-
pertension (DASH)-type diet or use of salt substitutes that
are rich in potassium may not be appropriate for patients
with advanced CKD or those with hyporeninemic hypo-
aldosteronism or other causes of
impaired potassium
excretion because of the potential for hyperkalemia.

(For Rationale of above practice points, please see text of

Recommendation 2.1.1.)

2.2 Physical activity

Recommendation 2.2.1: We suggest that patients
with high BP and CKD be advised to undertake
moderate-intensity physical activity for a cumula-
tive duration of at least 150 minutes per week, or to
a level compatible with their cardiovascular and
physical tolerance (2C).

This recommendation places a relatively higher value on evi-
improves
dence suggesting that physical activity lowers BP,
quality of life, and improves CV health in CKD patients. The
recommendation places lower value on the time investment
required for physical activity and the potential for physical ac-
tivity to cause adverse events in CKD patients. The recom-
mendation is weak according to GRADE because of the low
quality of evidence supporting the beneﬁts of physical activity,
speciﬁcally in hypertensive CKD populations.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The recommendation is
driven by low-quality evidence demonstrating that physical
activity may decrease BP and body weight and improve
quality of life in CKD patients. The recommendation was also
supported by the larger body of evidence in the general
population, demonstrating the BP-lowering and other health
beneﬁts of
regular physical activity. The Work Group
recognizes a higher prevalence of comorbidity and frailty in
CKD compared to the general population and is uncertain
about whether regular physical activity increases or decreases
adverse events. Nonetheless, the Work Group believes that
most CKD patients would beneﬁt from regular physical activity.

and

Quality of evidence. Intervention studies and systematic re-
views in the general population have ﬁrmly established the
effects of regular physical activity on BP lowering, improved
strengthening, physical ﬁtness, lower body weight, and lower
risks of dysglycemia and diabetes. In populations with CKD,
however, the evidence is much more limited. Our systematic
review in CKD populations found low-quality evidence from 1
study conducted over 12 months showing that physical activity
may improve SBP and DBP, and low-quality evidence from the
same study showing that physical activity may improve eGFR
over 12 months.75 These ﬁndings, however, were inconsistent
with other studies suggesting little or no differences.76–82 The
updated Cochrane systematic review ﬁnds that physical
the mental
activity decreases weight
life in CKD.83 Evaluating 282
components of quality of
patients from 6 studies, the systematic review found very
low-quality evidence supporting the association of physical
events
activity with increased study-reported adverse
(including pain, kidney infection, hypotension, dizziness,
etc.), an important consideration given the high burden of
comorbidity and frailty in CKD populations (Supplementary
Table S1075–83). Observational data also show a dose–
response relationship between greater levels of physical
activity and lower risk of mortality in CKD patients.84
Overall, the available literature did not allow differentiation
between resistive and aerobic physical activity, or between
supervised and unsupervised physical activity programs,
leading to uncertainty about the critical elements of physical
activity interventions in CKD populations. Nevertheless, it
was the opinion of the Work Group that recommendations
for the general population are likely to apply in CKD.

improves

Values and preferences. This recommendation places a
relatively high value on physical activity as a nonpharmacologic
intervention, with substantial evidence for BP lowering, im-
provements in dysglycemia, and other CV and health beneﬁts
in the general population. The high prevalence of hypertension,
dysglycemia, and CV disease in CKD populations suggests that
the absolute beneﬁt of physical activity may be especially high
in people with CKD if the established relative beneﬁts in the
general population are indeed applicable to CKD. The higher
potential for beneﬁt is possibly offset by the high prevalence of
comorbidity and frailty in CKD populations, which might limit
the level of physical activity CKD patients can achieve and in-
crease the risk of adverse events. However, the data on critical
outcomes are not available, and those for other health beneﬁts
and risks are limited in CKD populations, leading to a weak
recommendation.

The Work Group recognizes that some patients may have
limited ability to exercise due to severe cardiorespiratory ill-
nesses and physical or cognitive limitations, and may not be
able to achieve physical activity levels recommended for the
general population. In such individuals, targets can be indi-
vidualized by patients and healthcare providers. The Work
Group judged that most patients would beneﬁt from efforts to
perform physical activity regularly, even if not achieving the
targets set for the general population. Patients in whom

S34

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 2

physical activity is less feasible due to comorbidity may be less
inclined to follow the recommendation, as with those who
place a lower potential value on the uncertain beneﬁts asso-
ciated with physical activity.

Resource use and costs. Although a formal cost–beneﬁt
analysis has not been performed, the Work Group judged
that encouraging physical activity is likely to be a good use
of resources. Some individuals may choose to perform
such as a
physical activity in structured environments
gymnasium with guidance and supervision from exercise
professionals, which could incur costs. However, simple and
widely available recreational and leisure-time activities are
likely to lead to health beneﬁts for CKD patients as well.

for

Considerations for implementation. Moderate physical ac-
tivity may include recreational and leisure-time activities such
as walking and cycling, household chores, and playing sports
in the context of daily family and community life. Some
patients with musculoskeletal limitations, frailty, high risks
of falls, cognitive impairment, or severe cardiorespiratory
disease may not be able to achieve physical activity targets
to increase
set
physical activity levels to modiﬁed targets,
in the Work
Group’s opinion, are likely to translate to health beneﬁts
nonetheless. The speciﬁc type,
frequency, duration, and
intensity of physical activity that maximizes health beneﬁts
in CKD patients are unknown. However, the Work Group
found no reason to believe that interventions with proven
health beneﬁts in the general population would not also
provide health beneﬁts in CKD populations.

the general population, but efforts

Rationale
There are limited data in CKD populations on the risks and
beneﬁts of physical activity interventions. The quality of evi-
dence is low or very low. Nonetheless, short-term studies
suggest that physical activity interventions lower BP, decrease
weight, and improve the mental aspects of quality of life. These
data are consistent with a substantial body of evidence
demonstrating that physical activity improves BP, dysglycemia,
cardiopulmonary ﬁtness, physical function, and mood in the
general population. Prevalence of hypertension and diabetes,
and risk of CV disease are extremely high in CKD populations,
suggesting that the absolute beneﬁt of physical activity in-
terventions may be enhanced in CKD if the relative beneﬁts are
equivalent to those observed in the general population. Exer-
cise programs have also been shown to improve health out-
comes in other chronic disease conditions,
including CV
disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. These
factors led the Work Group to believe that physical activity is
likely to be beneﬁcial in CKD populations as well, despite the
low-quality direct evidence currently available.

There are limited data on the optimal type or intensity of
physical activity in CKD populations. The Work Group
reviewed physical activity targets set forth by the World
Health Organization (WHO)71 and the recently released
AHA/ACC lifestyle guidelines for primary prevention of CV
disease.7 These targets were not developed to speciﬁcally

address physical activity in populations with chronic diseases;
however, the Work Group believes there is no evidence or
plausibility to suggest that these recommendations are not
applicable to CKD patients. The Work Group also consulted
with the KDIGO 2020 Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes
Management in CKD. In an effort to align guidelines, the
target set forth by the AHA/ACC guidelines of moderate-
intensity physical activity for a cumulative duration of at
least 150 minutes per week was adopted. This target is
applicable to hypertensive CKD patients if their healthcare
providers consider that the individual patient’s comorbidities
and exercise tolerance allow it. For others, the degree of
physical activity should be individualized according to their
cognitive, CV, and physical tolerance, and adjusted, as these
limitations change over time.

Practice Point 2.2.1: Consider the cardiorespiratory ﬁtness
status, physical limitations, cognitive function, and risk of
falls when deciding on the implementation and intensity of
physical activity interventions in individual patients.

Practice Point 2.2.2: The form and intensity of physical
activity should be considered and modiﬁed as necessary in
individual patients. There may still be important health
beneﬁts even if physical activity falls below targets pro-
posed for the general population.

(For Rationale of above practice points, please see text of

Recommendation 2.2.1.)

2.3 Other lifestyle interventions

including weight

The Work Group recognizes that several other lifestyle in-
terventions,
loss among those who are
overweight or obese, reducing alcohol consumption among
those who drink heavily, and adopting a heart-healthy diet
pattern have been demonstrated in RCTs to lower BP in the
general population. These lifestyle interventions may also
have BP-lowering beneﬁts in patients with CKD, and it may
be reasonable to consider them when they can be applied
safely and without side effects. Insufﬁcient data on the risks or
beneﬁts of these interventions on BP in CKD populations per
se precluded speciﬁc recommendations in this guideline.

Research recommendations
(cid:3) Conduct clinical trials evaluating different dietary sodium
reduction strategies for prevention of clinical endpoints of
critical importance for CKD populations, including kidney
failure, CV disease, and mortality.

(cid:3) There are inconsistencies among the studies examining the
relationship of dietary sodium intake with health outcomes
in persons with diabetes.45,46,85 Additional research is
required to investigate the consistency of effects of dietary
sodium changes on health beneﬁts and harms across
different causes and severities of CKD.

(cid:3) It is unknown if there is a minimum dietary sodium level in
CKD below which health risks are increased. Most of these

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S35

c h a p t e r 2

www.kidney-international.org

random “spot” urine

data derive from studies evaluating sodium intake using
spot urine sodium measurements. There is current con-
troversy about the accuracy of assessing sodium intake us-
ing
and potential
increased risk of adverse health outcomes at the low-
sodium intake range when assessed by this method.86
Additional research is required in both sodium-intake
assessment methodology in CKD, and to evaluate the
in CKD
health impacts of very low-sodium intakes
populations.

specimens,

(cid:3) Recent small, single-center clinical trials evaluating chronic
oral sodium bicarbonate supplementation versus placebo
have not found changes in BP.87–89 These ﬁndings raise the
possibility that the anion associated with sodium intake
may inﬂuence the BP response. Future research is required
to determine if relationships of sodium intake with BP are
inﬂuenced by the accompanying anion.

(cid:3) In the general population, potassium-containing salt sub-
stitutes have been demonstrated to lower BP. Persons with
CKD have been systematically excluded from clinical trials
evaluating potassium-based salt substitutes, and some,
albeit not all, observational data in CKD populations

demonstrate that higher potassium intake is associated with
higher risk of CKD progression and CV disease. Whether
using potassium-containing salt substitutes may have health
beneﬁts or unique risks when applied to CKD populations
requires future study.

(cid:3) Persons of African ancestry are disproportionately repre-
sented in CKD populations. Prior systematic reviews sug-
gest that reductions in sodium intake may result in larger
reductions in BP in persons of African and Asian ancestry,
compared to Caucasians.90 Whether such racial differences
can also be found in CKD populations is uncertain and
should be evaluated in future studies.

(cid:3) There is a paucity of data on factors that could identify
individual CKD patients who have the greatest or least BP
beneﬁt from physical activity interventions, and also those
that are at greater risk for harm. Identiﬁcation of these
factors and algorithms to tailor physical activity intensity
and supervision to individual CKD patients is needed.
(cid:3) Iodine supplements are added to salt in some countries.
Future studies are required to determine whether restricting
sodium intake in CKD populations may contribute to
iodine deﬁciency in these settings.

S36

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

Chapter 3: Blood pressure management in patients
with CKD, with or without diabetes, not receiving
dialysis

3.1 Blood pressure targets

Recommendation 3.1.1: We suggest that adults with
high BP and CKD be treated with a target systolic
blood pressure (SBP) of <120 mm Hg, when toler-
ated, using standardized ofﬁce BP measurement
(2B).

The recommendation is based on a single high-quality RCT with
important beneﬁts in the study cohort that included a sub-
stantial number of CKD patients, even though the recommen-
dation is
considered weak by GRADE standards. This
recommendation assumes that standardized ofﬁce BP measure-
ment has been taken according to Recommendation 1.1. The
recommendation suggests that the majority of people would
want the recommended course of action, but some, particularly
in the subgroups mentioned below, may not, because adjusting
BP-lowering therapy to achieve this target SBP causes potential
beneﬁts and harms that may vary with comorbidities, severity of
CKD, existing treatment burden, and the presence of “white-
coat” or masked hypertension. The statement is weak because it
is based primarily on a subgroup from 1 RCT; however, the
subgroup was prespeciﬁed from a very high-quality trial. This
recommendation does not apply to patients with CKD who have
a kidney transplant; this guideline does not apply to those
receiving dialysis.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. There is evidence that tar-
geting SBP to <120 mm Hg, when measured under stan-
dardized conditions, reduces CV events and all-cause mortality
in CKD (Supplementary Table S1191–93). In most people with
high BP, including the frail and elderly, these beneﬁts appear to
outweigh the risks of harm (e.g., hypotension and acute kidney
injury [AKI]). However, empirical evidence demonstrating
how individuals would weigh these beneﬁts and harms is
lacking. These beneﬁts extend to patients with or without
CKD. Still, there is less certainty that the beneﬁts outweigh
the harms with the following scenarios:
(cid:3) CKD G4 and G5: For people with a lower GFR, there is less
certainty around the beneﬁt of lower BP target and po-
tential risk of harm, compared to people with higher GFRs.
(cid:3) Diabetes: The beneﬁts of intensive BP lowering are less
certain among patients with concomitant diabetes and
CKD, compared to patients with CKD without diabetes.

(cid:3) Individuals with SBP of 120–129 mm Hg: Observational
data suggest that individuals with SBP of 120–129 mm Hg
are at higher CV risk than those with SBP <120 mm Hg.94
Lowering the SBP from 120–129 mm Hg to <120 mm Hg
may therefore be beneﬁcial hypothetically. However, RCTs
in CKD targeting SBP <120 mm Hg have not included
individuals with SBP of 120–129 mm Hg. Therefore, the
recommendation of lowering SBP from 120–129 mm Hg
to <120 mm Hg by pharmacologic or non-pharmacologic
means is tentative.

(cid:3) People with very low baseline DBP (e.g., <50 mm Hg),
particularly in the presence of coronary artery disease: In
theory, it is possible that intensive BP lowering will increase
the risk of myocardial infarction (MI) in this subgroup
because coronary perfusion depends on DBP. However, in
SPRINT, the subgroup with the lowest DBP at baseline had
similar CV and survival beneﬁts
from intensive SBP
reduction as those with higher baseline DBP.

(cid:3) Etiology of CKD: There is no evidence that CV beneﬁts of a
lower target BP in CKD varies with its etiology. However,
kidney beneﬁts in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease may be greater with an SBP of 95–110 mm Hg than
with 120–130 mm Hg.95

(cid:3) Proteinuria: Proteinuria may no longer be an effect modi-
ﬁer of BP target with an SBP target of <120 mm Hg.
(cid:3) Older age: The ratio of beneﬁts to harms of intensive BP
reduction in CKD patients at the upper spectrum of age
(e.g., >90 years old) is less certain, although people with a
mean age of 83 (cid:4) 3 years seemed to derive CV, survival, and
cognitive beneﬁts.96

(cid:3) Younger age: The ratio of beneﬁts to harms of intensive BP
the younger spectrum of age
reduction in people at
(e.g., <50 years old), who may have low absolute risks of
CV disease and all-cause death, is less certain.

(cid:3) The very frail and those residing in a nursing home: Frailty
did not appear to modify the beneﬁcial effects of intensive
SBP lowering.

If ofﬁce BP,

(cid:3) “White-coat” hypertension:

even when
measured under standardized conditions, is higher than
daytime ambulatory or home BP, the risks of additional BP-
lowering treatment to achieve ofﬁce BP <120 mm Hg may
be higher, with less certainty of beneﬁts. Nonetheless, it
should be noted that patients with “white-coat” hyperten-
sion were not excluded in SPRINT and other major
outcome trials.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S37

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

(cid:3) Severe hypertension, such as SBP $180 mm Hg on no or 1
antihypertensive drug, or $150 mm Hg on >4 antihyper-
tensive drugs, because such patients were not included in
SPRINT.
Uncertainty in risk–beneﬁt ratios in the various scenarios
above does not necessarily imply that intensive SBP lowering
is not warranted. It only reﬂects the lack of RCT data to
support or refute the ratios. If the patient cannot tolerate
SBP <120 mm Hg despite a slow, gradual decrease in SBP
over months, efforts should be made to maintain SBP <130
mm Hg, <140 mm Hg, or an even higher tolerated SBP goal.
Individualization based on trial and error prevails, as in many
aspects of medical practice. The importance of standardized
BP measurement when applying this guideline cannot be
overemphasized. Routine, non-standardized ofﬁce BP mea-
surements often, but not
invariably, overestimate BP
compared to measurements under standardized conditions
(Chapter 1). Importantly, the extent to which routine mea-
surements overestimate or underestimate standardized ofﬁce
BP is highly variable between and within patients; therefore,
no correction factor can be used to convert routine BP to
standardized BP measurement by calculation. The use of
routine measurements to adjust BP-lowering therapy confers
a serious risk of overtreatment and sometimes undertreat-
ment. It should be emphasized that the most important
aspect of standardized BP measurement is preparation prior
to the measurement and not the equipment used (Chapter 1).
Heterogeneity in primary outcomes among various RCTs. It
should be noted that the medium-sized trials that exclusively
enrolled CKD patients and examined target BP levels, such as
the Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) trial,97 the
African American Study of Kidney Disease and Hypertension
(AASK)
for
Renoprotection in Patients with Non-diabetic Chronic
Renal Disease (REIN-2) trial,99 had used kidney events as
the primary outcomes and had relatively few non-kidney
events during the trial. In contrast, the larger trials that did
not exclusively enroll CKD patients, such as the Systolic
Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP) trial,100 the
Secondary Prevention of Small Subcortical Strokes (SPS3)
trial,101
the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes (ACCORD) trial,92 and the Systolic Blood Pressure
Intervention Trial
the
primary outcomes and had relatively few kidney events,
although there might be a sizeable number of CKD patients
in the latter trials. These dichotomies and the heterogeneity
in the characteristics of the study cohorts create challenges
in data synthesis to provide an evidence base for practice
recommendations in CKD.
Cardiovascular outcomes.

General population. In the general
population, there is extensive evidence that the reduction in
the risk of CV events is proportional to the SBP reduction
achieved, with the absolute beneﬁts being greater in those
with higher baseline risk of CV disease, and with no differ-
ence in proportional risk reductions across groups deﬁned
according to higher or lower baseline SBP.102–106 The meta-

(SPRINT),93 used CV events as

and the Blood-Pressure Control

trial,98

smaller

SPRINT provides further evidence that

the
analysis of 21 RCTs by Xie et al. concluded that
absolute beneﬁts of
lowering SBP were greater and the
number-needed-to-treat was
in trials where all
enrolled patients had vascular disease, diabetes, or kidney
disease.106 In this meta-analysis, on-treatment BP averaged
133/76 mm Hg on intensive treatment and 140/81 mm Hg
on less-intensive treatment. Outcomes in patients with and
without albuminuria at baseline were not reported separately.
intensive SBP
lowering reduces CV events and death in those at high CV
risk. Those beneﬁts targeting SBP <120 mm Hg compared
to <140 mm Hg in SPRINT extended to CKD, the elderly,
and those with frailty.91,107 In a prespeciﬁed analysis, the
beneﬁts of targeting SBP <120 mm Hg in SPRINT included a
signiﬁcant reduction in the combined endpoint of probable
dementia and mild cognitive impairment, with no interaction
with baseline CKD.108 Secondary analyses further suggest that
the beneﬁcial effect of intensive BP lowering on the incidence
of mild cognitive impairment per se may extend to those with
CKD107 and those who are aged 80 years or older.96

A recent meta-analysis of 74 RCTs with broader inclusion
criteria than those discussed above102,105,106 concluded that
the effect of BP lowering differed by baseline BP with no clear
effect on death or CV disease in participants with no prior
coronary heart disease and SBP <140 mm Hg at baseline.109
This ﬁnding has been used by some guideline groups, such as
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
in the United Kingdom,
to justify a more conservative
approach to BP-lowering therapy than that advocated in the
present guideline. However, the inclusion of large numbers of
trials comparing antihypertensive drugs versus placebo, not
lower versus higher BP target, and importantly, those in
which BP measurement technique was less precisely speciﬁed
makes drawing conclusions challenging.109

Adults with CKD. A meta-analysis from the Blood Pressure
Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, which included
trials of antihypertensive drugs versus placebo and trials of
different BP targets, found that the proportional reduction in
CV events with more intensive BP treatment was independent
of the presence or absence of CKD.110 In their meta-analysis,
Ettehad et al. also reported a risk reduction for CV events with
intensive BP lowering in those with CKD, but the size of the
risk reduction was less than that in those without CKD.105

SPRINT intentionally included a CKD subgroup a priori
and examined an SBP target of <120 mm Hg, as recom-
mended in the present guideline, versus <140 mm Hg. In the
primary analysis of the entire cohort of 9361 participants,
SPRINT demonstrated beneﬁts for the primary CV outcome
(hazard ratio [HR]: 0.75; 95% conﬁdence interval [CI]: 0.64–
0.89) and for all-cause death (HR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.60–0.90)
across all subgroups with no heterogeneity, including those
with or without CKD deﬁned as eGFR 20 to <60 ml/min per
1.73 m2, with proteinuria <1 g/d.91,93 Indeed, in the sub-
group with CKD (median albumin-creatinine ratio [ACR]:
13.3 mg/g [1.33 mg/mmol] [IQR: 6.4–43.1 {0.64–4.31}] and
mean eGFR: 47.9 (cid:4) 9.5 ml/min per 1.73 m2), the CV beneﬁt

S38

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

missed signiﬁcance of P < 0.05 (HR: 0.81; 95% CI: 0.63–
1.05), while the mortality beneﬁt was nominally signiﬁcant.
That said, SPRINT was not powered for subgroup analyses,
especially given that it ended early because of the substantial
CV disease and mortality beneﬁt. It should be noted that large
RCTs with major clinical outcomes are rarely powered for a
speciﬁc subgroup, even for age or sex. Trial results should be
interpreted for the entire study cohort, with effect modiﬁca-
tion by factors deﬁning subgroups examined in secondary
analysis. Such effect modiﬁcation was not noticed for CKD in
SPRINT. Regardless, SPRINT is the largest trial testing 2 BP
targets in CKD with approximately 2600 CKD patients.
Although SPRINT excluded patients with diabetes, polycystic
kidney disease, or proteinuria $1 g/d, those with glomeru-
lonephritis not taking immunosuppressive medications were
not excluded.

Three other trials comparing different BP targets, powered
for kidney outcomes as primary outcomes, generated far too
few CV events or death outcomes (MDRD, AASK, REIN-2).
However, a meta-analysis by Malhotra et al., examining
death as an outcome exclusively in the CKD subgroups of the
large hypertension treatment RCTs, also found a beneﬁt of
lower target BP.111

Older adults with or without CKD. There are meta-analyses
and systematic reviews based on the general population of
older adults, including patients with CKD, addressing the
impact of lower BP targets. Garrison et al. analyzed RCTs
conducted in hypertensive adults aged 65 years or older and
reported outcomes for higher SBP (150–160 mm Hg) or DBP
(95–105 mm Hg), compared to a lower treatment target
of #140/90 mm Hg.112 SPRINT was excluded from this
analysis because its lower target was lower than the inclusion
criteria of the meta-analysis. Its inclusion may have changed
the results of the meta-analysis. Based on this meta-analysis,
there was insufﬁcient evidence to determine whether a
lower SBP target provides meaningful differences in beneﬁts
or harms to older adults. However, there are very few major
trials and relatively few events in this meta-analysis. In
included RCTs in a meta-analysis
contrast, Bavishi et al.
comparing intensive versus standard or less-intensive BP
control in older adults ($65 years) and provided long-term
CV and safety outcomes.113 SPRINT met
the inclusion
criteria for this review. There were reductions in major CV
events, CV mortality, and heart failure (HF), but a possible
increase in AKI and serious adverse events. No analysis of the
older population with CKD was described in these studies.

There is only one large study analyzing the effects of lower
BP targets in CKD patients older than 75 years. A post hoc
analysis of that speciﬁc subgroup in SPRINT showed that the
low BP target (SBP <120 mm Hg) reduced the primary CV
outcome (HR: 0.64; 95% CI: 0.45–0.92), all-cause death (HR:
0.64; 95% CI: 0.43–0.96), and the composite of primary CV
disease outcome or all-cause death (HR: 0.66; 95% CI: 0.49–
0.90).91 There was no description of potential harm of
achieving lower targets in this subgroup of older adults with
CKD, although the risk–beneﬁt ratio in the entire CKD

cohort and in the entire subcohort older than 75 years in
SPRINT was favorable. Even in the age group 80 years and
older, subgroup analysis in SPRINT showed that intensive BP
lowering decreased the risk of CV events (HR: 0.66; 95% CI:
0.49–0.90) and all-cause mortality (HR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.48–
0.93).96

Adults with diabetes and CKD. Among patients with
concomitant diabetes and CKD, the beneﬁts of intensive BP
lowering are less certain than those with CKD without dia-
betes. All previous studies in diabetes with and without CKD
have favored more, instead of less, intensive BP reduction
(UKPDS-38,114 SHEP,100 Syst-Eur,115 ABCD,116 HOT117). In
their meta-analysis, Ettehad et al. reported that the reduction
in major CV events remained proportional to the BP reduc-
tion achieved among trial participants with diabetes, but that
the proportional risk reductions were smaller than the re-
ductions in those without diabetes.105 In contrast,
in the
meta-analysis of intensive versus less-intensive BP-lowering
therapy among patients with CKD, Malhotra et al. found no
evidence of heterogeneity in beneﬁcial effects on mortality
to the presence or absence of diabetes.111
with respect
Brunström et al. conducted a systematic review and meta-
analysis of RCTs that included at least 100 patients with
diabetes, and found that BP reduction decreased MI, stroke,
CV mortality, ESKD, and all-cause mortality if baseline SBP
was >150 mm Hg; there was decreased MI, HF, and all-cause
mortality if baseline SBP was 140 to 150 mm Hg, but para-
doxically, increased CV mortality was observed if baseline
SBP was <140 mm Hg.118

Two major caveats should be noted regarding these meta-
analyses in diabetes. First, these meta-analyses differ sub-
stantially from each other in their respective inclusion
criteria. Brunström et al. and Ettehad et al. included RCTs
that compared antihypertensives to placebo, and different BP
targets. Ettehad et al. included RCTs of head-to-head com-
parisons of antihypertensive agents to examine the effect of 10
mm Hg reduction in SBP on clinical outcomes. Second, none
of the trials conducted prior to ACCORD and SPRINT
examined an SBP target as low as <120 mm Hg. Nonetheless,
they collectively suggest that SBP lowering decreases the CV
event rate and perhaps mortality and kidney outcomes.

The ACCORD trial that enrolled exclusively patients with
diabetes did not show a difference in the prespeciﬁed primary
endpoint of composite CV events between the intensive SBP
target (<120 mm Hg) and standard SBP target (<140
mm Hg), but it did demonstrate a signiﬁcant reduction in
stroke (HR: 0.59; 95% CI: 0.39–0.89), a prespeciﬁed sec-
ondary outcome, with intensive SBP lowering.92 However,
ACCORD included few patients with CKD, as patients with
serum creatinine >1.5 mg/dl (132 mmol/l) were excluded, and
those with CKD were mostly proteinuric with well-preserved
eGFR.119 Therefore,
there is little direct evidence from
ACCORD alone to guide a recommendation for patients with
diabetes and CKD. Nonetheless,
there was no statistical
interaction between CKD and intensive BP lowering on the
reduction in stroke risk.119

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S39

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

In contrast to ACCORD, SPRINT included a substantial
number (n ¼ 2646) of participants with CKD. Although
SPRINT speciﬁcally excluded patients with diabetes, 42% (n ¼
3898) of the cohort had prediabetes, deﬁned as baseline fasting
serum glucose >100 mg/dl [5.6 mmol/l]. A post hoc analysis of
SPRINT comparing participants with and without prediabetes
found that the CV and survival beneﬁts of intensive SBP
reduction (<120 mm Hg) were similar in the 2 subgroups.120
Other secondary analyses of ACCORD data further suggest
that intensive SBP lowering is beneﬁcial. A combined post hoc
analysis of SPRINT and ACCORD suggested similar CV
beneﬁts of intensive BP-lowering therapy in the presence or
absence of diabetes.121 ACCORD was not only a BP trial, but
it also employed a rather complex study design. The partici-
pants were randomized ﬁrst to intensive versus less-intensive
glycemic control, and then either to intensive versus less-
intensive BP control or to the addition of fenoﬁbrate versus
placebo on a background of a statin. The trial of glycemic
control was terminated early because of higher all-cause
mortality with intensive glycemic control.92 This adverse ef-
fect of intensive glycemic control was also demonstrated in
the CKD subgroup of ACCORD.119 The ACCORD BP trial
reported no statistical interaction between glycemic control
and BP control on prespeciﬁed primary and secondary CV
outcomes. However, a more detailed combined analysis of
data from ACCORD and SPRINT found that the beneﬁcial
effects
(with both trials
SBP control
targeting <120 mm Hg) on combined CV endpoints and on
all-cause mortality were similar in the standard glycemia arm
of ACCORD and in SPRINT.122,123 In contrast, intensive SBP
control increased CV death, HF, and MI in the intensive
glycemia arm. These interactions lessened after discontinua-
tion of the glycemic intervention.122 In another post hoc
analysis among ACCORD participants in the standard gly-
cemia arm who had additional CV risk factors that would
have met the SPRINT inclusion criteria, intensive BP control
provided CV beneﬁts similar to those seen in SPRINT.124

intensive

of

Similarly, a pooled analysis of individual patient data from
4983 patients with CKD from AASK, MDRD, ACCORD, and
SPRINT found a non-signiﬁcant trend to decreased mortality
with intensive BP-lowering therapy, but a statistically signif-
icant reduction in mortality in a subgroup with eGFR <60
ml/min per 1.73 m2 who were not assigned to intensive gly-
cemic control.125 Collectively, these aforementioned post hoc
analyses support the notion that intensive BP control im-
proves clinical outcomes even in patients with diabetes and
CKD, but glycemic control modulates the effects of intensive
BP control on CV outcomes. This evidence is indirect, hence
diminishing the certainty of the beneﬁts and strength of
recommendation of targeting SBP <120 mm Hg.

Low diastolic blood pressure. Numerous observational
studies,126,127 including those that examine data from RCTs in
a post hoc observational manner,128 although not all studies,
have suggested a J-shaped curve with very low DBP being
associated with an increased risk of CV events, particularly MI

among patients with pre-existing coronary artery disease.94
The validity of these observations is supported by biological
plausibility, as low DBP in the setting of coronary stenosis
could lead to impaired subendocardial blood ﬂow during
diastole. However, this association is heavily confounded, as
patients with very low DBP inherently have high CV risks.
Beddhu et al. recently showed that in SPRINT participants,
baseline DBP indeed bore a U-shaped relationship with mor-
tality. However, the CV-protective beneﬁts of intensive SBP
lowering were independent of baseline DBP, including the
lowest DBP quintile at baseline with a mean DBP of 61 (cid:4)
5 mm Hg.129 Whether this beneﬁcial effect of SBP lowering
persists at even lower DBP levels (e.g., <45 mm Hg) cannot be
determined from these data.

Kidney outcomes.

Rate of decline in GFR. The effects of
intensive BP lowering on GFR are often complicated by an
exaggerated early acute GFR decline that is also seen with
inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and the
sodium–glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) system. This acute
eGFR decrease with BP lowering may be mediated, at least
in part,
changes. This
intrarenal hemodynamic
hypothesis is supported by the following observations:

by

(i) Single-nephron GFR decreases when glomerular blood
ﬂow rate drops below the level that can be sustained by
arteriolar autoregulation.130

(ii) Urinary excretion of various tubular biomarkers during
intensive SBP treatment in SPRINT was not indicative of
tubular damage.131,132

(iii) Albuminuria during follow-up was lower,

instead of
higher, in the intensive SBP arm than in the standard SBP
treatment arm in SPRINT. Similar observations have
been reported in ACCORD participants.133

Nonetheless, the overall rate of decline of eGFR was higher
rather than lower on intensive treatment in SPRINT in both
CKD91 and non-CKD subgroups,134 ACCORD,92 and SPS3.12
In both ACCORD and SPRINT, participants assigned to
intensive BP target also developed more incident CKD during
follow-up than those assigned to standard BP target.128,134
There was no difference in the rate of doubling of serum
creatinine between intensive and standard SBP treatment in
SPRINT, but the small number of these discrete events pre-
cludes ﬁrm conclusions. The difference in the rate of decline
of eGFR in SPRINT after the initial 6 months was small (0.47
vs. 0.32 ml/min per 1.73 m2/yr in the intensive and standard
arms, respectively). If this slope persisted long-term, it would
take 20 years to cause a 3 ml/min per 1.73 m2 difference in
eGFR between intensive and standard SBP treatment. Taking
both the beneﬁcial effect on albuminuria and the adverse
effect on eGFR into account, the long-term effects of intensive
SBP lowering on the kidney cannot be determined from these
relatively short-term, on-treatment observations.

Progression to kidney failure and effect modiﬁcation by
proteinuria. Prior to SPRINT, the largest RCTs addressing the
effects of intensive BP control in CKD were MDRD,97 AASK,135
and REIN-2.99 The primary outcome of these 3 trials was
progression of kidney disease. During the trial phase, when the

S40

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

participants were under their respective randomized in-
terventions, none of these trials showed beneﬁts or harms on
kidney function by intensive BP lowering in the primary
analysis of the entire cohort. A caveat of MDRD and AASK is
that both trials targeted mean arterial BP (MAP, calculated as
DBP þ 1/3 (cid:1) pulse pressure), rather than SBP or DBP. The
lower target was a MAP of <92 mm Hg (equivalent, for
example, to 125/75 mm Hg, 140/68 mm Hg, 160/58 mm Hg, or
many other combinations of SBPs and DBPs), whereas the
higher target was a MAP of <107 mm Hg (equivalent to 140/90
mm Hg, 125/98 mm Hg, etc.). Further, the MAP targets varied
in MDRD, depending on the age of the patients.136

(Supplementary Table

A meta-analysis in 2011 conducted by the ERT of the
KDIGO 2012 BP guideline found only these 3 studies
(MDRD, AASK, and REIN-2) pertinent to the discussion of
whether a lower BP target reduced the risk of progression to
kidney failure in the presence of proteinuria. They concluded
that the evidence was inconclusive.137 Similarly, the current
ERT review found no effect modiﬁcation according to the
S1297–
presence of proteinuria
99,135,138). The evidence that intensive BP reduction reduces
the risk of progression to kidney failure is derived mainly
from a predeﬁned subgroup analysis of MDRD (only 54 pa-
tients with proteinuria >3 g/d, but large effect size)97,139 and
follow-up from MDRD138 and
long-term post-treatment
AASK.135 A more recent meta-analysis of 11 RCTs of lower
versus higher BP goals found that intensive BP reduction was
associated with a reduction in kidney failure events (deﬁned
as the composite of doubling of serum creatinine and a >50%
reduction in eGFR or ESKD), with effect modiﬁcation by
baseline proteinuria.140 Intensive BP control reduced the risk
of kidney failure only among those with baseline proteinuria,
deﬁned as a protein–creatinine ratio (PCR) >220 mg/g (22
mg/mmol). The MDRD and AASK studies were major con-
tributors to this evidence base.

The REIN-2 study compared a higher DBP target of <90
mm Hg with a lower BP target of <130/80 mm Hg by adding
felodipine to baseline ramipril therapy in patients with protei-
nuric CKD (mean eGFR and proteinuria approximately 35 ml/
min and 3 g/d, respectively) without diabetes.99 REIN-2 found
no beneﬁt of intensiﬁed BP control over a mean follow-up of
approximately 19 months. However, the study was underpow-
ered with a total of only 338 participants and had very small
differences in achieved SBP and DBP of only 4 mm Hg and
2 mm Hg, respectively, during the intervention phase.

The effects of intensive SBP lowering with target <120
mm Hg are only available in ACCORD and SPRINT. In
ACCORD, which had few CKD patients, there was no dif-
ference in progression to ESKD between intensive (59 cases/
2362 patients) and standard (58 cases/2371 patients) SBP
groups. SPRINT excluded patients with proteinuria >1 g/d,
and the baseline median ACR was only 13 mg/g (1.3 mg/
mmol) in the CKD subgroup. ESKD events were rare in
SPRINT, with a total of only 16 cases in 9361 patients. No
reliable conclusions can therefore be reached on the effects of
an SBP target <120 mm Hg on progression to kidney failure

in patients with CKD from ACCORD or
(Supplementary Table S1191–93).

SPRINT

Previous guidelines, including the KDIGO 2012 BP guide-
line, recommended more aggressive BP lowering for patients
with albuminuria than for those without albuminuria.141 These
recommendations were based largely on the subgroup ﬁndings
of the MDRD,97 AASK,98 as described above, and in the pedi-
atric population, the ESCAPE trial (Chapter 5).142 With the
adoption of an SBP target <120 mm Hg for all patients with
CKD in the present revised guideline based on the evidence for
CV and survival beneﬁts, separate targets for patients with and
without albuminuria are no longer required. There is no evi-
dence supporting an even lower target (e.g., <110 mm Hg) for
patients with severely increased proteinuria.

Mortality. The ERT found 5 RCTs examining the effects of
intensive versus less-intensive BP control on mortality in
patients with CKD without diabetes
(Supplementary
Table S1491,97–99,135,138,143). Over a mean follow-up of 3.23
years of the 9351 participants in these 5 studies, 84 deaths
per 1000 participants were seen in the standard BP control
arm, and 66 per 1000 participants in the intensive BP
control arm (18 fewer deaths per 1000; 95% CI: 26 fewer—
8 fewer deaths per 1000 participants). Secondary analyses of
the MDRD and AASK cohorts using
administrative
databases have also suggested long-term survival beneﬁts
from a lower MAP target.144,145 The mortality rates were
low in these studies, and the conclusions can only be
interpreted as hypothesis-generating.

When results of studies in patients with CKD without dia-
betes are combined with those in patients with diabetes and
CKD, the effect of intensive BP lowering on all-cause mortality
was attenuated. In 9 studies with 13,367 participants and a mean
of 3 years of follow-up, intensive BP targets, compared with
higher BP targets, resulted in 23 fewer deaths per 1000 patients,
but the 95% CI indicated 49 fewer to 33 more deaths per 1000
(Supplementary Table S1391,92,97–99,116,135,138,143,146–148).

A recent individual patient-level meta-analysis of 18 trials
comprising 15,294 patients with CKD (deﬁned as an
eGFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2) found that intensive BP
lowering resulted in a signiﬁcantly lower risk of mortality
compared to less-intensive BP lowering; this beneﬁt was
consistent across multiple subgroups.111 This meta-analysis
included RCTs that compared a range of target BPs, but it
also included trials comparing antihypertensive agents with
placebo or no treatment.

Evidence of the effects of an SBP target of <120 mm Hg
versus <140 mm Hg in patients with CKD without diabetes is
available only from SPRINT.91 There were 53 deaths per 1000
participants in the standard BP control arm, and 40 deaths
per 1000 participants in the intensive BP control arm,
resulting in a statistically signiﬁcant difference of 13 fewer per
1000 participants (95% CI: 23 fewer—1 fewer deaths per
1000 participants; Supplementary Table S1191,93) This dif-
ference is also evident when the CKD subgroups in both
ACCORD (comprised all patients with diabetes) and SPRINT
(comprised no patients with diabetes) are combined.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S41

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

Adverse effects. Some practitioners may be concerned about
adverse events associated with the low SBP target. Although the
Work Group cautions about these possibilities, regardless of the
level of SBP, age, and comorbidities, the available evidence shows
that the SBP target of <120 mm Hg is generally safe. In a patient
with severe carotid stenosis, an SBP <120 mm Hg may be
insufﬁcient to maintain cerebral perfusion, and even an SBP of
150 mm Hg may be insufﬁcient. Diligence in monitoring the
patient and taking the appropriate actions of adjusting BP,
administration of anticoagulants, or surgical correction of the
stenosis may be necessary. Such scenarios do not refute the notion
that an SBP target <120 mm Hg in most adults is beneﬁcial and
not associated with increased signiﬁcant adverse events.

Clinical events. Within the CKD subgroup, SPRINT reported
no signiﬁcant difference in serious adverse events, and in
adverse events associated with hypotension, postural hypo-
tension, syncope, bradycardia, and injurious falls between the
intensive (<120 mm Hg SBP) and standard (<140 mm Hg
SBP) BP arms. Among the participants aged $75 years or
even $80 years at baseline, of which approximately 44% and
50%, respectively, had an eGFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2, the
risk proﬁle for clinical adverse events with intensive BP
lowering was also quite favorable.96,107 There were no differ-
ences in serious adverse events and injurious falls between the
intensive and standard BP arms. In SPRINT, standing BP was
measured at prespeciﬁed visits.149 Intensive BP lowering
reduced, rather than increased, the risk of orthostatic hypo-
tension. Further, orthostatic hypotension was not associated
with a higher risk of CV disease events, falls, or syncope.93
However, it is reasonable to consider a change in medica-
tions or less-intensive therapy if the patient is symptomatic or
BP is excessively low (e.g., SBP <100 mm Hg).

Electrolyte abnormalities. Within the CKD subgroup, SPRINT
reported no signiﬁcant difference in adverse events associated
with hyponatremia or hypernatremia between standard and
intensive BP arms. However, there were increased risks for hy-
pokalemia (HR: 1.87; 95% CI: 1.02–3.43) and hyperkalemia
(HR: 1.36; 95% CI: 1.01–1.82), presumably because of the greater
use of antihypertensive medications in the intensive BP arm.

Acute kidney injury. In the entire ACCORD cohort and
SPRINT cohort (and in the SPRINT CKD subgroup), there
were higher rates of AKI in the intensive SBP arms, although
most of these were AKI Stage 1 and showed full recovery.150 The
biomarker data described above suggest that at least some of the
fall in eGFR seen with intensive BP treatment could be due to
intrarenal hemodynamic changes rather than structural dam-
age. In a post hoc analysis of SPRINT, there was a signiﬁcant
interaction between baseline eGFR and SBP lowering, such that
patients with a baseline eGFR <45 ml/min per 1.73 m2 had an
increased risk of AKI in the intensive BP arm but no reduction
in the primary CV outcome.151 Hence, the risk–beneﬁt ratio for
kidney outcomes in the intensive SBP arm may not be as
favorable in this subgroup as in the subgroup with higher
baseline eGFR. However, caution should be used in interpreting
these non-prespeciﬁed post hoc ﬁndings in relatively small
the
subgroups. In 2 other post hoc analyses of SPRINT,

respective risks of AKI were marginally increased with the
intensive BP target in people $75 years old (HR: 1.41; 95% CI:
0.98–2.04) and increased in people $80 years old (HR: 2.12;
95% CI: 1.37–3.26). These data collectively suggest that inten-
sive BP lowering increased the risk of AKI in people with
moderate CKD and advanced age, but the episodes were
rather infrequent, affecting less than 4% of SPRINT participants
and tended to be mild and reversible (Supplementary
Table S1191–93).96,107

Polypharmacy. Most participants in SPRINTwere taking 1 or 2
BP-lowering therapies before randomization. The beneﬁts of
intensive SBP lowering are unclear among patients who require 4
or more BP-lowering medications to achieve SBP <120 mm Hg.
In a post hoc analysis of the SPRINT database, the number of
additional BP-lowering medications was an independent pre-
dictor of poorer survival.152 However, the requirement for
multiple medications to achieve SBP <120 mm Hg may reﬂect
the patient’s underlying characteristics and does not imply that
intensive SBP lowering is not beneﬁcial. Indeed, in another study
using the SPRINT database and more advanced statistical tech-
niques that account for confounding by indication, the addition
of a new antihypertensive drug class led to signiﬁcant reductions
in SBP and major CV event rates but no difference in serious
adverse events. These incremental effects appeared to be
consistent regardless of the level of baseline drug use.153 Hence, at
present, there is no clear evidence that people who require
multiple medications to achieve an SBP of <120 mm Hg would
have an unfavorable risk–beneﬁt ratio. Nonetheless, poly-
pharmacy also adds to treatment burden and is often associated
with reduced adherence, which may be attenuated by the use of
single-pill combinations.

Quality of evidence. The evidence on the effects of intensive
BP lowering, namely the <120 mm Hg SBP target, on critical
clinical outcomes such as CV events and all-cause mortality is
considered to be moderate due to study limitations, while the
effect on kidney failure is weak. For CV events and all-cause
mortality, the evidence is primarily derived from SPRINT,
in which the sample size was large, the effects of intensive
BP lowering on clinical outcomes were strong, and there
was no heterogeneity in the effects between the CKD and
non-CKD subgroups. Results from the subgroup analysis of
ACCORD, as well as the joint analysis of the ACCORD and
lend further support, although there were
SPRINT data,
relatively
few participants with CKD in ACCORD
(Supplementary Table S1191–93).

The renoprotective effects of BP lowering in CKD are primarily
derived from MDRD and AASK trials. The evidence is considered
to be of low quality due to study limitations and inconsistency. The
effects were seen in only the proteinuric subgroups, and in the
case of AASK, the effects were seen only during the long-term
post-trial follow-up (Supplementary Table S1297–99,135,138 and
Supplementary Table S1391,92,95,97–99,135,138,143,146–148). Further,
SPRINTshowed a short-term acute decline in eGFR and no long-
term beneﬁcial effect on eGFR with intensive SBP lowering.
Therefore, collectively, these studies did not show convincingly
that intensive BP lowering is renoprotective.

S42

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

Values and preferences. The Work Group places high value
on decreasing the risks of CV events and all-cause mortality
by intensive SBP lowering, although the renoprotective
effects are more tenuous. The reduction in the absolute risk
of all-cause mortality in the CKD subgroup in SPRINT was
0.6% per year (1.61% and 2.21% in the intensive and
standard SBP group, respectively). If this trend continues
linearly, the risk reduction would be substantial over 20 or
30 years.

The Work Group also places higher value on increased pill
burden, more clinic visits, electrolyte abnormalities, hypo-
tension, syncope, injurious falls, and AKI that may be caused
by targeting an SBP <120 mm Hg. However, intensive SBP
lowering in CKD patients did not cause more serious adverse
events, orthostatic hypotension, syncope, or injurious falls
than targeting SBP <140 mm Hg in SPRINT. The Work
Group places lower values on the higher risks of mild AKI,
hyperkalemia, and hypokalemia seen in the intensive SBP
lowering in CKD patients because they are largely mild,
transient, and manageable. We found no informative studies
of how patients with CKD would balance these potential
beneﬁts with potential harms.

The adoption of an SBP target <120 mm Hg is an ideal
topic for shared decision-making between individual pa-
tients and clinicians. There is likely to be marked variability
in how individual patients weigh and value the potential
beneﬁts and harms of intensive BP control. This may vary
with age, culture, number of drugs (both BP-lowering and
other drugs), and other factors. Decision aids to support
shared decision-making are available on the online version
of this guideline (see link to MAGICapp at https://kdigo.org/
guidelines/blood-pressure-in-ckd/). These aids are based on
the evidence syntheses compiled by the ERT that were used
to develop the guideline and can be used online or to
generate printable summaries of the evidence relating to
each decision (e.g., differences in absolute mortality or in
AKI per 1000 patients with standard vs.
intensive SBP
target).

Resource use and costs. The implications for resource uti-
lization for standardized ofﬁce BP measurement, as recom-
mended in this guideline, are discussed in Chapter 1. Costs of
additional antihypertensive drugs are relatively small in view
of the beneﬁts; however, there may be additional costs for
monitoring. The Work Group does not consider that resource
implications would have signiﬁcant impact on the recom-
mendation. Indeed, economic analysis using SPRINT data
is cost-effective.154
suggest
Nonetheless, it is possible that there will be difﬁculties in
implementing these recommendations in countries in which
resources are limited; in those settings, it is probably more
important to ensure that all eligible patients have at least
reasonable BP control (e.g., SBP <140 mm Hg) than to focus
efforts on achieving intensive BP control in a smaller fraction
of the population.

intensive SBP treatment

that

Considerations for implementation. Although there is strong
evidence that home BP measurements are predictive of long-

term adverse clinical outcomes, no adequately powered trial
for guiding antihypertensive medication based on home BP
targets has been reported. Nonetheless, HBPM may help to
improve patient motivation and adherence to treatment and
can also be used to identify patients with masked
hypertension, masked uncontrolled hypertension, “white-
coat” hypertension, and the “white-coat” effect as an adjunct
for diagnosis and potential management of BP (see Chapter 1).
The use of standardized ofﬁce measurements for BP
management may require additional equipment, clinic space,
time, training, and/or change in culture, habits, or policies
(see Chapter 1). Practitioners would beneﬁt from under-
standing the guidelines and the underlying data and rationale,
and can tailor the target and treatment strategy for individual
patients according to overall health conditions, response and
tolerability to SBP lowering, as well as their preferences.
Shared decision-making with individual patients is essential.
The practitioners should provide general information and
individualized considerations of the pros and cons of the
treatment option and explain that the evidence for intensive
SBP targets is more certain in some groups (e.g., those who
would have been eligible for SPRINT) and less certain in
others (e.g., people with diabetes, advanced CKD with
eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2, older adults aged >90 years,
and those with severe hypertension [e.g., SBP >180 mm Hg
or >150 mm Hg on >4 antihypertensive drugs]).

As worded,

the recommendation states that clinicians
should target an SBP <120 mm Hg. In practice, adoption of
this recommendation in a population of patients with CKD
will result in a median SBP around 120 mm Hg, meaning that
50% of patients will have SBP >120 mm Hg at any one time.
A more stringent recommendation would be that all patients
should achieve an SBP <120 mm Hg. This would require an
even lower target or threshold for intervention. However,
adoption of this more stringent recommendation would go
beyond the available evidence. SPRINT targeted an SBP <120
mm Hg; the mean achieved SBP was 121.4 mm Hg.

Rationale
This recommendation replaces the target recommendations
from Chapters 3 and 4 of the KDIGO 2012 recommenda-
tion on BP management in CKD.141 The most important
standardized ofﬁce
differences are: (i) the adoption of
measurement as the preferred technique; (ii) the adoption of
a lower SBP target (<120 mm Hg); and (iii) the adoption of
the same SBP target irrespective of the presence or absence
of proteinuria, diabetes, or older age. The current guideline
also speciﬁes only an SBP target and not a DBP target (see
below).

The recommendation of standardized ofﬁce measurement
is crucial because this technique was used in large RCTs
with clinically important outcomes, and values obtained
using other techniques cannot be readily translated to values
obtained using standardized ofﬁce measurement. If BP is
not measured using the standardized technique, the SBP
target goal does not apply. The adoption of a lower SBP

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S43

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

for patients with CKD without diabetes is based
target
largely on the CV and survival beneﬁts in the CKD sub-
group in SPRINT, although subgroup analysis and long-
term follow-up in the MDRD and AASK studies also sug-
gest kidney beneﬁts at BP levels that may be similar to the
lower BP goal in SPRINT.

The KDIGO 2012 guideline reversed previous recom-
mendations from other organizations that called for more-
aggressive BP-lowering therapies among CKD patients with
diabetes, largely because ACCORD-BP failed to demonstrate
statistically signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the primary CV endpoint
in the intensive BP-lowering arm. Since then, SPRINT and
further analyses of ACCORD, together with combined ana-
lyses of these 2 trials, have supported the conclusion that
intensive BP-lowering therapy might well confer similar
beneﬁts among patients with diabetes and CKD as in patients
with CKD alone. However, the quality of evidence for BP
target among CKD patients with concomitant diabetes is low,
especially among those with advanced CKD.

The recommendation of SBP <120 mm Hg is classiﬁed as
weak (in the dichotomous classiﬁcation of strong and weak in
GRADE), raising concerns that clinicians and patients may
decide to ignore the guidance and opt for less-intensive
treatment. The Work Group debated whether to provide a
strong recommendation for an SBP target of at least <140
mm Hg for all patients with CKD, together with separate
recommendations for lower SBP (<120 mm Hg) targets in
speciﬁed subgroups. This more complex alternative was
eventually rejected, on the basis that
it would probably
persuade clinicians to continue to adopt an SBP target
of <140 mm Hg for all CKD patients, thus denying many
patients the potential advantages of tighter control. A strong
recommendation implies that most patients and caregivers
would want the recommended course of action, whereas a
weak recommendation states that the majority of people
would want the recommended course of action, but some
would not. Regardless of the strength of recommendations,
but especially for weak recommendations, clinicians should
understand the nature and rationale of the recommendations
and engage in shared decision-making with the patients, as
discussed above.

to provide a target

Diastolic blood pressure as a target. The Work Group chose
for DBP alongside the targeted
not
SBP <120 mm Hg, although other guidelines often advocate
targets for both SBP and DBP. The reasons for this decision are
two-fold. First, for young patients with diastolic hypertension,
it is essential to target DBP. Indeed, a number of earlier trials in
the general population (e.g., ALLHAT) had explicit DBP as an
inclusion criterion. However, wide pulse pressure, which is
common in CKD implies that achievement of SBP <120
mm Hg will almost certainly result in DBP <70 mm Hg in
the great majority of patients, making the provision of a
separate DBP target redundant.141,155,156 Second,
literature
on RCTs targeting DBP with clinical outcomes is scarce,
especially in the CKD population. Both MDRD and AASK
studies employed a target MAP of <92 mm Hg, instead of an

SBP and a DBP target, in the intensive BP arm, which is
often considered equivalent to 125/75 mm Hg, but it is also
equivalent
to 116/80, 135/70, 140/68, 145/65, or other
ﬁgures, depending on the pulse pressure.

As discussed earlier, these studies suggest that this intensive
MAP target may provide renoprotective effects in proteinuric
patients. Hence, it seems reasonable to target DBP of young
patients with CKD and diastolic hypertension to <80
mm Hg, in addition to an SBP target <120 mm Hg. However,
the Work Group is hesitant to recommend a DBP target
because of the lack of evidence.

Comparison with ACC/AHA guideline. The Work Group dis-
cussed extensively the 2017 ACC/AHA guideline that offered a
target of <130/<80 mm Hg for patients with CKD and
analyzed the reasons provided in that guideline for this more
conservative target, although the SBP target of <130 mm Hg
is still more aggressive than those proposed by the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Society of Hyperten-
sion (ESH) (target: 130-139 mm Hg) and by NICE (target:
120–139 mm Hg).2,8,157,158 One of the reasons was a concern
that clinicians might apply the target to routine ofﬁce BP
readings. The KDIGO Work Group shares this concern but
takes the view that patients should not be penalized for
suboptimal clinical practice. One should not rely on routine
ofﬁce BP to adjust BP-lowering therapy. It should be noted
that Hypertension Canada recommends an SBP target
of <120 mm Hg using standardize BP measurement,159
consistent with the present guideline.

The ACC/AHA guideline provides a table of equivalent BP
values among standardized ofﬁce, home, daytime ambulatory,
night-time ambulatory, and 24-hour ambulatory measure-
ments. These equivalents were established using an outcome-
based approach that determines the BP threshold with each
measurement technique that is associated with similar long-
term outcomes in study populations.160 However, differ-
ences in BP values obtained using different measurement
techniques vary greatly among individual persons and even
within a given individual over time. Thus, for any given in-
dividual patient, the KDIGO Work Group found no evidence
that one can reliably estimate the BP that would be obtained
under standardized ofﬁce conditions from measurements
taken in any other settings. As a result, the Work Group
decided that the best evidence-based approach is to use
standardized ofﬁce BP for management (see Chapter 1).

Practice Point 3.1.1: It is potentially hazardous to apply the
recommended SBP target of <120 mm Hg to BP mea-
surements obtained in a non-standardized manner.

Non-standardized BP measurements

frequently yield
values that are substantially higher, but sometimes lower, than
standardized measurements, in an unpredictable manner for
individual patients. Basing BP-lowering therapy decisions on
non-standardized BP measurements therefore often risks
overtreatment and sometimes undertreatment. In these situ-
ations, the risk–beneﬁt ratio of BP therapy may not be
favorable.

S44

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

Practice Point 3.1.2: Clinicians can reasonably offer less
intensive BP-lowering therapy in patients with very limited
life expectancy or symptomatic postural hypotension.

Individualization based on patient characteristics and
preferences with an understanding of the literature, including
caveats, is important for proper BP goals and therapy.

Research recommendations
(cid:3) Information is needed on how patient values and prefer-
ences inﬂuence decisions related to BP-lowering therapy.
This would be an ideal topic for the Standardised Outcomes
in Nephrology (SONG) initiative.

(ii) with concomitant

(cid:3) Conduct adequately powered RCTs to examine the effects
of intensive BP control among patients with CKD: (i) with
concomitant diabetes;
severely
increased proteinuria (>1 g/d); or (iii) with very low GFR
(<30 ml/min per 1.73 m2). ACCORD included only small
numbers of patients with CKD, most of whom qualiﬁed for
CKD because of albuminuria, and it is therefore uninfor-
mative for patients with CKD G3–G5. On the other hand,
SPRINT explicitly excluded patients with diabetes.

(cid:3) In some Asian countries, stroke is more common than
cardiac diseases as the cause of CV deaths. Whether
intensive SBP control has similar, greater, or less CV-
protective effects in the Asian CKD population is unclear
and may require conﬁrmation.

(cid:3) Although there is strong evidence that ambulatory or home
BP measurements are better predictors of adverse outcomes
than ofﬁce BP, all
large RCTs on BP targets in adults
employed standardized ofﬁce BP. RCTs targeting home or
ambulatory BP measurements are needed.

(cid:3) SGLT2 inhibitors have major CV, kidney, and survival
beneﬁts among patients with CKD. In addition to reducing
BP, they cause an early, acute fall in GFR, a pattern that is
also observed in intensive SBP lowering. The effects of these
drugs, in combination with intensive BP-lowering therapy
on CV outcomes, all-cause mortality, cognition, as well as
acute and chronic changes in kidney function, require
further examination.

(cid:3) There is a strong need for implementation research on
to increase adherence to

locally acceptable strategies
guideline-based BP-lowering treatment (e.g., polypills).

3.2 Treatment with antihypertensive drugs,
including RAS inhibitors (RASi)

This section makes recommendations on which medications to
use for treatment of high BP in patients with CKD, with and
without diabetes, with and without albuminuria. The recom-
mendations presented in this section governing initiation of
RASi apply only to CKD G1–G4 since there is currently no RCT
evidence on the use of these agents in CKD G5. The beneﬁts
and harms of initiation, continuation, or discontinuation of
RASi in CKD G5 have not been tested in RCTs. The evidence
review included an assessment of subgroups based on the
amount of albuminuria (A1 [ACR <30 mg/g or 3 mg/mmol],

A2 [30–300 mg/g or 3–30 mg/mmol], A3 [>300 mg/g or 30
mg/mmol], respectively). The outcomes evaluated, where
available, include all-cause mortality; CV outcomes, such as
MI, stroke, and HF; and kidney outcomes, such as kidney
failure (ESKD) and doubling of serum creatinine, as well as
adverse effects including AKI and hyperkalemia.

There are no well-powered trials examining CV outcomes
or survival comparing various antihypertensive classes with
each other or with placebo in people with high BP and CKD,
although there was a CKD subgroup analysis in the ALLHAT
study.161 A few such trials examined kidney outcomes. For
example, AASK and IDNT, which enrolled only patients with
high BP, were powered for kidney outcomes and compared
the antihypertensive drug classes ACEi/ARB, beta-blockers,
and calcium channel blockers (CCBs) while treating to target
BP. ACEi/ARB demonstrated a slower decline in kidney
function in AASK for those with hypertensive nephrosclerosis
and in IDNT for those with diabetes and kidney disease with
severely increased albuminuria.98,162

A fair number of trials examined RASi as agents used to
reduce kidney disease progression in people with and without
high BP, and/or with and without diabetes. Similarly, at least 3
large trials (HOPE,163 EUROPA,164 and PEACE165) examined
ACEi as CV protective agents in people with and without high
BP and included a minority with CKD. Lowering of BP was
explicitly not the aim of those trials. Kidney disease pro-
gression was reduced with RASi compared to placebo or other
antihypertensive agents with a suggestion of effect modiﬁca-
tion by urine protein excretion.166 RASi also reduced CV
outcomes as compared to placebo in high-risk populations,
particularly in subgroups with CKD,166,167 independent of the
presence or absence of high BP.165,167,168

That said, there is limited evidence to use speciﬁc antihy-
pertensive agents to treat high BP to target in CKD, and almost
no evidence comparing antihypertensive combination therapies
in CKD from outcome trials. Many people with CKD and BP of
at least 20 mm Hg above the target will need combinations of
several antihypertensive drugs. Starting antihypertensive ther-
apy in such people with antihypertensive drug combinations is
suggested. There are, however, no RCTs comparing different
drug combinations in CKD, as there are no RCTs on antihy-
pertensive classes other than RASi, beta-blockers, and CCBs.

A recent network meta-analysis by Xie et al., including 119
RCTs (n ¼ 64,768), examined the beneﬁts of treating with RASi
compared to placebo or active therapy in patients with CKD for
kidney and CVoutcomes and included studies with and without
diabetes and albuminuria (A1–A3). The results demonstrated
improved precision with narrower conﬁdence intervals than
smaller meta-analyses reported below.169 Both ACEi and ARBs
reduced the risk of kidney failure (deﬁned as a composite of any
of the following: doubling of serum creatinine, 50% decline in
GFR, or ESKD) by 39% and 30%, respectively, compared to
placebo with high certainty; and 35% and 25%, respectively,
against active controls with moderate certainty. Although both
ACEi and ARB reduced major CV events to the same degree
compared to placebo (18% for ACEi and 24% for ARB), ACEi,

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S45

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

compared to ARBs, were consistently associated with higher
probabilities of reducing kidney failure and CV death. ACEi,
but not ARB, reduced the odds of all-cause death compared to
active control. Results of the network analysis were not sub-
divided by diabetes or albuminuria status.

Therefore, any antihypertensive treatment algorithm in
CKD beyond monotherapy depends on expert opinion,
pathophysiologic
considerations,
extrapolation from ﬁndings in primary hypertension in the
absence of CKD, and small studies in CKD with surrogate
outcomes, namely change in BP over the short term or meta-
analyses of underpowered studies.

pharmacodynamic

or

In people with high BP and CKD, and mildly or moder-
ately increased albuminuria (A1 or A2), there is limited evi-
dence on CV or kidney outcomes from RCTs comparing
speciﬁc antihypertensive drugs to placebo or active compar-
ators. There are, however, data from RCTs speciﬁcally in those
with severely increased albuminuria (A3), statistically pow-
ered for kidney outcomes comparing speciﬁc antihypertensive
drugs to placebo or active comparators. Those trials included
people with and without high BP, apart from a few studies
that excluded people with normal BP.98,162 There are also
secondary analyses of subgroups based on level of albumin-
uria (A1–A3) or eGFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2, comparing
speciﬁc antihypertensive drugs to placebo or to active com-
parators from CV and kidney outcome trials.

In RCTs of primary hypertension examining the effect of
antihypertensive drugs on CV outcomes that included partici-
pants with CKD, CV beneﬁts have been most consistent with
ACEi, ARBs, thiazide-like diuretics, and CCBs. The data are less
consistent with beta-blockers, which have been inferior to these
above classes in some but not all trials and in many meta-
analyses. However, beta-blockers are often indicated for spe-
ciﬁc conditions, such as angina pectoris, post-MI, and systolic
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). For CV
disease prevention in those with high BP, unless there is a strong
indication for 1 speciﬁc class, it seems reasonable to begin with 1
or more drugs among ACEi or ARB, CCB, and thiazide-like
diuretic. Non-dihydropyridine CCBs have the apparent addi-
tional beneﬁt of reducing proteinuria.170 If a 3-drug combina-
tion of RASi, CCB, and diuretic at recommended doses is not
therapy including a
adequate to control BP, additional
long-acting
(MRA),
mineralocorticoid-receptor antagonist
alpha antagonist, or beta-blocker can be used, as well as dihy-
dralazine, hydralazine, minoxidil, or centrally acting agents.171
Higher BP due to ﬂuid overload is common in CKD;
therefore, diuretics are, in general, logical agents at appropriate
dose to lower high BP, with or without the concomitant use of
RASi. Outcome data in primary hypertension favor chlortha-
lidone and indapamide over hydrochlorothiazide,2 although
this has been questioned and there is an ongoing trial.172–174
Thiazide diuretics lose efﬁcacy in diuresis and BP lowering as
GFR worsens, but several, including chlorthalidone, metola-
zone,
at
appear
GFRs <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2. Loop diuretics are often effective
at lower GFRs (i.e., <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2). When combined

to remain effective

and indapamide

with a loop diuretic, thiazides are particularly effective in
inducing diuresis, but they often lead to hypokalemia and hy-
pomagnesemia.175 There are no data on clinical outcomes with
loop diuretics in the treatment of high BP with or without CKD.
The most common side effects of each antihypertensive
drug class for patients with CKD include: for both ACEi and
ARBs, hyperkalemia as well as AKI, the latter when com-
pounded by volume depletion or renal artery stenosis; for
diuretics, hypokalemia; for dihydropyridine CCBs, edema; for
non-dihydropyridine CCBs,
constipation and bradyar-
rhythmias when used in conjunction with beta-blockers;
cough with ACEi; fatigue and limited exercise tolerance with
beta-blockers; somnolence or dry mouth with central alpha-
stopped
rebound hypertension if clonidine is
agonists;
suddenly without taper; dizziness with alpha-blockers; hyper-
kalemia with MRA; headache with hydralazine; and edema and
hirsutism with minoxidil, to name some examples.

The SPRINT research algorithm for BP management is
presented in Figure 5 with slight modiﬁcations of the foot-
notes. Clinicians should use this as a reference and modify it
as they see ﬁt. More detailed descriptions and recommenda-
tions about the use of antihypertensive drugs, various drug
combinations, potential advantages, or adverse effects is
beyond the scope of this guideline; readers are referred to
standard textbooks and guidelines.

Recommendation 3.2.1: We recommend starting
renin-angiotensin-system inhibitors (RASi) (angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitor [ACEi] or
angiotensin II receptor blocker [ARB]) for people
with high BP, CKD, and severely increased albu-
minuria (G1–G4, A3) without diabetes (1B).

This recommendation is strong according to GRADE, based on 3
moderate-quality RCTs with important beneﬁts in CKD pa-
tients. The recommendation suggests that the majority of people
would want the recommended course of action. This recom-
mendation does not apply to patients with CKD who are
receiving dialysis or have a kidney transplant.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. Kidney beneﬁts of RASi in
CKD without diabetes and severely increased proteinuria were
demonstrated in the Ramipril Efﬁcacy In Nephropathy (REIN)
study which compared ramipril to placebo to assess the effect of
RASi on CKD progression independent of BP lowering. The
Gruppo Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Nefologia (GISEN;
[REIN Stratum-2]) study of 166 patients with proteinuria $3 g
per 24 hours was stopped early due to efﬁcacy of ramipril in
slowing eGFR decline.176 The monthly decline in GFR was
signiﬁcantly lower in the ramipril group (0.88 ml/min) than the
placebo group (0.53 ml/min). The composite of doubling of
serum creatinine or ESKD was reached in 18 versus 40 partici-
pants (ramipril vs. placebo, P ¼ 0.02).176 In the REIN Stratum-1
of 186 patients with proteinuria of >1 to <3 g/d, the decline in
GFR was not different, but ESKD events were less with ramipril

S46

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

Start here:
At randomization visit, begin with
2- or 3-drug therapy* using a combination
of a thiazide-type** diuretic, and/or an
ACEI or ARB (but not both) and/or a CCB

Include β-blocker or other agents as
appropriate for compelling indication

Monitor as designated
through follow-up

You must:
(a) Add therapy not
already in use††
and
(b) See participant monthly
until SBP <120 mm Hg‡

Is SBP ≥120 mm Hg
this visit?

Yes

Is this a
milepost visit?

Yes

No

No

You must:
(a) Titrate or add therapy
not already in use††
and
(b) See participant monthly
until SBP <120 mm Hg‡

Is DBP ≥100 mm Hg
at this visit or is
DBP ≥ 90 mm Hg
on last 2 visits?

No

Yes

You must:
Titrate or add therapy not
already in use††

Continue therapy†

Figure 5 | SPRINT research treatment algorithm for the intensive group (goal SBP <120 mm Hg). From The New England Journal of
Medicine, the SPRINT Research Group, A Randomized Trial of Intensive Versus Standard Blood-Pressure Control, Volume 373, Pages 2103–2116,
Copyright ª 2015 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.93 *May begin with a
single agent for participants aged $75 years with SBP <140 mm Hg on 0–1 medications at study entry. A second medication should be added at
the 1-month visit if participant is asymptomatic and SBP $ 130 mm Hg. **May use loop diuretic for participants with advanced CKD. †Unless side
effects warrant change in therapy. ††Consider adding a ﬁfth antihypertensive medication. ‡Or until clinical decision made that therapy should not
be increased further. ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CKD,
chronic kidney disease; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SPRINT, Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial.

(9 cases/99 patients) than with placebo (18 cases/87 patients).177
The Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Kidney
Protection (AIPRI) trial compared benazepril to placebo in pa-
tients with CKD mostly without diabetes to assess its effect on
CKD progression (doubling of serum creatinine or ESKD as the
primary outcome). Benazepril also caused a 53% reduction of the
primary outcome (RR: 0.47; 95% CI: 0.27–0.70).178 A meta-analysis
of these 2 trials found a 49% decrease (RR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.38–0.69)
in the composite outcome, ESKD and a doubling of serum creati-
nine with 769 participants (Supplementary Table S15).177,178

CV beneﬁt from ACEi in these 3 aforementioned studies
was assessed by meta-analysis, with the addition of the study
by Hou et al.179 A reduction of CV events of 42% was found
(RR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0.36–0.93; Figure 6176–179). There are
several meta-analyses reporting greater beneﬁts of ACEi or

ARBs on kidney outcomes with increasing albuminuria, as for
example, from Jafar et al.166,180

The Renoprotection of Optimal Antiproteinuric Doses
(ROAD) study directly compared benazepril (ACEi) to los-
artan (ARB) in 360 patients with CKD without diabetes and
mean proteinuria of 1.4–2.0 g/d.181 No differences were found
in kidney outcomes (primary outcome) or CV events between
the 2 classes of RASi.

Many of the above trials examined RASi versus placebo in
people on background antihypertensive therapy. Few trials also
tested active comparators to RASi (e.g., AASK, IDNT). There is
sparse evidence of the effect of antihypertensive agents other
than RASi on clinical outcomes in the setting of CKD with high
BP and severely increased proteinuria, with the exception of
AASK and IDNT. A number of smaller trials assessed changes

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S47

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

ACEi

Placebo/
no treatment

Risk ratio

Risk ratio

Study or
subgroup

Events Total

Events Total Weight

M–H,
random, 95% CI

M–H, random, 95% CI

Albuminuria/proteinuria
9
AIPRI 1996
4
GISEN 1997
14
Hou 2006
2
REIN Stratum-1 1999
Subtotal (95% CI)

300
78
216
99
693

14
3
16
3

283
88
112
87
570

33.4%
10.5%
48.8%
7.3%
100.0%

0.61 [0.27, 1.38]
1.50 [0.35, 6.51]
0.45 [0.23, 0.90]
0.59 [0.10, 3.43]
0.58 [0.36, 0.93]

Total events
Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0.00; χ2 = 2.14, df = 3 (P = 0.54); I2 = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.26 (P = 0.02)

36

29

0.01

0.1
Favors ACEi

1

10
Favors placebo

100

Figure 6 | Cardiovascular events in patients with CKD G3–G4, A3 without diabetes. Meta-analysis was conducted by the Cochrane Kidney
and Transplant Evidence Review Team as part of the guideline evidence review. GISEN reported data from the REIN Stratum-2 group (baseline
proteinuria $3 g/24 h), in contrast to REIN Stratum-1 (baseline proteinuria 1-3 g/24 h). A3, severely increased albuminuria; ACEi, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor; AIPRI, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Kidney Protection; CI, conﬁdence interval; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; events, number of events; GISEN, Gruppo Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Nefologia; M-H, Mantel-Haenszel; REIN, Blood-
Pressure Control for Renoprotection in Patients with Non-diabetic Chronic Renal Disease; total, number of participants.

in proteinuria. Whether those changes translate to changes in
hard outcomes is uncertain. In particular, we have no RCT
evidence that, for example, targeting a proteinuria of <1 g
compared to >2 g leads to fewer hard kidney or CV outcomes.
Due to the imprecision in the studies from a low number of
events, beta-blockers (Supplementary Table S18182,183) and
CCBs (Supplementary Table S19184–186) were found to have
little or no difference compared to placebo or RASi for the CV
and kidney outcomes (ESKD, doubling of serum creatinine,
GFR decline) in patients with CKD with and without diabetes
and severely increased levels of albuminuria. Only RASi has
been extensively studied in appropriately powered trials. There
was only 1 relevant direct renin inhibitor study, comparing
aliskiren to the ARB losartan in patients without diabetes and
varying levels of albuminuria, and there were no events in
either arm (Supplementary Table S20187).

Quality of evidence. The overall quality of the evidence
comparing ACEi or ARB with placebo or standard of care in
patients with CKD and severely increased albuminuria without
diabetes is moderate. The quality of the evidence was down-
graded because of study limitations, such as small numbers of
events, inadequate reporting of sequence generation, and allo-
cation concealment (Supplementary Table S15176–179,188,188a,189
and Supplementary Table S16190,191).

For studies of ACEi versus placebo or standard of care,
some outcomes (ESKD, doubling of serum creatinine, and
CV events) exhibited moderate quality of
the evidence,
downgraded because of study limitations (Supplementary
Table S15176–179,188,188a,189).

The quality of evidence for other antihypertensive thera-
pies in the population of CKD patients without diabetes and
severely increased albuminuria was lower than the evidence
for RASi, as it has only been examined in a limited number of
RCTs for MRA of rather short duration and powered for
surrogate outcomes (Supplementary Table S17192–195).

Values and preferences. The presence of severely increased
albuminuria and CKD is associated with a higher prevalence
of CV disease, progressive CKD, and attendant loss of quality
of life.196 In the opinion of the Work Group, most well-
informed patients with CKD and severely increased albu-
minuria would place emphasis on preventing CV outcomes in
addition to preventing CKD progression.

Resource use and costs. The risks, beneﬁts, resource use, and
costs of RASi therapy should be considered when treating patients
with CKD. The costs of generic RASi medication are generally
low. However, the use of RASi in patients with CKD G1–G4 with
A3, especially those with G4, necessitates patient education (e.g.,
when to pause RASi), repeat lab testing, vigilance to prevent
hyperkalemia and AKI due to volume depletion and other
events, as well as repeat visits to restart RASi if it has been
stopped during a hospitalization. On the other hand, there is
moderate evidence for RASi
treatment with the goal of
preventing progressive loss of kidney function, which likely
justiﬁes the additional costs and visits required for monitoring.
Considerations for implementation. There is insufﬁcient in-
formation to differentiate between men and women for this
recommendation, and insufﬁcient evidence that there are
different outcomes by race.

Rationale
We make this recommendation for RASi because the beneﬁts
of kidney and CV protection outweigh the potential adverse
risks; therefore, most well-informed patients with CKD not
on dialysis with severely increased albuminuria but without
diabetes will opt for treatment with RASi. We feel that pa-
tients put a large value on the cardio- and renoprotective
beneﬁts of RASi and are willing to tolerate its potential harms,
including hyperkalemia and AKI. These side effects, however,
may lead to higher healthcare costs from additional visits and
laboratory testing.

S48

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

Recommendation 3.2.2: We suggest starting RASi
(ACEi or ARB) for people with high BP, CKD, and
moderately increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A2)
without diabetes (2C).

This recommendation is weak according to GRADE, based on
limited evidence from RCTs of sufﬁcient duration to evaluate
kidney protection. However, the Work Group judged that most
well-informed patients would value the cardio- and renoprotective
beneﬁts of RASi over potential harms from AKI or hyperkalemia.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The HOPE study,163 one of
the largest RASi studies, found in a prespeciﬁed subgroup
analysis of those with CKD and normal-to-moderately increased
albuminuria (creatinine clearance <65 ml/min, estimated by the
Cockcroft Gault formula; n ¼ 3394; mean follow-up 4.5 years)
that ACEi versus placebo reduced the risk for all-cause mortality
by 20% (HR: 0.80; 95% CI: 0.67–0.96), MI by 26% (HR: 0.74;
95% CI: 0.61–0.91), stroke by 31% (HR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.49–
0.90).167 It should be noted that approximately one-third of
patients in the HOPE study had diabetes, and only half had high
BP. In the overall HOPE study, the CV beneﬁts of ramipril versus
placebo were also present in those with moderately increased
albuminuria (approximately 1900 cases/9360 patients).197

There were no studies speciﬁcally evaluating the effect of
RASi on slowing kidney disease progression in patients with
CKD without diabetes and A2; therefore, HOPE provides the
best guide for this subpopulation. Cinotti et al. examined the
role of lisinopril on progression of kidney disease assessed by
inulin clearance in 131 patients without diabetic nephropathy
over 22.5 months.189 The mean baseline proteinuria per day was
506 mg, thus including A2 and A3, and progression to dialysis or
ESKD was reduced by 66% but with very wide 95% conﬁdence
intervals (HR: 0.34; 95% CI: 0.01–7.92). The TRANSCEND
study compared telmisartan to placebo in high-risk patients
with and without high BP. It reported a beneﬁt of the ARB on
the composite of doubling of serum creatinine or ESKD in those
with moderately increased albuminuria, but detrimental kidney
effects in those with normal or mildly increased albuminuria (P
for interaction 0.006).198 Limitations of subgroup data on ter-
tiary outcomes with low event numbers apply.

There is sparse evidence for agents other than RASi used as
initial therapy for high BP in people with CKD and moderately
increased albuminuria (A2) without diabetes. In the AASK trial
(mean PCR approximately 0.33 g/g [33 mg/mmol]), meto-
prolol and amlodipine were not signiﬁcantly different from
ramipril for the few CV events that occurred, but they were
inferior to ramipril for clinical kidney outcomes for which the
trial was powered.98

For MRAs, there were 3 RCTs with a total of 1426 par-
ticipants mainly from HF, not hypertension,
trials with
deﬁned CKD subgroups. Patients had varying levels of albu-
minuria.192,194,195 With relatively few events for the individual
trial outcomes,192,194,195 there was a 29% risk reduction (HR:

0.71; 95% CI: 0.58–0.87) for the composite outcome of CV
events and CV mortality based on data from 1 study with 912
CKD participants and a mean follow-up of 21 months
(Supplementary Table S17192–195).

Quality of evidence. The overall quality of the evidence for
kidney outcomes comparing ACEi or ARB with placebo or
standard of care in patients with CKD and moderately
increased albuminuria without diabetes
low, due to
imprecision because of a lack of data. The quality of the ev-
idence for CV outcomes in patients with A2 without diabetes
was rated as low. HOPE provided indirect evidence, as only
two-thirds of the population had no diabetes.

is

Values and preferences. In the opinion of the Work Group,
many well-informed patients would place more emphasis on
the potential for preventing CKD progression.

Resource use and costs. When treating patients with CKD
(G1–G4, A2) where the indication for ACEi or ARB therapy is
not strong, consideration should be given to the clinical
impact on the patient and the costs of starting RASi, including
additional clinic visits and the need for additional lab testing
Considerations for implementation. There is insufﬁcient in-
formation to differentiate between men and women for this
recommendation. However, data from ALLHAT demon-
strated that ACEi as initial therapy for high BP in patients of
African origin was inferior to chlorthalidone for stroke and
combined CV outcomes.199 ALLHAT did not measure urine
protein or albumin.

Rationale
We make this recommendation, albeit weak, because the CV
beneﬁts appear to outweigh the potential adverse risks; there-
fore, many well-informed patients with CKD not on dialysis
with moderately increased albuminuria but without diabetes
will opt for treatment with RASi. We feel that patients would
put a large value on the CV beneﬁts of RASi and are willing to
tolerate its potential harms, including hyperkalemia and AKI.
These side effects, however, may lead to higher healthcare costs
from additional visits and laboratory testing.

Recommendation 3.2.3: We recommend starting
RASi (ACEi or ARB) for people with high BP, CKD,
and moderately-to-severely increased albuminuria
(G1–G4, A2 and A3) with diabetes (1B).

This is a strong recommendation based on evidence from RCTs
of sufﬁcient duration to evaluate kidney protection in patients
with diabetes and CKD. This recommendation places a relatively
higher value on preventing long-term progression of CKD and a
relatively lower value on the risks of AKI or hyperkalemia, which
are often transient. Where data are available, analyses by
albuminuria subgroup are provided.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The 2 main studies demon-
strating kidney beneﬁt from RASi independent of BP control in
diabetes were the three-arm IDNT162 and the two-arm

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S49

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

compared to placebo. These

RENAAL200 studies where ARB was compared with placebo200 or
with placebo and with CCB in a double-blinded manner.162
IDNT excluded participants with normal BP; RENAAL
included those with and without high BP. Both studies
included only participants with severely increased albuminuria.
Irbesartan in the IDNT study resulted in a 20% (RR: 0.80; 95%
CI: 0.66–0.97) risk reduction in the primary composite
endpoint (doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD, death from any
cause) versus placebo and a 23% reduction versus amlodipine
(RR: 0.77; 95% CI: 0.63–0.93); while losartan in the RENAAL
study caused a 16% (RR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.72–0.98) reduction
in the composite outcome of death, dialysis, and doubling of
serum creatinine
studies
therapy improved the composite
demonstrated that RASi
outcome in patients with diabetes, signiﬁcant albuminuria
(IDNT: 2.9 g/d proteinuria, baseline serum creatinine of 1.67
mg/dl [148 mmol/l]; RENAAL: albumin–creatinine ratio 1237
mg/g [124 mg/mmol], baseline serum creatinine 1.9 g/dl [168
mmol/l]), and G3–G4, A3. Further,
the RENAAL study
demonstrated that in patients who have already doubled their
serum creatinine during the study, remaining on RASi therapy
signiﬁcantly delayed the onset of dialysis by a mean of 6
months. In the IDNT study, hyperkalemia necessitating a stop
in therapy occurred in only 2% of patients with RASi, versus
0.5% of patients in the other arms. Overall, serious adverse
events were actually lower in the RASi group than in the
control group. Therefore, in those with diabetes and CKD G3–
G4, A3, there is strong evidence supporting the treatment with
RASi because of their renoprotective effects.

Data for people with diabetes and CKD G1–G3, A2 comes
from the Micro-HOPE study, in which people with diabetes,
moderately increased albuminuria, and higher CV risks had
improved CV outcomes when randomized to ACEi therapy
compared to placebo.201 Speciﬁcally, for the composite outcome
of MI, stroke, and CV death, there was a relative risk reduction
of 28.6% (HR: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.6–0.9) based on 1140 patients
with diabetes from the Micro-HOPE study, with a mean follow-
up of 4.5 years. Kidney beneﬁt in this group was largely limited
to reducing progression from moderately increased albumin-
uria to severely increased albuminuria. Only 18 cases in total
developed ESKD–10 on ramipril and 8 on placebo.163 In the
Micro-HOPE study, baseline serum creatinine was 1.06 mg/dl
(94 mmol/l), and 474 (14%) of 3238 people progressed to a
serum creatinine level of $1.4 mg/dl (124 mmol/l) over the 4.5
years (231 on ramipril and 243 on placebo).202

In a meta-analysis performed by the ERT, we found that, for
patients with diabetes (including patients with and without
albuminuria [A1, A2, and A3]), ACEi compared to placebo or
standard of care did not reduce the risk for all-cause mortality,
based on data from 7561 patients in 22 studies with a mean follow-
(Supplementary Table S21163,203–223).
up of 32 months
The absolute difference was 26 fewer events per 1000 (95% CI:
57 fewer–20 more) and was not statistically signiﬁcant. The
risk of doubling of serum creatinine was reduced by 30% (RR:
0.70; 95% CI: 0.46–1.05) based on 6759 patients from 8 studies
with a mean follow-up of 32 months and an absolute difference

of 12 fewer events per 1000 (95% CI: 22 fewer–2 more), and
was not statistically signiﬁcant.163,207,213,215,221,222 However, in
patients with severely increased albuminuria, ACEi reduced
doubling of serum creatinine by 42% (RR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0.37–
0.90) based on 441 participants in 2 studies.219,224

ACEi also reduces albuminuria in the CKD population with
diabetes. The risk of progression from moderately increased
albuminuria to severely increased albuminuria decreased by
55% (RR: 0.45; 95% CI: 0.29–0.69) based on 2036 patients
from 17 studies with a mean follow-up of 34 months and an
absolute difference of 123 fewer events per 1000 patients (95%
CI: 159 fewer–69 fewer).163,206,208,210,213,221,222,225–233

Compared to placebo or standard of care in 8 studies of
4106 participants, ARBs did not show a difference in all-cause
mortality in patients with diabetes and CKD (RR: 0.99; 95%
CI: 0.85–1.16). Similarly, there was no beneﬁt in CV mor-
tality, MI, HF, stroke, or CV beneﬁt in diabetes and CKD.
There was a kidney beneﬁt with a reduction of doubling of
serum creatinine of 16% (RR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.72–0.98) based
on 3280 patients from 4 studies with a mean follow-up of 34
months (Supplementary Table S22162,200,234,235).

There were no differences between ACEi and ARB for the
discrete outcomes of all-cause mortality, CV mortality, MI,
stroke, HF, and kidney function in people with diabetes and
albuminuric or non-albuminuric CKD subpopulations
(Supplementary Table S23217,236–239). When compared to
placebo or standard of care, ACEi improves CV outcomes, but
for ARB, there is no improvement. Studies comparing ACEi
to ARB in patients with CKD and diabetes may have had an
insufﬁcient number of patients to ﬁnd a difference.

changes

in albuminuria

There has been little evidence to support the use of other
agents such as MRA, beta-blockers, and CCBs as the initial
therapy in patients with diabetes and albuminuria for CV or
kidney protection beyond albuminuria reduction. For MRA
compared to placebo, there were 3 small short-term studies
powered for
(Supplementary
Table S24235,240,241). Albuminuria was lowered by MRA;
however, in a meta-analysis by the ERT, there was no bene-
ﬁcial effect in RCTs on all-cause mortality, MI, and stroke,
and very few events to determine the effect on kidney out-
comes. However, those trials were not powered for CV or
kidney outcomes. Similarly, meta-analysis showed no evi-
dence of beneﬁts on CV or kidney outcomes for beta-blockers
(Supplementary Table S25242–249) and CCBs (Supplementary
Table S26210,230,250–256) compared to placebo or standard of
care. However, the studies were not properly powered for
kidney or CV outcomes.

The importance of diuretic therapy for lowering BP is
suggested by the ADVANCE study comparing treatment with a
combination of an ACEi plus diuretic (perindopril plus inda-
pamide) to usual care without a thiazide-type diuretic in
11,140 people aged $55 years with diabetes, CV risk, or
increased albuminuria (A2 or A3) over a mean of 4.3 years.257
The main outcomes were death from CV disease, non-fatal
stroke or non-fatal MI, and new or worsening kidney or dia-
betic eye disease. The relative risk of a major macrovascular or

S50

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

microvascular event was reduced by 9% (HR: 0.91; 95% CI:
0.83–1.00); the relative risk of death from CV disease was
reduced by 18% (HR: 0.82; 95% CI: 0.68–0.98); and death
from any cause was reduced by 14% (HR: 0.86; 95% CI: 0.75–
0.98). These improvements in clinical outcomes were associ-
ated with a fall in BP of SBP 5.3/DBP 2.1 mm Hg in patients
with CKD G1 or G2, and SBP 4.5/DBP 1.8 mm Hg in patients
with CKD G3–G5. There was no effect modiﬁcation by the
presence of baseline albuminuria. It should be noted that in the
ADVANCE study, 49% of the placebo group were already
treated with RASi at baseline, which further increased to 73%
by the end of the study, while 25% were on diuretics at baseline,
which decreased to 21% in the placebo group at the ﬁnal visit.
This ﬁnding suggests that the beneﬁts seen in ADVANCE
might have been due to the addition of the diuretic and/or
greater BP lowering in the active treatment group.

There is emerging evidence that MRA have beneﬁcial effects
on clinical kidney outcomes. The FIDELIO-DKD study, an
RCT of 5734 participants, demonstrated that ﬁnerenone, a
nonsteroidal MRA, on the background of an ACEi or ARB in
patients with diabetes, CKD, and albuminuria reduced the risk
of composite primary endpoint of GFR decline, kidney failure,
or renal death when added to standard of care.258 Finerenone
also reduced the risk of CV events. However, its effect on SBP
lowering was modest (2–3 mm Hg), and there was a higher risk
of hyperkalemia-related events. At the writing of this guideline,
ﬁnerenone has not been approved for clinical use. The trial was
published after the evidence review cut-off for the guideline but
will be assessed in future updates.

Quality of evidence. The ERT updated a Cochrane system-
atic review on antihypertensive therapies in patients with
diabetes and CKD, A2 and A3.259 The overall quality of the
evidence was rated as moderate, as the studies examining the
use of RASi therapy exhibited study limitations with unclear
allocation concealment for critical and important outcomes.
The quality of the evidence was lower for CV outcomes,
owing to there being fewer events and inconsistent reporting
of these outcomes in trials (Supplementary Tables S21–S30).
In the ADVANCE study of patients with CKD G1–G3, A2,
the quality of evidence is low according to GRADE.260 The
quality of the evidence was downgraded due to serious risk of
bias, with unclear allocation concealment, and imprecision, as
the beneﬁcial results of diuretics were seen only in the CKD
subgroups, when the results were negative in the entire cohort
(Supplementary Table S27).

The best evidence for renoprotective effects of RASi therapy
independent of BP control in patients with diabetes, CKD
G3–G4, and severely increased albuminuria comes from the
IDNT162 with its active comparator arm, and from the
RENAAL200 trial. For CV outcomes, the Micro-HOPE study
provides the best evidence for patients with moderately
increased albuminuria.163 There are no RCTs in those with
moderately increased albuminuria (A2) powered for hard kid-
ney outcomes. Published meta-analyses for patients with dia-
betes, hypertension, and CKD provided mixed results. One
found a reduction of all-cause mortality, CV mortality, and

major CV events in 32,827 people with diabetes treated with
ACEi, but this was not found in 23,867 patients treated with
ARBs.261 A meta-analysis comparing RASi to other antihyper-
tensive medications, excluding placebo-controlled trials,
in
people with diabetes, did not ﬁnd CVoutcome improvement.262
There was also no improvement in kidney failure, but the vast
majority of included studies enrolled people with normal urine
albumin or did not measure albumin at all. These meta-analyses
included patients with diabetes and CKD G1 and G2, A1–A3,
and G3 and G4, A1–A3, respectively. It is likely that including the
low-risk and high-risk groups together led to the lack of statis-
tical signiﬁcance for CV outcomes. Although it is tempting to
extrapolate the beneﬁcial CV effects of RASi to all people with
diabetes, in the absence of high BP, CV risks, and lower GFR (G3
and G4, A2 and A3), the evidence is weak at best. For treatment
with RASi, there is, therefore, a gradation of evidence from
strong in the CKD subpopulation with low eGFR and severely
increased albuminuria, to weak or absent in the subpopulation
with normal eGFR without albuminuria.

Values and preferences. In the opinion of the Work Group,
this recommendation for people with diabetes and CKD with
severely increased albuminuria places higher value on the
ability of RASi to prevent CV and CKD events, such as
doubling of serum creatinine and dialysis. It places less value
on the risks of hyperkalemia and AKI.

Resource use and costs. The costs of the RASi medications
are probably low in most countries. However, adding RASi to
patients with diabetes and severely increased albuminuria will
require more laboratory testing and visits to healthcare pro-
viders, especially in those with low GFR. It will also likely lead to
greater incidence of hyperkalemia and AKI—hence the asso-
ciated costs of monitoring and treating these complications.

Considerations for implementation. There is insufﬁcient in-
formation to differentiate between men and women for this
recommendation, and there is insufﬁcient evidence that there
are different outcomes by race.

Rationale
We issue a strong (1B) recommendation for treatment with
ACEi or ARB for patients with diabetes, increased albuminuria,
and normal-to-low GFR (G1–G4; A2 or A3), because their
desirable beneﬁts in kidney and CV protection outweigh the
adverse risks associated with therapy. Nonetheless, these side
effects, such as hyperkalemia and rises in serum creatinine, may
lead to higher costs from additional visits and laboratory testing.

Practice Point 3.2.1: It may be reasonable to treat people
with high BP, CKD, and no albuminuria, with or without
diabetes, with RASi (ACEi or ARB).

Patients with CKD, high BP, and no albuminuria are at lower
risk of CKD progression. In this subpopulation, existing evi-
dence does not demonstrate clear clinical beneﬁts of RASi for
CKD progression, and other antihypertensive agents are as
appropriate for BP management. However, we feel that some
patients would put a large value on the CV protection from RASi
and would be willing to tolerate the potential harms, particularly
patients with higher GFR and a relatively low risk of harm.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S51

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

The HOPE study, one of the largest RASi studies, reported
CV beneﬁts with an ACEi versus placebo in people at high CV
risk with or without high BP.163 In a prespeciﬁed CKD sub-
group (CrCl <65 ml/min by the Cockcroft-Gault formula) of
3394 patients with no or mildly increased albuminuria
(approximately one-third of whom had diabetes), ACEi
reduced the risk for all-cause mortality by 20% (HR: 0.80;
95% CI: 0.67–0.96), MI by 26% (HR: 0.74; 95% CI: 0.61–
0.91), and stroke by 31% (HR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.49–0.90)
during a mean follow-up of 4.5 years.167 In the overall HOPE
study, 3577 patients had diabetes, and 2437 of them (roughly
two-thirds) did not have albuminuria.163 The PEACE sub-
study in those with CKD conﬁrmed this notion.165

Practice Point 3.2.2: RASi (ACEi or ARB) should be
administered using the highest approved dose that
is
tolerated to achieve the beneﬁts described because the
proven beneﬁts were achieved in trials using these doses.
The Work Group judged that a large majority of physicians
would be comfortable initiating RAS blockade treatment and
titrating it to the maximum dose approved by regulatory
agencies and tolerated by the patient because of its beneﬁts in
kidney protection, their familiarity with this drug, and its good
safety proﬁle. The beneﬁts from RASi administered in less than
maximally recommended doses are less certain. However, if for
whatever reason (e.g., hyperkalemia) the patient cannot tolerate
the maximum dose, a smaller dose may still be reasonable. It
should be noted that the maximum dose of RASi allowed by the
regulatory agency varies by country, and the practitioners are
advised to follow their respective national guidance.

Practice Point 3.2.3: Changes in BP, serum creatinine, and
serum potassium should be checked within 2–4 weeks of
initiation or increase in the dose of a RASi, depending on
the current GFR and serum potassium.

ACEi and ARBs are potent antihypertensive agents that
counteract
the vasoconstrictive effects of angiotensin II.
Moreover, blocking the action of angiotensin II causes selec-
tively greater vasodilatation of the efferent arterioles of the
glomeruli, resulting in a decline of the intraglomerular ﬁltra-
tion pressure, and not unexpectedly, a decrease in the GFR and
a rise in the serum creatinine. In addition, RAS blockade in-
hibits the action of aldosterone, resulting in a greater pro-
pensity for hyperkalemia. In patients at risk for hyperkalemia,
measuring serum potassium before and at 1–2 weeks after
initiation of RASi is recommended, based on expert opinion.44
An increase in serum creatinine level, if it occurs, will typically
happen during the ﬁrst 2 weeks of treatment initiation, and it
should stabilize within 2–4 weeks in the setting of normal so-
dium and ﬂuid intake.263 Therefore, patients should be
monitored for symptomatic hypotension, hyperkalemia, and
serum creatinine within 2–4 weeks after initiating or changing
the dose of the drug, with the time interval depending on
baseline BP, serum creatinine, and serum potassium. A shorter
time interval is indicated if the baseline serum creatinine is
high, or serum potassium is already high-normal, or there is a

history of hyperkalemia or an acute rise in serum creatinine
with BP lowering or RASi.

Practice Point 3.2.4: Hyperkalemia associated with use of
RASi can often be managed by measures to reduce the
serum potassium levels rather than decreasing the dose or
stopping RASi.

In observational cohorts, hyperkalemia is often associated
with a subsequent reduction in dose or discontinuation of
RASi.44,264,265 Pseudo-hyperkalemia needs to be ﬁrst ruled
out. Then, there are multiple measures that can be taken to
mitigate the hyperkalemia.44 Improvement
in potassium
control could lead to increased use of RASi in patients with an
to control chronic
evidence-based indication. Strategies
hyperkalemia include dietary potassium restriction; discon-
tinuation of potassium supplements, certain salt substitutes,
and hyperkalemic drugs; adding potassium-wasting diuretics,
and oral potassium binders.44 In CKD patients receiving RASi
who develop hyperkalemia, the latter can be controlled with
newer oral potassium binders in many patients, with the ef-
fect
the recommended
dose.266,267 Whether the latter therapeutic strategy improves
CV or kidney outcomes is being examined in RCTs, such as
the ongoing DIAMOND trial (NCT03888066). Side effects of
the newer potassium binders are reported to be moderate.

that RASi can be continued at

Practice Point 3.2.5: Continue ACEi or ARB therapy unless
serum creatinine rises by more than 30% within 4 weeks
following initiation of treatment or an increase in dose.

This practice point reiterates a common expert opinion and
may be a reasonable option for many patients treated with RASi.
However, there is not a single trial that compared meaningful
clinical outcomes in patients who were continuing versus dis-
continuing versus reducing the dose of RASi upon a fast increase
in serum creatinine by 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, etc. Observational
data relating acute changes in serum creatinine shortly after
RASi initiation to subsequent long-term outcomes are equivocal
and contradictory.263,268–270 An increase of <30% in serum
creatinine from the baseline value does not mandate a dosage
decrease or discontinuation of RASi, as long as the serum
creatinine increase is not associated with other complications,
such as hyperkalemia and ﬂuid retention.

Practice Point 3.2.6: Consider reducing the dose or dis-
continuing ACEi or ARB in the setting of either symp-
tomatic hypotension or uncontrolled hyperkalemia despite
medical treatment, or to reduce uremic symptoms while
treating kidney failure (estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
[eGFR] <15 ml/min per 1.73 m2).

The dose of ACEi or ARBs should be reduced or dis-
continued in patients with hyperkalemia after other measures
have failed to achieve a normal serum potassium level. In
general, similar efforts should be made to discontinue other
concurrent BP medications before attempting to reduce the
dose of ACEi or ARBs in patients who experience symp-
tomatic hypotension and has a speciﬁc indication for RASi,

S52

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 3

such as severely increased albuminuria or heart failure. Which
BP medication to discontinue or which ones to retain would
depend on the relative indication of each medication.

When these drugs are used in patients with eGFR <30 ml/
min per 1.73 m2, close monitoring of serum potassium is
required. On the other hand, withholding these drugs solely
on the basis of the level of kidney function will unnecessarily
deprive many patients of the CV beneﬁts, and perhaps even
protection of the residual kidney function, that they otherwise
would have received, particularly when measures could be
undertaken to mitigate the risk of hyperkalemia.179,271
However, in patients with advanced CKD who are experi-
encing uremic symptoms or uncontrolled hyperkalemia, it is
reasonable to discontinue ACEi and ARB temporarily to allow
time for kidney replacement therapy preparation.272

Practice Point 3.2.7: Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
are effective for management of refractory hypertension but
may cause hyperkalemia or a reversible decline in kidney
function, particularly among patients with low eGFR.

The steroidal MRAs spironolactone and eplerenone have, in
small and short-term studies, been found to reduce BP in
resistant hypertension (deﬁned as uncontrolled hypertension
on 3 antihypertensive agents including a diuretic) in a popu-
lation that included CKD and non-CKD171,273 and to lower
albuminuria in patients with diabetes and elevated urinary
albumin excretion.193 Side effects, particularly hyperkalemia
and decline in kidney function,274 are however a concern when
added to background therapy with an ACEi, ARB, or diuretic,
particularly among patients with eGFR <45 ml/min per 1.73
m2.275 Thus, MRAs should not be used in patients with high risk
of hyperkalemia (e.g., hypoaldosteronism or type 4 renal
tubular acidosis). Results from the AMBER trial showed that in
patients with resistant hypertension and advanced CKD (25
to <45 ml/min per 1.73 m2), concomitant use of the oral po-
tassium binder patiromer compared with placebo allowed a
larger proportion of patients using spironolactone at 12
weeks.276 A recent trial, FIDELIO, examining the impact of the
nonsteroidal MRA ﬁnerenone showed kidney protection;
however,
the effect on BP was modest and the risk of
hyperkalemia-related events was increased.258
Research recommendations
(cid:3) RASi in patients with CKD G3–G4, A1 and A2 with or
without diabetes have not been adequately studied. Future
studies should examine if RASi, in the presence or absence of
other renoprotective agents such as SGLT2 inhibitors and
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, provide
kidney, CV, and survival beneﬁts to this important subgroup.
(cid:3) There are insufﬁcient data on the role of diuretics as ﬁrst-
line therapy for the treatment of high BP in patients with
CKD. It would be helpful to clarify the role of diuretics as
initial therapy in this population.

3.3 Role of dual therapy with RASi

RASi have been shown to both lower BP and slow the pro-
gression of certain types of kidney diseases independently of BP

control. The strongest data come from studies of patients with
CKD and diabetes with albuminuria, in which therapy with
ACEi or ARB has shown improvement of kidney outcomes and
potentially CV outcomes, as discussed above in Section 3.2.
Some investigators have advocated the use of dual therapy with
ACEi, ARB, and/or aliskiren to enhance the antiproteinuric and
renoprotective effects. However, compared to monotherapy
with ACEi or ARB, dual RASi therapy appears to cause more
adverse effects, including hyperkalemia and AKI, that may
outweigh any potential CV or kidney beneﬁt.

Recommendation 3.3.1: We recommend avoiding
any combination of ACEi, ARB, and direct renin in-
hibitor (DRI) therapy in patients with CKD, with or
without diabetes (1B).

This is a strong recommendation based on evidence from RCTs of
sufﬁcient duration to evaluate kidney and CV protection. There is
growing evidence that dual RAS blockade with an ACEi, ARB, or
DRI does not lead to long term CVor kidney beneﬁt despite lowering
proteinuria in the short term, but it leads to an increased risk of
harm from hyperkalemia and AKI. This recommendation places a
higher value on preventing harm from hyperkalemia and AKI than
on lowering proteinuria. The combination of ACEi or ARB with
MRA was beneﬁcial in 1 large outcome trial; thus, our recom-
mendations on combination therapy do not apply in this scenario.

Key information

to monotherapy

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. In patients with CKD with
and without diabetes, a large network meta-analysis compared
dual blockade
and included 17,750
participants. Two of these studies excluded participants with
diabetes.169 There was no signiﬁcant difference in all-cause
mortality from dual blockade versus monotherapy in 7
studies of 16,862 patients with a mean follow-up of 3.4 years.
There was also no difference in progression to ESKD and no
improvement of CV events based on 7 studies of 16,507
patients with a mean follow-up of 40 months.

On the other hand, a traditional pair-wise meta-analysis
performed by the ERT demonstrated harm for dual blockade
compared to monotherapy. In studies of patients with CKD
with and without diabetes, dual blockade compared to mon-
otherapy caused a slightly higher risk of all-cause mortality of
borderline signiﬁcance (HR: 1.09; 95% CI: 1.00–1.20) based on
data from 10,615 patients in 4 studies with a mean follow-up of
31 months: VALERIA,277 ONTARGET,278 PRONEDI,279 and
VA-NEPHRON-D280 (Supplementary Table S31).

Importantly, in studies of patients with CKD with or without
diabetes, there was evidence that dual therapy increased the
incidence of AKI by 40% (RR: 1.60; 95% CI: 1.26–2.04),
compared to monotherapy, based on data from 6139 patients in
2 studies—VA-NEPHRON-D280 and ONTARGET278—with a
mean follow-up of 39 months (Supplementary Table S31).

Combining data for patients who have both CKD and
diabetes (and excluding those without diabetes) from 3 large
RCTs, there was no beneﬁt in all-cause mortality; there were

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S53

c h a p t e r 3

www.kidney-international.org

9% fewer deaths with monotherapy RASi compared to dual
RASi therapy (RR: 0.92; 95% CI: 0.84–1.01) based on data
from 10,486 patients with a mean follow-up of 52 months
(PRONEDI,279 VA-NEPHRON-D,280 ONTARGET 2011278).
There was a marginal reduction of 20% (RR: 0.80; 95% CI:
0.65–1.00) in doubling of serum creatinine by dual therapy,
compared to monotherapy, during the study of 10,486 pa-
tients from 3 studies with a mean follow-up of 37 months
(PRONEDI,279 VA-NEPHRON-D,280
and ONTARGET
2011278). However, the lower conﬁdence interval reaches the
null, indicating high uncertainty.

The data analysis of

the meta-analysis cited above is
echoed by the individual large RCTs, including ONTARGET,
VA-NEPHRON D, ALTITUDE, and ORIENT.

Although dual therapy with ACEi and ARB (or DRI in
ALTITUDE) moderately
and BP
reduces
compared to monotherapy with either drug, dual therapy
does not confer important clinical kidney or CV beneﬁts, and
it causes more hyperkalemia and AKI.

albuminuria

Quality of evidence. The overall quality of the evidence for
harm was moderate. The network meta-analysis that compared
dual RASi with mono RASi exhibited moderate quality of the
evidence because of concerns regarding inconsistency for all-
cause mortality and CV events and serious imprecision for
ESKD due to wide CIs that indicated appreciable beneﬁts
and harms (Supplementary Table S32).169 The ERT review
(including Cochrane reviews that were updated259,281) rated
the quality of evidence to be moderate for studies that
compared dual with mono RASi because of study limitations,
with unclear reporting for Cochrane risk of bias282 domains,
random sequence generation, and allocation concealment
(Supplementary Table
ERT
updated a Cochrane review protocol on the addition of
aliskiren to RASi therapy with mono RASi.285 The quality of
outcomes
the
(Supplementary Table S29286–291). For CV mortality, ESKD,
moderately increased albuminuria, and doubling of serum
creatinine,
the evidence was downgraded
because of serious imprecision due to only 1 study reporting
these outcomes, and all-cause mortality was downgraded due
to wide conﬁdence intervals that indicate appreciable beneﬁts
and harms. Finally, for the serious adverse events, the quality
of the evidence was downgraded to moderate because of study
limitations (unclear random sequence generation, allocation
concealment, and a lack of blinding of outcome assessors).

S31234,277–279,283,284). The

evidence was moderate

the quality of

for most

Values and preferences. In the opinion of the Work Group,
this recommendation places a higher importance on preventing
hyperkalemia and AKI than on the beneﬁts in reduction of
albuminuria. The signiﬁcance of these beneﬁcial effects on
albuminuria is unclear, in view of the absence of effects in GFR,
at least during the follow-up period of the trials. Although some
beneﬁt has been found for dual therapy in HF, this has not been
conﬁrmed so far in patients with CKD with or without diabetes.
The Work Group believes that patients and providers would

want to avoid hyperkalemia and AKI because of the associated
downstream risks as well as the need for more frequent
laboratory tests, ofﬁce and emergency department visits,
additional short-term therapies, and adjustment in diet.

Resource use and costs. Resource utilization and costs in-
crease, instead of decrease, by instituting dual RASi therapy
compared to monotherapy.

Considerations for implementation. Given that dual RASi
therapy decreases proteinuria, practitioners might be tempted
to institute dual therapy to treat very high levels of albuminuria
in selected patients, even recognizing the risks of hyperkalemia
and AKI.292 There is, unfortunately, no RCT data on safety or
kidney efﬁcacy of dual therapy in patients with very elevated
proteinuria.293 There is a report that dedicated clinics for
remission of progression of kidney disease are superior to
historical controls.294 There is insufﬁcient information to
differentiate between men and women for this recommenda-
tion, and there remains insufﬁcient evidence that there are
different outcomes by race or age. In summary, dual therapy
should be discouraged for patients with CKD with or without
diabetes, with or without albuminuria.

Rationale
The belief
compared to monotherapies,
improvement in albuminuria with dual therapy.

therapies of RASi are beneﬁcial,
stemmed only from the

that dual

Addition of an MRA to ACEi or ARB. Limited data have shown
that the addition of an MRA, such as spironolactone, epler-
enone, or ﬁnerenone, to an ACEi or ARB for renoprotection in
patients with diabetes and kidney disease resulted in a reduc-
tion of albuminuria but a higher risk of hyperkalemia. Beyond
albuminuria, no adequately powered study examining GFR
and kidney failure outcomes has been completed with spi-
ronolactone or eplerenone.295 However, the recent FIDELIO
trial showed kidney and cardiovascular protection by ﬁner-
enone despite its modest effect on SBP (2–3 mm Hg lower) and
a higher incidence of hyperkalemia-related events.258 Results
of the FIGARO cardiovascular trial, which is also testing
ﬁnerenone on the background of an ACEi or ARB in patients
with diabetes and kidney disease, are forthcoming.

Research recommendations
(cid:3) The beneﬁts of dual versus monotherapy on major kidney
outcomes in people with CKD without diabetes and severely
increased proteinuria (e.g., >2–3 g/d) have not been well
studied. Future trials should examine this important sub-
group, while curtailing the risks of hyperkalemia and AKI.
(cid:3) Conduct studies examining the addition of endothelin
blockers or GLP-1 receptor agonists to concomitant RASi
monotherapy for potential kidney beneﬁts in the advanced
CKD (G4–G5) population and the nonproteinuric CKD
populations.

(cid:3) In the era of personalized medicine, research should be
directed to identify individuals who will beneﬁt or experience
harm from these combinations in all CKD populations.

S54

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 4

Chapter 4: Blood pressure management in kidney
transplant recipients (CKD G1T–G5T)

This chapter makes recommendations for BP management in
adult (age $18 years) kidney transplant recipients (CKD
G1T–G5T). The evidence review for this chapter included an
update of a previous Cochrane review296 in addition to a new
search of the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry for all
RCTs.

The term “high BP” is used throughout the document
for BP above the target. For kidney transplant recipients, the
target is SBP <130 mm Hg/DBP <80 mm Hg.

Practice Point 4.1: Treat adult kidney transplant recipients
with high BP to a target BP of <130 mm Hg systolic
and <80 mm Hg diastolic using standardized ofﬁce BP
measurement (see Recommendation 1.1).

This practice point is identical to the original recom-
mendation put forward in the KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic
Kidney Disease.141 The target is also consistent with the rec-
ommended target of <130/80 mm Hg as deﬁned in the
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for the Care of Kidney
Transplant Recipients.297

There are no completed RCTs in kidney transplant re-
cipients that have tested different BP targets on clinically
important outcomes such as graft survival, CV events, or
mortality. There is only 1 RCT on intensiﬁed BP control in
kidney transplant recipients that compared to standard blood
pressure (MAP between 50th and 99th percentiles) versus
intensiﬁed BP control (MAP <50th percentile), and it did not
report on any clinical outcomes.298

The Work Group judged that a target of <130 mm Hg
systolic, using standardized ofﬁce measurement, remained a
reasonable goal for kidney transplant recipients. A higher
target SBP, such as 140 mm Hg, was in the opinion of the
Work Group too high given the preponderance of evidence
from RCTs demonstrating survival and CV beneﬁts of tar-
geting SBP <130 mm Hg in the general population.299–301
In contrast,
the Work Group judged that a lower SBP
goal, such as 120 mm Hg (see Recommendation 3.1.1), may
not be appropriate for kidney transplant recipients without
further data on the risks and beneﬁts of targeting this level
of BP in this population. This concern for the lower SBP
goal of <120 mm Hg partly stems from observations from
the SPRINT trial showing that, compared to the standard
arm (SBP target <140 mm Hg), patients in the intensive BP
arm had modestly higher rates of eGFR decline within the

3-year follow-up of the trial,91,302 AKI (albeit mild in in-
tensity),150 and incident CKD,134 which may be of concern
to kidney transplant recipients and clinicians (see Values
and preferences below). It is conceivable that kidney trans-
plant patients with a solitary, denervated kidney could be at
an even higher risk for such adverse events with intensive
BP lowering, although this has not been substantiated by
clinical data. Data from RCTs involving kidney transplant
recipients will be needed to provide a clearer proﬁle of the
true risks and beneﬁts of a SPRINT-like goal
in this
population.

Similar to the non-transplant CKD population (Recom-
mendation 1.2), ABPM or HBPM may be used to comple-
ment standardized ofﬁce BP readings for the diagnosis and
management of high BP in the kidney transplant population.
As with the general population, classiﬁcation of BP status
using out-of-ofﬁce BP is often different from classiﬁcation
using standardized ofﬁce BP in kidney transplant recipients;
the complementary use of out-of-ofﬁce BP measurements
may lead to more appropriate therapeutic decisions.303,304
Again,
there have been no
completed RCTs targeting different BP values using either
ofﬁce BP readings or out-of-ofﬁce BP readings in the kidney
transplant population.

should be noted that

it

Recommendation 4.1: We recommend that a dihy-
dropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB) or an
ARB be used as the ﬁrst-line antihypertensive agent
in adult kidney transplant recipients (1C).

This recommendation places a relatively higher value on pre-
venting kidney allograft loss and a relatively lower value on the
risk of a possible medication-related side effect. This recom-
mendation is strong because in the judgment of the Work Group,
the potential prevention of transplant failure outweighs potential
risks of burden associated with its implementation. The Work
Group also judged that all or nearly all well-informed transplant
patients would choose to receive a CCB or an ARB given the
potential beneﬁt.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. This recommendation relies
heavily on the importance of preventing graft loss to kidney
transplant recipients and clinicians.305,306 The evidence re-
and normotensive
view,

including both hypertensive

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S55

c h a p t e r 4

www.kidney-international.org

Study or subgroup

Events Total

Events Total

Weight M–H, Random, 95% CI

CCB

Placebo/no treatment

Risk ratio

Risk ratio
M–H, Random, 95% CI

Non-dihydropyridine
Alcaraz 1991
Campistol 1991
Chen 2013a CyP+
Chen 2013a CyP–
Chen 2013b
Chrysostomou 1993
Dawidson 1991
Frei 1990
Guerin 1989
Ladefoged 1994
Patton 1994
Pirsch 1993
Santos 2002
Wagner 1986
Wahlberg 1992
Subtotal (95% CI)
46
Total events
Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0.00; χ2 = 7.05, df = 10 (P = 0.72); I2 = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.49 (P = 0.62)

23
12
31
29
11
32
30
65
14
19
32
32
15
30
20
395

2
0
0
0
0
3
7
11
3
2
1
1
5
10
1

1
0
0
0
0
2
4
9
1
6
2
2
5
7
3

42

Dihydropyridine
Harper 1996
Lehtonen 2000
Morales 1989
Morales 1994
Rahn 1999*
Van den Dorpel 1994
Van Riemsdijk 2000
Wilkie 1994
Subtotal (95% CI)
Total events
70
Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0.00; χ2 = 4.65, df = 7 (P = 0.70); I2 = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.54 (P = 0.01)

24
94
15
47
130
25
98
17
450

2
13
1
13
4
2
3
1

9
23
1
14
7
6
5
5

39

30
25
31
29
11
39
26
64
15
20
36
28
15
33
20
422

44
90
15
50
123
25
112
17
476

Total (95% CI)
Total events
Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0.00; χ2 = 13.48, df = 18 (P = 0.76); I2 = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 2.20 (P = 0.03)
Test for subgroup differences: χ2 = 1.88, df = 1 (P = 0.17); I2 = 46.8%

116

845

81

898

1.3%

2.4%
5.8%
10.8%
1.5%
3.3%
1.3%
1.3%
6.9%
10.3%
1.5%
46.4%

3.4%
18.7%
1.0%
17.2%
4.9%
3.1%
3.6%
1.7%
53.6%

0.65 [0.06, 6.76]
Not estimable
Not estimable
Not estimable
Not estimable
0.81 [0.14, 4.57]
0.50 [0.16, 1.50]
0.81 [0.36, 1.81]
0.36 [0.04, 3.04]
3.16 [0.72, 13.76]
2.25 [0.21, 23.66]
1.75 [0.17, 18.28]
1.00 [0.36, 2.75]
0.77 [0.34, 1.77]
3.00 [0.34, 26.45]
0.91 [0.61, 1.34]

0.41 [0.10, 1.74]
0.54 [0.29, 1.00]
1.00 [0.07, 14.55]
0.99 [0.52, 1.88]
0.54 [0.16, 1.80]
0.33 [0.07, 1.50]
0.69 [0.17, 2.80]
0.20 [0.03, 1.54]
0.62 [0.43, 0.90]

100.0%

0.74 [0.57, 0.97]

0.02

0.1
Less with CCB

1

50
10
Less with placebo

Figure 7 | CCB versus placebo/no treatment for the outcome of graft loss. Meta-analysis was conducted by the Cochrane Kidney and
Transplant Evidence Review Team as part of the guideline evidence review. *Includes patients both with and without high blood pressure. CCB,
calcium channel blocker; CI, conﬁdence interval; CyP, cytochrome P450 3A5 polymorphism; M-H, Mantel-Haenszel.

patients, has found that, compared to placebo, CCB use
caused a mean 26% reduction in graft loss (RR: 0.74; 95%
CI: 0.57–0.97; Supplementary Table S33; Figure 7307–326
[Santos AF, Keitel E, Bittar A, et al., eds. Long-term re-
sults of diltiazem use associated to cyclosporin in renal
transplantation {abstract}. XIXth International Congress of
the Transplantation Society; August 25–30, 2002; Miami, FL,
USA]). This evidence is derived from a meta-analysis of 22
RCTs involving 1745 patients conducted by the ERT for this
guideline. These 22 trials, however, evaluated both dihy-
dropyridine CCBs (e.g., amlodipine, nifedipine) and non-
dihydropyridine CCBs (e.g., diltiazem, verapamil). From a
pharmacologic perspective, non-dihydropyridine and dihy-
dropyridine CCBs are very different medications with
distinct effects and adverse effects and should not be com-
bined in a meta-analysis. When these medication classes
were examined separately, only the dihydropyridine CCB
group caused a 38% reduction in graft loss (RR: 0.62; 95%

CI: 0.43–0.90) over a mean of 25 months compared to
placebo (Figure 7307–326). This evidence was derived from 8
RCTs involving 926 participants followed for a mean of 25
months.314,316–318,321–323,326 In contrast,
the reduction in
graft loss caused by the non-dihydropyridine CCB group
was not statistically signiﬁcant (RR: 0.91; 95% CI: 0.61–
1.34) compared to placebo (Figure 7307–326). The evidence
review has also found that ARB use compared to placebo
caused a 65% reduction in graft loss (RR: 0.35; 95% CI:
0.15–0.84; Supplementary Table S34). This evidence was
derived from 3 RCTs involving 786 participants followed for
a mean of 37 months.327–329

The evidence review found no beneﬁt of CCB or ARB use
on all-cause mortality or CV events such as MI or stroke.
Dihydropyridine CCB use, but not ARB use, however, caused
a lower serum creatinine concentration (mean difference:
16.01 mmol/l [0.18 mg/dl] lower; 95% CI: 24.97 lower–7.05
lower) and a higher GFR (mean difference: 5.27 ml/min

S56

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

 
 
 
 
www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 4

higher; 95% CI: 2.79 higher–7.74 higher) compared to pla-
cebo over a mean follow-up of 15.3 months (Supplementary
Table S33314,317,318,321,322,330–334).

The tradeoff or harms with these interventions include
well-known adverse events for both dihydropyridine CCB
(e.g., edema335) and ARB (e.g., anemia, acute decline in
kidney function, hyperkalemia336).

Table

The evidence review found that, compared to placebo or
no treatment, ACEi, alpha-blockers, beta-blockers, and
MRAs had no signiﬁcant effect on mortality, graft
loss,
S35,332,337–349
or CV events
(Supplementary
Supplementary Table S36,350 Supplementary Table S37,351
Supplementary Table S38352). With regard to ACEi there
was trial evidence showing that these agents were effective at
reducing BP and proteinuria in kidney transplant recipients
(Supplementary Table S35). However, there was no signiﬁ-
cant effect of ACEi on all-cause mortality or graft loss, and
their use was associated with a signiﬁcant
increase in
adverse
transplant population,
including angioedema, cough, hyperkalemia, and anemia
(Supplementary Table S35).

in the kidney

events

Quality of evidence. The ERT updated a Cochrane sys-
tematic review296 and evaluated the quality of the evidence
based on RCTs only (Supplementary Tables S33–S39). The
evidence for the use of an ARB or CCB compared to
placebo or no treatment is considered low quality because of
a serious risk of bias (unclear randomization sequence
generation and allocation concealment) and imprecision
around the effect estimates. Overall, there were very few
graft failure events, which introduces greater fragility in the
effect estimates. For example, there were only a total of 25
graft failure outcomes among the 786 participants over a
mean of 37 months of follow-up in the ARB trials.

Values and preferences. Kidney transplant recipients place a
survival. The SONG–Kidney
high priority on allograft
Transplantation (SONG-Tx) group was established to deter-
mine which outcomes to measure in transplant trials.305 The
SONG-Tx methodology included a Delphi survey that was
completed by 461 patients or caregivers and 557 health pro-
fessionals from 79 countries. They also held 3 consensus
conferences
and caregivers partici-
pated.305,306 Kidney allograft survival was unequivocally the
dominant priority for patients, caregivers, and health pro-
fessionals.305,306 From the patient’s perspective, there was a
prevailing dread of returning to dialysis, and they focused on
well-being.305 Preventing graft loss was the top priority, even
over death, as the patients were more concerned with quality
than quantity of life.305

in which patients

The SONG-Tx work provides strong rationale for the use
of interventions that will reduce graft failure. It is the opinion
of the Work Group that most well-informed transplant pa-
tients would have the same values and preferences for the
avoidance of graft loss, as was evident from the SONG-Tx

work. Thus, we believe that nearly all well-informed trans-
plant patients would accept the tradeoffs of side effects of a
CCB or an ARB in exchange for the possible beneﬁt of pro-
longed graft survival.

a

and generic ARBs

Resource use and other costs. This recommendation as-
sumes that an antihypertensive agent will be started for the
treatment of high BP, and the guideline is to facilitate the
decision on the choice of the agent. In most countries,
In
generic CCBs
resource-limited settings, these drugs are most likely to be
available at even lower cost. Given the high ﬁnancial and
human cost of graft failure, and the relatively low cost of
CCB or ARB, it is likely that the initiation of a CCB or
ARB would be
formal
economic
antihypertensive
agents in the kidney transplantation setting has not been
performed.354

cost-effective.353 However,
evaluating different

inexpensive.

analysis

are

Considerations for implementation. High BP can be difﬁcult
to control in kidney transplant recipients, and most patients
will require more than 1 antihypertensive agent.299–301 This
recommendation is for the selection of an initial antihy-
pertensive agent with the understanding that other medi-
cations may be required to achieve BP control. Patients
with evidence of volume overload and high BP should be
treated with diuretics before considering an ARB or CCB.
Women trying to conceive or who are pregnant should be
treated with a CCB, which is generally safe during preg-
nancy and lactation, whereas ARB is contraindicated in
these conditions. In kidney transplant recipients with pro-
teinuria and high BP, ARB should be considered ﬁrst given
the
these
medications.296 In the early posttransplant period, ARBs
should be
function
stabilizes, as the acute negative effect of an ARB on GFR
can be confused with other causes of graft dysfunction
(e.g., rejection). For most other subgroups of transplant
patients (e.g., elderly, diabetic), an ARB or CCB should
the ﬁrst-line antihypertensive agent.
be considered as
subgroups, would value graft
Most,
survival as a high-priority outcome. The choice of class
(i.e., ARB vs. CCB) and speciﬁc agent should be based
on local availability and cost.

avoided until kidney

proteinuria-lowering

if not all patient

transplant

known

effects

of

Rationale
This recommendation places a higher value on preventing
kidney allograft
loss and a lower value on the risk of
medication-related side effects. There are many advantages
of using an ARB or CCB for high BP in kidney transplant
recipients,
including physician familiarity with these
agents, well-known side-effect proﬁles, availability, and low
costs.

This recommendation is strong because, in the judgment
of the Work Group, the potential prevention of transplant

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S57

c h a p t e r 4

www.kidney-international.org

failure far outweighs potential risks and burden associated
with its implementation. The Work Group also judged that
most transplant patients would take a CCB or an ARB given
the potential beneﬁt, and only a small proportion would not.
Finally, the Work Group judged that the majority, if not all, of
clinicians would be comfortable in starting a CCB or ARB due
to the familiarity with these agents and their well-known
safety proﬁles.

Research recommendations
Future research should include:
(cid:3) Adequately powered RCT to evaluate CV and kidney effects
of targeting SBP <120 mm Hg versus <130 mm Hg SBP
among patients with kidney transplants.

(cid:3) Adequately powered RCT to evaluate CV and kidney effects
of ARB versus dihydropyridine CCB among patients with
kidney transplants.

S58

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 5

Chapter 5: Blood pressure management in children
with CKD

Recommendation 5.1: We suggest that in children
with CKD, 24-hour mean arterial pressure (MAP) by
ABPM should be lowered to £50th percentile for
age, sex, and height (2C).

This recommendation is weak, according to GRADE, because the
potential risks for adverse events from BP lowering may vary
depending on the underlying cause of CKD in children. In
particular, risks of dehydration, hypotension, and possible AKI
may be greater in children with underlying urologic disease that
may be associated with ﬁxed urine output despite intercurrent
gastrointestinal (GI) illness and ﬂuid loss or decreased ﬂuid
intake. There may also be burden due to limitations in available
resources associated with BP monitoring via 24-hour ABPM. It
places a high value on reduction in kidney disease progression
and kidney failure and use of the same BP measurement tech-
nique by ABPM as in the single RCT that forms the evidence
base. It places a relatively low value on the lack of evidence
demonstrating that the clinical beneﬁts of BP lowering extend to
populations characterized by different causes of CKD, level of
albuminuria, race and ethnicity, and on the costs and incon-
venience associated with BP monitoring using ABPM.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. This recommendation relies
heavily on the data from a single trial (the Effect of Strict Blood
Pressure Control and ACE Inhibition on the Progression of
CKD in Pediatric Patients [ESCAPE] trial) of 385 participants in
which intensiﬁed BP control (targeting 24-hour MAP <50th
percentile of normal children) was compared to standard BP
control (targeting 24-hour MAP 50th–99th percentile of
normal children; Supplementary Table S401,142,355). This
study showed a probable beneﬁt in slowing kidney disease
progression and no greater risk of adverse events, such as
hypotension or acute decrease in GFR. This study in children
was not powered for, and did not demonstrate, differences in
the critical outcome of all-cause mortality. In the ESCAPE
trial, targeting the intensiﬁed BP control required a larger
number of antihypertensive agents than the conventional
target, which may be a burden for some children. Certain
subgroups, those with glomerular disorders, GFR <45 ml/
min per 1.73 m2, and those with PCR >1.5 g/g (150 mg/
mmol) seemed to beneﬁt the most. Of note, based on this
observation,
the 2016 European Society of Hypertension
guideline recommends targeting the 75th percentile of MAP
of normal children in a CKD patient with no proteinuria, and

the 50th percentile if an individual has proteinuria.356 This is
based on a subgroup analysis of the ESCAPE data, which
suggested that those children with a PCR <0.5 g/g (50 mg/
mmol) did not have a signiﬁcant beneﬁt from strict BP
control. Therefore, the risk–beneﬁt ratio associated with this
treatment strategy may differ in different subpopulations.
There may be a higher risk of adverse events with aggressive
BP control
in individuals who are prone to become
dehydrated and are at risk of AKI. This is especially relevant
to children with CKD and congenital anomalies of the kidney
and urinary tract
(CAKUT) who may be unable to
concentrate urine and have a salt-losing nephropathy.357 On
the other hand, there are potential CV end-organ beneﬁts,
such as less left ventricular hypertrophy.358

The single RCT of BP control and kidney failure outcomes
in the pediatric CKD population utilized 24-hour MAP as the
BP target.142 Additionally, the AHA Scientiﬁc Statement on
pediatric ABPM currently considers ABPM as the gold stan-
dard metric for the assessment of BP in children, as stronger
associations have been reported between ABPM and target
organ damage in children compared with clinic BP values.359
Targeting BP control by ABPM in children with CKD is also
recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP).1 However, in clinics that do not have the capacity to
provide ABPM, performance of standardized, protocol-driven
manual BP measurement using an aneroid sphygmoma-
nometer
is a reasonable alternative. Such standardized
manual BP measurement provides prognostic information
similar to that provided by ABPM.360,361 Data from the
Chronic Kidney Disease in Children Study (CKiD) further
demonstrate that manual auscultatory clinic BPs taken in a
protocol-driven setting are not inferior to ambulatory BP in
the discrimination of BP-related adverse outcomes in children
with CKD.360 However, it must be emphasized that, despite
their prognostic utility, RCTs targeting standardized manual
BP with meaningful clinical outcomes are not available in
children.

Proper technique is essential for BP measurement. BP
should be measured in the right arm using standard practices,
similar to the method used for adults (see Figure 2 in Chapter
1). The AAP 2017 Clinical Practice guidelines also provide
considerable detail on correct BP measurement methods.1
When possible, in the clinic, the use of auscultatory BP is
preferred, as normative BP data in children are obtained
using this technique, and there are signiﬁcant differences
between values obtained by oscillometric and auscultatory
measurements, with oscillometric measures being slightly

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S59

c h a p t e r 5

www.kidney-international.org

higher on average.1,3,362 Regardless, RCT data targeting either
oscillometric or auscultatory BP measurements obtained in
the clinic setting in children are lacking.363 For practical
purposes, the initial BP measurement in a clinic setting may
be oscillometric using a calibrated machine that has been
validated for use in the pediatric population.1,3 However,
conversion from oscillometric to ascultatory measurement on
an individual basis is difﬁcult. In individuals at particularly
high risk for elevated BP (e.g., those with glomerular dis-
ease),364 readings should then be conﬁrmed by auscultation.
Use of HBPM in children requires further study and has
not been endorsed for the diagnosis of hypertension by the
AAP Clinical Practice Guideline. When performed, elec-
tronic upper-arm cuff monitors, which have been clinically
validated in children, should be used with appropriate cuff
size. Validation status for oscillometric BP devices in the
pediatric age group can be checked at stridebp.org. HBPM
should be performed for 7 days (not less than 3), with
duplicate morning and evening measurements after 5 mi-
nutes of sitting at rest and 1 minute between measurements
(total of at least 12 readings per week). These preparations
have been suggested to be useful in the initial evaluation of
untreated children with suspected hypertension, and for
children with treated hypertension before each follow-up
to the healthcare provider.365 The advantages of
visit
HBPM include the ability to obtain multiple BP measure-
ments outside the ofﬁce setting, its relative ease of use, and
perhaps higher acceptance by patients and families. Similar
to standardized ofﬁce BP measurements and in contrast to
ABPM, however, no prospective RCTs targeting HBPM to
improve clinical outcomes are available in children. Reliable
factors converting standardized ofﬁce BP to home BP or
ABPM are also not available in children. Additionally, clin-
ical validation of newer, more automated BP devices in
children is necessary.

Quality of evidence. The quality of the evidence is low for
the outcomes of annual GFR loss and ESKD, as the recom-
mendation of a target of <50th percentile MAP by ABPM in
children was based on a single RCT with study limitations
(Supplementary Table S40142). The quality of the evidence for
the mortality outcome was very low because of study limi-
tations and very serious imprecision because death is a rare
event in children. Nonetheless, multiple smaller interven-
tional trials and observational studies with multiple mean-
ingful outcomes for children have consistently shown beneﬁts
of BP lowering. For example, observational data from CKiD,
published in abstract form, suggest that MAP targets at <90th
percentile are beneﬁcial for children with either glomerular or
non-glomerular causes of CKD, and lower MAP at <50th
percentile may have an additional beneﬁt.366 Therefore, a
range of MAP targets, including the 50th–90th percentile,
may also be considered.

Values and preferences. The Work Group judged that the
prevention of kidney failure and progressive kidney function
loss would be of high value to nearly all well-informed patients
or caregivers. Published patient-reported outcome data from

the SONG–Kids study reported that children with kidney
disease and caregivers rated kidney function as an important
outcome, whereas BP control was also rated as an important
outcome by caregivers.367 In the judgment of
the Work
Group, most patients would value these clinical beneﬁts
despite the inconvenience and potential
risk of harms
associated with aggressive BP management (e.g., multiple
medications, more-frequent dosing, possible adverse events if
dehydrated, and the burden of monitoring with 24-hour
ABPM). Patients
the
burden of ABPM monitoring are particularly important
concerns may be more
to follow this
recommendation.

for whom medication burden or

inclined not

Resource use and costs. In the judgment of

the Work
Group, the potential beneﬁts associated with ABPM outweigh
the costs and inconvenience associated with its implementa-
tion. Patients and families in areas where ABPM is unavailable
or less affordable will be less inclined to follow this recom-
mendation and may choose to use clinic-based auscultatory
BP monitoring instead.

Consideration for implementation. There are no data that
suggest differences in beneﬁcial effects of BP lowering be-
tween males and females, or children of different ethnic
backgrounds or races. However, compared to nonproteinuric
kidney diseases, children with proteinuria may derive more
clinical beneﬁts from intensive BP lowering.142

Implementation of ABPM for monitoring treatment of
hypertension is challenging.368 Some children have difﬁculty
wearing the monitors and completing the full 24 hours of
measurements. Monitors are not always available when
needed; they require time from a parent or other adult to
return the monitor to the clinic and are expensive. With this
in mind, there are certain situations in which there is a low
probability of ﬁnding elevated BP by ABPM. For example,
individuals with clinic BP at #25th percentile are unlikely to
have elevated ABPM. Individual practitioners may, therefore,
consider less-frequent ABPM monitoring if this level of clinic
BP is achieved.360

There are additional challenges on how these guidelines
apply to children who are too young to undergo ABPM or to
children <120 centimeters in height, for whom no normative
ABPM data exist. Additionally, for those on ACEi or ARB, it is
important for families to understand how to monitor their
children to prevent complications, such as dehydration, hy-
potension, and AKI.

Rationale
The Work Group considered the balance between beneﬁts and
harms, evidence quality, values and preferences, as well as
resource utilization in making this recommendation. Primary
evidence comes from the ESCAPE trial in which children with
baseline CKD with eGFR 20–80 ml/min per 1.73 m2 and 24-
hour average ambulatory MAP >95th percentile were ran-
domized to <50th percentile versus 50th–90th percentile of
MAP in the nomogram of healthy children. Both arms
received ramipril. The primary composite endpoint of 50%

S60

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

c h a p t e r 5

GFR decline and ESKD favored the intensive BP arm (HR:
0.65; 95% CI: 0.44–0.94).142

Existing guidelines from other organizations include the
2016 ESH guidelines for management of high BP in chil-
dren and adolescents, which promote the use of ausculta-
tory ofﬁce measurements and BP targets in children with
CKD of <75th percentile of normal children (and <50th
percentile if proteinuric). This recommendation is based
on a post hoc analysis from the ESCAPE study.142 Obser-
vational data on standardized auscultatory ofﬁce moni-
toring in the CKiD cohort suggest achieved ofﬁce SBP and
DBP <90th percentile offers protection against kidney
function decline, compared to ofﬁce SBP and DBP >90th
percentile in children with CKD, with potential additional
beneﬁt of even lower ofﬁce BP levels in children with non-
glomerular forms of CKD.369 Additionally, observational
data illustrate that higher levels of proteinuria are most
strongly associated with poor BP control and worsening BP
over time.370

Targeting BP control by ABPM in children with CKD is also
recommended by the AAP. The AAP 2017 Pediatric Hyper-
tension guideline recommends that children or adolescents
with both CKD and hypertension should be treated to lower
24-hour MAP to <50th percentile of the distribution of BP of
healthy children, as measured using ABPM. They further
recommend that, regardless of apparent control of BP ac-
cording to ofﬁce measurements, children and adolescents with
CKD and a history of hypertension should have BP assessed by
ABPM at least yearly. Additionally, this guideline recommends
that children and adolescents with CKD, hypertension, and
proteinuria should be treated with an ACEi or ARB, largely
based on observational data.1 In the ESCAPE trial, children in
both arms of the trial were given a ﬁxed-dose ACEi; therefore,
the effect of ACEi per se could not be delineated.

Key differences between the current and prior KDIGO
recommendations in children with CKD include that the
prior KDIGO guideline made a recommendation for the
initiation of antihypertensive medication when the ofﬁce SBP
or DBP is consistently above the 90th percentile for age, sex,
and height, whereas in the current guideline, all children with
CKD and MAP consistently above the 50th percentile should
be treated. The use of medications is included in this update
only as a practice point, as direct trial evidence supporting

their use does not exist, and the prior recommendation was
based on limited indirect evidence, primarily data from CKiD
that showed better BP control with use of ACEi or ARB.371
Compared to standard-of-care therapy, ACEi
in children
with CKD did not lower BP or protect against GFR decline,
although it has been reported to have a beneﬁcial effect on
proteinuria
in small
and left ventricular hypertrophy
RCTs.372,373

Practice Point 5.1: We suggest monitoring BP once a year
with ABPM, and monitoring every 3–6 months with stan-
dardized auscultatory ofﬁce BP in children with CKD.

Practice Point 5.2: In children with high BP and CKD,
when ABPM is not available, manual auscultatory ofﬁce BP
obtained in a protocol-driven standardized setting target-
ing achieved SBP <90th percentile for age, sex, and height
of normal children is a reasonable approach.

Practice Point 5.3: Use ACEi or ARB as ﬁrst-line therapy for
high BP in children with CKD. These drugs lower pro-
teinuria and are usually well tolerated, but they carry the
risk of hyperkalemia and have adverse fetal risks for
pregnant women.

(For Rationale of above practice points, please see text of

Recommendation 5.1.)

Research recommendations
(cid:3) Develop normative reference values for ABPM in pediatric
populations that include various races and ethnicities, as
differences in normative values by race or ethnicity might
inform appropriate targets for BP treatment in childhood
CKD.

(cid:3) Identify the best BP measurement technique and setting to
deﬁne hypertension and BP targets for pediatric CKD
patients.

(cid:3) Ascertain when antihypertensive medications should be

initiated.

(cid:3) Conduct RCTs that deﬁne targets for treatment when
ABPM cannot be obtained repeatedly, for example, with
home-based or ofﬁce-based auscultatory or oscillometric
BP, with kidney disease progression and CVD as outcomes.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S61

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Methods for guideline development

Aim

This is an update of the KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Management of Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
published in 2012.141 In September 2017, KDIGO held a Contro-
versies Conference to determine whether there was sufﬁcient new
evidence to support updating any of the guideline recommendations.
It was decided that a guideline update was required.374

The objective of this project was to update the evidence-based
clinical practice guideline for the management of BP in patients
with CKD. The guideline development methods are described below.

Overview of the process

This guideline adhered to international best practice for guideline
development (Appendix B: Supplementary Tables S2 and S3).375,376
This guideline has been conducted and reported in accordance
with the AGREE II reporting checklist.377 The processes under-
taken for the development of the KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Management of Blood Pressure in CKD are
described below.
(cid:3) Appointing Work Group members and the ERT
(cid:3) Finalizing guideline development methodology
(cid:3) Deﬁning scope and topics of the guideline
(cid:3) Formulating

clinical questions—identifying

the Population,

Intervention, Comparator, Outcome, Methods (PICOM)

(cid:3) Selecting topics for systematic evidence review and linking to

existing Cochrane Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews

(cid:3) Developing and implementing literature search strategies
(cid:3) Selecting studies according to predeﬁned inclusion criteria
(cid:3) Data extraction and critical appraisal of the literature
(cid:3) Evidence synthesis and meta-analysis
(cid:3) Grading the quality of the evidence for each outcome across

studies

(cid:3) Grading the strength of the recommendation, based on the quality

of the evidence, and other considerations

(cid:3) Finalizing guideline recommendations and supporting rationale
(cid:3) Public review in January 2020
(cid:3) Guideline update
(cid:3) Finalizing and publishing the guideline

The development process was followed in the majority of the
guideline chapters. Some chapters, in particular Chapter 3, required
an iterative process, whereby the initial evidence review deliverables
were revised to reﬂect issues raised during the Work Group meeting
in January 2019. These additional reviews and clariﬁcations were
provided to the Work Group coauthors to ensure that the draft of the
Chapter reﬂected available evidence.

Commissioning of Work Group and ERT. The KDIGO Co-
Chairs appointed the Work Group Co-Chairs, who then assembled
the Work Group, to include content experts in adult and pediatric
nephrology, blood pressure management, epidemiology, and public
health. Cochrane Kidney and Transplant was contracted to
systematic evidence review and provide expertise in
conduct

and

synthesis,

guideline development methodology. The ERT consisted of adult
and pediatric nephrologists, and methodologists with expertise in
development. The ERT
guideline
evidence
and analytical processes of
coordinated the methodological
guideline
data
development,
extraction, critical appraisal, evidence synthesis and meta-analysis,
grading the quality of the evidence per outcome, and grading the
quality of the evidence for the recommendations. The Work Group
was responsible for writing the recommendations and underlying
rationale, as well as grading the strength of the recommendation.

searching,

including

literature

The KDIGO Co-Chairs, KDIGO Methods Chair, Work Group
Co-Chairs, and the ERT had a one-day meeting in Houston, Texas,
USA in February 2018 to discuss the previous guideline and the
ﬁndings from the KDIGO Controversies Conference on Blood
Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease,374 and ﬁnalize the guideline
development process. Guideline topics from the previous guideline
and new guideline topics were linked with appropriate clinical
questions to underpin the systematic evidence review. The draft
guideline topics and review topics were ﬁnalized with feedback from
the Work Group.

Deﬁning scope and topics and formulating key clinical
questions. The guideline Work Group, with assistance from the
ERT, determined the overall scope of the guideline. A preliminary
list of topics and key clinical questions was informed by the pre-
vious KDIGO guideline141 and the KDIGO Controversies Confer-
ence on Blood Pressure in CKD.374 Logical
frameworks were
developed to present a visual representation of the clinical question
and facilitate discussion about the scope of the guideline. The
majority of clinical questions for this guideline were based upon
RCTs to avoid bias by design. However, for questions of critical
importance, systematic reviews of
the general population were
included. Clinical questions adhered to the PICOM format (a list
of critical and important outcomes was compiled after voting from
the Work Group [Table 1]). The Work Group and the ERT further
reﬁned the clinical questions to ﬁnalize inclusion and exclusion
criteria to guide literature searching and data extraction. Clinical
questions were mapped to existing Cochrane Kidney and Trans-
plant systematic reviews. These systematic reviews were updated
accordingly. For clinical questions that did not map with any
Cochrane Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews, de novo sys-
tematic reviews were undertaken. The previous guideline was
reviewed to ensure all identiﬁed studies were included in the evi-
dence review.141 Details of the PICOM questions and associated
Cochrane Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews are provided
in Table 2. All evidence reviews were conducted in accordance to
the Cochrane Handbook,383 and guideline development adhered to
the standards of GRADE.384

Literature searches and article selection. Searches for RCTs
utilized the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry of studies. The
Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry of studies is a database of
RCTs in kidney disease that is maintained by information specialists.
The database is populated by monthly searches of the Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials, weekly searches of MEDLINE

S62

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 1 | Hierarchy of outcomes

Hierarchy

Critical outcomes

Important outcomes

Outcomes of limited

importance

Outcomes

(cid:3) All-cause mortality
(cid:3) Cardiovascular mortality
(cid:3) Kidney failure (formerly known as

ESKD)

(cid:3) Cardiovascular events (MI, stroke, HF)
(cid:3) Dementia or cognitive impairment
(cid:3) Doubling serum creatinine
(cid:3) AKI
(cid:3) Falls
(cid:3) Fatigue
(cid:3) Body weight
(cid:3) Blood pressure
(cid:3) eGFR or creatinine clearance
(cid:3) Proteinuria

AKI, acute kidney injury; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; ESKD, end-stage
kidney disease; HF, heart failure; MI, myocardial infarction.
The critical and important outcomes were voted on by the Work Group using an
adapted Delphi process (1–9 Likert scale). Critical outcomes median was rated 7–9,
and important outcomes were rated 4–6 on the 9-point scale.

OVID, yearly searches of Embase OVID, hand-searching of major
kidney and transplant conference proceedings, searches of trial
registries, including clinicaltrials.gov and the International Clinical
Trials Register search portal. The updated search examined the
medical databases MEDLINE, Cochrane Central Registry of
Controlled Trials, and Embase.

For review topics that matched existing Cochrane Kidney and
Transplant systematic reviews, an updated search for the review
using the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry of studies was
conducted. The Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry of studies
was searched for clinical questions that included only RCTs and were
not linked to any existing Cochrane systematic review. For clinical
questions that included other study types, such as systematic reviews
on non-CKD populations, the medical literature databases MED-
LINE and Embase were searched. The search strategies are provided
in Appendix A: Supplementary Table S1.

The titles and abstracts resulting from the searches were screened
by 2 ERT members who independently assessed retrieved abstracts,
and if necessary, the full text, to determine which studies satisﬁed the
inclusion criteria. Disagreement about inclusion was resolved by
discussion with a third member of the ERT.

A total of 6863 citations were screened. Of these, 290 RCTs, 35
reviews, and 14 observational studies were included in the evidence
review (Figure 8).

Data extraction. Data extraction was performed independently
by 2 members of the ERT. Unclear data were clariﬁed by contacting
the author of the study report, and any relevant data obtained in this
manner were included. The ERT designed data extraction forms to
capture data on study design, study participant characteristics,
intervention and comparator characteristics, and critical and
important outcomes. Any differences in extraction between mem-
bers of the ERT were resolved through discussion. A third reviewer
was included if consensus could not be achieved.

Critical appraisal of studies. The majority of reviews undertaken
were intervention reviews that included RCTs. For these reviews, the
Cochrane Risk of Bias tool was used to assess individual study
limitations based on the following items383:
(cid:3) Was there adequate sequence generation (selection bias)?
(cid:3) Was allocation adequately concealed (selection bias)?

(cid:3) Was knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately pre-

vented during the study (detection bias)?

(cid:3) Participants and personnel (performance bias)
(cid:3) Outcome assessors (detection bias)

(cid:3) Were incomplete outcome data adequately addressed (attrition

bias)?

(cid:3) Are reports of the study free of suggestion of selective outcome

reporting (reporting bias)?

(cid:3) Was the study apparently free of other problems that could put it

at risk of bias?
For some topics, for which there were no RCTs in the CKD
population, the ERT conducted reviews of existing systematic re-
views. AMSTAR 2 was used to critically appraise systematic re-
views.385 For systematic reviews of diagnostic test accuracy studies,
the QUADAS-2 tool was used to assess study limitations.386 All
critical appraisal was conducted independently by 2 ERT members,
with disagreements regarding the risk of bias adjudications resolved
by consultation with a third review author.

Evidence

Measures

synthesis

and meta-analysis.

of
treatment effect. Dichotomous outcomes (all-cause mortality, CV
mortality, kidney failure, CV events [MI, stroke, HF], dementia or
cognitive impairment, doubling serum creatinine, AKI, falls, fatigue,
body weight, and BP) results were expressed as RR with 95% CI.
When continuous scales of measurement were used to assess the
effects of treatment, such as body weight, the mean difference (MD)
with 95% CI was used.

Data synthesis. Data were pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel
random-effects model for dichotomous outcomes, and the inverse
for continuous outcomes. The
variance random-effects model
random-effects model was
a
conservative estimate of effect
in the presence of known and
unknown heterogeneity.383

chosen because

it provides

Assessment of heterogeneity. Heterogeneity was assessed by visual
inspection of forest plots of standardized mean effect sizes and of risk
ratios, and c2 tests. A P value of <0.05 was used to denote statistical
heterogeneity, and an I2 was calculated to measure the proportion of
total variation in the estimates of treatment effect that was due to
heterogeneity beyond chance.384 We used conventions of interpre-
tation as deﬁned by Higgins et al. (2003).387

Assessment of publication bias. We made every attempt
to
minimize publication bias by including unpublished studies (for
example, by searching online trial registries). To assess publication
bias, we used funnel plots of the log odds ratio (effect vs. standard
error of the effect size) when a sufﬁcient number of studies were
available (i.e., >10 studies).383 Other reasons for the asymmetry of
funnel plots were considered.

Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity. Subgroup
analysis was undertaken to explore whether there were clinical dif-
ferences between the studies that may have systematically inﬂuenced
the differences that were observed in the critical and important
subgroup analyses are hypothesis-forming
outcomes. However,
rather than hypothesis-testing and should be interpreted with
caution. The following subgroups were considered: severity of
CKD,
of
disease,
comorbidities, presence of proteinuria or albuminuria, diabetes,
number of antihypertensives,
lifestyle behaviors/health behaviors.
The test of subgroup differences used the I2 statistic and a P value
of 0.1 (noting that this is a weak test).383

age/presence

primary

kidney

elderly

Sensitivity analysis. The

following sensitivity analyses were

considered:

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S63

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Table 2 | Clinical questions and systematic review topics in the PICOM format

Guideline Chapter 1

Clinical question

Population
Index test
Reference standard
Outcomes
Study design
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Index test
Reference standard
Outcomes
Study design
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Index test
Reference standard
Outcomes
Study design
SoF table

Guideline Chapter 2

Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention

S64

Blood pressure measurement

In patients with CKD, what is the diagnostic accuracy of various BP measurement techniques compared to
standardized auscultatory ofﬁce-based BP?
Patients with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant, and kidney transplant recipients)
Oscillometric (ofﬁce-based) BP (unattended or attended), ambulatory BP, home oscillometric monitors
Auscultatory ofﬁce-based BP monitoring
Sensitivity, speciﬁcity, negative predictive value, positive predictive value
Systematic reviews
Supplementary Table S41
In the general population, what is the diagnostic accuracy of various BP measurement techniques (oscillometric
ofﬁce and home BP, ambulatory BP) compared to standardized auscultatory ofﬁce-based BP in diagnosing high BP?

General population
Oscillometric (ofﬁce-based) BP (unattended or attended), ambulatory BP, home oscillometric monitors
Auscultatory ofﬁce-based BP monitoring
Sensitivity, speciﬁcity, negative predictive value, positive predictive value
Systematic reviews
Supplementary Tables S4, S42, and S43
In the general population, what is the association among various approaches to measuring BP including in the
clinic (standardized vs. non-standardized), at home, and ambulatory with classiﬁcation of BP and long-term
outcomes?

General population
Oscillometric (ofﬁce-based) BP (unattended or attended), ambulatory BP, home oscillometric monitors
Auscultatory ofﬁce-based BP monitoring
Cost-effectiveness
Systematic reviews
Supplementary Tables S43 and S44

Lifestyle interventions for lowering blood pressure in patients with CKD not receiving dialysis

In adults with CKD without diabetes, does reducing protein intake compared to usual protein intake improve
clinically relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) without diabetes
Low-protein diet
Usual-protein diet
Outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
Hahn D, et al. Low protein diets for non-diabetic adults with chronic kidney disease (Review). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2020:10;CD001892.378
Supplementary Tables S49 and S50
In adults with CKD without diabetes, does reducing dietary salt intake compared to usual dietary salt intake
improve clinically relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) without diabetes
Low-salt diet
Usual salt diet
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—sodium excretion, serum creatinine, BP
RCTs
McMahon EJ, et al. Altered dietary salt intake for people with chronic kidney disease (Review). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2015:2; CD010070.47
Supplementary Table S5
In adults with CKD and diabetes, does reducing dietary salt intake compared to usual dietary salt intake improve
clinically relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and diabetes (T1D and T2D)
Low-salt diet
Usual salt diet
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—body mass index
RCTs
No relevant Cochrane Kidney and Transplant review
Supplementary Tables S6–S9, S45, and S46
What are the beneﬁts and harms of dietary interventions/patterns among adults with CKD, including people with
kidney failure treated with kidney transplantation?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 including kidney transplant recipient)
Dietary modiﬁcations (including dietary advice or lifestyle management)

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 2 | (Continued) Clinical questions and systematic review topics in the PICOM format

Guideline Chapter 2

Lifestyle interventions for lowering blood pressure in patients with CKD not receiving dialysis

Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention

Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table

Standard of care (including lifestyle advice) or any other dietary pattern
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—BP
RCTs
Palmer SC, et al. Dietary interventions for adults with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2017:4;CD011998.379
Supplementary Tables S51–S53 and S90
In adults with CKD and hypertension, does exercise improve clinically relevant outcomes and decrease adverse
effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and high BP
Any exercise intervention greater than 8 weeks’ duration (to examine the effects of regular ongoing physical exercise
training)
Standard of care
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—fat mass, BP, quality of life
RCTs
Heiwe S and Jacobson SH. Exercise training for adults with chronic kidney disease (Review). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2011:10;CD00323.380
Supplementary Tables S10, S47, and S48

Guideline Chapter 3

Blood pressure management in patients with CKD, with or without diabetes, not receiving dialysis

Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review

In patients with CKD, does lower (intensive) BP targets compared to standard BP targets improve clinical efﬁcacy
outcomes and reduce adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and with or without diabetes (T1D and T2D)
Lower BP target (<140/80 mm Hg, <130/80 mm Hg, <120 mm Hg, MAP <92 mm Hg target)
Standard BP target (including MAP target 102–107 mm Hg)
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
None relevant
Supplementary Tables S11–S14, S54–S59, and S75–S78
In patients with CKD, does RAS inhibition compared to placebo/no treatment or standard of care improve clinical
efﬁcacy outcomes and reduce adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and with and without diabetes (T1D and T2D)
ACEi, ARB, aldosterone antagonists
Placebo/standard of care
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
Strippoli GFM, et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists for preventing the
progression of diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006:4;CD006257.259
Sharma P, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers for adults with early (stage 1
to 3) non-diabetic chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011:10;CD007751.281
Chung EYM, Ruospo M, Natale P, et al. Aldosterone antagonists in addition to renin angiotensin system antagonists for
preventing the progression of chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2020;10:CD007004.193
Supplementary Tables S15–S17, S21–S24, and S60–S62
In patients with CKD, does non-RAS inhibition compared to placebo or RAS inhibition improve clinical efﬁcacy
outcomes and reduce adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and with and without diabetes (T1D and T2D)
Non-RAS inhibition (alpha-blockers, beta-blockers, CCBs, DRIs, diuretics)
Placebo or RASi
Critical and important harms listed in Table 1
RCTs
None relevant
Supplementary Tables S18–S20, S25–S30, S63–S72, S79, and S81–S87
In patients with CKD, does dual-RAS inhibition compared to mono-RAS inhibition improve clinical efﬁcacy
outcomes and reduce adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) and with and without diabetes (T1D and T2D)
Dual RAS inhibition
Mono RAS inhibition
Critical and important harms listed in Table 1
RCTs
Strippoli GFM, et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists for preventing the
progression of diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2006:4;CD006257.259
Sharma P, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers for adults with early (stage 1
to 3) non-diabetic chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011:10;CD007751.281

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

(Continued on following page)

S65

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Table 2 | (Continued) Clinical questions and systematic review topics in the PICOM format

Guideline Chapter 3

Blood pressure management in patients with CKD, with or without diabetes, not receiving dialysis

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table

Guideline Chapter 4

Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention

Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design

S66

Supplementary Tables S31, S32, and S80
In patients with CKD and chronic hyperkalemia, do potassium binders compared to placebo or standard of care
improve clinically relevant outcomes, and decrease adverse effects?
Adults with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant) with chronic hyperkalemia
Potassium binders
Placebo/standard of care
Critical and important harms listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes reported–hospitalization, hypokalemia, SBP, and DBP
RCTs
Natale P, et al. 2020. Potassium binders for chronic hyperkalaemia in people with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2020:6:CD013165.381
Supplementary Tables S73, S74, and S88

Blood pressure management in kidney transplant recipients

In kidney transplant recipients, does reducing protein intake compared to usual protein intake improve clinically
relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effects?

Kidney transplant recipients
Low-protein diet
Usual protein diet
Outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
None relevant
None
In kidney transplant recipients, does reducing dietary salt intake compared to usual salt intake improve clinically
relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effect?

Kidney transplant recipients
Low-salt diet
Usual salt diet
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—sodium excretion, serum creatinine, BP
RCTs
None relevant
Supplementary Table S89
What are the beneﬁts and harms of dietary interventions/patterns among kidney transplant recipients?

Kidney transplant recipients
Dietary modiﬁcations (including dietary advice or lifestyle management)
Standard of care (including lifestyle advice) or any other dietary pattern
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—BP
RCTs
Palmer SC, et al. Dietary interventions for adults with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2017:4;CD011998.379
Supplementary Table S90
In kidney transplant recipients and high BP, does exercise improve clinically relevant outcomes and decrease
adverse effects?

Kidney transplant recipients and high BP
Any exercise intervention greater than 8 weeks’ duration (to examine the effects of regular ongoing physical exercise
training)
Standard of care
Outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes—body mass index, BP, quality of life
RCTs
Heiwe S and Jacobson SH. Exercise training for adults with chronic kidney disease (Review). Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2011:10;CD00323.380
Supplementary Table S91
In kidney transplant recipients does lower (intensive) BP target compared to standard BP targets improve clinical
efﬁcacy outcomes and reduce adverse effects?

Kidney transplant recipients, adult and children
Lower BP target
Standard BP target
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 2 | (Continued) Clinical questions and systematic review topics in the PICOM format

Guideline Chapter 4

Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention

Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table

Guideline Chapter 5

Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane review
SoF table
Clinical question

Population
Intervention

Comparator
Outcomes

Study design
Cochrane review

SoF table

Blood pressure management in kidney transplant recipients

None relevant
None
In kidney transplant recipients, what antihypertensive agents improve efﬁcacy outcomes and reduce adverse
effects?

Kidney transplant recipients, adult and children
RAS inhibition (ACEi, ARB, aldosterone antagonists), and non-RAS inhibition (alpha-blockers, beta-blockers,
CCBs, diuretics, DRI)
Placebo or standard of care
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
Other outcomes reported: BP
RCTs
Cross NB, et al. Antihypertensive treatment for kidney transplant recipients. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
2009:3;CD003598.296
Supplementary Tables S33–S39 and S92–S106
In kidney transplant recipients with chronic hyperkalemia, do potassium binders compared to placebo or standard
of care improve clinically relevant outcomes and decrease adverse effects?

Kidney transplant recipients with chronic hyperkalemia
Potassium binders
Placebo/standard of care
Critical and important harms listed in Table 1
RCTs
Natale P, et al. 2020. Potassium binders for chronic hyperkalaemia in people with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2020:6:CD013165.381
None

Blood pressure management in children with CKD

In children with CKD, does a lower BP target compared to a higher BP target improve efﬁcacy outcomes and reduce
adverse effects?

Children with CKD
Lower BP target
Standard BP target
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
None relevant
Supplementary Table S40
In children with CKD, what antihypertensive agents compared to standard of care improve efﬁcacy outcomes and
reduce adverse effects?
Children with CKD (CKD G1–G5 without kidney transplant and kidney transplant recipients) and diabetes (T1D and T2D)
RAS inhibition (ACEi, ARB, aldosterone antagonists), and non-RAS inhibition (alpha-blockers, beta-blockers,
CCBs, diuretics, DRI)
Placebo or standard of care
Critical and important outcomes listed in Table 1
Additional outcomes: BP, serum creatinine
RCTs
Bagga A, et al. Antihypertensive agents for children with chronic kidney disease (Protocol). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2014:1;CD010911.382
Supplementary Table S107

ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; BP, blood pressure; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DBP,
diastolic blood pressure; DRI, direct renin inhibitor; MAP, mean arterial pressure; RAS(i), renin-angiotensin system (inhibitor); RCT, randomized controlled trial; SBP, systolic
blood pressure; SoF, summary of ﬁndings; T1D, type 1 diabetes; T2D, type 2 diabetes.

(cid:3) Repeating the analysis, excluding unpublished studies
(cid:3) Repeating the analysis taking account of the risk of bias, as

speciﬁed

(cid:3) Repeating the analysis, excluding any very long or large studies to

establish how much they dominate the results

(cid:3) Repeating the analysis, excluding studies using the following ﬁl-
language of publication, source of funding (industry vs.

ters:
other), and country in which the study was conducted.
However, the available data were insufﬁcient to determine the inﬂu-
ence of these factors on the effect size of critical and important outcomes.

GRADING the quality of

Grading the quality of the evidence and the strength of a
guideline recommendation.
the
evidence for each outcome across studies. The overall quality of
the evidence related to each critical and important outcome was
assessed using the GRADE approach,384,388 which assesses the quality
of the evidence for each outcome. For outcomes that are based on
data from RCTs, the initial grade for the quality of the evidence is
considered to be high. For observational studies, the initial quality of
the evidence is low. The quality of the evidence is lowered in the
event of study limitations; important inconsistencies in results across

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S67

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Primary evidence
• Search October 2018, updated
  September 2019, updated April 2020
• Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry,
  MEDLINE, Embase
  - 6156 study reports retrieved
  - 148 observational studies

Systematic reviews of blood pressure
measurement techniques
• Search February 2019, updated April 2020
• Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Registry
  - 559 reports retrieved

Included RCTs
• Dietary protein – 21 RCTs
• Dietary and supplementary salt – 30 RCTs
• Dietary patterns – 5 RCTs
• Exercise interventions – 11 RCTs
• Blood pressure targets in CKD – 11 RCTs
• Renin angiotensin system inhibitors in adults – 76 RCTs
• Non-renin angiotensin system inhibitors – 37 RCTs
• Blood pressure targets in transplant recipients – 1 RCT
• Antihypertensive therapy in transplant recipients – 82 RCTs
• Blood pressure targets in children – 1 RCT
• Antihypertensive therapy in children – 2 RCTs
• Potassium binders – 13 RCTs

Full-text screening
524 citations excluded

Included studies
•  290 RCTs (n ≈ 61 000)
• Systematic reviews
  - 7 CKD narrative reviews
  - 3 general population diagnostic test accuracy reviews
  - 20 general population narrative reviews
  - 5 general population cost-effectiveness reviews
• 14 observational studies

Figure 8 | Search yield and study ﬂow diagram. CKD, chronic kidney disease; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Table 3 | Classiﬁcation for certainty and quality of the evidence

Grade Quality of evidence

Meaning

A
B
C
D

High
Moderate
Low
Very low

We are conﬁdent that the true effect is close to the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often it will be far from the true effect.

studies; indirectness of the results, including uncertainty about the
population, intervention, and outcomes measured in trials and their
applicability to the clinical question of interest; imprecision in the
evidence review results; and concerns about publication bias. For
imprecision, data were benchmarked against optimal information
size, low event rates in either arm, CIs that indicate appreciable
beneﬁt and harm (25% decrease and 25% increase in the outcome of
interest), and sparse data (only 1 study), all indicating concerns
about the precision of the results.388 The ﬁnal grade for the quality of
the evidence for an outcome could be high, moderate, low, or very
low (Table 3). For observational studies and other study types, it is
possible for the quality of the evidence to be upgraded from a rating
of low quality, according to the speciﬁed criteria. For further details
on the GRADE approach for rating quality of the evidence, see
Table 4.

Summary of ﬁndings (SoF) tables. The SoF tables were developed
to include a description of the population and the intervention and
comparator. In addition, the SoF tables included results from the

data synthesis as relative and absolute effect estimates. The grading of
the quality of the evidence for each critical and important outcome is
also provided in the SoF table. The SoF tables were generated using
MAGICapp, an online software application designed to support
guideline development, and they are available
in the Data
Supplement Appendix C and Appendix D (https://kdigo.org/
guidelines/blood-pressure-in-ckd/).

Developing the recommendations. The recommendations were
drafted by the Work Group Co-Chairs and Work Group members.
Recommendations were revised in a multistep process during a
face-to-face meeting (New Orleans, LA, USA, January 2019) and
by e-mail communication. The ﬁnal draft was sent for external
public review, and reviewers provided open-ended responses.
Based on the external stakeholder feedback, the draft was further
revised by Work Group Co-Chairs and members. All Work Group
members provided feedback on initial and ﬁnal drafts of
the
recommendation statement and guideline text and approved the
ﬁnal version of the guideline. The ERT also provided a descriptive

S68

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 4 | GRADE system for grading quality of evidence

Starting grade of the
quality of the evidence

Step 2—Lower grade

Step 3—Raise grade for observational studies

Study design

RCTs

High

Moderate

Observational studies

Low

Very low

Strength of association:
þ1, large effect size (e.g., <0.5 or >2)
þ2, very large effect size (e.g., <0.2 or >5)

Evidence of a dose–response gradient

All plausible confounding would reduce the demonstrated effect

Study limitations:
(cid:5)1, serious
(cid:5)2, very serious

Inconsistency:
(cid:5)1, serious
(cid:5)2, very serious

Indirectness:
(cid:5)1, serious
(cid:5)2, very serious

Imprecision:
(cid:5)1, serious
(cid:5)2, very serious

Publication bias:
(cid:5)1, serious
(cid:5)2, very serious

GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Table 5 | KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Grade

Level 1 ‘Strong’
“We recommend”

Level 2 ‘Weak’
“We suggest”

Patients

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of
action, and only a small proportion
would not.
The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course
of action, but many would not.

Implications

Clinicians

Policy

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

The recommendation can be evaluated as
a candidate for developing a policy or a
performance measure.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs
help to arrive at a management decision
consistent with her or his values and
preferences.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement of
stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

Table 6 | Determinants of the strength of recommendation

Factors

Balance of beneﬁts and harms

Quality of evidence

Values and preferences

Resources and other
considerations

Comment

The larger the difference between the desirable and undesirable effects, the more likely a strong recommendation
is provided. The narrower the gradient, the more likely a weak recommendation is warranted.

The higher the quality of evidence, the more likely a strong recommendation is warranted. However, there are
exceptions for which low or very low quality of the evidence will warrant a strong recommendation.

The more variability in values and preferences, or the more uncertainty in values and preferences, the more likely
a weak recommendation is warranted. Values and preferences were obtained from the literature, where possible,
or were assessed by the judgment of the Work Group when robust evidence was not identiﬁed.
The higher the costs of an intervention—that is, the more resources consumed—the less likely a strong
recommendation is warranted.

summary
recommendations.

of

the

evidence

quality

in

support

of

the

Grading the strength of the recommendations. The strength of a
recommendation is graded as strong or weak (Table 5). The strength
of a recommendation was determined by the balance of beneﬁts and
harms across all critical and important outcomes, the grading of the
overall quality of evidence, patient preferences and values, resources,
and other considerations (Table 6).

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The Work Group and ERT
determined the anticipated net health beneﬁt on the basis of

expected beneﬁts and harms across all critical and important out-
comes from the underlying evidence review. In addition to the evi-
dence review, the ERT assisted Work Group members in evaluating
the balance of beneﬁts and harms arising from key individual
studies.

The overall quality of evidence. The overall quality of the evidence
was based on the certainty of the evidence for all critical and
important outcomes, taking into account the relative importance of
each outcome to the population of interest. The overall quality of the
evidence was graded A, B, C, or D (Table 3).

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S69

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Patient preferences and values. No patients or caregivers were
involved in the Work Group. The Work Group, from their experi-
ence in managing BP in patients with CKD and their understanding
of the best available scientiﬁc literature, made judgments on the
preferences and values of patients. Formal qualitative evidence syn-
thesis on patient priorities and preferences was not undertaken.

inputs

including all

Resources and other

considerations. Healthcare

and non-
healthcare resources,
in the treatment
management pathway,389 were considered in grading the strength of
a recommendation. The following resources were considered: direct
healthcare costs, non-healthcare resources (e.g., transportation and
social services), informal caregiver resources (e.g., time of family
and caregivers), and changes in productivity. Economic evaluations,
including cost-effectiveness analysis, were not conducted for any of
the guideline topics. However, the ERT conducted searches for
systematic reviews of cost-effectiveness
in support of
selected topics, such as BP measurement techniques.

studies

Practice points

In addition to graded recommendations, KDIGO guidelines now
include “practice points” to help clinicians better evaluate and
implement the guidance from the expert Work Group. Practice points
are consensus statements about a speciﬁc aspect of care, and they
supplement recommendations for which a larger quantity of evidence
was identiﬁed. These were used when no formal systematic evidence
review was undertaken, or there was insufﬁcient evidence to provide a
graded recommendation. Practice points represent the expert judg-
ment of the guideline Work Group, but they also may be based on

limited evidence. Practice points were sometimes formatted as a table,
a ﬁgure, or an algorithm to make them easier to use in clinical
practice.

Format for guideline recommendations

Each guideline recommendation provides an assessment of the
strength of the recommendation (strong, level 1 or weak, level 2) and
the quality of evidence (A, B, C, D). The recommendation state-
ments are followed by a short remark, Key information (Balance of
beneﬁts and harms, Quality of evidence, Values and preferences,
Resource use and costs, Considerations for implementation), and a
rationale. Each recommendation is linked to relevant SoF tables. An
underlying rationale supported each practice point.

Limitations of the guideline development process

The evidence review prioritized RCTs as the primary source of evi-
dence. For a select number of clinical questions in this guideline, the
ERT undertook a comprehensive evidence review beyond RCTs.
However, these reviews were not exhaustive, as specialty or regional
databases were not searched, and manual searching of journals was
not performed for these reviews. In the development of these
guidelines, no scoping exercise with patients, searches of the quali-
tative literature, or formal qualitative evidence synthesis examining
patient experiences and priorities were undertaken. As noted,
although resource implications were considered in the formulation
of recommendations, formal economic evaluations were not un-
dertaken for all topics.

S70

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Biographic and disclosure information

Co-Chair),

Alfred K. Cheung, MD (Work
Group
is Dialysis
Research Foundation Presidential
Endowed Chair, Professor of Internal
Medicine, Chief of the Division of
Nephrology & Hypertension, Execu-
tive Director of the Dialysis Program,
and Vice-chair for Research in the
Department of Internal Medicine at

the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

the US

Foundation,

His research has focused on CKD, hemodialysis, vascular
access, and hypertension. He has served on various com-
mittees in the American Society of Nephrology, the US Na-
tional Kidney
Food & Drug
Administration, the US Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services, and as a councilor at the International Society of
Nephrology. He has also been a chartered member or ad hoc
member of grant review committees for the US National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and other research funding orga-
nizations. He was interim Co-Editor-in-chief of the Journal of
American Society of Nephrology.

He co-chaired the Kidney Disease Outcome Quality
Initiative (K/DOQI) guidelines on “Cardiovascular Disease in
Dialysis Patients.” Of particular relevance to this task, he was a
member of the Steering Committee and the Principal Inves-
tigator of the Utah Clinical Center Network in the Systolic
Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT) sponsored by the
NIH.

Consultancy: Amgen, Bard, Boehringer Ingelheim, Calliditas,
Tricida, and UpToDate
Grant/research support: National Institutes of Health for
SPRINT*
*Monies paid to institution.

Johannes F.E. Mann, MD (Work Group
Co-Chair), is a professor of medicine at
the University of Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany, and head of
the
KfH Kidney Centre, Munich, Germany.
He is also an international scholar at the
Population Health Research Institute,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Can-
ada. He is board-certiﬁed in internal
medicine, nephrology, intensive care, and pharmacology. His
work focused initially on the physiology of
the RAS in
experimental animals and later on the role of this system in
the diseases of the kidney and the heart. From there, his

interest moved to the treatment of progressive kidney dis-
eases. The latter included steering, adjudication, and data
safety monitoring board memberships in outcome trials,
namely AIPRI, HOPE, MICRO-HOPE, HOPE-TOO,
RENAL-ONTARGET,
ASCEND,
DIABHYCAR, ORIGIN, LEADER, SONAR, SOUL, FLOW,
DAPA-CKD.

RENAL-TRANSCEND,

His scientiﬁc work includes about 270 original papers.
Consultancy: AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer
Ingelheim,
Fresenius Medical Care, Novo Nordisk, and Vifor Fresenius
Medical Care Renal Pharma
Grant/research support: Boehringer Ingelheim, Canadian
Institutes Health Research, European Union, Idorsia, Novo
Nordisk, Sandoz, and Sanoﬁ
Speaker bureaus: AstraZeneca, B. Braun, Fresenius Medical
Care, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Roche

Tara I. Chang, MD, MS, is an associate
professor of medicine, division chief,
and director of clinical research in the
Division of Nephrology at Stanford
University School of Medicine in Palo
Alto, CA, USA. She received her medi-
cal degree at the University of Michigan
before completing her internal medi-
cine residency at the University of Cal-
ifornia, San Francisco, CA, USA, and her nephrology
fellowship at Stanford. Dr. Chang maintains an active clin-
ical research program that focuses on improving cardio-
vascular outcomes among patients with CKD. Dr. Chang’s
research projects involve clinical epidemiology and clinical
trials. She recently served as a US national leader for the
Canagliﬂozin and Renal Events in Diabetes with Established
Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE) trial. Dr.
Chang is a member of the KDIGO Executive Committee and
is actively involved with the American Society of Nephrology
and the US National Kidney Foundation. Her other re-
sponsibilities include serving as an associate editor for the
American Heart Journal, and as a member of the editorial
boards of Kidney360, the Clinical Journal of the American
Society
of Human
Hypertension.

of Nephrology,

and the

Journal

Consultancy: Bayer, Gilead, Janssen Research and Develop-
ment, Novo Nordisk, Tricida, and Vascular Dynamics
Advisory boards: AstraZeneca and Fresenius Medical Care
Renal Therapies Group
Grant/research support: AstraZeneca and Satellite Healthcare

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S71

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

William C. Cushman, MD, FAHA,
FACP,
is the medical director of the
Department of Preventive Medicine,
and a professor of preventive medicine,
medicine, and physiology at the Uni-
versity of Tennessee Health Science
Center
in Memphis, TN,
USA. He was trained at the University of
Mississippi School of Medicine in Jack-
son, Mississippi, USA. After serving on the faculty there and
as staff at the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical
Center, he moved to the UTHSC and the VA in Memphis,
Tennessee. He retired from the VA in 2020 to assume his
current position at UTHSC.

(UTHSC)

Dr. Cushman is recognized for his expertise in hyperten-
sion. He was a VA champion for the 2014 and 2020 US VA/
DoD Hypertension Clinical Practice Guideline committees,
and was on the leadership committees for the Joint National
Committee (JNC) 7 and JNC 8 US hypertension guidelines.
He has participated in the leadership for many National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, VA, and industry-sponsored
clinical trials in hypertension and diabetes. He has authored
more than 300 journal article and book chapter publications
and has received several awards,
including the 2010 VA
Clinical Science Research and Development Barnwell Award,
the 2017 Inter-American Society of Hypertension Lifetime
Achievement Award, and the 2018 American Heart Associa-
tion’s Council on Hypertension Irvine Page-Alva Bradley
Lifetime Achievement Award.

Grant/research support: National Institutes of Health* and
Eli Lilly*
*Monies paid to institution.

Susan L. Furth, MD, PhD,
is Vice-
chair of the Department of Pediatrics,
associate Chair for Academic Affairs,
and professor of pediatrics and epide-
miology at the University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. She is
chief of
the nephrology division at
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
the
Philadelphia, PA, USA. She
principal
investigator of the Chronic Kidney Disease in
Children (CKiD) Study, the largest multicenter prospective
cohort study of children with CKD ever conducted in
North America, now in its 16th year. She also leads the
Pediatric Center of Excellence in Nephrology at the Chil-
dren’s Hospital of Philadelphia. She has authored over 250
publications, and in 2020, she was awarded the Maureen
Andrew Mentor Award by the Society for Pediatric
Research.

is

Grant/research support: National Institutes of Health*
*Monies paid to institution.

is

Fan Fan Hou, MD, PhD,
a
nephrologist and professor of medicine
at the Southern Medical University in
Guangzhou, China. She is an acade-
the Chinese Academy of
mician of
Sciences and a member of the Third
World Academy of Sciences. Dr. Hou
received her nephrology training at the
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and
Harvard Medical School in Boston, MA, USA. She assumed
her current position as chief of nephrology at Nanfang Hos-
pital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China in
1999. Dr. Hou has been serving as Chair of the National
Clinical Research Center for Kidney Disease since 2013. She is
currently a councilor of
International Society of
the
Nephrology and an Executive Committee member of KDIGO.
Dr. Hou is a clinician–scientist with an interest in kidney
disease, speciﬁcally the intervention of CKD and mechanisms
underlying CKD progression. She had served as a steering
committee member of international clinical trials, including
ALBUM, SONAR, DAPA-CKD, and principal investigator of
several national trials such as ESBARI, ROAD, and CSPPT-
CKD. Dr. Hou has published hundreds of papers in peer-
reviewed journals such as the New England Journal of Medi-
cine, the Journal of the American Medical Association, Nature
Medicine, the Journal of the American Society of Nephrology,
and Kidney International.

Consultancy: AstraZeneca

joined

subsequently

Joachim H. Ix, MD, MAS, received
his medical degree from the Uni-
versity of Chicago, Pritzker School of
Medicine, IL, USA. He trained in
internal medicine and nephrology
and
the
faculty at University of California
San Francisco, CA, USA. He was
recruited to University of California
San Diego, CA, USA, in 2007 and has served as chief of the
Division of Nephrology-Hypertension at University of Cali-
fornia San Diego since 2013. Dr. Ix’s research interests broadly
focus on the overlap between kidney disease and vascular
disease. His work has primarily utilized epidemiologic
methods and clinical trials to understand disease patterns that
overlap between kidney and vascular disease, and to test novel
therapies to improve vascular disease in the kidney patient.
He is particularly interested in the effects of blood pressure
control on kidney disease and its complications and is a
principal investigator of an NIH award focused on this topic.
He also served as the San Diego Site principal investigator and
a member of the CKD working group within the SPRINT
trial. Dr. Ix has co-authored over 370 peer-reviewed scientiﬁc
papers, has previously served as an associate editor for the
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology and Circulation.

S72

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

In 2020, he received the Shaul G. Massry Award from the US
National Kidney Foundation.

Consultancy: AstraZeneca and Saniﬁt
Grants/research support: Baxter International* and National
Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases*
Travel expenses: American Society of Nephrology and Insti-
tute of Medicine
*Monies paid to institution.

Gregory A. Knoll, MD, MSc, FRCPC,
is head of the Division of Nephrology
at the Ottawa Hospital and a professor
the University of
of medicine at
Ottawa, Canada. He currently holds
the University of Ottawa Chair in
Clinical Transplantation Research and
is a senior scientist with the Clinical
Epidemiology Program of the Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute. He completed his nephrology
fellowship at the University of Ottawa, followed by a kidney
transplant fellowship at the University of Alabama at Bir-
mingham, USA. Following this training, he took further
graduate work and received a master’s degree in epidemi-
ology. For over 15 years, he was the medical director of kidney
transplantation at the Ottawa Hospital. He assumed his cur-
rent position as head of the nephrology division in 2016. He is
a past president of the Canadian Society of Transplantation.
Dr. Knoll is involved in ongoing studies related to cardiac
screening in kidney transplant candidates, systematic reviews
on immunosuppressive strategies, and measuring quality in
transplantation. He was the lead author on the Canadian
Society of Transplantation consensus guidelines on eligibility
for kidney transplantation. He also served as the Co-Chair of
the KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline on Evaluation and
Management of Candidates for Kidney Transplantation.

Grant/research support: Canadian Institutes of Health
Research*
*Monies paid to institution.

Paul Muntner, PhD, MHS, FASH,
FAHA, is associate dean for research and
a professor of epidemiology at the Uni-
versity of Alabama
at Birmingham
(UAB), AL, USA. Additionally, he is the
the UAB Pharmacoepi-
co-director of
and Economics Research
demiology
Unit. He earned a master’s degree in
biostatistics and a doctorate in epidemi-
ology from the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
USA. Since 2015, Dr. Muntner has served as the director for
the UAB American Heart Association Strategically Focused
Research Network hypertension center. He is the principal
investigator on grants from the US National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. From 2015 to 2018, he was Vice-chair of the
Statistics Committee for the American Heart Association and

chaired the 2019 American Heart Association Scientiﬁc
Statement on blood pressure measurement. His research has
focused on the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular
disease and its risk factors. Dr. Muntner has an extensive
and population hypertension,
bibliography
including over 500 peer-reviewed journal articles.

in clinical

Consultancy: Amgen
Grant/research support: Amgen and National Institutes of
Health

Roberto Pecoits-Filho, MD, PhD,
FASN, FACP, is a senior research sci-
entist at Arbor Research Collaborative
for Health in Ann Arbor, MI, USA, and
a professor of medicine at the Pontiﬁcal
Catholic University of Paraná in Curi-
tiba, Brazil. As a clinician, he has broad
and
activities
nephrology based at
the university-
afﬁliated hospitals, where he was chief
of the Department of Internal Medicine between 2010 and
the residency program in
2016, and the director of
nephrology from 2013 to 2016. Dr. Pecoits-Filho is the
principal investigator for CKDOPPS, a multinational study on
practice patterns and outcomes in CKD, and acts as a scien-
tiﬁc leader for clinical
trials in nephrology with George
Clinical, Sydney, Australia.

in internal medicine

Dr. Pecoits-Filho received his medical degree and trained
in internal medicine and nephrology in Curitiba, Brazil,
before completing a research nephrology fellowship at the
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA, and a PhD from
the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. He was a visiting scholar
for extended periods at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden
and the George Institute in Australia. He has participated as a
principal investigator, regional leader, and on steering com-
mittees in multinational clinical
trials. Dr. Pecoits-Filho
served as a member of the Executive Committee of the ISN
(2017–2019),
the SONG Initiative (2017–present), and
KDIGO (2016–2018).

Consultancy: Akebia, AstraZeneca, Fresenius Medical Care,
and Novo Nordisk
Grant/research support: Fresenius Medical Care*
Speaker bureaus: AstraZeneca and Novo Nordisk
*Monies paid to institution.

Mark J. Sarnak, MD, MS, is chief of the
Division of Nephrology at Tufts Medical
Center and the Gerald J. and Dorothy R.
Friedman Professor of Medicine at Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston,
MA, USA. Dr. Sarnak’s primary research
interest is in cardiovascular disease in
CKD. He has also focused on cognitive
function, novel biomarkers, and hyper-
tension in CKD. Dr. Sarnak’s research is funded by the NIH.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S73

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

He is a previous recipient of the Shaul Massry Award from the
US National Kidney Foundation.

Dr. Sarnak has a long record of national and international
leadership positions in nephrology. He was Co-Chair and lead
author of a review commissioned by the Kidney Council of
the American Heart Association, “CKD as a Risk Factor for
Cardiovascular Disease.” He chaired the subgroup covering
CKD patients without diabetes on the previous KDIGO Blood
Pressure Guideline. He chaired the Kidney Disease Outcomes
Quality Initiative Commentary on the KDIGO Clinical
Practice Guideline for Lipid Management in CKD, and most
recently, he co-chaired the KDIGO Controversies Conference
on Coronary Artery and Valvular Disease in CKD.

Dr. Sarnak is a previous recipient of a K24 Midcareer
Career Award in Patient-Oriented Research and has men-
tored more than 20 research fellows and 9 junior faculty
members. He has published more
than 350 articles,
including more than 85 peer-reviewed, non-review articles,
with his mentee as the ﬁrst author. His mentees now include
professors of medicine and chiefs of divisions of nephrology
at other institutions.

Akebia*,

Consultancy:
Pharmaceuticals
Grant/research support: National Institutes of Health*
*Monies paid to institution.

Bayer,

and

Cardurion

Sheldon W. Tobe, MD, FRCPC,
FRCP, FACP, FAHA, MScCH
(HPTE), received his medical de-
gree in 1985 from the University
of Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Dr.
Tobe trained in internal medicine
and nephrology at the University
of Toronto, Ottawa, Canada. He is
a professor of medicine at both
the University of Toronto and the Northern Ontario School of
Medicine and the Nephrology Postgraduate Fellowship Di-
rector at the University of Toronto. Dr. Tobe was previously
the director of
the nephrology division at Sunnybrook
Research Institute. His clinical activities focus on hemodialysis
and patients with CKD and hypertension. His main research
interests are implementation science for the dissemination of
cardiovascular-focused clinical practice guidelines. Dr. Tobe
was Chair of the Canadian Hypertension Education Program
from 2005 to 2012 and is a Co-Chair of the Canadian Car-
diovascular Harmonized National Guidelines Endeavor (C-
CHANGE). He also chairs the diabetes subgroup of Hyper-
tension Canada’s clinical practice guidelines. Dr. Tobe serves
on the Board of Directors of the American Society of Hy-
pertension Specialists Program. Dr. Tobe has had continuous
peer-reviewed funding for 25 years. Dr. Tobe has received
many teaching awards and other career distinctions, has
published over 150 peer-reviewed articles, and has led and
and
participated in peer-reviewed,
multi-centered international research collaborations.

investigator-initiated,

Consultancy: AstraZeneca
Grant/research support: Bayer*
Speaker bureaus: AstraZeneca and Janssen
*Monies paid to institution.

upon

Tyne,

Charles R.V. Tomson, MA, BM,
Bch, DM, FRCP, received his un-
dergraduate training at Cambridge
and Oxford, UK, and underwent
training in Nottingham,
clinical
Newcastle
and
Leicester, UK, before taking up
consultant posts at St Barts, Lon-
don (1991–1993), Bristol (1993–
2014), and Newcastle upon Tyne
(2014–2018). He has authored or coauthored 36 book chapters
and over 250 journal articles on a wide range of topics including
hypertension, CKD, and cardiovascular complications of kid-
ney disease. His involvement in guideline development started
with the third edition of the Renal Association Clinical Practice
Guidelines. He was a member of the group that produced the
KDIGO 2012 Management of Blood Pressure in CKD guide-
line. He was a Health Foundation Quality Improvement Fellow
at the Institute for Healthcare Improvement in Boston from
2003 to 2004, a placement that led to a keen interest in the
translation of evidence into reliable practice and in shared
decision-making. He was Chair of the UK Renal Registry
(2006–2010), president of the Renal Association (2010–2012),
and is a current trustee of Kidney Research UK. He retired from
clinical practice in 2018 but returned during the COVID-19
pandemic.

Travel: Attendance at a London Hatter Institute meeting
organized by The Lancet and University College London with
arm’s length funding from pharmaceutical companies.

KDIGO Chairs

Michel Jadoul, MD, received his medi-
the Université
cal degree in 1983 at
Catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain) in
Brussels, Belgium. Dr. Jadoul trained in
internal medicine and nephrology under
the mentorship of Professor Charles van
Ypersele de Strihou. He has served as
Chair at the Department of Nephrology
of the Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc
since 2003 and is currently a full clinical
professor at UCLouvain. Dr. Jadoul’s clinical activities focus
on the follow-up of hemodialysis and CKD patients, and his
main research interests include b2-microglobulin amyloid-
osis, hepatitis C, and other complications (e.g., falls, bone
fractures, sudden death) in hemodialysis patients, as well as
cardiovascular complications after kidney transplantation and
various causes of kidney disease (e.g., drug-induced).

Dr. Jadoul has coauthored over 260 scientiﬁc papers, most
them published in major nephrology journals. He is

of

S74

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

currently serving as a theme editor of Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation, and he is also a country co-investigator for
the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS;
2001–present). In 2008, he received the international distin-
guished medal from the US National Kidney Foundation.
He was previously a member of
the KDIGO Executive
Committee (2010–2015) and the ERA-EDTA Council (2013–
2016). Presently, Dr. Jadoul is a KDIGO Co-Chair.

testimony: Vifor Fresenius Medical Care Renal

Consultancy: Astellas*, AstraZeneca*, Merck Sharp &
Dohme*, Mundipharma*, and Vifor Fresenius Medical Care
Renal Pharma*
Expert
Pharma*
Grants / research support: Amgen*, Janssen-Cilag*, Otsuka*,
and Roche*
Speaker bureaus: Amgen*, Menarini*, Merck Sharp &
Dohme*, Mundipharma, and Vifor Fresenius Medical Care
Renal Pharma*
Travel: Amgen* and Sanoﬁ*
*Monies paid to institution.

Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, MD, MPH,
ScD,
is the Gordon A. Cain Chair of
Nephrology and professor of medicine at
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston,
TX, USA. Dr. Winkelmayer received his
medical degree (1990) from the Univer-
sity of Vienna, Austria, and later earned a
Master of Public Health in healthcare
management (1999) and a Doctor of
Science in health policy (2001) from Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA. He then spent 8 years on the faculty of
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
where he established himself as a proliﬁc investigator and
leader in the discipline of comparative-effectiveness research
as it pertains to patients with kidney disease. From 2009 to
2014, he was the director of clinical research in the Division of
Nephrology at Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo
Alto, CA, USA. He assumed his current position as chief of
nephrology at Baylor College of Medicine in September 2014.
His main areas of research interest
include comparative
effectiveness and safety research of treatment strategies for
anemia, as well as of various interventions for cardiovascular
disease in patients with kidney disease. Dr. Winkelmayer is a
member of the American Society of Clinical Investigation. His
clinical passion lies in providing quality kidney care to the
predominantly disadvantaged and un(der)insured population
in the public safety net health system of Harris County, Texas.
Dr. Winkelmayer has authored over 300 peer-reviewed pub-
lications, and he has a particular interest in medical pub-
lishing. He currently serves as associate editor for the Journal
of the American Medical Association, was a co-editor of the
American Journal of Kidney Disease from 2007 to 2016, and
has been appointed to several other editorial boards of leading
nephrology and epidemiology journals. He also volunteers his

time toward important initiatives of the American Society of
Nephrology (e.g., Public Policy Board), and he joined KDIGO
volunteer leadership as an executive committee member in
2015 and has served as its Co-Chair since 2016.

Consultancy: Akebia, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Daiichi
Sankyo, Relypsa, and Vifor Fresenius Medical Care Renal
Pharma

Methods Chair

Marcello Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc,
FRCPC, is senior associate dean (clinical
research) at the Cumming School of
Medicine in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
He is associate vice president (health
research) at the University of Calgary.
He received his medical degree from the
University of Western Ontario, Canada,
a Master of Science in epidemiology
from Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA, and a Master of Science in health policy from
Imperial College London, UK. He is a nephrologist and
professor at the University of Calgary.

Dr. Tonelli has served in the past as president of the Ca-
nadian Society of Nephrology, councilor of the ISN, and a
member of the KDIGO Executive Committee. Dr. Tonelli is
Chair emeritus of the Canadian Task Force for Preventive
Health Care, a national panel of experts that makes recom-
mendations about preventive health services to Canada’s
36,000 family physicians.

A unique aspect of Dr. Tonelli’s research program includes
partnering with regional, provincial, and national decision
makers to ensure that the ﬁndings will be used to produce
rational health policy.

Speaker bureaus: B. Braun*
*Monies donated to charity.

Evidence Review Team

Jonathan C. Craig, MBChB,
DipCH, FRACP, M Med (Clin
Epi), PhD, Evidence Review
Team Director,
is an interna-
tionally recognized clinician and
scientist and holds the position of
vice president and executive dean
of
the College of Medicine &
Public Health at Flinders Univer-
sity, Adelaide, South Australia. Professor Craig has made a
signiﬁcant contribution to the clinical research landscape in
the prevention, identiﬁcation, management, and treatment of
CKD, particularly in relation to children and in indigenous
communities.

He has led the formation of state, national, and interna-
tional networks to conduct high-quality, relevant trials in
children. He has been instrumental in the development and
implementation of best-practice methods and guidelines

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S75

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

relating to CKD in Australia and globally. Professor Craig’s
many current advisory roles include member of the National
Health and Medical Research Council’s (NHMRC) Health
Translation Advisory Committee, the Pharmaceutical Beneﬁts
Advisory Committee, Medical Services Advisory Committee,
and Commonwealth Department of Health Life Savings Drug
Program.

He is a past member of the World Health Organization
expert review panel for global strategy and plan of action
on public health, innovation and intellectual property; a
past chairman of
the Cochrane
Collaboration; and a past member of the Expert Advisory
the Structural Review of NHMRC’s Grant
Group for
Program.

the Steering Group of

Dr. Craig declared no competing interests.

Suetonia C. Palmer, MBChB, FRACP, PhD, Evidence Re-
view Team Co-Director, is an academic nephrologist at the
University of Otago at Christchurch in New Zealand. She
studied medicine at the University of Otago, graduating in
1995. She became a fellow of the Royal Australasian Col-
in Nephrology in 2005. She later
lege of Physicians
completed a PhD in 2010 on the link between kidney
function and heart health and a 2-year postdoctoral
fellowship in Boston, MA, USA, at
the Brigham and
Women’s Hospital.

Dr. Palmer began as an author with the Cochrane Renal
Group in 2004 during her training to become a nephrologist.
Through systematic reviews, she discovered a passion for
understanding more about the amount and quality of evi-
dence that are required to make good clinical decisions in
nephrology. She is actively engaged in the conduct of sys-
tematic reviews of interventions (the treatments we use),
prognosis (whether risk factors for disease link to important
outcomes), and trial quality (how good is the evidence on
which to base our decisions).

Dr. Palmer enjoys training others in systematic review and
meta-analysis using an evidence-based approach to research.
She has strong collaborative links with researchers in Italy,
Australia, Europe, and North America with an increasing
research output, including recent publications in key internal
medicine and nephrology journals.

Dr. Palmer declared no competing interests.

Giovanni F.M. Strippoli, MD, MPH, M Med (Clin Epi),
PhD, Evidence Review Team Co-Director, has made sig-
niﬁcant contributions to clinical research in CKD, with
particular focus on prevention of kidney disease, and man-
agement of kidney failure, including hemodialysis, peritoneal
dialysis, and kidney transplantation. He has contributed
strongly to the development of policy in the area of kidney
through an international network
disease management
designing and conducting epidemiologic studies in the ﬁeld,
including systematic reviews, RCTs, and cohort studies,
among others. Professor Strippoli has been an active
contributor in his positions as chairman, deputy chairman,
and council in nephrology societies including the ISN and the

Italian Society of Nephrology, as well as editorial positions in
nephrology and general medicine scientiﬁc journals.

Dr. Strippoli declared no competing interests.

Martin Howell, PhD, Assistant Project
Director, is a senior research fellow in
health economics in the Sydney School
of Public Health (University of Sydney),
NSW, Australia. Since 2009, Martin has
been responsible for evidence review
and synthesis and the development of
over 20 clinical practice guidelines for
the Kidney Health Australia—Caring
for Australasians with Renal
(KHA-CARI)
Impairment
guidelines group. His research focuses on applied health
economics, predominantly in the areas of assessment of
preferences using discrete choice methods and economic
evaluations. His PhD project involved the application of a
type of choice experiment known as a Best Worst Scaling
survey to elicit preferences of recipients of kidney transplants
for outcomes after transplantation. This methodology has
since been applied to address a diverse range of health-related
issues. He is currently leading the economic evaluations of 9
active clinical trials. He is an author on 57 publications (ﬁrst
author on 10). These publications show the broad application
of his research from clinical trials to translation of clinical
evidence to clinical practice guidelines and patient-centered
care.

Dr. Howell declared no competing interests.

David J. Tunnicliffe, PhD, Evidence
Review Project Team Leader and
Project Manager, is a research fellow at
the University of Sydney, School of
Public Health, and the Centre for Kid-
ney Research at the Children’s Hospital
at Westmead, NSW, Australia. He was
awarded his PhD in 2018 at the Uni-
versity of Sydney. David has a research
interest in meta-research and the utilization of living evidence
in the management of CKD, and teaching epidemiology,
which he performs through the Masters (Medicine) Clinical
Epidemiology program, as a unit coordinator of introductions
to systematic reviews.

As part of Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, David has
served as the evidence review project team leader and project
manager for the 2021 update of the KDIGO 2012 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Management of Blood Pressure in
CKD, providing methodological expertise on evidence syn-
thesis and guideline development. His role was key in coor-
dinating the formation of key clinical questions to guide
literature searching and leading data extraction, critical
appraisal, meta-analysis, and evidence grading.

Dr. Tunnicliffe declared no competing interests.

S76

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Fiona Russell, PhD, Cochrane Kidney and Transplant,
Managing Editor, has more than 20 years’ experience at
media organizations such as News Corp and Fairfax Media in
a variety of editorial positions including reporter, sub-editor,
deputy editor, and production editor. Two years as an infor-
mation technology supervisor led to an ongoing technological
change management role at both companies, developing new
system procedures and workﬂows, and providing training
solutions for new and existing staff.

During her editorial career, Dr. Russell also gained a
bachelor’s degree in journalism, international relations, and
literary studies, a graduate degree in cognitive science, and a
PhD in comparative cognition research. She has been the
managing editor of Cochrane Kidney and Transplant since
October 2015.

Grants/grants pending: National Health and Medical
Research Council of Australia

Gail Y. Higgins, BA, Grad Ed, Grad Dip LibSc, Information
Specialist, completed a bachelor’s degree in arts, a graduate
diploma in education from the University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia, and a graduate diploma in Library Science from
Kuring-gai College of Advanced Education. Following a
number of years as a teacher–librarian, she changed tack and
spent 3 years with the NSW TAFE Information Systems Di-
vision. After that, she joined the University of Sydney Library
and worked as a pharmacy librarian and then as an internet
training librarian. She has worked as an information specialist
for the Cochrane Haematological Malignancies Group in
Cologne, Germany, and the Cochrane Cancer Network in
Oxford, UK. In 2007 and 2008, she completed a secondment
with the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland,
on the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP)
project.

Ms. Higgins declared no competing interests.

Tess E. Cooper, MPH, MSc (Evidence-based Health Care),
Research Associate, has completed an MSc in evidence-based
health care, a Master of Public Health, and a bachelor’s degree
in population health and marketing. Ms. Cooper is the in-
house systematic reviewer for the Cochrane Kidney and
Transplant Review Group, based at the University of Sydney,
NSW, Australia. In addition, she works with several other
Cochrane Review groups, including the Pain; Palliative and
Supportive Care; Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT); and Skin
groups, based in the United Kingdom. She has research
experience in evidence-based health care, long-term cohort
studies, chronic disease prevention, and is a current PhD
candidate researching kidney transplant patients.

Grants/grants
scholarship

pending: Australian Government

PhD

Nicole Evangelidis, MPH, MPhil, Research Associate, is a
public health researcher at the Centre for Kidney Research at
the University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. She has experience
in chronic disease prevention, patient-centered research, and
the development of core outcome sets. She is interested in diet
and lifestyle changes for the prevention of chronic disease.
She undertook key aspects of the evidence review for the
KDIGO guideline, including data extraction, synthesis, and
preparation of evidence summaries.

Ms. Evangelidis declared no competing interests.

Brydee Cashmore, MPH, Research Associate, has a Master
of Public Health from the University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia, as well as a bachelor’s degree in science, a double
major
in physiology and human nutrition, a graduate
diploma in science in psychology, and a postgraduate diploma
in science in human nutrition from Massey University, New
Zealand. She is a researcher at the Centre for Kidney Research
at the University of Sydney, where she undertakes evidence
review and synthesis for Cochrane Kidney and Transplant and
the KHA-CARI Guideline group. She was involved across all
of the KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline on the Manage-
ment of Blood Pressure in CKD subtopics and undertook key
aspects of the evidence review,
including data extraction,
evidence synthesis, and the writing and preparation of evi-
dence summaries in MAGICapp.

Ms. Cashmore declared no competing interests.

Rabia Khalid, MND, Research Associate, graduated from the
University of Sydney, NSW, Australia, in 2016 with a Master
of Nutrition and Dietetics. Since then, she has been working
as an accredited practicing dietitian in the community. In
2017, she started her additional role as a researcher at the
Centre for Kidney Research, where her role has ranged from
helping with guideline development to assisting with and
coordinating clinical trials. Her passion lies in increasing the
availability of evidence-based knowledge for the general
public.

Ms. Khalid declared no competing interests.

Claris Teng, BPsych (Hons), Research Associate, is a PhD
candidate at the University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. Her
thesis title is “Perspectives and preferences of people with
dementia and their caregivers about long-term care: estab-
lishing a person-centered framework for decision-making.”
As a research associate, Ms. Teng undertook key aspects of
the evidence review for
the KDIGO Clinical Practice
Guideline on the Management of Blood Pressure in CKD,
including data extraction, synthesis, and preparation of ev-
idence summaries.

Ms. Teng declared no competing interests.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S77

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Acknowledgments

A special debt of gratitude is owed to the KDIGO Co-Chairs,
Michel Jadoul and Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, and immedi-
ate past Co-Chair David C. Wheeler, for their invaluable
oversight throughout the development of this guideline. In
particular, we thank Jonathan Craig, Martin Howell, David
Tunnicliffe, and the ERT members for their substantial
contribution to the rigorous assessment of the available evi-
dence. We acknowledge Marcello Tonelli and Lyubov Lytvyn
for their guidance on strengthening the linkage between the
recommendations and the evidence base and for striving to
improve on the format to better meet KDIGO’s aspiration for a
“living guideline” that is consistently kept up-to-date, and
above all, useful and informative to practicing clinicians. We
would also like to acknowledge Debbie Maizels for her vital
contributions to the artwork presented in this guideline. Lastly,
we acknowledge Joseph T. Flynn for his contributions to
Chapter 5: Blood pressure management in children with CKD.
We are especially grateful to the Work Group members for
their expertise throughout the entire process of literature
review, data extraction, meeting participation, and the critical
writing and editing of the statements and rationale, which
made the publication of this guideline possible. The generous
gift of their time and dedication is greatly appreciated. Finally,
and on behalf of the Work Group, we gratefully acknowledge
the careful assessment of the draft guideline by public external
reviewers. The Work Group considered all of the valuable
comments made, and where appropriate, suggested changes
were incorporated into the ﬁnal publication. The following
individuals and organizations provided feedback during the
public review of the draft guideline:

Baris Afsar, Ahmed Akl, Laith Al-Rabadi, Bülent Altun,
Pablo Amair, Mustafa Arici, Lynda Azzouz, George L. Bakris,
Rommel Bataclan, Zineb Benjelloun, Patrick Biggar, Juliana

Borborema, Victor Botero, Jordi Bover, British and Irish
Hypertension Society, Lawrence Byrd, Rolando Claure-Del
Granado, Indranil Dasgupta, Ian H. de Boer, Filippo De
Stefano, Goffredo Del Rosso, Laura Fiersens, Joseph T. Flynn,
Eleni Frangou, Daniel Froment, Alvaro Garcia, Osama
Gheith, Richard J. Glassock, Claudia Fernanda Leiva Gomez,
Manuel Gorostidi, Remi Goupil, William E. Haley, Tess
Harris, Clarissa Havel, Lai Seong Hooi, Fan Hook Hou, Chiu-
Ching Huang, Rümeyza Turan Kazancio(cid:1)glu, Said Khamis,
Arif Khwaja, Bernhard Karl Krämer, Craig B. Langman, Edgar
V. Lerma, Lingyun Li, Jose Lima, José António Lopes, Fran-
cesca Mallamaci, Partha Pratim Mandal, Roberto Ramirez
Marmolejo, Michel Marre, Sandro Mazzaferro, Mehran
Raghib Motlagh, Eugen Mota, Martin Myers, Narcisse Oue-
draogo, Alberto Ortiz, Fabio Paglialonga, Sa_Ime Paydas,
Carmen A. Peralta, Carlos Eduardo Poli-de-Figueiredo,
Harun Rashid, Maria Fernanda Slon Roblero, Nicolas Rob-
erto Robles, Cibele Isaac Rodrigues, Patrick Rossignol, Luis
M. Ruilope, Rafael
Sekercioglu,
Deepak Sharma, Alexander Shutov, Habib Skhiri, Andrew
Smyth, Sandra J. Taler, Ekamol Tantisattamo, Nhan Tran,
UK Renal Association, Markus van der Giet,
Janelle
Vicknair, Ji-Guang Wang, Daniel E. Weiner, Paul K. Whelton,
Chi Pang Wen, Helen Yeh, Carmine Zoccali, and Muhammed
Zubair.

Santamaria, Nigar

Participation in the review does not necessarily consti-
tute endorsement of the content of this report by the above
they
the organizations or
individuals or
represent.

institutions

Alfred K. Cheung, MD
Johannes F.E. Mann, MD
Work Group Co-Chairs

S78

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

References

1.

Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-Smith CM, et al. Clinical practice guideline
for screening and management of high blood pressure in children
and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2017;140:e20171904.

2. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the prevention,
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2018;71:e127–e248.

3. Muntner P, Shimbo D, Carey RM, et al. Measurement of blood pressure in
humans: a scientiﬁc statement From the American Heart Association.
Hypertension. 2019;73:e35–e66.

4. Turner MJ, Speechly C, Bignell N. Sphygmomanometer calibration–why,

how and how often? Aust Fam Physician. 2007;36:834–838.

5. Agarwal R, Pappas MK, Sinha AD. Masked uncontrolled hypertension in

CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;27:924–932.

6. Ahmad FS, Chan C, Rosenman MB, et al. Validity of cardiovascular data
from electronic sources: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis and
HealthLNK. Circulation. 2017;136:1207–1216.

7. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: executive summary:
a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2019;74:1376–1414.

8. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al. 2018 ESC/ESH guidelines for the
the task force for
the
management of arterial hypertension:
management of arterial hypertension of
the European Society of
Cardiology and the European Society of Hypertension. J Hypertens.
2018;36:1953–2041.

9. Kallioinen N, Hill A, Horswill MS, et al. Sources of inaccuracy in the
resting blood pressure in clinical

measurement of adult patients’
settings: a systematic review. J Hypertens. 2017;35:421–441.

10. Drawz PE, Ix JH. BP Measurement in clinical practice: time to SPRINT
to guideline-recommended protocols. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018;29:
383–388.

11. ONTARGET Investigators, Yusuf S, Teo KK, et al. Telmisartan, ramipril, or
both in patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:
1547–1559.

12. de Galan BE, Perkovic V, Ninomiya T, et al. Lowering blood pressure
reduces renal events in type 2 diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:
883–892.

13. Peralta CA, McClure LA, Scherzer R, et al. Effect of intensive versus usual
blood pressure control on kidney function among individuals with prior
lacunar stroke: a post hoc analysis of the secondary prevention of Small
Subcortical Strokes (SPS3) Randomized Trial. Circulation. 2016;133:584–
591.

14. Duncombe SL, Voss C, Harris KC. Oscillometric and auscultatory blood
pressure measurement methods in children: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 2017;35:213–224.

15. Mingji C, Onakpoya IJ, Heneghan CJ, et al. Assessing agreement of blood
pressure-measuring devices in Tibetan areas of China: a systematic
review. Heart Asia. 2016;8:46–51.

16. Wan Y, Heneghan C, Stevens R, et al. Determining which automatic
digital blood pressure device performs adequately: a systematic
review. J Hum Hypertens. 2010;24:431–438.

17. Cohen JB, Padwal RS, Gutkin M, et al. History and justiﬁcation of a
validated device listing.

national blood pressure measurement
Hypertension. 2019;73:258–264.
Ishikawa J, Nasothimiou EG, Karpettas N, et al. Automatic ofﬁce blood
pressure measured without doctors or nurses present. Blood Press
Monit. 2012;17:96–102.

18.

19. Stergiou GS, Alpert B, Mieke S, et al. A universal standard for the
validation of blood pressure measuring devices: Association for the
Advancement of Medical
Instrumentation/European Society of
Hypertension/International Organization for Standardization (AAMI/
ESH/ISO) collaboration statement. Hypertension. 2018;71:368–374.
20. Roerecke M, Kaczorowski J, Myers MG. Comparing automated ofﬁce
blood pressure readings with other methods of blood pressure

r e f e r e n c e s

measurement for identifying patients with possible hypertension: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2019;179:351–
362.

21. Bauer F, Seibert FS, Rohn B, et al. Attended versus unattended blood
pressure measurement in a real life setting. Hypertension. 2018;71:243–
249.

22. Campbell NR, Conradson HE, Kang J, et al. Automated assessment of
blood pressure using BpTRU compared with assessments by a trained
technician and a clinic nurse. Blood Press Monit. 2005;10:257–262.
Lamarre-Cliche M, Cheong NN, Larochelle P. Comparative assessment of
four blood pressure measurement methods in hypertensives. Can J
Cardiol. 2011;27:455–460.

23.

24. Myers MG. Automated blood pressure measurement in routine clinical

practice. Blood Press Monit. 2006;11:59–62.

25. Myers MG, McInnis NH, Fodor GJ, et al. Comparison between an
automated and manual sphygmomanometer in a population survey.
Am J Hypertens. 2008;21:280–283.
Johnson KC, Whelton PK, Cushman WC, et al. Blood pressure
measurement in SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial).
Hypertension. 2018;71:848–857.

26.

27. Stergiou GS, Kollias A, Destounis A, et al. Automated blood pressure
in atrial ﬁbrillation: a systematic review and meta-

measurement
analysis. J Hypertens. 2012;30:2074–2082.

28. Chan PH, Wong CK, Pun L, et al. Diagnostic performance of an automatic
blood pressure measurement device, Microlife WatchBP Home A, for
atrial ﬁbrillation screening in a real-world primary care setting. BMJ
Open. 2017;7:e013685.

29. Cohen JB, Lotito MJ, Trivedi UK, et al. Cardiovascular events and
mortality in white coat hypertension: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2019;170:853–862.

30. Pierdomenico SD, Pierdomenico AM, Coccina F, et al. Prognostic value of
masked uncontrolled hypertension. Hypertension. 2018;72:862–869.
31. Shimbo D, Muntner P. Should out-of-ofﬁce monitoring be performed for
detecting white coat hypertension? Ann Intern Med. 2019;170:890–892.
32. Ghazi L, Yaffe K, Tamura MK, et al. Association of 24-hour ambulatory
blood pressure patterns with cognitive function and physical
functioning in CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020;15:455–464.

33. Minutolo R, Gabbai FB, Borrelli S, et al. Changing the timing of
antihypertensive therapy to reduce nocturnal blood pressure in CKD:
an 8-week uncontrolled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007;50:908–917.
34. Mwasongwe SE, Tanner RM, Poudel B, et al. Ambulatory blood pressure
phenotypes in adults taking antihypertensive medication with and
without CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020;15:501–510.

35. Pogue V, Rahman M, Lipkowitz M, et al. Disparate estimates of
from ambulatory and clinic blood pressure
hypertension control
measurements in hypertensive kidney disease. Hypertension. 2009;53:
20–27.

in

adults:

36. Siu AL, U.S. Preventative Services Task Force. Screening for high blood
Force

pressure
Task
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163:778–786.
Little P, Barnett J, Barnsley L, et al. Comparison of acceptability of and
preferences for different methods of measuring blood pressure in
primary care. BMJ. 2002;325:258–259.

Preventive

Services

U.S.

37.

38. McGowan N, Padﬁeld PL. Self blood pressure monitoring: a worthy
substitute for ambulatory blood pressure? J Hum Hypertens. 2010;24:
801–806.

39. Nasothimiou EG, Karpettas N, Dafni MG, et al. Patients’ preference for
ambulatory versus home blood pressure monitoring. J Hum Hypertens.
2014;28:224–229.

40. Beyhaghi H, Viera AJ. Comparative cost-effectiveness of clinic, home, or
ambulatory blood pressure measurement for hypertension diagnosis in
US adults. Hypertension. 2019;73:121–131.
Lovibond K, Jowett S, Barton P, et al. Cost-effectiveness of options for
the diagnosis of high blood pressure in primary care: a modelling
study. Lancet. 2011;378:1219–1230.

41.

42. Eguchi K, Kuruvilla S, Ishikawa J, et al. A novel and simple protocol for
the validation of home blood pressure monitors in clinical practice.
Blood Press Monit. 2012;17:210–213.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S79

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

43. Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and
Medicine Division; Food and Nutrition Board; Committee to Review
the Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium, Oria M,
Harrison M, Stallings VA, eds. Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium
and Potassium. Available at: http://doi.org/10.17226/25353. Accessed
January 15, 2021.

44. Clase CM, Carrero JJ, Ellison DH, et al. Potassium homeostasis and
management of dyskalemia in kidney diseases: conclusions from a
Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies
Conference. Kidney Int. 2020;97:42–61.

45. He J, Mills KT, Appel LJ, et al. Urinary sodium and potassium excretion

and CKD progression. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;27:1202–1212.

46. Mills KT, Chen J, Yang W, et al. Sodium excretion and the risk of
cardiovascular disease in patients with chronic kidney disease. JAMA.
2016;315:2200–2210.

47. McMahon EJ, Campbell KL, Bauer JD, et al. Altered dietary salt intake for
people with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;2:
CD010070.

48. Suckling RJ, He FJ, Macgregor GA. Altered dietary salt intake for
preventing and treating diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010:CD006763.

on

albuminuria

49. Hwang JH, Chin HJ, Kim S, et al. Effects of intensive low-salt diet
education
nondiabetic patients with
among
hypertension treated with olmesartan: a single-blinded randomized,
controlled trial. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:2059–2069.
Jardine MJ, Li N, Ninomiya T, et al. Dietary sodium reduction reduces
albuminuria: a cluster randomized trial. J Ren Nutr. 2019;29:276–284.
51. Keyzer CA, van Breda GF, Vervloet MG, et al. Effects of vitamin D receptor
activation and dietary sodium restriction on residual albuminuria in CKD:
the ViRTUE-CKD Trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:1296–1305.

50.

52. Konishi Y, Okada N, Okamura M, et al. Sodium sensitivity of blood
pressure appearing before hypertension and related to histological
damage in immunoglobulin a nephropathy. Hypertension. 2001;38:81–
85.

53. Kwakernaak AJ, Krikken JA, Binnenmars SH, et al. Effects of sodium
restriction and hydrochlorothiazide on RAAS blockade efﬁcacy in
diabetic nephropathy: a randomised clinical
trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2014;2:385–395.

54. McMahon EJ, Bauer JD, Hawley CM, et al. A randomized trial of dietary
sodium restriction in CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:2096–2103.
55. Meuleman Y, Hoekstra T, Dekker FW, et al. Sodium restriction in patients
with CKD: a randomized controlled trial of self-management support.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2017;69:576–586.

56. Ruilope LM, Casal MC, Guerrero L, et al. Sodium intake does not
in hypertensive patients with mild

inﬂuence the effect of verapamil
renal insufﬁciency. Drugs. 1992;44:94–98.

57. Saran R, Padilla RL, Gillespie BW, et al. A randomized crossover trial of
dietary sodium restriction in stage 3-4 CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2017;12:399–407.

59.

58. Slagman MC, Waanders F, Hemmelder MH, et al. Moderate dietary
sodium restriction added to angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition
compared with dual blockade in lowering proteinuria and blood
pressure: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2011;343:d4366.
Lopes de Faria JB, Friedman R, de Cosmo S, et al. Renal functional
response to protein loading in type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetic
patients on normal or high salt intake. Nephron. 1997;76:411–417.
Luik PT, Hoogenberg K, Van Der Kleij FG, et al. Short-term moderate
sodium restriction induces relative hyperﬁltration in normotensive
normoalbuminuric Type I diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia. 2002;45:535–
541.

60.

61. Miller JA. Renal responses to sodium restriction in patients with early

diabetes mellitus. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1997;8:749–755.

62. Muhlhauser I, Prange K, Sawicki PT, et al. Effects of dietary sodium on
blood pressure in IDDM patients with nephropathy. Diabetologia.
1996;39:212–219.

63. Trevisan R, Bruttomesso D, Vedovato M, et al. Enhanced responsiveness
of blood pressure to sodium intake and to angiotensin II is associated
with insulin resistance in IDDM patients with microalbuminuria.
Diabetes. 1998;47:1347–1353.

64. Dodson PM, Beevers M, Hallworth R, et al. Sodium restriction and blood
pressure in hypertensive type II diabetics: randomised blind controlled
and crossover studies of moderate sodium restriction and sodium
supplementation. BMJ. 1989;298:227–230.

65. Houlihan CA, Allen TJ, Baxter AL, et al. A low-sodium diet potentiates the

66.

effects of losartan in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2002;25:663–671.
Imanishi M, Yoshioka K, Okumura M, et al. Sodium sensitivity related to
albuminuria appearing before hypertension in type 2 diabetic patients.
Diabetes Care. 2001;24:111–116.

67. Petrie JR, Morris AD, Minamisawa K, et al. Dietary sodium restriction
impairs insulin sensitivity in noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998;83:1552–1557.

68. Vedovato M, Lepore G, Coracina A, et al. Effect of sodium intake on
blood pressure and albuminuria in Type 2 diabetic patients: the role
of insulin resistance. Diabetologia. 2004;47:300–303.

69. Yoshioka K, Imanishi M, Konishi Y, et al. Glomerular charge and size
intake in type 2 diabetic

selectivity assessed by changes in salt
patients. Diabetes Care. 1998;21:482–486.
Lambers Heerspink HJ, Holtkamp FA, Parving HH, et al. Moderation of
dietary sodium potentiates the renal and cardiovascular protective
effects of angiotensin receptor blockers. Kidney Int. 2012;82:330–337.

70.

71. World Health Organization. Guideline: Sodium Intake for Adults and
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/1
Accessed

Children. Available
at:
0665/77985/9789241504836_eng.pdf?sequence¼1;
January 15, 2021.

2012.

72. EFSA Panel on Nutrition. Novel Foods and Food Allergens (NDA), Turck
D, Castenmiller J, et al. Dietary reference values for sodium. EFSA J.
2019;17:191.

73. Dunkler D, Dehghan M, Teo KK, et al. Diet and kidney disease in high-risk
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:
1682–1692.

74. Smyth A, Dunkler D, Gao P, et al. The relationship between estimated
sodium and potassium excretion and subsequent renal outcomes.
Kidney Int. 2014;86:1205–1212.
Flesher M, Woo P, Chiu A, et al. Self-management and biomedical
outcomes of a cooking, and exercise program for patients with
chronic kidney disease. J Ren Nutr. 2011;21:188–195.

75.

76. Greenwood SA, Koufaki P, Mercer TH, et al. Effect of exercise training on
estimated GFR, vascular health, and cardiorespiratory ﬁtness in patients
with CKD: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015;65:
425–434.

77. Headley S, Germain M, Wood R, et al. Short-term aerobic exercise and
vascular function in CKD stage 3: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Kidney Dis. 2014;64:222–229.

79.

78. Howden EJ, Coombes JS, Strand H, et al. Exercise training in CKD:
efﬁcacy, adherence, and safety. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015;65:583–591.
Ikizler TA, Robinson-Cohen C, Ellis C, et al. Metabolic effects of diet and
exercise in patients with moderate to severe CKD: a randomized clinical
trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018;29:250–259.
Leehey DJ, Collins E, Kramer HJ, et al. Structured exercise in obese
diabetic patients with chronic kidney disease: a randomized controlled
trial. Am J Nephrol. 2016;44:54–62.
Leehey DJ, Moinuddin I, Bast JP, et al. Aerobic exercise in obese diabetic
patients with chronic kidney disease: a randomized and controlled pilot
study. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2009;8:62.

80.

81.

82. Van Craenenbroeck AH, Van Craenenbroeck EM, Van Ackeren K, et al.
Effect of moderate aerobic exercise training on endothelial function
and arterial stiffness in CKD stages 3-4: a randomized controlled trial.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2015;66:285–296.

83. Heiwe S, Jacobson SH. Exercise training in adults with CKD: a systematic

review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64:383–393.

84. Beddhu S, Wei G, Marcus RL, et al. Light-intensity physical activities and
in the United States general population and CKD

mortality
subpopulation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;10:1145–1153.

85. Ekinci EI, Clarke S, Thomas MC, et al. Dietary salt intake and mortality in

patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:703–709.

86. Mente A, O’Donnell M, Rangarajan S, et al. Urinary sodium excretion,
blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, and mortality: a community-
level prospective epidemiological cohort study. Lancet. 2018;392:496–
506.

87. BiCARB study group. Clinical and cost-effectiveness of oral sodium
bicarbonate therapy for older patients with chronic kidney disease
and low-grade acidosis (BiCARB): a pragmatic randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. BMC Med. 2020;18:91.

88. Mahajan A, Simoni J, Sheather SJ, et al. Daily oral sodium bicarbonate
preserves glomerular ﬁltration rate by slowing its decline in early
hypertensive nephropathy. Kidney Int. 2010;78:303–309.

S80

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

89. Raphael KL, Isakova T, Ix JH, et al. A randomized trial comparing the
safety, adherence, and pharmacodynamics proﬁles of two doses of
sodium bicarbonate in CKD: the BASE Pilot Trial. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2020;31:161–174.

90. Graudal NA, Hubeck-Graudal T, Jurgens G. Effects of low sodium diet
versus high sodium diet on blood pressure,
renin, aldosterone,
catecholamines, cholesterol, and triglyceride. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2017;4:CD004022.

91. Cheung AK, Rahman M, Reboussin DM, et al. Effects of intensive BP

control in CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:2812–2823.

92. ACCORD Study Group, Cushman WC, Evans GW, et al. Effects of intensive
in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med.

blood-pressure control
2010;362:1575–1585.

93. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al. A randomized
trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:2103–2116.
Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-speciﬁc relevance of usual
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data
for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:
1903–1913.

94.

95. Schrier RW. Blood pressure in early autosomal dominant polycystic

kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:976–977.

96. Pajewski NM, Berlowitz DR, Bress AP, et al. Intensive vs standard blood
in adults 80 years or older: a secondary analysis of
J Am Geriatr Soc.

pressure control
the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial.
2020;68:496–504.

97. Klahr S, Levey AS, Beck GJ, et al. The effects of dietary protein restriction
and blood-pressure control on the progression of chronic renal disease.
Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group. N Engl J Med.
1994;330:877–884.

98. Wright JT Jr, Bakris G, Greene T, et al. Effect of blood pressure lowering
and antihypertensive drug class on progression of hypertensive kidney
disease: results from the AASK trial. JAMA. 2002;288:2421–2431.
99. Ruggenenti P, Perna A, Loriga G, et al. Blood-pressure control

for
renoprotection in patients with non-diabetic chronic renal disease (REIN-
2): multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:939–946.

100. Curb JD, Pressel SL, Cutler

JA, et al. Effect of diuretic-based
antihypertensive treatment on cardiovascular disease risk in older
diabetic patients with isolated systolic hypertension.
Systolic
Hypertension in the Elderly Program Cooperative Research Group.
JAMA. 1996;276:1886–1892.

101. SPS3 Study Group, Benavente OR, Coffey CS, et al. Blood-pressure
targets in patients with recent lacunar stroke: the SPS3 randomised
trial. Lancet. 2013;382:507–515.

102. Bundy JD, Li C, Stuchlik P, et al. Systolic blood pressure reduction and
risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality: a systematic review and
network meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:775–781.

103. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists Collaboration. Blood
pressure-lowering treatment based on cardiovascular risk: a meta-
analysis of individual patient data. Lancet. 2014;384:591–598.

104. Czernichow S, Zanchetti A, Turnbull F, et al. The effects of blood pressure
reduction and of different blood pressure-lowering regimens on major
cardiovascular events according to baseline blood pressure: meta-
analysis of randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2011;29:4–16.

105. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood pressure lowering for
prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387:957–967.

106. Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, et al. Effects of intensive blood pressure lowering on
cardiovascular and renal outcomes: updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387:435–443.

107. Williamson JD, Supiano MA, Applegate WB, et al. Intensive vs standard
blood pressure control and cardiovascular disease outcomes in adults
aged $75 years: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315:2673–2682.
Research Group,
Williamson JD, Pajewski NM, et al. Effect of
intensive vs standard
blood pressure control on probable dementia: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA. 2019;321:553–561.

108. SPRINT MIND Investigators

SPRINT

the

for

109. Brunstrom M, Carlberg B. Association of blood pressure lowering with
mortality and cardiovascular disease across blood pressure levels:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2018;178:28–36.
110. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists Collaboration, Ninomiya T,
Perkovic V, et al. Blood pressure lowering and major cardiovascular
events in people with and without chronic kidney disease: meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2013;347:f5680.

111. Malhotra R, Nguyen HA, Benavente O, et al. Association between more
intensive vs less intensive blood pressure lowering and risk of
mortality in chronic kidney disease stages 3 to 5: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177:1498–1505.

112. Garrison SR, Kolber MR, Korownyk CS, et al. Blood pressure targets for
hypertension in older adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;8:
CD011575.

113. Bavishi C, Bangalore S, Messerli FH. Outcomes of

intensive blood
pressure lowering in older hypertensive patients. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2017;69:486–493.

114. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight blood pressure control and
risk of macrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2
diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ. 1998;317:703–713.

115. Staessen JA, Fagard R, Thijs L, et al. Randomised double-blind
comparison of placebo and active treatment for older patients with
isolated systolic hypertension. The Systolic Hypertension in Europe
(Syst-Eur) Trial Investigators. Lancet. 1997;350:757–764.

116. Schrier RW, Estacio RO, Esler A, et al. Effects of aggressive blood pressure
in normotensive type 2 diabetic patients on albuminuria,

control
retinopathy and strokes. Kidney Int. 2002;61:1086–1097.

117. Ruilope LM, Salvetti A, Jamerson K, et al. Renal function and intensive
lowering of blood pressure in hypertensive participant of
the
hypertension optimal
J Am Soc Nephrol.
2001;12:218–225.

(HOT) study.

treatment

118. Brunstrom M, Carlberg B. Effect of antihypertensive treatment at
different blood pressure levels in patients with diabetes mellitus:
systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ. 2016;352:i717.

119. Papademetriou V, Zaheer M, Doumas M, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes
impact of blood
in action to control cardiovascular risk in diabetes:
pressure level and presence of kidney disease. Am J Nephrol. 2016;43:
271–280.

120. Bress AP, King JB, Kreider KE, et al. Effect of intensive versus standard
blood pressure treatment according to baseline prediabetes status: a
post hoc analysis of a randomized trial. Diabetes Care. 2017;40:1401–
1408.

121. Perkovic V, Rodgers A. Redeﬁning Blood-Pressure Targets–SPRINT Starts

the Marathon. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2175–2178.

122. Beddhu S, Chertow GM, Greene T, et al. Effects of intensive systolic blood
pressure lowering on cardiovascular events and mortality in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus on standard glycemic control and in
those without diabetes mellitus: reconciling results from ACCORD BP
and SPRINT. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e009326.

123. Tsujimoto T, Kajio H. Beneﬁts of Intensive blood pressure treatment in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus receiving standard but not
intensive glycemic control. Hypertension. 2018;72:323–330.

124. Buckley LF, Dixon DL, Wohlford GFt, et al.

Intensive versus standard
in SPRINT-Eligible participants of ACCORD-BP.

blood pressure control
Diabetes Care. 2017;40:1733–1738.

125. Aggarwal R, Petrie B, Bala W, et al. Mortality outcomes with intensive
patients.

pressure

chronic

disease

targets

kidney

blood
Hypertension. 2019;73:1275–1282.

in

126. Bangalore S, Messerli FH, Wun CC, et al. J-curve revisited: an analysis of
blood pressure and cardiovascular events in the Treating to New Targets
(TNT) Trial. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2897–2908.

127. D’Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Kannel WB, et al. Relation of

low
diastolic blood pressure to coronary heart disease death in presence
of myocardial infarction: the Framingham Study. BMJ. 1991;303:385–
389.

128. Beddhu S, Greene T, Boucher R, et al. Intensive systolic blood pressure
control and incident chronic kidney disease in people with and
without diabetes mellitus: secondary analyses of
two randomised
controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;6:555–563.

129. Beddhu S, Chertow GM, Cheung AK, et al. Inﬂuence of baseline diastolic
blood pressure on effects of intensive compared with standard blood
pressure control. Circulation. 2018;137:134–143.

130. Kirchheim HR, Ehmke H, Hackenthal E, et al. Autoregulation of renal
blood ﬂow, glomerular ﬁltration rate and renin release in conscious
dogs. Pﬂugers Arch. 1987;410:441–449.

131. Malhotra R, Craven T, Ambrosius WT, et al. Effects of intensive blood
pressure lowering on kidney tubule injury in CKD: a longitudinal
subgroup analysis in SPRINT. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019;73:21–30.

132. Zhang WR, Craven TE, Malhotra R, et al. Kidney damage biomarkers and
incident chronic kidney disease during blood pressure reduction: a case-
control study. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169:610–618.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S81

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

133. Nadkarni GN, Chauhan K, Rao V, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure
lowering on kidney tubule injury: ﬁndings from the ACCORD Trial study
participants. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019;73:31–38.

156. Zhang L, Zhao F, Yang Y, et al. Association between carotid artery
intima-media thickness and early-stage CKD in a Chinese population.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2007;49:786–792.

134. Beddhu S, Rocco MV, Toto R, et al. Effects of intensive systolic blood
pressure control on kidney and cardiovascular outcomes in persons
without kidney disease: a secondary analysis of a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:375–383.

135. Appel LJ, Wright JT Jr, Greene T, et al. Intensive blood-pressure control in
hypertensive chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:918–929.
136. Beck GJ, Berg RL, Coggins CH, et al. Design and statistical issues of the
Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease Trial. The Modiﬁcation of Diet in
Renal Disease Study Group. Control Clin Trials. 1991;12:566–586.
137. Upadhyay A, Earley A, Haynes SM, et al. Systematic review: blood
pressure target in chronic kidney disease and proteinuria as an effect
modiﬁer. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:541–548.

138. Sarnak MJ, Greene T, Wang X, et al. The effect of a lower target blood
pressure on the progression of kidney disease: long-term follow-up of
the modiﬁcation of diet
in renal disease study. Ann Intern Med.
2005;142:342–351.

139. Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group. Short-term effects of
protein intake, blood pressure, and antihypertensive therapy on
glomerular ﬁltration rate in the Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease
Study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1996;7:2097–2109.
Lv J, Ehteshami P, Sarnak MJ, et al. Effects of intensive blood pressure
lowering on the progression of chronic kidney disease: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2013;185:949–957.

140.

141. Kidney Disease:

Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Blood Pressure
Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of
Blood Pressure in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney Int Suppl. 2012;2:
337–414.

142. ESCAPE Trial Group, Wuhl E, Trivelli A, et al. Strict blood-pressure control
and progression of renal failure in children. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1639–
1650.

143. Pahor M, Shorr RI, Somes GW, et al. Diuretic-based treatment and
cardiovascular events in patients with mild renal dysfunction enrolled
in the systolic hypertension in the elderly program. Arch Intern Med.
1998;158:1340–1345.

144. Ku E, Gassman J, Appel LJ, et al. BP Control and long-term risk of ESRD

and mortality. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:671–677.

145. Ku E, Glidden DV, Johansen KL, et al. Association between strict blood
pressure control during chronic kidney disease and lower mortality
after onset of end-stage renal disease. Kidney Int. 2015;87:1055–1060.

146. Chan JC, So WY, Yeung CY, et al. Effects of structured versus usual care
on renal endpoint in type 2 diabetes: the SURE study: a randomized
multicenter translational study. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:977–982.
147. Estacio RO, Coll JR, Tran ZV, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure
control with valsartan on urinary albumin excretion in normotensive
patients with type 2 diabetes. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19:1241–1248.
Lewis JB, Berl T, Bain RP, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure control
on the course of type 1 diabetic nephropathy. Collaborative Study
Group. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;34:809–817.
Juraschek SP, Taylor AA, Wright JT Jr, et al. Orthostatic Hypotension,
cardiovascular outcomes, and adverse events: results from SPRINT.
Hypertension. 2020;75:660–667.

148.

149.

150. Rocco MV, Sink KM, Lovato LC, et al. Effects of intensive blood pressure
treatment on acute kidney injury events in the Systolic Blood Pressure
Intervention Trial (SPRINT). Am J Kidney Dis. 2018;71:352–361.

151. Obi Y, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Shintani A, et al. Estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate and the risk-beneﬁt proﬁle of intensive blood pressure control
amongst nondiabetic patients: a post hoc analysis of a randomized
clinical trial. J Intern Med. 2018;283:314–327.

152. Nguyen LS. Effect of additional antihypertensive medications in patients
with high-risk hypertension: a post hoc analysis of the SPRINT (Systolic
Blood Pressure
J Clin Hypertens
Intervention Trial) database.
(Greenwich). 2018;20:814–815.

153. Markovitz AA, Mack JA, Nallamothu BK, et al.

Incremental effects of
instrumental variable analysis. BMJ. 2017;359:

antihypertensive drugs:
j5542.

154. Bress AP, Bellows BK, King JB, et al. Cost-effectiveness of intensive versus
standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:745–755.
155. Wang MC, Tsai WC, Chen JY, et al. Stepwise increase in arterial stiffness
corresponding with the stages of chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney
Dis. 2005;45:494–501.

157. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in adults:
diagnosis and management. NICE guideline [NG136]. Available at:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng136; 2019. Accessed January 15,
2021.

158. Nerenberg KA, Zarnke KB, Leung AA, et al. Hypertension Canada’s 2018
guidelines for diagnosis, risk assessment, prevention, and treatment of
hypertension in adults and children. Can J Cardiol. 2018;34:506–525.

159. Hiremath S, Sapir-Pichhadze R, Nakhla M, et al. Hypertension Canada’s
2020 evidence review and guidelines for the management of resistant
hypertension. Can J Cardiol. 2020;36:625–634.

160. Muntner P, Carey RM, Jamerson K, et al. Rationale for ambulatory and
home blood pressure monitoring thresholds in the 2017 American
College
Association Guideline.
Hypertension. 2019;73:33–38.

Cardiology/American Heart

of

162.

161. Rahman M, Pressel S, Davis BR, et al. Renal outcomes in high-risk
hypertensive patients treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor or a calcium channel blocker vs a diuretic: a report from the
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment
to Prevent Heart
Attack Trial (ALLHAT). Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:936–946.
Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al. Renoprotective effect of the
patients with
angiotensin-receptor
nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:851–860.
163. HOPE Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and
microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of
the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Heart Outcomes
Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Lancet. 2000;355:253–259.

antagonist

irbesartan

in

164. The EURopean trial On reduction of cardiac events with Perindopril
in stable coronary Artery disease Investigators. Efﬁcacy of perindopril
in reduction of cardiovascular events among patients with stable
randomised,
coronary
placebo-
disease:
artery
controlled, multicentre trial
(the EUROPA study). Lancet. 2003;362:
782–788.

double-blind,

166.

Jablonski KA, et al. Renal

165. Solomon SD, Rice MM,

function and
effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy in
patients with chronic stable coronary disease in the Prevention of
Events with ACE inhibition (PEACE) trial. Circulation. 2006;114:26–31.
Jafar TH, Schmid CH, Landa M, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and progression of nondiabetic renal disease. A meta-
analysis of patient-level data. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:73–87.
167. Mann JF, Gerstein HC, Pogue J, et al. Renal insufﬁciency as a predictor of
the HOPE

cardiovascular outcomes and the impact of
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134:629–636.

ramipril:

168. Dagenais GR, Pogue J, Fox K, et al. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme
inhibitors in stable vascular disease without left ventricular systolic
dysfunction or heart failure: a combined analysis of three trials. Lancet.
2006;368:581–588.

169. Xie X, Liu Y, Perkovic V, et al. Renin-angiotensin system inhibitors and
kidney and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with CKD: a Bayesian
network meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Am J Kidney Dis.
2016;67:728–741.

170. Gashti CN, Bakris GL. The role of calcium antagonists in chronic kidney

disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2004;13:115–161.

171. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, et al. Spironolactone versus
and doxazosin to determine the optimal
placebo, bisoprolol,
treatment for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a randomised,
double-blind, crossover trial. Lancet. 2015;386:2059–2068.

173.

172. Hripcsak G, Suchard MA, Shea S, et al. Comparison of cardiovascular and
safety outcomes of chlorthalidone vs hydrochlorothiazide to treat
hypertension. JAMA Intern Med. 2020;180:542–551.
Lederle FA, Cushman WC, Ferguson RE, et al. Chlorthalidone versus
hydrochlorothiazide: a new kind of veterans affairs cooperative study.
Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:663–664.
AE, Whelton

and
hydrochlorothiazide for treatment of patients with hypertension. JAMA
Intern Med. 2020;180:1132–1133.
Jentzer JC, DeWald TA, Hernandez AF. Combination of loop diuretics
with thiazide-type diuretics in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:
1527–1534.

Chlorthalidone

174. Moran

Frieden

175.

PK,

TR.

176. The GISEN Group (Gruppo Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Nefrologia).
Randomised placebo-controlled trial of effect of ramipril on decline in

S82

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

glomerular ﬁltration rate and risk of terminal renal failure in proteinuric,
non-diabetic nephropathy. Lancet. 1997;349:1857–1863.

177. Ruggenenti P, Perna A, Gherardi G, et al. Renoprotective properties of
ACE-inhibition in non-diabetic nephropathies with non-nephrotic
proteinuria. Lancet. 1999;354:359–364.

178. Maschio G, Alberti D, Janin G, et al. Effect of the angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibitor benazepril on the progression of chronic renal
insufﬁciency.
in
Progressive Renal Insufﬁciency Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:
939–945.

Angiotensin-Converting-Enzyme

Inhibition

The

180.

179. Hou FF, Zhang X, Zhang GH, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of benazepril for
advanced chronic renal insufﬁciency. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:131–140.
Jafar TH, Stark PC, Schmid CH, et al. Progression of chronic kidney
the role of blood pressure control, proteinuria, and
disease:
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition:
a patient-level meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139:244–252.

181. Hou FF, Xie D, Zhang X, et al. Renoprotection of Optimal Antiproteinuric
Doses (ROAD) Study: a randomized controlled study of benazepril and
losartan in chronic renal insufﬁciency. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;18:1889–
1898.

182. Hannedouche T, Landais P, Goldfarb B, et al. Randomised controlled trial
of enalapril and beta blockers in non-diabetic chronic renal failure. BMJ.
1994;309:833–837.

183. Rakugi H, Ogihara T, Umemoto S, et al. Combination therapy for
hypertension in patients with CKD: a subanalysis of the Combination
Therapy of Hypertension to Prevent Cardiovascular Events
trial.
Hypertens Res. 2013;36:947–958.

184. Esnault VL, Brown EA, Apetrei E, et al. The effects of amlodipine and
function in adults with hypertension and
enalapril on renal
nondiabetic nephropathies: a 3-year, randomized, multicenter, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study. Clin Ther. 2008;30:482–498.

185. Marin IR, Ruilope LM. Effect of antihypertensive treatment on
insufﬁciency in non-diabetics patients (ESPIRAL

progression of renal
Trial). Nefrologia. 1995;15:464–475.

186. Zucchelli P, Zuccala A, Borghi M, et al. Long-term comparison between
captopril and nifedipine in the progression of renal insufﬁciency. Kidney
Int. 1992;42:452–458.

187. Woo KT, Choong HL, Wong KS, et al. Aliskiren and losartan trial in non-
diabetic chronic kidney disease. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst.
2014;15:515–522.

188. Mimura T, Takenaka T, Kanno Y, et al. Vascular compliance is secured
under angiotensin inhibition in non-diabetic chronic kidney diseases.
J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22:38–47.
Ihle BU, Whitworth JA, Shahinfar S, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
insufﬁciency: a controlled
inhibition in nondiabetic progressive renal
double-blind trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:489–495.

188a.

189. Cinotti GA, Zucchelli PC, Collaborative Study Group. Effect of Lisinopril
insufﬁciency in mild proteinuric non-

on the progression of renal
diabetic nephropathies. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2001;16:961–966.
190. Shen PC, He LQ, Yang XJ, Cao H X. Renal protection of losartan 50 mg in
normotensive Chinese patients with nondiabetic chronic kidney disease.
J Investig Med. 2012;60:1041–1047.

191. Nakamura T, Kanno Y, Takenaka T, Suzuki H. An angiotensin receptor
blocker
failure in elderly
the risk of congestive heart
hypertensive patients with renal insufﬁciency. Hypertens Res. 2005;28:
415–423.

reduces

192. Ando K, Ohtsu H, Uchida S, et al. Anti-albuminuric effect of the
aldosterone blocker eplerenone in non-diabetic hypertensive patients
with albuminuria: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014;2:944–953.

193. Chung EYM, Ruospo M, Natale P, et al. Aldosterone antagonists in
addition to renin angiotensin system antagonists for preventing the
progression of chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev.
2020;10:CD007004.

194. Edwards NC, Steeds RP, Stewart PM, et al. Effect of spironolactone on left
ventricular mass and aortic stiffness in early-stage chronic kidney disease:
a randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:505–512.
195. Zannad F, McMurray JJ, Krum H, et al. Eplerenone in patients with
systolic heart failure and mild symptoms. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:11–21.
196. Herzog CA, Asinger RW, Berger AK, et al. Cardiovascular disease in
chronic kidney disease. A clinical update from Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int. 2011;80:572–586.
197. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators, Yusuf S,
Sleight P, et al. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor,

ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med.
2000;342:145–153.

198. Mann JF, Schmieder RE, Dyal L, et al. Effect of telmisartan on renal outcomes:

a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:1–10. W11–W12.

199. Wright JT Jr, Dunn JK, Cutler JA, et al. Outcomes in hypertensive black
and nonblack patients treated with chlorthalidone, amlodipine, and
lisinopril. JAMA. 2005;293:1595–1608.

200. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al. Effects of losartan on renal
and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and
nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:861–869.

201. Gerstein HC, Mann JF, Pogue J, et al. Prevalence and determinants of
microalbuminuria in high-risk diabetic and nondiabetic patients in the
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study. The HOPE Study
Investigators. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(suppl 2):B35–B39.

202. Mann JF, Gerstein HC, Yi QL, et al. Progression of renal insufﬁciency in
type 2 diabetes with and without microalbuminuria: results of the
Heart Outcomes and Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) randomized study.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42:936–942.

203. Maschio G, Alberti D, Locatelli F, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and kidney protection: the AIPRI trial. The ACE Inhibition in
Insufﬁciency (AIPRI) Study Group.
Progressive Renal
J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol. 1999;(suppl 1):S16–S20. discussion S41–S43.

204. Bakris GL, Barnhill BW, Sadler R. Treatment of arterial hypertension in
therapeutic selection. Kidney Int.

importance of

diabetic humans:
1992;41:912–919.

205. Bakris GL, Slataper R, Vicknair N, et al. ACE inhibitor mediated reductions
in renal size and microalbuminuria in normotensive, diabetic subjects.
J Diabetes Complications. 1994;8:2–6.

206. Bojestig M, Karlberg BE, Lindstrom T, et al. Reduction of ACE activity is
insufﬁcient to decrease microalbuminuria in normotensive patients
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2001;24:919–924.

207. Capek M, Schnack C, Ludvik B, et al. Effects of captopril treatment versus
function in type 2 diabetic patients with

placebo on renal
microalbuminuria: a long-term study. Clin Investig. 1994;72:961–966.

208. Chase HP, Garg SK, Harris S, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor treatment for young normotensive diabetic subjects: a two-
year trial. Ann Ophthalmol. 1993;25:284–289.

209. Cordonnier DJ, Pinel N, Barro C, et al. Expansion of cortical interstitium is
limited by converting enzyme inhibition in type 2 diabetic patients with
glomerulosclerosis. The Diabiopsies Group. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999;10:
1253–1263.

210. Crepaldi G, Carta Q, Deferrari G, et al. Effects of lisinopril and nifedipine
on the progression to overt albuminuria in IDDM patients with incipient
nephropathy and normal blood pressure. The Italian Microalbuminuria
Study Group in IDDM. Diabetes Care. 1998;21:104–110.

211. Garg SK, Chase HP, Jackson WE, et al. Renal and retinal changes after
treatment with ramipril and pentoxifyline in subjects with IDDM. Ann
Ophthalmol Glaucoma. 1998;30:33–37.

212. Hommel E, Jensen B, Parving H. Long-term effect of captopril on kidney
function in normotensive insulin dependent diabetic patients (iddm)
with diabetic nephropathy [abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1995;6:450.

214.

213. Katayama S, Kikkawa R, Isogai S, et al. Effect of captopril or imidapril on
the progression of diabetic nephropathy in Japanese with type 1
diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled study (JAPAN-IDDM).
Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2002;55:113–121.
Laffel LM, McGill JB, Gans DJ. The beneﬁcial effect of angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibition with captopril on diabetic nephropathy
in normotensive
IDDM patients with microalbuminuria. North
American Microalbuminuria Study Group. Am J Med. 1995;99:497–504.
215. Marre M, Lievre M, Chatellier G, et al. Effects of low dose ramipril on
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
and raised excretion of urinary albumin: randomised, double blind,
placebo controlled trial (the DIABHYCAR study). BMJ. 2004;328:495.
216. Mathiesen ER, Hommel E, Giese J, et al. Efﬁcacy of captopril

in
postponing nephropathy in normotensive insulin dependent diabetic
patients with microalbuminuria. BMJ. 1991;303:81–87.

217. Mauer M, Zinman B, Gardiner R, et al. Renal and retinal effects of
enalapril and losartan in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:40–51.
218. Nankervis A, Nicholls K, Kilmartin G, et al. Effects of perindopril on renal
histomorphometry in diabetic subjects with microalbuminuria: a 3-year
placebo-controlled biopsy study. Metabolism. 1998;47:12–15.

219. Parving HH, Hommel E, Damkjaer Nielsen M, et al. Effect of captopril on
blood pressure and kidney function in normotensive insulin dependent
diabetics with nephropathy. BMJ. 1989;299:533–536.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S83

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

220. Phillips PJ, Phillipou G, Bowen KM, et al. Diabetic microalbuminuria and

cilazapril. Am J Med. 1993;94:58s–60s.

221. Ravid M, Savin H, Jutrin I, et al. Long-term stabilizing effect of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on plasma creatinine and
on proteinuria in normotensive type II diabetic patients. Ann Intern
Med. 1993;118:577–581.

222. Romero R, Salinas I, Lucas A, et al. Renal

function changes in
microalbuminuric normotensive type II diabetic patients treated with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Diabetes Care. 1993;16:597–
600.

on

224.

223. Sano T, Kawamura T, Matsumae H, et al. Effects of long-term enalapril
treatment
in well-controlled
persistent micro-albuminuria
hypertensive and normotensive NIDDM patients. Diabetes Care.
1994;17:420–424.
Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, et al. The effect of angiotensin-
converting-enzyme
The
on
Collaborative Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1993;329:1456–1462.
225. The EUCLID Study Group. Randomised placebo-controlled trial of
lisinopril
in normotensive patients with insulin-dependent diabetes
and normoalbuminuria or microalbuminuria. Lancet. 1997;349:1787–
1792.

nephropathy.

inhibition

diabetic

226. Ahmad J, Shaﬁque S, Abidi SM, et al. Effect of 5-year enalapril therapy on
progression of microalbuminuria and glomerular structural changes in
type 1 diabetic subjects. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2003;60:131–138.
227. Ahmad J, Siddiqui MA, Ahmad H. Effective postponement of diabetic
in normotensive type 2 diabetic patients

nephropathy with enalapril
with microalbuminuria. Diabetes Care. 1997;20:1576–1581.

229.

228. Hansen KW, Klein F, Christensen PD, et al. Effects of captopril on ambulatory
blood pressure, renal and cardiac function in microalbuminuric type 1
diabetic patients. Diabete Metab. 1994;20:485–493.
Jerums G, Allen TJ, Campbell DJ, et al. Long-term renoprotection by
perindopril or nifedipine in non-hypertensive patients with Type 2
diabetes and microalbuminuria. Diabet Med. 2004;21:1192–1199.
Jerums G, Allen TJ, Campbell DJ, et al. Long-term comparison between
perindopril and nifedipine in normotensive patients with type 1
diabetes and microalbuminuria. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;37:890–899.
231. Muirhead N, Feagan BF, Mahon J, et al. The effects of valsartan and
captopril on reducing microalbuminuria in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a placebo-controlled trial. Curr Therapeutic Res.
1999;60:650–660.

230.

232. O’Hare P, Bilbous R, Mitchell T, et al. Low-dose ramipril

reduces
microalbuminuria in type 1 diabetic patients without hypertension:
results of a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. 2000;23:1823–
1829.

233. Winocour PH, Waldek S, Anderson DC. Converting enzyme inhibition
and kidney function in normotensive diabetic patients with persistent
microalbuminuria. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1987;295:391.
Imai E, Chan JC,
Ito S, et al. Effects of olmesartan on renal and
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes with overt nephropathy: a
multicentre,
randomised, placebo-controlled study. Diabetologia.
2011;54:2978–2986.

234.

235. Mehdi UF, Adams-Huet B, Raskin P, et al. Addition of angiotensin
receptor blockade or mineralocorticoid antagonism to maximal
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition in diabetic nephropathy.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:2641–2650.

236. Barnett AH, Bain SC, Bouter P, et al. Angiotensin-receptor blockade
and

inhibition in type

converting-enzyme

versus
nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1952–1961.

2 diabetes

237. Ko GT, Tsang CC, Chan HC. Stabilization and regression of albuminuria in
Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes: a one-year randomized study of
valsartan versus enalapril. Adv Ther. 2005;22:155–162.

238. Rizzoni D, Porteri E, De Ciuceis C, et al. Effect of treatment with
candesartan or enalapril on subcutaneous small artery structure in
hypertensive patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Hypertension. 2005;45:659–665.

239. Schram MT, van Ittersum FJ, Spoelstra-de Man A, et al. Aggressive
antihypertensive therapy based on hydrochlorothiazide, candesartan
or lisinopril as initial choice in hypertensive type II diabetic individuals:
effects on albumin excretion, endothelial function and inﬂammation in
a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. J Hum Hypertens. 2005;19:
429–437.

240. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Chan JC, et al. Effect of ﬁnerenone on albuminuria
in patients with diabetic nephropathy: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2015;314:884–894.

241.

van den Meiracker AH, Baggen RG, Pauli S, et al. Spironolactone in type 2
diabetic nephropathy: effects on proteinuria, blood pressure and renal
function. J Hypertens. 2006;24:2285–2292.

242. Bjorck S, Mulec H, Johnsen SA, et al. Renal protective effect of enalapril

in diabetic nephropathy. BMJ. 1992;304:339–343.

243. De Cesaris R, Ranieri G, Filitti V, et al. Effects of atenolol and enalapril on
J Cardiovasc

kidney function in hypertensive diabetic patients.
Pharmacol. 1993;22:208–214.

244. Elving LD, Wetzels JF, van Lier HJ, et al. Captopril and atenolol are
equally effective in retarding progression of diabetic nephropathy.
Results of a 2-year prospective,
randomized study. Diabetologia.
1994;37:604–609.

245. Nielsen FS, Rossing P, Gall MA, et al. Impact of lisinopril and atenolol on
kidney function in hypertensive NIDDM subjects with diabetic
nephropathy. Diabetes. 1994;43:1108–1113.

246. Nielsen FS, Rossing P, Gall MA, et al. Long-term effect of lisinopril and
atenolol on kidney function in hypertensive NIDDM subjects with
diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes. 1997;46:1182–1188.

247. Rudberg S, Osterby R, Bangstad HJ, et al. Effect of angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitor or beta blocker on glomerular structural
changes in young microalbuminuric patients with Type I
(insulin-
dependent) diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia. 1999;42:589–595.

248. Schnack C, Hoffmann W, Hopmeier P, et al. Renal and metabolic effects
of 1-year treatment with ramipril or atenolol in NIDDM patients with
microalbuminuria. Diabetologia. 1996;39:1611–1616.

249. Stornello M, Valvo EV, Scapellato L. Persistent albuminuria in
normotensive non-insulin-dependent
II) diabetic patients:
comparative effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and
beta-adrenoceptor blockers. Clin Sci (Lond). 1992;82:19–23.

(type

250. Guasch A, Parham M, Zayas CF, et al. Contrasting effects of calcium
channel blockade versus converting enzyme inhibition on proteinuria
in African Americans with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
and nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1997;8:793–798.

251. Holdaas H, Hartmann A, Lien MG, et al. Contrasting effects of lisinopril
functions in
and nifedipine on albuminuria and tubular
insulin dependent diabetics with nephropathy. J Intern Med. 1991;229:
163–170.

transport

252. Karalliedde J, Smith A, DeAngelis L, et al. Valsartan improves arterial
stiffness in type 2 diabetes independently of blood pressure lowering.
Hypertension. 2008;51:1617–1623.

253. Norgaard K, Jensen T, Christensen P, et al. A comparison of spirapril and
isradipine in patients with diabetic nephropathy and hypertension.
Blood Press. 1993;2:301–308.

254. O’Donnell MJ, Rowe BR, Lawson N, et al. Comparison of the effects of an
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor and a calcium antagonist in
randomised
hypertensive, macroproteinuric diabetic patients:
double-blind study. J Hum Hypertens. 1993;7:333–339.

a

255. Tarnow L, Sato A, Ali S, et al. Effects of nisoldipine and lisinopril on left
ventricular mass and function in diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes Care.
1999;22:491–494.

256. Thomas MC, Jerums G, Tsalamandris C, et al. Increased tubular organic
ion clearance following chronic ACE inhibition in patients with type 1
diabetes. Kidney Int. 2005;67:2494–2499.

257. ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a ﬁxed combination of
perindopril and indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE
trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370:829–840.

258. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al. Effect of ﬁnerenone on chronic
kidney disease outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:
2219–2229.

259. Strippoli GF, Bonifati C, Craig M, et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists for preventing the
progression of diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2006;4:CD006257.

260. Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3.
Rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:401–406.
261. Cheng J, Zhang W, Zhang X, et al. Effect of angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers on all-cause
mortality, cardiovascular deaths, and cardiovascular events in patients
with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:
773–785.

262. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Toklu B, et al. Diabetes mellitus as a compelling
indication for use of renin angiotensin system blockers: systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. BMJ. 2016;352:i438.

S84

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

references

263. Clase CM, Barzilay J, Gao P, et al. Acute change in glomerular ﬁltration
rate with inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system does not predict
subsequent renal and cardiovascular outcomes. Kidney Int. 2017;91:
683–690.

264. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al. Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-
angiotensin system blockade: The Stockholm Creatinine Measurements
(SCREAM) Project. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e005428.
Jun M, Jardine MJ, Perkovic V, et al. Hyperkalemia and renin-angiotensin
aldosterone system inhibitor therapy in chronic kidney disease: A
general practice-based, observational
study. PLoS One. 2019;14:
e0213192.

265.

266. Spinowitz BS, Fishbane S, Pergola PE, et al. Sodium zirconium
cyclosilicate among individuals with hyperkalemia: a 12-month phase
3 study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019;14:798–809.

267. Weir MR, Bakris GL, Bushinsky DA, et al. Patiromer in patients with kidney
disease and hyperkalemia receiving RAAS inhibitors. N Engl J Med.
2015;372:211–221.

268. Collard D, Brouwer TF, Peters RJG, et al. Creatinine rise during blood
pressure therapy and the risk of adverse clinical outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hypertension. 2018;72:1337–1344.
269. Ku E, Ix JH, Jamerson K, et al. Acute declines in renal function during
intensive BP lowering and long-term risk of death. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2018;29:2401–2408.

270. Schmidt M, Mansﬁeld KE, Bhaskaran K, et al. Serum creatinine elevation
after renin-angiotensin system blockade and long term cardiorenal risks:
cohort study. BMJ. 2017;356:j791.

271. Qiao Y, Shin JI, Chen TK, et al. Association between renin-angiotensin
system blockade discontinuation and all-cause mortality among
persons with low estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. JAMA Intern
Med. 2020;180:718–726.

272. Ahmed AK, Kamath NS, El Kossi M, et al. The impact of stopping
inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system in patients with advanced
chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:3977–3982.
273. Oxlund CS, Henriksen JE, Tarnow L, et al. Low dose spironolactone
reduces blood pressure in patients with resistant hypertension and
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a double blind randomized clinical trial.
J Hypertens. 2013;31:2094–2102.

274. Dhaybi OA, Bakris G. Mineralocorticoid antagonists in chronic kidney

disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2017;26:50–55.

275. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al. Design and baseline characteristics
of the Finerenone in Reducing Kidney Failure and Disease Progression in
Diabetic Kidney Disease Trial. Am J Nephrol. 2019;50:333–344.

276. Agarwal R, Rossignol P, Romero A, et al. Patiromer versus placebo to
enable spironolactone use in patients with resistant hypertension and
chronic kidney disease (AMBER): a phase 2, randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2019;394:1540–1550.

277. Menne J, Farsang C, Deak L, et al. Valsartan in combination with lisinopril
versus the respective high dose monotherapies in hypertensive patients
with microalbuminuria: the VALERIA trial. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1860–
1867.

279.

278. Tobe SW, Clase CM, Gao P, et al. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with
telmisartan, ramipril, or both in people at high renal risk: results from the
ONTARGET and TRANSCEND studies. Circulation. 2011;123:1098–1107.
Fernandez Juarez G, Luno J, Barrio V, et al. Effect of dual blockade of the
renin-angiotensin system on the progression of
type 2 diabetic
nephropathy: a randomized trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:211–218.
Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al. Combined angiotensin inhibition
for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1892–
1903.

280.

281. Sharma P, Blackburn RC, Parke CL, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers for adults with early (stage
1 to 3) non-diabetic chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2011;10:CD007751.

283.

282. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane Collaboration’s
tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2011;343:d5928.
Ferrari P, Marti HP, Pﬁster M, et al. Additive antiproteinuric effect of
combined ACE inhibition and angiotensin II
receptor blockade.
J Hypertens. 2002;20:125–130.
Leon SJ, Tangri N. The use of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors
in patients with chronic kidney disease. Can J Cardiol. 2019;35:1220–
1227.

284.

285. Anand V, Kshiragar AV, Navaneethan SD, et al. Direct renin inhibitors for
preventing the progression of diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2013;9:CD01072.

287.

286. Bakris GL, Oparil S, Purkayastha D, et al. Randomized study of
antihypertensive efﬁcacy and safety of combination aliskiren/valsartan
vs valsartan monotherapy in hypertensive participants with type 2
diabetes mellitus. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2013;15:92–100.
Fogari R, Mugellini A, Zoppi A, et al. Time course of antiproteinuric effect
of aliskiren in arterial hypertension associated with type 2 diabetes and
microalbuminuria. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2013;14:371–384.
288. Ohsawa M, Tamura K, Kanaoka T, et al. Addition of aliskiren to
angiotensin receptor blocker
improves ambulatory blood pressure
proﬁle and cardiorenal function better than addition of benazepril in
chronic kidney disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2013;14:15361–15375.

289. Parving HH, Brenner BM, McMurray JJ, et al. Cardiorenal end points in a
trial of aliskiren for type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2204–2213.
290. Parving HH, Persson F, Lewis JB, et al. Aliskiren combined with losartan
in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2433–2446.
291. Persson F, Rossing P, Reinhard H, et al. Optimal antiproteinuric dose of
aliskiren in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomised crossover trial.
Diabetologia. 2010;53:1576–1580.

292. Burgess E, Muirhead N, Rene de Cotret P, et al. Supramaximal dose of
candesartan in proteinuric renal disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:
893–900.

293. Ruggenenti P, Perticucci E, Cravedi P, et al. Role of remission clinics in
the longitudinal treatment of CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19:1213–
1224.

294. Ruggenenti P, Bettinaglio P, Pinares F, et al. Angiotensin converting
enzyme insertion/deletion polymorphism and renoprotection in
diabetic and nondiabetic nephropathies. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;3:
1511–1525.

295. Currie G, Taylor AH, Fujita T, et al. Effect of mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonists on proteinuria and progression of chronic kidney disease:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Nephrol. 2016;17:127.
296. Cross NB, Webster AC, Masson P, et al. Antihypertensive treatment for
recipients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;3:

kidney transplant
CD003598.

297. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Transplant Work
the care of kidney

Group. KDIGO clinical practice guideline for
transplant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2009;9(suppl 3):S1–S155.
298. Seeman T, Dusek J, Simankova N, et al. ESCORT trial-effects of strict
control of blood pressure in pediatric renal
recipients-
baseline characteristics of patients from a randomized controlled trial
[abstract no: P-SAT456]. Pediatric Nephrology. 2013;28:1531.

transplant

299. Carpenter MA, John A, Weir MR, et al. BP, cardiovascular disease, and
reduction in

death in the
acid for
transplantation trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;25:1554–1562.

vascular outcome

folic

300. Opelz G, Wujciak T, Ritz E. Association of chronic kidney graft failure with
recipient blood pressure. Collaborative transplant study. Kidney Int.
1998;53:217–222.

301. Pagonas N, Bauer F, Seibert FS, et al. Intensive blood pressure control is
associated with improved patient and graft survival after
renal
transplantation. Sci Rep. 2019;9:10507.

302. Beddhu S, Shen J, Cheung AK, et al. Implications of early decline in eGFR
due to intensive BP control for cardiovascular outcomes in SPRINT. J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2019;30:1523–1533.
Fernandez Fresnedo G, Franco Esteve A, Gomez Huertas E, et al.
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in kidney transplant patients:
RETENAL study. Transplant Proc. 2012;44:2601–2602.

303.

304. Mallamaci F, Tripepi R, D’Arrigo G, et al. Long-term blood pressure
monitoring by ofﬁce and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure in renal
transplant patients: a longitudinal study. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2019;34:1558–1564.

305. Tong A, Gill J, Budde K, et al. Toward establishing core outcome
domains for trials in kidney transplantation: report of the Standardized
Outcomes
Consensus
Workshops. Transplantation. 2017;101:1887–1896.

Nephrology-Kidney

Transplantation

in

306. Tong A, Sautenet B, Poggio ED, et al. Establishing a core outcome measure
for graft health: a Standardized Outcomes
in Nephrology-Kidney
Transplantation (SONG-Tx) Consensus Workshop report. Transplantation.
2018;102:1358–1366.

307. Alcaraz A, Oppenheimer F, Talbot-Wright R, et al. Effect of diltiazem in
the prevention of acute tubular necrosis, acute rejection, and
cyclosporine levels. Transplant Proc. 1991;23:2383–2384.

308. Campistol JM, Oppenheimer F, Vilardell J, et al.

Interaction between
transplant patients. Nephron.

ciclosporin and diltiazem in renal
1991;57:241–242.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S85

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

309. Chen SY, Li JL, Meng FH, et al. Individualization of tacrolimus dosage
basing on cytochrome P450 3A5 polymorphism–a prospective,
randomized, controlled study. Clin Transplant. 2013;27:E272–E281.
310. Chrysostomou A, Walker RG, Russ GR, et al. Diltiazem in renal allograft
recipients receiving cyclosporine. Transplantation. 1993;55:300–304.
311. Dawidson I, Rooth P, Lu C, et al. Verapamil improves the outcome after
cadaver renal transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1991;2:983–990.
Frei U, Harms A, Bakovic-Alt R, et al. Calcium channel blockers for kidney
protection. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1990;16:S11–S15.

312.

313. Guerin C, Berthoux P, Broyet C, et al. Effects of diltiazem on arterial
pressure and renal function in renal transplanted and cyclosporin A
treated subjects. Results after 3 months of a prospective study. Arch
Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1989;82:1223–1227 [in French].

314. Harper SJ, Moorhouse J, Abrams K, et al. The beneﬁcial effects of oral
recipients–a

transplant

on cyclosporin-treated renal

function and rejection in renal allograft

nifedipine
randomised prospective study. Transplant Int. 1996;9:115–125.
Ladefoged SD, Pedersen E, Hammer M, et al. Inﬂuence of diltiazem on
recipients receiving
renal
triple-drug immunosuppression: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1994;9:543–547.
Lehtonen S, Isoniemi H, Salmela K. A randomised placebo controlled
study on initial
isradipine therapy in renal transplantation: long-term
results [abstract]. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2000;15:A276.

315.

316.

317. Morales JM, Andres A, Prieto C, et al. Calcium antagonist treatment of
recipients minimizes early
in renal
transplantation: a prospective randomized trial. Transplant Proc.
1989;21:1537–1539.

cyclosporine nephrotoxicity

318. Morales JM, Rodriguez-Paternina E, Araque A, et al. Long-term protective
effect of a calcium antagonist on renal function in hypertensive renal
transplant patients on cyclosporine therapy: a 5-year prospective
randomized study. Transplant Proc. 1994;26:2598–2599.

319. Patton PR, Brunson ME, Pfaff WW, et al. A preliminary report of diltiazem
and ketoconazole. Their cyclosporine-sparing effect and impact on
transplant outcome. Transplantation. 1994;57:889–892.

320. Pirsch JD, D’Alessandro AM, Roecker EB, et al. A controlled, double-blind,
randomized trial of verapamil and cyclosporine in cadaver
renal
transplant patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1993;21:189–195.

321. Rahn KH, Barenbrock M, Fritschka E, et al. Effect of nitrendipine on renal
treated with cyclosporin: a

function in renal-transplant patients
randomised trial. Lancet. 1999;354:1415–1420.

322. Van den Dorpel MA, Zietse R,

Ijzermans JN, et al. Prophylactic
isradipine treatment after kidney transplantation: a prospective
double-blind placebo-controlled randomized trial. Transplant
Int.
1994;7:S270–S274.
van Riemsdijk IC, Mulder PG, de Fijter JW, et al. Addition of isradipine
(Lomir) results in a better renal function after kidney transplantation: a
double-blind,
study.
Transplantation. 2000;70:122–126.

randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-center

323.

324. Wagner K, Albrecht S, Neumayer HH. Protective effect of the calcium
antagonist diltiazem on acute kidney failure following kidney
transplantation. The results of a prospective randomized study. Dtsch
Med Wochenschr. 1986;111:1363–1367 [in German].

325. Wahlberg J, Hanas E, Bergstrom C, et al. Diltiazem treatment with
reduced dose of cyclosporine in renal transplant recipients. Transplant
Proc. 1992;24:311–312.

327.

326. Wilkie ME, Beer JC, Evans SJ, et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled study of nifedipine on early renal allograft function. Nephrol
Dial Transplant. 1994;9:800–804.
Ibrahim HN, Jackson S, Connaire J, et al. Angiotensin II blockade in
kidney transplant recipients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:320–327.
328. Philipp T, Martinez F, Geiger H, et al. Candesartan improves blood
pressure control and reduces proteinuria in renal transplant recipients:
results from SECRET. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:967–976.
329. Salzberg DJ, Karadsheh FF, Haririan A, et al. Speciﬁc management of
inﬂuence of

anemia and hypertension in renal transplant recipients:
renin-angiotensin system blockade. Am J Nephrol. 2014;39:1–7.
330. Kuypers DR, Neumayer HH, Fritsche L, et al. Calcium channel blockade
function in cyclosporine-treated
and preservation of
recipients: a prospective randomized placebo-controlled 2-year study.
Transplantation. 2004;78:1204–1211.

renal graft

331. Sperschneider H, Wagner C, Korn A, et al. Effect of diltiazem on
concentration of cyclosporin metabolites in Sandimmune and Neoral
treated kidney transplant patients. Med Klin (Munich). 1997;92:589–596
[in German].

332.

van der Schaaf MR, Hene RJ, Floor M, et al. Hypertension after renal
transplantation. Calcium channel or converting enzyme blockade?
Hypertension. 1995;25:77–81.

333. Venkat Raman G, Feehally J, Coates RA, et al. Renal effects of amlodipine
in normotensive renal transplant recipients. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
1999;14:384–388.

334. Wilkie ME, Beer JC, Raftery MJ, et al. Effect of nifedipine on renal
haemodynamics and urinary protein excretion in stable renal
transplant recipients. Transplant Proc. 1993;25:612–615.

335. Makani H, Bangalore S, Romero J, et al. Peripheral edema associated with
rate–a meta-

calcium channel blockers:
analysis of randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2011;29:1270–1280.

incidence and withdrawal

336. Schmidt M, Mansﬁeld KE, Bhaskaran K, et al. Adherence to guidelines for
creatinine and potassium monitoring and discontinuation following
renin-angiotensin system blockade: a UK general practice-based
cohort study. BMJ Open. 2017;7:e012818.

337. Amara AB, Sharma A, Alexander JL, et al. Randomized controlled trial:
lisinopril reduces proteinuria, ammonia, and renal polypeptide tubular
catabolism in
nephropathy.
patients with
Transplantation. 2010;89:104–114.

allograft

chronic

338. Beckingham IJ, Woodrow G, Hinwood M, et al. A randomized
placebo-controlled
of
erythrocytosis after renal transplantation. Nephrol Dial Transplantat.
1995;10:2316–2320.

treatment

enalapril

study

the

of

in

339. Glicklich D, Gordillo R, Supe K, et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor use soon after renal transplantation: a randomized, double-
blinded placebo-controlled safety study. Clin Transplant. 2011;25:843–
848.

340. Gronhagen-Riska C, Fyhrquist F, Ahonen J, et al. Angiotensin I-
converting enzyme inhibition after renal transplantation. Scand J Urol
Nephrol Suppl. 1984;79:63–67.

341. Hernandez E, Morales JM, Andres A, et al. Usefulness and safety of
erythrocytosis.

posttransplant

captopril

with

in

treatment
Transplantation Proc. 1995;27:2239–2241.

342. Kim IG, Bagdasaryan AR, Birukova LS, et al. The effect of enalapril on the
progression of chronic allograft nephropathy. [abstract]. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2002;17:324.

343. Knoll GA, Fergusson D, Chasse M, et al. Ramipril versus placebo in kidney
transplant patients with proteinuria: a multicentre, double-blind,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:318–326.
344. Mandelbrot DA, Alberu J, Barama A, et al. Effect of ramipril on urinary
protein excretion in maintenance renal transplant patients converted
to sirolimus. Am J Transplant. 2015;15:3174–3184.

345. Paoletti E, Cassottana P, Amidone M, et al. ACE inhibitors and persistent
left ventricular hypertrophy after renal transplantation: a randomized
clinical trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007;50:133–142.

346. Rashtchizadeh N, Aghaeishahsavari M, Argani H, et al. Enalapril and
losartan affect lipid peroxidation in renal transplant recipients with
renin-angiotensin system polymorphisms. Clin Biochem. 2007;40:194–
200.

347. Takahara S, Moriyama T, Kokado Y, et al. Randomized prospective study
of effects of benazepril in renal transplantation: an analysis of safety and
efﬁcacy. Clin Exper Nephrol. 2002;6:242–247.

348. Trivedi H, Lal SM. A prospective, randomized, open labeled crossover
transplant
and theophylline

in post

renal

trial of
erythrocytosis. Ren Fail. 2003;25:77–86.

fosinopril

349. Zhang ZH, Zhang WD, Yao K. Treatment of chronic allograft
nephropathy with combination of enalapril and bailing capsule.
Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2008;28:806–809 [in Chinese].
350. Vanrenterghem Y, Waer M, De Keyser P, et al. Controlled trial of the
protective effect of dihydroergotoxine (Hydergine) on cyclosporine-
recipients. Transplantation
associated nephrotoxicity in renal graft
Proc. 1988;20:615–617.

351. Tylicki L, Biedunkiewicz B, Chamienia A, et al. Randomized placebo-
controlled study on the effects of
losartan and carvedilol on
albuminuria in renal transplant recipients. Transplantation. 2006;81:52–
56.

352. Medeiros M, Velasquez-Jones L, Hernandez AM, et al. Randomized
controlled trial of mineralocorticoid receptor blockade in children with
chronic kidney allograft nephropathy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;12:
1291–1300.

353. Axelrod DA, Schnitzler MA, Xiao H, et al. An economic assessment of
contemporary kidney transplant practice. Am J Transplant. 2018;18:
1168–1176.

S86

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

354. Chung R, Howard K, Craig JC, et al. Economic evaluations in kidney
frequency, characteristics, and quality-a systematic

transplantation:
review. Transplantation. 2014;97:1027–1033.

355. Wuhl E, Witte K, Soergel M, et al. Distribution of 24-h ambulatory blood
pressure in children: normalized reference values and role of body
dimensions. J Hypertens. 2002;21:1995–2007.
Lurbe E, Agabiti-Rosei E, Cruickshank JK, et al. 2016 European Society of
Hypertension guidelines for the management of high blood pressure in
children and adolescents. J Hypertens. 2016;34:1887–1920.

356.

357. Simonetti GD, Santoro L, Ferrarini A, et al. Systemic hypertension
and proteinuria in childhood chronic renal parenchymal disease:
role of antihypertensive drug management. Paediatr Drugs. 2007;9:
413–418.

359.

358. Matteucci MC, Chinali M, Rinelli G, et al. Change in cardiac geometry and
function in CKD children during strict BP control: a randomized study.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:203–210.
Flynn JT, Daniels SR, Hayman LL, et al. Update: ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring in children and adolescents: a scientiﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2014;63:1116–1135.
360. Ku E, McCulloch CE, Warady BA, et al. Twenty-four-hour ambulatory
blood pressure versus clinic blood pressure measurements and risk of
adverse outcomes in children with CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2018;13:422–428.

361. Stergiou GS, Karpettas N, Panagiotakos DB, et al. Comparison of ofﬁce,
ambulatory and home blood pressure in children and adolescents on
the basis of normalcy tables. J Hum Hypertens. 2011;25:218–223.
362. Stergiou GS, Boubouchairopoulou N, Kollias A. Accuracy of automated
issues, and

in children: evidence,

blood pressure measurement
perspectives. Hypertension. 2017;69:1000–1006.

363. Wuhl E, Hadtstein C, Mehls O, et al. Home, clinic, and ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring in children with chronic renal failure. Pediatr Res.
2004;55:492–497.

364. Warady BA, Abraham AG, Schwartz GJ, et al. Predictors of

rapid
progression of glomerular and nonglomerular kidney disease in
the Chronic Kidney Disease in Children
children and adolescents:
(CKiD) cohort. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015;65:878–888.

365. Stergiou G, Stambolliu E, Bountzona I, et al. Home blood pressure
monitoring in children and adolescents: systematic review of evidence
on clinical utility. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2019;21:64.

366. Dionne JM, Jiang S, Ng D, et al. Ambulatory blood pressure and CKD
progression in the CKiD cohort [Abstract FR-PO543]. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2017;28:542.

371.

Flynn JT, Mitsnefes M, Pierce C, et al. Blood pressure in children with
chronic kidney disease: a report from the Chronic Kidney Disease in
Children study. Hypertension. 2008;52:631–637.

372. Hari P, Sahu J, Sinha A, et al. Effect of enalapril on glomerular ﬁltration
rate and proteinuria in children with chronic kidney disease: a
randomized controlled trial. Indian Pediatr. 2013;50:923–928.

373. Seeman T, Gilik J, Vondrak K, et al. Regression of

left-ventricular
hypertrophy in children and adolescents with hypertension during
ramipril monotherapy. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20:990–996.

374. Cheung AK, Chang TI, Cushman WC, et al. Blood pressure in chronic
kidney disease: conclusions from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference. Kidney Int. 2019;95:
1027–1036.
Institute of Medicine (IOM) Committee on Standards for Developing
Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines.
In: Graham R, Mancher M,
Miller Wolman D, et al., eds. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust.
Washington DC: National Academies Press; 2011.

375.

376. Schunemann HJ, Fretheim A, Oxman AD. Improving the use of research
evidence in guideline development: 9. Grading evidence and
recommendations. Health Res Policy Syst. 2006;4:21.

377. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline
development, reporting and evaluation in health care. J Clin Epidemiol.
2010;63:1308–1311.

378. Hahn D, Hodson EM, Fouque D. Low protein diets for non-diabetic adults
with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;10:
CD001892.

379. Palmer SC, Maggo JK, Campbell KL, et al. Dietary interventions for adults
with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;4:
CD011998.

380. Heiwe S, Jacobson SH. Exercise training for adults with chronic kidney
disease (Review). Cochrane Database of Syst Rev. 2011;10:CD00323.
381. Natale P, Palmer SC, Ruospo M, et al. Potassium binders for chronic
hyperkalaemia in people with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2020;6:CD013165.

382. Bagga A, Sinha A, Pandey RM, et al. Antihypertensive agents for children
with chronic kidney disease (Protocol). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2014;1:CD010911.

383. Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, eds. Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Chichester UK: Wiley; 2019.
384. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Schunemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines: a new
series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. J Clin Epidemiol.
2011;64:380–382.

367. Hanson CS, Gutman T, Craig JC, et al. Identifying important outcomes for
young people with CKD and their caregivers: a nominal group technique
study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019;74:82–94.

385. Shea BJ, Reeves BC, Wells G, et al. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for
systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies
of healthcare interventions, or both. BMJ. 2017;358:j4008.

368. Halbach S. Practical application of ABPM in the pediatric nephrology

369.

clinic. Pediatr Nephrol. 2020;35:2067–2076.
Flynn JT, Carroll MK, Ng DK, et al. Achieved clinic blood pressure level
and chronic kidney disease progression in children: a report from the
Chronic Kidney Disease in Children Cohort [e-pub ahead of print].
Pediatr Nephrol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-020-04833-8. Accessed
January 15, 2021.

370. Kogon AJ, Pierce CB, Cox C, et al. Nephrotic-range proteinuria is strongly
associated with poor blood pressure control in pediatric chronic kidney
disease. Kidney Int. 2014;85:938–944.

386. Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, et al. QUADAS-2: a revised tool for
the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med.
2011;155:529–536.

387. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, et al. Measuring inconsistency in

meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327:557–560.

388. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines 6. Rating the

quality of evidence–imprecision. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:1283–1293.

389. Brunetti M, Shemilt I, Pregno S, et al. GRADE guidelines: 10. Considering
resource use and rating the quality of economic evidence. J Clin
Epidemiol. 2013;66:140–150.

Kidney International (2021) 99, S1–S87

S87

