KDIGO 2024 CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF LUPUS NEPHRITIS

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S1

c o n t e n t s

www.kidney-international.org

VOL 105 | ISSUE 1S | JANUARY 2024

KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management
of Lupus Nephritis

S3

S6

S7

S8

S9

S10

S11

S12

S13

S14

S15

S23

S52

S57

S61

S62

Tables, ﬁgures, and Supplementary Materials
KDIGO Executive Committee

Reference keys

CKD nomenclature

Conversion factors

Abbreviations and acronyms

Notice

Foreword

Work Group membership

Abstract

Summary of recommendation statements and practice points

Lupus nephritis

Methods for guideline development

Biographic and disclosure information

Acknowledgments

References

This article is published as part of a supplement sponsored by Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). The
opinions or views expressed in this supplement are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions or rec-
ommendations of the International Society of Nephrology or Elsevier. Dosages, indications, and methods of use for products
that are referred to in the supplement by the authors may reﬂect their clinical experience or may be derived from the pro-
fessional literature or other clinical sources. Because of the differences between in vitro and in vivo systems and between
laboratory animal models and clinical data in humans, in vitro and animal data do not necessarily correlate with clinical results.

S2

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

c o n t e n t s

S52

S53

S55

S55

S56

S56

S15
S24
S16
S17
S30
S31

S18
S39
S19
S19
S20
S20
S21
S54

TABLES

Table 1. Hierarchy of outcomes

Table 2. Clinical questions and systematic review topics in PICOD format

Table 3. Grading the certainty of the evidence

Table 4. GRADE system for grading certainty of evidence

Table 5. KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Table 6. Determinants of the strength of recommendation

FIGURES

Figure 1. Diagnosis of kidney involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus
Figure 2. Activity and chronicity items included in lupus nephritis kidney biopsy report
Figure 3. Measures to minimize the risk of complications related to lupus nephritis or its treatment
Figure 4.
Immunosuppressive treatment for patients with Class I or Class II lupus nephritis
Figure 5. Recommended approach for initial therapy of active Class III/IV lupus nephritis
Figure 6. Cyclophosphamide dosing regimens, combined with glucocorticoids, in initial treatment for active

Class III/IV lupus nephritis

Figure 7. Examples of glucocorticoid regimens for lupus nephritis
Figure 8. Recommended options of maintenance therapy for Class III and Class IV lupus nephritis
Figure 9. Maintenance immunosuppressive regimens in patients with lupus nephritis
Figure 10. Management of patients with pure Class V lupus nephritis
Figure 11. Deﬁnitions of response commonly used in clinical trials of lupus nephritis
Figure 12. Management of patients who show unsatisfactory response to initial therapy for active lupus nephritis
Figure 13. Management of patients with lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA)
Figure 14. Search yield and study ﬂow diagram

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplementary File (PDF)

Appendix A. Search strategies

Table S1. Search strategies for systematic review topics

Appendix B. Concurrence with Institute of Medicine (IOM) standards for guideline development
Table S2. Guideline development checklist—IOM standards for development of trustworthy clinical

practice guidelines

Table S3. Adapted systematic review reporting standards checklist—IOM standards for systematic reviews
Appendix C. Data supplement—summary of ﬁndings (SoF) tables cited in the guideline text
Table S4. Patients with lupus nephritis—antimalarials versus standard of care
Table S5. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide versus

induction: glucocorticoids alone

Table S6. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: high-dose cyclophosphamide versus

induction: low-dose cyclophosphamide

Table S7. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: mycophenolate mofetil versus induction:

intravenous cyclophosphamide

Table S8. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: mycophenolate mofetil plus tacrolimus

versus induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide

Table S9. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: voclosporin versus induction: placebo
Table S10. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: CNI-included triple therapy versus induction:

standard of care

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S3

c o n t e n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Table S11. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis (Class III/IV) or pure Class V lupus nephritis—induction:

induction: belimumab versus induction: placebo

Table S12. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: reduced-dose oral glucocorticoids versus

induction: standard-dose oral glucocorticoids

Table S13. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide versus induction:

oral cyclophosphamide

Table S14. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: mycophenolate mofetil versus induction:

tacrolimus

Table S15. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: tacrolimus versus induction: cyclophosphamide
Table S16. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: cyclophosphamide versus induction:

azathioprine

Table S17. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: plasma exchange plus immunosuppression

versus induction: immunosuppression alone

Table S18. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: sirukumab plus other immunosuppressive agent

versus induction: placebo plus other immunosuppressive agent

Table S19. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: laquinimod plus other immunosuppressive agent

versus induction: placebo plus other immunosuppressive agent

Table S20. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: rituximab plus mycophenolate mofetil versus

induction: placebo plus mycophenolate mofetil

Table S21. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: rituximab plus cyclophosphamide versus

induction: rituximab

Table S22. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: abatacept plus other immunosuppressive agent

versus induction: placebo plus other immunosuppressive agent

Table S23. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: ocrelizumab plus other immunosuppressive

agent versus induction: placebo plus other immunosuppressive agent

Table S24. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: azathioprine versus maintenance:

mycophenolate mofetil

Table S25. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: long duration (18 months) cyclophosphamide

versus induction: short-duration (6 months) cyclophosphamide

Table S26. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: azathioprine versus maintenance:

cyclosporine

Table S27. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: immunosuppressive therapy (IST)

(mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine) continuation versus maintenance IST (mycophenolate mofetil
or azathioprine) taper

Table S28. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: leﬂunomide versus maintenance:

azathioprine

Appendix D. Data supplement—Additional SoF tables developed as part of the evidence review
Table S29. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: calcineurin inhibitors versus induction:

cyclophosphamide

Table S30. Patients with nonproliferative lupus nephritis (Class V)—induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide

versus induction: cyclosporine

Table S31. Children with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: intravenous glucocorticoids versus induction:

oral glucocorticoids

Table S32. Patients with nonproliferative lupus nephritis (Class V)—induction: cyclosporine versus induction:

prednisone

Table S33. Patients with nonproliferative lupus nephritis (Class V)—induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide

versus induction: prednisone

Table S34. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: azathioprine plus glucocorticoids versus

induction: glucocorticoids alone

Table S35. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: mycophenolate mofetil versus induction: oral

cyclophosphamide

Table S36. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: mycophenolate mofetil plus intravenous

cyclophosphamide versus induction: intravenous cyclophosphamide

S4

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

c o n t e n t s

Table S37. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: cyclophosphamide plus azathioprine plus

glucocorticoids versus induction: glucocorticoids alone

Table S38. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: cyclophosphamide plus glucocorticoids versus

induction: glucocorticoids alone

Table S39. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: misoprostol plus glucocorticoids versus

induction: glucocorticoids alone

Table S40. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: plasma exchange versus induction:

immunosuppression

Table S41. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: azathioprine versus maintenance:

cyclosporine

Table S42. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: azathioprine versus maintenance: tacrolimus
Table S43. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: prednisone withdrawal versus maintenance:

prednisone continuation

Table S44. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: intravenous immunoglobulin versus

maintenance: intravenous cyclophosphamide

Table S45. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: anifrolumab 900 mg or 300 mg versus induction:

placebo

Table S46. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: anifrolumab 900 mg versus induction:

anifrolumab 300 mg

Table S47. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: obinutuzumab versus induction: placebo
Table S48. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—induction: dapirolizumab versus induction: placebo
Table S49. Patients with proliferative lupus nephritis—maintenance: hydroxychloroquine, low dose (2–3 mg/kg/d)

versus maintenance hydroxychloroquine, high dose (4–5.5 g/kg/d)

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S5

K D I G O e x e c u t i v e c o m m i t t e e

www.kidney-international.org

KDIGO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

Garabed Eknoyan, MD
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Founding KDIGO Co-Chairs

Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, MD, MPH, ScD
Immediate Past Co-Chair

Michel Jadoul, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Gloria E. Ashuntantang, MD
Sunita Bavanandan, MBBS
Irene de Lourdes Noronha, MD, PhD
Michelle R. Denburg, MD, MSCE
Jennifer E. Flythe, MD, MPH
Masafumi Fukagawa, MD, PhD
Joachim H. Ix, MD, MAS
Meg J. Jardine, MBBS, PhD
Markus Ketteler, MD, FERA

Morgan E. Grams, MD, PhD, MHS
KDIGO Co-Chair

Michelle M. O’Shaughnessy, MB, BCh, BAO, MS, MD
Patrick Rossignol, MD, PhD
Paul E. Stevens, MB, FRCP
Rita S. Suri, MD, MSc
Sydney C.W. Tang, MD, PhD, FRCP, FACP, FHKCP, FHKAM
Irma Tchokhonelidze, MD
Marcello A. Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc, FRCPC
Wolfgang C. Winkelmayer, MD, MPH, ScD

KDIGO Staff
John Davis, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
Danielle Green, Executive Director
Melissa Thompson, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer
Michael Cheung, Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer
Amy Earley, Guideline Development Director
Jennifer King, Director of Medical Writing
Tanya Green, Events Director
Coral Cyzewski, Events Coordinator
Kathleen Conn, Director of Communications

S6

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e k e y s

Reference keys

NOMENCLATURE AND DESCRIPTION FOR RATING GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS

Within each recommendation, the strength of recommendation is indicated as Level 1 or Level 2, and the certainty of the supporting
evidence is shown as A, B, C, or D.

Grade

Level 1
“We recommend”

Patients

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of
action, and only a small proportion
would not.

Level 2
“We suggest”

The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course
of action, but many would not.

Implications

Clinicians

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

Policy

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy
or a performance measure.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs
help to arrive at a management
decision consistent with her or his
values and preferences.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement of
stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

Grade

Certainty of evidence

Meaning

A
B
C
D

High
Moderate
Low
Very low

We are conﬁdent that the true effect is close to the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of the effect is very uncertain, and often it will be far from the true effect.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S7

C K D n o m e n c l a t u r e

www.kidney-international.org

CURRENT CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) NOMENCLATURE USED BY KDIGO

CKD is deﬁned as abnormalities of kidney structure or function, present for > 3 months, with implications for health. CKD is classiﬁed
based on Cause, GFR category (G1–G5), and Albuminuria category (A1–A3), abbreviated as CGA.

Persistent albuminuria categories
Description and range

A1

A2

A3

KDIGO: Prognosis of CKD by GFR
and albuminuria categories

Normal to mildly
increased

Moderately
increased

Severely
increased

<30 mg/g
<3 mg/mmol

30–300 mg/g
3–30 mg/mmol

>300 mg/g
>30 mg/mmol

)
2

.

m
3
7
1
n
m

/

i

/
l

m

(
s
e
i
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
R
F
G

G1

G2

G3a

G3b

Normal or high

≥90

Mildly decreased

60–89

Mildly to
moderately decreased

45–59

Moderately to
severely decreased

30–44

G4

Severely decreased

15–29

e
g
n
a
r

d
n
a

n
o

i
t

p
i
r
c
s
e
D

G5

Kidney failure

<15

Green: low risk (if no other markers of kidney disease, no CKD); Yellow: moderately increased risk; Orange: high
risk; Red: very high risk. GFR, glomerular filtration rate.

S8

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

 
 
 
 
 
www.kidney-international.org

c o n v e r s i o n f a c t o r s

CONVERSION FACTORS OF CONVENTIONAL UNITS TO SI UNITS

Conventional unit

Conversion factor

Albumin
Creatinine
Creatinine clearance
Cyclosporine
Mycophenolic acid
Protein-creatinine ratio (PCR)
Tacrolimus

g/dl
mg/dl
ml/min
ng/ml
mg/ml
mg/g
ng/ml

PCR, protein-creatinine ratio; SI, International System of Units.
Note: Conventional unit (cid:1) conversion factor ¼ SI unit.

10
88.4
0.01667
0.832
3.12
0.113
1.24

SI unit

g/l
mmol/l
ml/s
nmol/l
mmol/l
mg/mmol
nmol/l

RELATIONSHIP AMONG CATEGORIES FOR ALBUMINURIA AND PROTEINURIA

Measure

AER (mg/d)
PER (mg/d)
ACR

(mg/mmol)
(mg/g)

PCR

(mg/mmol)
(mg/g)

Protein reagent strip

Normal to mildly increased (A1)

Moderately increased (A2)

Severely increased (A3)

Categories

<30
<150

<3
<30

<15
<150
Negative to trace

30–300
150–500

3–30
30–300

15–50
150–500
Trace to +

>300
>500

>30
>300

>50
>500
+ or greater

ACR, albumin-to-creatinine ratio; AER, albumin excretion rate; PCR, protein–creatinine ratio; PER, protein excretion rate.
Relationships among measurement methods within a category are not exact. For example, the relationships between AER and ACR and between PER and PCR are based on
the assumption that average creatinine excretion rate is approximately 1.0 g/d or 10 mmol/d. The conversions are rounded for pragmatic reasons. (For an exact conversion
from mg/g of creatinine to mg/mmol of creatinine, multiply by 0.113.) Creatinine excretion varies with age, sex, race, and diet; therefore, the relationship among these
categories is approximate only. The relationship between urine reagent strip results and other measures depends on urine concentration.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S9

a b b r e v i a t i o n s a n d a c r o n y m s

www.kidney-international.org

Abbreviations and acronyms

aPLA

APS
CFH
CFHR
CI
CKD
CNI
CV
dsDNA
eGFR
FDA
FSGS
G6PD
GN
HBV
HCV
HIV
HR
i.v.
KDIGO

antiphospholipid antibodies

antiphospholipid syndrome
Complement Factor H
Complement Factor H–related
conﬁdence interval
chronic kidney disease
calcineurin inhibitor
cardiovascular
double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
Food and Drug Administration
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
glomerulonephritis
hepatitis B virus
hepatitis C virus
human immunodeﬁciency virus
hazard ratio
intravenous
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes

lupus nephritis
minimal change disease
mycophenolic acid
mycophenolic acid analogs
mycophenolate mofetil
National Institutes of Health, USA
odds ratio
protein–creatinine ratio
primary efﬁcacy renal response
oral
renin–angiotensin system (inhibitor[s])
randomized controlled trial
subcutaneous
serum creatinine
systemic lupus erythematosus
Therapeutics Goods Administration
thrombotic microangiopathy

LN
MCD
MPA
MPAA
MMF
NIH
OR
PCR
PERR
p.o.
RAS(i)
RCT
s.c.
SCr
SLE
TGA
TMA
TMP-SMX trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
U.S.

United States

S10

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

Notice

n o t i c e

SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon literature searches last conducted in July 2022 and updated in April
2023. It is designed to assist decision-making. It is not intended to deﬁne a standard of care and should not be interpreted as
prescribing an exclusive course of management. Variations in practice will inevitably and appropriately occur when clinicians
consider the needs of individual patients, available resources, and limitations unique to an institution or type of practice.
Healthcare professionals using these recommendations should decide how to apply them to their own clinical practice.

SECTION II: DISCLOSURE
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual or reasonably perceived conﬂicts
of interest that may arise from an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work
Group. All members of the Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form showing
all such relationships that might be perceived as or are actual conﬂicts of interest. This document is updated annually, and
information is adjusted accordingly. All reported information is published in its entirety at the end of this document in the
Work Group members’ Disclosure section and is kept on ﬁle at KDIGO.

Copyright (cid:1) 2023, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Society of Nephrology. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Single copies may be made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws. Special rates
are available for educational institutions that wish to make photocopies for nonproﬁt educational use. No part of this pub-
lication may be reproduced, amended, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without explicit permission in writing from KDIGO.
Details on how to seek reprints, permission for reproduction or translation, and further information about KDIGO’s per-
missions policies can be obtained by contacting Melissa Thompson, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer, at melissa.thompson@kdigo.org.

Neither KDIGO, Kidney International, the Publisher, nor the authors, contributors, or editors shall have or assume any
liability for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages (including without limitation lost
proﬁts) or any injury and/or damage to persons or property, however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in
contract, strict liability, or tort (including product liability, negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of the use or
operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S11

f o r e w o r d

Foreword

www.kidney-international.org

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2023.09.002

Copyright ª 2023, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the International Society of Nephrology. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

The mission of Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) is to “improve the care and outcomes of people
with kidney disease worldwide through promoting coordi-
nation, collaboration, and integration of initiatives to develop
and implement clinical practice guidelines.” Since its incep-
tion in 2003, KDIGO has published comprehensive guidelines
on many distinct
including the Clinical Practice
Guidelines for the Management of Glomerulonephritis in
2012 and Glomerular Diseases in 2021. The latter guideline
summarized recommendations for 11 diseases based on evi-
dence available through June 2020. The current update, just 2
years later, reﬂects the unprecedented pace of scientiﬁc dis-
covery in the ﬁeld, and centers on guidance regarding the
diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring of kidney involvement
in systemic lupus erythematosus.

topics,

KDIGO strives to maintain the highest standards of
excellence and provide clinicians with the most relevant,
evidence-based guidance,
incorporating both recent ad-
vancements as well as widely accepted clinical standards. As
such, this Lupus nephritis guideline update features a com-
bination of both graded recommendations and practice
points. Graded recommendations are based on a systematic
review of the evidence and are graded for strength of the
recommendation (level 1, “we recommend” or level 2, “we
suggest”) and certainty of the evidence (A, “high”; B, “mod-
erate”; C, “low”; or D, “very low”). Practice points are un-
graded, consensus-based statements representing the expert
judgment of the Work Group. These practice points are issued
when there has not been a systematic review. Some practice
points aim at helping the reader in the implementation of
graded recommendations and we often provide these in a
graphical format. Readers should consider practice points as

expert guidance or “good practice statements” and use them
as they see ﬁt to inform the care of patients.

We once again thank Jürgen Floege, MD, and Brad H.
Rovin, MD, for leading this important initiative, and we very
much appreciate the continued dedication of the Work
Group members, Tak Mao (T.M.) Chan, MD, DSc; Isabelle
Ayoub, MD; Zhi-Hong Liu, MD; and Juan Mejía-Vilet, MD,
PhD. Each of
these volunteers provided a considerable
amount of time and expertise to the current Lupus nephritis
guideline. The independent Evidence Review Team (ERT)
from Brown University School of Public Health led by Ethan
Balk, MD, MPH, and Craig Gordon, MD, MS, updated the
evidence reviews that informed this latest version of the
guideline.

To ensure transparency and rigorous public review during
guideline development, the draft guideline update was made
publicly available for comment in March 2023, per KDIGO
policy. We very much appreciate the feedback received from
the scientiﬁc community. All Work Group members have
revised and approved the update for formal release.

In summary, we are pleased to present this revised Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Management of Lupus Nephritis,
reﬂecting the most recent and up-to-date global evidence for
the care of people with lupus nephritis throughout the world.
We are thrilled at the pace of scientiﬁc advancement and are
exceptionally grateful to the Work Group Co-Chairs, Work
Group members, and other contributors to this very impor-
tant KDIGO activity.

Morgan E. Grams, MD, PhD, MHS
Michel Jadoul, MD
KDIGO Co-Chairs

S12

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

W o r k G r o u p m e m b e r s h i p

Work Group membership

WORK GROUP CO-CHAIRS

Jürgen Floege, MD
University Hospital, RWTH Aachen
Aachen, Germany

WORK GROUP

Isabelle M. Ayoub, MD
The Ohio State University College of Medicine
Columbus, OH, USA

Brad H. Rovin, MD, FACP, FASN
The Ohio State University College of Medicine
Columbus, OH, USA

Zhi-Hong Liu, MD
National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases,
Nanjing University School of Medicine
Nanjing, China

Tak Mao Chan, MBBS, MD, DSc, MRCP, FHKCP, FHKAM,
FRCP, FASN
University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China

Juan Manuel Mejía-Vilet, MD, PhD
Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición, Salvador Zubirán
Mexico City, Mexico

METHODS CHAIR
Marcello A. Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc, FRCPC
University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta, Canada

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM

Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University School of Public Health Providence, RI, USA
Ethan M. Balk, MD, MPH, Project Director, Evidence Review Team Director
Craig E. Gordon, MD, MS, Associate Professor of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Division of Nephrology,
Tufts Medical Center; Assistant Project Director, Evidence Review Team Associate Director
Gaelen Adam, MLIS, MPH, Information Specialist and Research Associate

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S13

a b s t r a c t

Abstract

www.kidney-international.org

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for
the Management of Lupus Nephritis represents a focused update of the Lupus nephritis chapter
from the KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Glomerular Diseases.
The aim is to assist clinicians caring for individuals with lupus nephritis. The update takes into
consideration evidence from randomized controlled trials published since February 2022. As in
2021, the chapter follows the same template, providing guidance related to diagnosis, treatment,
and special situations. Based on the evidence, this update is focused on guidance related to
treatment of lupus nephritis. This guideline update followed an explicit process of evidence
review and appraisal. Treatment approaches and guideline recommendations are based on sys-
tematic reviews of relevant studies, and appraisal of the strength of recommendations and cer-
tainty of the evidence following the “Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation” (GRADE) approach. Limitations of the evidence are discussed and areas of
future research are presented.

Keywords: evidence-based; glomerular diseases; glomerulonephritis; guideline; KDIGO; lupus
nephritis; nephrotic syndrome; systematic review

CITATION

In citing this document, the following format should be used: Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Lupus Nephritis Work Group. KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Management of Lupus Nephritis. Kidney Int. 2024;105(1S):S1–S69.

S14

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

Summary of recommendation statements and practice
points

10.1 Diagnosis

Practice Point 10.1.1: Approach to the diagnosis of kidney involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (Figure 1)

Patient with systemic lupus erythematosus

Testing indicated when:
• Systemic lupus erythematosus presentation
• As regular surveillance

Testing panel:
• Serum creatinine and eGFR
• Urinalysis (dipstick and sediment)
• Spot protein–creatinine ratio (PCR)
• Serology (anti-dsDNA and complement)

Is there evidence of abnormal proteinuria or urine sediment:
• Abnormal proteinuria assessed by dipstick protein ≥2+

• Urine sediment positive for acanthocytes
(≥5%), red blood cell casts or white blood cell casts

Is there evidence of decreased or decreasing GFR: 
• For example, abnormal eGFR that is below the
expected level based on age and clinical history,
or decreasing eGFR, with no attributable
cause other than systemic lupus erythematosus

No

Yes

oN

No further urine
testing at this time

Quantify proteinuria

No further kidney function
testing at this time

seY

Repeat testing

Is 24-hour proteinuria
≥500 mg/d?

No

Yes

Yes

Repeat testing and
follow the progress

No

No further urine
testing at this time

Consider kidney biopsy

Figure 1 | Diagnosis of kidney involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. anti-dsDNA, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid;
eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S15

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

www.kidney-international.org

10.2 Treatment

10.2.1 General management of patients with lupus nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.1.1: We recommend that patients with SLE, including those with lupus nephritis (LN), be

treated with hydroxychloroquine or an equivalent antimalarial unless contra-
indicated (1C).

Risk

Risk attenuation

Cardiovascular risk

• Dyslipidemia management
• Low-dose aspirin during pregnancy
• Blood pressure control

Proteinuria and
CKD progression
(refer to Chapter 1)

Infection risk

• Avoid high-sodium diet
• Optimize blood pressure
• Renoprotective medications, such as RAAS blockade, SGLT2 inhibitor, etc., in
  stable patients without AKI
• Avoid nephrotoxic insult
• Prevent AKI

• Assess medical history of herpes zoster and tuberculosis
• Screening for HBV, HCV, HIV, and HBV vaccination
• Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis (issue of potential adverse drug reaction
  discussed below)

• Individualized consideration for recombinant zoster vaccine
• Individualized consideration for other infectious organisms as dictated by
  public health concerns at the time of treatment

Bone injury

• Bone mineral density and fracture risk assessment 
• Calcium and vitamin D supplementation
• Bisphosphonates when appropriate

Ultraviolet light
exposure

• Broad-spectrum sunscreen
• Limit ultraviolet light exposure

Premature ovarian
failure

• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (i.e. leuprolide)
• Sperm/oocyte cryopreservation

Unplanned pregnancy

• Individual evaluation and counselling for contraception type
  (preference, thrombosis risk, age)

Cancer

• Evaluate individual risk factors for malignancies 

• Minimize lifetime cyclophosphamide exposure to <36 g

Figure 3 | Measures to minimize the risk of complications related to lupus nephritis or its treatment. Note: Chapter 1 refers to Chapter 1
of the KDIGO Guideline on Glomerular Diseases. AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C
virus; HIV, human immunodeﬁciency virus; RAAS, renin–angiotensin-aldosterone system; SGLT2, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2.

S16

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

Practice Point 10.2.1.1: Adjunctive therapies to manage LN and attenuate complications of the disease or its treatments

should be considered for all patients, as outlined in Figure 3.

10.2.2 Class I or Class II lupus nephritis

Kidney biopsy showing
Class I/II lupus nephritis

airunietorp level-woL

emordnys citorhpeN

Evaluate for lupus podocytopathy
(electron microscopy would be useful)

Treat as minimal change disease
(Chapter 5)

Immunosuppressive treatment
guided by extrarenal manifestations
of systemic lupus erythematosus

Consider maintenance combination
therapy with low-dose glucocorticoid
and another immunosuppressive agent

Figure 4 | Immunosuppressive treatment for patients with Class I or Class II lupus nephritis. Note: Chapter 5 refers to Chapter 5 of the
KDIGO Guideline on Glomerular Diseases.

Practice Point 10.2.2.1: Approach to immunosuppressive treatment for patients with Class I or Class II LN (Figure 4)

10.2.3 Class III or Class IV lupus nephritis

10.2.3.1 Initial therapy of active Class III/IV lupus nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.3.1.1: We recommend that patients with active Class III or IV LN, with or without a

membranous component, be treated initially with glucocorticoids plus any one of
the following:
i. mycophenolic acid analogs (MPAA) (1B); or
ii. low-dose intravenous cyclophosphamide (1B); or
iii. belimumab and either MPAA or low-dose intravenous cyclophosphamide (1B); or
iv. MPAA and a calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) when kidney function is not

severely impaired (i.e., estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR] £45
ml/min per 1.73 m2) (1B).

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S17

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

www.kidney-international.org

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.1: A regimen of reduced-dose glucocorticoids following a short course of methylprednisolone pulses
may be considered during the initial treatment of active LN when both the kidney and extrarenal
disease manifestations show satisfactory improvement (Figure 7).

High-dose scheme

Moderate-dose scheme

Reduced-dose scheme

Methylprednisolone
intravenous pulses

Nil or 0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days
as initial treatment

0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days often
included as initial treatment

0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days usually
included as initial treatment

Oral prednisone
equivalent (/day)

Week 0–2
Week 3–4
Week 5–6
Week 7–8
Week 9–10
Week 11–12
Week 13–14
Week 15–16
Week 17–18
Week 19–20
Week 21–24
Week >25

0.8–1.0 mg/kg (max 80 mg)
0.6–0.7 mg/kg
30 mg
25 mg
20 mg
15 mg
12.5 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
<5 mg

0.6–0.7 mg/kg (max 50 mg)
0.5–0.6 mg/kg
20 mg
15 mg
12.5 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
5 mg
<5 mg
<5 mg

0.5–0.6 mg/kg (max 40 mg)
0.3–0.4 mg/kg
15 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
<2.5 mg

Figure 7 | Examples of glucocorticoid regimens for lupus nephritis. max, maximum.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.2: Intravenous cyclophosphamide can be used as the initial therapy for active Class III and Class

IV LN in patients who may have difﬁculty adhering to an oral regimen.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.3: An MPAA-based regimen is the preferred initial therapy of proliferative LN for patients at high risk

of infertility, such as patients who have a moderate-to-high prior cyclophosphamide exposure.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.4: Initial therapy with an immunosuppressive regimen that includes a CNI (voclosporin, tacrolimus, or
cyclosporine) may be preferred in patients with relatively preserved kidney function and nephrotic-
range proteinuria likely due to extensive podocyte injury, as well as patients who cannot tolerate
standard-dose MPAA or are unﬁt for or will not use cyclophosphamide-based regimens.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.5: A triple immunosuppressive regimen of belimumab with glucocorticoids and either MPAA or
reduced-dose cyclophosphamide may be preferred in patients with repeated kidney ﬂares or at
high-risk for progression to kidney failure due to severe chronic kidney disease.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.6: Other therapies, such as azathioprine or leﬂunomide combined with glucocorticoids, may be
considered in lieu of the recommended initial drugs for proliferative LN in situations of
patient intolerance, lack of availability, and/or excessive cost of standard drugs, but these
alternatives may be associated with inferior efﬁcacy, including increased rate of disease ﬂares
and/or increased incidence of drug toxicities.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.7: Newer biologic and non-biologic therapies are under development and may offer future options
for the treatment of active LN. Rituximab may be considered for patients with persistent disease
activity or inadequate response to initial standard-of-care therapy.

10.2.3.2 Maintenance therapy for Class III and Class IV lupus nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.3.2.1: We recommend that after completion of initial therapy, patients should be placed

on MPAA for maintenance (1B).

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.1: Azathioprine is an alternative to MPAA after completion of initial therapy in patients who do not

tolerate MPAA, who do not have access to MPAA, or who are considering pregnancy.

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.2: Glucocorticoids should be tapered to the lowest possible dose during maintenance, except when
glucocorticoids are required for extrarenal lupus manifestations; discontinuation of glucocor-
ticoids can be considered after patients have maintained a complete clinical renal response
for ‡12 months.

S18

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.3: The dose of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) in the early maintenance phase is approximately 750–
1000 mg twice daily, and for mycophenolic acid (MPA), approximately 540–720 mg twice daily.
Practice Point 10.2.3.2.4: The total duration of initial immunosuppression plus combination maintenance immunosup-

pression for proliferative LN should be ‡36 months.

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5: Patients treated with triple immunosuppressive regimens that include belimumab or a CNI in
addition to standard immunosuppressive therapy can continue with a triple immunosup-
pressive regimen as maintenance therapy (Figure 9).

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.6: If MPAA and azathioprine cannot be used for maintenance, CNIs or mizoribine or leﬂunomide

can be considered (Figure 9).

Maintenance
immuno-
suppressive
regimens

Comments

Low-dose glucocorticoids AND

Mycophenolic
acid analogs

Azathioprine

Preferred treatment
based on high-
certainty evidence; 

Low medication
cost; safe in
pregnancy

than azathioprine
maintenance

Belimumab and
mycophenolic acid
analogs or azathioprine

CNI and mycophenolic
acid analogs

CNI (such as
voclosporin, tacrolimus
or cyclosporine)

Tacrolimus and
cyclosporine safe in

pregnancy data on
voclosporin

belimumab demonstrated
in BLISS-LN (104-wk) and
open-label extension
trials (28-wk)
[Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5]

voclosporin demonstrated
in AURORA 1 (52-wk) and
AURORA 2 continuation trials

tacrolimus demonstrated in
‘Multitarget Therapy’ trial in
Chinese patients in which
tacrolimus and reduced-dose
MPAA were given for
24 months
[Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5]

Mizoribine

Experience
mostly in
Japanese
patients

Figure 9 | Maintenance immunosuppressive regimens in patients with lupus nephritis. AURORA, Aurinia Renal Response in Active Lupus
with Voclosporin; BLISS-LN, Efﬁcacy and Safety of Belimumab in Patients with Active Lupus Nephritis; CNI, calcineurin inhibitor; MPAA,
mycophenolate acid analogs.

10.2.4 Class V lupus nephritis

Practice Point 10.2.4.1: A suggested approach to the management of patients with pure Class V LN is described

in Figure 10.

Kidney biopsy
showing Class V lupus nephritis

airunietorp level-woL

airunietorp egnar-citorhpeN

Monitor the level of proteinuria and prevent or treat
complications (e.g., thrombosis, dyslipidemia, edema)

1  Renin-angiotensin system blockade and
    blood pressure control
2  Immunosuppressive treatment guided
    by extrarenal manifestations of systemic
    lupus erythematosus
3  Hydroxychloroquine

1  Renin-angiotensin system blockade and blood pressure control
2  Combined immunosuppressive treatment with glucocorticoid and
    one other agent (e.g., mycophenolic acid analogs, cyclophosphamide,

    recommendation of glucocorticoid regimen, but moderate or reduced
    dose preferred.  Please refer to Practice Point 10.2.3.1.1.
3  Hydroxychloroquine

If proteinuria worsens and/or complications
of proteinuria develop (e.g., thrombosis,
dyslipidemia, edema), consider
immunosuppressive therapy

Figure 10 | Management of patients with pure Class V lupus nephritis.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S19

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

www.kidney-international.org

10.2.5 Response and relapse considerations

10.2.5.1 Assessing treatment response in LN

Practice Point 10.2.5.1.1: Deﬁnitions of response to therapy in LN used in clinical trials are provided in Figure 11.

Complete response*

• Reduction in proteinuria <0.5 g/g (50 mg/mmol) measured as the PCR from
  a 24-h urine collection
• Stabilization or improvement in kidney function (±10%–15% of baseline)
• Within 6–12 mo of starting therapy, but could take more than 12 mo

renal response

Partial response

• PCR ≤0.7 g/g (70 mg/mmol)

  per 1.73 m2
• No use of rescue therapy for treatment failure

• Reduction in proteinuria by at least 50% and to <3 g/g (300 mg/mmol)
  measured as the PCR from a 24-h urine collection
• Stabilization or improvement in kidney function (±10%–15% of baseline)
• Within 6–12 mo of starting therapy

No kidney response

• Failure to achieve a partial or complete response within 6–12 mo of starting
  therapy 

Figure 11 | Deﬁnitions of response commonly used in clinical trials of lupus nephritis. *For children <18 years old, complete response is
deﬁned as proteinuria <0.5 g/1.73 m2 per day or <300 mg/m2 per day based on a 24-hour urine specimen. eGFR, estimated glomerular
ﬁltration rate; PCR, protein–creatinine ratio.

10.2.5.2 Management of unsatisfactory response to treatment

Practice Point 10.2.5.2.1: An algorithmic approach to patients whose response to therapy is deemed unsatisfactory is

provided in Figure 12.

Verify adherence to treatment

Ensure adequate dosing of immunosuppressive medications by measuring
plasma drug levels if applicable or available (check mycophenolic acid level
if on mycophenolic acid analogs/check infusion records if on cyclophosphamide)

Repeat biopsy if concern for chronicity or other diagnosis
(e.g., thrombotic microangiopathy)

Consider switching to an alternative recommended treatment regimen when
there is persistent active disease

Consider the following in patients refractory
• Addition of rituximab or other biologic therapies
• Extended course of i.v. pulse cyclophosphamide
• Enrollment in clinical trials if eligible

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 12 | Management of patients who show unsatisfactory response to initial therapy for active lupus nephritis. i.v., intravenous.

10.2.5.3 Treatment of LN relapse

Practice Point 10.2.5.3.1: After a complete or partial remission has been achieved, LN relapse should be treated with the
same initial therapy used to achieve the original response, or an alternative recommended
therapy.

S20

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

10.3 Special situations

10.3.1 Lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy

Practice Point 10.3.1.1: Patients with LN and thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) should be managed according to the

underlying etiology of TMA, as shown in Figure 13.1

Lupus nephritis AND
suspected thrombotic microangiopathy

Test for ADAMTS13 activity and antibodies to ADAMTS13 
Test for antiphospholipid antibodies

Start plasma exchange
and glucocorticoid
while awaiting test
results (adults)

Moderate/high risk
(>5 points)

Low risk
(0–4 points)

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic

purpura

(PLASMIC score)

Low ADAMTS13
activity (<10%)

Normal ADAMTS13
activity and negative
antiphospholipid
antibodies

Normal ADAMTS13
activity and positive
antiphospholipid
antibodies

Systemic lupus
erythematosus-
associated thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura

Evaluate for
thrombotic
microangiopathy
etiologies

Antiphospholipid
syndrome nephropathy

Primary or secondary
complement-mediated
thrombotic
microangiopathy

Plasma exchange
+ glucocorticoid
+ rituximab
+/– caplacizumab

Consider
eculizumab

Other
etiology

Anticoagulation
+/– plasma exchange

Figure 13 | Management of patients with lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). Bendapudi PK, Hurwitz S, Fry A, et al.
Derivation and external validation of the PLASMIC score for rapid assessment of adults with thrombotic microangiopathies: a cohort study.
Lancet Haematol. 2017;4:e157–e164.1 ADAMTS13, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13;
PLASMIC, Platelet count, combined hemoLysis variable, absence of Active cancer, absence of Stem-cell or solid-organ transplant, mean
corpuscular volume (MCV), international normalized ratio (INR), Creatinine.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S21

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s a n d p r a c t i c e p o i n t s

www.kidney-international.org

10.3.2 Pregnancy in patients with lupus nephritis

Practice Point 10.3.2.1: Patients with active LN should be counseled to avoid pregnancy while the disease is active or when
treatment with potentially teratogenic drugs is ongoing, and for ‡6 months after LN becomes
inactive.

Practice Point 10.3.2.2: To reduce the risk of pregnancy complications, hydroxychloroquine should be continued during

pregnancy, and low-dose aspirin should be started before 16 weeks of gestation.

Practice Point 10.3.2.3: Glucocorticoids, hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, tacrolimus, and cyclosporine are considered safe

immunosuppressive treatments during pregnancy.

10.3.3 Treatment of lupus nephritis in children

Practice Point 10.3.3.1: Treat pediatric patients with LN using immunosuppression regimens similar to those used in adults,
but consider issues relevant to this population, such as dose adjustment, growth, fertility, and
psychosocial factors, when devising the therapy plan.

10.3.4 Management of lupus patients with kidney failure

Practice Point 10.3.4.1: Patients with LN who develop kidney failure may be treated with hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis,

or kidney transplantation; and kidney transplantation is preferred to long-term dialysis.

S22

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Lupus nephritis

Among patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), the
reported lifetime incidence of lupus nephritis (LN) is 20%–
60%, depending on the demographics of the population
studied.2–5 Kidney involvement in SLE has been associated
with higher mortality, especially for patients progressing to
kidney failure.6–8 The ultimate goal of treating LN is to pre-
serve kidney function and reduce the morbidity and mortality
associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney
failure, while minimizing medication-associated toxicities.

This chapter makes management recommendations for
adults who have SLE with kidney involvement. The focus is
on immune complex–mediated glomerulonephritis (GN) in
the setting of SLE, commonly referred to as LN, but other
types of kidney injury in patients with SLE are also discussed.
Information for pediatric populations is limited, but an
approach to the management of children with LN is outlined
in Practice Point 10.3.3.1.

Patient with systemic lupus erythematosus

Testing indicated when:
• Systemic lupus erythematosus presentation
• As regular surveillance

Testing panel:
• Serum creatinine and eGFR
• Urinalysis (dipstick and sediment)
• Spot protein–creatinine ratio (PCR)
• Serology (anti-dsDNA and complement)

Is there evidence of abnormal proteinuria or urine sediment:
• Abnormal proteinuria assessed by dipstick protein ≥2+

• Urine sediment positive for acanthocytes
(≥5%), red blood cell casts or white blood cell casts

Is there evidence of decreased or decreasing GFR: 
• For example, abnormal eGFR that is below the
expected level based on age and clinical history,
or decreasing eGFR, with no attributable
cause other than systemic lupus erythematosus

No

Yes

oN

No further urine
testing at this time

Quantify proteinuria

No further kidney function
testing at this time

seY

Repeat testing

Is 24-hour proteinuria
≥500 mg/d?

No

Yes

Yes

Repeat testing and
follow the progress

No

No further urine
testing at this time

Consider kidney biopsy

Figure 1 | Diagnosis of kidney involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus. anti-dsDNA, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid;
eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S23

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

10.1 Diagnosis

Practice Point 10.1.1: Approach to the diagnosis of kidney
involvement
(SLE)
(Figure 1)

erythematosus

in systemic

lupus

Patients with SLE should be actively and regularly
monitored, as the clinical presentation of kidney involve-
ment can remain silent or asymptomatic for a signiﬁcant
period of time. As the incidence of LN varies by race/
ethnicity and age, a high index of suspicion should be
maintained for patients of Asian, African/Caribbean, and
Hispanic descent.2–5 Childhood-onset SLE is associated with
a higher incidence of LN and more severe disease than adult-
onset SLE.9 Although a proteinuria level of 500 mg/d is
suggested as a threshold for further investigations, taking
into consideration physiological causes of low-level pro-
teinuria and to avoid unnecessary kidney biopsies,
it is
important to note that the severity of proteinuria varies
considerably in severe active nephritis and can appear rela-
assessment
tively

times. A holistic

“insigniﬁcant”

at

www.kidney-international.org

including clinical, urinary, and laboratory parameters, and
repeated investigations to note the progression of abnormal
ﬁndings over time, are important
in informing clinical
management decisions. Because clinical ﬁndings do not al-
severity of kidney
ways correlate with the extent or
involvement,10,11 a kidney biopsy is useful to conﬁrm the
diagnosis and for the assessment of activity and chronicity
features that inform treatment decisions and prognosis.10–20
Kidney biopsies should be read by an experienced kidney
pathologist and classiﬁed according to the International
Society of Nephrology (ISN)/Renal Pathology Society (RPS)
scheme.21–23 Electron microscopy, where available, is helpful
in ascertaining ultrastructural details of histopathology such
as the extent and severity of podocyte injury and the location
of immune deposits. Clinicians should pay attention to the
detailed description of both active and chronic histopatho-
logic features affecting different elements of the kidney pa-
renchyma, especially regarding potentially reversible active
lesions versus chronic damage not reversible by immuno-
suppressive medications (Figure 2).

Components of the activity index

• Endocapillary hypercellularity
• Neutrophils and/or karyorrhexis
• Fibrinoid necrosis
• Hyaline deposits (wire loop and/or hyaline thrombi)

Calculating the activity score
Extent of lesion

Points

Not present
Present in <25%
Present in 25%–50%
Present in >50%

0
1
2
3

Score

0–3
0–3
(0–3) × 2
0–3
(0–3) × 2
0–3

Total:

0–24

Items included in the NIH chronicity score

Score

Calculating the chronicity score
Extent of lesion

Points

• Total glomerulosclerosis (global + segmental) 
• Fibrous crescents

• Tubular atrophy

0–3
0–3
0–3
0–3

Total:

0–12

Present in <10%
Present in 10%–25%
Present in 25%–50%
Present in >50%

0
1
2
3

• Collapsing lupus glomerulopathy

Figure 2 | Activity and chronicity items included in lupus nephritis kidney biopsy report. NIH, National Institutes of Health, USA.

S24

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

10.2 Treatment

10.2.1 General management of patients with lupus nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.1.1: We recommend that pa-
tients with SLE, including those with lupus nephritis
(LN), be treated with hydroxychloroquine or an
equivalent antimalarial unless contraindicated (1C).

This recommendation places a relatively higher value on the
various beneﬁts associated with hydroxychloroquine use reported
in observational studies (including lower rates of disease ﬂares,
progressive kidney damage, and vascular complications) and on
the generally favorable safety proﬁle of hydroxychloroquine
treatment. It places a relatively lower value on the lack of large-
scale prospective randomized controlled trial (RCT) data.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The reported beneﬁts of
antimalarial use in SLE include lower ﬂare rates (including
kidney),24,25 higher response rates to therapy,24–27 slower
progression of kidney disease,28,29 lower incidence of car-
diovascular (CV) and thrombotic events in patients with
antiphospholipid antibodies,30–33 less organ damage,28,34–38
improved lipid proﬁle,39,40 and better preservation of bone
mass.41

Hydroxychloroquine use in pregnancy has been associated
with a decrease in lupus activity and a satisfactory safety
proﬁle in both the mother and the fetus.42–44 Signiﬁcant side
effects are uncommon but include skin rash, increase in skin
pigmentation, muscle weakness, and visual change or loss of
vision. Hydroxychloroquine may accumulate in lysosomes
and cause a form of phospholipidosis with accumulation of
multilamellar zebra bodies in podocytes that can mimic the
appearance of Fabry disease.45,46

Certainty of evidence. Moderate-certainty data support
the beneﬁt of hydroxychloroquine use in patients with SLE,
but in LN, the available evidence is from observational
studies and post hoc analyses. In a 24-week RCT that
included 47 patients, the Canadian Hydroxychloroquine
Study Group reported a higher incidence of SLE ﬂares in
patients who stopped hydroxychloroquine compared to
those who continued treatment, with a hazard ratio (HR)
of 2.50 (95% CI: 1.08–5.58). The frequency of severe LN
ﬂares was also increased but did not reach statistical sig-
niﬁcance.47 A systematic review that included 95 reports
published between 1982 and 2007, 5 of which were RCTs,
concluded that hydroxychloroquine use could prevent SLE
ﬂares and increase long-term patient survival, while toxicity
was infrequent, mild, and usually reversible; and hydroxy-
chloroquine use in pregnancy was associated with a decrease in
lupus activity without harm to the fetus.48 Low-certainty
observational studies have indicated that hydroxychloroquine
may have kidney beneﬁts, may have protective effects against

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

infection, and may increase complete remission rate in
patients with LN. Although the certainty of the evidence is low
due to study limitations,
indirectness, or imprecision, this
is stated as a recommendation because of the relatively large
effect sizes reported and the generally satisfactory safety data
(Supplementary Table S426–28,36–50). Two observational studies
reported an association between hydroxychloroquine treatment
and reduced mortality in patients with LN, but the certainty
of evidence for this outcome is very low (Supplementary
Table S428,50).

Values and preferences. The potential beneﬁts of preventing
organ damage and vascular complications were judged as
being important to patients. The Work Group also judged
that the relatively low risk of adverse events associated with
hydroxychloroquine would also be important to patients.
Therefore, the Work Group felt that nearly all well-informed
patients in the target population would choose to receive
in comparison to no
hydroxychloroquine
treatment.

treatment

Resource use and costs. Hydroxychloroquine can be an
expensive drug in some countries. In low-resource settings,
one might consider substituting it with structurally similar
drugs such as chloroquine that have a similar mechanism of
action and are less expensive, but the increased risk of toxicity
of the latter should be noted.

Considerations for implementation. Because of the risk of
hemolysis in patients who have glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase (G6PD) deﬁciency, measurement of G6PD levels
is preferred in men, especially those of African, Asian, or
Middle Eastern origin, before starting hydroxychloroquine.
However, this risk appeared low, according to the ﬁndings
of a recent report.51 Updated guidelines from the Royal
College of Ophthalmologists in the United Kingdom pub-
lished in 2020 do not recommend baseline examination
prior to initiating treatment (https://www.rcophth.ac.uk/
resources-listing/2609/), and yearly monitoring should
begin after 1 year of therapy in patients with additional risk
factors (concomitant tamoxifen use; estimated glomerular
ﬁltration rate (eGFR) <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2; dose of
hydroxychloroquine >5 mg/kg/d; use of chloroquine) or
after 5 years of therapy otherwise.52 Nevertheless, recent
data showed that hydroxychloroquine retinopathy in long-
term users is more common than previously perceived,
affecting 0.5% after 6 years of treatment,
increasing to
7.5% of long-term users in general, and could be >20%
when treatment duration is over 20 years. The recom-
mended starting dose of hydroxychloroquine is around
5 mg/kg/d (#2.3 mg/kg/d for chloroquine). Doses of
2–3 mg/kg/d may not achieve adequate blood levels and
could be associated with higher ﬂare rates.53,54 Recent data
suggested that a blood hydroxychloroquine level above 0.6
mg/l may be associated with a lower risk of LN ﬂare.55 In
patients with eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2, the dose of
hydroxychloroquine should be reduced by $25%. Also,
antimalarials may rarely be cardiotoxic, manifesting as

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S25

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

cardiomyopathy or conduction abnormalities in patients
with a high cumulative exposure.

Rationale
Data from multiple observational cohort studies show various
beneﬁts of hydroxychloroquine treatment in SLE, notably a
reduced incidence of ﬂare and organ damage accrual, and a
relatively low rate of drug-related adverse effects, including
ocular toxicity. Despite the relatively low-certainty evidence,
the overall balance between beneﬁts and potential risks pro-
vides the basis for recommending its use as part of general
management in patients with SLE.

Practice Point 10.2.1.1: Adjunctive therapies to manage LN
and attenuate complications of the disease or its treatments
should be considered for all patients, as outlined in Figure 3.

Although many of the above recommendations also apply
to patients with proteinuric kidney diseases treated with
immunosuppression in general (KDIGO 2021 GD Guideline
Chapter 1), some risks are especially relevant to patients
with SLE and LN. Patients with SLE show increased mortality
rates when compared to age- and sex-matched controls in the
general population.56,57
(CV)
complications, and CKD, especially kidney failure, are major
causes of death.6–8,58 Early deaths are related to infections or
lupus activity, while CV and malignant complications and
deaths related to kidney failure account for late mortalities.59
Cardiovascular complications in patients with LN. Patients
with SLE have both traditional (dyslipidemia, smoking,
obesity, etc.) and non-traditional (proteinuria, inﬂammation,
etc.) CV risk factors. A patient often has multiple risk factors,
which can be secondary to disease-related organ damage

cardiovascular

Infections,

Risk

Risk attenuation

Cardiovascular risk

• Dyslipidemia management
• Low-dose aspirin during pregnancy
• Blood pressure control

Proteinuria and
CKD progression
(refer to Chapter 1)

Infection risk

• Avoid high-sodium diet
• Optimize blood pressure
• Renoprotective medications, such as RAAS blockade, SGLT2 inhibitor, etc., in
  stable patients without AKI
• Avoid nephrotoxic insult
• Prevent AKI

• Assess medical history of herpes zoster and tuberculosis
• Screening for HBV, HCV, HIV, and HBV vaccination
• Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis (issue of potential adverse drug reaction
  discussed below)

• Individualized consideration for recombinant zoster vaccine
• Individualized consideration for other infectious organisms as dictated by
  public health concerns at the time of treatment

Bone injury

• Bone mineral density and fracture risk assessment 
• Calcium and vitamin D supplementation
• Bisphosphonates when appropriate

Ultraviolet light
exposure

• Broad-spectrum sunscreen
• Limit ultraviolet light exposure

Premature ovarian
failure

• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (i.e. leuprolide)
• Sperm/oocyte cryopreservation

Unplanned pregnancy

• Individual evaluation and counselling for contraception type
  (preference, thrombosis risk, age)

Cancer

• Evaluate individual risk factors for malignancies 

• Minimize lifetime cyclophosphamide exposure to <36 g

Figure 3 | Measures to minimize the risk of complications related to lupus nephritis or its treatment. Note: Chapter 1 refers to Chapter 1
of the KDIGO Guideline on Glomerular Diseases. AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C
virus; HIV, human immunodeﬁciency virus; RAAS, renin–angiotensin-aldosterone system; SGLT2, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2.

S26

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

(especially CKD, hypertension, proteinuria) or treatment
(such as glucocorticoids and calcineurin inhibitors [CNIs]).
Regular evaluation of various risk factors and timely treat-
ment are essential to prevent premature CV complications.60
Infections in patients with LN. Infection is a leading cause of
death in patients with LN, and infection-related deaths are
more common during the initial phase of management
following exposure to intensive immunosuppressive ther-
apy.49,56,61 There are data to suggest a higher incidence of
adverse outcomes related to infections in Asia, which may be
related to delayed presentation and the access to care.61
Avoidance of overimmunosuppression is an important mea-
sure to reduce the risk of infections and adverse outcomes.
Pneumocystis pneumonia is a serious complication in pa-
tients who are immunosuppressed and can result in fatality.
Prophylaxis
taking into
should be actively considered,
consideration a patient’s allergic diathesis and available al-
ternatives. Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis is standard practice in
organ transplant recipients, but its role in patients on high-
dose glucocorticoid therapy without human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus (HIV) infection remains controversial, and there
are few data from patients with SLE.2,62 Antibiotic-related
adverse drug reactions are not infrequent in patients with
lupus, and in an early survey, 31% reported allergy to sul-
fonamide, with one-ﬁfth of these patients also reporting
worsening of SLE with the drug intolerance.63 In a retro-
spective study from Thailand that included 132 patients with
various connective tissue diseases, trimethoprim-sulfameth-
oxazole (TMP-SMX) was effective in preventing pneumo-
cystis pneumonia, and adverse drug reaction occurred in only
9.4% of patients with SLE given prophylaxis.64 However, a
recent retrospective study from Japan reported an adverse
drug reaction rate of 41.9% in patients with lupus given TMP-
SMX prophylaxis with conventional dosing, but only 10.7%
in those with gradual introduction of the drug over a 9-day
period.65 Pentamidine inhalation can be used in patients
who are not suitable for TMP-SMX. Alternative second-line
agents include dapsone and atovaquone.

Response to vaccination is reduced following exposure to
high-dose immunosuppression with glucocorticoid, myco-
phenolate, or rituximab.66 Vaccination for the prevention of
hepatitis B infection is recommended, especially in endemic
regions. The rate of Herpes zoster is 2–10 times higher in
patients with SLE than in healthy controls. Available zoster
vaccine preparations
include the live-attenuated vaccine
Zostavax(cid:3) and the adjuvanted recombinant vaccine Shingrix.
In general, live vaccines should be avoided in immunosup-
pressed subjects. While some guidelines recommend the use
zoster vaccine in immunodeﬁcient or
of
immunosuppressed patients,
including patients with SLE,
there are controversial data on whether the vaccine might
precipitate a ﬂare of immune-mediated diseases in a small
number of patients, and a study investigating its efﬁcacy and
safety in patients with SLE is ongoing. There is also concern
that the polio vaccination has been associated with lupus
the data on inﬂuenza vaccination are
ﬂares, whereas

recombinant

conﬂicting. Vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 is recommended
in general, although there have been anecdotal reports of new
onset or ﬂares of
following
exposure to mRNA COVID-19 vaccines.67

immune-mediated diseases

CKD progression. CKD is common in patients with LN due
to the kidney ﬂares that reduce nephron mass.68,69 In addition
to treatment and prevention of active LN, it is important that
measures to reduce the rate of kidney function deterioration
be included as part of holistic management, such as optimal
blood pressure control, the use of renoprotective medications,
avoidance of nephrotoxic insults, and prevention of circum-
stances that may result in acute kidney injury (AKI).

Contraception and pregnancy. Pregnancy in patients with
LN is associated with increased maternal complications and
inferior fetal outcomes compared with the occurrence in
healthy individuals, and the risks are higher when LN is
active. Some of the frequently used medications in patients
with lupus are contraindicated during pregnancy, such as
mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF), cyclophosphamide, and
warfarin. Counseling with regard to contraception and
pregnancy should be done early in patients of childbearing
age. The choice of methods for contraception should be
discussed, and if necessary, the opinion of a gynecologist
should be sought. For patients who prefer oral hormonal
contraception, estrogen–progestin contraceptives with ethinyl
estradiol dose not higher than 30 mg may be used in patients
who are negative for antiphospholipid antibodies and with
stable low disease activity, whereas progestin-only contra-
ceptives are preferable in patients with a moderate or high
level of disease activity. Estrogen-containing contraceptives
should be avoided in patients with antiphospholipid anti-
bodies or a history of thrombosis, in view of the risk of
thromboembolism.70 Data from women exposed to chemo-
therapy showed efﬁcacy of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) analogs in reducing the rate of premature ovarian
failure, whereas the putative gonadal protective effect of oral
contraceptive pills appeared variable.71 Fertility protection
with GnRH agonists, or sperm and oocyte cryopreservation,
should be considered in patients treated with cyclophospha-
mide, especially in patients with high cumulative exposure.

Bone health. Glucocorticoid therapy, especially when high
doses are used for long durations, increases bone loss.72,73 In
children, glucocorticoid cumulative dose affects peak bone
mass and growth.74 Individual evaluation of fracture risk can
be estimated using patient demographics and clinical history,
glucocorticoid dose, and the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool
(FRAX) score.75,76 Calcium (optimal intake 1000–1200 mg/d)
and vitamin D supplementation are recommended for pa-
tients with LN, as well as consideration for oral bisphosph-
onates according to individual risk assessment.77,78

Malignancies in patients with LN. Patients with SLE have
increased risk of malignant tumors, including non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, lung, liver, vulvar/vaginal, thyroid, nonmelanoma
skin cancer, and the risk (especially with bladder cancer) is
increased in patients with a history of exposure to cyclophos-
phamide.79,80 In general, the surveillance for malignancies in

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S27

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

patients with LN follows the cancer-screening policies for the
general population in the local community, and speciﬁc ma-
lignancy screening guidelines for patients with SLE are either
lacking or largely opinion-based.81 Although there is evidence
showing efﬁcacy and safety of human papillomavirus vaccines
in patients with SLE, the development of SLE or lupus-like
disease following vaccination has been reported.82,83

10.2.2 Class I or Class II lupus nephritis

Practice Point 10.2.2.1: Approach to immunosuppressive
treatment for patients with Class I or Class II LN (Figure 4)
Patients with Class I or Class II LN generally have normal
kidney function, or at most, low-grade proteinuria that is well
below the nephrotic range, and sometimes microscopic he-
maturia. For these patients, no speciﬁc immunosuppressive
therapy beyond what is being given for nonrenal lupus is
needed.84

Patients with Class I or II histology but with nephrotic-
range proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome (NS) are consid-
ered to have lupus podocytopathy. This diagnosis may be
conﬁrmed by demonstrating diffuse podocyte effacement on
electron microscopy. Clinical and histologic manifestations of
patients with podocytopathy are similar to those with mini-
mal change disease (MCD) or focal segmental glomerulo-
sclerosis (FSGS), and they often show a good response to
glucocorticoid treatment.85–87 Although there have been no
RCTs, observational data showed that over 90% of patients
given glucocorticoid monotherapy achieved remission within
a median time of 4 weeks.85,88–92 Data on relapse are even

more limited, but there appears to be a signiﬁcant risk of
relapse after glucocorticoids are tapered.93 Although optimal
duration is not known, maintenance with low-dose gluco-
corticoid plus an additional agent such as mycophenolic acid
analogs (MPAA), azathioprine, or a CNI is suggested, espe-
cially in patients with a history of relapse.

10.2.3 Class III or Class IV lupus nephritis

10.2.3.1 Initial therapy of active Class III/IV lupus nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.3.1.1: We recommend that
patients with active Class III or IV LN, with or
without a membranous component, be treated
initially with glucocorticoids plus any one of the
following:
i. mycophenolic acid analogs (MPAAs) (1B); or
ii.
iii. belimumab and either MPAA or low-dose
intravenous cyclophosphamide (1B); or
iv. MPAA and a calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) when

low-dose intravenous cyclophosphamide (1B); or

kidney function is not severely impaired (i.e.,
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR] £45
ml/min per 1.73 m2) (1B).

This recommendation places a high value on results from clinical
trials demonstrating clinical efﬁcacy with combined immuno-
suppressive regimens that include glucocorticoids and either low-
dose intravenous cyclophosphamide or MPAA (dual immuno-
suppressive therapy), as well as triple immunosuppressive regi-
mens that include belimumab or voclosporin (or tacrolimus)

Kidney biopsy showing
Class I/II lupus nephritis

airunietorp level-woL

emordnys citorhpeN

Evaluate for lupus podocytopathy
(electron microscopy would be useful)

Treat as minimal change disease
(Chapter 5)

Immunosuppressive treatment
guided by extrarenal manifestations
of systemic lupus erythematosus

Consider maintenance combination
therapy with low-dose glucocorticoid
and another immunosuppressive agent

Figure 4 | Immunosuppressive treatment for patients with Class I or Class II lupus nephritis. Note: Chapter 5 refers to Chapter 5 of the
KDIGO Guideline on Glomerular Diseases.

S28

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

added to the above dual immunosuppression. In the case of CNI,
the improved clinical response was driven by greater reduction of
proteinuria compared with placebo, and in the case of belimumab,
a reduced incidence rate of adverse kidney outcomes was also
observed in post hoc analysis. A summary of options of initial
therapy that can be recommended for active proliferative LN is
shown in Figure 5. The Work Group acknowledges the consider-
able variation of characteristics among patients. Readers are
advised to refer to the practice points for discussions on the
preferred choice of therapy according to patient characteristics.
Also, regarding the choice of therapy and the dose of speciﬁc
medications,
the Work Group emphasizes the importance of
preventing potential adverse effects that could result from high-
cyclophosphamide, and CNI
dose glucocorticoid, high-dose
nephrotoxicity. In this regard, patients with CKD G3b–G5 were
often excluded from the respective clinical trials.

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The short-term prognosis of
patients with proliferative LN improved dramatically when
treatment with high-dose glucocorticoids was started in the
1960s.94 However, the long-term kidney prognosis continued
to be poor, as many patients progressed to kidney failure
despite treatment. In landmark studies during the 1980s, the
addition of cyclophosphamide to glucocorticoids was shown to
be superior to treatment with glucocorticoids alone in pre-
serving long-term kidney survival in active severe LN.13,95–98
Dual
immunosuppressive regimens comprising glucocorti-
coids and cyclophosphamide were standard-of-care initial
therapy for active proliferative LN for decades. But the signif-
icant incidence of adverse effects, due to the high glucocorti-
coid dose and the toxicities of cyclophosphamide, prompted
investigation of alternative induction regimens.

Subsequent

investigations aimed to improve the risk–
beneﬁt ratio of treatment. A study of 90 patients of Euro-
pean descent with active LN showed that, when compared to
high-dose cyclophosphamide, a reduced-dose cyclophospha-
mide regimen was associated with no statistically signiﬁcant
difference in efﬁcacy both short- and long-term and an
improved side-effect proﬁle.17,99 In a short-term trial that
included 100 patients from India, reduced-dose cyclophos-
phamide showed similar efﬁcacy to that of MPAA when both
were combined with glucocorticoids.100 In view of the scarcity
of data on reduced-dose cyclophosphamide in patients of
African or Hispanic descent, there is concern as to whether
this regimen is effective in these patient groups. Figure 6
shows the details of cyclophosphamide-dosing regimens.

efﬁcacy

of

Following

establishment

in preventing
organ transplant rejection, MPAA were investigated in LN
and was shown to have efﬁcacy similar to that of cyclo-
phosphamide in treating active LN.100,101 The dose is typically
MMF 2–3 g/d (or equivalent for MPAA). The rate of adverse
events in patients treated with glucocorticoids and MPAA
appeared not signiﬁcantly reduced compared with that of
cyclophosphamide in clinical trials with MMF dose of 3 g/d,
suggesting a dose effect and possible racial or ethnic variation

in tolerability of MPAA. Also, concomitant high-dose gluco-
corticoids contributed to many treatment-associated adverse
events.12,14,100–102 Based on generally favorable real-world
clinical experience, combined immunosuppression with glu-
cocorticoids and MPAA is widely used as initial treatment of
proliferative LN.

CNIs reduce IL-2 transcription and T lymphocyte prolif-
eration and have a direct modulatory effect on podocyte
cytoskeleton, thereby reducing proteinuria due to podocyte
injury. The addition of ﬁxed-dose tacrolimus to low-dose
MPAA and glucocorticoids in a triple immunosuppressive
regimen (termed “multitargeted therapy”) was investigated in
Chinese patients.19,103–105 A prospective study including 40
LN (Class IV (cid:3) V) patients from China demonstrated higher
24-week response rates in patients treated with the “multi-
target” regimen compared with high-dose cyclophosphamide
and glucocorticoids.103 These ﬁndings were later corroborated
in a trial of 368 Chinese patients with active LN and baseline
serum creatinine (SCr) #3 mg/dl (265 mmol/l; translating to
an eGFR level of around 25 ml/min per 1.73 m2), showing a
higher complete response rate at 6 months in the triple
immunosuppressive scheme than with cyclophosphamide,
though with numerically higher numbers of adverse events.19
Yet, continued follow-up data showed similar cumulative
response rates at 24 months between patients who continued
triple therapy and controls treated with sequential cyclo-
phosphamide
azathioprine
maintenance.106

induction

followed

by

studies

A triple immunosuppressive regimen of voclosporin added
to standard-dose MPAA and a rapid-tapering regimen of
glucocorticoids was tested in phase 2 (Aurinia Urinary Pro-
tein Reduction Active-Lupus with Voclosporin [AURA-LV])
and phase 3 (Aurinia Renal Response in Active Lupus with
Voclosporin [AURORA 1]) multinational
that
included patients with baseline eGFR >45 ml/min per 1.73
m2.107,108 The response rates at 24 and 52 weeks were higher
in voclosporin-treated groups compared with placebo, with
all patients receiving MPAA plus rapid-tapering glucocorti-
severe adverse events,
coids. An excessive number of
including deaths, was noted in voclosporin-treated patients
only in the phase 2 trial and was thought to be a center effect.
Pooled phase 2 and phase 3 data showed no statistically sig-
niﬁcant difference in the incidence of adverse events.109 Pa-
tients who completed the phase 3 trial were eligible to
continue on the same blinded therapy in a 2-year continua-
tion study (AURORA 2; 116 of 179 patients in the voclosporin
arm and 100 of 178 patients in the control arm).110 Results
from the completed AURORA 2 Continuation Study showed
sustained reduction of proteinuria with voclosporin treat-
ment, and stable kidney function in both groups, with no
safety signal. The improved treatment response rate in pa-
tients treated with CNIs was mainly driven by earlier and
more effective suppression of proteinuria, while the follow-up
data to date showed similar kidney function in the CNI-
treated group versus controls. The impact of the addition of
a CNI on long-term kidney survival remains unclear.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S29

S
3
0

i

K
d
n
e
y

I

n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a

l

(
2
0
2
4
)

1
0
5

(
S
u
p
p

l

1
S
)
,

S
1
–
S
6
9

l

u
p
u
s

n
e
p
h
r
i
t
i
s

Kidney biopsy showing
Class III/IV ± V lupus nephritis

Concomitant thrombotic
microangiopathy
(Section 10.3.1)

Assess activity and
chronicity items

Active Class III/IV ± V lupus nephritis

Chronic Class III/IV ± V lupus nephritis
without activity

Supportive treatment
for chronic kidney disease

If concomitant Class V
manage as Class V
(Section 10.2.4)

Glucocorticoids
Methylprednisolone i.v. 0.25–0.50 g/d for 1–3 days as appropriate
depending on disease severity and rate of progression, then
prednisone p.o. at approximately 0.35–1.0 mg/kg/d
(not to exceed 80 mg/d) and taper over a few months to
maintenance dose (the lower steroid dosing option referring
to the reduced-dose regimen in the voclosporin trials)†
(Practice Point 10.2.3.1.1)

and one of the
following options

CNI + MPAA
Voclosporin 23.7 mg b.i.d. and MPAA in patients
with eGFR >45 ml/min per 1.73 m2
Tacrolimus (trough level approximately 5.5 ng/ml
[6.8 nmol/l], data mainly from Chinese patients)
and reduced-dose MPAA in patients with SCr
<3.0 mg/dl (265 μmol/l) as initial and
maintenance therapy
Consider cyclosporine when voclosporin
and tacrolimus are not available
(Practice Point 10.2.3.1.4)
CNI duration up to 3 years‡

Mycophenolic acid
analogs (MPAA)
for at least 6 months
MMF p.o. 1.0–1.5 g b.i.d. or
mycophenolic acid sodium
 0.72–1.08 g b.i.d.
(Practice Point 10.2.3.1.3)

Cyclophosphamide 
for up to 6 months
i.v. 500 mg q2wk × 6 or
0.5–1.0 g/m2 monthly × 6;
or p.o. 1.0-1.5 mg/kg/d
for 3 months
(Practice Point 10.2.3.1.2)§

Belimumab + MPAA or
reduced-dose cyclophosphamide
Belimumab (i.v., 10 mg/kg q2wk for
3 doses then q4wk) and MPAA or i.v.
cyclophosphamide 500 mg q2wk × 6
(Practice Point 10.2.3.1.5)
Belimumab duration up to 2.5 years

Figure 5 | Recommended approach for initial therapy of active Class III/IV lupus nephritis. Caution is warranted when calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) are used in patients with signiﬁcantly
impaired kidney function, in view of increased susceptibility for severe consequences due to CNI nephrotoxicity. The estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) and serum creatinine (SCr)
levels stated in the ﬁgure were patient selection criteria adopted in the respective clinical trials. †Refer to Figure 7 for examples of glucocorticoid treatment regimens. ‡Refer to Figure 9 for
durations of CNI or belimumab treatment in clinical trials. §Refer to Figure 6 for comments on cyclophosphamide regimens. Note: Chapter 5 refers to Chapter 5 of the KDIGO Guideline on
Glomerular Diseases; b.i.d., twice daily; i.v., intravenous; MMF, mycophenolate mofetil; p.o., oral; q2wk, every 2 weeks; q4wk, every 4 weeks; s.c., subcutaneous.

.

i

w
w
w
k
d
n
e
y
-
i
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
.

o
r
g

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

High-dose intravenous
cyclophosphamide
(NIH regimen)

Low-dose intravenous
cyclophosphamide
(Euro-Lupus regimen)

Oral cyclophosphamide

Cyclophosphamide

i.v. 0.5–1 g/m2 monthly for
6 months

i.v. 500 mg every 2 weeks
for 3 months

p.o. 1.0–1.5 mg/kg/d (max
150 mg/d) for 2–6 months

Comments

ethnicities

Caucasian patients, with
some data from patients
of African or Caribbean
descent, Hispanic descent,
Indian patients, and other
Asian countries

Figure 6 | Cyclophosphamide dosing regimens, combined with glucocorticoids, in initial treatment for active Class III/IV lupus
nephritis. i.v., intravenous; max, maximum; NIH, National Institutes of Health, USA; p.o., oral.

Abnormal B lymphocyte hyperreactivity is a characteristic
feature in the pathogenesis of SLE. B-cell–activating factor
(BAFF, also known as B lymphocyte stimulator or BLyS) is a
cytokine expressed in cells with B-cell lineage and acts as a
potent B cell activator. Belimumab, a human monoclonal
antibody that inhibits BAFF, was approved by the United
States (U.S.) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of SLE in 2011 based on efﬁcacy demonstrated in
clinical trials. The addition of belimumab to glucocorticoids
plus either standard-dose MPAA or low-dose cyclophospha-
mide followed by azathioprine in a triple immunosuppressive
regimen was evaluated in a multinational phase 3 trial (Efﬁ-
cacy and Safety of Belimumab in Patients with Active Lupus
Nephritis [BLISS-LN]) of 448 patients observed over 104
weeks.111 Patients treated with belimumab had superior pri-
mary efﬁcacy renal response rate (PERR, a composite end-
point with proteinuria #0.7 g/g [70 mg/mmol]) compared
to placebo, while all patients received standard dual immu-
nosuppression. The 2 groups showed similar rates of adverse
events. Results from a secondary analysis and an open-label
extension study of 28 weeks showed that the efﬁcacy advan-
treated with the
tage was maintained,
belimumab-containing triple immunosuppressive regimen
had lower rates of adverse kidney outcomes.112,113 Subgroup
analysis of 142 East Asian patients showed similar ﬁndings.114
While intravenous belimumab was used in the BLISS-LN
trial, the U.S. FDA approved both the intravenous (i.v.) and
subcutaneous (s.c.) routes of belimumab treatment for LN in
the latter based on pharmacokinetics
December 2020,
matching that
showed similar exposure between the 2
administration routes with a higher trough level when given
subcutaneously.

and patients

It is important to note that, while there were long-term
data from controlled trials showing that cyclophosphamide
combined with glucocorticoids as initial therapy for active LN
was more efﬁcacious than glucocorticoids alone in preserving
kidney function, long-term data are relatively scarce for the
other regimens, especially for the more recent treatments
such as CNI and belimumab.96,97 In this regard, data from

observational studies suggested that higher rates of response
to induction therapy may translate into better long-term
kidney survival, but the data were from treatment regimens
that did not include a CNI.15,99,115–118

In summary, Class III and Class IV LN are severe diseases
that result in AKI that leads to permanent nephron loss if not
treated promptly with effective therapeutic regimens. Severe LN
is an important, but treatable, cause of patient morbidity and
mortality in many parts of the world. Advances in therapy have
resulted in increased efﬁcacy and reduced incidence of adverse
events; the latter could be due to disease or the toxicities of
treatments. Attempts to reduce medication side effects, espe-
cially those due to glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide, have
been modestly successful. Despite the potential of important
treatment-associated toxicities, the beneﬁts of treating prolif-
erative LN clearly outweigh the potential harms.

Certainty of evidence. In the 6 RCTs that compared i.v.
cyclophosphamide with glucocorticoids, there was moderate
certainty of evidence for a kidney beneﬁt and decrease in
kidney relapse. The certainty of the evidence from these RCTs
was downgraded to moderate because of study limitations
(unclear blinding of participants and personnel, unclear allo-
cation concealment; Supplementary Table S513,95,96,101,119–121).
High-dose versus low-dose cyclophosphamide has been
compared in a few RCTs (Supplementary Table S617,121–124).
The results from these trials indicate that low-dose cyclo-
phosphamide is associated with fewer adverse events (such as
leukopenia, and bone toxicity121;
infection, malignancy,
although in some studies, the efﬁcacy also appeared lower
than that of the high-dose regimen), with moderate certainty
of the evidence because of serious imprecision (only a few
events, resulting in wide conﬁdence intervals [CIs] indicating
appreciable beneﬁt and harm).

From the RCTs, there is moderate certainty in the evidence
that MMF exhibits a similar efﬁcacy, and a different side-
effect proﬁle compared with i.v. cyclophosphamide. The
certainty of
the evidence was downgraded to moderate
because of unclear reporting of allocation concealment in
trials (Supplementary Table S712,100–102,121,125–128).

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S31

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

that

include tacrolimus,

There is low-certainty evidence that triple immunosup-
pressive regimens
reduced-dose
MPAA, and glucocorticoids are superior to standard-of-care
regimens when used as initial therapy, with similar incidence
of adverse events (Supplementary Table S819,103,104,121). There
is high-certainty evidence showing that triple therapy with
voclosporin, standard-dose MPAA, and rapid-tapering gluco-
corticoids is superior to MPAA and rapid-tapering glucocor-
ticoids in achieving renal response (mainly driven by more
effective suppression of proteinuria) with similar incidence of
adverse
(Supplementary Table
and
Supplementary Table S1019,103,104,107,108). The long-term effect
of CNI-containing immunosuppressive regimens in LN on
preservation of kidney function ($50% loss of GFR or kidney
failure)
to be demonstrated (Supplementary
Table S1019,103,104,107,108).

S9107,108,129

still needs

events

There is moderate-certainty evidence showing that adding
belimumab to MPAA or reduced-dose cyclophosphamide and
glucocorticoids results in higher renal response rates with
similar incidence of adverse events compared with placebo,
and low-certainty evidence for an effect of belimumab in
renal relapse prevention and reduction of adverse kidney
outcomes (Supplementary Table S11111,113,130).

Values and preferences. Without treatment, the prognosis
for kidney survival in patients with proliferative LN is poor.
Well-informed patients with Class III and IV LN would
normally choose to be treated with one of the immunosup-
pressive regimens with proven efﬁcacy as outlined previously,
and patients should be informed of
the severe risk of
declining or not adhering to treatment. Given the risks of
infertility associated with cyclophosphamide and the spectra
of potential malignancies, most patients of childbearing
age who anticipate conceiving in the future, and most
patients, in general, will
likely opt for initial MPAA over
cyclophosphamide-based treatment. Low-dose i.v. cyclo-
phosphamide has less risk than high-dose and is a reasonable
alternative to MPAA, but because the data favoring low-dose
cyclophosphamide have largely come from White patients
with mild to moderately severe LN, this alternative may not
be appropriate for the treatment of severe LN in patients of
African or Hispanic ancestry.17

Triple immunosuppressive regimens that include a CNI,
together with MPAA and glucocorticoids, may be particularly
useful for patients with high-grade proteinuria associated
with extensive podocyte injury. Caution is recommended
with the use of this regimen in patients with impaired kidney
function and/or signiﬁcant chronic damage in kidney biopsy.
In the voclosporin trials, patients with baseline eGFR #45 ml/
min per 1.73 m2 were excluded, and this eGFR threshold is
also included in the regulatory approval for the drug. In the
trial on Chinese patients with the “multitarget”
clinical
regimen that included ﬁxed-dose tacrolimus, reduced-dose
MPAA, and glucocorticoids, patients were continued on this
regimen for up to 2 years. The primary endpoint in the phase
3 voclosporin trial was assessed at 1 year, and results from a
further 2-year extension on the same blinded treatment

showed sustained reduction of proteinuria and stable kidney
function during follow-up, with no increase in adverse events
compared with controls.110 The optimal duration of CNI
treatment for LN remains uncertain, and there are insufﬁcient
data on subsequent tapering or discontinuation, and clinical
outcomes thereafter.

In addition to increasing the therapeutic response rate, post
hoc analysis showed that adding belimumab to MPAA or
cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids may confer further
beneﬁts of reducing renal relapses and the rate of adverse
kidney outcomes, and the eGFR value was numerically higher
in patients treated with belimumab compared with placebo.
Post hoc analysis showed that the efﬁcacy beneﬁt in LN
associated with belimumab treatment was driven by patients
with baseline urine protein-creatinine ratio (PCR) <3 g/g
(<300 mg/mmol).113 Whether this could be related to the
increased clearance of belimumab in patients with heavy
proteinuria remains to be investigated. Results from an in-
dependent analysis of the BLISS-LN data by the U.S. FDA also
showed that the efﬁcacy of belimumab was driven by patients
with lower levels of proteinuria at baseline, but post hoc time-
to-event analysis of the high proteinuria group ($3 g/g
[$300 mg/mmol]) suggested that the estimated risk of a
kidney-related event or death was lower in the belimumab
group.131 Results from the 28-week open-label extension of
the BLISS-LN study showed continued increase in the pro-
portions of patients achieving PERR or complete renal
response, and no safety signal, associated with belimumab
treatment.112

Despite these being post hoc analysis or extension study
results, the Work Group attributes value to these observa-
tions, which are relevant to optimizing the choice of therapies
to match different patient characteristics.

and

Resource use and costs. Management of active LN with
labor-intensive
immunosuppression is
resource-
because the medications and the surveillance for potential
complications are costly. Access to appropriate therapies is
essential to prevent adverse clinical outcomes, including the
high treatment cost for kidney failure. Intravenous admin-
istration requires an infusion center with supervision, and
patients must be monitored frequently for treatment- or
disease-related complications and require frequent clinical
laboratory testing. However, it is likely that these costs are
lower over time than those associated with managing CKD
and kidney failure resulting from no treatment, although a
direct economic analysis has not been done. Furthermore,
there have been no comparisons of quality of life between
patients with CKD, patients with kidney failure receiving
kidney replacement therapy, and patients receiving immu-
nosuppression, especially with high-dose or prolonged
administration of glucocorticoids. MPAA regimens were
associated with higher medication costs but lower facility
costs and a superior quality of life compared to i.v. cyclo-
phosphamide regimens.132–134

Addition of a third drug (CNI or belimumab) increases the
costs of therapy,135 while the potential increase in complete

S32

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

response rates and prevention of renal relapses may be cost-
saving.136 Access to treatment, cost barriers, and cost of
additional monitoring such as blood level measurements are
additional factors to consider. This Work Group advocates
including
individualized choice of
informed discussions with patients, to suit unique patient
characteristics.

treatment

regimen,

Considerations for implementation. In view of the signiﬁcant
treatment costs,134,137,138 the choice of
therapy is often
region-speciﬁc and depends on drug availability, reimburse-
ment policies, and the ﬁnancial means of individual patients.
Other considerations when choosing initial therapy for LN
include likelihood of adherence, age, prior immunosuppres-
sive exposure, disease tempo and severity, and race and
ethnicity.

Physicians may choose an i.v. regimen if suboptimal
adherence is anticipated. Age is an important factor with
respect to preservation of fertility, as susceptibility to gonadal
failure after cyclophosphamide use increases with age and
cumulative exposure. Future susceptibility to malignancies
increases with higher lifetime cyclophosphamide exposure, so
a detailed knowledge of prior therapies is important. Many
physicians may still choose high-dose cyclophosphamide for
patients in whom kidney function is rapidly deteriorating and
whose biopsy shows severe activity (e.g., capillary necrosis, an
abundance of crescents). It should be noted that there are
sparse data on this group of patients who present with
aggressive disease, as their clinical characteristics precluded
them from inclusion in clinical trials. Physicians caring for
patients of mixed ethnic background or Hispanic ethnicity
may choose MPAA over cyclophosphamide as there are some
post hoc analysis data suggesting it has higher efﬁcacy,139,140
whereas physicians caring for Chinese patients may want to
choose MPAA and glucocorticoids, or triple immunosup-
pression with glucocorticoids plus low-dose MPAA plus low-
dose CNI,
cyclophosphamide-based
regimen.19,106

as opposed to a

Based on beneﬁt-versus-risk considerations, the inclusion of
CNI in the treatment regimen may be preferred in patients
with high-level proteinuria due to podocyte injury and without
signiﬁcantly impaired kidney function, while the inclusion of
belimumab may be preferred in patients treated with MPAA in
contrast to cyclophosphamide, and when prevention of disease
ﬂares and adverse kidney outcomes assumes high priority such
as in patients with signiﬁcant CKD. Note that there are no data
on voclosporin given together with cyclophosphamide. Also,
results from voclosporin trials suggest that inclusion of a CNI
might facilitate rapid glucocorticoid tapering. In addition, re-
sults from post hoc analysis suggested that belimumab might
not be as effective in patients who present with heavy pro-
teinuria in the nephrotic range.

min per 1.73 m2, and these patients were excluded from the
trials.141 Similarly, in a trial investigating the triple immu-
nosuppressive regimen of glucocorticoids and reduced-dose
MMF and ﬁxed-dose tacrolimus in Chinese patients, pa-
tients with a baseline SCr >3 mg/dl (265 mmol/l) were
excluded.19 The overall results suggest that kidney function
remained relatively stable when either voclosporin or tacro-
limus was used at the reported doses in the selected pop-
ulations for a duration of 2–3 years.

With regard to the duration of treatment, reduced-dose
cyclophosphamide is given for 12 weeks, whereas high-dose
cyclophosphamide is normally given for up to 6 months,
and MPAA can be continued after the early treatment phase
as maintenance immunosuppression. CNIs can be used as
long-term maintenance immunosuppression, but vigilance to
prevent nephrotoxicity is warranted. Results from the 2-year
continuation study (AURORA 2) suggested that voclosporin
treatment for 3 years was safe in patients with LN whose
baseline eGFR was >45 ml/min per 1.73 m2. Results from the
BLISS-LN open-label extension study suggested safety of
continuing belimumab treatment for around 2.5 years.

Rationale
Class III or IV LN is an aggressive disease that requires prompt
and effective therapy to abate ongoing injury and destruction of
normal nephrons. Immunosuppressive treatment targets the
active inﬂammatory lesions in kidney histopathology, in contrast
to the chronic lesions, whose number portends the likelihood of
CKD and long-term kidney prognosis.

The choice of initial treatment for Class III or IV LN en-
tails personalized consideration of
the balance between
beneﬁt and risk and is informed by data on short-term
response
and safety, potential
adverse effects, including infections and cumulative toxicities,
quality of life, and factors relevant to patient experience and
adherence.

and long-term efﬁcacy

Patient and kidney survival rates in Class III and Class IV
LN have improved since the 1970s, ﬁrst with the use of glu-
cocorticoids, and subsequently following the adoption of
combined immunosuppressive regimens with cyclophospha-
mide or MPAA (cid:3) CNI or belimumab as standard therapy.

Glucocorticoids remain an integral component in initial
therapy for Class III and IV LN based on their anti-
inﬂammatory and immunosuppressive actions. The addition
of the other immunosuppressants was associated with lower
relapse rates and improved long-term kidney survival
compared with glucocorticoid treatment alone. Combined
immunosuppressive regimens also facilitate glucocorticoid
minimization,
effects
reducing
(Figure 7).

thereby

adverse

their

The use of CNI in patients with severe CKD requires
careful individualized consideration of risk versus potential
beneﬁt, and should be done with caution and careful moni-
toring, and at reduced drug exposure. Voclosporin is generally
not recommended for patients with a baseline eGFR #45 ml/

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.1: A regimen of reduced-dose glu-
cocorticoids following a short course of methylpredniso-
lone pulses may be considered during the initial treatment
of active LN when both the kidney and extrarenal disease
manifestations show satisfactory improvement (Figure 7).

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S33

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

High-dose scheme

Moderate-dose scheme

Reduced-dose scheme

Methylprednisolone
intravenous pulses

Nil or 0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days
as initial treatment

0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days often
included as initial treatment

0.25–0.5 g/day up to 3 days usually
included as initial treatment

Oral prednisone
equivalent (/day)

Week 0–2
Week 3–4
Week 5–6
Week 7–8
Week 9–10
Week 11–12
Week 13–14
Week 15–16
Week 17–18
Week 19–20
Week 21–24
Week >25

0.8–1.0 mg/kg (max 80 mg)
0.6–0.7 mg/kg
30 mg
25 mg
20 mg
15 mg
12.5 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
<5 mg

0.6–0.7 mg/kg (max 50 mg)
0.5–0.6 mg/kg
20 mg
15 mg
12.5 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
5 mg
<5 mg
<5 mg

0.5–0.6 mg/kg (max 40 mg)
0.3–0.4 mg/kg
15 mg
10 mg
7.5 mg
5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
2.5 mg
<2.5 mg

Figure 7 | Examples of glucocorticoid regimens for lupus nephritis. max, maximum.

Glucocorticoids are used in all current treatment regimens
for LN. These drugs have both immunosuppressive and anti-
inﬂammatory effects and provide immediate treatment for
the often-extensive intrarenal inﬂammation that is seen in
patients with Class III and Class IV LN. This regimen is
necessary because there is a lag before the immunosuppressive
effects of cyclophosphamide, MPAA, CNIs, or B cell–directed
therapies are seen. The dose, tapering regimen, and duration
of glucocorticoid schemes vary considerably among clinicians
and are largely opinion-based. Examples are given in Figure 7.
In view of the established efﬁcacy associated with combined
immunosuppression,
there is a move towards reducing
glucocorticoid exposure.

The role of i.v. methylprednisolone pulses at the start of
treatment has not been well-studied, but i.v. glucocorticoid is
commonly given as up to 3 daily doses of 500 mg each (range
250–1000 mg/d). There is general agreement to start treat-
ment with i.v. pulse methylprednisolone in patients who
present with a clinical syndrome of rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis (RPGN)—acute and severe deterioration
of kidney function often accompanied by a high proportion
of crescents or vascular lesions in the kidney biopsy–or when
there are severe extrarenal manifestations, such as central
nervous system or lung involvement. In contrast, opinions
vary on the use of i.v. methylprednisolone in patients with
milder disease manifestations. As shown in Figure 7, “high-
dose” glucocorticoid schemes in earlier clinical trials could
start with no i.v. methylprednisolone but with high-dose oral
prednisone, while glucocorticoid schemes adopted in more
recent clinical trials often began with i.v. methylprednisolone
pulses followed by oral prednisone at a relatively lower dose
and more-rapid tapering. Also, presently it is unusual for the
daily prednisone dose to exceed 60 mg.

To minimize the side effects due to high cumulative expo-
sure to glucocorticoids, there is increasing use of initial i.v.

for growth, psychosocial

glucocorticoid pulses followed by a lower starting dose and/or
more-rapid tapering of oral glucocorticoid in recent clinical
trials.107 Results from a retrospective propensity analysis of
data from 63 patients enrolled in the Aspreva Lupus Man-
agement Study (ALMS) and the phase 2 AURA-LV trial sug-
gested that doses of glucocorticoids and MPAA lower than
those adopted in ALMS may result in better long-term safety,
including a reduction in lymphoproliferative disorders, skin
cancers, and glucocorticoid-related side effects.142 In children,
the avoidance of excessive glucocorticoid exposure also has
implications
issues, and drug
adherence.143 With accumulating data on the efﬁcacy and
glucocorticoid-sparing role of
immunosuppressive medica-
tions such as cyclophosphamide, MPAA, and triple immuno-
there is a move toward
suppressive drug combinations,
reducing
(Supplementary
exposure
Table S12144–146). Examples of dosing and tapering regimens
in initial treatment of LN, based on published literature and
recent clinical trials that investigate the efﬁcacy and safety of
new therapeutic agents, are shown in Figure 7. They serve to
illustrate variations in exposure to glucocorticoids over time.
The certainty of evidence supporting any of these regimens is
low as they have only been compared in relatively small clinical
trials144–146 and observational studies.147 The use of reduced-
dose glucocorticoids may decrease the incidence of major
infections and other adverse effects. Accumulating evidence
shows that reducing glucocorticoid exposure in combined
immunosuppressive regimens is feasible in the treatment
of LN, with maintained efﬁcacy while reducing the glucocorti-
coid-related toxicities.146,148

glucocorticoids

to

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.2: Intravenous cyclophosphamide
can be used as the initial therapy for active Class III and
Class IV LN in patients who may have difﬁculty adhering to
an oral regimen.

S34

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Cyclophosphamide may be given orally or intravenously,
and in a high dose (also known as the modiﬁed National
Institutes of Health [NIH] regimen or high-dose regimen) or
low dose (also known as the Euro-Lupus regimen). Examples
of dosing and duration for these regimens are given in
Figure 6.

The choice of which regimen to use depends on several

factors and can be individualized:
(cid:4) Efﬁcacy: Oral and high-dose i.v. cyclophosphamide regimens
have been used in diverse ethnic populations and for all levels
of disease severity, and show equivalent efﬁcacy.18,149–152
Low–dose cyclophosphamide (Euro-Lupus regimen) shows
efﬁcacy equivalent to that of standard-dose cyclophospha-
mide but was tested mainly in White patients.17,99 Emerging
data suggest
low-dose cyclophosphamide is effective in
Asians, Hispanics, and Black patients, but these studies did
not make direct comparisons to high-dose i.v. cyclophos-
phamide (Supplementary Table S617,121–124,153).

(cid:4) Cost: Intravenous cyclophosphamide is more expensive
than oral and requires the availability of an infusion suite
and experienced staff.

(cid:4) Convenience: Oral cyclophosphamide does not require pa-
tients to come to the healthcare facility for regular drug
infusions but results in rapid increase in cumulative
exposure.

fertility,

loss of

(cid:4) Toxicity: The toxicities of cyclophosphamide may be cons-
sidered immediate (e.g., gastrointestinal, susceptibility to
infection) or delayed (e.g.,
future
malignancies).
B High-dose i.v. cyclophosphamide was shown to be less
toxic than oral cyclophosphamide, but the dose and
duration of oral treatment in these reports were sub-
stantially higher and longer than those currently recom-
mended (Supplementary Table S1313,154). The incidence
of bladder toxicity is also felt to be lower with i.v.
cyclophosphamide. Reduced-dose i.v. cyclophosphamide
has the most favorable immediate toxicity proﬁle among
the 3 cyclophosphamide regimens.

B The risk of future hematologic malignancy is related to
total lifetime exposure (>36 g), as is myeloﬁbrosis (>80 g).
Total lifetime exposure plus age constitutes a signiﬁcant
risk factor for premature ovarian failure (>7.5–15 g/m2 for
young to older pediatric patients, respectively; 300 mg/kg
for adults).
In view of its toxicities, including the increased risk of
malignancies, the exposure to cyclophosphamide should be
minimized to the extent possible.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.3: An MPAA-based regimen is the
preferred initial therapy of proliferative LN for patients at
infertility, such as patients who have a
high risk of
moderate-to-high prior cyclophosphamide exposure.

Trials of MMF for initial treatment of proliferative LN have
targeted dosing of 2–3 g/d. Several studies have shown that
MMF has comparable short-term efﬁcacy to that of oral or
i.v. cyclophosphamide for induction of complete and partial

signiﬁcant

gastrointestinal

renal responses (Supplementary Table S713–15,102,121,125–128).
MMF has
and at
moderate-to-high doses, some patients may not tolerate it. In
patients with gastrointestinal intolerance, a trial of enteric-
coated mycophenolic acid (MPA) in a dose range of 1440–
2160 mg is warranted, in view of its greater gastrointestinal
tolerance.146

toxicity,

Although use of MPAA does not predispose patients to
gonadal failure or hematologic malignancies as does cyclo-
phosphamide, the ALMS trial (target dose 3 g/d) showed a
similar incidence of side effects between patients treated with
MMF plus glucocorticoids and patients treated with cyclo-
phosphamide plus glucocorticoids.12 In this trial, 9 deaths
occurred in the MMF group, and 5 in the cyclophosphamide
group. Seven of the 9 deaths in the MMF group were due to
infections, and 7 of the 9 deaths in MMF-treated patients
occurred in Asia. Concomitant high-dose glucocorticoids and
the relatively high MPA exposure have been proposed as
contributory factors to the higher-than-expected infection-
related adverse outcomes in this trial. In this regard, data
from kidney transplant clinical trials showed that, compared
with an MMF dose of 2 g/d, an increased MMF dose of 3 g/
d did not result in a higher efﬁcacy in the non-Black patient
population, but was associated with more adverse events.155
Therefore, consideration of the race or ethnicity of a pa-
tient, or the geographic locality, may also be relevant when
deciding on the dose of MPAA to be used, in view of the
potential differences in risk proﬁles among patients.

MPA pharmacokinetics varies considerably among patients,
especially in the context of hypoalbuminemia and impaired
kidney function. Data from small-scale studies suggested that
an MPA area under the concentration-versus-time curve of
35–45 mg h/l or a trough level of 3.0–4.5 mg/l may serve to
ensure adequate exposure during initial therapy, but the role
of therapeutic drug-level monitoring remains to be estab-
lished.156–160

MMF has been tested successfully in diverse ethnic groups.
A more granular look at the efﬁcacy of MMF in speciﬁc ethnic
groups was done through a post hoc analysis of data from the
ALMS study, the largest trial comparing MMF to i.v. cyclo-
phosphamide to date.12,139 The analysis
showed higher
treatment response rates for MMF compared to cyclophos-
phamide in Hispanic patients (60.9% vs. 38.8%, P ¼ 0.011)
and patients from Latin America (60.7% vs. 32%, P ¼ 0.003),
whereas the response to MMF was numerically higher but not
statistically different than that to cyclophosphamide in Black
patients (53.9% vs. 40.0%, P ¼ 0.39). A higher response rate
to MMF than to cyclophosphamide in Hispanic patients was
also reported in cohort studies.140 In contrast, the response
rate to cyclophosphamide was numerically higher but not
statistically different than that to MMF in Asian patients
(63.9% vs. 53.2%, P ¼ 0.24).12,139 Notwithstanding these
results, both MPAA and cyclophosphamide are effective
therapies for active LN.

Cyclophosphamide has historically been the ﬁrst-choice
treatment for very severe proliferative LN. An analysis of

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S35

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

pooled data from various clinical trials of patients with Class
III/IV LN, crescents in >15% of glomeruli, and abnormal SCr
level at presentation showed a comparable early response to
glucocorticoids plus either cyclophosphamide or MMF.161
However, the analysis also suggested that initial treatment
with cyclophosphamide might be associated with a more sus-
tained response and more favorable long-term kidney outcome
than initial treatment with MMF. In the maintenance phase of
ALMS,16 although the difference was not statistically different,
patients initially treated with cyclophosphamide had numeri-
cally lower rates of disease ﬂare compared with those initially
treated with MMF.

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.4: Initial therapy with an immuno-
suppressive regimen that includes a CNI (voclosporin,
tacrolimus, or cyclosporine) may be preferred in patients
with relatively preserved kidney function and nephrotic-
range proteinuria likely due to extensive podocyte injury,
as well as patients who cannot tolerate standard-dose
MPAA or are unﬁt for or will not use cyclophosphamide-
based regimens.

CNIs are potent immunosuppressive medications due to
their inhibition of T lymphocyte activation and release of
interleukin-2. They also modulate the podocyte cytoskeleton,
leading to reduction of proteinuria in various glomerular
diseases. The use of a CNI in the treatment of LN may
therefore lead to more effective or more rapid reduction of
proteinuria.

Data from short-term studies with follow-up of 6–12
months suggest that a regimen of glucocorticoids combined
with cyclosporine or tacrolimus, with or without reduced-
dose MPAA, as initial LN therapy has comparable efﬁcacy
to glucocorticoids combined with cyclophosphamide.19,162,163
Until recently, most of these trials had been done in Asia (see
Practice Point 10.2.3.1.5). The largest trial, conducted in
China, combined a ﬁxed, relatively low dose of tacrolimus (4
mg/d, achieved trough levels of 5.2–5.5 ng/ml [6.4–6.8 nmol/
l]) with low-dose MMF (1 g/d) in patients with a baseline SCr
level #3.0 mg/dl (265 mmol/l), and reported earlier attain-
ment of renal response than that in controls treated with the
NIH-cyclophosphamide regimen, with a higher complete
renal response rate (46% vs. 26%) after 24 weeks of treat-
ment.19 Extended follow-up, however, showed comparable
renal response rates in both groups during the second year of
treatment.106 Similarly, a study from Japan reported a com-
plete response rate of 80% after 6 months of treatment with a
triple immunosuppressive regimen that included glucocorti-
coids, reduced-dose cyclophosphamide, and tacrolimus.162

study

The evidence from the few RCTs that compared triple
therapy to cyclophosphamide is judged as having low cer-
and indirectness
tainty because of
(Supplementary Table S819,103,104,121). As these early trials
mainly included patients of Asian ethnicity, and some
excluded patients with severe disease, the generalizability of
this therapy to the broader LN population is unclear (see also
Practice Point 10.2.3.1.5).

limitations

Of importance, in the large Chinese study, the number of
infections was higher in patients who received triple therapy
than that in those who were treated with cyclophosphamide,
although this difference did not reach statistical signiﬁcance.
More data are also required on the incidence of acute and
chronic CNI nephrotoxicity, the metabolic side effects of
CNIs and their effect on blood pressure control, as well as the
optimal duration of treatment and whether there may be a
rebound of proteinuria after stopping CNIs.163

that

involved 334 low-risk kidney transplant

Voclosporin is an analog of cyclosporine that exhibits
enhanced potency in calcineurin inhibition. Voclosporin was
noninferior to tacrolimus in the prevention of biopsy-proven
acute rejection in a 6-month multicenter open-label phase 2b
re-
trial
cipients.164 Voclosporin for the treatment of active biopsy-
proven Class III, IV, and V LN was investigated in the
AURA-LV trial,107 a phase 2 RCT of 265 subjects and the
AURORA 1 trial,108,165 a phase 3 RCT of 357 subjects. Both
trials included patients of diverse ancestry. Voclosporin was
compared to placebo, and all patients received glucocorticoids
and MMF (target dose: 2 g/d) as background therapy. The
rapidly tapered corticosteroid regimen used was novel. All
patients received 2 doses of i.v. methylprednisolone (500 mg/
dose) followed by 20–25 mg prednisone that was rapidly
tapered to 2.5 mg/d by 16 weeks. The primary endpoint of
these trials was renal response (RR), deﬁned as urine
PCR #0.5 mg/mg [50 mg/mmol], eGFR $60 ml/min per
1.73 m2, or no decline of >20% from baseline, and predni-
sone dose of <10 mg/d for the 8 weeks prior to endpoint
measurement.

In AURA-LV, 33% of patients treated with voclosporin
23.7 mg twice per day reached an RR at 24 weeks compared to
19% of placebo-treated patients (odds ratio [OR] 2.03,
P <0.05).107 Similarly, in AURORA, 41% of voclosporin-
treated patients achieved RR at 52 weeks, compared to 23%
of placebo-treated patients (OR 2.65, P < 0.001).108,165 A
pooled analysis of the 2 trials showed that patients treated
with voclosporin added to standard therapy had an RR rate of
44% at 1 year, compared to 23% in placebo patients (P <
0.0001).166 The incidences of adverse events were similar
between the placebo and voclosporin arms.

a more

voclosporin

relationship due

Compared to other CNIs, such as cyclosporine and
consistent
has
tacrolimus,
pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic
to
enhanced binding of the voclosporin–cyclophilin complex to
calcineurin and reduced drug and metabolite load. Pre-
liminary evidence, based on data from the AURA-LV and
AURORA trials, suggests that therapeutic drug monitoring is
not necessary in the studied patient population.167 Note that
there are no data on voclosporin given together with
cyclophosphamide.

Results from the pivotal trials led to the U.S. FDA approval
of voclosporin to treat adult patients with LN in January
2021. Of note, voclosporin is not recommended for patients
with a baseline eGFR #45 ml/min per 1.73 m2, and these
patients were excluded from the trials. Similarly, signiﬁcant

S36

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

impairment of kidney function is often an exclusion criterion
in clinical trials of CNIs. The use of a CNI in patients with
severe CKD requires careful individualized consideration of
risk versus potential beneﬁt, and should be done with caution
and careful monitoring, and at reduced drug exposure.

The positive results of AURA-LV and AURORA coupled
with those of the Asian studies of tacrolimus and cyclosporine
suggest triple immunosuppressive therapy incorporating a
CNI can be an effective treatment regimen for LN. An
advantage of a CNI-based regimen is the more rapid reduc-
tion of proteinuria. However, outstanding issues on the
duration of the CNI, its tapering and suspension, and the
long-term efﬁcacy and safety of CNI triple therapy regimens
remain under study.

A dual immunosuppressive regimen that included tacro-
limus and glucocorticoids was compared with MPAA and
glucocorticoids in a study conducted in Hong Kong. One
hundred ﬁfty patients were randomized to tacrolimus (target
trough level >5 ng/ml [>6.2 nmol/l]) or MPAA plus gluco-
corticoids, and complete response rates at 6 months were
similar in the tacrolimus and MPAA groups (62% vs. 59%),
while the proﬁle of adverse events was different, with higher
Herpes zoster infections in MPAA-treated patients (18% vs.
3%).168 This study also showed a high incidence of renal
relapses when these induction agents were discontinued after
6 months and substituted with azathioprine for maintenance.
A statistically nonsigniﬁcant trend of more disease ﬂares and
kidney function decline was suggested in patients treated with
tacrolimus during the induction phase. The evidence for ef-
ﬁcacy for this trial is considered to be of low-to-very low
certainty (Supplementary Table S14101,126,168–170). Data from
10-year follow-up reported a higher incidence of kidney ﬂares
in patients treated with tacrolimus during the induction phase
(53% vs. 34%), while long-term kidney function was similar
between the 2 groups.170 A more recent open-label clinical
trial randomized 314 patients to tacrolimus (target trough
level 4–10 ng/ml [5–12.4 nmol/l]) or i.v. cyclophosphamide
and reported non-inferior 6-month responses between
groups, with similar rates of adverse events (Supplementary
Table S15171–173).173

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.5: A triple immunosuppressive
regimen of belimumab with glucocorticoids and either
MPAA or
cyclophosphamide may be
preferred in patients with repeated kidney ﬂares or at high-
risk for progression to kidney failure due to severe chronic
kidney disease.

reduced-dose

A phase 3 RCT of belimumab (10 mg/kg i.v. on days 1, 15,
and 29, then every 28 days to week 100) added to standard-of-
care therapy resulted in approval of belimumab for LN by the
U.S. FDA in December 2020.111 This trial, BLISS-LN, exam-
ined the 2-year PERR when belimumab or placebo was added
to standard-of-care therapy, which was either MMF or the
Euro-Lupus low-dose cyclophosphamide regimen chosen by
the site investigator. PERR was deﬁned as a ratio of PCR
of <0.7 g/g [70 mg/mmol], an eGFR that was no worse than

20% below baseline or at least 60 ml/min per 1.73 m2, and no
use of rescue therapy for treatment failure. At week 104,
signiﬁcantly more patients who received belimumab achieved
a PERR compared to the number of patients who received
placebo (43% vs. 32%; OR 1.60; P ¼ 0.03; Supplementary
Table S11111). Key secondary endpoints included complete
renal response and the risk of kidney event or death. These
also favored belimumab. Subgroup analysis showed that the
overall PERR response was driven by the results in the larger
subgroup (73.5%) of patients who received MMF as back-
ground therapy. Belimumab treatment was not associated
with excess adverse events. In this context, extended follow-
up data from open-label continuation studies in patients
with SLE showed no new safety concerns when belimumab
was used for 8–13 years.174,175 Although not directly tested in
the BLISS-LN trial, subcutaneous belimumab has been shown
to achieve similar exposure to intravenous. Subcutaneous
belimumab is administered at 200 mg weekly.176–178 An
important observed effect of belimumab therapy in the
BLISS-LN trial was the prevention of disease ﬂares.113 The
follow-up for 2 years and an open-label follow-up for an
additional 6 months reported better preservation of kidney
function and reduced incidence of adverse kidney outcomes
when
standard-of-care
therapy.111,112

belimumab was

added

In post hoc subgroup analysis of this study, the efﬁcacy
beneﬁt of belimumab appeared restricted to patients who
received MMF versus cyclophosphamide, and to patients with
proteinuria in the non-nephrotic range. Also, those who self-
identiﬁed as Black race (63 of a total of 446 patients in the
trial) appeared to have a lower treatment response rate
compared with other racial groups, while the response rate with
belimumab added was higher compared with placebo.111,113

to

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.6: Other therapies, such as azathi-
oprine or leﬂunomide combined with glucocorticoids, may
be considered in lieu of the recommended initial drugs for
proliferative LN in situations of patient intolerance, lack of
availability, and/or excessive cost of standard drugs, but
these alternatives may be associated with inferior efﬁcacy,
including increased rate of disease ﬂares and/or increased
incidence of drug toxicities.

included 87 patients

Azathioprine combined with methylprednisolone pulses
showed a comparable short-term renal response rate to that
for prednisolone combined with high-dose i.v. cyclophos-
phamide in a study that
in the
Netherlands, but the azathioprine and pulse methylprednis-
olone group had more infections, and their extended follow-
up data showed a higher relapse rate and greater progression
of CKD (Supplementary Table S1613,179,180). Nonetheless,
some patients may not tolerate MPAA, cyclophosphamide, or
CNIs, or these drugs may be unavailable, too costly in some
regions of the world, or contraindicated, as in pregnant
patients.

Short-term studies in Chinese patients compared leﬂu-
in both cases
cyclophosphamide,

against

i.v.

nomide

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S37

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

response

rates of

approximately

combined with glucocorticoids, and reported comparable
renal
6
months.181,182 It should be noted that leﬂunomide may cause
birth defects and has a long elimination half-life of over 2
weeks, and its active metabolite is highly bound to plasma
proteins, so patients who have taken leﬂunomide must stop
treatment for at least 2 years before trying to conceive.

70% after

Other therapies that have not shown signiﬁcant beneﬁt
when added to standard therapy include plasmapheresis
(Supplementary Table S1718,62,183–186), and the anti-interleukin-
6 antibody sirukumab (Supplementary Table S18187). However,
in a phase 2a trial, laquinimod was associated with a higher renal
response rate (62.5% compared with 33.3% in the placebo
group) when added to standard-of-care treatment with gluco-
corticoids and MMF in patients with active LN (Supplementary
Table S19188).

Practice Point 10.2.3.1.7. Newer biologic and non-biologic
therapies are under development and may offer future
options for the treatment of active LN. Rituximab may be
considered for patients with persistent disease activity or
inadequate response to initial standard-of-care therapy.

Results from phase 2 and phase 3 clinical trials did not
demonstrate superiority in efﬁcacy when B cell–targeting
therapies (rituximab, ocrelizumab), costimulatory blockade
(abatacept), or anti-interleukin-6 monoclonal antibody were
added to standard initial therapy of glucocorticoids and either
MMF or cyclophosphamide.141,189–193 The negative outcomes
contrast with reports of case series that suggested efﬁcacy
when patients with suboptimal response to standard therapy
were treated with rituximab.194–197 Interestingly, patients
treated with rituximab and abatacept in the RCTs showed
more effective suppression of anti-double-stranded deoxy-
ribonucleic acid (dsDNA) levels and complement activation,
but this biological efﬁcacy did not translate to conventional
clinical indicators of treatment response.141,189 Reasons for
the apparent discrepancy between biological efﬁcacy versus
clinical observations, and between the case series versus RCT
results, include the different populations of patients studied,
the outcome parameters used in the trials, and the relatively
short duration of observation in the trials. Some trials using
biologics have yielded encouraging results. For example, in a
prospective single-center pilot study to investigate whether
rituximab could facilitate corticosteroid avoidance, 50 pa-
tients with active LN (22 Class V, 28 Class III/IV (cid:3) V) were
treated with rituximab 1 g and methylprednisolone 500 mg
i.v. on day 1 and day 15 and were maintained on MMF
(maximum dose 1.5 g twice per day, target trough blood level
of mycophenolic acid 1.2–2.4 mg/ml
[3.7–7.5 mmol/l])
without glucocorticoids, and by 52 weeks, 52% of patients
achieved complete remission and 34% achieved partial
remission.198

The negative outcomes in previous clinical trials do not
preclude a therapeutic role for some of these novel agents
in selected patients, including those who have not responded
well to or who do not tolerate standard therapy, or when

www.kidney-international.org

(Supplementary

Tables

steroid-sparing
S20–S23141,153,189,191,195).198

is

attempted

Ongoing clinical trials continue to investigate the role of
biologics for the treatment of LN. A recent phase 2 study
showed that in adult patients with active proliferative LN
treated with MPAA and glucocorticoids,
the addition of
obinutuzumab resulted in higher complete renal response
rates at week 76 (40% vs. 18%, P ¼ 0.007), and at week 104
compared to placebo (54% vs. 29%, P ¼ 0.005). The rate of
serious adverse events and serious infections did not differ
between the 2 groups.192

Anifrolumab is a human monoclonal antibody that binds
to the type I interferon receptor unit 1 and has been recently
approved by the U.S. FDA for treatment of nonrenal SLE. In a
phase 2 clinical trial that randomized 147 patients to a basic
(anifrolumab 300 mg), intensiﬁed (anifrolumab 900 mg), or
placebo added to MPAA standard-of-care therapy, ani-
renal
frolumab was associated with numerically higher
response rate (45.5 % vs. 31.1% in placebo group). As po-
tential beneﬁt of anifrolumab was suggested by exploratory
endpoints of
is ongoing
(NCT02547922).

a phase 3 trial

response,

In summary, there are accumulating data on the biological
and clinical efﬁcacy of various biologic and non-biologic
therapies. Although long-term results are awaited, results on
these new drugs have expanded the armamentarium of
therapeutic options and potential combinations of
treat-
ments. The favorable safety proﬁle associated with some of
the new drugs presents a distinct advantage. Further in-
vestigations are necessary to deﬁne the proﬁles and charac-
teristics of patients who would beneﬁt most from each of the
various novel therapies.

10.2.3.2 Maintenance therapy for Class III and Class IV lupus
nephritis

Recommendation 10.2.3.2.1: We recommend that
after completion of initial therapy, patients should
be placed on MPAA for maintenance (1B).

This recommendation places a high value on the data demon-
strating that long-term, reduced-dose MPAA decrease the risk of
LN relapse compared to azathioprine or no treatment and that
MPAA have effectiveness comparable to that of cyclophospha-
mide but with a lower risk of adverse events. The recommen-
dation places a lower value on the risk of adverse events
associated with long-term MPAA treatment as compared to no
treatment (Figure 8).

Key information

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. High-intensity immunosup-
pression for the initial treatment of LN is given for 3–6
months, depending on the regimen (Section 10.2.3.1). At the
end of initial therapy, only about 10%–40% of patients achieve
complete response as deﬁned by clinical parameters,11,17,19,199

S38

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Reduce prednisone
to <5 mg/d

First choice

Patients who received triple
immunosuppression as initial
therapy for active nephritis
(refer to Recommendation
10.2.3.1.1 and Figure 5)

Individual cases or when
no access to MPAA

If MPAA or azathioprine
not tolerated or available

Mycophenolic acid analogs:
mycophenolate mofetil 1–2 g/d or
mycophenolic acid 720–1440 mg/d

or

Continue with the maintenance triple
immunosuppression as described
in Figure 5 as appropriate, Practice
Point 10.2.3.2.5, and Figure 9

or

Azathioprine
1.5–2.0 mg/kg/d

or

CNI (tacrolimus, level ≈4–6 ng/ml;
cyclosporine, level ≈50–100 ng/ml)
or mizoribine ≈3–5 mg/kg/d

Figure 8 | Recommended options of maintenance therapy for Class III and Class IV lupus nephritis. The target ranges of calcineurin
inhibitors (CNIs) have been based on the transplant literature. The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Work Group
acknowledges that targets for glomerular diseases are not known. Most clinicians check these levels to verify adherence and avoid CNI toxicity.
At present, the most reasonable dosing of a CNI may be to titrate in the individual patient to obtain the desired effect on proteinuria, balancing
dose escalation against serum creatinine level, reducing the dose if the serum creatinine level increases but does not plateau or increases to
over 30% of baseline. If the serum creatinine level does not fall after dose reduction, the CNI should be discontinued. MPAA, mycophenolic acid
analogs.

and approximately 20% achieve complete histologic remission,
deﬁned as an activity index of zero on repeat kidney biopsy.10
Also, LN relapses frequently, and relapses predispose patients to
additional kidney damage and progression to kidney failure.
Ongoing treatment is therefore needed to consolidate initial
responses into more complete and sustained responses, and to
prevent disease ﬂares. After initial therapy, ongoing immuno-
suppression is designated as maintenance therapy.

lifetime

exposure

cyclophosphamide

The evolution of current maintenance therapy for prolif-
erative LN is an example of how investigators have tried to
balance preservation of kidney function against the toxicities
of long-term immunosuppressive therapy. After it became
clear that the addition of a cytotoxic agent to glucocorticoids
during the initial treatment of LN improved long-term kidney
survival, patients were kept on oral, or in later studies i.v.,
cyclophosphamide for months or years.119 This
led to
considerable
and
toxicity.200,201 A study reporting in 2004 compared quarterly
i.v. cyclophosphamide against oral MMF or azathioprine for
LN maintenance, and the results showed not only a signiﬁcant
reduction in side effects in those treated with MMF or
azathioprine but also improved kidney and patient outcomes
compared to the cyclophosphamide group.202 This led to a
decrease in the use of quarterly cyclophosphamide as main-
tenance treatment. Favorable long-term results with sequen-
immunosuppressive regimen have been published by
tial
others.115,116 Together, they ushered in the current era of
intense, high-dose immunosuppression for the initial treat-
ment of proliferative LN followed by prolonged immuno-
suppression with a less-intense regimen to reduce adverse
events while ensuring the continued suppression of immune-
mediated pathogenic processes so that the response following
initial therapy is consolidated, the disease remains quiescent,
ﬂares are prevented, and further damage to the kidney or
other organs is avoided.

MMF and azathioprine were directly compared as main-
tenance agents in 2 major clinical
trials (Supplementary
Table S2412,202–204).16,99 In an LN cohort of 227 ethnically
diverse patients, the maintenance phase of ALMS showed that
over 3 years of follow-up, the composite treatment failure
endpoint of death, kidney failure, LN ﬂare,
sustained
doubling of SCr, or requirement for rescue therapy was
observed in 16% of MMF-treated patients and in 32% of
(P ¼ 0.003).16 LN ﬂares
azathioprine-treated patients
occurred in 12.9% of MMF-treated patients and 23.4% of
azathioprine-treated patients. In contrast, the Mycophenolate
Mofetil Versus Azathioprine for Maintenance Therapy of
Lupus Nephritis (MAINTAIN) trial randomized 105 pre-
dominantly White patients to MMF or azathioprine and
glucocorticoid maintenance therapy after initial therapy with
the low-dose cyclophosphamide regimen and showed no
difference in time to kidney ﬂare between the 2 groups, with a
cumulative kidney ﬂare rate of around 20% in both groups
after 36 months.99 A higher proportion of patients in the
azathioprine group had adverse events leading to withdrawal
of therapy in the ALMS maintenance trial (39.6% vs. 25.2%),
and there was a higher incidence of cytopenia in the azathi-
oprine group in the MAINTAIN trial. Thus, in most LN
populations, MMF (MPAA) is the maintenance drug of
choice.

An RCT compared maintenance treatment with triple
immunosuppression that included low-dose MPAA, low-dose
(“multitarget”
tacrolimus, and low-dose glucocorticoids
regimen) against azathioprine in responders following a
“multitarget” regimen or the NIH i.v. cyclophosphamide
regimen as initial treatment for 6 months in the 2 groups
respectively, and the results showed similar efﬁcacy in pre-
venting ﬂares in the 2 groups and a higher incidence of
adverse events due to transaminitis in the azathioprine
group.106 However, the follow-up duration of 18 months was

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S39

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

Maintenance
immuno-
suppressive
regimens

Comments

Low-dose glucocorticoids AND

Mycophenolic
acid analogs

Azathioprine

Preferred treatment
based on high-
certainty evidence; 

Low medication
cost; safe in
pregnancy

than azathioprine
maintenance

Belimumab and
mycophenolic acid
analogs or azathioprine

CNI and mycophenolic
acid analogs

CNI (such as
voclosporin, tacrolimus
or cyclosporine)

Tacrolimus and
cyclosporine safe in

pregnancy data on
voclosporin

belimumab demonstrated
in BLISS-LN (104-wk) and
open-label extension
trials (28-wk)
[Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5]

voclosporin demonstrated
in AURORA 1 (52-wk) and
AURORA 2 continuation trials

tacrolimus demonstrated in
‘Multitarget Therapy’ trial in
Chinese patients in which
tacrolimus and reduced-dose
MPAA were given for
24 months
[Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5]

Mizoribine

Experience
mostly in
Japanese
patients

Figure 9 | Maintenance immunosuppressive regimens in patients with lupus nephritis. AURORA, Aurinia Renal Response in Active Lupus
with Voclosporin; BLISS-LN, Efﬁcacy and Safety of Belimumab in Patients with Active Lupus Nephritis; CNI, calcineurin inhibitor; MPAA,
mycophenolate acid analogs.

relatively short, and the generalizability of data needs further
investigation. Also, although the response rate was signiﬁ-
cantly higher in the “multitarget” group after 6 months of
initial treatment, the cumulative response rate was similar
between the 2 groups during the second year of therapy,
increasing to approximately 90% by the end of 24 months.
Relatively favorable results demonstrating sustained beneﬁt
have been reported for continued maintenance immuno-
suppression with triple immunosuppressive treatment regi-
mens that included low-dose glucocorticoids and MPAA or
azathioprine plus belimumab; low-dose glucocorticoids and
MPAA plus voclosporin; or low-dose glucocorticoids and
MPAA or azathioprine plus cyclosporine or
tacrolimus
(Figures 8 and 9).108,110,113,205–207 Nevertheless, the optimal
duration of such treatment remains unclear.

Based on these considerations collectively, the Work Group
concluded that the beneﬁts of maintenance immunosup-
pression far outweigh its potential harms, and MPAA is the
preferred drug based on the data to date (Practice Point
10.2.3.2.1), while there is the need for more data on how long
to extend triple immunosuppressive regimens with belimu-
mab or CNIs,
to taper maintenance
immunosuppression.

and the way

Certainty of evidence. Three RCTs compared azathioprine
with mycophenolate mofetil. There was moderate certainty of
evidence that azathioprine probably increases renal relapse,
risks for doubling of SCr, and leukopenia due to serious
imprecision in the estimate of effects, and low or very low
certainty of evidence for other outcomes due to study limi-
tations and/or very serious
imprecision (Supplementary
Table S2412,202–204).

Only 1 RCT compared long duration (18 months) of
cyclophosphamide therapy, encompassing both the initial
treatment period and the maintenance phase, with short
duration (6 months) of cyclophosphamide therapy as initial
treatment followed by maintenance treatment with variable
immunosuppressive regimens. Due to study limitations and

very serious imprecision (only 1 study, and very wide CIs,
indicating appreciable beneﬁt and harm), the certainty of the
evidence for this trial is very low; thus, no conclusions were
able to be drawn (Supplementary Table S25119).

Similarly, only 1 RCT (n ¼39) compared azathioprine with
quarterly pulse cyclophosphamide as maintenance treatment,
indicating very low certainty of the evidence because of study
limitations and very serious imprecision (only 1 study, wide
CIs) (Supplementary Table S26202). Thus, the ﬁndings of this
review are inconclusive.

The ALMS trial compared azathioprine with MMF as
maintenance therapy in patients with proliferative LN and
showed an increased rate of a composite “treatment failure”
endpoint and adverse effects (e.g.,
leukopenia) in patients
who received azathioprine.16 Despite the large sample size and
the fact that this was an RCT, the certainty of the evidence was
downgraded to moderate because of imprecision (few events)
or study limitations (unclear allocation concealment).

Data on the use of CNIs or mizoribine exclusively added to
the maintenance treatment are generally of low certainty
(Practice Point 10.2.3.2.6208–211), and there is a lack of in-
formation regarding addition of B-cell–directed therapies to
the maintenance phase.212

Values and preferences. In the judgment of the Work Group,
most well-informed patients who have undergone aggressive
immunosuppression to control their LN would choose main-
tenance therapy to try to attain complete remission if it had not
yet been achieved, and in all cases to avoid disease relapses
needing reinstitution of high-dose immunosuppression. In the
judgment of the Work Group, given the better efﬁcacy of MPAA
with its generally favorable tolerability proﬁle, compared to
azathioprine, most well-informed patients would choose MPAA
as the ﬁrst-line treatment.

However, patients who have had severe adverse effects
while on MPAA, or who place a high value on becoming
pregnant, may choose azathioprine (or a CNI) over MPAA, as

S40

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

may patients
unaffordable.

for whom MPAAs

are unavailable or

Resource use and costs. In general, it is reasonable to assume
that the personal and societal cost of not using maintenance
therapy and risking disease relapse after investing in initial
therapy would be higher than the cost of maintenance medi-
cations. Compared with initial therapy, facility costs are often
lower, as maintenance regimens are oral. Outside of medication
expense, major resource implications arise from laboratory
monitoring of lupus activity and immunosuppression and
managing complications of treatment. Although the drug cost
of MPAA is considerably higher than that of azathioprine, there
are few cost-effectiveness analyses of maintenance treatment for
LN.213 Also, some drugs may have limited accessibility in certain
regions, and this may inﬂuence choices. Drug-level monitoring
is required in patients treated with some CNIs, but not when
azathioprine or MPAA are used, and this also has implications
for affordability and accessibility.

Considerations for implementation. Apart from availability
and cost of MPAA, a major consideration for implementation
of maintenance therapy is safety during pregnancy. It is not
advisable to attempt pregnancy until LN and SLE have been
well controlled for some time, which would give ample op-
portunity to switch patients over to a regimen that is safe
during pregnancy. Pregnancy decisions are complex, and
maintenance therapy often needs to be individualized on this
basis (Section 10.3.2.). MPAA are contraindicated during
pregnancy and must be discontinued well in advance of trying
to conceive. Cyclosporine is classiﬁed under category C by both
the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) in Australia and
the FDA in the U.S., while tacrolimus is classiﬁed under cate-
gory C by the TGA and is not assigned a category by the FDA.
Data from animal studies showed potential adverse effects that
appeared dose-related. With regard to human pregnancy,
category C means risk cannot be excluded, but the experience
to date, mainly from organ transplant recipients, is generally
favorable with both cyclosporine and tacrolimus, showing an
increased incidence of low birth weight but not fetal malfor-
mations. Prescribing information from the manufacturer of
voclosporin states to avoid its use in pregnant women due to
the alcohol content of the drug formulation, while there are
insufﬁcient data to conclude whether there is a drug-associated
risk for major birth defects, miscarriage, or adverse maternal or
fetal outcomes. Data from animal studies showed embryo/
feticidal effects but no treatment-related fetal malformations.
In this regard, most preparations of cyclosporine also contain
alcohol. Low-dose azathioprine is safe during pregnancy.

There are insufﬁcient data on the safety of belimumab
during pregnancy, and its use cannot be recommended at this
time.214

Rationale
The use of maintenance combined immunosuppressive
therapy in Class III/IV LN to consolidate response to initial
immunosuppressive treatment and prevent disease ﬂares is
supported by evidence of at least moderate certainty. There

are more robust data supporting the superiority of MPAA
over azathioprine as maintenance therapy from clinical trials
that included patients of different races and ethnicities. In-
formation from the clinical trials using belimumab as initial
therapy and then continued for 2–2.5 years as maintenance
therapy suggest a lower risk for disease relapses based on post
hoc analysis with low certainty of evidence.

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.1: Azathioprine is an alternative to
MPAA after completion of initial therapy in patients who
do not tolerate MPAA, who do not have access to MPAA, or
who are considering pregnancy.

As discussed under Recommendation 10.2.3.2.1, the direct
comparison between MPAA and azathioprine as maintenance
treatment in LN, both combined with low-dose glucocorticoids,
is mainly based on data from ALMS and the MAINTAIN
trial.16,203 Although the results from the latter showed no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant difference in time to disease ﬂare or long-
term clinical outcomes in Caucasian patients, data from
ALMS based on a large sample size from different countries with
different ancestry demonstrated superior efﬁcacy of MPAA
compared with azathioprine. In both trials, azathioprine was
associated with more adverse effects, such as leukopenia and
abnormal liver-enzyme levels. However, azathioprine is much
cheaper than MPAA, and ﬁnancial barriers may limit access to
MPAA in many countries. Under such circumstances, or in
patients who do not tolerate MPAA because of side effects, low-
dose glucocorticoids combined with azathioprine are an effec-
tive maintenance immunosuppressive treatment. Observational
cohort data from Chinese patients showed that in patients who
received MPAA as initial therapy, the disease ﬂare rate was
increased when the total duration of MPAA was <2 years,15,118
and that long-term maintenance treatment with MPAA was
associated with a low disease ﬂare rate.215 Overall, although the
efﬁcacy and safety data to date favor MPAA as maintenance
treatment, azathioprine is an acceptable alternative, especially in
the later phase of long-term management.

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.2: Glucocorticoids should be tapered
to the lowest possible dose during maintenance, except
when glucocorticoids are required for extrarenal
lupus
manifestations; discontinuation of glucocorticoids can be
considered after patients have maintained a complete
clinical renal response for ‡12 months.

accrual

Prolonged glucocorticoid exposure is associated with
continued and signiﬁcant organ damage
and
morbidity.146,148 At the end of the initial phase of treatment, the
goal is to have reduced most patients to a daily dose of pred-
nisone (or equivalent) that is #7.5 mg, and preferably as low as
possible. The tapering regimen and duration of glucocorticoid
maintenance therapy vary considerably among clinicians and
are largely opinion-based, informed by individualized consid-
erations of a patient’s risk of developing disease ﬂare, and
the risk–beneﬁt balance of the prevailing dose of immuno-
suppressive medications. A recent open-label controlled
the Discontinuation of Maintenance
trial (Evaluation of

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S41

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

in Quiescent Systemic Lupus
Corticosteroid Treatment
[CORTICOLUP] trial) compared continuation of prednisone 5
mg daily against discontinuation in 124 multiethnic patients in
Paris with stable and quiescent SLE (history of LN in 34% and
41%, respectively).216 The results showed a signiﬁcantly
increased ﬂare rate over 52 weeks of follow-up in patients who
discontinued prednisone (HR: 0.2 in those who continued
prednisone 5 mg daily, P ¼ 0.002), and 45 of 63 patients in the
discontinuation group remained glucocorticoid-free. It should
be noted that the withdrawal of glucocorticoids in this study
may have been too abrupt for patients who had been taking
glucocorticoids for many years, in which case, the “ﬂares”
presented may in fact have been withdrawal symptoms.
Glucocorticoid discontinuation in patients with stable quies-
cent disease can be considered, but it should be undertaken
with caution and careful monitoring for disease ﬂare. Gluco-
corticoid avoidance in maintenance therapy has been attemp-
ted with the use of rituximab, but the evidence to support this
approach remains limited to one cohort.198

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.3: The dose of mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) in the early maintenance phase is approx-
imately 750–1000 mg twice daily, and for mycophenolic
acid (MPA), approximately 540–720 mg twice daily.

The suggested dosages are largely based on data from the
ALMS and MAINTAIN trials.16,203 As mentioned before, the
Work Group recommends maintenance of these doses until
achievement of complete response, and then tapering. Due to
pharmacogenetic differences, the level of MPA exposure varies
considerably among patients receiving the same dose of
MPAA. The dose of MPAA may need to be reduced when
kidney function is signiﬁcantly impaired, as patients with
CKD are more susceptible to the adverse effects of MPA.
Although there are insufﬁcient data to date to provide rec-
ommendations on therapeutic drug monitoring, measure-
ment of MPA exposure may be helpful
in patients with
unsatisfactory treatment response or patients who manifest or
are at increased risk of drug toxicities. There are preliminary
data associating disease ﬂares with low MPA exposure, but the
optimal drug level at different phases of clinical management
remains to be determined.217

initial
Practice Point 10.2.3.2.4: The total duration of
immunosuppression
combination maintenance
plus
immunosuppression for proliferative LN should be ‡36
months.

The optimal duration of maintenance immunosuppression
in patients with proliferative LN is not known. If it is with-
drawn too early, patients may relapse even after having had a
good response to treatment. Prolonged maintenance increases
exposure to immunosuppression and may not provide sufﬁ-
cient continued beneﬁts to outweigh toxicity risk. The Work
Group recommends that the total duration of immunosup-
pression (initial therapy plus maintenance) for patients with

proliferative LN who have achieved a complete renal response
and have no ongoing extrarenal manifestations be $36
months, based on consideration of the following evidence
collectively:
(cid:4) In a recent clinical trial (Weaning of Immunosuppression
in Nephritis of Lupus [WIN-Lupus]) from France, 96 pa-
tients who responded to initial therapy and with protein-
uria below 0.5 g/d for 2–3 years were randomized to
immunosuppression discontinuation over 3 months or
continuation and were observed for 24 months. The study
was underpowered, but after 2 years, there were more se-
vere SLE ﬂares and a trend toward higher renal relapses in
the discontinuation group (Supplementary Table S27).218
(cid:4) In Chinese patients who received MMF as initial therapy,
discontinuation of MMF before 2 years was associated with
an increased risk of disease ﬂare.15,118

(cid:4) During the third to fourth year of MMF maintenance
therapy, kidney ﬂare was associated with low 12-hour
trough MPA blood levels, whereas patients with trough
levels of approximately 2 mg/l (6.2 mmol/l) remained in
remission.219

(cid:4) The ALMS maintenance phase data demonstrated a rela-
tively high incidence of treatment failure (16%–32%) and
kidney ﬂares (13%–23%) despite 36 months of immuno-
suppression and maintenance with low-dose glucocorti-
coids and either MMF or azathioprine.16

(cid:4) In an Italian cohort, immunosuppression was tapered in
patients who were in complete remission for >12 months,
and 27% relapsed. One of the predictors of successful
treatment discontinuation was a longer duration (median
of 4 years) of prior immunosuppressive therapy.220

(cid:4) Despite $36 months of

immunosuppression and $12
months of sustained complete clinical renal response, 28%–
50% of patients continued to show inﬂammatory histologic
activity on repeat kidney biopsy.221–223 Patients with
persistent histologic activity have an increased risk of LN
ﬂare
immunosuppression is dis-
continued, compared to patients who have no residual in-
ﬂammatory activity in their kidneys.222,223

after maintenance

(cid:4) Patients who have achieved a partial remission tend to be left
on maintenance immunosuppression indeﬁnitely. Kidney
biopsy studies of such patients have shown that many have
resolution of histologic activity but are clinically only in
partial remission due to residual proteinuria.221–223 In such
patients, proteinuria may reﬂect CKD as opposed to active
disease, and immunosuppression may be able to be dis-
continued in the absence of ongoing kidney inﬂammation.
In summary, despite the unknown optimal duration of
maintenance immunosuppression for proliferative LN, most
patients will require $3 years of therapy. Clinical response
ﬁndings do not correlate completely with ongoing kidney
inﬂammation. A repeat kidney biopsy can be considered to
inform the decision to continue or withdraw maintenance
immunosuppression.

S42

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.5: Patients treated with triple
immunosuppressive regimens that include belimumab or a
CNI in addition to standard immunosuppressive therapy
can continue with a triple immunosuppressive regimen as
maintenance therapy (Figure 9).

In the phase 3 belimumab trial in LN (BLISS-LN), patients
in the intervention arm were treated with low-dose gluco-
corticoids and belimumab plus either MPAA or azathioprine
as maintenance immunosuppression, and treatment was
continued until 100 weeks from baseline with the primary
endpoint assessed at week 104.111 This was followed by an
open-label extension study of 28 weeks that included 257 of
the original 448 patients randomized in the BLISS-LN trial,
during which patients originally randomized to receive pla-
cebo were changed to belimumab.112 Results from the latter
showed that the efﬁcacy beneﬁt associated with belimumab
treatment was maintained with no safety concerns; and post
hoc analysis showed that patients treated with the belimumab-
containing triple immunosuppressive regimen had lower rates
of adverse kidney outcomes as well as better kidney
function.112,113

In the phase 3 voclosporin trial

in LN (AURORA 1),
treatment was continued for 52 weeks and the primary
endpoint was assessed at week 52.141 Patients who completed
the phase 3 trial were eligible to continue the same blinded
therapy in a 2-year continuation study (AURORA 2; 116 of
179 patients in the voclosporin arm and 100 of 178 patients in
the control arm).110 Results from the latter showed sustained
reduction of proteinuria with voclosporin treatment, and
stable and similar kidney function in both groups, with no
safety signal.

continued with the

In a trial of 368 Chinese patients that compared triple
immunosuppression with glucocorticoids and ﬁxed-dose
tacrolimus and reduced-dose MMF against glucocorticoids
and sequential cyclophosphamide followed by azathioprine,
patients
immunosuppressive
regimen for 24 months.106 By the end of 24 months, the 2
treatment arms showed similar complete remission rates
approaching 80%, and patients treated with triple immuno-
suppression showed a relapse rate of 5.47%, with a lower
withdrawal rate due to adverse events (1.7%) compared with
that of controls (8.9%).

triple

These results suggest that triple immunosuppressive regi-
mens that include belimumab or a CNI in addition to stan-
dard maintenance immunosuppression can be continued for
2–3 years.

Practice Point 10.2.3.2.6: If MPAA and azathioprine cannot
be used for maintenance, CNIs or mizoribine or leﬂuno-
mide can be considered (Figure 9).

Experience in Japanese patients suggested that low-dose
tacrolimus at 3 mg/d was safe and effective when given as
long-term maintenance therapy together with low-dose glu-
cocorticoids.209,224 In a study of 70 Chinese patients who ach-
ieved remission after initial therapy with glucocorticoids and
either i.v. cyclophosphamide or tacrolimus, maintenance

therapy with tacrolimus (trough blood level target of 4–6 ng/ml
[5–7.4 nmol/l]) was compared with azathioprine 2 mg/kg/d,
both in combination with prednisone 10 mg/d. Over 6 months
of follow-up, kidney relapse occurred in 2 azathioprine-treated
patients and in none in the tacrolimus group.225

Adding tacrolimus or cyclosporine to maintenance therapy
was reported in case series as effective in reducing proteinuria
in patients with unsatisfactory suppression of proteinuria
therapy with glucocorticoids and MMF,
following initial
especially in patients who showed features of Class V LN in
their baseline kidney biopsies.208,210,226–228 Caution is required
when considering adding CNI for the purpose of decreasing
proteinuria. It is desirable that there be histologic evidence of
podocyte injury so that the CNI is likely to be effective. Also, it
is prudent to avoid overimmunosuppression and chronic CNI
nephrotoxicity, especially in patients with CKD.

Although most studies were done in patients of Asian
origin, it is reasonable to consider a CNI for maintenance
therapy in any patients who cannot take MPAA or azathio-
prine. Tacrolimus and cyclosporine can also be used safely
during pregnancy (Figure 9).

that

study

surveillance

The experience with mizoribine as maintenance therapy in
LN is largely limited to Japanese patients.211,229 Results from a
post-marketing
559
mizoribine-treated patients showed that nearly all were
receiving glucocorticoids, and 43.8% were receiving tacroli-
mus as concomitant treatment. Overall, 63.3% of patients
achieved complete or partial remission, and only 3.6% of
patients experienced serious adverse drug reactions within 2
years of mizoribine treatment, and the authors concluded that
mizoribine was safe and effective (Figure 9).230

included

Leﬂunomide is a prodrug that once metabolized inhibits de
novo pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. An open-label 36-
month trial from China randomized 270 LN patients with
previous response to i.v. cyclophosphamide therapy to leﬂu-
nomide 20 mg/d or azathioprine (target dose 100 mg/d) and
oral glucocorticoids. No difference in kidney ﬂares was
observed between groups by 36 months (15.7% vs. 17.8%),
and the kidney function was similarly preserved in both
groups. No differences in adverse events were observed be-
tween groups (Supplementary Table S28231). There are no
formal studies comparing leﬂunomide and MPAA; therefore,
leﬂunomide is considered an alternative to MPAA in the
above-mentioned circumstances exclusively. Leﬂunomide is
contraindicated in pregnancy and should be discontinued for
at least 2 years before patients try to conceive.

10.2.4 Class V lupus nephritis

Practice Point 10.2.4.1: A suggested approach to the man-
agement of patients with pure Class V LN is described in
Figure 10.

Class V LN accounts for 5%–10% of all LN cases. Data on
clinical management are based on very few RCTs with small
sample sizes, analyses of pooled data, and observational
studies. The management of Class V LN with no proliferation

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S43

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

Kidney biopsy
showing Class V lupus nephritis

airunietorp level-woL

airunietorp egnar-citorhpeN

Monitor the level of proteinuria and prevent or treat
complications (e.g., thrombosis, dyslipidemia, edema)

1  Renin-angiotensin system blockade and
    blood pressure control
2  Immunosuppressive treatment guided
    by extrarenal manifestations of systemic
    lupus erythematosus
3  Hydroxychloroquine

1  Renin-angiotensin system blockade and blood pressure control
2  Combined immunosuppressive treatment with glucocorticoid and
    one other agent (e.g., mycophenolic acid analogs, cyclophosphamide,

    recommendation of glucocorticoid regimen, but moderate or reduced
    dose preferred.  Please refer to Practice Point 10.2.3.1.1.
3  Hydroxychloroquine

If proteinuria worsens and/or complications
of proteinuria develop (e.g., thrombosis,
dyslipidemia, edema), consider
immunosuppressive therapy

Figure 10 | Management of patients with pure Class V lupus nephritis.

in the kidney histology is guided by the severity of protein-
uria. Long-term follow-up data show that 10%–30% of pa-
tients with Class V LN progress to kidney failure, and the risk
of progressive CKD is associated with the severity of pro-
teinuria. Unlike primary membranous nephropathy, heavy
proteinuria in Class V LN does not usually spontaneously
remit. Also, heavy proteinuria and NS increase the risk of
infections and CV morbidity and predispose patients to
thrombosis.232–235

A small RCT demonstrated that remission was signiﬁcantly
more likely with prednisone plus cyclophosphamide (60%) or
prednisone plus cyclosporine (84%) than with prednisone alone
(27%), but cyclophosphamide maintained remission longer (no
relapses within a year) than CNI treatment (40% relapsed
within a year of discontinuing the CNI).149 Pooled data from 2
studies showed that prednisone plus either cyclophosphamide
or MMF had similar efﬁcacy in lowering proteinuria after 6
months of treatment.236 Other studies with relatively small
sample sizes reported the efﬁcacy of glucocorticoids combined
with azathioprine,27,219 oral cyclophosphamide,237 i.v. cyclo-
phosphamide,149,238 MMF,26,27,168,238–240 CNIs,149,168,227,241–243
and rituximab,198,244 with response rates of 40%–60%. Triple
immunosuppression with glucocorticoids, tacrolimus, and low-
dose MPAA resulted in a higher complete remission rate in
patients with Class V LN compared to that in controls treated
with glucocorticoids and high-dose cyclophosphamide followed
by azathioprine (33.1% vs. 7.8%).19 Also, tacrolimus was re-
ported as effective when given together with glucocorticoids as
initial therapy to patients with Class V LN who presented with
NS, or when given as add-on therapy to patients with mixed

Class V and Class III/IV LN whose proteinuria response was
judged suboptimal after initial treatment with prednisolone and
MMF.210 In the phase 3 voclosporin trial (AURORA; see Prac-
tice Point 10.2.3.1.4), 14% of the patients had pure Class V
LN.165 Adding voclosporin to background therapy was more
effective than background immunosuppression alone in
achieving renal response, and in 31 patients with Class V LN, the
median time to reduce proteinuria to #0.5 mg/mg (50 mg/
mmol) was 3.6 months in patients treated with voclosporin
added to glucocorticoids and MMF, compared with 8.3 months
in controls treated with placebo added to glucocorticoids and
MMF (HR 1.93, P ¼ 0.167).245 In the BLISS-LN trial, 16% of
patients had Class V LN (36 patients treated with belimumab,
and 36 patients treated with placebo). Results from post hoc
analysis suggested that belimumab might not be as effective in
patients who presented with nephrotic-range proteinuria
compared to those with less-severe proteinuria, although it
might still reduce the incidence of adverse kidney outcomes.
The overall increase in PERR and complete response rate (CRR)
when belimumab was added to standard therapy was attributed
to patients with a proliferative histologic component, while
there was no observed treatment difference associated with
belimumab in patients with Class V LN (PERR: OR: 0.65; 95%
CI: 0.23–1.86; CRR: OR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.27–2.62).113 There is a
lack of robust data in the management of Class V LN, especially
in patients who present with NS. The data to date are more in
favor of combining glucocorticoids with MPAA, a CNI, or
short-term cyclophosphamide than with other options.

In addition to general methods to reduce urine protein,
such as renin-angiotensin system inhibitors and meticulous

S44

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Complete response*

• Reduction in proteinuria <0.5 g/g (50 mg/mmol) measured as the PCR from
  a 24-h urine collection
• Stabilization or improvement in kidney function (±10%–15% of baseline)
• Within 6–12 mo of starting therapy, but could take more than 12 mo

renal response

Partial response

• PCR ≤0.7 g/g (70 mg/mmol)

  per 1.73 m2
• No use of rescue therapy for treatment failure

• Reduction in proteinuria by at least 50% and to <3 g/g (300 mg/mmol)
  measured as the PCR from a 24-h urine collection
• Stabilization or improvement in kidney function (±10%–15% of baseline)
• Within 6–12 mo of starting therapy

No kidney response

• Failure to achieve a partial or complete response within 6–12 mo of starting
  therapy 

Figure 11 | Deﬁnitions of response commonly used in clinical trials of lupus nephritis. *For children <18 years old, complete response is
deﬁned as proteinuria <0.5 g/1.73 m2 per day or <300 mg/m2 per day based on a 24-hour urine specimen. eGFR, estimated glomerular
ﬁltration rate; PCR, protein–creatinine ratio.

blood pressure control, MMF is a reasonable ﬁrst choice for
treating patients with Class V and nephrotic-range protein-
ineffective, we advise cyclophosphamide for #6
uria. If
months next to help induce long-term remission, but long-
term CNI or rituximab may also be tried if the patient has
had prior signiﬁcant exposure to cyclophosphamide or is
reluctant to take the medication in view of the associated
toxicities. Decisions on whether to treat with immunosup-
pressive medications or CNI in patients with proteinuria that
is non-nephrotic but above 1 g/24 h need to be individualized,
taking into account the severity and progression of protein-
uria and the risks and beneﬁts of treatment. Appropriate
measures to prevent venous thrombosis should be considered
in patients whose proteinuria persists despite treatments (see
Chapter 1 of the KDIGO Guideline on Glomerular Diseases).

10.2.5 Response and relapse considerations

10.2.5.1 Assessing treatment response in LN

Practice Point 10.2.5.1.1: Deﬁnitions of response to therapy
in LN used in clinical trials are provided in Figure 11.

All response criteria currently used in clinical trials of LN
in proteinuria and stabilization or
require improvement
improvement in kidney function. Several observational studies
suggest that long-term kidney health is considerably more
favorable in patients who respond to treatment.115,246–248
However, there are no universally accepted criteria for the
level of improvement required, which makes direct compari-
sons of different clinical trials more difﬁcult.

The deﬁnitions in Figure 11 are commonly used, with
“baseline” kidney function referring to the level before disease
ﬂare, which is not known in patients with no previous

medical record. Long-term data from 2 large European LN
trials showed that favorable kidney outcomes were predicted
by achieving a proteinuria level of 0.7–0.8 g/d after 12 months
of therapy, a conclusion supported by other reports.117,249–251
In this regard, the PERR at Week 104 was the primary
endpoint in the BLISS-LN trial.111

Another caveat is the lack of consensus on the appropriate
time for assessing response. For logistic and economic reasons,
large clinical trials often evaluate response at 6–12 months, but
improvement of proteinuria and eGFR is continuous over time,
and the rate of improvement varies considerably among pa-
tients. Also, there are marked differences in baseline kidney
abnormalities at disease presentation. Therefore, the time to
reach prespeciﬁed proteinuria and eGFR cutoffs, either abso-
lute or
relative to baseline, varies considerably among
patients.12,14,15,150,227,252,253 The timeframes
response
assessment as stated in the deﬁnitions in Figure 11 refer to the
timepoints when these outcomes are assessed in clinical trials.
These timeframes do not mean that one would need to wait for
the speciﬁed time periods to lapse before making management
decisions. Instead, patients should be assessed continuously to
ensure that there is continuous improvement, and in patients
not responding satisfactorily to current therapy, alternative
treatments should be considered early.

for

Outside of a formal clinical trial setting, the Work Group
if patients are improving, allowing 18–24
suggests that
months to achieve a complete response is reasonable in pa-
tients who show continuous improvement. A potential tool to
predict kidney outcomes was derived from a post hoc analysis
of the large ALMS trial. This analysis suggested favorable
kidney outcomes are predicted by normalization of comple-
ment levels and $25% reduction of proteinuria after 8 weeks
of treatment.254

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S45

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

SLE is a systemic disease, and the kidney should not be
examined in isolation from other clinical manifestations.
Several other clinical parameters have not been evaluated in
detail in clinical studies but are relevant at individual levels,
such as systemic activity of SLE (e.g., Systemic Lupus Ery-
thematosus Disease Activity Index [SLEDAI] score), blood
pressure control, edema resolution, urine sediment, hemoglo-
bin and albumin improvements, and serologic parameters,
including dsDNA antibodies and serum complements. If lupus
serologies are abnormal, it is reasonable to expect improve-
ment with therapy for LN, although many patients remain
positive for anti-dsDNA and/or have low complement levels
despite resolution of proteinuria. Extrarenal
lupus activity
requiring continuation or a change in therapy could remain
even if the kidney improves. Finally, response is currently only
assessed clinically. Considerable data suggest that persistent
intrarenal
lupus activity may remain, despite resolution of
proteinuria and eGFR.221–223 A repeat kidney biopsy may,
therefore, be useful in conﬁrming renal response, especially
before making important major treatment decisions such as
discontinuation of immunosuppression.10 Also, holistic man-
agement should include considerations of CKD progression
and CV risk factor management, in addition to minimization
of other long-term adverse outcomes.

early appraisal of potential causes for nonresponse and early
intervention, whereas patients who show response to treatment
can be closely observed and investigated when the level of
improvement after 3–4 months of therapy is suboptimal or
below expectation. A 2-month timeframe to see improvement
was suggested based on post hoc analysis of data from the
ALMS trial,254 but deterioration needs to be evaluated on an
individual basis in terms of rapidity and severity.

The role of nonadherence in unsatisfactory treatment
response cannot be overemphasized. The prevalence of non-
adherence in patients with SLE could be >60%.255–258 It is
imperative therefore to check treatment adherence on a reg-
ular basis. Switching from oral immunosuppression to i.v.
cyclophosphamide should be considered when nonadherence
is suspected or known.

treatment

response or

refractoriness,

The certainty of evidence on the management of LN “re-
fractory” to standard initial therapy is marred by variable
deﬁnitions of
the
disparity between kidney histology and clinical outcome pa-
rameters, the legacy effect of prior therapy, and the impact of
factors other than disease activity on outcome parameters
such as proteinuria and kidney function. Available data on the
management of refractory disease are largely from uncon-
trolled observational cohort studies, with varied inclusion
criteria and based on relatively small sample sizes.

10.2.5.2 Management of unsatisfactory response to treatment

Practice Point 10.2.5.2.1: An algorithmic approach to pa-
tients whose response to therapy is deemed unsatisfactory
is provided in Figure 12.

Judging the response to therapy to be unsatisfactory is
difﬁcult because there are no robust data with which to
compare an individual’s response trajectory, and there needs to
be a balance between giving a patient sufﬁcient time to respond
and minimizing the likelihood of ongoing nephron loss.
Nonetheless, patients are expected to show improvement over
time after treatment. So, no improvement or worsening despite
treatment for 3–4 weeks is clearly unsatisfactory and warrants

The role of switching between therapeutic regimens has
not been formally investigated. In a U.S. study that compared
mycophenolate with i.v. cyclophosphamide, patients who did
not show response, deﬁned as improvement by $30%, after
12 weeks of treatment were switched to the other treatment
arm.102 Another study reported efﬁcacy of MMF in patients
refractory to or who had relapsed after cyclophosphamide
treatment.259 However, a legacy effect of prior therapy could
not be excluded. Unequivocal evidence on the efﬁcacy of
switching therapies is lacking.

Evidence supporting the use of rituximab for refractory LN
is from open-label observational studies that have reported
response rates of 50%–80%190,215,260–271 and a meta-analysis of

1

2

3

4

5

Verify adherence to treatment

Ensure adequate dosing of immunosuppressive medications by measuring
plasma drug levels if applicable or available (check mycophenolic acid level
if on mycophenolic acid analogs/check infusion records if on cyclophosphamide)

Repeat biopsy if concern for chronicity or other diagnosis
(e.g., thrombotic microangiopathy)

Consider switching to an alternative recommended treatment regimen when
there is persistent active disease

Consider the following in patients refractory
• Addition of rituximab or other biologic therapies
• Extended course of i.v. pulse cyclophosphamide
• Enrollment in clinical trials if eligible

Figure 12 | Management of patients who show unsatisfactory response to initial therapy for active lupus nephritis. i.v., intravenous.

S46

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

31 studies with 1112 patients that showed complete and partial
response rates of 46% and 32%, respectively, after rituximab
was added.272 The role of other biologics with demonstrated
efﬁcacy in recent clinical trials, such as obinutuzumab or
belimumab, warrants further investigation.

Similarly, data from observational cohorts suggested efﬁcacy
of CNIs, combined with either glucocorticoids and/or MMF, in
patients with refractory or relapsing LN.206,208,273–277 Other
therapies under investigation may offer potential options for
refractory LN, such as anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor T
(CAR-T) cell therapy.278

10.2.5.3 Treatment of LN relapse

Relapses of LN are common, and LN ﬂare is an important
predictor of poor long-term kidney survival.279–282 LN ﬂare
rates of 10%–50% have been reported, and relapses occur
over time.283 Failure to achieve complete remission increases
the risk of subsequent relapse.97,115,284 Relapse rates of 39%
and 64% were found in patients who achieved complete
remission or partial remission, respectively, and time-to-
relapse after complete response was 36 months, compared
to 18 months after partial response.97 Similarly, an HR of 6.2
for relapse was reported in Chinese patients who did not
achieve complete remission after initial therapy.115

Practice Point 10.2.5.3.1: After a complete or partial
remission has been achieved, LN relapse should be treated
with the same initial therapy used to achieve the original
response, or an alternative recommended therapy.

There are no data that focus on the treatment of LN ﬂares
alone. However, it is generally agreed that there is no major
difference between management of an LN ﬂare and that of de
novo active LN, and initial therapies are the same as outlined
above. Although not yet ready to be applied in clinical man-
agement, emerging data from a recent transcriptomic study of
paired serial kidney biopsies showed slight differences in intra-
renal inﬂammatory gene expression between the initial pre-
sentation and LN relapse.285 All LN clinical trials testing initial,
induction therapies for LN include both types of patients.
Although these considerations form the basis for Practice Point
10.2.5.3.1, there are several caveats in choosing an approach:
(cid:4) If patients had been treated with cyclophosphamide in the
past, it is important to calculate lifetime exposure. Ovarian
failure has been associated with age (and oocyte reserve)
and cumulative dose, with sustained amenorrhea occur-
ring in up to 50% of patients aged >32 years with a cu-
mulative exposure of 8 g/m2.286,287 The chance of future
malignancy increases after a total exposure of 36 g, so if a
patient is approaching this level, cyclophosphamide is
better avoided.

(cid:4) If patients relapse during pregnancy, treatment choices are

more limited. These are discussed in Section 10.3.2.

(cid:4) Patient preference and/or tolerance of the initial regimen
should be considered. Also, patient adherence should be
considered in the choice of treatment.

(cid:4) Disease activity should be veriﬁed, as proteinuria may be

secondary to CKD.
The last point is critical but complex. The same clinical
criteria used to diagnose de novo LN are used to diagnose LN
ﬂares, absent a kidney biopsy. That is, ﬂares are generally
considered when proteinuria increases beyond a certain
threshold, with or without an active urinary sediment or dete-
rioration of kidney function. Without histology, it is sometimes
difﬁcult to determine whether changes in proteinuria are due to
active inﬂammatory kidney injury or reﬂect progression of
chronic damage incurred during preceding episodes of active
LN, because there is often discordance between clinical ﬁndings
and histologic ﬁndings.10,11 The tempo and magnitude of change
in proteinuria may help identify rapid increases, and large
changes often reﬂect active disease. SLE serologies (e.g., com-
plement, anti-dsDNA) may support a ﬂare diagnosis but need to
be evaluated in the context of prior serologic trends. A change
from normal to abnormal is more useful than serologic studies
that are always normal or always abnormal. Given the risks of
immunosuppression, if the diagnosis of ﬂare remains uncertain,
a repeat kidney biopsy to assess disease activity versus chronic
damage is important to inform treatment decisions.288

In lieu of waiting until LN ﬂares before treating it, some
investigators have examined preemptive treatment to prevent
ﬂare. A trial in the Netherlands compared “early treatment” of
16 patients to conventional management of 23 patients who
increased their anti-dsDNA levels by 25%.289 Prednisone was
increased by 30 mg/d in the early treatment group and was
tapered back to baseline over 18 weeks. After a mean follow-
up of <2 years, 2 major relapses (12.5%, both LN relapses)
occurred in the early treatment group, compared to 20 re-
lapses (87%), 7 of which were major (1 kidney relapse), in the
conventionally managed patients. A prospective trial in the
U.S. randomized 41 patients who showed an increase in both
anti-dsDNA and C3a to prednisone (30 mg/d tapered >4
weeks) or placebo. During a short follow-up (90 days), none
of the patients given prednisone had a severe ﬂare, but 6
the ﬂares were kidney-
placebo patients did, and 3 of
related.290 A recently published retrospective study of Chinese
patients with LN suggested that a moderate increase in
immunosuppressive treatment dose was effective in prevent-
ing kidney and nonrenal ﬂares without excessive treatment-
related adverse effects.217 Taken together, all of these data
suggest that impending LN ﬂares may be preventable, at least
for some patients, but larger RCTs of sufﬁcient duration are
needed before this approach can be endorsed.

10.3 Special situations

10.3.1 Lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy

Practice Point 10.3.1.1: Patients with LN and thrombotic
microangiopathy (TMA) should be managed according to
the underlying etiology of TMA, as shown in Figure 131.

TMA is a pathologic description of vascular endothelial
injury secondary to various etiologies.291 The causes of TMA

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S47

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

Lupus nephritis AND
suspected thrombotic microangiopathy

Test for ADAMTS13 activity and antibodies to ADAMTS13 
Test for antiphospholipid antibodies

Start plasma exchange
and glucocorticoid
while awaiting test
results (adults)

Moderate/high risk
(>5 points)

Low risk
(0–4 points)

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic

purpura

(PLASMIC score)

Low ADAMTS13
activity (<10%)

Normal ADAMTS13
activity and negative
antiphospholipid
antibodies

Normal ADAMTS13
activity and positive
antiphospholipid
antibodies

Systemic lupus
erythematosus-
associated thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura

Evaluate for
thrombotic
microangiopathy
etiologies

Antiphospholipid
syndrome nephropathy

Primary or secondary
complement-mediated
thrombotic
microangiopathy

Plasma exchange
+ glucocorticoid
+ rituximab
+/– caplacizumab

Consider
eculizumab

Other
etiology

Anticoagulation
+/– plasma exchange

Figure 13 | Management of patients with lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). Bendapudi PK, Hurwitz S, Fry A, et al.
Derivation and external validation of the PLASMIC score for rapid assessment of adults with thrombotic microangiopathies: a cohort study.
Lancet Haematol. 2017;4:e157–e164.1 ADAMTS13, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13;
PLASMIC, Platelet count, combined hemoLysis variable, absence of Active cancer, absence of Stem-cell or solid-organ transplant, mean
corpuscular volume (MCV), international normalized ratio (INR), Creatinine.

most relevant to patients with LN are thrombotic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura (TTP), antiphospholipid syndrome (APS),
and complement-mediated TMA. However, patients with
lupus can also develop TMA due to Shiga-toxin-hemolytic
uremic syndrome, infections, drugs, or malignancies.292,293
The key to a good outcome for TMA in LN is rapid diag-
nosis and prompt treatment. When appropriate expertise is
available, it is preferable that patients with LN and TMA be
comanaged with an experienced hematologist. However, some
of the serologic and genetic testing needed for a speciﬁc

diagnosis, such as activity of ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and
metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif,
member 13) or the presence of anti-ADAMTS13 antibodies in
the case of TTP, antiphospholipid antibodies, and complement
studies, may not be available, and even when they are available,
they often take considerable time to complete (Figure 13). If
TTP is suspected, one may consider using scoring through the
PLASMIC (Platelet count, combined hemoLysis variable,
absence of Active cancer, absence of Stem-cell or solid-organ
transplant, MCV, INR, Creatinine),1 and if the score deﬁnes

S48

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

an intermediate-to-high risk of TTP, adults should be started
on plasma exchange and glucocorticoids while waiting for the
investigation results. In children, TTP is less common, and
plasma exchange has been associated with considerable
morbidity,294 so it is acceptable to defer plasma exchange for
24–48 hours until the ADAMTS13 result is available to conﬁrm
that the procedure is indicated.295

TMA due to lupus-associated TTP. The diagnosis of TTP is
mainly reserved for patients with TMA and low ADAMST13
activity (#10%).291,296 The treatment of conﬁrmed TTP in
LN is extrapolated from that of acquired TTP and includes
plasma exchange,297,298 high-dose glucocorticoids,299,300 rit-
uximab,301–304 and/or caplacizumab (von Willebrand factor
inhibitor; Figure 13).305,306

TMA due to APS. Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLA) are
found in about 30% of patients with SLE and may be asso-
ciated with venous and/or arterial macro- or microvascular
thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, adverse pregnancy outcomes,
and neurologic abnormalities. Kidney damage is a well-
recognized complication of APS, presenting as renal artery
thrombosis or stenosis, renal vein thrombosis, or injury to the
kidney microvasculature, also known as APS nephropathy.307
There are few data on the management of APS nephropathy.
In a retrospective study of 97 patients with kidney TMA,
62.9% tested positive for aPLA, 38.1% tested positive for
lupus anticoagulant, and 13.4% had APS.308 Complete and
partial response rates were 38.1% and 22.6%, respectively,
after 12 months of immunosuppressive treatment. Thirty-
seven of 61 patients who were aPLA-positive also received
anticoagulation therapy, and anticoagulated patients showed a
higher complete response rate (59.5% vs. 30.8%). The partial
response rate was 18.9% and 26.9% in patients who had or
had not received anticoagulant therapy, respectively. There-
fore, it is reasonable to treat APS nephropathy with long-term
anticoagulation with warfarin. Direct oral anticoagulants are
not recommended, as they were inferior to warfarin in pre-
venting thromboembolic events in this setting.309,310

Catastrophic APS is characterized by thrombosis, often of
rapid onset, affecting multiple organs, and it is associated
with high mortality. Treatment
includes both total anti-
coagulation and high-dose glucocorticoids.311 Plasma ex-
change is often used in catastrophic APS312 and has been
in retrospective
associated with improved patient survival
studies.313 There are recent anecdotal reports on the potential
efﬁcacy of rituximab in catastrophic APS.314,315 It has been
shown that complement activation is involved in the patho-
tissue injury induced by aPLA, and there is
genesis of
emerging evidence on the efﬁcacy of eculizumab in the
treatment of catastrophic APS.316–318

Complement-mediated TMA and atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome (aHUS). Many cases of kidney TMA with ADAMTS13
activity >10% and negative aPLA correspond to complement-
mediated TMA, and these patients ideally should be evaluated
with complement studies when they are available.319,320 aHUS is
a rare and severe form of TMA caused by dysregulation of the

alternative complement pathway due to genetic or acquired
functional defects in complement regulatory proteins, resulting
in excessive production of the terminal complement complex
C5b-C9, triggering endothelial cell injury that predominantly
affects the kidney vasculature in the arterioles and interlobular
arteries.

Complement-mediated TMA in LN does not respond well
to plasma exchange or immunosuppression with glucocorti-
coids and cyclophosphamide, and it may be best treated with
a complement inhibitor such as eculizumab, although the
optimal dose and duration remain controversial.321–323 The
limited data to date show a high response rate, with resolution
of TMA in 68% of patients with secondary aHUS.324 Data
from 31 adult patients (26 treated with plasma therapy and 5
plasma-resistant patients treated with eculizumab) showed
complete kidney recovery in 4 of 5 eculizumab-treated pa-
tients.325 Efﬁcacy of eculizumab treatment was also reported
in patients with lupus and heterozygous deletion in comple-
ment factor H CFHR1-CFHR3 gene presenting with TMA,
and a review of 20 patients showed a kidney recovery rate of
85% in patients with SLE and/or APS after treatment with
eculizumab.326 A recent report on 9 patients with TMA
associated with SLE and/or APS showed that kidney function
improved by 25% in half of the patients after 4 weeks of
eculizumab treatment, and 2 of 3 patients were able to dis-
continue dialysis.327

Another recent report on 11 patients with TMA and LN
showed complement regulatory protein mutations in 6 pa-
tients, and response to eculizumab treatment in 10 patients.317
Prior to the advent of eculizumab, plasma exchange and/or
plasma infusion was the only treatment for aHUS, with efﬁ-
cacy in less than half of patients and little beneﬁt in patients
with membrane cofactor protein mutations.300,328,329 As
complement studies often take some time to be returned,
initiation of plasma exchange is warranted during the waiting
period, or if access to eculizumab is limited. The rationale and
objectives of plasma infusion and plasma exchange include
the replacement of absent or mutated circulating complement
regulators such as complement regulatory genes factor H
(CFH) and the removal of antibodies directed to complement
regulatory proteins or mutated factors that play a permissive
role in aberrant complement activation. In the absence of
eculizumab, the efﬁcacy of plasma exchange and plasma
infusion varies, and the duration of therapy is dependent on
the treatment response.330–333 Data from 31 adult patients (26
treated with plasma therapy and 5 plasma-resistant patients
treated with eculizumab) showed recovery of kidney function
in approximately 40% of patients given plasma therapy.325

10.3.2 Pregnancy in patients with lupus nephritis

Practice Point 10.3.2.1: Patients with active LN should be
counseled to avoid pregnancy while the disease is active or
when treatment with potentially teratogenic drugs is
ongoing, and for ‡6 months after LN becomes inactive.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S49

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

www.kidney-international.org

Practice Point 10.3.2.2: To reduce the risk of pregnancy
complications, hydroxychloroquine should be continued
during pregnancy, and low-dose aspirin should be started
before 16 weeks of gestation.

Point

10.3.2.3: Glucocorticoids,

Practice
hydroxy-
chloroquine, azathioprine, tacrolimus, and cyclosporine
are considered safe immunosuppressive treatments during
pregnancy.

Adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as preeclampsia, pre-
term birth, and fetal loss, are more frequent in patients with
active LN.334,335 Commonly used medications for LN in-
duction and maintenance therapy, particularly cyclophos-
phamide and MMF formulations, are toxic to the fetus and
teratogenic, respectively. A discussion of acceptable methods
of contraception should, therefore, take place as part of
initiating treatment for LN. Because of the increased risk of
clotting in patients with SLE and antiphospholipid antibodies,
use of estrogen-containing birth control should be avoided or
minimized. A risk-factor checklist has been proposed by some
organizations to stratify, plan, and counsel pregnancy in pa-
tients with lupus.336

Hydroxychloroquine is considered safe in pregnancy and
may decrease the rate of preterm birth and intrauterine
growth retardation, whereas withdrawal
of hydroxy-
chloroquine has been associated with LN ﬂare, so it should be
continued when an LN patient becomes pregnant.43,48,337
Low-dose aspirin (#100 mg/d) may also reduce the risk of
preeclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation and can be
started at conception or as soon as pregnancy is recog-
nized.338,339 The incidence of LN ﬂare in pregnancy has been
reported to be 11%–28% and is higher if patients have low
serum complement levels or high anti-dsDNA antibody ti-
ters.334 Active LN during pregnancy can be treated with
glucocorticoids plus azathioprine and/or a CNI, although in
the ﬁrst trimester, the use of glucocorticoids is associated with
an increased risk of gestational diabetes and cleft palate. For
patients on maintenance therapy, if they are on azathioprine,
this can be continued, but if they are on MPAA, this must be
discontinued or changed to azathioprine. Although there are
emerging data on the use of belimumab in pregnancy,214 this
drug is labeled as category C and cannot be recommended for
use in pregnancy at this time. Prescribing information from
the manufacturer states to avoid the use of voclosporin in
pregnant women due to the alcohol content of the drug
formulation, while there are insufﬁcient data to conclude
whether there is a drug-associated risk for major birth defects,
miscarriage, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Data from
animal
showed embryo/feticidal effects but no
treatment-related fetal malformations.
Hydroxychloroquine, tacrolimus,

low-dose azathioprine,
and prednisone have limited transfer into breast milk and are
considered safe with breastfeeding. MPAA are contraindicated
when patients are breastfeeding.340

studies

10.3.3 Treatment of lupus nephritis in children

Practice Point 10.3.3.1: Treat pediatric patients with LN
using immunosuppression regimens similar to those used
in adults, but consider issues relevant to this population,
such as dose adjustment, growth, fertility, and psychosocial
factors, when devising the therapy plan.

Approximately 20% of SLE is diagnosed before the age of 18
years, and genetic components are more common in childhood-
onset SLE.341–343 There is suggestive evidence that disease is
often more severe in the pediatric population. In adolescent
patients with SLE and isolated proteinuria, orthostatic or
postural proteinuria should be excluded, as this phenomenon
has been observed frequently in this population.344,345

There are few large-scale RCTs to guide treatment of
children with LN, and much of the current literature reports
the results of adult regimens applied to this population. The
data are insufﬁcient to conﬁrm superiority of efﬁcacy for any
particular treatment regimen. Recently reported long-term
data from 92 patients with biopsy-proven LN occurring
before the age of 18 years, presenting in the time period
2001–2020, showed survival rates without advanced CKD,
kidney failure, or death of 94.2%, 92.7%, and 83.2% at 5, 10,
and 20 years, respectively. Induction immunosuppression
was done using glucocorticoid and MPAA (36%) or cyclo-
phosphamide (34%), while MPAA were the maintenance
immunosuppressive medication in 55%.346 Several
issues
must be addressed when treating pediatric lupus, including
adherence concerns, which may favor i.v. medications;
growth concerns, which may favor limiting glucocorticoid
exposure; fertility concerns, especially as patients approach
adolescence, which may favor limiting cyclophosphamide
exposure; and psychosocial concerns relating to school and
socialization with peers. Special considerations regarding
glucocorticoid dosing in children are included under Prac-
tice Point 10.2.3.1.1. Treatment decisions for hyperlipidemia
are risk-stratiﬁed, and statins may be given to children aged
8 years or above. Children with LN should be comanaged by
pediatric nephrologists and rheumatologists with expertise
in lupus, and the expertise of other professionals, such as
clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, or social workers, can be
helpful.

10.3.4 Management of lupus patients with kidney failure

Practice Point 10.3.4.1: Patients with LN who develop
kidney failure may be treated with hemodialysis, peritoneal
dialysis, or kidney transplantation; and kidney trans-
plantation is preferred to long-term dialysis.

There are no data to favor one form of dialysis over
another in kidney failure due to LN. Patients with lupus
receiving hemodialysis display similar 3-year survival rates
and mortality due to CV or infectious complications to
dialysis.347–349
those

peritoneal

receiving

patients

of

S50

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

l u p u s n e p h r i t i s

Therefore, kidney replacement therapy should be individ-
ualized,
taking into account patient characteristics and
preferences.

Kidney transplantation is preferred to dialysis. Kidney
transplant outcomes are similar to those in patients who
developed kidney failure due to other types of kidney
disease,350,351 and transplanted patients have lower mor-
tality than patients with lupus who remain on dialysis.352
As clinical outcomes are better in patients with shorter
durations of dialysis,353,354 transplantation may be carried
out as soon as disease is quiescent. Although lupus activity
tends to decrease after kidney failure develops, patients can
still ﬂare,355 so periodic monitoring is required. LN can
recur in kidney allografts, but the risk is low, and ﬂares do
not generally result in allograft loss.356–358 One important
consideration is that patients who have antiphospholipid
antibodies may experience dialysis vascular access clotting
thrombosis and may require prophylactic
or allograft
anticoagulation.359–361

Research recommendations
(cid:4) Identify and validate biomarkers of kidney histology that
can be used to follow the tissue response to treatment in
real-time to help in managing immunosuppression.

(cid:4) Identify and validate biomarkers of impending LN ﬂare that
can be used to decide if preemptive immunosuppressive
therapy is indicated.

(cid:4) Classify LN on the basis of molecular pathogenesis and
histology as opposed to histology alone. This classiﬁcation
ideally could be used in conjunction with novel, targeted
therapies for LN to select the most appropriate treatment,

including biologic medications targeting speciﬁc pathogenic
pathways.

(cid:4) Establish renal response criteria that reﬂect resolution of
disease activity at the tissue level and are also predictive of
long-term kidney survival and patient survival without
need of kidney replacement therapy.

(cid:4) Establish criteria for duration of maintenance immuno-

suppression and the safe withdrawal of therapy.
(cid:4) RCTs are needed to test the following questions:

B What is the optimal therapy for patients with severe Class
III/IV LN (i.e., patients presenting with severe acute
kidney disease and/or markedly abnormal SCr level or
eGFR) who have been excluded from the majority of
clinical trials to date?

B What is the optimal therapy for pure Class V LN?
B Do antimalarials improve the responsiveness of LN to
treatment and/or help maintain disease quiescence and
prevent ﬂares?

B Is there a role for complement inhibition in the man-

agement of LN?

B What are the optimal or prioritized therapies for child-

hood LN?

B What are the efﬁcacy and safety proﬁles of CNIs,
including the optimal drug exposure when used as initial
or maintenance treatment of LN? What are the long-term
implications of such treatment?

B What are the optimal glucocorticoid-reduction protocols

for LN management?

B What is the effect on the incidence of disease relapses
initiated during the

from B-cell–directed therapies
maintenance phase?

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S51

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Methods for guideline development

Aim
This is an update of the Lupus nephritis chapter of the KDIGO
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Glomerular
Diseases published in 2021.362 Based on the recently published data
in the ﬁeld, it was decided that a guideline update was required.

The objective of this project was to update the evidence-based
clinical practice guideline for the management of LN. The guide-
line development methods are described below.

Overview of the process
This guideline adhered to international best practices for guideline
development (Appendix B: Supplementary Tables S2 and S3).363 This
guideline has been developed and reported in accordance with the
AGREE II reporting checklist.364

The processes undertaken for the development of the KDIGO
2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Lupus
Nephritis included:
(cid:4) Appointing Work Group members and the ERT
(cid:4) Deﬁning scope of the guideline update
(cid:4) Implementing literature search strategies to update the evidence

base for the guideline

(cid:4) Selecting studies according to predeﬁned inclusion criteria
(cid:4) Conducting data extraction and critical appraisal of the updated

literature

(cid:4) Updating the evidence synthesis and meta-analysis to include

newly identiﬁed studies

(cid:4) Updating the certainty of the evidence for each outcome
(cid:4) Finalizing guideline recommendations and supporting rationale
(cid:4) Grading the strength of the recommendations, based on the cer-

tainty of the evidence and other considerations

(cid:4) Convening a public review of the guideline draft in March 2023
(cid:4) Amending the guideline based on the external review feedback and

updating the literature search

(cid:4) Finalizing and publishing the guideline

Commissioning of Work Group and ERT. The KDIGO Co-
Chairs appointed the Work Group Co-Chairs, who then assem-
bled the Work Group,
in adult
nephrology, epidemiology, and public health. The Work Group was
responsible for writing the recommendations and practice points
and underlying rationale, as well as grading the strength of each
recommendation.

to include content experts

For the 2024 update, the Brown University School of Public
Health Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health was contracted to
update the systematic evidence review and provide expertise in
guideline development methodology. The Brown ERT consisted of a
senior physician–methodologist who led the ERT for the 2012
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Glomerulonephritis, an adult
nephrologist, and a librarian–methodologist, all with expertise in
evidence synthesis and guideline development, including for KDIGO
guidelines. Cochrane Kidney and Transplant was contracted to
conduct systematic evidence review and provide expertise in guide-
line development methodology for the 2021 Guideline.

Deﬁning scope and topics and formulating key clinical
questions. Due to resourcing and the probability of practice-
changing studies, clinical questions on effectiveness and safety of
interventions included in the guideline update were limited to RCTs.
Guideline topics and clinical questions focusing on nonrandomized
studies were not included in the guideline update (Supplementary
Table S1). The guideline Work Group, with assistance from the
ERT, determined the overall scope of the guideline. A preliminary list
of topics and key clinical questions was informed by the previous
KDIGO guideline.362 The majority of clinical questions for this
guideline were based upon RCTs to avoid bias by design. Clinical
intervention, comparator,
questions adhered to the population,
outcomes, and study design (PICOD) format (a list of critical and
important outcomes was compiled after voting by the Work Group
[Table 1]). Clinical questions were mapped to existing Cochrane
Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews. These systematic reviews
were updated accordingly. For clinical questions that did not map to
any Cochrane Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews, de novo
systematic reviews were undertaken. The previous guideline was
reviewed to ensure all identiﬁed studies were included in the evi-
dence review.362 Details of the PICOD questions and associated
Cochrane Kidney and Transplant systematic reviews are provided in
Table 2121.

All evidence reviews were conducted in accordance with the
Cochrane Handbook,365 and guideline development adhered to the
standards of GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation).366

Literature searches and article selection. For the KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Lupus Nephritis,
updated literature searches were conducted in MEDLINE (via
PubMed), Embase, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled
Trials. The searches were restricted to records entered into the da-
tabases since January 1, 2020. This was done to provide a 6-month
overlap with the prior searches. The searches were conducted on
July 7, 2022 and updated on April 25, 2023. These search updates
included terms for both LN and antineutrophil cytoplasmic anti-
bodies (ANCA) vasculitis (which underwent updating concurrently
with the chapter on lupus nephritis).

Table 1 | Hierarchy of outcomes

Hierarchy

Critical outcomes

Important outcomes

Outcomes

(cid:4) All-cause mortality
(cid:4) Kidney failure
(cid:4) $50% loss of GFR
(cid:4) Infection
(cid:4) Glucocorticoid-related adverse events
(cid:4) Malignancy
(cid:4) Complete remission/relapse
(cid:4) Annual GFR loss (minimum 3 years follow-up)

GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.
The critical and important outcomes were voted on by the Work Group using an
adapted Delphi process (1–9 Likert scale). Critical outcomes were rated 7–9, and
important outcomes were rated 4–6 on the 9-point scale.

S52

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 2 | Clinical questions and systematic review topics in PICOD format

PICOD criteria

Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design

Cochrane systematic reviews
SoF tables
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane systematic reviews
SoF tables
Clinical question

Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Study design
Cochrane systematic reviews

SoF tables

Lupus nephritis

In patients with biopsy-proven LN, compared to no treatment, placebo, or standard of care, does antimalarial
therapy improve clinical efﬁcacy outcomes and reduce adverse effects?
Patients with biopsy-proven LN
Antimalarial therapy
No treatment, placebo, or standard of care
Outcomes listed in Table 1
2021 Guideline: RCTs and observational studies
2024 Guideline: RCTs published in peer-reviewed journals
None relevant
Supplementary Table S4
In patients with nonproliferative (Class I, II, V, or VI) LN, what immunosuppressive agents, compared to
no treatment, placebo, or other immunosuppressive therapies, improve efﬁcacy outcomes, and reduce
adverse effects?
Patients with biopsy-proven nonproliferative (Class I, II, V, or VI) LN
Immunosuppressive therapy
No treatment, placebo, or other immunosuppressive therapies
Outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
None relevant
Supplementary Tables S30, S32, S33
In patients with biopsy-proven proliferative (Class III, IV, III/V, or IV/V) LN, what immunosuppressive agents,
compared to no treatment, placebo, or other immunosuppressive therapies, improve clinical efﬁcacy
outcomes, and reduce adverse effects?
Patients with biopsy-proven proliferative (Class III, IV, III/V, or IV/V) LN
Immunosuppressive therapy
No treatment, placebo, or other immunosuppressive therapies
Outcomes listed in Table 1
RCTs
Tunnicliffe DJ, et al. Immunosuppressive treatment for proliferative lupus nephritis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. 2018:6;CD002922121
Supplementary Tables S5–S29, S31, and S34–S49

LN, lupus nephritis; MCD, minimal change disease; PICOD, population, intervention, comparator, outcomes, study design; RCT, randomized controlled trial; SoF, summary of
ﬁndings.

The titles and abstracts resulting from the searches were screened
by 2 members of the ERT who independently assessed retrieved
abstracts, and if necessary, the full text, to determine which studies
satisﬁed the inclusion criteria. Disagreement about inclusion was
resolved by discussion with a third member of the ERT.

For the KDIGO 2021 guideline, a total of 25,925 citations were
screened. Of these, 479 RCTs and 102 observational studies were
included in the evidence review for all diseases. For the 2024 update,
a total of 1556 citations were screened (for both LN and ANCA
vasculitis) (Figure 14). From these, we found 21 new eligible articles
on LN that addressed 16 new RCTs, in 17 publications, and 4 new
analyses of previously included RCTs.

Data extraction. For the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guide-
line for the Management of Lupus Nephritis, data extraction was
performed by 1 member of the Brown ERT and conﬁrmed by the 2
other members of the ERT. The Brown ERT extracted data into the
forms designed by the Cochrane ERT. The Cochrane ERT designed
data extraction forms to capture data on study design, study
participant characteristics, intervention and comparator character-
istics, and critical and important outcomes. Any differences in
extraction between members of the ERT were resolved through
discussion. A third reviewer was included if consensus could not be
achieved.

Critical appraisal of studies. The majority of reviews under-
taken were intervention reviews that included RCTs. For these re-
views, the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool was used to assess individual
study limitations based on the following items367:

(cid:4) Was there adequate sequence generation (selection bias)?
(cid:4) Was allocation adequately concealed (selection bias)?
(cid:4) Was knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately pre-

vented during the study (detection bias)?

(cid:4) Participants and personnel (performance bias)
(cid:4) Outcome assessors (detection bias)
(cid:4) Were incomplete outcome data adequately addressed (attrition

bias)?

(cid:4) Are reports of the study free of suggestion of selective outcome

reporting (reporting bias)?

(cid:4) Was the study apparently free of other problems that could put it

at risk of bias?
All critical appraisal was conducted independently by 2 members
of the ERT, with disagreements regarding the risk of bias adjudica-
tions resolved by consultation with a third review author.

outcome

Evidence synthesis and meta-analysis. Measures of treatment
effect. Dichotomous
kidney
failure, $50% loss of GFR, infection, malignancy, complete remis-
sion/relapse) results were expressed as RR with 95% CI. When
continuous scales of measurement were used to assess the effects of
treatment, such as annual GFR loss, the mean difference (MD) with
95% CI was used.

(all-cause mortality,

Data synthesis. Data were pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel
random-effects model for dichotomous outcomes and the inverse
variance random-effects model for continuous outcomes. The random-
effects model was chosen because it provides a conservative estimate of
effect in the presence of known and unknown heterogeneity.365

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S53

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Studies included for lupus nephritis
in previous version of the guideline
(n = 81 RCTs, 16 observational studies)

and LN chapters: PubMed, Embase,
Cochrane CENTRAL (n = 1556)

Records removed before screening:
Duplicate records removed (n = 0)

Records screened
(n = 1556)

Records excluded
(n = 1405)

Reports sought for retrieval
(n = 151)

Reports not retrieved
(n = 0)

Reports assessed for eligibility
(n = 151)

Reports excluded:
Wrong population (n = 12)
Wrong study design (n = 105)
No outcomes of interest (n = 8)
Previously included (n = 5)

New studies included in
review for LN chapter
(n = 21*)

Total studies included in review for LN
(n = 97 RCTs, 16 observational studies)

Figure 14 | Search yield and study ﬂow diagram. *16 RCTs in 17 records, and 4 new records from previously identiﬁed studies. ANCA,
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; LN, lupus nephritis; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Assessment of heterogeneity. Heterogeneity was assessed by vi-
sual inspection of forest plots of standardized mean effect sizes, and
of risk ratios, and by c2 tests. A P value of <0.1 was used to denote
statistical heterogeneity, and an I2 was calculated to measure the
proportion of total variation in the estimates of treatment effect that
was due to heterogeneity beyond chance.365 We used conventions of
interpretation as deﬁned by Higgins et al.368

Assessment of publication bias. We made every attempt
to
minimize publication bias by including unpublished studies (for
example, by searching online trial registries). To assess publication
bias, we used funnel plots of the log odds ratio (effect vs. standard
error of the effect size) when a sufﬁcient number of studies were
available (i.e., >10 studies).365 Other reasons for the asymmetry of
funnel plots were considered.

Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity. Subgroup
analysis was undertaken to explore whether there were clinical dif-
ferences among the studies that may have systematically inﬂuenced
the differences that were observed in the critical and important
outcomes. However,
subgroup analyses are hypothesis-forming
rather than hypothesis-testing and should be interpreted with
caution. The following subgroups were considered: baseline kidney
function (GFR, proteinuria, presence of albuminuria, presence of
macroscopic hematuria), histopathologic class of disease, primary
versus secondary forms of disease, sex, and adult versus pediatric.
The test of subgroup differences used the I2 statistic and a P value of
0.10 (noting that this is a weak test).365

Sensitivity analysis. The following sensitivity analyses were

considered:
(cid:4) Repeating the analysis excluding unpublished studies
(cid:4) Repeating the analysis, taking account of the risk of bias, as

speciﬁed

(cid:4) Repeating the analysis excluding any very long or large studies, to

establish how much they dominate the results

(cid:4) Repeating the analysis excluding studies using the following ﬁlters:
language of publication, source of funding (industry vs. other),
and country in which the study was conducted.
However, the available data were insufﬁcient to determine the
inﬂuence of these factors on the effect size of critical and important
outcomes.

Grading the certainty of the evidence and the strength of a
guideline recommendation. GRADING the certainty of the evidence
for each outcome across studies. The overall certainty of the evi-
dence related to each critical and important outcome was assessed
using the GRADE approach,366,369 which assesses the certainty of the
evidence for each outcome. For outcomes that are based on data from
RCTs, the initial grade for the certainty of the evidence is considered to
be high. For observational studies, the initial certainty of the evidence
is low. The certainty of the evidence is lowered in the event of study
limitations; important inconsistencies in results across studies; indi-
rectness of the results, including uncertainty about the population,
intervention, and outcomes measured in trials and their applicability
to the clinical question of interest; imprecision in the evidence review

S54

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 3 | Grading of certainty of the evidence

Grade Certainty of evidence

Meaning

A
B
C
D

High
Moderate
Low
Very low

We are conﬁdent that the true effect is close to the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of the effect is very uncertain, and often it will be far from the true effect.

Table 4 | GRADE system for grading certainty of evidence

Study design

RCTs

Starting grade for the
certainty of evidence

High

Step 2—lower grade

Step 3—raise grade for observational evidence

Study limitations:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Strength of association
þ1, large effect size (e.g., <0.5 or >2)
þ2, very large effect size (e.g., <0.2 or >5)

Moderate

Observational studies

Low

Very low

Inconsistency:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Indirectness:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Imprecision:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Publication bias:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Evidence of a dose–response gradient

All plausible confounding would reduce the demonstrated effect

RCT, randomized controlled trial; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation.

results; and concerns about publication bias. For imprecision, data
were benchmarked against optimal information size, low event rates
in either arm, CIs that indicate appreciable beneﬁt and harm (25%
decrease and 25% increase in the outcome of interest), and sparse data
(only 1 study), all indicating concerns about the precision of the re-
sults.369 The ﬁnal grade for the certainty of the evidence for an
outcome could be high, moderate, low, or very low (Table 3). For
observational studies and other study types, it is possible for the
certainty of the evidence to be upgraded from a rating of low certainty,
according to the speciﬁed criteria. For further details on the GRADE
approach for rating certainty of the evidence, see Table 4.

Summary of ﬁndings (SoF) tables. The SoF tables were developed
to include a description of the population, intervention, and compar-
ator. In addition, the SoF tables included results from the data synthesis
as relative and absolute effect estimates. The grading of the certainty of
evidence for each critical and important outcome is also provided in the
SoF tables. For the 2024 update, the SoF tables were updated or created
manually. The SoF tables are available in the Data Supplement:
Appendix C and Appendix D (https://kdigo.org/guidelines/gd/).

Developing the recommendations. For the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Management of Lupus Nephritis, the
existing recommendations were reviewed and revised, as necessary,
and new recommendations were drafted by the Work Group and Co-
Chairs. Recommendations were revised in a multistep process by
email and teleconferences. The Brown ERT participated in these
discussions to ensure consistency with the evidence base and to
provide additional feedback.

The ﬁnal draft was sent for external public review, and reviewers
provided open-ended responses. Based on the external stakeholder
feedback, the draft was further revised by the Work Group. All Work
Group members provided feedback on initial and ﬁnal drafts of the
guideline statements and text, and approved the ﬁnal version of the
guideline. The ERT also provided a descriptive summary of the
certainty of evidence in support of the recommendations.

Grading the strength of the recommendations. The strength of a
recommendation is graded as Level 1, “we recommend” or Level 2,
“we suggest” (Table 5). The strength of a recommendation was
determined by the balance of beneﬁts and harms across all critical
and important outcomes, the grading of the overall certainty of the
evidence, patient values and preferences, resource use and costs, and
considerations for implementation (Table 6).

Balance of beneﬁts and harms. The Work Group and ERT
determined the anticipated net health beneﬁt on the basis of ex-
pected beneﬁts and harms across all critical and important outcomes
from the underlying evidence review.

The overall certainty of the evidence. The overall certainty of the
evidence was based on the certainty of the evidence for all critical
and important outcomes, taking into account the relative impor-
tance of each outcome to the population of interest. The overall
certainty of the evidence was graded (A, B, C, or D—Table 3).

Patient values and preferences. No patients or caregivers were
involved in the Work Group. The Work Group, from their experi-
ence in managing patients with GD and their understanding of the
best available scientiﬁc literature, made judgments on the values and

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S55

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

www.kidney-international.org

Table 5 | KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Grade

Level 1
“We recommend”

Level 2
“We suggest”

Patients

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of
action, and only a small proportion
would not.
The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course
of action, but many would not.

KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes.

Implications

Clinicians

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs
help to arrive at a management
decision consistent with her or his
values and preferences.

Policy

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy
or a performance measure.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement of
stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

Table 6 | Determinants of the strength of recommendation

Factors

Balance of beneﬁts and harms

The larger the difference between the desirable and undesirable effects, the more likely a strong recommendation
is provided. The narrower the gradient, the more likely a weak recommendation is warranted.

Comment

Certainty of evidence

The higher the certainty of evidence, the more likely a strong recommendation is warranted. However, there are
exceptions for which low or very low certainty of the evidence will warrant a strong recommendation.

Values and preferences

The more variability in values and preferences, or the more uncertainty in values and preferences, the more likely a
weak recommendation is warranted. Values and preferences were obtained from the literature, when possible, or
were assessed by the judgment of the Work Group when robust evidence was not identiﬁed.

Resource use and costs

The higher the costs of an intervention—that is, the more resources consumed—the less likely a strong
recommendation is warranted.

preferences of patients. Formal qualitative evidence synthesis on
patient priorities and preferences was undertaken by the Cochrane
ERT, but
there was limited evidence available to inform the
formulation of guideline recommendations (Appendix D).

inputs

in the

including all

Resources and other costs. Healthcare and non-healthcare re-
treatment management
sources,
pathway,370 were considered in grading the strength of a recom-
mendation. The following resources were considered: direct health-
care costs; non-healthcare resources, such as transportation and
social services; informal caregiver resources (e.g., time of family and
caregivers); and changes in productivity. Economic evaluations,
including cost-effectiveness analysis, were not conducted for any of
the guideline topics.

Practice points
In addition to graded recommendations, KDIGO guidelines now
include “practice points” to help clinicians better evaluate and
implement the guidance from the expert Work Group. Practice points
are consensus statements about a speciﬁc aspect of care, and they
supplement recommendations for which a larger quantity of evidence
was identiﬁed. They are issued when a clinical question was not
supported by a systematic review, often to help readers implement the
guidance from graded recommendation. Practice points represent the
expert judgment of the guideline Work Group, but they also may be
based on limited evidence. For example, practice points were provided
on monitoring, frequency of testing, dosing adjustments for the
severity of CKD, and use of therapies in speciﬁc subgroup populations.

Practice points were sometimes formatted as a table, a ﬁgure, or an
algorithm to make them easier to use in clinical practice.

Format for guideline recommendations
Each guideline recommendation provides an assessment of the
strength of the recommendation (Level 1; or Level 2) and the cer-
tainty of the evidence (A, B, C, D). The recommendation statements
are followed by Key information (Balance of beneﬁts and harms,
Certainty of the evidence, Values and preferences, Resource use and
costs, Considerations for implementation), and Rationale. Each
recommendation is linked to relevant SoF tables. An underlying
rationale may support a practice point.

Limitations of the guideline development process
The evidence review prioritized RCTs as the primary source of
evidence. For a select number of clinical questions in this
guideline, the ERT undertook a comprehensive evidence review
beyond RCTs. However, these reviews were not exhaustive, as
specialty or regional databases were not searched, and manual
searching of journals was not performed for these reviews. In
the development of these guidelines, no scoping exercise with
patients,
the qualitative literature, nor
formal qualitative evidence synthesis examining patient expe-
riences and priorities were undertaken. As noted, although
resource implications were considered in the formulation of
recommendations, formal economic evaluations were not un-
dertaken for all topics.

limited searches of

S56

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Biographic and disclosure information

Jürgen Floege, MD (Work Group
Co-Chair), is head of the Division of
Nephrology and Immunology at the
University of Aachen, Aachen, Ger-
many since 1999.

BHR reports receiving consultancy fees from Alexion, AstraZe-
neca, Aurinia, Bristol Myers Squibb, Exagen, Genentech,
GlaxoSmithKline, Kezar Life Sciences, Kyverna, Novartis, and
Otsuka; and grant/research support from Biogen*.
*Monies paid to institution.

Renal

Professor Floege is a former ex-
ecutive council member of Interna-
tional Society of Nephrology (ISN),
Association-
European
European Dialysis and Transplant Association (ERA-EDTA),
and Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO).
He is a Distinguished Fellow of the ERA-EDTA and recipient of
the 2018 ERA-EDTA Award for Outstanding Clinical Contri-
butions to Nephrology, past President of the German Society of
Nephrology, as well as an honorary member of the Japanese,
Polish, Portuguese, Serbian, and Slovakian Societies of
Nephrology. Together with Professors Richard Johnson, Mar-
cello Tonelli, and John Feehally, he edits the best-selling text-
book Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology. He is associate editor
of Kidney International and a member of the editorial board of
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology (JASN), Journal of
Nephrology, and other journals. Until 2017, he served as asso-
ciate editor of Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation (NDT).

in particular, kidney ﬁbrosis,

His research interests encompass progression of kidney
disease,
immune-mediated
kidney disease, and IgA nephropathy, as well as chronic kid-
ney disease-mineral and bone disorders (CKD-MBD) and
cardiovascular disease in uremic patients.

His scientiﬁc work encompasses about 700 original papers,

reviews, and editorials, and 40 book chapters.

JF reports receiving consultancy fees and/or speaker honoraria
from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Calliditas, Chinook, Glax-
oSmithKline, Novartis, Omeros, Otsuka, Stadapharm, and
Travere; and serving on data safety monitoring boards for
Novo Nordisk and Visterra.

Brad H. Rovin, MD, FACP, FASN
(Work Group Co-Chair), is the Lee
A. Hebert Professor of Nephrology at
The Ohio State University Wexner
Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio,
USA. He is the Division Director of
Nephrology and Medical Director of
The Ohio State University Center for
Clinical Research Management. Dr.
Rovin conducts
research on autoimmune
glomerular diseases and applies these studies to clinical trial
development
investigator-initiated and
and design for
industry-sponsored trials of novel therapeutics.

translational

Isabelle M. Ayoub, MD, is an Asso-
ciate Professor of Medicine in the
Division of Nephrology at The Ohio
State University Wexner Medical
Center. She works in a busy lupus,
and glomerulonephritis
vasculitis,
clinic. She is the Director of
the
Nephrology Clinical Trials Unit at
Ohio State University. Dr Ayoub’s
primary focus is in the area of glomerular diseases with a
research interest in evaluating experimental therapeutics in
glomerular diseases.

IMA reports receiving funding for travel and/or accom-
modation from Aurinia and serving on the advisory board
for Aurinia.

Tak Mao Chan, MBBS, MD, DSc,
MRCP, FHKCP, FHKAM, FRCP,
FASN, is the Yu Chiu-Kwong Chair
of Medicine and Chief of Nephrology
at the School of Clinical Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, China.
He obtained his MBBS, MD, and DSc
from the University of Hong Kong
(HKU). He was promoted to Per-
sonal Chair Professor at HKU in 2005, and was appointed Yu
Chair of Nephrology in 2008, then Yu Chiu-Kwong Chair of
Medicine in 2011, and has been Chief of Nephrology since
2010. He has served as Associate Dean, member of the Senate,
and member of the University Selection & Promotion Com-
mittee, and is now a member of the University Council at
the Asian Paciﬁc Society of
HKU. He was President of
Nephrology (APSN), Chairman of the Hospital Authority
Coordinating Committee for Internal Medicine, and Council
Member of the International Society of Nephrology. He has
been President of The Hong Kong College of Physicians
since 2022.

Dr. Chan’s research focuses on lupus nephritis and viral
hepatitis in patients with kidney diseases. His work contrib-
uted to the establishment of mycophenolate as standard-of-
care induction and maintenance therapy for lupus nephritis
and highlighted the role of different
immunosuppressive
treatments such as calcineurin inhibitors and mammalian

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S57

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, and the importance
of preventing nephritic ﬂare and chronic kidney disease
(CKD) in lupus nephritis management. His work also
established the role of antiviral therapy for the prevention of
hepatitis B ﬂare in kidney transplant recipients. Translational
studies from his laboratory investigate immunopathogenic
mechanisms in kidney inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis, and the
role of resident kidney cells. Dr. Chan’s publications have
appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine, Kidney
International, Journal of the American Society of Nephrology,
Arthritis Rheumatology, Nature Reviews Nephrology, Hepatol-
ogy, and UpToDate. He received the APSN Kenzo Oshima
Award in 2014.

TMC reports receiving support for studies or manuscripts
pertaining to this topic from Astellas and GlaxoSmithKline;
and consultancy fees from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline,
and Novartis.

Zhi-Hong Liu, MD, is a professor of
medicine and academician at
the
Chinese Academy of Engineering,
China. She is the Director of the
National Clinical Research Center of
Kidney Disease, Jinling Hospital, and
Dean of
the Zhejiang University
School of Medicine. Dr. Liu is the
past President of the Chinese Society
of Nephrology. She was an executive committee member of
the International Society of Nephrology and KDIGO. She is
the Editor-in-Chief of Kidney Diseases, Chinese Journal of
Nephrology, and Dialysis & Transplantation.

Dr. Liu has devoted herself to patient care, research, and
medical education. Her primary interest is in the ﬁeld of
kidney disease, with a special interest in glomerulonephritis
and diabetic nephropathy. She has edited 5 books on kidney
disease, and is the chief scientist of
the National Basic
Research Program of China (973 Program) and was honored
with the National Science and Technology Progress Award of
China.

Z-HL declared no competing interests.

Juan Manuel Mejía-Vilet, MD, PhD,
is a consultant nephrologist at Insti-
tuto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico,
a clinical researcher for the Mexican
National Research System, and a
professor of medicine for the Na-
tional University of Mexico, Pan-
the
american University,

and

Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education.

Dr. Mejia-Vilet received his medical degree from the
University of San Luis Potosi. He was trained in internal
the National University of
medicine and nephrology at

and

completed

an International

of
Mexico
Nephrology Glomerular Diseases fellowship at The Ohio
State University. He has a Master of Medical Science and a
PhD degree from the National University of Mexico for his
lupus nephritis pathophysiology and biomarker
study of
development.

Society

His primary research area is centered on noninvasive
biomarkers and prognosis of glomerular diseases, especially
lupus nephritis and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
(ANCA) vasculitis. He currently follows a local
lupus
nephritis cohort comprising more than 700 subjects, and the
local glomerular diseases registry, and actively participates in
clinical trials in these areas.
receiving

educational pre-
JMMV reports
sentations from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Glax-
oSmithKline, and Roche; and serving on the advisory board
for Kezar Life Sciences.

funding

for

KDIGO Chairs

Michel Jadoul, MD, received his MD
the Université
degree in 1983 at
Catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain),
Brussels, Belgium. Dr. Jadoul trained
in internal medicine and nephrology
under the mentorship of Professor
Charles van Ypersele de Strihou. He
has served as chair of the Depart-
ment of Nephrology of the Cliniques
Universitaires Saint-Luc (2003-2023) and is currently a full
clinical professor at UCLouvain. Dr. Jadoul’s clinical activities
focus on the follow-up of hemodialysis and chronic kidney
disease (CKD) patients, and his main research interests
include b2-microglobulin amyloidosis, hepatitis C, and other
complications (e.g., falls, bone fractures, sudden death) in
hemodialysis patients, as well as cardiovascular complications
after kidney transplantation and various causes of kidney
disease (e.g., drug-induced).

Dr. Jadoul has coauthored over 350 scientiﬁc papers, most
of
them published in major nephrology journals. He is
currently serving as an associate editor of Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation, and he is also a country co-investigator for the
Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS)
(2001–present). In 2008, he received the International Distin-
guished Medal from the U.S. National Kidney Foundation
(NKF). He was previously a member of the European Renal
Association Council (2013–2016). Presently, Dr. Jadoul is a
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Co-
Chair.

MJ reports receiving consultancy fees from Astellas*, Astra-
Zeneca*, Bayer*, Boehringer Ingelheim*, Cardiorenal*, CSL
Vifor*, Fresenius Medical Care Asia Paciﬁc*, GlaxoSmith-
Kline*, Mundipharma*, and Vertex*; grants/research support
from Amgen and AstraZeneca*; speaker honoraria from
AstraZeneca*, Bayer*, and Boehringer Ingelheim*; providing

S58

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

testimony for Astellas* and Stada-Eurogenerics*;

expert
receiving travel support from AstraZeneca*.
*Monies paid to institution.

MAT reports receiving payment for providing expert testi-
mony from Gilead Sciences (not related to the guideline
topic).

a

Morgan E. Grams, MD, PhD, MHS,
is the Co-Director of the New York
University Division of Precision
Medicine,
multidisciplinary
research unit that aims to produce
evidence to inform the delivery of
high-quality, equitable patient care,
responding rapidly to changes
in
health care guidelines, delivery, safety,
and regulation. A practicing nephrologist, PhD-trained epide-
miologist, and the Susan and Morris Mark Professor of Med-
icine and Population Health at New York University, Dr. Grams
is Co-Principal Investigator of the Chronic Kidney Disease
Prognosis Consortium (CKD-PC), a consortium of over 30
million participants, 100 cohorts, and 250 investigators from
around the globe. In this role, Dr. Grams and the CKD-PC
team focus on developing, testing, and implementing ana-
lytic strategies to answer clinically meaningful questions
using as much of the world’s data on kidney measures and
outcomes as possible. She also leads efforts to integrate
multimodal omics data as they relate to kidney disease. She
was the winner of the Young Investigator Award in 2018
given by the American Society of Nephrology/American
Heart Association Kidney Council, the top award for in-
vestigators under 45 years of age, and she is a member of the
American Society of Clinical Investigation. She attended
medical school at Columbia University and completed her
nephrology fellowship at Johns Hopkins University.

MEG declared no competing interests.

Methods Chair

Marcello A. Tonelli, MD, SM, MSc,
FRCPC, is a nephrologist, professor,
and clinician–scientist at the University
of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Dr. Tonelli’s research focuses on
improving the care of people with
chronic kidney disease and other non-
communicable diseases. He is chair
emeritus of the Canadian Task Force on
Preventive Health Care, a past President of the Canadian Society
of Nephrology, and the President-Elect of the International So-
ciety of Nephrology. He is a member of the Governing Council for
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Director of the
World Health Organization’s Collaborating Centre for the Pre-
vention and Control of Chronic Kidney Disease.

Dr. Tonelli has been named a Highly Cited Researcher each
year since 2015 by Thomson Reuters Web of Science, corre-
sponding to a rank in the top 0.1% by citations of all re-
searchers worldwide.

Evidence Review Team

in Health,

Ethan M. Balk, MD, MPH, is Asso-
ciate Director of the Center for Evi-
dence Synthesis
and
Professor of Health Services, Policy
and Practice at Brown University
School of Public Health in Provi-
dence, RI, USA. He has been Project
Director of the ERT and has collab-
orated on numerous Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines since 2008,
and Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI)
guidelines since 2000. As project director for this guideline, he
played a pivotal role in providing methodological expertise in
the guideline development process and assisted in the
collection, evaluation, grading, and synthesis of evidence and
the revisions of the ﬁnal evidence report. Dr. Balk also pro-
vided methodological guidance and training of Work Group
members regarding topic reﬁnement, key question formula-
tion, data extraction, study assessment, evidence grading, and
recommendation formulation. His primary research interests
systematic review, clinical
are evidence-based medicine,
practice
literature
appraisal.

guideline development,

and critical

EMB declared no competing interests.

Craig E. Gordon, MD, MS, is Asso-
ciate Professor of Medicine at Tufts
University Medical Center in Boston,
MA, USA. Dr. Gordon graduated
from New York University School of
Medicine and received a master’s
degree
research
from the Tufts University School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences. Dr.
Gordon previously served as the assistant project director of
the ERT for the 2020 KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline on
the Evaluation and Management of Candidates for Kidney
Transplantation and associate director of the ERT, and assis-
tant project director for the 2018 and the 2022 KDIGO
Clinical Practice Guideline on HCV in CKD.

in clinical

care

Dr. Gordon provided methodologic expertise to the Work
Group during the guideline development process and assisted
in the collection, evaluation, grading, and synthesis of evi-
dence for the guideline, as well as providing guidance to Work
Group members in the areas of topic reﬁnement, key question
formulation, data extraction, study assessment, evidence
grading, and recommendation formulation. His primary
research and clinical interests are in the management of HCV
in patients with CKD, polycystic kidney disease, and

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S59

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

www.kidney-international.org

thrombotic microangiopathies, as well as evidence-based
medicine and systematic review related to other areas of
nephrology.

CEG reports receiving consultancy fees for Alexion; serving in
the speaker bureau for Alexion; and receiving funding for
travel and/or accommodation from Alexion.

Gaelen Adam, MLIS, MPH, has
editor, and
librarian,
worked as
research associate at Brown’s Center
for Evidence Synthesis
in Health
(CESH) since 2013. In these roles,
she has been involved in all steps of
the projects undertaken by CESH
deep
developed
and

has

a

understanding of the methods and tools used in evidence
synthesis research. As a research associate and the Pro-
gram Manager for
the Brown Evidence-based Practice
Center (EPC), she has contributed to the production of
over 20 evidence-synthesis products (systematic reviews,
technology assessments, and other similar products) on a
wide variety of clinical and public health topics. As a
doctorate student in Health Service Policy and Practice in
Brown University’s School of Public Health,
she has
leveraged extensive experience in search strategy design to
conduct research in methods to incorporate text-mining,
machine-learning,
to
and text-modeling
improve the process of searching and screening studies for
systematic reviews.

technologies

GA declared no competing interests.

S60

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

Acknowledgments

A special debt of gratitude is owed to the KDIGO Co-Chairs,
Morgan Grams and Michel Jadoul, and immediate past Co-
Chair Wolfgang Winkelmayer, for their invaluable oversight
throughout the development of this guideline. In particular,
we thank Ethan Balk, Craig Gordon, and Gaelen Adam for
their substantial contribution to the rigorous assessment of
the available evidence. We also acknowledge Debbie Maizels
for her vital contributions to the artwork presented in this
guideline.

The following individuals provided feedback during the

public review of the draft guideline:

Débora Aguiar, Carolina Albanez Andrade, Elisa Albu-
querque, Hans-Joachim Anders, Mabel Aoun, Suheir Assady,
Kaung Myat Aung, Joanne Bargman, Susie Barnes, Rommel
Bataclan, Cristian Camacho, Corey Cavanaugh, Marlene
Cisneros, Rolando Claure Del Granado, Fabrizio Conti,
Henry Cremisi, Ankana Daga, Kader Daghastanli, Marcelo De
Rosa, Pasquale Esposito, Flor Garcia López, Maira Genaro,
Erim Gülcan, Astrid Gutierrez, Ramy Hassan, Mohammad
José Júnior, Ambily
Imnul

Islam, Chandra Mauli

Jha,

Kuttikkattu, Andreas Kronbichler, Henry Leher, Claudia
Fernanda Leiva Gómez, Antonio Alanmar León Martinez,
Edgar Lerma, Liz Lightstone, Carlos Lins, Ana Malvar, Partha
Pratim Mandal, Mario Manunta, Carmen Marruffo, Safak
Mirioglu, Dana Miskulin, Andrés Montalvo, Odirlei Mon-
ticielo, Yussara Morales, Rogelio Moscoso, Eugen Mota, Jorge
Novoa, Tania Oliveira, Vuddhidej Ophascharoensuk, Fabián
Ortega, Alberto Ortiz, Ivan Padjen, Adriana Penalba, Nuria S.
Perez Romano, Alisson Pugliesi, Daniel Ramírez, Luis Manuel
Ramirez Gomez, Carlos Rodrigues,
Jorge Rojas-Rivera,
Sebastian Sahores, Anna Salmela, Domenico Santoro, Anin-
dita Santosa, Deepak Sharma, Habib Skhiri, Maria José Soler
Romeo, Mustafa Sulaiman, Carlos Eduardo Garcez Teixeira,
Manuel Ugarte-Gil, Clara Ynés Uviedo Martínez, Debora
Veghini, Jhonatan Velador Mendoza, Gisella Vischini, Charles
Williams, and Manjusha Yadla.

Participation in the public review does not necessarily
constitute endorsement of the content of this report by the
above individuals, or the organizations or institutions they
represent.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S61

r e f e r e n c e s

References

1. Bendapudi PK, Hurwitz S, Fry A, et al. Derivation and external validation
of the PLASMIC score for rapid assessment of adults with thrombotic
microangiopathies: a cohort study. Lancet Haematol. 2017;4:e157–e164.
2. Alarcon GS, McGwin G Jr, Petri M, et al. Baseline characteristics of a

multiethnic lupus cohort: PROFILE. Lupus. 2002;11:95–101.

4.

3. Bastian HM, Roseman JM, McGwin G Jr, et al. Systemic lupus
lupus

erythematosus in three ethnic groups. XII. Risk factors for
nephritis after diagnosis. Lupus. 2002;11:152–160.
Feldman CH, Hiraki LT, Liu J, et al. Epidemiology and sociodemographics
of systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis among US adults
with Medicaid coverage, 2000-2004. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65:753–763.
5. Pons-Estel BA, Catoggio LJ, Cardiel MH, et al. The GLADEL multinational
Latin American prospective inception cohort of 1,214 patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus: ethnic and disease heterogeneity
among “Hispanics”. Medicine (Baltimore). 2004;83:1–17.

6. Mok CC, Kwok RC, Yip PS. Effect of renal disease on the standardized
mortality ratio and life expectancy of patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65:2154–2160.

7. Sule S, Fivush B, Neu A, et al. Increased risk of death in pediatric and
adult patients with ESRD secondary to lupus. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011;26:
93–98.

8. Yap DY, Tang CS, Ma MK, et al. Survival analysis and causes of mortality
in patients with lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:3248–
3254.

9. Hiraki LT, Feldman CH, Liu J, et al. Prevalence,

incidence, and
demographics of systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis
from 2000 to 2004 among children in the US Medicaid beneﬁciary
population. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64:2669–2676.

10. Malvar A, Pirruccio P, Alberton V, et al. Histologic versus clinical
remission in proliferative lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2017;32:1338–1344.

11. Zickert A, Sundelin B, Svenungsson E, et al. Role of early repeated renal

biopsies in lupus nephritis. Lupus Sci Med. 2014;1:e000018.

12. Appel GB, Contreras G, Dooley MA, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil versus
cyclophosphamide for induction treatment of lupus nephritis. J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2009;20:1103–1112.

13. Austin HA 3rd, Klippel JH, Balow JE, et al. Therapy of lupus nephritis.
Controlled trial of prednisone and cytotoxic drugs. N Engl J Med.
1986;314:614–619.

14. Chan TM, Li FK, Tang CS, et al. Efﬁcacy of mycophenolate mofetil in
patients with diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis. Hong Kong-
Guangzhou Nephrology Study Group. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1156–
1162.

15. Chan TM, Tse KC, Tang CS, et al. Long-term study of mycophenolate
for
mofetil as continuous induction and maintenance treatment
diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:1076–
1084.
16. Dooley MA,

Jayne D, Ginzler EM, et al. Mycophenolate versus
azathioprine as maintenance therapy for lupus nephritis. N Engl J Med.
2011;365:1886–1895.

18.

17. Houssiau FA, Vasconcelos C, D’Cruz D, et al. Immunosuppressive therapy
in lupus nephritis: the Euro-Lupus Nephritis Trial, a randomized trial of
low-dose versus high-dose intravenous cyclophosphamide. Arthritis
Rheum. 2002;46:2121–2131.
Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Lan SP, et al. A controlled trial of plasmapheresis
therapy in severe lupus nephritis. The Lupus Nephritis Collaborative
Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:1373–1379.
Liu Z, Zhang H, Liu Z, et al. Multitarget therapy for induction treatment
of lupus nephritis: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:18–26.
20. Pollak VE, Pirani CL, Schwartz FD. The natural history of the renal
J Lab Clin Med.

manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
1964;63:537–550.

19.

21. Bajema IM, Wilhelmus S, Alpers CE, et al. Revision of the International
Society of Nephrology/Renal Pathology Society classiﬁcation for lupus
nephritis: clariﬁcation of deﬁnitions, and modiﬁed National
Institutes
of Health activity and chronicity indices. Kidney Int. 2018;93:789–796.

22. Markowitz GS, D’Agati VD. The ISN/RPS 2003 classiﬁcation of lupus
nephritis: an assessment at 3 years. Kidney Int. 2007;71:491–495.

www.kidney-international.org

23. Weening JJ, D’Agati VD, Schwartz MM, et al. The classiﬁcation of
glomerulonephritis in systemic lupus erythematosus revisited. J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:241–250.

24. Galindo-Izquierdo M, Rodriguez-Almaraz E, Pego-Reigosa JM, et al.
Characterization of patients with lupus nephritis included in a large
cohort from the Spanish Society of Rheumatology Registry of Patients
With Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (RELESSER). Medicine (Baltimore).
2016;95:e2891.

25. Pons-Estel GJ, Alarcon GS, Burgos PI, et al. Mestizos with systemic lupus
erythematosus develop renal disease early while antimalarials retard its
appearance: data from a Latin American cohort. Lupus. 2013;22:899–907.
26. Kasitanon N, Fine DM, Haas M, et al. Hydroxychloroquine use predicts
complete renal remission within 12 months among patients treated
with mycophenolate mofetil therapy for membranous lupus nephritis.
Lupus. 2006;15:366–370.

27. Mejia-Vilet

JM, Cordova-Sanchez BM, Uribe-Uribe NO,
pure membranous
for

al.
Immunosuppressive
lupus
nephropathy in a Hispanic population. Clin Rheumatol. 2016;35:2219–
2227.

treatment

et

28. Siso A, Ramos-Casals M, Bove A, et al. Previous antimalarial therapy in
inﬂuence on outcomes and

patients diagnosed with lupus nephritis:
survival. Lupus. 2008;17:281–288.

29. Zavala-Miranda MF, Perez-Arias AA, Marquez-Macedo SE, et al.
Characteristics and outcomes of a Hispanic lupus nephritis cohort
from Mexico. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023;62:1136–1144.

30. Kaiser R, Cleveland CM, Criswell LA. Risk and protective factors for
thrombosis in systemic lupus erythematosus: results from a large,
multi-ethnic cohort. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009;68:238–241.

31. Petri M. Use of hydroxychloroquine to prevent thrombosis in systemic
and in antiphospholipid antibody-positive

lupus erythematosus
patients. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2011;13:77–80.

32. Ruiz-Irastorza G, Egurbide MV, Pijoan JI, et al. Effect of antimalarials on
lupus
in

patients with

systemic

survival

and

thrombosis
erythematosus. Lupus. 2006;15:577–583.

34.

33. Tektonidou MG, Laskari K, Panagiotakos DB, et al. Risk factors for
thrombosis and primary thrombosis prevention in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus with or without antiphospholipid
antibodies. Arthritis Rheum. 2009;61:29–36.
Fessler BJ, Alarcon GS, McGwin G Jr, et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus
in three ethnic groups: XVI. Association of hydroxychloroquine use with
reduced risk of damage accrual. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52:1473–1480.
35. Pakchotanon R, Gladman DD, Su J, et al. More consistent antimalarial
intake in ﬁrst 5 years of disease is associated with better prognosis in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 2018;45:90–
94.

36. Pokroy-Shapira E, Gelernter I, Molad Y. Evolution of chronic kidney
disease in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus over a long-
period follow-up:
study. Clin
Rheumatol. 2014;33:649–657.

inception cohort

a single-center

37. Pons-Estel GJ, Alarcon GS, McGwin G Jr, et al. Protective effect of
hydroxychloroquine on renal damage in patients with lupus nephritis:
LXV, data from a multiethnic US cohort. Arthritis Rheum. 2009;61:830–
839.

38. Shaharir SS, Ghafor AH, Said MS, et al. A descriptive study of the factors
associated with damage in Malaysian patients with lupus nephritis.
Lupus. 2014;23:436–442.

39. Hodis HN, Quismorio FP Jr, Wickham E, et al. The lipid, lipoprotein, and
apolipoprotein effects of hydroxychloroquine in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 1993;20:661–665.

40. Tam LS, Gladman DD, Hallett DC, et al. Effect of antimalarial agents on
the fasting lipid proﬁle in systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol.
2000;27:2142–2145.
Lakshminarayanan S, Walsh S, Mohanraj M, et al. Factors associated with
low bone mineral density in female patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 2001;28:102–108.

41.

42. Eudy AM, Siega-Riz AM, Engel SM, et al. Effect of pregnancy on disease
ﬂares in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann Rheum Dis.
2018;77:855–860.

S62

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

43.

44.

Leroux M, Desveaux C, Parcevaux M, et al. Impact of hydroxychloroquine
on preterm delivery and intrauterine growth restriction in pregnant
women with systemic lupus erythematosus: a descriptive cohort
study. Lupus. 2015;24:1384–1391.
Liu E, Liu Z, Zhou Y. Feasibility of hydroxychloroquine adjuvant therapy
in pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus. Biomed Res.
2018;29:980–983.

45. Serre J, Buob D, Boffa JJ. Hydroxychloroquine-induced podocytopathy

mimicking Fabry disease. BMJ Case Rep. 2019;12:e228876.

46. Sperati CJ, Rosenberg AZ. Hydroxychloroquine-induced mimic of renal

Fabry disease. Kidney Int. 2018;94:634.

47. Canadian Hydroxychloroquine Study Group. A randomized study of the
effect of withdrawing hydroxychloroquine sulfate in systemic lupus
erythematosus. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:150–154.

49.

48. Ruiz-Irastorza G, Ramos-Casals M, Brito-Zeron P, et al. Clinical efﬁcacy
and side effects of antimalarials in systemic lupus erythematosus: a
systematic review. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:20–28.
Feldman CH, Hiraki LT, Winkelmayer WC, et al. Serious infections among
adult Medicaid beneﬁciaries with systemic lupus erythematosus and
lupus nephritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015;67:1577–1585.
50. Zheng ZH, Zhang LJ, Liu WX, et al. Predictors of survival
patients with lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2012;21:1049–1056.

in Chinese

51. Mohammad S, Clowse MEB, Eudy AM, et al. Examination of
hydroxychloroquine use and hemolytic anemia in G6PDH-deﬁcient
patients. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2018;70:481–485.

52. Yusuf IH, Sharma S, Luqmani R, et al. Hydroxychloroquine retinopathy.

Eye (Lond). 2017;31:828–845.

53. Dima A, Jurcut C, Chasset F, et al. Hydroxychloroquine in systemic lupus
erythematosus: overview of current knowledge. Ther Adv Musculoskelet
Dis. 2022;14:1759720X211073001.
Fasano S, Messiniti V, Iudici M, et al. Hydroxychloroquine daily dose,
hydroxychloroquine blood levels and the risk of ﬂares in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus Sci Med. 2023;10:e000841.

54.

55. Cunha C, Alexander S, Ashby D, et al. Hydroxycloroquine blood
concentration in lupus nephritis: a determinant of disease outcome?
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2018;33:1604–1610.

56. Cervera R, Khamashta MA, Font J, et al. Morbidity and mortality in
systemic lupus erythematosus during a 10-year period: a comparison
of early and late manifestations in a cohort of 1,000 patients. Medicine
(Baltimore). 2003;82:299–308.
Fors Nieves CE, Izmirly PM. Mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus: an
updated review. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2016;18:21.

57.

58. Tselios K, Gladman DD, Sheane BJ, et al. All-cause, cause-speciﬁc and
age-speciﬁc standardised mortality ratios of patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus in Ontario, Canada over 43 years (1971-2013).
Ann Rheum Dis. 2019;78:802–806.

59. Yurkovich M, Vostretsova K, Chen W, et al. Overall and cause-speciﬁc
mortality in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a meta-
analysis of observational studies. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2014;66:
608–616.

60. Steiman AJ, Gladman DD, Ibanez D, et al. Outcomes in patients with
systemic
lupus erythematosus with and without a prolonged
serologically active clinically quiescent period. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2012;64:511–518.

61. Thong KM, Chan TM.

Infectious complications in lupus nephritis
treatment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lupus. 2019;28:334–
346.

62. Goceroglu A, Rahmattulla C, Berden AE, et al. The Dutch Transplantation
in Vasculitis (DUTRAVAS) Study: outcome of renal transplantation in
antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody-associated glomerulonephritis.
Transplantation. 2016;100:916–924.

63. Petri M, Allbritton J. Antibiotic allergy in systemic lupus erythematosus: a

case-control study. J Rheumatol. 1992;19:265–269.

64. Vananuvat P, Suwannalai P, Sungkanuparph S, et al. Primary prophylaxis
for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia in patients with connective tissue
diseases. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2011;41:497–502.

65. Suyama Y, Okada M, Rokutanda R, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of upfront
graded administration of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in systemic
lupus erythematosus: a retrospective cohort study. Mod Rheumatol.
2016;26:557–561.

66. Murdaca G, Orsi A, Spano F, et al. Vaccine-preventable infections in
systemic lupus erythematosus. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016;12:632–
643.

67. Canney M, Atiquzzaman M, Cunningham AM, et al. A population-based
the risk of glomerular disease relapse after COVID-19

analysis of
vaccination. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2022;33:2247–2257.

68. Mageau A, Timsit JF, Perrozziello A, et al. The burden of chronic kidney
disease in systemic lupus erythematosus: a nationwide epidemiologic
study. Autoimmun Rev. 2019;18:733–737.

69. Perez-Arias AA, Marquez-Macedo SE, Pena-Vizcarra OR, et al. The
inﬂuence of repeated ﬂares in response to therapy and prognosis in
lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2023;38:884–893.

70. Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al. Combined oral contraceptives in
women with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:
2550–2558.

71. Blumenfeld Z, von Wolff M. GnRH-analogues and oral contraceptives for
fertility preservation in women during chemotherapy. Hum Reprod
Update. 2008;14:543–552.

72. Angeli A, Guglielmi G, Dovio A, et al. High prevalence of asymptomatic
in post-menopausal women receiving chronic
study. Bone.

vertebral
glucocorticoid therapy: a cross-sectional outpatient
2006;39:253–259.

fractures

73. Curtis JR, Westfall AO, Allison J, et al. Population-based assessment of
adverse events associated with long-term glucocorticoid use. Arthritis
Rheum. 2006;55:420–426.

74. Hansen KE, Kleker B, Safdar N, et al. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis in children. Semin
Arthritis Rheum. 2014;44:47–54.

75. Mok CC, Tse SM, Chan KL, et al. Estimation of fracture risk by the FRAX
tool
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a 10-year
longitudinal validation study. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2022;14:
1759720X221074451.

76. Center for Metabolic Bone Diseases. Fracture Risk Assessment Tool.
Available at:. Accessed May 17, 2023. https://www.shefﬁeld.ac.uk/FRAX/
77. Buckley L, Guyatt G, Fink HA, et al. 2017 American College of
Rheumatology guideline for
the prevention and treatment of
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2017;69:
1521–1537.

78. Zhang Y, Milojevic D. Protecting bone health in pediatric rheumatic
diseases: pharmacological considerations. Paediatr Drugs. 2017;19:193–
211.

79. Choi MY, Flood K, Bernatsky S, et al. A review on SLE and malignancy.

Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2017;31:373–396.

80. Goobie GC, Bernatsky S, Ramsey-Goldman R, et al. Malignancies in
systemic lupus erythematosus: a 2015 update. Curr Opin Rheumatol.
2015;27:454–460.

81. Tessier-Cloutier B, Clarke AE, Pineau CA, et al. What investigations are
needed to optimally monitor for malignancies in SLE? Lupus. 2015;24:
781–787.

82. Gatto M, Agmon-Levin N, Soriano A, et al. Human papillomavirus vaccine
and systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin Rheumatol. 2013;32:1301–1307.
83. Pellegrino P, Carnovale C, Perrone V, et al. Human papillomavirus
vaccine in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Epidemiology.
2014;25:155–156.

84. Baldwin DS, Gluck MC, Lowenstein J, et al. Lupus nephritis. Clinical
course as related to morphologic forms and their transitions. Am J
Med. 1977;62:12–30.

85. Hu W, Chen Y, Wang S, et al. Clinical-morphological

features and
outcomes of lupus podocytopathy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016;11:
585–592.
Lewis EJ. Lupus podocytopathy. In: Lewis EJ, Schwartz MM, Korbet SM,
Chan TM, eds. Lupus Nephritis. 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press; 2010:199–210.

86.

87. Oliva-Damaso N, Payan J, Oliva-Damaso E, et al. Lupus podocytopathy:

an overview. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2019;26:369–375.

88. Gutierrez S, Petiti JP, De Paul AL, et al. Lupus-related podocytopathy.
Could it be a new entity within the spectrum of lupus nephritis?
Nefrologia. 2012;32:245–246.
Schwartz MM,

EJ. Association of glomerular
podocytopathy and nephrotic proteinuria in mesangial lupus nephritis.
Lupus. 2006;15:71–75.

89. Han TS,

Lewis

90. Kraft SW, Schwartz MM, Korbet SM, et al. Glomerular podocytopathy in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:
175–179.

91. Shea-Simonds P, Cairns TD, Roufosse C, et al. Lupus podocytopathy.

Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009;48:1616–1618.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S63

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

92. Wang SF, Chen YH, Chen DQ, et al. Mesangial proliferative lupus
lupus nephritis.

nephritis with podocytopathy: a special entity of
Lupus. 2018;27:303–311.

93. Hu WX, Chen YH, Bao H, et al. Glucocorticoid with or without additional
immunosuppressant therapy for patients with lupus podocytopathy: a
retrospective single-center study. Lupus. 2015;24:1067–1075.

94. Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, Rahman P, et al. Accrual of organ damage
over time in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol.
2003;30:1955–1959.

and

lupus

prednisone

nephritis with

95. Donadio JV Jr, Holley KE, Ferguson RH, et al. Treatment of diffuse
proliferative
combined
prednisone and cyclophosphamide. N Engl J Med. 1978;299:1151–1155.
96. Gourley MF, Austin HA 3rd, Scott D, et al. Methylprednisolone and
cyclophosphamide, alone or in combination,
in patients with lupus
nephritis. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1996;125:
549–557.
Illei GG, Austin HA, Crane M, et al. Combination therapy with pulse
cyclophosphamide plus pulse methylprednisolone improves long-term
renal outcome without adding toxicity in patients with lupus nephritis.
Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:248–257.

97.

98. Steinberg AD, Kaltreider HB, Staples PJ, et al. Cyclophosphamide in lupus

nephritis: a controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1971;75:165–171.

99. Houssiau FA, Vasconcelos C, D’Cruz D, et al. The 10-year follow-up data
of the Euro-Lupus Nephritis Trial comparing low-dose and high-dose
intravenous cyclophosphamide. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:61–64.
100. Rathi M, Goyal A, Jaryal A, et al. Comparison of low-dose intravenous
cyclophosphamide with oral mycophenolate mofetil in the treatment
of lupus nephritis. Kidney Int. 2016;89:235–242.
Li X, Ren H, Zhang Q, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil or tacrolimus compared
with intravenous cyclophosphamide in the induction treatment for active
lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:1467–1472.

101.

102. Ginzler EM, Dooley MA, Aranow C, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil or
lupus nephritis. N Engl J Med.

intravenous cyclophosphamide for
2005;353:2219–2228.

103. Bao H, Liu ZH, Xie HL, et al. Successful treatment of class VþIV lupus
nephritis with multitarget therapy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19:2001–2010.
104. Ye F, Wang S, Wang M, et al. Clinical analysis of multi-target treatment
for complex lupus nephritis. Am J Transl Res. 2022;14:687–692.
105. Zhang Y, Han H, Chu L. Neuropsychiatric lupus erythematosus: future
directions and challenges; a systematic review and survey. Clinics (Sao
Paulo). 2020;75:e1515.

106. Zhang H, Liu Z, Zhou M, et al. Multitarget therapy for maintenance
treatment of lupus nephritis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:3671–3678.
107. Rovin BH, Solomons N, Pendergraft WF 3rd, et al. A randomized,
controlled double-blind study comparing the efﬁcacy and safety of
dose-ranging voclosporin with placebo in achieving remission in
patients with active lupus nephritis. Kidney Int. 2019;95:219–231.
108. Rovin BH, Teng YKO, Ginzler EM, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of voclosporin
versus placebo for
lupus nephritis (AURORA 1): a double-blind,
randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2021;397:2070–2080.

109. Arriens C, Teng YKO, Ginzler EM, et al. Update on the efﬁcacy and safety
proﬁle of voclosporin: an integrated analysis of clinical trials in lupus
nephritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2022;75:1399–1408.

110. Saxena A, Ginzler EM, Gibson K, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of long-term
voclosporin treatment for lupus nephritis in the phase 3 AURORA 2
trial. Arthritis Rheumatol. Published online July 19, 2023.
clinical
https://doi.org/10.1002/art.42657
Furie R, Rovin BH, Houssiau F, et al. Two-year, randomized, controlled
trial of belimumab in lupus nephritis. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1117–1128.
Furie R, Rovin BH, Houssiau F, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of belimumab in
patients with lupus nephritis: open-label extension of BLISS-LN study.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2022;17:1620–1630.

112.

111.

113. Rovin BH, Furie R, Teng YKO, et al. A secondary analysis of the
Belimumab International Study in Lupus Nephritis trial examined
effects of belimumab on kidney outcomes and preservation of kidney
function in patients with lupus nephritis. Kidney Int. 2022;101:403–413.
114. Yu X, Chen N, Xue J, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of belimumab in patients
with lupus nephritis: subgroup analyses of a phase 3 randomized trial in
the East Asian population. Am J Kidney Dis. 2023;81:294–306.e1.
115. Chan TM, Tse KC, Tang CS, et al. Long-term outcome of patients with
diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis treated with prednisolone and oral
cyclophosphamide followed by azathioprine. Lupus. 2005;14:265–272.

116. Chen YE, Korbet SM, Katz RS, et al. Value of a complete or partial
remission in severe lupus nephritis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;3:46–53.
117. Dall’Era M, Cisternas MG, Smilek DE, et al. Predictors of long-term renal
outcome in lupus nephritis trials: lessons learned from the Euro-Lupus
Nephritis Cohort. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015;67:1305–1313.

118. Yap DY, Ma MK, Mok MM, et al. Long-term data on corticosteroids and
mycophenolate mofetil treatment in lupus nephritis. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2013;52:480–486.

119. Boumpas DT, Austin HA 3rd, Vaughn EM, et al. Controlled trial of pulse
methylprednisolone versus two regimens of pulse cyclophosphamide in
severe lupus nephritis. Lancet. 1992;340:741–745.

120. Sesso R, Monteiro M, Sato E, et al. A controlled trial of pulse
cyclophosphamide versus pulse methylprednisolone in severe lupus
nephritis. Lupus. 1994;3:107–112.

121. Tunnicliffe DJ, Palmer SC, Henderson L, et al.

Immunosuppressive
treatment for proliferative lupus nephritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;6:CD002922.

122. Mehra S, Usdadiya JB, Jain VK, et al. Comparing the efﬁcacy of low-dose
vs high-dose cyclophosphamide regimen as induction therapy in the
treatment of proliferative lupus nephritis: a single-center
study.
Rheumatol Int. 2018;38:557–568.

123. Mitwalli AH, Al Wakeel JS, Hurraib S, et al. Comparison of high and low
dose of cyclophosphamide in lupus nephritis patients: a long-term
randomized controlled trial. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2011;22:935–940.
124. Sabry A, Abo-Zenah H, Medhat T, et al. A comparative study of two
intensiﬁed pulse cyclophosphamide remission-inducing regimens for
diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis: an Egyptian experience.
Int Urol
Nephrol. 2009;41:153–161.

125. El-Shafey EM, Abdou SH, Shareef MM. Is mycophenolate mofetil superior
to pulse intravenous cyclophosphamide for
induction therapy of
proliferative lupus nephritis in Egyptian patients? Clin Exp Nephrol.
2010;14:214–221.

126. Mendonca S, Gupta D, Ali S, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil or
cyclophosphamide in Indian patients with lupus nephritis: Which is
better? A single-center experience. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2017;28:
1069–1077.

127. Ong LM, Hooi LS, Lim TO, et al. Randomized controlled trial of pulse
intravenous cyclophosphamide versus mycophenolate mofetil
in the
induction therapy of proliferative lupus nephritis. Nephrology (Carlton).
2005;10:504–510.

128. Sedhain A, Hada R, Agrawal RK, et al. Low dose mycophenolate mofetil
versus cyclophosphamide in the induction therapy of lupus nephritis in
Nepalese population: a randomized control trial. BMC Nephrol. 2018;19:
175.

129. Parikh SV, Pendergraft WF, Tumlin JA, et al. Treatment of active lupus
nephritis with voclosporin: 48 week data from the AURA-LV study
[abstract no:4]. Am J Kidney Dis. 2017;69:A2.

131.

130. Atisha-Fregoso Y, Malkiel S, Harris KM, et al. Phase II randomized trial of
rituximab plus cyclophosphamide followed by belimumab for
the
treatment of lupus nephritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021;73:121–131.
Liu T, Neuner R, Thompson A, et al. Clinical pharmacology considerations
for the approval of belimumab for the treatment of adult patients with
active lupus nephritis: a regulatory perspective. Lupus. 2022;31:424–432.
132. Mohara A, Perez Velasco R, Praditsitthikorn N, et al. A cost-utility analysis
of alternative drug regimens for newly diagnosed severe lupus nephritis
patients in Thailand. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014;53:138–144.

133. Tse KC, Tang CS, Lam MF, et al. Cost comparison between
mycophenolate mofetil and cyclophosphamide-azathioprine in the
treatment of lupus nephritis. J Rheumatol. 2009;36:76–81.

134. Wilson EC,

Jayne DR, Dellow E, et al. The cost-effectiveness of
mycophenolate mofetil as ﬁrstline therapy in active lupus nephritis.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007;46:1096–1101.

135. Mandrik O, Fotheringham J, Ren S, et al. The cost-effectiveness of
belimumab and voclosporin for patients with lupus nephritis in the
United States. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2022;17:385–394.

136. Bell CF, Huang SP, Cyhaniuk A, et al. The cost of ﬂares among patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus with and without lupus nephritis
in the United States. Lupus. 2022;32:301–309.

137. Meacock R, Dale N, Harrison MJ. The humanistic and economic burden
review.

erythematosus:

systematic

lupus

a

systemic

of
Pharmacoeconomics. 2013;31:49–61.
Ismal K,
Saivani Y,

138. Sahay M,

versus
cyclophosphamide for lupus nephritis. Indian J Nephrol. 2018;28:35–40.

al. Mycophenolate

et

S64

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

139.

Isenberg D, Appel GB, Contreras G, et al. Inﬂuence of race/ethnicity on
response to lupus nephritis treatment: the ALMS study. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2010;49:128–140.

140. Mejia-Vilet

JM, Arreola-Guerra JM, Cordova-Sanchez BM, et al.
Comparison of
lupus nephritis induction treatments in a Hispanic
population: a single-center cohort analysis. J Rheumatol. 2015;42:2082–
2091.

141. Rovin BH, Furie R, Latinis K, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of rituximab in
patients with active proliferative lupus nephritis: the Lupus Nephritis
Assessment with Rituximab study. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64:1215–1226.
142. Dall’Era M, Solomons N, Federico R, et al. Comparison of standard of care
treatment with a low steroid and mycophenolate mofetil regimen for
lupus nephritis in the ALMS and AURA studies. Lupus. 2019;28:591–596.
143. Mina R, von Scheven E, Ardoin SP, et al. Consensus treatment plans for
induction therapy of newly diagnosed proliferative lupus nephritis in
juvenile systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2012;64:375–383.

144. Bandhan IH,

Islam MN, Ahmad HI, et al. Outcome of

low-dose
prednisolone use for the induction of remission in lupus nephritis
patients. Int J Rheum Dis. 2022;25:121–130.

145. Bharati J, Rathi M, Ramachandran R, et al. Comparison of two steroid
regimens in induction therapy of proliferative lupus nephritis: a
randomized controlled trial. Indian J Nephrol. 2019;29:373–375.
146. Zeher M, Doria A, Lan J, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of enteric-coated
mycophenolate sodium in combination with two glucocorticoid regimens
for the treatment of active lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2011;20:1484–1493.
147. Ruiz-Irastorza G, Danza A, Perales I, et al. Prednisone in lupus nephritis:

How much is enough? Autoimmun Rev. 2014;13:206–214.

long-term disease

148. Ruiz-Arruza I, Lozano J, Cabezas-Rodriguez I, et al. Restrictive use of oral
glucocorticoids in systemic lupus erythematosus and prevention of
damage without worsening
an
control:
observational study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2018;70:582–591.
149. Austin HA 3rd, Illei GG, Braun MJ, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of
lupus

prednisone,
in
membranous nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:901–911.
150. McKinley A, Park E, Spetie D, et al. Oral cyclophosphamide for lupus
glomerulonephritis: an underused therapeutic option. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2009;4:1754–1760.

cyclophosphamide,

cyclosporine

and

151. Mok CC, Ho CT, Chan KW, et al. Outcome and prognostic indicators of
diffuse proliferative lupus glomerulonephritis treated with sequential
oral cyclophosphamide and azathioprine. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;46:1003–
1013.

152. Yee CS, Crabtree N, Skan J, et al. Prevalence and predictors of fragility
fractures in systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005;64:
111–113.

153. ACCESS Trial Group. Treatment of lupus nephritis with abatacept: the
Abatacept and Cyclophosphamide Combination Efﬁcacy and Safety
Study. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014;66:3096–3104.

154. Yee CS, Gordon C, Dostal C, et al. EULAR randomised controlled trial of
pulse cyclophosphamide and methylprednisolone versus continuous
cyclophosphamide and prednisolone followed by azathioprine and
prednisolone in lupus nephritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004;63:525–529.
155. Ciancio G, Miller J, Gonwa TA. Review of major clinical trials with
Transplantation.
in renal

transplantation.

mycophenolate mofetil
2005;80(2 suppl):S191–S200.

156. Alexander S, Fleming DH, Mathew BS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
concentration-controlled mycophenolate mofetil in proliferative lupus
nephritis: an observational cohort study. Ther Drug Monit. 2014;36:
423–432.

157. Kittanamongkolchai W, Rukrung C, Supasiri T, et al. Therapeutic drug
monitoring of mycophenolate mofetil for the treatment of severely
active lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2013;22:727–732.
Lertdumrongluk P,
al.
Pharmacokinetics of mycophenolic acid in severe lupus nephritis.
Kidney Int. 2010;78:389–395.

Somparn P, Kittanamongkolchai W,

158.

et

160.

159. Neumann I, Fuhrmann H, Fang IF, et al. Association between
mycophenolic acid 12-h trough levels and clinical endpoints in
patients with autoimmune disease on mycophenolate mofetil. Nephrol
Dial Transplant. 2008;23:3514–3520.
van Gelder T, Berden JH, Berger SP. To TDM or not to TDM in lupus nephritis
patients treated with MMF? Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2015;30:560–564.
161. Rovin BH, Parikh SV, Hebert LA, et al. Lupus nephritis: induction therapy
in severe lupus nephritis—should MMF be considered the drug of
choice? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:147–153.

162. Sakai R, Kurasawa T, Nishi E, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of multitarget
therapy with cyclophosphamide and tacrolimus for lupus nephritis: a
prospective, single-arm, single-centre, open label pilot study in Japan.
Lupus. 2018;27:273–282.

163. Yang TH, Wu TH, Chang YL, et al. Cyclosporine for the treatment of lupus
nephritis in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin Nephrol.
2018;89:277–285.

164. Busque S, Cantarovich M, Mulgaonkar S, et al. The PROMISE study: a
phase 2b multicenter study of voclosporin (ISA247) versus tacrolimus
in de novo kidney transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2011;11:2675–2684.
165. Arriens C, Polyakova S, Adzerikho I, et al. OP0277 AURORA phase 3 study
demonstrates voclosporin statistical superiority over standard of care in
lupus nephritis (LN). Ann Rheum Dis. 2020;79:172–173.

for

167.

induction therapy of

166. Rovin BH, Parikh SV, Huizinga B, et al. Management of lupus nephritis
with voclosporin: an update from a pooled analysis of 534 patients
[Abstract PO1917]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020. Abstract Supplement:P594.
van Gelder T, Huizinga RB, Noukens J, et al. Use of therapeutic drug
monitoring does not add clinical value for voclosporin in patients with
lupus nephritis [Abstract PO1918]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020:P594.
168. Mok CC, Ying KY, Yim CW, et al. Tacrolimus versus mycophenolate
mofetil
lupus nephritis: a randomised
controlled trial and long-term follow-up. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016;75:30–36.
169. Kamanamool N, Ingsathit A, Rattanasiri S, et al. Comparison of disease
in lupus

activity between tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil
nephritis: a randomized controlled trial. Lupus. 2018;27:647–656.
170. Mok CC, Ho LY, Ying SKY, et al. Long-term outcome of a randomised
controlled trial comparing tacrolimus with mycophenolate mofetil as
induction therapy for active lupus nephritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020;79:
1070–1076.
Li L, Du Y, Ji J, et al. Analysis of the safety and efﬁcacy of tacrolimus
combined with glucocorticoid in the treatment of lupus nephritis. Pak
J Med Sci. 2022;38:1285–1291.

171.

172. Zhang X, Liu P, Zhang Z. Analysis of

the clinical effects of

the
tacrolimus or

combination of mycophenolate mofetil with either
cyclophosphamide. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2020;75:e1820.

173. Zheng Z, Zhang H, Peng X, et al. Effect of tacrolimus vs intravenous
cyclophosphamide on complete or partial response in patients with
lupus nephritis: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5:
e224492.
van Vollenhoven RF, Navarra SV, Levy RA, et al. Long-term safety and
limited organ damage in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
treated with belimumab: a phase III study extension. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2020;59:281–291.

174.

175. Wallace DJ, Ginzler EM, Merrill JT, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of belimumab
plus standard therapy for up to thirteen years in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2019;71:1125–1134.

176. Stohl W, Schwarting A, Okada M, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of
subcutaneous belimumab in systemic lupus erythematosus: a ﬁfty-
two-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Arthritis
Rheumatol. 2017;69:1016–1027.

177. Struemper H, Murtaugh T, Gilbert J, et al. Relative bioavailability of a
single dose of belimumab administered subcutaneously by preﬁlled
syringe or autoinjector in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmacol Drug Dev.
2016;5:208–215.

178. Yapa SW, Roth D, Gordon D, et al. Comparison of intravenous and
subcutaneous exposure supporting dose selection of subcutaneous
belimumab systemic lupus erythematosus phase 3 program. Lupus.
2016;25:1448–1455.

179. Dyadyk AI, Bagriy AE, Yarovaya NF, et al. Results of

long-term
randomised study of immunosuppressive treatment of patients with
idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis [abstract]. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2001;16:A64.

180. Grootscholten C, Ligtenberg G, Hagen EC, et al. Azathioprine/
methylprednisolone versus cyclophosphamide in proliferative lupus
nephritis. A randomized controlled trial. Kidney Int. 2006;70:732–742.

181. Wang HY, Cui TG, Hou FF, et al. Induction treatment of proliferative lupus
nephritis with leﬂunomide combined with prednisone: a prospective
multi-centre observational study. Lupus. 2008;17:638–644.

182. Zhang M, Qi C, Zha Y, et al. Leﬂunomide versus cyclophosphamide in the
induction treatment of proliferative lupus nephritis in Chinese patients: a
randomized trial. Clin Rheumatol. 2019;38:859–867.

183. Clark WF, Lindsay RM, Cattran DC, et al. Monthly plasmapheresis for systemic
lupus erythematosus with diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis: a pilot
study. Can Med Assoc J. 1981;125:171–174.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S65

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

184. Doria A, Piccoli A, Vesco P, et al. Therapy of lupus nephritis. A two-year

prospective study. Ann Med Interne (Paris). 1994;145:307–311.

185. Wallace DJ, Goldﬁnger D, Pepkowitz SH, et al. Randomized controlled
for

trial
proliferative lupus nephritis. J Clin Apher. 1998;13:163–166.

cyclophosphamide/apheresis

pulse/synchronization

of

186. Clark WF, Williams W, Cattran DC, et al. A controlled trial of chronic
plasma exchange therapy in S.L.E. nephritis [abstract]. Kidney Int.
1984;25:161.

188.

treatment with sirukumab (CNTO 136)

187. Rovin BH, van Vollenhoven RF, Aranow C, et al. A multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the
efﬁcacy and safety of
in
patients with active lupus nephritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2016;68:2174–
2183.
Jayne D, Appel G, Chan TM, et al. LB0003: a randomized controlled study
of laquinimod in active lupus nephritis patients in combination with
standard of care. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013;72:A164.
Furie R, Nicholls K, Cheng TT, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of abatacept in
randomized, double-blind study.
lupus nephritis: a twelve-month,
Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014;66:379–389.

189.

190. Gunnarsson I, Sundelin B, Jonsdottir T, et al. Histopathologic and clinical
outcome of rituximab treatment in patients with cyclophosphamide-
resistant proliferative lupus nephritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2007;56:1263–
1272.

191. Mysler EF, Spindler AJ, Guzman R, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of
ocrelizumab in active proliferative lupus nephritis:
results from a
randomized, double-blind, phase III study. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65:
2368–2379.

192. Rovin BH, Martinez A, Analia A, et al. A phase 2 randomized controlled
study of obinutuzumab with mycophenolate and corticosteroids in
proliferative lupus nephritis [Abstract FR-OR136.]. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2019;30:B2.

193. Wofsy D, Hillson JL, Diamond B. Abatacept for lupus nephritis: alternative
deﬁnitions of complete response support conﬂicting conclusions.
Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64:3660–3665.

hot

lupus

194. Karim MY, Pisoni CN, Khamashta MA. Update on immunotherapy for
erythematosus—what’s
not.

and what’s

systemic
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009;48:332–341.
Li EK, Tam LS, Zhu TY, et al.
Is combination rituximab with
cyclophosphamide better than rituximab alone in the treatment of
lupus nephritis? Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009;48:892–898.
Lu TY, Ng KP, Cambridge G, et al. A retrospective seven-year analysis of
the use of B cell depletion therapy in systemic lupus erythematosus at
University College London Hospital: the ﬁrst ﬁfty patients. Arthritis
Rheum. 2009;61:482–487.

195.

196.

197. Ramos-Casals M, Soto MJ, Cuadrado MJ, et al. Rituximab in systemic
lupus erythematosus: a systematic review of off-label use in 188 cases.
Lupus. 2009;18:767–776.

198. Condon MB, Ashby D, Pepper RJ, et al. Prospective observational single-
centre cohort study to evaluate the effectiveness of treating lupus
nephritis with rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil but no oral
steroids. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013;72:1280–1286.

199. Rovin BH, Caster DJ, Cattran DC, et al. Management and treatment of
glomerular diseases (part 2): conclusions from a Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference. Kidney
Int. 2019;95:281–295.

200. Mok CC, Lau CS, Wong RW. Risk factors for ovarian failure in patients
receiving cyclophosphamide

with systemic
therapy. Arthritis Rheum. 1998;41:831–837.

lupus erythematosus

201. Radis CD, Kahl LE, Baker GL, et al. Effects of cyclophosphamide on the
development of malignancy and on long-term survival of patients
with rheumatoid arthritis. A 20-year followup study. Arthritis Rheum.
1995;38:1120–1127.

202. Contreras G, Pardo V, Leclercq B, et al. Sequential

therapies for

proliferative lupus nephritis. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:971–980.

203. Houssiau FA, D’Cruz D, Sangle S, et al. Azathioprine versus
mycophenolate mofetil
for long-term immunosuppression in lupus
nephritis: results from the MAINTAIN Nephritis Trial. Ann Rheum Dis.
2010;69:2083–2089.

204. Kaballo BG, Ahmed AE, Nur MM, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil versus
azathioprine for maintenance treatment of lupus nephritis. Saudi J
Kidney Dis Transpl. 2016;27:717–725.

206. Choi CB, Won S, Bae SC. Outcomes of multitarget therapy using
relapsing

refractory or

mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus for
lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2018;27:1007–1011.

207. Kasitanon N, Boripatkosol P, Louthrenoo W. Response to combination of
mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporin A and corticosteroid treatment in
lupus nephritis patients with persistent proteinuria.
Int J Rheum Dis.
2018;21:200–207.

208. Karasawa K, Uchida K, Kodama M, et al. Long-term effects of tacrolimus
for maintenance therapy of lupus nephritis: a 5-year retrospective study
at a single center. Rheumatol Int. 2018;38:2271–2277.

209. Yap DY, Ma MK, Mok MM, et al. Long-term data on tacrolimus treatment

in lupus nephritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014;53:2232–2237.

210. Yumura W, Suganuma S, Uchida K, et al. Effects of long-term treatment
with mizoribine in patients with proliferative lupus nephritis. Clin
Nephrol. 2005;64:28–34.

211. Zavada J, Sinikka Pesickova S, Rysava R, et al. Extended follow-up of the
induction and
CYCLOFA-LUNE
regimens for proliferative lupus nephritis
maintenance treatment
based either on cyclophosphamide or on cyclosporine A. Lupus.
2014;23:69–74.

comparing two sequential

trial

212. Moroni G, Doria A, Mosca M, et al. A randomized pilot trial comparing
cyclosporine and azathioprine for maintenance therapy in diffuse
lupus nephritis over four years. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1:925–932.
213. Nee R, Rivera I, Little DJ, et al. Cost-utility analysis of mycophenolate
mofetil versus azathioprine based regimens for maintenance therapy
of proliferative lupus nephritis. Int J Nephrol. 2015;2015:917567.
Juliao P, Wurst K, Pimenta JM, et al. Belimumab use during pregnancy:
interim results of the belimumab pregnancy registry. Birth Defects Res.
2023;115:188–204.

214.

215. Yap DYH, Tang C, Ma MKM, et al. Longterm data on disease ﬂares in
patients with proliferative lupus nephritis in recent years. J Rheumatol.
2017;44:1375–1383.

216. Mathian A, Pha M, Haroche J, et al. Withdrawal of low-dose prednisone
in SLE patients with a clinically quiescent disease for more than 1 year: a
randomised clinical trial. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020;79:339–346.

217. Yap DYH, Kwan LPY, Ma MKM, et al. Preemptive immunosuppressive
treatment for asymptomatic serological reactivation may reduce renal
ﬂares in patients with lupus nephritis: a cohort study. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2019;34:467–473.
Jourde-Chiche N, Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Baumstarck K, et al. Weaning
of maintenance immunosuppressive therapy in lupus nephritis (WIN-
Lupus):
results of a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Ann
Rheum Dis. 2022;81:1420–1427.

218.

219. Yap DYH,

Tam CH,

and
pharmacogenomics of mycophenolic acid and its clinical correlations
in maintenance immunosuppression for lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2018;35:810–818.

Pharmacokinetics

Yung S,

al.

et

220. Moroni G, Longhi S, Giglio E, et al. What happens after complete
therapy in patients with lupus nephritis. Clin Exp

withdrawal of
Rheumatol. 2013;31:S75–S81.

221. Alvarado AS, Malvar A, Lococo B, et al. The value of repeat kidney biopsy
in quiescent Argentinian lupus nephritis patients. Lupus. 2014;23:840–
847.

222. De Rosa M, Azzato F, Toblli JE, et al. A prospective observational cohort
study highlights kidney biopsy ﬁndings of lupus nephritis patients in
remission who ﬂare following withdrawal of maintenance therapy.
Kidney Int. 2018;94:788–794.

223. Malvar A, Alberton V, Lococo B, et al. Kidney biopsy-based management
of maintenance immunosuppression is safe and may ameliorate ﬂare
rate in lupus nephritis. Kidney Int. 2020;97:156–162.

224. Tanaka H, Watanabe S, Aizawa-Yashiro T, et al. Long-term tacrolimus-
based immunosuppressive treatment for young patients with lupus
nephritis: a prospective study in daily clinical practice. Nephron Clin
Pract. 2012;121:c165–c173.

225. Chen W, Liu Q, Chen W, et al. Outcomes of maintenance therapy with
tacrolimus versus azathioprine for active lupus nephritis: a multicenter
randomized clinical trial. Lupus. 2012;21:944–952.

226. Cortes-Hernandez J, Torres-Salido MT, Medrano AS, et al. Long-term
outcomes—mycophenolate mofetil treatment for lupus nephritis with
addition of tacrolimus for
resistant cases. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2010;25:3939–3948.

205. Aragon E, Resontoc LP, Chan YH, et al. Long-term outcomes with multi-
in children with severe

targeted immunosuppressive protocol
proliferative lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2016;25:399–406.

227. Tse KC, Lam MF, Tang SC, et al. A pilot study on tacrolimus treatment in
membranous or quiescent lupus nephritis with proteinuria resistant to
angiotensin inhibition or blockade. Lupus. 2007;16:46–51.

S66

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

228. Uchino A, Tsukamoto H, Nakashima H, et al. Tacrolimus is effective for
lupus nephritis patients with persistent proteinuria. Clin Exp
Rheumatol. 2010;28:6–12.

229. Sugiyama S. Long-term therapy of mizoribine on lupus nephritis in joint

multi-center study. J Clin Ther Med. 1996;12:215–219.

230. Takeuchi T, Okada K, Yoshida H, et al. Post-marketing surveillance study
of the long-term use of mizoribine for the treatment of lupus nephritis:
2-year results. Mod Rheumatol. 2018;28:85–94.
Fu Q, Wu C, Dai M, et al. Leﬂunomide versus azathioprine for
maintenance therapy of lupus nephritis: a prospective, multicentre,
randomised trial and long-term follow-up. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022;81:
1549–1555.

231.

232. Appel GB, Cohen DJ, Pirani CL, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients
with lupus nephritis. A study based on the classiﬁcation of the World
Health Organization. Am J Med. 1987;83:877–885.

233. Mercadal L, Montcel ST, Nochy D, et al. Factors affecting outcome and
prognosis in membranous lupus nephropathy. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2002;17:1771–1778.

234. Mok CC. Membranous nephropathy in systemic lupus erythematosus: a

therapeutic enigma. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2009;5:212–220.

235. Mok CC, Ying KY, Yim CW, et al. Very long-term outcome of pure lupus
and

treated with

glucocorticoid

membranous
azathioprine. Lupus. 2009;18:1091–1095.

nephropathy

251. Ugolini-Lopes MR, Seguro LPC, Castro MXF, et al. Early proteinuria
response: a valid real-life situation predictor of long-term lupus renal
outcome in an ethnically diverse group with severe biopsy-proven
nephritis? Lupus Sci Med. 2017;4:e000213.
Ioannidis JP, Boki KA, Katsorida ME, et al. Remission, relapse, and re-
remission
with
proliferative
cyclophosphamide. Kidney Int. 2000;57:258–264.

nephritis

treated

lupus

252.

of

253. Touma Z, Urowitz MB, Ibanez D, et al. Time to recovery from proteinuria
receiving standard treatment.

in patients with lupus nephritis
J Rheumatol. 2014;41:688–697.

254. Dall’Era M, Stone D, Levesque V, et al. Identiﬁcation of biomarkers that
predict response to treatment of lupus nephritis with mycophenolate
(Hoboken).
mofetil or pulse cyclophosphamide. Arthritis Care Res
2011;63:351–357.

255. Bruce IN, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB. Factors associated with refractory
renal disease in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: the role
of patient nonadherence. Arthritis Care Res. 2000;13:406–408.

256. Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Pouchot J, Guettrot-Imbert G, et al. Adherence
to treatment in systemic lupus erythematosus patients. Best Pract Res
Clin Rheumatol. 2013;27:329–340.

257. Marengo MF, Waimann CA, de Achaval S, et al. Measuring therapeutic
electronic
lupus

erythematosus with

systemic

in

adherence
monitoring. Lupus. 2012;21:1158–1165.

236. Radhakrishnan J, Moutzouris DA, Ginzler EM, et al. Mycophenolate
mofetil and intravenous cyclophosphamide are similar as induction
therapy for class V lupus nephritis. Kidney Int. 2010;77:152–160.
237. Chan TM, Li FK, Hao WK, et al. Treatment of membranous lupus nephritis
immunosuppression. Lupus.

with nephrotic syndrome by sequential
1999;8:545–551.

238. Cramer CH 2nd, Mills M, Valentini RP, et al. Clinical presentation and
outcome in a cohort of paediatric patients with membranous lupus
nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22:3495–3500.

239. Borba EF, Guedes LK, Christmann RB, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil is
effective in reducing lupus glomerulonephritis proteinuria. Rheumatol
Int. 2006;26:1078–1083.

240. Spetie DN, Tang Y, Rovin BH, et al. Mycophenolate therapy of SLE

membranous nephropathy. Kidney Int. 2004;66:2411–2415.

258. Petri M, Perez-Gutthann S, Longenecker JC, et al. Morbidity of systemic
lupus erythematosus: role of race and socioeconomic status. Am J Med.
1991;91:345–353.

259. Rivera F, Merida E, Illescas ML, et al. Mycophenolate in refractory and

relapsing lupus nephritis. Am J Nephrol. 2014;40:105–112.

260. Bang SY, Lee CK, Kang YM, et al. Multicenter retrospective analysis of the
effectiveness and safety of rituximab in Korean patients with refractory
systemic lupus erythematosus. Autoimmune Dis. 2012;2012:565039.
261. Contis A, Vanquaethem H, Truchetet ME, et al. Analysis of

the
effectiveness and safety of rituximab in patients with refractory lupus
nephritis: a chart review. Clin Rheumatol. 2016;35:517–522.

262. Diaz-Lagares C, Croca S, Sangle S, et al. Efﬁcacy of rituximab in 164
patients with biopsy-proven lupus nephritis: pooled data from
European cohorts. Autoimmun Rev. 2012;11:357–364.

241. Chen W, Tang X, Liu Q, et al. Short-term outcomes of induction therapy
with tacrolimus versus cyclophosphamide for active lupus nephritis: a
multicenter randomized clinical trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011;57:235–244.
242. Szeto CC, Kwan BC, Lai FM, et al. Tacrolimus for the treatment of
nephritis.

class

pure

systemic
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008;47:1678–1681.

erythematosus with

lupus

V

243. Yap DY, Yu X, Chen XM, et al. Pilot 24-month study to compare
mycophenolate mofetil
of
and tacrolimus
membranous lupus nephritis with nephrotic syndrome. Nephrology
(Carlton). 2012;17:352–357.

treatment

in the

244. Chavarot N, Verhelst D, Pardon A, et al. Rituximab alone as induction
therapy for membranous lupus nephritis: a multicenter retrospective
study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017;96:e7429.

245. Saxena A, Caster D, Almaani S, et al. Long-term use of voclosporin in
patients with class V lupus nephritis: results from the AURORA 2
Continuation Study [abstract]. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2022;74(suppl 9).
Available at: Accessed May 17, 2023. https://acrabstracts.org/abstract/
long-term-use-of-voclosporin-in-patients-with-class-v-lupus-nephritis-
results-from-the-aurora-2-continuation-study/

246. Houssiau FA, Vasconcelos C, D’Cruz D, et al. Early response to
immunosuppressive therapy predicts good renal outcome in lupus
nephritis:
lessons from long-term followup of patients in the Euro-
Lupus Nephritis Trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2004;50:3934–3940.

247. Korbet SM, Lewis EJ, Collaborative Study Group. Severe lupus nephritis:
the predictive value of a >/¼ 50% reduction in proteinuria at 6 months.
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:2313–2318.

248. Korbet SM, Lewis EJ, Schwartz MM, et al. Factors predictive of outcome
in severe lupus nephritis. Lupus Nephritis Collaborative Study Group. Am
J Kidney Dis. 2000;35:904–914.

249. Tamirou F, D’Cruz D, Sangle S, et al. Long-term follow-up of the
MAINTAIN Nephritis Trial, comparing azathioprine and mycophenolate
mofetil as maintenance therapy of lupus nephritis. Ann Rheum Dis.
2016;75:526–531.

250. Tamirou F, Lauwerys BR, Dall’Era M, et al. A proteinuria cut-off level of 0.7
g/day after 12 months of treatment best predicts long-term renal
outcome in lupus nephritis: data from the MAINTAIN Nephritis Trial.
Lupus Sci Med. 2015;2:e000123.

264.

263. Garcia-Carrasco M, Mendoza-Pinto C, Sandoval-Cruz M, et al. Anti-CD20
therapy in patients with refractory systemic lupus erythematosus: a
longitudinal analysis of 52 Hispanic patients. Lupus. 2010;19:213–219.
Iaccarino L, Bartoloni E, Carli L, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of off-label use of
rituximab in refractory lupus: data from the Italian Multicentre Registry.
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015;33:449–456.
Iwata S, Saito K, Hirata S, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of anti-CD20 antibody
rituximab for patients with refractory systemic lupus erythematosus.
Lupus. 2018;27:802–811.

265.

266. Koike R, Harigai M, Atsumi T, et al. Japan College of Rheumatology 2009
guidelines for the use of tocilizumab, a humanized anti-interleukin-6
receptor monoclonal
arthritis. Mod
Rheumatol. 2009;19:351–357.

rheumatoid

antibody,

in

267. Kotagiri P, Martin A, Hughes P, et al. Single-dose rituximab in refractory

lupus nephritis. Intern Med J. 2016;46:899–901.

268. Melander C, Sallee M, Trolliet P, et al. Rituximab in severe lupus nephritis:
early B-cell depletion affects long-term renal outcome. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2009;4:579–587.

269. Tanaka Y, Takeuchi T, Miyasaka N, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of rituximab
in Japanese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus
nephritis who are refractory to conventional therapy. Mod Rheumatol.
2016;26:80–86.

270. Vigna-Perez M, Hernandez-Castro B, Paredes-Saharopulos O, et al.
Clinical and immunological effects of rituximab in patients with lupus
nephritis refractory to conventional therapy: a pilot study. Arthritis Res
Ther. 2006;8:R83.

271. Weidenbusch M, Rommele C, Schrottle A, et al. Beyond the LUNAR trial.
rituximab in refractory lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial

Efﬁcacy of
Transplant. 2013;28:106–111.

273.

272. Alshaiki F, Obaid E, Almuallim A, et al. Outcomes of rituximab therapy in
refractory lupus: a meta-analysis. Eur J Rheumatol. 2018;5:118–126.
Fei Y, Wu Q, Zhang W, et al. Low-dose tacrolimus in treating lupus
nephritis refractory to cyclophosphamide: a prospective cohort study.
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013;31:62–68.
Jesus D, Rodrigues M, da Silva JAP, et al. Multitarget therapy of
mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporine A for induction treatment of
refractory lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2018;27:1358–1362.

274.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S67

r e f e r e n c e s

www.kidney-international.org

275. Mok CC, To CH, Yu KL, et al. Combined low-dose mycophenolate mofetil
and tacrolimus for lupus nephritis with suboptimal response to standard
therapy: a 12-month prospective study. Lupus. 2013;22:1135–1141.
276. Ogawa H, Kameda H, Amano K, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of cyclosporine
A in patients with refractory systemic lupus erythematosus in a daily
clinical practice. Lupus. 2010;19:162–169.

277. Sheikholeslami M, Hajialilo M, Rasi Hashemi SS, et al. Low dose
resistant proliferative lupus

cyclosporine A in the treatment of
nephritis. Mod Rheumatol. 2018;28:523–529.

278. Mackensen A, Muller F, Mougiakakos D, et al. Anti-CD19 CAR T cell
therapy for refractory systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat Med. 2022;28:
2124–2132.

279. Arriens C, Chen S, Karp DR, et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of repeat biopsy
in lupus nephritis: histopathologic worsening and a short time between
biopsies is associated with signiﬁcantly increased risk for end-stage renal
disease and death. Clin Immunol. 2017;185:3–9.

280. Moroni G, Quaglini S, Gallelli B, et al. The long-term outcome of 93
patients with proliferative lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2007;22:2531–2539.

281. Mosca M, Bencivelli W, Neri R, et al. Renal ﬂares in 91 SLE patients with
diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. Kidney Int. 2002;61:1502–1509.
282. Parikh SV, Nagaraja HN, Hebert L, et al. Renal ﬂare as a predictor of
incident and progressive CKD in patients with lupus nephritis. Clin J
Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:279–284.

283. Morris HK, Canetta PA, Appel GB. Impact of the ALMS and MAINTAIN
trials on the management of lupus nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2013;28:1371–1376.

284. Hanaoka H,

Iida H, Kiyokawa T, et al. Early achievement of deep
remission predicts low incidence of renal ﬂare in lupus nephritis class
III or IV. Arthritis Res Ther. 2018;20:86.
285. Mejia-Vilet JM, Parikh SV, Song H, et al.

Immune gene expression in
kidney biopsies of lupus nephritis patients at diagnosis and at renal
ﬂare. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2019;34:1197–1206.
Ioannidis JP, Katsiﬁs GE, Tzioufas AG, et al. Predictors of sustained
in
amenorrhea
premenopausal women with
erythematosus.
J Rheumatol. 2002;29:2129–2135.

cyclophosphamide
lupus

intravenous
systemic

from pulsed

286.

287. Katsiﬁs GE, Tzioufas AG. Ovarian failure in systemic lupus erythematosus
patients treated with pulsed intravenous cyclophosphamide. Lupus.
2004;13:673–678.

288. Parikh SV, Alvarado A, Malvar A, et al. The kidney biopsy in lupus

nephritis: past, present, and future. Semin Nephrol. 2015;35:465–477.

289. Bootsma H, Spronk P, Derksen R, et al. Prevention of relapses in systemic

lupus erythematosus. Lancet. 1995;345:1595–1599.

290. Tseng CE, Buyon JP, Kim M, et al. The effect of moderate-dose
in patients with
corticosteroids
serologically active, but clinically stable, systemic lupus erythematosus:
ﬁndings of
randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2006;54:3623–3632.

a prospective,

in preventing

severe

ﬂares

291. George JN, Nester CM. Syndromes of thrombotic microangiopathy.

N Engl J Med. 2014;371:654–666.

292. Ahmed S, Siddiqui RK, Siddiqui AK, et al. HIV associated thrombotic

microangiopathy. Postgrad Med J. 2002;78:520–525.

293. Brocklebank V, Wood KM, Kavanagh D. Thrombotic microangiopathy

294.

295.

and the kidney. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018;13:300–317.
Johnson S, Stojanovic J, Ariceta G, et al. An audit analysis of a guideline
for the investigation and initial therapy of diarrhea negative (atypical)
hemolytic uremic syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014;29:1967–1978.
Loirat C, Fakhouri F, Ariceta G, et al. An international consensus
approach to the management of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome
in children. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016;31:15–39.

296. Scully M, Hunt BJ, Benjamin S, et al. Guidelines on the diagnosis and
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and other

management of
thrombotic microangiopathies. Br J Haematol. 2012;158:323–335.
297. Rock GA, Shumak KH, Buskard NA, et al. Comparison of plasma exchange
with plasma infusion in the treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura. Canadian Apheresis Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:393–
397.
von Baeyer H. Plasmapheresis
in thrombotic microangiopathy-
associated syndromes: review of outcome data derived from clinical
trials and open studies. Ther Apher. 2002;6:320–328.

298.

299. Allford SL, Hunt BJ, Rose P, et al. Guidelines on the diagnosis and
haemolytic

thrombotic microangiopathic

the
management
anaemias. Br J Haematol. 2003;120:556–573.

of

301.

300. Bell WR, Braine HG, Ness PM, et al.

Improved survival

in thrombotic
syndrome. Clinical

uremic

thrombocytopenic purpura-hemolytic
experience in 108 patients. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:398–403.
Froissart A, Buffet M, Veyradier A, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of ﬁrst-line
rituximab in severe, acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
with a suboptimal response to plasma exchange. Experience of the
French Thrombotic Microangiopathies Reference Center. Crit Care Med.
2012;40:104–111.

302. Scully M, Cohen H, Cavenagh J, et al. Remission in acute refractory and
relapsing thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura following rituximab is
associated with a reduction in IgG antibodies to ADAMTS-13. Br J
Haematol. 2007;136:451–461.

303. Scully M, McDonald V, Cavenagh J, et al. A phase 2 study of the safety
and efﬁcacy of rituximab with plasma exchange in acute acquired
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood. 2011;118:1746–1753.
304. Westwood JP, Thomas M, Alwan F, et al. Rituximab prophylaxis to
prevent thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura relapse: outcome and
evaluation of dosing regimens. Blood Adv. 2017;1:1159–1166.

305. Peyvandi F, Scully M, Kremer Hovinga JA, et al. Caplacizumab for
J Med.

acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl
2016;374:511–522.

306. Scully M, Cataland SR, Peyvandi F, et al. Caplacizumab treatment for
J Med.

acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl
2019;380:335–346.

307. Tektonidou MG. Antiphospholipid syndrome nephropathy:
pathogenesis to treatment. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1181.

from

308. Sciascia S, Yazdany J, Dall’Era M, et al. Anticoagulation in patients with
lupus nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy: a

concomitant
multicentre cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2019;78:1004–1006.

309. Dufrost V, Risse J, Reshetnyak T, et al. Increased risk of thrombosis in
antiphospholipid syndrome patients
oral
anticoagulants. Results from an international patient-level data meta-
analysis. Autoimmun Rev. 2018;17:1011–1021.

treated with direct

310. Pengo V, Denas G, Zoppellaro G, et al. Rivaroxaban vs warfarin in high-
risk patients with antiphospholipid syndrome. Blood. 2018;132:1365–
1371.

311. Kazzaz NM, McCune WJ, Knight

JS. Treatment of catastrophic

antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2016;28:218–227.
312. Schwartz J, Padmanabhan A, Aqui N, et al. Guidelines on the use of
therapeutic apheresis in clinical practice-evidence-based approach
from the Writing Committee of the American Society for Apheresis:
the seventh special issue. J Clin Apher. 2016;31:149–162.

313. Bucciarelli S, Espinosa G, Cervera R, et al. Mortality in the catastrophic
antiphospholipid syndrome: causes of death and prognostic factors in
a series of 250 patients. Arthritis Rheum. 2006;54:2568–2576.

314. Dioszegi A, Tarr T, Nagy-Vincze M, et al. Microthrombotic renal
catastrophic
rituximab

in an SLE patient with concomitant

involvement
antiphospholipid syndrome:
treatment. Lupus. 2018;27:1552–1558.

the beneﬁcial

effect of

315. Rymarz A, Niemczyk S. The complex treatment including rituximab in
the management of catastrophic antiphospholid syndrome with renal
involvement. BMC Nephrol. 2018;19:132.

316. Guillot M, Rafat C, Buob D, et al. Eculizumab for catastrophic
antiphospholipid syndrome—a case report and literature review.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018;57:2055–2057.

317. Ruffatti A, Tarzia V, Fedrigo M, et al. Evidence of complement activation
in the thrombotic small vessels of a patient with catastrophic
antiphospholipid syndrome treated with eculizumab. Autoimmun Rev.
2019;18:561–563.
318. Tinti MG, Carnevale V,

Inglese M, et al. Eculizumab in refractory
catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: a case report and systematic
review of the literature. Clin Exp Med. 2019;19:281–288.

319. Angioi A, Fervenza FC, Sethi S, et al. Diagnosis of complement

alternative pathway disorders. Kidney Int. 2016;89:278–288.

Improving Global Outcomes"

320. Goodship TH, Cook HT, Fakhouri F, et al. Atypical hemolytic uremic
from a "Kidney
Controversies

syndrome and C3 glomerulopathy: conclusions
Disease:
Conference. Kidney Int. 2017;91:539–551.
Legendre CM, Licht C, Muus P, et al. Terminal complement inhibitor
eculizumab in atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. N Engl J Med.
2013;368:2169–2181.
Licht C, Greenbaum LA, Muus P, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of eculizumab
in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome from 2-year extensions of phase
2 studies. Kidney Int. 2015;87:1061–1073.

321.

322.

(KDIGO)

S68

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

www.kidney-international.org

r e f e r e n c e s

323. Wijnsma KL, Duineveld C, Wetzels JFM, et al. Eculizumab in atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome: strategies toward restrictive use. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2019;34:2261–2277.

346. Chan EY, Yap DY, Wong WT, et al. Long-term outcomes of children and
adolescents with biopsy-proven childhood-onset lupus nephritis. Kidney
Int Rep. 2023;8:141–150.

324. Cavero T, Rabasco C, Lopez A, et al. Eculizumab in secondary atypical
haemolytic uraemic syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2017;32:466–
474.

325. Cao M, Leite BN, Ferreiro T, et al. Eculizumab modiﬁes outcomes in
adults with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome with acute kidney
injury. Am J Nephrol. 2018;48:225–233.

326. de Holanda MI, Porto LC, Wagner T, et al. Use of eculizumab in a
systemic
erythemathosus patient presenting thrombotic
microangiopathy and heterozygous deletion in CFHR1-CFHR3. A case
report and systematic review. Clin Rheumatol. 2017;36:2859–2867.

lupus

327. Kello N, Khoury

LE, Marder G, et al. Secondary
in

thrombotic
and
microangiopathy
antiphospholipid syndrome,
the role of complement and use of
eculizumab: case series and review of literature. Semin Arthritis Rheum.
2019;49:74–83.

erythematosus

systemic

lupus

328. Caprioli J, Noris M, Brioschi S, et al. Genetics of HUS: the impact of MCP,
CFH, and IF mutations on clinical presentation, response to treatment,
and outcome. Blood. 2006;108:1267–1279.
Loirat C, Sonsino E, Hinglais N, et al. Treatment of the childhood
haemolytic uraemic syndrome with plasma. A multicentre randomized
controlled trial. The French Society of Paediatric Nephrology. Pediatr
Nephrol. 1988;2:279–285.

329.

330. Ariceta G, Besbas N, Johnson S, et al. Guideline for the investigation and
initial therapy of diarrhea-negative hemolytic uremic syndrome. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2009;24:687–696.

331. Kaplan BS, Ruebner RL, Spinale JM, et al. Current treatment of atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2014;3:34–45.
332. Reid VL, Mullan A, Erwig LP. Rapid recovery of membrane cofactor
protein (MCP; CD46) associated atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome
with plasma exchange. BMJ Case Rep. 2013;2013:bcr2013200980.
333. Sengul Samanci N, Ayer M, Ergen A, et al. An effective treatment of
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome with plasma exchange and
eculizumab: a case report. Transfus Apher Sci. 2015;52:314–316.
334. Buyon JP, Kim MY, Guerra MM, et al. Kidney outcomes and risk factors
in a multiethnic cohort of pregnant

for nephritis (ﬂare/de novo)
patients with lupus. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;12:940–946.
335. Clowse ME, Jamison M, Myers E, et al. A national study of

the
complications of lupus in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008;199:
127. e1–6.

336. Andreoli L, Bertsias GK, Agmon-Levin N, et al. EULAR recommendations
for women’s health and the management of family planning, assisted
reproduction, pregnancy and menopause in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus and/or antiphospholipid syndrome. Ann Rheum
Dis. 2017;76:476–485.

337. Kroese SJ, de Hair MJH, Limper M, et al. Hydroxychloroquine use in lupus
patients during pregnancy is associated with longer pregnancy duration
in preterm births. J Immunol Res. 2017;2017:2810202.

338. Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, Askie L. Antiplatelet therapy before or after
16 weeks’ gestation for preventing preeclampsia: an individual
participant data meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;216:121–128.
e2.

339. Xu TT, Zhou F, Deng CY, et al. Low-dose aspirin for preventing
preeclampsia and its complications: a meta-analysis. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich). 2015;17:567–573.

340. Russell MD, Dey M, Flint J, et al. British Society for Rheumatology
guideline on prescribing drugs in pregnancy and breastfeeding:
immunomodulatory
corticosteroids.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023;62:e48–e88.

anti-rheumatic

drugs

and

341. Remmers EF, Plenge RM, Lee AT, et al. STAT4 and the risk of rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:977–
986.

342. Silva CA, Avcin T, Brunner HI. Taxonomy for

lupus
erythematosus with onset before adulthood. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2012;64:1787–1793.

systemic

343. Wenderfer SE, Ruth NM, Brunner HI. Advances in the care of children

with lupus nephritis. Pediatr Res. 2017;81:406–414.

344. Chandar J, Gomez-Marin O, del Pozo R, et al. Role of routine urinalysis in
asymptomatic pediatric patients. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2005;44:43–48.
345. Sebestyen JF, Alon US. The teenager with asymptomatic proteinuria:

think orthostatic ﬁrst. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2011;50:179–182.

348.

347. Contreras G, Pagan J, Chokshi R, et al. Comparison of mortality of ESRD
patients with lupus by initial dialysis modality. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2014;9:1949–1956.
Levy B, Couchoud C, Rougier JP, et al. Outcome of patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus on chronic dialysis: an observational study of
incident patients of the French National Registry 2002-2012. Lupus.
2015;24:1111–1121.

349. Mejia-Vilet JM, Tejeda-Maldonado J, Correa-Rotter R. Comment on
“Clinical Practice Guidelines for
the Treatment of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus by the Mexican College of Rheumatology”. Reumatol
Clin. 2018;16:433–434.

350. O’Shaughnessy MM, Liu S, Montez-Rath ME, et al. Kidney transplantation
outcomes across GN subtypes in the United States. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2017;28:632–644.

352.

351. Park ES, Ahn SS, Jung SM, et al. Renal outcome after kidney-transplantation
in Korean patients with lupus nephritis. Lupus. 2018;27:461–467.
Jorge A, Wallace ZS, Lu N, et al. Renal transplantation and survival
among patients with lupus nephritis: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med.
2019;170:240–247.

353. Goldfarb-Rumyantzev A, Hurdle JF, Scandling J, et al. Duration of end-
stage renal disease and kidney transplant outcome. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 2005;20:167–175.

354. Plantinga LC, Patzer RE, Drenkard C, et al. Association of time to kidney
transplantation with graft failure among U.S. patients with end-stage
renal disease due to lupus nephritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2015;67:571–581.

355. Cheigh JS, Kim H, Stenzel KH, et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus in
patients with end-stage renal disease:
long-term follow-up on the
prognosis of patients and the evolution of lupus activity. Am J Kidney
Dis. 1990;16:189–195.

356. Contreras G, Mattiazzi A, Guerra G, et al. Recurrence of lupus nephritis
after kidney transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;21:1200–1207.
357. Pham PT, Pham PC. Graft loss due to recurrent lupus nephritis in living-
related kidney donation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:2296–2299.
358. Ponticelli C, Moroni G, Glassock RJ. Recurrence of secondary glomerular
disease after renal transplantation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:1214–
1221.

359. Bataille S, Burtey S, Decourt A, et al. [Antiphospholipids antibodies and
hemodialysis: a frequent association linked to arteriovenous ﬁstula
thrombosis]. Nephrol Ther. 2015;11:27–33 [in French].

360. Morales JM, Serrano M, Martinez-Flores JA, et al. Antiphospholipid
syndrome and renal allograft thrombosis. Transplantation. 2019;103:
481–486.

361. Wagenknecht DR, Fastenau DR, Torry RJ, et al. Risk of early renal allograft
failure is increased for patients with antiphospholipid antibodies. Transpl
Int. 2000;(suppl 1):S78–S81.

363.

362. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Glomerular Diseases Work
Group. KDIGO 2021 clinical practice guideline for the management of
glomerular diseases. Kidney Int. 2021;100:S1–S276.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Committee on Standards for Developing
Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines.
In: Graham R, Mancher M,
Miller Wolman D, et al., eds. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.

364. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline
development, reporting and evaluation in health care. J Clin Epidemiol.
2010;63:1308–1311.

365. Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, eds. Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Chichester, UK: Wiley; 2019.
366. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Schunemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines: a new
series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. J Clin Epidemiol.
2011;64:380–382.

367. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane Collaboration’s
tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2011;343:d5928.
368. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, et al. Measuring inconsistency in

meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327:557–560.

369. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines 6. Rating the

quality of evidence--imprecision. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:1283–1293.

370. Brunetti M, Shemilt I, Pregno S, et al. GRADE guidelines: 10. Considering
resource use and rating the quality of economic evidence. J Clin
Epidemiol. 2013;66:140–150.

Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 1S), S1–S69

S69

