OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF NEPHROLOGY

KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease

VOLUME 2 | ISSUE 4 | AUGUST 2 2012

http://www.kidney-international.org

KI_SuppCover_2.4.indd   1
KI_SuppCover_2.4.indd   1

7/11/12   12:00 PM
7/11/12   12:00 PM

KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline

for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease

KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following consortium of sponsors that make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen,
Bayer Schering Pharma, Belo Foundation, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food
Company, Fresenius Medical Care, Genzyme, Hoffmann-LaRoche,
JC Penney, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, NATCO—The
Organization for Transplant Professionals, NKF-Board of Directors, Novartis, Pharmacosmos, PUMC Pharmaceutical,
Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Transwestern Commercial Services, Vifor Pharma,
and Wyeth.

Sponsorship Statement: KDIGO is supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is accepted for the development
of specific guidelines.

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c o n t e n t s

VOL 2 | ISSUE 4 | AUGUST (2) 2012

KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease

v

vi

vii

viii

279

280

281

282

283

288

292

299

311

317

324

330

331

Tables and Figures

KDIGO Board Members

Reference Keys

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Notice

Foreword

Work Group Membership

Abstract

Summary of Recommendation Statements

Chapter 1:

Diagnosis and evaluation of anemia in CKD

Chapter 2:

Use of iron to treat anemia in CKD

Chapter 3:

Use of ESAs and other agents to treat anemia in CKD

Chapter 4:

Red cell transfusion to treat anemia in CKD

Methods for Guideline Development

Biographic and Disclosure Information

Acknowledgments

References

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c o n t e n t s

289

289

307

308

312

312

314

318

318

319

319

320

320

321

321

321

322

293

294

TABLES
Table 1. Hb levels in children between 1–19 years for initiation of anemia workup

Table 2. Hb levels in children between birth and 24 months for initiation of anemia workup

Table 3.

Potentially correctable versus non correctable factors involved in the anemia of CKD,
deficiency

in addition to ESA

Table 4.

Practical approach in presence of ESA hyporesponsiveness

Table 5.

Estimated risk associated with blood transfusions per unit transfused

Table 6.

Estimated risk of transfusion-related infections per unit transfused

Table 7.

Indications for blood transfusions

Table 8.

Systematic review topics and screening criteria

Table 9. Hierarchy of importance of outcomes

Table 10. Literature search yield of primary articles for systematic review topics

Table 11. Classification of study quality

Table 12. GRADE system for grading quality of evidence

Table 13. Final grade for overall quality of evidence

Table 14. Balance of benefits and harm

Table 15. KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Table 16. Determinants of strength of recommendation

Table 17. The Conference on Guideline Standardization (COGS) checklist for reporting clinical practice guidelines

FIGURES
Figure 1. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, examining the utility of iron status tests to distinguish iron

deficient from nondeficient study patients

Figure 2. Sensitivity and specificity of TSAT and serum ferritin and their combination (TSAT + ferritin) and bone marrow
iron (BM iron) to identify correctly a positive erythropoietic response (Z1-g/dl [Z10-g/l] increase in Hb [DHb]) to
intravenous iron in 100 nondialysis patients with CKD (areas under the ROCs)

313

Figure 3. Lymphocytotoxic antibody reactivity against random donor test panel

in relation to the number of blood

transfusions

315

Figure 4. Algorithms for red cell transfusion use in CKD patients

Additional information in the form of supplementary materials can be found online at http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/anemia.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, v

v

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

KDIGO Board Members

Garabed Eknoyan, MD
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Founding KDIGO Co-Chairs

Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD
Immediate Past Co-Chair

Bertram L Kasiske, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

David C Wheeler, MD, FRCP
KDIGO Co-Chair

Omar I Abboud, MD, FRCP
Sharon Adler, MD, FASN
Rajiv Agarwal, MD
Sharon P Andreoli, MD
Gavin J Becker, MD, FRACP
Fred Brown, MBA, FACHE
Daniel C Cattran, MD, FRCPC
Allan J Collins, MD, FACP
Rosanna Coppo, MD
Josef Coresh, MD, PhD
Ricardo Correa-Rotter, MD
Adrian Covic, MD, PhD
Jonathan C Craig, MBChB, MM (Clin Epi), DCH, FRACP, PhD
Angel de Francisco, MD
Paul de Jong, MD, PhD
Ana Figueiredo, RN, MSc, PhD
Mohammed Benghanem Gharbi, MD
Gordon Guyatt, MD, MSc, BSc, FRCPC
David Harris, MD
Lai Seong Hooi, MD
Enyu Imai, MD, PhD
Lesley A Inker, MD, MS, FRCP

Michel Jadoul, MD
Simon Jenkins, MBE, FRCGP
Suhnggwon Kim, MD, PhD
Martin K Kuhlmann, MD
Nathan W Levin, MD, FACP
Philip K-T Li, MD, FRCP, FACP
Zhi-Hong Liu, MD
Pablo Massari, MD
Peter A McCullough, MD, MPH, FACC, FACP
Raﬁque Moosa, MD
Miguel C Riella, MD
Adibul Hasan Rizvi, MBBS, FRCP
Bernardo Rodriquez-Iturbe, MD
Robert Schrier, MD
Justin Silver, MD, PhD
Marcello Tonelli, MD, SM, FRCPC
Yusuke Tsukamoto, MD
Theodor Vogels, MSW
Angela Yee-Moon Wang, MD, PhD, FRCP
Christoph Wanner, MD
Elena Zakharova, MD, PhD

NKF-KDIGO GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT STAFF

Kerry Willis, PhD, Senior Vice-President for Scientiﬁc Activities

Michael Cheung, MA, Guideline Development Director

Sean Slifer, BA, Guideline Development Manager

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, vi

vi

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Reference Keys

NOMENCLATURE AND DESCRIPTION FOR RATING GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS

Within each recommendation, the strength of recommendation is indicated as Level 1, Level 2, or Not Graded, and the quality of the
supporting evidence is shown as A, B, C, or D.

Implications

Grade*

Patients

Clinicians

Policy

Level 1
‘We recommend’

Level 2
‘We suggest’

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of action
and only a small proportion would not.

Most patients should receive the recommended
course of action.

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy or
a performance measure.

The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course of
action,
but many would not.

Different choices will be appropriate for different
patients. Each patient needs help to arrive at a
management decision consistent with her or his
values and preferences.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement of
stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

*The additional category ‘Not Graded’ was used, typically, to provide guidance based on common sense or where the topic does not allow adequate application of evidence.
The most common examples include recommendations regarding monitoring intervals, counseling, and referral to other clinical specialists. The ungraded recommendations
are generally written as simple declarative statements, but are not meant to be interpreted as being stronger recommendations than Level 1 or 2 recommendations.

Grade

Quality of evidence

Meaning

A
B

C
D

High
Moderate

Low
Very Low

We are confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility
that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often will be far from the truth.

CKD Stage

Description

STAGES OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

1
2
3
4
5a

Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR
Kidney damage with mild decreased GFR
Moderate decreased GFR
Severe decreased GFR
Kidney failure

CKD, chronic kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
CKD 1–5T notation applies to kidney transplant recipients.
a5D if dialysis (HD or PD).

GFR (ml/min per 1.73 m2)

Z90
60–89
30–59
15–29
o15 (or dialysis)

CURRENT CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) NOMENCLATURE USED BY KDIGO

Definition

CKD of any stage (1–5), with or without a kidney transplant, including both non-dialysis
dependent CKD (CKD 1–5ND) and dialysis-dependent CKD (CKD 5D)
Non-dialysis-dependent CKD of any stage (1–5), with or without a kidney transplant
(i.e., CKD excluding CKD 5D)
Non-dialysis-dependent CKD of any stage (1–5) with a kidney transplant

CKD Categories

CKD

CKD ND

CKD T

Specific CKD Stages

CKD 1, 2, 3, 4
CKD 3-4, etc.
CKD 5D
CKD 5HD
CKD 5PD

Parameter

Ferritin
Hemoglobin

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, vii

Specific stages of CKD, CKD ND, or CKD T
Range of specific stages (e.g., both CKD 3 and CKD 4)
Dialysis-dependent CKD 5
Hemodialysis-dependent CKD 5
Peritoneal dialysis-dependent CKD 5

CONVERSION FACTORS OF METRIC UNITS TO SI UNITS

Metric units

ng/ml
g/dl

Conversion factor

1
10

SI units

mg/l
g/l

vii

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Abbreviations and Acronyms

D
AGREE

BM
CBC
CERA
CHOIR

CI
CKD
CKiD

COGS
CREATE

CRP
CVD
eGFR
EMA
EPO
ERT
ESA
ESRD
EQ-5D

FACT-Fatigue

FDA
GFR
GRADE

Hb
Hct
HCV
HD

Change
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation
Bone marrow
Complete blood count
Continuous erythropoietin receptor activator
Correction of Hemoglobin and Outcomes in
Renal Insufﬁciency
Conﬁdence interval
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic Kidney Disease in Children
Prospective Cohort Study
Conference on Guideline Standardization
Cardiovascular Risk Reduction by Early
Anemia Treatment With Epoetin Beta Trial
C-reactive protein
Cardiovascular disease
Estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
European Medicines Agency
Erythropoietin
Evidence review team
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agent
End-stage renal disease
A measure of health status from the
EuroQol Group
Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy-Fatigue
Food and Drug Administration
Glomerular ﬁltration rate
Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation
Hemoglobin
Hematocrit
Hepatitis C virus
Hemodialysis

HEMO Study Kidney Disease Clinical Studies Initiative

HLA
HR
IM
IU
IV
KDIGO
KDOQI
Kt/V

MCH
NAPRTCS

ND
NHANES

PD
PRA
PRCA
QoL
RBC
RCT
rHuEPO
ROC
RR
SC
SF-36

TRALI
TREAT

TSAT
USRDS
WHO

Hemodialysis Study
Human leukocyte antigen
Hazard ratio
Intramuscular
International unit
Intravenous
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative
Clearance expressed as a fraction of urea or
body water volume
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
North American Pediatric Renal Transplant
Cooperative Study
Non-dialysis
National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey
Peritoneal dialysis
Panel reactive antibody
Pure red cell aplasia
Quality of life
Red blood cell
Randomized controlled trial
Recombinant human erythropoietin
Receiver operating characteristic
Relative risk
Subcutaneous
36-Item Medical Outcomes Study
Short-Form Health Survey
Transfusion-related acute lung injury
Trial to Reduce Cardiovascular Events
with Aranesp Therapy
Transferrin saturation
United States Renal Data System
World Health Organization

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, viii

viii

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Notice

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 279; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.37

SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon systematic literature searches last
conducted in October 2010, supplemented with additional evidence through March 2012. It is
designed to provide information and assist decision making. It is not intended to deﬁne a
standard of care, and should not be construed as one, nor should it be interpreted as prescribing
an exclusive course of management. Variations in practice will inevitably and appropriately occur
when clinicians take into account the needs of individual patients, available resources, and
limitations unique to an institution or type of practice. Every health-care professional making
use of these recommendations is responsible for evaluating the appropriateness of applying them
in any particular clinical situation. The recommendations for research contained within this
document are general and do not imply a speciﬁc protocol.

SECTION II: DISCLOSURE
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual or
reasonably perceived conﬂicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a
personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work Group. All members of the
Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form
showing all such relationships that might be perceived or actual conﬂicts of interest. This
document is updated annually and information is adjusted accordingly. All reported information
will be printed in the ﬁnal publication and are on ﬁle at the National Kidney Foundation (NKF),
Managing Agent for KDIGO.

Copyright & 2012 by KDIGO. All rights reserved.
Single photocopies may be made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws.
Special rates are available for educational institutions that wish to make photocopies for
non-profit educational use. No part of this publication may be reproduced, amended, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without explicit permission in
writing from KDIGO. Details on how to seek permission for reproduction or translation,
and further information about KDIGO’s permissions policies can be obtained by contacting
Anita Viliusis, KDIGO Permissions Manager, at anita.viliusis@kidney.org

To the fullest extent of the law, neither KDIGO, Kidney International Supplements, National
Kidney Foundation (KDIGO Managing Agent) nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of
products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods,
products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 279

279

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Foreword

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 280; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.38

It is our hope that this document will serve several useful
purposes. Our primary goal is to improve patient care. We
hope to accomplish this,
in the short term, by helping
clinicians know and better understand the evidence (or lack
of evidence) that determines current practice. By providing
comprehensive evidence-based recommendations, this guide-
line will also help deﬁne areas where evidence is lacking and
research is needed. Helping to deﬁne a research agenda is an
often neglected, but very important, function of clinical
practice guideline development.

We used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system to rate the
strength of evidence and the strength of recommendations. In
all, there were only 2 (5.4%) recommendations in this guideline
for which the overall quality of evidence was graded ‘A,’ whereas
9 (24.3%) were graded ‘B,’ 14 (37.8%) were graded ‘C,’ and 12
(32.4%) were graded ‘D.’ Although there are reasons other than
quality of evidence to make a grade 1 or 2 recommendation, in
general, there is a correlation between the quality of overall
evidence and the strength of the recommendation. Thus, there
were 15 (40.5%) recommendations graded ‘1’ and 22 (59.5%)
graded ‘2.’ There were 2 (5.4%) recommendations graded ‘1A,’
8 (21.6%) were ‘1B,’ 1 (2.7%) were ‘1C,’ and 4 (10.8%) were
‘1D.’ There were 0 (0%) graded ‘2A,’ 1 (2.7%) were ‘2B,’ 13
(35.1%) were ‘2C,’ and 8 (21.6%) were ‘2D.’ There were 22
(37.3%) statements that were not graded.

Some argue that recommendations should not be made
when evidence is weak. However, clinicians still need to make
clinical decisions in their daily practice, and they often ask,
‘What do the experts do in this setting?’ We opted to give
guidance, rather than remain silent. These recommendations
are often rated with a low strength of recommendation and a
low strength of evidence, or were not graded. It is important
for the users of this guideline to be cognizant of this (see
Notice). In every case these recommendations are meant to
be a place for clinicians to start, not stop, their inquiries into
speciﬁc management questions pertinent to the patients they
see in daily practice.

We wish to thank the Work Group Co-Chairs,
Drs John McMurray and Pat Parfrey, along with all of the
Work Group members who volunteered countless hours
their time developing this guideline. We also thank
of
the Evidence Review Team members and staff of
the
National Kidney Foundation who made this project possible.
Finally, we owe a special debt of gratitude to the many
KDIGO Board members and individuals who volunteered
time reviewing the guideline, and making very helpful
suggestions.

Bertram L Kasiske, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

David C Wheeler, MD, FRCP
KDIGO Co-Chair

280

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 280

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Work Group Membership

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 281; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.39

John J V McMurray, MD, FRCP, FESC
BHF Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre
Glasgow, United Kingdom

Patrick S Parfrey, MD, FRCPC, FRSC
Memorial University Medical School
St John’s, Canada

WORK GROUP CO-CHAIRS

John W Adamson, MD
University of California at San Diego
San Diego, CA, USA

Pedro Aljama, MD, PhD
Hospital Universitario Reina Sofı´a
Co´ rdoba, Spain

Jeffrey S Berns, MD
The Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Julia Bohlius, MD, MScPH
University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland

Tilman B Dru¨eke, MD, FRCP
Universite´ de Picardie Jules Verne
Amiens, France

Fredric O Finkelstein, MD
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

Steven Fishbane, MD
North Shore-LIJ Health System
Manhasset, NY, USA

Tomas Ganz, PhD, MD
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Los Angeles, CA, USA

WORK GROUP

Iain C Macdougall, BSc, MD, FRCP
King’s College Hospital
London, United Kingdom

Ruth A McDonald, MD
Seattle Children’s Hospital
Seattle, WA, USA

Lawrence P McMahon, MBBS, MD
Monash University
Box Hill, Australia

Gregorio T Obrador, MD, MPH
Universidad Panamericana School of Medicine
Mexico City, Mexico

Giovanni FM Strippoli, MD, PhD, MPH
Consorzio Mario Negri Sud
Chieti, Italy

Gu¨nter Weiss, MD
Medical University of Innsbruck
Innsbruck, Austria

Andrzej Wie˛cek, MD, PhD, FRCP
Silesian University School of Medicine
Katowice, Poland

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM

Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementation
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA:

Ethan M Balk, MD, MPH; Project Director; Program Director, Evidence-based Medicine
Ashish Upadhyay, MD, Assistant Project Director

Dana C Miskulin, MD, MS, Staff Nephrologist

Amy Earley, BS, Project Coordinator
Shana Haynes, MS, DHSc, Research Assistant

Jenny Lamont, MS, Project Manager

In addition, support and supervision were provided by:

Katrin Uhlig, MD, MS; Director, Guideline Development

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 281

281

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Abstract

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 282; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.40

The 2012 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for
Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease aims to provide guidance on diagnosis, evaluation,
management and treatment for all CKD patients (non-dialysis, dialysis, kidney transplant
recipients and children) at risk of or with anemia. Guideline development followed an explicit
process of evidence review and appraisal. The guideline contains chapters addressing diagnosis
and evaluation of anemia in CKD and the use of various therapeutic agents (iron, ESAs and
other agents) and red cell transfusion as means of treatment. Treatment approaches are
addressed in each chapter and guideline recommendations are based on systematic reviews of
relevant trials. Appraisal of the quality of the evidence and the strength of recommendations
followed the GRADE approach. Ongoing areas of controversies and limitations of the evidence
are discussed and additional suggestions are also provided for future research.

Keywords: anemia in CKD; blood transfusions; clinical practice guideline; erythropoiesis-
stimulating agent; KDIGO; evidence-based recommendation; iron; systematic review.

In citing this document, the following format should be used: Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Anemia Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for
Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney inter., Suppl. 2012; 2: 279–335.

282

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 282

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Summary of Recommendation Statements

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.41

Chapter 1: Diagnosis and evaluation of anemia in CKD

TESTING FOR ANEMIA

Frequency of testing for anemia

1.1.1: For CKD patients without anemia (as defined below in Recommendation 1.2.1 for adults and Recommendation

1.2.2 for children), measure Hb concentration when clinically indicated and (Not Graded):

K at least annually in patients with CKD 3
K at least twice per year in patients with CKD 4–5ND
K at least every 3 months in patients with CKD 5HD and CKD 5PD

1.1.2: For CKD patients with anemia not being treated with an ESA, measure Hb concentration when clinically indicated

and (Not Graded):

K at least every 3 months in patients with CKD 3–5ND and CKD 5PD
K at least monthly in patients with CKD 5HD

[See Recommendations 3.12.1–3.12.3 for measurement of Hb concentration in patients being treated with
ESA.]

Diagnosis of anemia

1.2.1: Diagnose anemia in adults and children 415 years with CKD when the Hb concentration is o13.0 g/dl (o130 g/l)

in males and o12.0 g/dl (o120 g/l) in females. (Not Graded)

1.2.2: Diagnose anemia in children with CKD if Hb concentration is o11.0 g/dl (o110 g/l) in children 0.5–5 years, o11.5

g/dl (115 g/l) in children 5–12 years, and o12.0 g/dl (120 g/l) in children 12–15 years. (Not Graded)

Investigation of anemia

1.3: In patients with CKD and anemia (regardless of age and CKD stage), include the following tests in initial evaluation

of the anemia (Not Graded):

K Complete blood count (CBC), which should include Hb concentration, red cell indices, white blood cell count

and differential, and platelet count

K Absolute reticulocyte count
K Serum ferritin level
K Serum transferrin saturation (TSAT)
K Serum vitamin B12 and folate levels

Chapter 2: Use of iron to treat anemia in CKD

TREATMENT WITH IRON AGENTS

2.1.1: When prescribing iron therapy, balance the potential beneﬁts of avoiding or minimizing blood transfusions, ESA
therapy, and anemia-related symptoms against the risks of harm in individual patients (e.g., anaphylactoid and
other acute reactions, unknown long-term risks). (Not Graded)

2.1.2: For adult CKD patients with anemia not on iron or ESA therapy we suggest a trial of IV iron (or in CKD ND

patients alternatively a 1–3 month trial of oral iron therapy) if (2C):

K an increase in Hb concentration without starting ESA treatment is desired* and
K TSAT is r30% and ferritin is r500 ng/ml (r500 mg/l)

*Based on patient symptoms and overall clinical goals, including avoidance of transfusion, improvement in anemia-related symptoms, and after exclusion of
active infection.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287

283

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

2.1.3: For adult CKD patients on ESA therapy who are not receiving iron supplementation, we suggest a trial of IV iron

(or in CKD ND patients alternatively a 1–3 month trial of oral iron therapy) if (2C):
K an increase in Hb concentration** or a decrease in ESA dose is desired*** and
K TSAT is r30% and ferritin is r500 ng/ml (r500 mg/l)

2.1.4: For CKD ND patients who require iron supplementation, select the route of iron administration based on the
severity of iron deﬁciency, availability of venous access, response to prior oral iron therapy, side effects with prior
oral or IV iron therapy, patient compliance, and cost. (Not Graded)

2.1.5: Guide subsequent iron administration in CKD patients based on Hb responses to recent iron therapy,
as well as ongoing blood losses, iron status tests (TSAT and ferritin), Hb concentration, ESA responsiveness
and ESA dose in ESA treated patients,
status.
(Not Graded)

in each parameter, and the patient’s clinical

trends

2.1.6: For all pediatric CKD patients with anemia not on iron or ESA therapy, we recommend oral iron (or IV iron in

CKD HD patients) administration when TSAT is r20% and ferritin is r100 ng/ml (r100 lg/l). (1D)

2.1.7: For all pediatric CKD patients on ESA therapy who are not receiving iron supplementation, we recommend oral
iron (or IV iron in CKD HD patients) administration to maintain TSAT 420% and ferritin 4100 ng/ml (4100 lg/
l). (1D)

**Consistent with Recommendations #3.4.2 and 3.4.3.
***Based on patient symptoms and overall clinical goals including avoidance of transfusion and improvement in anemia-related symptoms, and after exclusion
of active infection and other causes of ESA hyporesponsiveness.

IRON STATUS EVALUATION

2.2.1: Evaluate iron status (TSAT and ferritin) at least every 3 months during ESA therapy, including the decision to start

or continue iron therapy. (Not Graded)

2.2.2: Test iron status (TSAT and ferritin) more frequently when initiating or increasing ESA dose, when there is blood
loss, when monitoring response after a course of IV iron, and in other circumstances where iron stores may become
depleted. (Not Graded)

CAUTIONS REGARDING IRON THERAPY

2.3: When the initial dose of IV iron dextran is administered, we recommend (1B) and when the initial dose of IV non-
dextran iron is administered, we suggest (2C) that patients be monitored for 60 minutes after the infusion, and that
resuscitative facilities (including medications) and personnel trained to evaluate and treat serious adverse reactions
be available.

Iron during infection

2.4: Avoid administering IV iron to patients with active systemic infections. (Not Graded)

Chapter 3: Use of ESAs and other agents to treat
anemia in CKD

ESA INITIATION

3.1: Address all correctable causes of anemia (including iron deﬁciency and inﬂammatory states) prior to initiation of

ESA therapy. (Not Graded)

3.2: In initiating and maintaining ESA therapy, we recommend balancing the potential beneﬁts of reducing blood
transfusions and anemia-related symptoms against the risks of harm in individual patients (e.g., stroke, vascular
access loss, hypertension). (1B)

284

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

3.3: We recommend using ESA therapy with great caution, if at all, in CKD patients with active malignancy—in

particular when cure is the anticipated outcome—(1B), a history of stroke (1B), or a history of malignancy (2C).

3.4.1: For adult CKD ND patients with Hb concentration Z10.0 g/dl (Z100 g/l), we suggest that ESA therapy not be

initiated. (2D)

3.4.2: For adult CKD ND patients with Hb concentration o10.0 g/dl (o100 g/l) we suggest that the decision whether to
initiate ESA therapy be individualized based on the rate of fall of Hb concentration, prior response to iron therapy,
the risk of needing a transfusion, the risks related to ESA therapy and the presence of symptoms attributable to
anemia. (2C)

3.4.3: For adult CKD 5D patients, we suggest that ESA therapy be used to avoid having the Hb concentration fall below

9.0 g/dl (90 g/l) by starting ESA therapy when the hemoglobin is between 9.0–10.0 g/dl (90–100 g/l). (2B)

3.4.4: Individualization of therapy is reasonable as some patients may have improvements in quality of life at higher Hb

concentration and ESA therapy may be started above 10.0 g/dl (100 g/l). (Not Graded)

3.4.5: For all pediatric CKD patients, we suggest that the selection of Hb concentration at which ESA therapy is initiated
in the individual patient includes consideration of potential benefits (e.g., improvement in quality of life, school
attendance/performance, and avoidance of transfusion) and potential harms. (2D)

ESA MAINTENANCE THERAPY

3.5.1: In general, we suggest that ESAs not be used to maintain Hb concentration above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) in adult

patients with CKD. (2C)

3.5.2: Individualization of therapy will be necessary as some patients may have improvements in quality of life at Hb

concentration above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) and will be prepared to accept the risks. (Not Graded)

3.6: In all adult patients, we recommend that ESAs not be used to intentionally increase the Hb concentration above

13 g/dl (130 g/l). (1A)

3.7: In all pediatric CKD patients receiving ESA therapy, we suggest that the selected Hb concentration be in the range of

11.0 to 12.0 g/dl (110 to 120 g/l). (2D)

ESA DOSING

3.8.1: We recommend determining the initial ESA dose using the patient’s Hb concentration, body weight, and clinical

circumstances. (1D)

3.8.2: We recommend that ESA dose adjustments be made based on the patient’s Hb concentration, rate of change in Hb

concentration, current ESA dose and clinical circumstances. (1B)

3.8.3: We suggest decreasing ESA dose in preference to withholding ESA when a downward adjustment of Hb

concentration is needed. (2C)
3.8.4: Re-evaluate ESA dose if (Not Graded):

K The patient suffers an ESA-related adverse event
K The patient has an acute or progressive illness that may cause ESA hyporesponsiveness (See Recommendations

3.13.1–3.13.2)

ESA ADMINISTRATION

3.9.1: For CKD 5HD patients and those on hemoﬁltration or hemodiaﬁltration therapy, we suggest either intravenous or

subcutaneous administration of ESA. (2C)

3.9.2: For CKD ND and CKD 5PD patients, we suggest subcutaneous administration of ESA. (2C)

Frequency of administration

3.10: We suggest determining the frequency of ESA administration based on CKD stage, treatment setting, efﬁcacy

considerations, patient tolerance and preference, and type of ESA. (2C)

TYPE OF ESA

3.11.1: We recommend choosing an ESA based on the balance of pharmacodynamics, safety information, clinical outcome

data, costs, and availability. (1D)

3.11.2: We suggest using only ESAs that have been approved by an independent regulatory agency. Speciﬁcally for ‘copy’

versions of ESAs, true biosimilar products should be used. (2D)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287

285

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

EVALUATING AND CORRECTING PERSISTENT FAILURE TO REACH OR MAINTAIN INTENDED
HEMOGLOBIN CONCENTRATION

Frequency of monitoring

3.12.1: During the initiation phase of ESA therapy, measure Hb concentration at least monthly. (Not Graded)
3.12.2: For CKD ND patients, during the maintenance phase of ESA therapy measure Hb concentration at least every 3

months. (Not Graded)

3.12.3: For CKD 5D patients, during the maintenance phase of ESA therapy measure Hb concentration at least monthly.

(Not Graded)

Initial ESA hyporesponsiveness

3.13.1: Classify patients as having ESA hyporesponsiveness if they have no increase in Hb concentration from baseline

after the first month of ESA treatment on appropriate weight-based dosing. (Not Graded)

3.13.2: In patients with ESA hyporesponsiveness, we suggest avoiding repeated escalations in ESA dose beyond double the

initial weight-based dose. (2D)

Subsequent ESA hyporesponsiveness

3.14.1: Classify patients as having acquired ESA hyporesponsiveness if after treatment with stable doses of ESA, they
require 2 increases in ESA doses up to 50% beyond the dose at which they had been stable in an effort to maintain
a stable Hb concentration. (Not Graded)

3.14.2: In patients with acquired ESA hyporesponsiveness, we suggest avoiding repeated escalations in ESA dose beyond

double the dose at which they had been stable. (2D)

Management of poor ESA responsiveness

3.15.1: Evaluate patients with either initial or acquired ESA hyporesponsiveness and treat for specific causes of poor ESA

response. (Not Graded)

3.15.2: For patients who remain hyporesponsive despite correcting treatable causes, we suggest individualization of

therapy, accounting for relative risks and benefits of (2D):

K decline in Hb concentration
K continuing ESA, if needed to maintain Hb concentration, with due consideration of the doses required, and
K blood transfusions

ADJUVANT THERAPIES

3.16.1: We recommend not using androgens as an adjuvant to ESA treatment. (1B)
3.16.2: We suggest not using adjuvants to ESA treatment including vitamin C, vitamin D, vitamin E, folic acid,

L-carnitine, and pentoxifylline. (2D)

EVALUATION FOR PURE RED CELL APLASIA (PRCA)

3.17.1: Investigate for possible antibody-mediated PRCA when a patient receiving ESA therapy for more than 8 weeks

develops the following (Not Graded):

K Sudden rapid decrease in Hb concentration at the rate of 0.5 to 1.0 g/dl (5 to 10 g/l) per week OR requirement

of transfusions at the rate of approximately 1 to 2 per week, AND

K Normal platelet and white cell counts, AND
K Absolute reticulocyte count less than 10,000/ml

3.17.2: We recommend that ESA therapy be stopped in patients who develop antibody-mediated PRCA. (1A)
3.17.3: We recommend peginesatide be used to treat patients with antibody-mediated PRCA. (1B)

286

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

Chapter 4: Red cell transfusion to treat anemia in CKD

USE OF RED CELL TRANSFUSION IN CHRONIC ANEMIA

4.1.1: When managing chronic anemia, we recommend avoiding, when possible, red cell transfusions to minimize the

general risks related to their use. (1B)

4.1.2: In patients eligible for organ transplantation, we speciﬁcally recommend avoiding, when possible, red cell

transfusions to minimize the risk of allosensitization. (1C)

4.1.3: When managing chronic anemia, we suggest that the beneﬁts of red cell transfusions may outweigh the risks in

patients in whom (2C):

K ESA therapy is ineffective (e.g., hemoglobinopathies, bone marrow failure, ESA resistance)
K The risks of ESA therapy may outweigh its benefits (e.g., previous or current malignancy, previous stroke)

4.1.4: We suggest that the decision to transfuse a CKD patient with non-acute anemia should not be based on any
arbitrary Hb threshold, but should be determined by the occurrence of symptoms caused by anemia. (2C)

URGENT TREATMENT OF ANEMIA

4.2: In certain acute clinical situations, we suggest patients are transfused when the beneﬁts of red cell transfusions

outweigh the risks; these include (2C):

K When rapid correction of anemia is required to stabilize the patient’s condition (e.g., acute hemorrhage, unstable

coronary artery disease)

K When rapid pre-operative Hb correction is required

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 283–287

287

c h a p t e r 1

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Chapter 1: Diagnosis and evaluation of anemia
in CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 288–291; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.33

TESTING FOR ANEMIA

BACKGROUND
In any individual, anemia may be the initial laboratory sign
of an underlying medical problem. Consequently, a complete
blood count, including the hemoglobin (Hb) concentration,
is routinely part of global health assessment in most adults,
whether or not they have chronic kidney disease (CKD). In
patients with CKD but stable kidney function, the appear-
ance or progression of anemia may herald a new problem
that is causing blood loss or is interfering with red cell
production. The anemia should be evaluated independently
of CKD stage in order to identify any reversible process
contributing to the anemia. The causes of acquired anemia
are myriad and too many to include in a guideline such as
this. A comprehensive list of causes and the approach to
diagnosis can be found in a standard textbook of medicine or
hematology. The most commonly encountered reversible
cause of chronic anemia or worsening anemia in CKD
patients, other than anemia related directly to CKD, is iron
deﬁciency anemia.

Frequency of testing for anemia

1.1.1: For CKD patients without anemia (as deﬁned below
in Recommendation 1.2.1 for adults and Recom-
mendation 1.2.2 for children), measure Hb concen-
tration when clinically indicated and (Not Graded):

K at least annually in patients with CKD 3
K at least twice per year in patients with CKD

4–5ND

K at least every 3 months in patients with CKD

5HD and CKD 5PD

1.1.2: For CKD patients with anemia not being treated
with an ESA, measure Hb concentration when
clinically indicated and (Not Graded):

K at least every 3 months in patients with CKD

3–5ND and CKD 5PD

K at least monthly in patients with CKD 5HD

[See Recommendations 3.12.1–3.12.3 for mea-
surement of Hb concentration in patients being
treated with ESA.]

RATIONALE
Relatively little is known about
the development and
progression of anemia in patients with CKD. Consequently,
one cannot determine precisely the optimal frequency at

that,

which Hb levels should be monitored. The recommendation
that patients with CKD be periodically evaluated for anemia
rests on observations
in the absence of use of
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs), there often is a
gradual decline in Hb over time in patients with CKD as the
level of glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) declines,1 suggesting
the need for regular surveillance of Hb concentration. The
frequency of Hb monitoring, regardless of CKD stage, should
be inﬂuenced by the Hb level (i.e., more frequent monitoring
may be appropriate in patients with more severe anemia) and
rate of decline in Hb level. As kidney function declines and in
patients with more advanced CKD stages, the incidence and
prevalence of anemia increases. Thus, in order to identify
CKD patients who may need intervention with iron
administration, an ESA, or even require a transfusion,
more frequent monitoring of the Hb concentration will be
necessary at later CKD stages.

More frequent monitoring is recommended for adult
CKD 5HD and CKD 5PD patients with anemia who are not
receiving an ESA; at least monthly in CKD 5HD patients and
at least every 3 months in CKD 5PD patients. In CKD 5HD
patients, Hb monitoring is traditionally performed prior to a
mid-week hemodialysis (HD) session. While this is not
essential it probably does tend to minimize Hb variability due
to the longer inter-dialytic interval between the last treatment
of one week and the ﬁrst of the next. As in all patients, Hb
testing should be performed whenever clinically indicated,
such as after a major surgical procedure, hospitalization, or
bleeding episode.

In the pediatric population with CKD, there is no direct
evidence to recommend a different frequency of monitoring
for anemia than for adults. In the Chronic Kidney Disease in
Children Prospective Cohort Study (CKiD), which evaluated
340 North American children with CKD using iohexol-
determined GFR,2 below a GFR threshold of 43 ml/min per
1.73 m2, there was a linear relationship between Hb and GFR,
with Hb 0.3 g/dl (3 g/l) lower per 5 ml/min per 1.73 m2 lower
there was a nonsigniﬁcant
GFR. Above that
association of 0.1 g/dl (1 g/l) lower Hb for every 5 ml/min
per 1.73 m2 lower GFR. Because serum creatinine-based
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) using the
Schwartz formula may overestimate the true GFR in the
children3 providers need to consider
for
Hb decline and anemia even at early stages of CKD and
monitor accordingly.
In children with CKD 5HD and
CKD 5PD, monthly monitoring for anemia is standard
clinical practice.

the potential

threshold,

288

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 288–291

Diagnosis of anemia

Investigation of anemia

c h a p t e r 1

1.2.1: Diagnose anemia in adults and children 415 years
with CKD when the Hb concentration is o13.0 g/dl
(o130 g/l) in males and o12.0 g/dl (o120 g/l) in
females. (Not Graded)

1.2.2: Diagnose anemia in children with CKD if Hb
concentration is o11.0 g/dl (o110 g/l) in children
0.5–5 years, o11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) in children 5–12
years, and o12.0 g/dl (120 g/l) in children 12–15
years. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
The Hb concentration values that deﬁne anemia and should
lead to initiation of an evaluation for the cause of anemia
are dependent on sex and age. The recommended Hb values
for
the World Health
Organization (WHO) deﬁnition of anemia and establish a
benchmark for anemia workup that has been applied across
populations.4

and children represent

adults

An alternative source for Hb concentration values that
deﬁne anemia in children between 1 and 19 years is based on
US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III
(NHANES III) data from 1988–945 (Table 1). For children
between birth and 24 months, the data are taken from
normal reference values6 (Table 2).

These thresholds for diagnosis of anemia and evaluation
for the causes of anemia should not be interpreted as being
thresholds for treatment of anemia. Rather than relying on a
single laboratory test value, in patients without an apparent
cause for a low Hb level, the value should be conﬁrmed to be
below the threshold values for diagnosis of anemia prior to
initiating a diagnostic work up.

1.3: In patients with CKD and anemia (regardless of age
and CKD stage), include the following tests in initial
evaluation of the anemia (Not Graded):

K Complete blood count

(CBC), which should
include Hb concentration, red cell indices, white
blood cell count and differential, and platelet count

K Absolute reticulocyte count
K Serum ferritin level
K Serum transferrin saturation (TSAT)
K Serum vitamin B12 and folate levels

RATIONALE
Complete blood count
The complete blood count (CBC) provides information
about the severity of anemia and adequacy of bone marrow
function. Severity of anemia is assessed best by measuring Hb

Table 2 | Hb levels in children between birth and 24 months
for initiation of anemia workupa

Age

Mean Hb g/dl (g/l)

(cid:2)2 SDb g/dl (g/l)

Term (cord blood)
1–3 d
1 wk
2 wk
1 mo
2 mo
3–6 mo
6–24 mo

16.5 (165)
18.5 (185)
17.5 (175)
16.5 (165)
14.0 (140)
11.5 (115)
11.5 (115)
12.0 (120)

13.5 (135)
14.5 (145)
13.5 (135)
12.5 (125)
10.0 (100)
9.0 (90)
9.5 (95)
10.5 (105)

d, day; Hb, hemoglobin; mo, month; SD, standard deviation; wk, week.
aData taken from normal reference values. This was published in Nathan DG, Orkin
SH. Appendix 11: Normal hematologic values in children. In: Nathan DG, Orkin SH,
Ginsburg D et al. (eds). Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 6th
edn. p 1841, & Elsevier, 2003.6
bValues 2 standard deviations below the mean are equivalent to o2.5th percentile.

Table 1 | Hb levels in children between 1–19 years for initiation of anemia workupa

All races/ethnic
groups

Boys

1 yr and over
1–2 yr
3–5 yr
6–8 yr
9–11 yr
12–14 yr
15–19 yr

Girls

1 yr and over
1–2 yr
3–5 yr
6–8 yr
9–11 yr
12–14 yrb
15–19 yrb

Number of
subjects

12,623
931
1,281
709
773
540
836

13,749
858
1,337
675
734
621
950

Mean Hb
g/dl (g/l)

14.7 (147)
12.0 (120)
12.4 (124)
12.9 (129)
13.3 (133)
14.1 (141)
15.1 (151)

13.2 (132)
12.0 (120)
12.4 (124)
12.8 (128)
13.1 (131)
13.3 (133)
13.2 (132)

Hb, hemoglobin; yr, year.
aBased on NHANES III data, United States, 1988–94.5
bMenstrual losses contribute to lower mean and 5th percentile Hb values for group.

Standard deviation
g/dl (g/l)

Anemia definition met if value is
o5th percentile g/dl (g/l)

1.4 (14)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
1.1 (11)
1.0 (10)

1.1 (11)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
0.8 (8)
1.0 (10)
1.0 (10)

12.1 (121)
10.7 (107)
11.2 (112)
11.5 (115)
12.0 (120)
12.4 (124)
13.5 (135)

11.4 (114)
10.8 (108)
11.1 (111)
11.5 (115)
11.9 (119)
11.7 (117)
11.5 (115)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 288–291

289

c h a p t e r 1

concentration rather than hematocrit. The latter measure-
ment is a relatively unstable analyte and its measurement
lacks standardization and is instrumentation dependent,
since it is derived indirectly by automated analyzers.7–9 There
is no evidence to support any different recommendation for
the initial evaluation of anemia for children compared to
adults.

regard it

In addition to Hb concentration, other reported results of
the CBC may convey important clinical information. The
anemia of CKD is hypoproliferative, and in general,
In this
normochromic
is
and normocytic.
morphologically indistinguishable
from the anemia of
chronic disease.10 Folate or vitamin B12 deﬁciencies may
lead to macrocytosis, whereas iron deﬁciency or inherited
disorders of Hb formation (e.g., a- or b-thalassemia) may
produce microcytosis. Iron deﬁciency, especially if
long-
standing,
is associated with hypochromia (low mean
corpuscular hemoglobin [MCH]). Macrocytosis with leuko-
penia or thrombocytopenia suggests a generalized disorder of
hematopoiesis caused by toxins (e.g., alcohol), nutritional
deﬁcit (vitamin B12 or folate deﬁciency), or myelodysplasia.
When these ﬁndings are present, further diagnostic evalua-
tion may be indicated.

The low erythropoietic activity that characterizes the
anemia of CKD is consistent with insufﬁcient erythropoietin
stimulation. Erythropoietin levels are not routinely used in
distinguishing erythropoietin deﬁciency from other causes of
anemia in patients with CKD in most clinical settings and
recommended.11,12
their measurement
is generally not
Effective erythropoietic proliferative activity is most simply
assessed by determination of the absolute reticulocyte count.
Abnormalities of the white blood cell count and differential
or platelet count are not typical of the anemia of CKD and
should prompt investigation for other processes.

Reticulocyte count, which may be obtained with auto-
mated CBC testing, may be high in patients who have active
blood loss or hemolysis, and may be low in hypoproliferative
erythropoiesis with anemia.

Iron status
There are two important and distinct aspects of
the
assessment of iron status testing: the presence or absence of
storage iron and the availability of iron to support ongoing
erythropoiesis. The serum ferritin is the most commonly
used test for evaluation of storage iron, for which the ‘gold
standard’ remains examination of a bone marrow aspiration
stained for iron.13 The transferrin saturation (TSAT; serum
iron (cid:3) 100 divided by total iron binding capacity) is the most
commonly used measure of the availability of iron to support
erythropoiesis. The serum ferritin is affected by inﬂammation
and is an ‘acute phase reactant’13 and, thus, ferritin values
have to be interpreted with caution in CKD patients,
especially those on dialysis in whom subclinical inﬂammation
may be present.14

Serum ferritin values r30 ng/ml (r30 mg/l) indicate
severe iron deﬁciency and are highly predictive of absent

serum ferritin level

iron stores in bone marrow.15,16 Ferritin values 430 ng/ml
(430 mg/l), however, do not necessarily indicate the presence
of normal or adequate bone marrow iron stores. Studies
assessing ferritin levels above which all or nearly all patients
with CKD have normal bone marrow iron stores have
produced varied results but most CKD patients, including
those who are on HD, will have normal bone marrow iron
is Z300 ng/ml
stores when their
(Z300 mg/l). Even at serum ferritin levels of 100 ng/ml
(100 mg/l) most CKD patients have stainable bone marrow
iron stores.16–21 As will be discussed in Chapter 2, the serum
ferritin and TSAT values are often used together to assess iron
status, diagnose iron deﬁciency, and predict an erythropoietic
response to iron supplementation (Supplementary Table 1
online).
Other

such as percentage of
hypochromic red blood cells and reticulocyte Hb content
may be used instead of, or in addition to, TSAT and ferritin
levels if available. Measurement of hepcidin levels has not
been shown to be clinically useful or superior to more
standard iron status tests in patients with CKD.22,23

iron status,

tests of

Vitamin B12 and folate
Folate and vitamin B12 deﬁciency are uncommon but
important causes of treatable anemia, typically associated
with macrocytic red blood cell (RBC) indices. Limited data
indicate a prevalence of vitamin B12 and folate deﬁciency in
r10% of HD patients; the prevalence in CKD patients
is not known. Nonetheless, since these deﬁciencies are easily
correctable, and in the case of vitamin B12 may indicate
other underlying disease processes, assessment of
folate
and vitamin B12 levels are generally considered standard
components of
in the
presence of macrocytosis. Folate deﬁciency is best detected
in most patients with serum folate level testing; RBC folate
levels can be measured when serum folate levels are equivocal
or when there is concern that recent dietary intake may
obscure underlying folate deﬁciency using serum levels
alone.24

evaluation,

especially

anemia

Additional tests
Other tests, in addition to those indicated above, may be
appropriate in individual patients and in certain speciﬁc
clinical settings. For instance measurement of high sensitivity
C-reactive protein (CRP) may be indicated if occult
inﬂammation is a concern. In certain countries and/or in
patients of speciﬁc nationalities or ethnicities, testing for
hemoglobinopathies, parasites, and other conditions may be
appropriate.

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it
clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contri-

290

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 288–291

c h a p t e r 1

butor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accord-
ingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and
their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no
liability whatsoever
the consequences of any such
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and

for

described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplemental Table 1: Association between iron status and level of
anemia in multivariable analyses.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/anemia.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 288–291

291

c h a p t e r 2

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Chapter 2: Use of iron to treat anemia in CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.34

TREATMENT WITH IRON AGENTS

BACKGROUND
Correction of iron deﬁciency with oral or intravenous iron
supplementation can reduce the severity of anemia in
patients with CKD.25,26 Untreated iron deﬁciency is an
important cause of hyporesponsiveness to ESA treatment.27,28
It is important to diagnose iron deﬁciency because treatment
can readily correct the associated anemia and investigation
for the cause of iron deﬁciency, which should follow its
detection, can lead to important diagnoses. In the absence of
iron depletion and iron deﬁciency
menstrual bleeding,
usually result
from blood loss from the gastrointestinal
tract. There are additional considerations in CKD patients
with iron deﬁciency. For instance, hemodialysis patients
are subject to repeated blood loss due to retention of blood in
the dialyzer and blood lines. Other contributing causes in
hemodialysis and other CKD patients
include frequent
blood sampling for laboratory testing, blood loss from
surgical procedures (such as creation of vascular access),
interference with iron absorption due to medications
such as gastric acid inhibitors and phosphate binders,
and reduced iron absorption due to inﬂammation.29 The
reader is referred to standard textbooks of medicine and
pediatrics for more extensive discussions on the diagnosis
and evaluation of patients with known or suspected iron
deﬁciency.

Iron supplementation is widely used in CKD patients
to treat iron deﬁciency, prevent its development in ESA-
treated patients, raise Hb levels in the presence or absence
of ESA treatment, and reduce ESA doses in patients receiving
ESA treatment. Iron administration is appropriate when
bone marrow iron stores are depleted or in patients who are
likely to have a clinically meaningful erythropoietic response.
It is prudent, however to avoid iron therapy in patients
is unlikely to provide meaningful clinical
in whom it
i.e., avoid transfusion and reduce anemia-related
beneﬁt,
symptoms, and in those in whom potential beneﬁt
is
outweighed by risks of treatment.23,30–32 There are relatively
iron
few data on the
supplementation other
than direct effects on the Hb
concentration. There is similarly little information on the
long-term adverse consequences of iron supplementation in
excess of that necessary to provide adequate bone marrow
iron stores.33–35 Since bone marrow aspiration for assessment
of
iron
iron stores is rarely done in clinical practice,
supplementation is typically assessed by blood-based iron
status
tests without knowledge of bone marrow iron
stores.27,28,36–38

long-term clinical beneﬁts of

The following statements provide recommendations for

use of iron supplementation in patients with CKD.

2.1.1: When prescribing

iron therapy, balance

the
potential beneﬁts of
avoiding or minimizing
blood transfusions, ESA therapy, and anemia-
related symptoms against the risks of harm in
individual patients (e.g., anaphylactoid and other
acute reactions, unknown long-term risks). (Not
Graded)

2.1.2: For adult CKD patients with anemia not on iron or
ESA therapy we suggest a trial of IV iron (or in CKD
ND patients alternatively a 1–3 month trial of oral
iron therapy) if (2C):

K an increase in Hb concentration without start-

ing ESA treatment is desired* and

K TSAT is r30% and ferritin is r500 ng/ml

(r500 mg/l)

2.1.3: For adult CKD patients on ESA therapy who
are not receiving iron supplementation, we suggest
a trial of
in CKD ND patients
alternatively a 1–3 month trial of oral iron therapy)
if (2C):

IV iron (or

K an increase in Hb concentration** or a decrease

in ESA dose is desired*** and

K TSAT is r30% and ferritin is r500 ng/ml

(r500 mg/l)

2.1.4: For CKD ND patients who require iron supplemen-
tation, select
iron administration
the route of
based on the severity of iron deﬁciency, availability
iron
of venous access, response to prior oral
therapy,
IV
iron therapy, patient compliance, and cost. (Not
Graded)

effects with prior oral or

side

2.1.5: Guide subsequent

iron administration in CKD
patients based on Hb responses to recent iron
therapy, as well as ongoing blood losses, iron status
tests (TSAT and ferritin), Hb concentration, ESA
responsiveness and ESA dose in ESA treated
patients, trends in each parameter, and the patient’s
clinical status. (Not Graded)

transfusion,

improvement

*Based on patient symptoms and overall clinical goals, including avoidance
in anemia-related symptoms, and after
of
exclusion of active infection.
**Consistent with Recommendations #3.4.2 and 3.4.3.
***Based on patient symptoms and overall clinical goals including avoidance
of transfusion and improvement in anemia-related symptoms, and after
exclusion of active infection and other causes of ESA hyporesponsiveness.

292

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

2.1.6: For all pediatric CKD patients with anemia not on
iron or ESA therapy, we recommend oral iron (or IV
iron in CKD HD patients) administration when
TSAT is r20% and ferritin is r100 ng/ml
(r100 lg/l). (1D)

2.1.7: For all pediatric CKD patients on ESA therapy who
are not receiving iron supplementation, we recom-
mend oral iron (or IV iron in CKD HD patients)
administration to maintain TSAT 420% and
ferritin 4100 ng/ml (4100 lg/l). (1D)

reveal adequate

iron stores.38–40

RATIONALE
In patients with CKD-associated anemia, iron supplementa-
tion is intended to assure adequate iron stores for erythro-
poiesis, correct iron deﬁciency, and, in patients receiving ESA
treatment, prevent iron deﬁciency from developing. Iron
supplementation, particularly with intravenous iron, can
enhance erythropoiesis and raise Hb levels in CKD patients
with anemia even when TSAT and ferritin levels are not
indicative of absolute iron deﬁciency, and even when bone
Iron
marrow studies
treatment, particularly when administered intravenously,
has also been consistently demonstrated to improve the
erythropoietic response to ESA treatment.27,28,32,36,37,41–43 For
any individual patient the optimal balance of Hb level, ESA
dose, and iron dose at which clinical beneﬁt is maximized
and potential risk is minimized is not known. Prescribing
iron therapy for CKD patients is complicated by the relatively
poor diagnostic utility of serum ferritin and TSAT tests to
estimate body iron stores or for predicting a Hb response to
iron supplementation.23,30 Even examination of bone marrow
iron stores, considered the ‘gold standard’ for assessment of
iron stores, does not predict erythropoietic responsiveness to
iron supplementation in patients with CKD with a high
degree of accuracy.16,23,30,40 It is important that the short-
and long-term safety of oral and intravenous (IV) iron
agents, when known, be carefully considered when iron
therapy is prescribed, and that the potential
for as yet
undiscovered toxicities also be taken into account. In each
patient there must be consideration of current and desired
Hb level, ESA dose and trends in ESA dose over time,
assessment of the Hb response to iron supplementation,
ongoing blood loss, and changes in iron status tests. While
observational studies have not for the most part produced
strong evidence of signiﬁcant toxicity of chronic IV iron
administration, the clinical beneﬁt of such treatment has also
not been convincingly demonstrated, although a recent
randomized controlled trial (RCT) in patients with heart
failure (some of whom also had mild CKD) is encouraging.44

TSAT and ferritin levels
The two most widely available tests for assessing iron status
are the TSAT and serum ferritin level. A very low serum
[o30 mg/l])
ferritin (o30 ng/ml
iron
deﬁciency.16 Except in this circumstance,
the TSAT and
serum ferritin level have only limited sensitivity and

indicative of

is

c h a p t e r 2

speciﬁcity in patients with CKD for prediction of bone
marrow iron stores and erythropoietic response to iron
supplementation16-21,40,45 (Figures 1 and 2). Their utility is
further compromised by substantial inter-patient variability
unrelated to changes in iron store status.46

Evidence to support a recommendation for speciﬁc TSAT
and ferritin levels at which iron therapy should be initiated or
as ‘targets’
for iron therapy is limited, with very few
RCTs.16–21 No iron intervention trials have been sufﬁciently
powered or of long enough duration to assess long-term
safety and no studies have addressed the clinical beneﬁt, cost-
effectiveness, and risk-beneﬁt comparison of using different
TSAT and ferritin levels for the diagnosis of iron deﬁciency or
as a trigger for iron supplementation.

The Work Group sought to recommend iron targets that
balance diagnostic sensitivity and speciﬁcity with assump-
tions regarding safety. Previous clinical practice recommen-
Initiative
(Kidney Diseae Outcomes Quality
dations
[KDOQI] 2006 and others), largely opinion-based, indicated
that supplemental iron should be administered to maintain
ferritin levels 4200 ng/ml (4200 mg/l) in CKD 5HD patients
and 4100 ng/ml (4100 mg/l) in CKD ND and CKD 5PD
with TSAT 420% in all CKD patients. These guidelines also
indicated that there was insufﬁcient evidence to recommend
routine IV iron administration when the ferritin level was
4500 ng/ml (4500 mg/l).

Most CKD patients with serum ferritin levels 4100 ng/ml
(4100 mg/l) have normal bone marrow iron stores,16–21 yet
many such patients will also have an increase in Hb
concentration and/or reduction in ESA dose if supplemental
iron is provided.16,23,30,31,40,45 A substantial fraction of CKD
patients with anemia and TSAT 420% respond to iron
supplementation with an increase in Hb concentration and/

Figure 1 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves,
examining the utility of iron status tests to distinguish iron
deficient from nondeficient study patients. Reprinted with
permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Kidney International.
Van Wyck DB, Roppolo M, Martinez CO et al. A randomized,
controlled trial comparing IV iron sucrose to oral iron in anemic
patients with nondialysis-dependent CKD. Kidney Int 2005; 68:
2846–2856;45 accessed http://www.nature.com/ki/journal/v68/n6/
full/4495631a.html.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

293

c h a p t e r 2

Figure 2 | Sensitivity and specificity of TSAT and serum ferritin
(ferritin) and their combination (TSAT þ ferritin) and bone
marrow iron (BM iron) to identify correctly a positive
erythropoietic response (Z1-g/dl [Z10-g/l] increase in Hb
[DHb]) to intravenous iron in 100 nondialysis patients with
CKD (areas under the ROCs). Reproduced with permission from
American Society of Nephrology40 from Stancu S, Barsan L,
Stanciu A et al. Can the response to iron therapy be predicted in
anemic nondialysis patients with chronic kidney disease? Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 409–416; permission conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center; accessed http: http://
cjasn.asnjournals.org/content/5/3/409.long

is desired, particularly if

or reduction in ESA dose. Therefore, for patients who have
not been receiving iron supplementation, we suggest iron
administration in anemic CKD patients with TSAT o30%
and serum ferritin o500 ng/ml (o500 mg/l) if an increase in
Hb level
intended to avoid
transfusions and reduce anemia-related symptoms, and/or
reduction in ESA dose, after consideration of the potential
risks of
iron administration. The safety of providing
additional iron to intentionally maintain TSAT 430% and
serum ferritin 4500 ng/ml (4500 mg/l) has been studied in
very few patients. We do not recommend routine use of iron
supplementation in patients with TSAT 430% or serum
ferritin 4500 ng/ml (4500 mg/l) since, as stated above, the
beneﬁts and risks of doing so are inadequately studied. In all
patients receiving iron, it is important to weigh both short-
term and acute toxicities associated with iron therapy and
exclude the presence of active infection (Recommendation
2.4) before embarking on a course of IV iron treatment.

There is only very limited evidence in patients with CKD
that informs any decision about deﬁning any speciﬁc upper
limits for iron status targets in guiding iron treatment.47,48
Previous guidelines, such as the 2006 KDOQI guidelines and
others, have speciﬁed serum ferritin levels above which
additional
recom-
mended,8,49–52 usually
500–800 ng/ml
(500–800 mg/l). However, no RCTs and few other studies
have examined the efﬁcacy and safety of providing IV iron to

IV iron therapy was generally not

limits of

citing

maintain ferritin levels 4500–800 ng/ml (4500–800 mg/l).
Most studies are retrospective and the few prospective studies
have had small numbers of patients and short follow up,
using surrogate outcomes such as Hb and ESA dose rather
than more meaningful patient outcomes such as infection
risk and mortality. In most patients with TSAT 430% or
serum ferritin 4500 ng/ml (4500 mg/l), any erythropoietic
responsive to iron supplementation alone (i.e., the incre-
mental change in Hb and/or reduction in ESA dose) will be
small. In one RCT conducted in CKD 5HD patients with
anemia, serum ferritin 500–1200 ng/ml (500–1200 mg/l), and
TSATo25%, patients received a 25% increase in epoetin dose
and were randomly assigned to receive either no iron
(control) or 1000 mg IV iron. At 6 weeks, Hb increased to
a greater extent in the IV iron group.53 This study was not
considered in the choice of target levels for ferritin and TSAT
in this guideline in part because it studied only a restricted
group of patients, all of whom also received an increase in
ESA dose. The number of patients was too small and the
period of observation too short to assess either clinically
important outcomes or
toxicity in a meaningful way
(Supplementary Tables 2–4 online).

High ferritin levels in some studies have been associated
with higher death rates, but whether elevation of ferritin
levels is a marker of excessive iron administration rather than
a nonspeciﬁc acute phase reactant is not clear. At increasingly
higher ferritin levels, there is some evidence to indicate that
hepatic deposition of iron increases.54,55 Clinical sequelae of
this have not been documented although such hepatic iron
deposition might be of particular concern in patients with
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.56 While some data are
available linking ferritin levels in patients with hemochro-
matosis and transfusional tissue iron deposition in patients
without CKD,57 it is not clear to what extent these ﬁndings
are relevant to CKD patients or should be used to guide
clinical practice in CKD patients.

Rather than focusing on serum ferritin levels as a predictor
of outcomes, some observational studies have examined
associations between patient outcomes and amount of iron
administered. One such study found no adverse association
between 2-year survival when the IV iron dose over 6 months
was r1000 mg, but a statistically signiﬁcant higher mortality
for iron doses 41000 mg (adjusted hazards ratio [HR] 1.09;
95% conﬁdence interval [CI] 1.01–1.17 for 4 1000 mg to
1800 mg and 1.18; 95% CI 1.09–1.27 for 4 1800 mg).33 How-
ever,
accounting for
iron administration and other
time-varying measures of
parameters, there was no statistically signiﬁcant association
between any level of
iron administration and mortality.
Another retrospective study using time-dependent and multi-
variate adjustment for case mix found that IV iron doses up to
400 mg/month were associated with lower death rates
compared to doses 4400 mg/month35 (Supplementary Table
5 online).

after using multivariable models

It is the consensus of the Work Group that additional IV
iron should not routinely be administered in patients with

294

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

that are consistently 4500 ng/ml
serum ferritin levels
(4500 mg/l). In patients with Hb below the desired level
who are receiving relatively high ESA doses, or in whom
discontinuation of ESA therapy is preferred (for instance a
CKD patient with malignancy), a therapeutic trial of
additional IV iron (i.e., a single course of up to 1000 mg
over a period of several weeks which can be repeated as
needed) may be undertaken in patients with serum ferritin
levels 4500 ng/ml (4500 mg/l) after due consideration of
potential acute toxicities and long-term risks. Subsequent
treatment decisions should be based on the patient’s clinical
status, including trends in TSAT, ferritin, and Hb level, and
ESA dose and responsiveness.

Ferritin levels need to be interpreted with caution in
patients who may have an underlying inﬂammatory condi-
tion as they may not predict iron stores or responsiveness to
iron therapy in a manner similar to that when inﬂammation
is absent. In the absence of a clinically evident infectious or
inﬂammatory process, assessment of CRP may suggest the
presence of an occult
inﬂammatory state that may be
associated with an elevated ferritin level and ESA-hypor-
esponsiveness (Supplementary Table 6 online).

Other iron status tests not as widely available as TSAT and
ferritin such as percentage of hypochromic red cells,
reticulocyte Hb content, zinc protoporphyrin, and soluble
transferrin receptors may be used to assess iron status, but are
less well studied.22,23

is

the

(200 mg/l)

appropriate or

There is no evidence that a higher ferritin target of 200
ng/ml
inappropriate
cutoff in CKD 5HD pediatric patients. Consequently no
change has been made to the 2006 KDOQI guideline in
children with CKD and anemia, which recommended a
ferritin target greater than 100 ng/ml (100 mg/l) for CKD
5HD, as well as for CKD 5PD and CKD ND who are not on
ESA therapy.58

Iron treatment
A decision to provide an individual patient with iron therapy
should be based on an assessment that an increase in Hb level
is desirable, that is, to avoid transfusions or reduce anemia-
related symptoms, and that the potential adverse effects of
iron supplementation, either oral or IV, have been considered
and are appropriately outweighed by the expected treatment
beneﬁt. Such supplementation could be in the form of oral or
intravenous iron. Use of intramuscular iron has largely been
abandoned. Each route has its own potential advantages and
disadvantages. Oral iron is inexpensive, readily available, and
does not require IV access, a particular concern in CKD
patients not on HD. It is also not associated with severe
adverse effects but gastrointestinal side effects are common
and may limit adherence. This, along with variable gastro-
intestinal tract absorption, limits the efﬁcacy of oral iron. IV
iron avoids concerns about medication adherence and
efﬁcacy in treating iron deﬁciency, but requires IV access
and has been associated with infrequent but severe adverse
iron
reactions. Decisions about

the preferred route of

c h a p t e r 2

supplementation should take into consideration severity of
anemia and iron deﬁciency, the response, tolerance and
adherence to prior oral iron administration, costs, and ease of
obtaining venous access balanced against
the desire to
preserve venous access sites.

In patients with CKD ND, the available evidence supports
an efﬁcacy advantage of IV compared with oral administra-
tion of
iron although the effect is rather small, with a
weighted mean Hb difference of 0.31 g/dl (3.1 g/l).45,59–63
Whether the small Hb beneﬁt of IV iron in CKD ND patients
is clinically meaningful or justiﬁes the small risk of serious
adverse events and unknown long-term risks is uncertain.
The consensus of the Work Group is that a clearly deﬁned
advantage or preference for IV compared to oral iron was not
supported by available evidence in CKD ND patients.
Therefore, in such patients, the route of iron administration
can be either IV or oral. In some patients the desire to avoid
venipuncture (and preserve IV access) may favor in some
patients, particularly those with mild iron deﬁciency, an
initial trial of oral iron.

Oral iron is typically prescribed to provide approximately
200 mg of elemental iron daily (for instance ferrous sulfate
325 mg three times daily; each pill provides 65 mg elemental
iron). Smaller daily doses may be useful and better tolerated
in some patients. Although ferrous sulfate is commonly
iron preparations
available and inexpensive, other oral
may also be used; there is not signiﬁcant evidence to suggest
iron formulations are more effective or
that other oral
associated with fewer adverse side effects
than ferrous
sulfate. If the goals of iron supplementation are not met
with a 1–3 month course of oral iron, it is appropriate to
consider IV iron supplementation in a manner consistent
with the above recommendation statements and the discus-
sion that follows.

There is evidence supporting a preference for the IV
route of
iron administration in CKD 5HD patients
derived from RCTs and other studies comparing IV iron
with oral iron and placebo, with and without concomitant
ESA treatment.27,32,62,64,65
studies,
IV iron administration led to a greater increase in Hb
concentration, a lower ESA dose, or both. In CKD 5HD
patients, the ready IV access and convenience of being able to
administer IV iron during HD treatments further supports
the preference for the IV route for iron administration in
these patients.

In most of

these

In prior CKD anemia guidelines,50 CKD 5PD patients
were considered more similar to CKD ND than CKD 5HD in
their need for and likely responsiveness to iron, as well as in
their absence of ready venous access for IV iron administra-
tion. Limited studies of
iron administration in CKD
5PD patients indicate that oral iron is of limited efﬁcacy
and that IV iron is superior to oral iron in terms of achieved
Hb level and ESA dose. Consequently, this route is preferred
in these patients, although the desire to preserve potential
future venous access sites must be considered in such
patients.66–70

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

295

c h a p t e r 2

IV iron may be provided as a single large dose or as
repeated smaller doses depending on the speciﬁc IV iron
preparation used (with the highest single dose varying by
speciﬁc formulation). It is common practice to provide an
IV iron amounting to approximately
initial course of
1000 mg; this may be repeated if an initial dose fails to
increase Hb level and/or allow a decrease in ESA dose and if
the TSAT remains r30% and serum ferritin remains
r500 ng/ml (r500 mg/l).38

Decisions regarding continued iron therapy should take
into consideration recent patient responses to iron therapy,
iron status tests (TSAT and ferritin), Hb concentration, ESA
responsiveness and ESA dose in ESA-treated patients,
ongoing blood losses, trends in each parameter, and the
patient’s clinical status. Serum ferritin and TSAT levels
should not be measured until at least one week has elapsed
since the most recent prior IV iron dose. Consideration of
expected iron needs and evaluation for ongoing iron losses
should precede further IV iron administration. Blood loss
should be minimal in CKD ND and CKD 5PD patients, while
CKD 5HD patients have reported to lose between 1–2 gm of
iron per year related to the HD procedure and related
circumstances.71–73 Thus, an apparent ongoing need for any
iron supplementation in CKD ND and CKD 5PD patients or
for more than 1–2 gm/yr in CKD 5HD patients should
prompt assessment for a source of active blood loss. The need
to consider trends in iron status tests are highlighted by
consideration of a patient with decreasing TSAT and ferritin
levels which may signify the presence of gastrointestinal
bleeding or excessive dialysis-associated blood loss. As
another example, an increasing TSAT and ferritin level may
indicate excessive iron supplementation and a need to
decrease or discontinue iron administration. Finally, an
increase in ferritin level accompanied by a decrease in TSAT
and Hb level suggests inﬂammation-mediated reticuloen-
dothelial blockade.14

There are two commonly used approaches to ongoing
or maintenance IV iron treatment in CKD 5HD patients:
(1) periodic iron repletion, consisting of a series of IV iron
doses administered episodically to replenish iron stores
whenever iron status tests indicate the likelihood of iron
deﬁciency or decrease below speciﬁc target levels; or (2)
maintenance treatment, consisting of smaller doses adminis-
tered at regular intervals to maintain iron status tests stable
within speciﬁc limits with the intent of avoiding iron
deﬁciency or decline of iron test parameters below speciﬁc
levels. Limited evidence suggests that regular maintenance IV
iron administration in CKD 5HD is associated with use of
lower ESA doses and may result in lower cumulative iron
doses41,74,75 but these data are insufﬁcient to support a
recommendation favoring any particular IV iron dosing
strategy in this patient population. By nature of the clinical
encounters with CKD 5PD patients, IV iron supplementation
is often provided at periodic (e.g., monthly) visits.

Overall, the TSAT and ferritin recommendations above are
applicable to children with CKD on ESA therapy. However,

there is no evidence that a higher ferritin target of 200 ng/ml
(200 mg/l) is the appropriate or inappropriate cutoff
in
pediatric CKD HD patients. Consequently no change has
been made to the 2006 KDOQI guideline in CKD in children
with anemia, which recommended a ferritin target greater
than 100 ng/ml (100 mg/l) for CKD 5HD, as well as for CKD
5PD and CKD ND who are on ESA therapy.58

IRON STATUS EVALUATION

2.2.1: Evaluate iron status (TSAT and ferritin) at least
every 3 months during ESA therapy, including the
decision to start or continue iron therapy. (Not
Graded)

2.2.2: Test iron status (TSAT and ferritin) more frequently
when initiating or increasing ESA dose, when
there is blood loss, when monitoring response after
a course of IV iron, and in other circumstances
where iron stores may become depleted.
(Not
Graded)

RATIONALE
trials that speciﬁcally inform
In the absence of clinical
the optimal
iron status, and
testing of
frequency for
consistent with prior guidelines,50 the consensus of the Work
Group is that patients who are on ESA therapy, regardless of
whether iron treatment is also being used, should have tests
of iron status at least every 3 months. Falling TSAT and/or
ferritin levels are likely to reﬂect ongoing blood loss or
consumption of available iron stores, and can be used to
anticipate the need for future or additional iron supplemen-
tation. In patients on oral iron treatment, iron status testing
can also be used to assess adherence with iron treatment.
Increasing TSAT and/or ferritin levels may indicate that iron
is excessive and can be stopped or reduced.
treatment
Increasing ferritin levels
in association with stable or
declining TSAT levels may also indicate the presence of
inﬂammation, infection, or other clinical situations inducing
acute phase reactants during which time the appropriate-
ness of continued iron administration may need to be
reassessed.14

In some circumstances, more frequent iron status testing
may be appropriate, including following initiation of ESA or
iron therapy or when the ESA dose or dose frequency is
increased.
in the
assessment of patients who become less responsive to ESA
treatment.

Iron status testing is also important

Despite the absence of speciﬁc data in the pediatric CKD
population, this recommendation is considered applicable to
children since there are no reasons to suggest a different
recommendation. Since the 2006 KDOQI guideline for
anemia in pediatric CKD,58 no new evidence regarding iron
therapy for children with CKD has been published. The
suggestion for oral
iron supplementation in children is
2–6 mg/kg/day of elemental iron in 2–3 divided doses.76,77 An
RCT of 35 iron replete pediatric CKD 5HD patients evaluated

296

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

their response to either weekly IV iron dextran dosed by
weight or oral iron 6 mg/kg/day. Only the IV iron dextran
produced a signiﬁcant increase in the serum ferritin levels
and showed a signiﬁcant decrease in ESA dose required to
maintain target Hb levels.78 An international multicenter
double-blind RCT investigated the safety and efﬁcacy of two
dosing regimens (1.5 mg/kg or 3 mg/kg) of ferric gluconate in
iron-deﬁcient pediatric hemodialysis patients receiving con-
comitant ESA therapy. Efﬁcacy and safety proﬁles were
comparable, with no unexpected adverse events with either
dose.79 Based on this trial, the recommendation for initial
ferric gluconate therapy is 1.5 mg/kg for eight doses for iron-
deﬁcient pediatric CKD 5HD patients and 1 mg/kg per
week for iron-replete pediatric CKD 5HD patients, with
subsequent dose adjustments made according to TSAT
and/or ferritin levels.79,80 Iron sucrose has also been used in
children with CKD81 but, as of yet, no RCTs have been
published in this population. Although it is not uncommon
that pediatric CKD 5PD and CKD ND patients either do not
respond to or tolerate oral iron therapy, the need for IV access
for parenteral
iron therapy often limits its utilization in
children.

CAUTIONS REGARDING IRON THERAPY

2.3: When the initial dose of IV iron dextran is adminis-
tered, we recommend (1B) and when the initial dose
of IV non-dextran iron is administered, we suggest
(2C) that patients be monitored for 60 minutes after
the infusion, and that resuscitative facilities (including
medications) and personnel trained to evaluate and
treat serious adverse reactions be available.

immune mechanisms

RATIONALE
Any form of IV iron may be associated with potentially
severe acute reactions.82–91 The symptoms of most concern
are hypotension and dyspnea, which in the worst cases may
be catastrophic with features of anaphylaxis. The cause
of reactions has not been fully characterized, but may
involve
free,
reactive iron into the circulation with induction of oxidative
stress. The mechanisms of acute reactions may differ for
different iron preparations. Certain iron dextrans in parti-
cular have been associated with reactions characteristic of
anaphylaxis. The rate of such reactions is estimated to occur
in 0.6–0.7% of patients treated. The serious adverse effect
event rate may be lower with low molecular weight iron
dextran compared to high molecular weight
iron dex-
tran.92–96

release of

and/or

it

With non-dextran IV iron drugs,

is believed that
anaphylactoid and other severe and potentially life-threaten-
ing reactions are less common, but this has not been well
substantiated. Serious reactions including profound hypo-
tension do occur, even if uncommonly, with all non-dextran
IV iron preparations. Because all forms of IV iron drugs can
be associated with serious immediate reactions, they should

c h a p t e r 2

be used with vigilance. Since the rate of such reactions
may be greater for iron dextran drugs we recommend
that resuscitative medications and personnel
trained to
evaluate and treat serious adverse reactions be available
when the initial dose of IV iron dextran is administered.
The data to support such a recommendation for the initial
dose of non-iron dextran compounds is not as strong. In the
US, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-mandated
labeling for ferumoxytol speciﬁes that patients be observed
for 60 minutes after administration. This may be reasonable
advice for all IV iron drugs,
including other new iron
preparations such ferric carboxymaltose and iron isomalto-
side. For each IV iron preparation prescribing physicians
should be familiar with the drug’s safety and toxicity proﬁle
and the product labeling warnings and recommendations
for administration, as well as patient monitoring during and
after treatment.

Iron during infection

2.4: Avoid administering IV iron to patients with active

systemic infections. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
Iron is essential for the growth and proliferation of most
pathogens including many bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites
and helminthes, and also exerts subtle effects on immune
function and host responses towards microbes.97 There is
theoretical and experimental evidence to suggest that iron
administration may worsen an existing infection but clinical
evidence is lacking. In animal models, iron overload results in
an impaired control of infections, speciﬁcally with intracel-
lular bacteria or fungi.98–101 In humans, tissue iron overload
has been considered as a risk factor for the acquisition of
certain infections and for an unfavorable clinical course of
the infection. Data in CKD patients are conﬂicting.102–104
Since current evidence cannot provide a clear answer as to
whether speciﬁc CKD patient groups are at increased risk for
infection, or of having a poorer outcome with infection when
anemia is treated with IV iron, the Work Group suggests that
IV iron not be administered when patients have an active
systemic infection. Clinical
judgment is necessary in each
individual patient to assess whether there is an immediate
need for IV iron (as opposed to delaying treatment until
resolution of an infection), likelihood of achieving beneﬁt
from a dose of IV iron in the setting of an active infection,
and the severity of an infection.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
Much regarding the testing of iron status and use of iron
in CKD patients of all
supplementation, particularly IV,
stages remains unknown. There is a serious lack of large,
prospective clinical trials with assessment of clinically mean-
ingful outcomes and toxicities; rather, most have been small,
short-term studies focusing primarily on surrogate outcomes
such as increase in Hb level and reduction in ESA dose. Some

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

297

c h a p t e r 2

important questions that should be addressed in future
studies might include:

K What is the comparative risk-benefit balance of various
treatment strategies that include differing ratios of ESA
dosing and iron supplementation to achieve a particular
Hb level?

K Is there a role, and if so under what circumstances, for
anemia management in CKD patients with iron alone,
without ESA treatment (or with only ESA ‘rescue
therapy’ for particularly low Hb levels)?

K Is

there important

IV iron
supplementation and if so, under what circumstances
and in what CKD patient groups?

long-term toxicity of

K Is IV iron administration, with or without concomitant
ESA dose increases, safe and of clinical benefit, in patients
with ferritin levels 4500–800 ng/ml (4500–800 mg/l)?
K What are the best laboratory tests to guide decisions
regarding initiation, ongoing treatment, and discontinua-
tion of iron supplementation?

K Is current iron and anemia management in pediatric

CKD patients appropriate?

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it

clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contri-
butor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accord-
ingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and
their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no
liability whatsoever
the consequences of any such
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

for

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplemental Table 2: Summary table of RCT examining the effect
of IV iron þ EPO vs. EPO only in patients with HD-CKD (categorical
outcomes).
Supplemental Table 3: Summary table of RCT examining the effect
of IV iron þ EPO vs. EPO only in patients with HD-CKD (continuous
outcomes).
Supplemental Table 4: Summary table of adverse events in RCT
examining the effect of IV iron þ EPO vs. EPO only in patients with
HD-CKD (continuous outcomes).
Supplemental Table 5: Association between cumulative iron dose and
clinical outcome in multivariable analyses.
Supplemental Table 6: Association between iron status and clinical
outcome in multivariable analyses.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/anemia.php

298

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 292–298

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3

Chapter 3: Use of ESAs and other agents* to treat
anemia in CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.35

ESA INITIATION

BACKGROUND
The introduction of recombinant human erythropoietin
(rHuEPO) into clinical practice in the 1980 s was a major
breakthrough in the treatment of the anemia of patients with
CKD. The development of rHuEPO was aimed at replacing
the insufﬁcient endogenous erythropoietin (EPO) produc-
tion related to CKD progression. It remains unclear whether
the main cause of anemia is a loss of kidney EPO production
capacity or a derangement in oxygen sensing, as proposed
more recently.105

In the early years, rHuEPO administration was regarded
by the nephrology community as a beneﬁcial therapy for
long-term dialysis patients whose Hb values fell to extremely
low levels, making them transfusion-dependent. The im-
mediate beneﬁt of rHuEPO in CKD patients with severe
anemia and anemia-related signs and symptoms was clear. In
the reduction in the need for regular blood
addition,
transfusions was
in
transmission of blood-borne viral diseases,
less frequent
such as hepatitis B and C, less allosensitization, predisposing
times or failure to receive a kidney
to prolonged wait
transplant,
transfusional
and less
hemosiderosis.106–109

another major beneﬁt,

transplant

rejection,

resulting

After introduction of rHuEPO into clinical practice its
administration was limited to dialysis patients with the most
severe forms of anemia. Progressively, its use was extended to
the majority of dialysis patients with renal anemia, and
subsequently also to anemic patients with CKD 4–5 in
countries in which the high cost of rHuEPO did not limit the
number of patients eligible for this treatment.

Hb targets also increased progressively, often into the
range of normal values. The idea that anemia should be
corrected completely was based on pathophysiologic con-
siderations and the demonstration by numerous observa-
tional
studies of an inverse association between Hb
concentrations up into the normal range and intermediate
outcomes such as left ventricular hypertrophy,110 as well as
hard patient outcomes such as cardiovascular events,111–113
hospital admission,114 and death.115,116 Of note, a recent
study also showed that CKD 5D patients with naturally
occurring Hb concentrations greater than 12 g/dl (120 g/l)
the
were not at
suggestion drawn from epidemiological studies that anemia

increased mortality risk.117 However,

*Excluding iron which is discussed in Chapter 2.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

should be completely corrected in patients with CKD was not
supported by the Normal Hematocrit Study in CKD 5D
patients118 and several recent randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) performed in large CKD patient cohorts (Supple-
mentary Table 7 online).

In CKD 5D patients Hb concentrations often fall below
8 g/dl (80 g/l) if anemia is untreated, whereas in CKD ND
patients higher Hb concentrations are usual, unless patients
are close to dialysis or have another contributing cause. The
decision to prescribe ESAs should be based on evidence
accrued from RCTs. However substantial heterogeneity exists
in RCTs performed to evaluate ESA therapy, particularly in
relation to classiﬁcation of patients, research design, baseline
Hb, target Hb, clinical outcome measures, and deﬁnitions of
clinically meaningful improvements.

Outcomes of interest in RCTs of ESAs include mortality,
cardiovascular and kidney endpoints, safety, quality of life
(QoL), blood transfusions and cost. QoL outcomes are
particularly important for CKD 5D patients and for some
may be more important
than cardiovascular events or
mortality, since they have relatively short life expectancy
and the symptoms attributable to anemia (e.g., low energy,
fatigue, decreased physical
function, and low exercise
capacity) occur frequently and can be disabling.119 However,
QoL is extremely difﬁcult to quantify as is the clinical
importance of changes measured. Furthermore, unless
assessed under rigorous double-blind conditions, the validity
of QoL measurements is questionable. Avoidance of transfu-
sions is important, as mentioned above.

The guidelines to treat or not to treat the anemia of CKD
are also valid for CKD 4–5T patients. Of note, blood
transfusions may increase the risk of alloreactivity and
rejection episodes after kidney transplantation.120 In addition
a recent randomized trial has shown that early post-kidney
transplant anemia correction by ESAs reduces the progres-
sion of allograft nephropathy, although its effect on hard
outcomes in this patient population remains unknown.121

3.1: Address all correctable causes of anemia (including
iron deﬁciency and inﬂammatory states) prior to
initiation of ESA therapy. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
After diagnosing anemia in a patient with CKD all correctable
causes should be treated before considering ESA therapy.
Above all, this recommendation is based on the observation
iron supplementation given to CKD patients with
that

299

c h a p t e r 3

proven iron deﬁciency or impaired iron availability (‘func-
tional iron deﬁciency’) generally leads to an increase in Hb
(See Chapter 2). However, the correction of other deﬁciency
states also may ameliorate anemia.
In patients with
inﬂammatory diseases, including bacterial and viral infec-
tions, the attenuation of the inﬂammatory status is often
followed by an improvement of Hb.

There are several reasons why correctable causes other
than erythropoietin deﬁciency should be actively sought. As
in any disease state, pathological conditions which can be
cured should be corrected ﬁrst. As examples, ESA treatment
is unlikely to be fully effective in raising Hb concentrations
until either severe systemic bacterial
infections or severe
secondary hyperparathyroidism are appropriately treated
(Supplementary Table 8 online). When several different
factors are thought to contribute to the anemia of CKD, even
though the main underlying cause is impaired kidney EPO
treating all
synthesis, appropriate medical care dictates
underlying causes.

3.2: In initiating and maintaining ESA therapy, we
recommend balancing the potential beneﬁts of redu-
cing blood transfusions and anemia-related symptoms
against the risks of harm in individual patients (e.g.,
stroke, vascular access loss, hypertension). (1B)

RATIONALE
Treatment of severe anemia
Objective evidence to support treatment of Hb concentra-
tions below 9 g/dl (90 g/l) is quite strong because the
transfusion beneﬁts are substantial and the QoL improve-
ments are clinically important. However the safety of ESAs in
treating severe anemia has not been evaluated in large
placebo controlled trials.

The Canadian Erythropoietin Study Group reported
a double-blind RCT of 118 CKD 5HD patients in 1990.
ESA was utilized in patients with Hb concentrations o9 g/dl
(o90 g/l), and three randomly allocated groups were
followed (placebo, target Hb 9.5–11 g/dl [95–110 g/l], high
target Hb 411 g/dl [4110 g/l]).122 Baseline Hb was 7.0 g/dl
(70 g/l) and the mean transfusion requirement was 7
transfusions per year. After 8 weeks, 58% (N ¼ 23/40) in
the placebo group were transfused and only 2.5% (N ¼ 1/40)
was transfused in the group with target Hb of 9.5–11g/dl
(95–110 g/l) and 2.6% (N ¼ 1/38) in the group with target
Hb411g/dl (4110 g/l). After 6 months, signiﬁcant improve-
ments in fatigue, physical function, and 6 minute walking
tests were reported for the low Hb group compared to
placebo, but no improvement was observed comparing low vs
high Hb group. In an open-label RCT of only 83 CKD ND
patients with Hb o10 g/dl (o100 g/l), signiﬁcant improve-
ments in energy and physical function were also reported.123

Treatment of moderate anemia
There are several large RCTs of ESA therapy where baseline
Hb is 410 g/dl (4100 g/l). 118,124–128 The intervention being

tested in these trials is complete correction of anemia with
ESAs, compared to partial correction with ESAs in ﬁve
RCTs118,124–126,128 and to placebo in one.127 A double-blind
design is necessary to accurately assess subjective or clinician-
driven endpoints particularly QoL, starting dialysis, and
giving transfusions. Notably, only 3 of the 6 trials were
double-blind – the Normal Hematocrit Study reported in
1998,118 the Canada-Europe Study reported in 2005,126 and
TREAT reported in 2009.127 The Scandinavian Study,125
CREATE124 and CHOIR128 trials were open label.

The US Normal Hematocrit Trial by Besarab et al.118 was
the ﬁrst of a series of RCTs which cast serious doubt on the
assumption that full anemia correction should be achieved in
the majority of dialysis patients. A cohort of 1233 prevalent
CKD 5HD patients with symptomatic heart
failure or
ischemic heart disease were allocated to either partial
treatment of anemia or
full anemia correction, using
epoetin-alfa. The eventually achieved hematocrit values were
31% and 40%, respectively. In the normal hematocrit group
treated with epoetin there were 183 deaths and 19 myocardial
infarcts, producing 202 primary events, compared to 164
events (150 deaths, 14 myocardial infarcts) in the group in
which anemia was partially corrected with epoetin. The risk
ratio for the primary endpoint was 1.3 (95% CI 0.9–1.9)
which did not satisfy the pre-speciﬁed criterion for statistical
signiﬁcance (even though the nominal p value was 0.03) after
adjusting for interim analyses. The trial was stopped early in
a situation where the primary hypothesis was unlikely to be
proven and the intervention being tested caused harm: 39%
had vascular access clotting in the intervention arm and 29%
in the control arm (P ¼ 0.001).

The double-blind Canada-Europe trial by Parfrey et al.126
of 596 incident CKD 5HD patients without symptomatic
heart disease (18% with diabetic nephropathy) examined the
question whether full anemia correction by epoetin-alfa in
the group randomized to a Hb target of 13.5–14.5 g/dl
(135–145 g/l), as compared to partial treatment of anemia in
the group randomized to a Hb target of 9.5–11.5 g/dl
(95–115 g/l), had a beneﬁcial effect on left ventricular volume
and mass index. The eventually achieved Hb values were 13.1
and 10.8 g/dl (131 and 108 g/l), respectively. There was no
difference in left ventricular volume index or mass index
between the two groups during this 96-week study. Of note,
patients
full anemia correction group had a
signiﬁcantly higher stroke incidence (secondary endpoint)
than patients in the partial
treatment correction group.
However, the absolute numbers of patients with stroke were
very small. As one might expect, the high Hb group received
signiﬁcantly fewer transfusions than the low Hb group, but
extent of the beneﬁt was modest: although 9% in the high Hb
arm received at least one transfusion compared to 19% in the
low Hb arm (P ¼ 0.004) during the 96-week study, the
transfusions per patient per year was 0.3 in the high Hb arm
and 0.7 in the low Hb arm (Po0.0001).129 In addition
improvements in QoL were reported for the
signiﬁcant
a priori selected domains of vitality and of fatigue.126,130

in the

300

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

The goal of the CREATE study by Drueke et al.124 was to
show superiority of
full anemia correction in terms of
cardiovascular events, as compared to partial correction of
anemia, when starting ESA therapy at an earlier stage than
end-stage renal disease (ESRD). In this trial, 603 CKD 3–5
patients (26% with diabetes) were randomly allocated to
either a Hb target of 13.0–15.0 g/dl (130–150 g/l) or a Hb
target of 10.5–11.5 g/dl (105–115 g/l) using epoetin-beta. The
eventually achieved Hb values were 13.5 and 11.6 g/dl (135
and 116 g/l), respectively. Dialysis was required in signiﬁ-
cantly more patients in the high Hb group than in the low Hb
group. However the rate of fall of GFR in the two groups
during the 3 year study was similar. Statistically signiﬁcant
improvements in some domains of QoL, including physical
function and vitality, were observed in the high Hb group,
although these must be interpreted cautiously because the
study was open-label.

reasons. The

The US CHOIR study by Singh et al.128 similarly aimed to
show superiority of full anemia correction by ESA admin-
istration in terms of cardiovascular events and death,
as compared to partial treatment of anemia,
in patients
with CKD not yet on dialysis. In this trial, 1432 CKD 3–4
patients (49% with diabetes) were randomized to Hb targets
of 13.5 g/dl (135 g/l) and 11.3 g/dl (113 g/l) using epoetin-
alfa. Withdrawal rate was high: 17% due to renal replacement
study was
therapy and 21% for other
prematurely stopped after an interim analysis with a median
study duration of 16 months. The achieved Hb values
were 12.6 and 11.3 g/dl (126 and 113 g/l), respectively. At this
time point, 125 patients in the complete anemia correction
group but only 97 patients in the standard correction
group had reached the primary combined cardiovascular
endpoint (P ¼ 0.03). No differences in QoL were observed
comparing the two groups although, again, this ﬁnding must
be interpreted cautiously because the study was open-label.
Finally, the international trial of darbepoetin-alfa in type 2
diabetes and CKD (TREAT) by Pfeffer et al.127 examined
cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in 4038 CKD 3–4
patients. Of note, this is by far the largest ESA trial, and
has the best research design, as it was placebo controlled and
double-blinded. Patients received either darbepoetin-alfa to
achieve a Hb target of 13.0 g/dl (130 g/l) or placebo with
rescue darbepoetin-alfa when the Hb concentration was
o9.0 g/dl (o90 g/l). The achieved Hb values were 12.5 and
10.6 g/dl (125 and 106 g/l), respectively. The median follow-
up duration of the study was 29 months. There were no
differences in the two primary endpoints, which were the
composite outcomes of death or a cardiovascular event (ﬁrst
primary endpoint) and death or ESRD (second primary
endpoint). The hazard ratio for death/composite cardiovas-
cular event was 1.05 (95% CI 0.94–1.17), and for death or
ESRD it was 1.06 (95% CI 0.96–1.19). However there was a
substantial
increased risk of stroke (HR 1.92; 95% CI
1.38–2.68), although the absolute risk of stroke overall was
modest: 5.0% of the high Hb group had a stroke compared to
2.6% in the placebo group (Po0.001). The relative increase

c h a p t e r 3

in risk of stroke was similar in patients with and without a
past history of stroke. As a result, the absolute risk of stroke
was substantial in the 11% of subjects with a prior history of
stroke; 12% in the darbepoetin group compared to 4% in the
placebo group. Venous thrombo-embolic events occurred
signiﬁcantly more frequently in the high Hb arm (2.0%)
compared to the placebo arm (1.1%, P ¼ 0.02). A signal that
normalization of Hb with darbepoetin may be harmful in
patients with a history of malignancy was reported following
a post-hoc analysis: 14/188 (7.4%) of those with a history of
malignancy at baseline died from cancer in the darbepoetin
arm compared to 1/160 (0.6%) (P ¼ 0.002) in the placebo
arm. A statistically signiﬁcant improvement in Functional
Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Fatigue (FACT-fatigue) scores
was reported at week 26 favoring the darbepoetin group, but
the clinical signiﬁcance of this was modest, as 55% of the
high Hb group had a clinically important improvement in
the placebo group.
fatigue score compared to 50% of
Transfusions were prescribed relatively frequently, and more
often in the placebo arm (25%) compared to the high Hb
arm (15%). The harm:beneﬁt trade-off in TREAT was 1
stroke for 5 transfusions prevented by the high Hb target131
(Supplementary Tables 9–19 online). In a large subset of the
TREAT patients QoL was assessed using FACT-fatigue, SF-36,
and EQ-5D through 97 weeks. Compared to placebo,
darbepoetin conferred a consistent, but small improvement
over 97 weeks in fatigue and overall QoL, but none in energy
and physical
function. Interim stroke had a substantial
negative impact on fatigue and physical function.132

Meta-analyses
Assessment of ESAs in CKD using meta-analysis is proble-
matic because of the heterogeneity of patients entered, the
different quality and research designs of the RCTs performed,
and differences in deﬁnitions of endpoints. In addition
abstraction of aggregate data from the reports of RCTs to
populate the meta-analysis data base is also a limitation, as
individual patient data would be preferable. The most recent
meta-analysis133 concluded that higher Hb concentrations in
CKD increases risk for stroke (relative risk [RR] 1.51, 95% CI
1.03–2.21), hypertension (RR 1.67, 95% CI 1.31–2.12), and
vascular access thrombosis (RR 1.33; 95% CI 1.16–1.53), and
may perhaps increase risk for death (RR 1.09; 95% CI
0.99–1.20), serious cardiovascular events (RR 1.15, 95% CI
0.98–1.33) or ESRD (RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.97–1.20). In our
opinion, because of
the heterogeneity of patients and
interventions across studies in the meta-analysis greater
credence should be given to the results of the very large,
placebo controlled, double-blind trial, TREAT, than to the
meta-analyses, in areas where the results differ: TREAT found
no difference between the higher Hb, darbepoetin, group and
the lower Hb, placebo, group for the two primary composite
outcomes (either death or a cardiovascular event, or death or
a renal event).127

The existing meta-analyses of QoL outcomes are further
complicated by inclusion of data from open label studies,

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

301

c h a p t e r 3

different instruments to measure QoL, differences in research
design across RCTs, incomplete reporting as some trials chose
(a priori) speciﬁc domains as trial outcomes, and differences
in the deﬁnition of clinically meaningful improvement in
QoL domains.119 Results
from two systematic reviews
published recently134,135 suggest that improvements in QoL
are maximized in the 10–12 g/dl (100–120 g/l) range. In CKD
ND patients the review focused on energy and physical
function134 and in CKD 5D patients the review focused
on physical
function and the meta-analysis on exercise
tolerance.135

3.4.4: Individualization of therapy is reasonable as some
patients may have improvements in quality of life at
higher Hb concentration and ESA therapy may be
started above 10.0 g/dl (100 g/l). (Not Graded)
3.4.5: For all pediatric CKD patients, we suggest that the
selection of Hb concentration at which ESA therapy
is
includes
consideration of potential beneﬁts (e.g., improve-
ment in quality of life, school attendance/perfor-
mance, and avoidance of transfusion) and potential
harms. (2D)

initiated in the individual patient

3.3: We recommend using ESA therapy with great caution,
if at all, in CKD patients with active malignancy—in
particular when cure is the anticipated outcome—
(1B), a history of stroke (1B), or a history of
malignancy (2C).

RATIONALE
The joint guideline from the American Society of Clinical
Oncology136 and the American Society of Hematology137
recommend using ESA therapy with great caution in patients
with active malignancy, particularly when cure is
the
anticipated outcome. This advice is supported in CKD
patients by the post-hoc analysis in TREAT which demon-
from cancer
strated a signiﬁcantly higher death rate
in the darbepoetin arm in patients with a history of a
malignant condition at baseline as compared with the
placebo arm.127

The relative risk of stroke in patients in the darbepoetin
arm of TREAT was the same in those with and without a
history of stroke (i.e., approximately doubled). However
the absolute risk of stroke was much higher in subjects
with a history of stroke (in both study arms) and the absolute
risk of stroke attributable to high Hb/darbepoetin was
particularly high, 8% in those with a history of stroke vs
1% in those without a history of stroke over 29 months.138
Consequently the Work Group concluded that ESAs should
be used with great caution in those with a prior history
of stroke.

3.4.1: For adult CKD ND patients with Hb concentration
Z10.0 g/dl (Z100 g/l), we suggest that ESA therapy
not be initiated. (2D)

3.4.2: For adult CKD ND patients with Hb concentration
o10.0 g/dl (o100 g/l) we suggest that the decision
whether to initiate ESA therapy be individualized
based on the rate of fall of Hb concentration, prior
response to iron therapy, the risk of needing a
transfusion, the risks related to ESA therapy and the
presence of symptoms attributable to anemia. (2C)
3.4.3: For adult CKD 5D patients, we suggest that ESA
therapy be used to avoid having the Hb concentra-
tion fall below 9.0 g/dl (90 g/l) by starting ESA
therapy when the hemoglobin is between 9.0–10.0 g/
dl (90–100 g/l). (2B)

RATIONALE
In adult CKD-ND patients TREAT demonstrated that the
high Hb darbepoetin arm was associated with harm. In the
patients on placebo with rescue treatment allowed when Hb
fell to below 9.0 g/dl (90 g/l) the achieved median Hb value
was as high as 10.6 g/dl (106 g/l), despite the majority of
patients receiving no or little darbepoetin127 (Supplementary
Tables 15–19 online).

There is no convincing evidence that the active increase of
Hb towards concentrations in the normal range leads to
demonstrable beneﬁt in adult patients with CKD stages 3–5.
Moreover, when Hb falls below 10 g/dl (100 g/l) in these
patients the Work Group were unconvinced that all patients
should have an ESA initiated, particularly as the rate of Hb
fall may be slow. It was suggested that the decision to initiate
ESA therapy in CKD-ND when Hb is 49.0 and o10.0 g/dl
(490 and o100 g/l) should be individualized based on risk
of requiring transfusions and on the presence of symptoms
attributable to anemia, particularly as some patients may be
at higher risk of requiring red-cell transfusions, and some
patients are more prone to developing symptoms and signs
associated with anemia (Supplementary Tables 15–19 online).
In adult hemodialysis patients the rate of fall of Hb is
faster than in ND patients, and if untreated Hb will
the risk of
frequently fall below 8 g/dl
transfusions is high in those HD patients whose Hb falls
below 9 g/dl (90 g/l) the Work Group suggested that ESA
therapy should be used to prevent the Hb concentration from
falling below 9.0 g/dl (90 g/l), which in practice means that
the Hb concentration at which ESA should be initiated
should be between 9.0 and 10.0 g/dl [90 and 100 g/l] (Supple-
mentary Tables 9–14 online).

(80 g/l).122 As

However, there may be subgroups of adult CKD stage 3–5
and 5D patients in whom it may not be wise to let Hb values
(100 g/l), particularly in elderly
descend below 10 g/dl
patients who are more prone to developing symptoms and
signs associated with anemia, and those who are prone to
requiring red-cell transfusions.

Moreover, physical and mental performances and QoL
may be seriously compromised in adult CKD patients with
severe anemia. RCTs supporting registration of epoetin-alfa
for the treatment of anemia in dialysis patients demonstrated
that ESA treatment of subjects with a Hb of o 10 g/dl
(o100 g/l) to a Hb target of approximately 10–12 g/dl

302

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

(100–120 g/l) improved patient-reported physical function-
ing.134,135 The question of the Hb value above which there is
no further
remains
unsolved, especially for CKD-ND patients without diabetes
and CKD-5D patients with or without diabetes.

in these parameters

improvement

In anemic children with CKD there are no RCTs examining
the effects of ESA administration on hard outcomes. Therefore,
any suggestion for Hb targets in this subgroup of CKD patients
has to rely on results obtained in the adult CKD patient
population and on clinical experience in the pediatric setting.
The upper and lower Hb targets are opinion-based, in keeping
with the lack of pediatric speciﬁc evidence. There are a number
of factors unique to children that make exclusive reliance on
evidence in adults inappropriate such as age-speciﬁc variation of
normal Hb concentrations as well as QoL, growth, develop-
mental, and psychological differences between children and
adults.58 Limited data suggest that children with CKD and a Hb
less than 9.9 g/dl (99 g/l) are at increased risk for mortality,139
left ventricular hypertrophy,140,141 and/or decreased exercise
capacity142 compared to those with a Hb greater than 9.9 g/dl
(99 g/l). When evaluated as a continuous variable, hematocrit
(Hct) was linked directly to measures of improved health and
physical
functioning in a health based QoL questionnaire
administered to a pediatric CKD population.143

ESA MAINTENANCE THERAPY

3.5.1: In general, we suggest that ESAs not be used to
maintain Hb concentration above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l)
in adult patients with CKD. (2C)

3.5.2: Individualization of therapy will be necessary as
some patients may have improvements in quality of
life at Hb concentration above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) and
will be prepared to accept the risks. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
The suggestion to set the upper Hb target in general to values
r11.5 g/dl (r115 g/l) in adult CKD patients is based on the
interpretation of the combined results of the recent major
RCTs that there may be more harm than beneﬁt at higher Hb
concentrations. Of note, the update of the 2006 KDOQI
anemia guideline in 2007 had already led to the recommen-
dation to limit the upper Hb target to 12 g/dl (120 g/l), not to
exceed 13 g/dl (130 g/l).51 The present suggestion not to
exceed in general a Hb limit of 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) has been
inﬂuenced by the fact that the upper boundary of the Hb
concentration in the control group of the major ESA RCTs
usually did not exceed 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l); no data exist on the
beneﬁts of Hb targets between 11.5 and 13.0 g/dl (115 and
130 g/l); and high Hb targets are associated with adverse
outcomes.

The Work Group recognized that some patients experi-
ence an improvement in QoL when the Hb value is above
11.5 g/dl
supported by the
heterogeneity of QoL outcomes in the major RCTs: in the
double-blind Canada-Europe Study and in open label

(115 g/l). This opinion is

c h a p t e r 3

CREATE study statistically signiﬁcant improvements in some
QoL domains that may be clinically important were reported
with higher Hb values.124,126,130 In the double-blind TREAT
study the QoL beneﬁts of higher Hb were modest127,132 and
in open label CHOIR study no beneﬁts were observed128
(Supplementary Tables 9–19 online).

As all CKD patients in TREAT study also had type 2
diabetes, it is possible that improvements in QoL may be
more difﬁcult to achieve in this subgroup of patients than in
those not suffering from diabetes.

An increase of Hb above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) towards 13 g/dl
(130 g/l) may also be justiﬁed in individual patients with a
high bleeding tendency since this results in lower transfusion
needs, as shown by 8 RCTs.133

Obviously, increasing Hb above 11.5 g/dl (115 g/l) up to
13 g/dl (130 g/l) has to be weighed against the probability of
increased harm. This perspective needs
to be clearly
explained to each patient who wishes to examine the possible
beneﬁts of more complete anemia correction.

3.6: In all adult patients, we recommend that ESAs not be
used to intentionally increase the Hb concentration
above 13 g/dl (130 g/l). (1A)

RATIONALE
The strong recommendation not to aim for Hb increases to
concentrations 413 g/dl (4130 g/l) is based on the inter-
pretation of the combined results of the recent major RCTs
showing more harm than beneﬁt with higher Hb targets, as
compared to lower Hb targets, including increased risks for
stroke,126,127 hypertension,133 and vascular access thrombosis
(in hemodialysis patients).118 TREAT did not demonstrate
signiﬁcant differences for serious cardiovascular or kidney
events comparing correction of anemia with darbepoetin to
the placebo group.127 Thus the increased risk of kidney events
reported in CREATE124 and of cardiovascular events reported
in CHOIR128 were not substantiated in the much larger
TREAT trial.127 However, a recent meta-analysis point
estimate indicated increased mortality at higher Hb target133
(Supplementary Tables 9–19 online).

to concentrations 413 g/dl

An exception to the recommendation to avoid Hb
(4130 g/l) might
increases
however be made for patients with comorbidities that are
normally associated with elevated Hb levels (e.g., cyanotic
heart disease).

3.7: In all pediatric CKD patients receiving ESA therapy,
we suggest that the selected Hb concentration be in
the range of 11.0 to 12.0 g/dl (110 to 120 g/l). (2D)

RATIONALE
As mentioned above, in children with CKD observational
data associates high Hb with better survival139 and/or
increased exercise capacity.142 Moreover, a recent North
American Pediatric Renal Trials and Collaborative Studies
(NAPRTCS) retrospective analysis done on pediatric CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

303

c h a p t e r 3

patients found an increased risk of hospitalization in children
with low Hb compared to those with normal Hb.144
However, based on recent experience with the adult CKD
patient population, caution is warranted with any extrapola-
tion from observational treatment studies to conclusions on
hard outcomes. This being said, direct extrapolation of the
results
is not
appropriate given the differences
in causes of CKD,
contributions of age to growth and development, and impact
of comorbidities on outcomes.

to pediatric patients

from adult

trials

ESA DOSING

3.8.1: We recommend determining the initial ESA dose
using the patient’s Hb concentration, body weight,
and clinical circumstances. (1D)

3.8.2: We recommend that ESA dose adjustments be made
based on the patient’s Hb concentration, rate of
change in Hb concentration, current ESA dose and
clinical circumstances. (1B)

3.8.3: We suggest decreasing ESA dose in preference to
withholding ESA when a downward adjustment of
Hb concentration is needed. (2C)
3.8.4: Re-evaluate ESA dose if (Not Graded):

K The patient suffers an ESA-related adverse event
K The patient has an acute or progressive illness
that may cause ESA hyporesponsiveness (see
Recommendations 3.13.1–3.13.2)

RATIONALE
The initiation of ESA therapy, ESA dose adjustments and
rates of changes have remained similar to those outlined in
the 2006 KDOQI Anemia Guideline.50 In general,
the
objective of initial ESA therapy is a rate of increase in Hb
concentrations of 1.0 to 2.0 g/dl (10 to 20 g/l) per month.
This is consistent with the ﬁndings in ESA trials of CKD-
associated anemia where the mean initial rates of Hb
concentration increase were of 0.7 to 2.5 g/dl (7 to 25 g/l)
in the ﬁrst 4 weeks. However, a rise in Hb of greater than
2.0 g/dl (20 g/l) over a 4-week period should be avoided.

The rate of

increase varies greatly as a function of
individual ESA responsiveness. Poor responders are more
likely to be female, to have a history of cardiovascular disease
(CVD), to have signs of iron deﬁciency and inﬂammation,
and to be overweight.145 The response also depends on initial
dose, dosing frequency, and route of administration. The
dependence on dosing frequency and route of administration
concerns epoetin-alfa, epoetin-beta, and darbepoetin but
not CERA (continuous erythropoietin receptor activator
[methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin-beta]). When ESAs
were introduced into clinical practice over 20 years ago,
hypertension was frequently noted in the ﬁrst 3 months after
initiating therapy in severely anemic patients, and seizures in
rare instances. It is possible, although not proven, that these
events were related to a too rapid rate of increase in Hb
concentrations.

Epoetin-alfa or epoetin-beta dosing usually starts at 20 to
50 IU/kg body weight three times a week. Darbepoetin-alfa
dosing usually starts at 0.45 mg/kg body weight once weekly
by subcutaneous (SC) or IV administration, or 0.75 mg/kg
body weight once every 2 weeks by SC administration. CERA
dosing starts at 0.6 mg/kg body weight once every 2 weeks by
SC or IV administration for CKD ND and CKD 5D patients,
respectively, or 1.2 mg/kg body weight once every 4 weeks by
SC administration for CKD ND patients. Higher baseline Hb
concentrations require lower initial ESA doses, except for
CERA for which there is no initial dose change. In patients
with a history of CVD, thrombo-embolism or seizures, or in
those with high blood pressure, the initial doses should be in
the lower range. Epoetin-alfa or epoetin-beta dosage may
subsequently be increased every 4 weeks by a weekly dose of
3 (cid:2) 20 IU/kg if the increase of Hb is not adequate. Increases
in dose should not be made more frequently than once a
month. If the Hb is increasing and approaching 11.5 g/dl
(115 g/l), the dose should be reduced by approximately 25%.
If the Hb continues to increase, doses should be temporarily
withheld until the Hb begins to decrease, at which point
therapy should be reinitiated at a dose approximately 25%
below the previous dose. Alternatively, one could simply
repeat the Hb determination again in a shorter interval (e.g.,
weekly) and interpret any further rise, in particular in light of
reticulocyte counts and their direction, before considering
holding the dose. If the Hb increases by more than 1.0 g/dl
(10 g/l) in any 2-week period, the dose should be decreased
by approximately 25%. See Recommendations 3.13.1 to
3.15.2 regarding ESA hyporesponsiveness and loss of ESA
response (Supplementary Table 20 online).

Dose adjustments may be necessary once the Hb target
range has been reached. Note that
in clinical practice,
achieved Hb values may easily rise above or fall below the
optimal Hb limits. Therefore, cautious dose adaptations are
required. In general, ESA dose adjustments are made only
after the ﬁrst 4 weeks after ESA initiation. The frequency of
ESA dose adjustment should be determined by the rate of
increase in Hb concentrations during initial ESA therapy, the
stability of Hb concentrations during maintenance ESA
therapy, and the frequency of Hb testing. The minimum
interval between ESA dose adjustments in the outpatient
setting generally is 2 weeks because the effect of most dose
changes will not be seen within a shorter interval. ESA doses
should be decreased, but not necessarily held, when a
downward adjustment of Hb concentration is needed.
Withholding ESA doses, particularly for long periods, may
lead to a delayed decrease in Hb concentrations to less than
target range. Such a decrease may initiate periodic cycling of
Hb concentrations at greater than and less than the target Hb
range.146 Hb variability has been found to be an independent
predictor of mortality in a large US CKD 5HD patient
population147 although this observation could not be
conﬁrmed in a large European CKD 5HD patient cohort.148
Each time a patient with CKD is hospitalized the treating
clinician should evaluate or reevaluate the patient’s ESA

304

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

requirements. Disease states such as severe infections or post-
surgery may modify the ESA responsiveness profoundly. In
case of profound anemia and markedly impaired ESA
response a red cell
transfusion may be preferred to
administering ESAs or increasing ESA dose.

ESA ADMINISTRATION

3.9.1: For CKD 5HD patients and those on hemoﬁltration
or hemodiaﬁltration therapy, we suggest either
intravenous or
subcutaneous administration of
ESA. (2C)

3.9.2: For CKD ND and CKD 5PD patients, we suggest

subcutaneous administration of ESA. (2C)

RATIONALE
As outlined in the 2006 KDOQI guideline,50 the route of
administration should be determined by the CKD stage,
treatment setting, efﬁcacy considerations, and the class of
ESA used. Among CKD 5D patients undergoing intermittent
hemodialysis or hemoﬁltration therapy, either SC or IV
administration is possible. In the outpatient setting, SC
the only routinely feasible route of
administration is
administration for patients with CKD 3–5 or on peritoneal
dialysis treatment. Among short-acting ESAs, efﬁcacy of SC
administration in patients with CKD 5HD may be superior
to that of IV administration, as shown by a large multicenter
RCT in hemodialysis patients.149 However, another RCT of
much smaller sample size did not ﬁnd an advantage of SC
over IV administration in CKD 5HD patients.150 Among
long-acting ESAs, efﬁcacy of SC compared with IV admin-
to be equivalent at examined dosing
istration appears
frequencies.151–153 Furthermore, CKD 5HD patients
in
general prefer IV to SC administration of ESAs because SC
administration may be painful (Supplementary Tables 21–24
online).

Frequency of administration

3.10: We suggest determining the frequency of ESA
treatment
tolerance

administration based on CKD stage,
setting, efﬁcacy considerations, patient
and preference, and type of ESA. (2C)

RATIONALE
The frequency of ESA administration depends on considera-
tions of efﬁcacy, convenience and comfort. Maximum
efﬁcacy occurs within dosing intervals that are ESA class
speciﬁc. For example, in patients on hemodialysis treatment
receiving SC or IV short-acting ESA therapy, epoetin-alfa
efﬁcacy decreases when the dosing is extended from 3 times
weekly to once-weekly administration,154 and even more so
when the dosing intervals are extended to every other week
administration.155 Among long-acting ESAs, darbepoetin-
alfa appears to have maximum efﬁcacy when administered
every 2 weeks, and methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin-beta
(CERA) every 4 weeks.156 When converting short-acting

c h a p t e r 3

ESAs to long-acting ESAs, differences in drug half-life need to
be considered. For the sake of comparison, 3 times weekly
administered epoetin-alfa to darbepoetin-alfa given only
once monthly resulted in a decreased frequency of injections
needed to maintain Hb concentrations of CKD patients
within an accepted target range157 (Supplementary Tables
25–28 online).

When converting a patient from one ESA to another the
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of
the new ESA need to be taken into consideration. The
manufacturers have provided conversions from epoetin-
alfa or epoetin-beta to darbepoetin-alfa or CERA. Note that
the conversion ratios from epoetin to darbepoetin are
non-linear.

When using different types of approved ESAs (biosimilars
that have received approval by ofﬁcial regulatory bodies such
as FDA and European Medicines Agency [EMA]),
license
information provided by companies should also be taken into
account.

TYPE OF ESA

3.11.1: We recommend choosing an ESA based on the
balance of pharmacodynamics, safety information,
clinical outcome data, costs, and availability. (1D)
that have been
approved by an independent regulatory agency.
Speciﬁcally for
true
biosimilar products should be used. (2D)

3.11.2: We suggest using only ESAs

‘copy’ versions of ESAs,

RATIONALE
As outlined above, the choice of short-acting or long-acting
ESAs needs to take into account a number of different aspects,
encompassing patient-oriented issues and country-speciﬁc
considerations. At present, there is no evidence that any given
ESA brand is superior to another in terms of patient
outcomes, with the historical exception of the temporary
increase in the incidence of antibody-mediated pure red cell
aplasia (PRCA) about 10–20 years ago, which was associated
with SC administration of an epoetin-alfa formulation
available in Europe, but not in the United States.158,159 It is
the considered opinion of the Work Group that the likelihood
of differences in clinical outcomes among ESA brands is low,
although there is no robust evidence supporting this
assumption (Supplementary Tables 29–32 online).

At present, a number of different types of short-acting or
long-acting ESAs are available worldwide, including original
formulations, biosimilars, and ‘copy’ ESAs which have not
been exposed to the rigor of scientiﬁc evaluation as mandated
by the regulatory agencies prior to approval. Their accessi-
bility and costs vary from country to country. True
biosimilars, as deﬁned by the EMA, are not identical to the
originator products, but they have undergone a minimum
number of
‘non-inferiority’
studies to gain marketing authorization in Europe. In other
countries outside Europe, some ‘copy’ ESA products have

regulatory ‘equivalence’ or

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

305

c h a p t e r 3

been marketed that may not have undergone the same
rigorous testing.160 Since patient safety is one of the most
important drug treatment issues, only biosimilars approved
by an independent regulatory agency should be used.

numbers of patients receiving either short-acting ESA thrice
weekly or darbepoetin once weekly required dose adjust-
ments (44% and 49%, respectively).162

EVALUATING AND CORRECTING PERSISTENT
FAILURE TO REACH OR MAINTAIN INTENDED
HEMOGLOBIN CONCENTRATION

Frequency of monitoring

3.12.1: During the initiation phase of ESA therapy,
measure Hb concentration at least monthly. (Not
Graded)

3.12.2: For CKD ND patients, during the maintenance
phase of ESA therapy measure Hb concentration at
least every 3 months. (Not Graded)

3.12.3: For CKD 5D patients, during the maintenance
phase of ESA therapy measure Hb concentration at
least monthly. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
ESA initiation phase. The suggestion to monitor Hb values
at least monthly in patients in whom ESA therapy is started is
intended to provide sufﬁcient surveillance information to
assist in achieving and maintaining desired Hb concentra-
tions safely and follows common practice.50 The minimum
interval between ESA dose adjustments is 2 weeks because the
effect of most dose changes will not be seen within a shorter
interval. Consideration of an ESA dose adjustment is based
on the next projected Hb concentration. Because the accuracy
of projection (extrapolation) increases with the number of
contributing data points, the frequency of Hb monitoring is
likely to be an important determinant of the accuracy of ESA
dose adjustment. However, evidence to support this line of
reasoning is indirect. Several RCTs have randomized CKD
5HD patients with target-range Hb concentrations to a
change in frequency of ESA administration, a change in ESA
class, or both. RCTs that have monitored Hb values weekly
and adjusted ESA doses as frequently as every 2 weeks have
achieved stable Hb concentrations early after randomiza-
tion.152,161,162 In contrast, an RCT that monitored Hb
concentrations and considered ESA dose adjustment monthly
required 6 to 9 months to stabilize Hb concentrations after
randomization,163 but mean Hb concentration remained
within the target range for that trial.

ESA maintenance phase. Within the recommended ranges
for monitoring and dose adjustment, unstable Hb concen-
tration, inappropriate high or low Hb concentration, and
hemodialysis favor shorter intervals of ESA administration,
whereas stable Hb concentration, within target Hb concen-
tration, peritoneal dialysis, CKD 3–5, and minimizing
laboratory resource utilization favor longer intervals for
long-acting ESAs such as darbepoetin. The frequency of ESA
dose adjustment is unaffected by length of action: during an
8-week period with weekly Hb monitoring, about equal

Initial ESA hyporesponsiveness

3.13.1: Classify patients as having ESA hyporesponsiveness
if they have no increase in Hb concentration from
baseline after the ﬁrst month of ESA treatment on
appropriate weight-based dosing. (Not Graded)

3.13.2: In patients with ESA hyporesponsiveness, we
suggest avoiding repeated escalations in ESA dose
beyond double the initial weight-based dose. (2D)

Subsequent ESA hyporesponsiveness

3.14.1: Classify patients as having acquired ESA hypor-
esponsiveness if after treatment with stable doses
of ESA, they require 2 increases in ESA doses up to
50% beyond the dose at which they had been stable
in an effort to maintain a stable Hb concentration.
(Not Graded)

3.14.2: In patients with acquired ESA hyporesponsiveness,
we suggest avoiding repeated escalations in ESA
dose beyond double the dose at which they had
been stable. (2D)

Management of poor ESA responsiveness

3.15.1: Evaluate patients with either initial or acquired
for speciﬁc

ESA hyporesponsiveness and treat
causes of poor ESA response. (Not Graded)
3.15.2: For patients who remain hyporesponsive despite
correcting treatable causes, we suggest individuali-
zation of therapy, accounting for relative risks and
beneﬁts of (2D):

K decline in Hb concentration
K continuing ESA,

if needed to maintain Hb
concentration, with due consideration of the
doses required, and
K blood transfusions

intense interest, all

RATIONALE
Relative resistance to the effect of ESAs is a common problem
in managing the anemia of patients with CKD and remains
the subject of
the more since ESA
hyporesponsiveness has been found to be among the most
powerful predictors of the risk of cardiovascular events and
mortality.164 Recently a report from TREAT assessed the
initial Hb response to darbepoetin after two weight-based
doses at 2 weekly intervals, in 1872 patients with CKD and
diabetes.145 Patients with a poor response, (the lowest
quartile, who had o2% change in Hb concentration after
1 month), had higher rates of the composite cardiovascular
events (adjusted HR 1.31, 95% CI 1.09–1.59), compared to
those with a better response. Although this differential effect
may be related to comorbidity in hyporesponsive patients,
nonetheless it is possible that the high ESA doses used in

306

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

hyporesponsive patients may be toxic. Though not empiri-
cally tested, per se, the deﬁnition of initial hyporesponsive-
ness agreed upon by the Work Group is derived from the
secondary analysis of the TREAT study.145 Since a o2%
increase in the Hb concentration is likely to be within the
variability range of Hb values in individual patients, this
value is considered as 00no increase.00 The deﬁnition of initial
hyporesponsiveness relies on presently accepted ESA starting
doses, as indicated in the Rationale under 3.8.1–3.8.4. Of
note, weight-based doses for darbepoetin do not differ for IV
or SC routes, but do differ for epoetin-alfa.

in the USA the label

If lower initial dosages than those used in TREAT are
chosen, the diagnosis of hyporesponsiveness must take this
for
into account. For example,
darbepoetin now recommends a starting dose of 0.45 mg
per kg per four weeks, much lower than the dose used in
TREAT or in Europe (i.e., 0.45 mg per kg per week or 0.75 mg
per kg per two weeks). If such lower starting doses are used,
repeated escalations in ESA dose should be allowed to reach
double the weight-based dose used in TREAT.

Although the distinction between initial ESA hyporespon-
siveness and acquired partial or complete loss of ESA
responsiveness in a patient with already treated, stable
anemia is somewhat artiﬁcial, it is useful in our opinion
for clinical practice.

In the Normal Hematocrit Study both the high Hb and the
low Hb groups revealed an inverse relationship between
achieved Hb and the primary outcome (death or myocardial
infarction).118 This is consistent with the idea that those
patients who failed to achieve the target Hb were unable to do
so because comorbid condition(s) existed that prevented
achievement of this target. Thus, hyporesponsiveness may just
have been a marker for adverse outcomes, although the
possibility that high ESA doses used in hyporesponsive
patients are toxic in themselves cannot be excluded. Dose-
targeting bias has been reported by the Kidney Disease Clinical
Studies Initiative Hemodialysis Study (HEMO) investiga-
tors.165 In this RCT ESRD patients, randomly allocated to
either high or low quantity of dialysis, as measured by Kt/V,
demonstrated an inverse relationship between achieved Kt/V
and mortality. The interpretation was that patients with
comorbid conditions were unable to achieve higher Kt/V and
that comorbidity predisposed these patients to earlier death.
The same principle as used with deﬁning hyporespon-
siveness to darbepoetin could be applied to the early response
to other short-acting ESAs but cannot be applied to longer
acting ESAs such as CERA. In that case, evaluating the Hb
response after a time period of 2 months appears to be
appropriate. Early ESA hyporesponsiveness or the subsequent
occurrence of hyporesponsiveness in CKD patients with
previously stable Hb values should lead to an intensive search
for potentially correctable factors which might be causally
involved. Unfortunately, besides iron deﬁciency, there are
only few other easily reversible factors that contribute to ESA
hyporesponsiveness, as shown in Table 3. If other such factors
are identiﬁed they should be treated as well. Although most

c h a p t e r 3

Table 3 | Potentially correctable versus non correctable
factors involved in the anemia of CKD, in addition to ESA
deficiency

Easily correctable

Potentially correctable Impossible to correct

Absolute iron deficiency
Vitamin B12/folate
deficiency
Hypothyroidism
ACEi/ARB
Non-adherence

Infection/
inflammation
Underdialysis
Hemolysis
Bleeding
Hyperparathyroidism
PRCA
Malignancy
Malnutrition

Hemoglobinopathies
Bone marrow
disorders

ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin-receptor blocker;
PRCA, pure red cell aplasia.

disorders associated with hyporesponsiveness are readily
apparent, hyporesponsive patients should be evaluated for
coexisting oncological or hematologic disorders. They
include hematological and non-hematological malignancies
as well as such diverse hematological conditions as thalasse-
mia, sickle cell disease or the anemia associated with other
chronic diseases. Myelodysplastic syndromes are a particular
case. If at all ESA responsive, the anemia in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome responds more slowly. Therefore,
1 month may be too short to deﬁne hyporesponsiveness in
this and several other conditions. Moreover, patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes may need higher ESA doses.
Finally, a rare disorder, PRCA, deserves special consideration
(see 3.17.1–3.17.3). The estimation of loss of ESA response
also may require a longer observation time in some patients.
Note that poor ESA response, either in the initial correction
phase or subsequently, is most often a transient condition.
Complete loss of response is exceptional. Poor responders
should periodically be re-tested for responsiveness, including
after the correction of treatable causes of hyporesponsiveness.
It is important to note that the dosing requirements may
differ substantially between children and adults. Registry data
from NAPRTCS showed that young children require higher
doses of ESA than adults, ranging from 275 U/kg/week to
350 U/kg/week for infants and 200–250 U/kg/week for older
children.166 Another retrospective analysis among patients on
chronic hemodialysis found that children and adolescents
required higher absolute doses of ESA than adults to maintain
target hemoglobin levels, despite the lower mean body weight
of the children.167 Unfortunately, there are no RCTs that
establish the appropriate dosing of ESA in children. Future
research to establish pediatric ESA dosing guidelines is needed,
especially for infants and younger children.

There may be toxicity from high doses of ESA, as
suggested, though not proven, by recent post-hoc analyses
of major ESA RCTs,145,168 especially in conjunction with the
achievement of high Hb levels.169 Therefore, in general ESA
dose escalation should be avoided. The Work Group
suggestions for initial and acquired hyopresponsiveness imply
that maximal doses should be no greater than four times
initial weight-based appropriate doses.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

307

c h a p t e r 3

Table 4 | Practical approach in presence of ESA
hyporesponsiveness

Tests

Finding and action

1. Check adherence
2. Reticulocyte count

If poor, attempt to improve (if self-injection)
If 4130,000/ml, look for blood loss or
hemolysis: endoscopy, colonoscopy,
hemolysis screen
If low, replenish

Serum vitamin B12,
folate
Iron status
Serum PTH
Serum CRP

If low, replenish iron
If elevated, manage hyperparathyroidism
If elevated, check for and treat infection or
inflammation
If underdialyzed, improve dialysis efficiency
If yes, consider reducing dose or
discontinuing drug
3. Bone marrow biopsy Manage condition diagnosed e.g., dyscrasia,
infiltration, fibrosis

Underdialysis
ACEi/ARB use

ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin-receptor blocker;
CRP, C-reactive protein; PTH, parathyroid hormone.

In practice, Tables 3 and 4 can guide to diagnose and
correct ESA hyporesponsiveness. In patients in whom all
correctable causes have been maximally treated but who
remain hyporesponsive, ESA therapy may be continued
cautiously at doses up to 4 times the initial dose to prevent a
further decline in Hb concentration. Red cell transfusions can
be used to prevent or treat anemia-related symptoms and
signs. The treatment strategy needs to take into account each
patient’s anemia tolerance and potential beneﬁts and risks
linked to increases in Hb values solely obtained by high ESA
dosing.

Given the disproportionate burden of morbidity and
mortality that the hyporesponsive patient population bears
and the ESA expense that hyporesponsiveness engenders,
further research is necessary on the causes and management
of hyporesponsiveness.

ADJUVANT THERAPIES

3.16.1: We recommend not using androgens as an adjuvant

to ESA treatment. (1B)

3.16.2: We suggest not using adjuvants to ESA treatment
including vitamin C, vitamin D, vitamin E, folic
acid, L-carnitine, and pentoxifylline. (2D)

RATIONALE
Several adjuvant treatments have been proposed, either with
the goal of limiting the use of more expensive ESA therapy or
to improve ESA responsiveness.

Androgens. The use of androgens for treatment of anemia
was suggested long before rHuEPO became available in
clinical practice. Androgens were used regularly in many
centers in the treatment of anemia in dialysis patients
despite the need for intramuscular (IM) injection and a
variety of adverse events,
including acne, virilization,
priapism, liver dysfunction, injection-site pain, and risk for

peliosis hepatis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The three
RCTs that tested androgens in combination with ESA therapy
in CKD 5HD patients were all small short-term studies.
Currently
recommended Hb concentrations were not
achieved, and in two of them the ESA doses used were lower
than current practice.170–172 The studies did not enroll
patients with ESA hyporesponsiveness, so the effect of
androgens on hyporesponsiveness is unknown. The risks of
androgen therapy and their uncertain beneﬁt on Hb
concentration or clinical outcomes argue against their use
as an ESA adjuvant.

Vitamin C. Vitamin C has been reported to increase the
release of
iron from ferritin and the reticuloendothelial
system and increase iron utilization during heme synth-
esis.173,174 A recent meta-analysis of vitamin C use in CKD
5HD175 and a more recent small RCT176 concluded that
vitamin C may result in larger increases in Hb and may limit
the use of ESAs. In seven trials, patients generally had
functional iron deﬁciency and in three studies they had EPO
hyporesponsiveness (variously deﬁned).176–178 However, the
number of patients studied was insufﬁcient to address the
safety of this intervention. Thus the long-term safety of IV
ascorbic acid in HD patients remains undeﬁned, and whether
secondary oxalosis should be a concern.

Convincing data do not exist for other potential adjuvants
including vitamin D, vitamin E, folic acid, L-carnitine and
pentoxifylline. Several anecdotal reports, small case series,
and nonrandomized studies, primarily in CKD 5HD patients,
have been published, but do not provide sufﬁcient evidence
upon which to base a recommendation. Future RCTs are
clearly needed for ESA adjuvants.

EVALUATION FOR PURE RED CELL APLASIA (PRCA)

3.17.1: Investigate for possible antibody-mediated PRCA
when a patient
for
more than 8 weeks develops the following (Not
Graded):

receiving ESA therapy

K Sudden rapid decrease in Hb concentration at
the rate of 0.5 to 1.0 g/dl (5 to 10 g/l) per week
OR requirement of transfusions at the rate of
approximately 1 to 2 per week, AND

K Normal platelet and white cell counts, AND
K Absolute reticulocyte count less than 10,000/ml
3.17.2: We recommend that ESA therapy be stopped in
patients who develop antibody-mediated PRCA.
(1A)

3.17.3: We recommend peginesatide be used to treat
patients with antibody-mediated PRCA. (1B)

RATIONALE
Rarely, patients undergoing ESA therapy develop antibodies
that neutralize both ESA and endogenous erythropoietin.
The
is
characterized by the sudden development of severe transfu-
sion-dependent anemia. Rapid recognition, appropriate

antibody-mediated PRCA,

resulting syndrome,

308

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

evaluation, and prompt intervention can be effective in
limiting the consequences of this life-threatening condition.
Antibody-mediated PRCA, although rare in patients admi-
nistered ESAs, received urgent attention after 1998. Between
1989 and 1998, three reports described the development of
PRCA in only a small number of patients with CKD
administered ESAs. Reports of PRCA increased sharply in
1998 and reached a peak in 2002.159,179 These reports were
associated with SC administration of an epoetin-alfa
formulation not available in the United States. After removal
of this formulation from the market, by 2004, the incidence
of new antibody-mediated PRCA had decreased to pre-1998
levels.
Isolated cases of PRCA have been observed in
association with the use of other ESAs.159,179,180 Outside this
historical episode the incidence rate of PRCA with SC use of
all other forms of SC-administered ESA is estimated to be 0.5
cases/10,000 patient-years.158 Antibody-associated PRCA
stemming from IV administration of ESAs is rare and has
only been reported anecdotally.181

Recommendations based on expert opinions have been
published to guide the workup and therapy of patients
suspected to have antibody-mediated PRCA.179,182–184 The
two main distinguishing features of antibody-mediated
PRCA are the associated decline in blood Hb concentration
of approximately 4 g/dl (40 g/l) per month, and a decrease in
the number of circulating reticulocytes to o10,000/ml of
blood.185 Bone marrow biopsy characteristically shows
reduced numbers or absence of erythroblasts. The deﬁnitive
diagnosis is dependent upon demonstration of the presence
of neutralizing antibodies against erythropoietin. Evidence
for parvovirus infection as an alternative cause of PRCA
should be sought and excluded.

levels.

to recover

to pre-treatment

Following a diagnosis of antibody-mediated PRCA,
patients should stop treatment with the incriminated ESA
immediately and not resume treatment with the same or
another EPO-derived ESA.184 Immunosuppressive therapy
may hasten the disappearance of circulating antibodies in
patients with EPO-induced PRCA, and allow endogenous
In a
erythropoiesis
retrospective study of 47 patients who developed PRCA
during EPO therapy (primarily epoetin brand ‘Eprexs’ in
Europe), 29 of 37 patients (78%) who received immunosup-
pressive therapy recovered, whereas none of the nine patients
who did not receive immunosuppressive therapy recov-
ered.185 Red cell production recovered only when patients
received immunosuppressive
to
epoetins or darbepoetin-alfa can re-induce the formation of
antibodies.186 Anaphylactoid reactions after repeated injec-
tions of epoetin- or darbepoetin-alfa have been reported in a
patient with pure red-cell aplasia.187 A novel approach to the
treatment of this condition using a synthetic, peptide-based
erythropoietin-receptor agonist (peginesatide) has generated
optimistic results,188 and has the advantage of avoiding
immunosuppressive therapy.

treatment. Re-exposure

The recognition of antibody-mediated PRCA in patients
treated with recombinant epoetins has underscored the need

c h a p t e r 3

for full clinical documentation and post-marketing surveil-
lance with newer ESAs and biosimilar products, as well as
therapeutic recombinant proteins in general.189

If a decision to treat with peginesatide is taken,
it
can be initiated at a dose of 0.05 to 0.075 mg/kg body weight
by subcutaneous injection every 4 weeks. Subsequently,
the dose needs to be adjusted to reach the desired target
Hb value.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
The following research questions have arisen during the
deliberations of the Work Group, and further research will be
necessary to answer them.

K In cohort studies moderate anemia is associated with an
increased incidence of cardiovascular events. Is anemia
really a risk factor for these events or is it a marker for
some other cardiovascular risk factor(s)?

K There is uncertainty about optimal Hb targets for ESA
therapy. What is the risk-benefit ratio of low Hb targets
o10.0 g/dl (o100 g/l) or high targets of 11.5–13.0 g/dl
(115–130 g/l),
targets of
10.0–11.5 g/dl (100–115 g/l)?

compared to conventional

K These guidelines have

stressed individualization of
anemia therapy. Should the objective of anemia therapy
in clinical outcomes (provided Hb
be improvement
than
concentration is o13.0 g/dl [o130 g/l]) rather
achievement of a specified Hb target range? Should these
outcomes include improvements in QoL, and if so, what
defines clinically important improvements?

K As the relationship between ESA responsiveness and
hard patient outcomes may be the result of co-morbidity
or of high ESA dose, what is the impact of high vs low
dose on clinical outcomes
in ESA hyporesponsive
patients?

K Is the risk-benefit ratio of anemia correction similar in

non-diabetic and diabetic CKD patients?

K Is there a difference in adverse clinical outcomes com-

paring IV and SC routes of administration?

K Are the risk-benefit ratios for biosimilars comparable to

current ESAs?

K What is the pathogenesis of cerebrovascular and vascular
toxicity associated with normalization of Hb using ESAs?
K Are CKD patients with cancer or a cancer history who are
receiving ESA therapy at higher cardiovascular risk than
non-CKD patients with cancer or a cancer history?

K What

is the effect of vitamin C administration in
functional iron deficiency and what is the clinical impact
of increased oxalate levels?

K There appears to be differences in anemia treatment
outcomes between different geographic regions. What are
the reasons for this?

K What are the risks and benefits of ESA administration on

outcomes in anemic children with CKD?

K What are the appropriate, weight-based, dosing regimens
for the younger pediatric patients, especially those under
the age of two years?

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 299–310

309

c h a p t e r 3

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it clear
that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contributor,
copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accordingly, the
publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and their respective
employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no liability whatsoever for
the consequences of any such inaccurate or misleading data,
opinion or statement. While every effort is made to ensure that
drug doses and other quantities are presented accurately,
readers are advised that new methods and techniques
involving drug usage, and described within this Journal,
should only be followed in conjunction with the drug
manufacturer’s own published literature.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplemental Table 7: Association between anemia severity (prior to
erythropoietin use) and clinical outcome in multivariable analyses.
Supplemental Table 8: Association between hyperparathyroidism and
ESA responsiveness in multivariable analyses.
Supplemental Table 9: Evidence profile of RCTs comparing higher vs.
lower Hb targets/ESA doses in the HD-CKD and PD-CKD populations.
Supplemental Table 10: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on key clinical outcomes in the HD-CKD and
PD-CKD populations.
Supplemental Table 11: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on quality of life in the HD-CKD and PD-CKD
populations.
Supplemental Table 12: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on Fatigue, Vitality/Energy, and Physical
function in the HD-CKD and PD-CKD populations.
Supplemental Table 13: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on non-CVD/mortality adverse event rates in
the HD-CKD and PD-CKD populations.
Supplemental Table 14: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on exercise capacity in the HD-CKD and
PD-CKD populations.
Supplemental Table 15: Evidence profile of RCTs comparing different
higher vs. lower Hb targets/ESA doses in the ND-CKD populations.

table of RCTs

Supplemental Table 16: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on key clinical outcomes in the ND-CKD
population.
Supplemental Table 17: Summary
comparing
different Hb targets/ESA doses on quality of life in the ND-CKD
population.
Supplemental Table 18: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on Fatigue, Vitality/Energy, and Physical
function in the ND-CKD population.
Supplemental Table 19: Summary table of RCTs comparing different
Hb targets/ESA doses on non-CVD/mortality adverse event rates in
the ND-CKD population.
Supplemental Table 20: ESA protocols from the major trials in CKD
populations.
Supplemental Table 21: Evidence profile of RCTs examining IV vs. SC
EPO in CKD patients with anemia.
Supplemental Table 22: Summary table of RCTs examining IV vs. SC
ESA in CKD patients with anemia (categorical outcomes).
Supplemental Table 23: Summary table of RCTs examining IV vs. SC
ESA in CKD patients with anemia (continuous outcomes).
Supplemental Table 24: Summary table of adverse events in RCTs
examining IV vs. SC EPO in CKD patients with anemia.
Supplemental Table 25: Evidence profile of RCTs examining different
dosing schedules in CKD patients with anemia.
Supplemental Table 26: Summary table of RCTs examining different
dosing schedules in CKD patients with anemia (categorical out-
comes).
Supplemental Table 27: Summary table of RCTs examining different
dosing schedules in CKD patients with anemia (continuous out-
comes).
Supplemental Table 28: Summary table of adverse events
in
RCTs examining different dosing schedules in CKD patients with
anemia.
Supplemental Table 29: Evidence profile of RCTs examining ESA vs.
ESA in CKD patients with anemia.
Supplemental Table 30: Summary table of RCTs examining ESA vs. ESA
in CKD patients with anemia (categorical outcomes).
Supplemental Table 31: Summary table of RCTs examining ESA vs. ESA
in CKD patients with anemia (continuous outcomes).
Supplemental Table 32: Summary table of adverse events in RCTs
examining ESA vs. ESA in CKD patients with anemia (categorical
outcomes).
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/anemia.php

310

Kidney International Supplements (2012), 299–310

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4

Chapter 4: Red cell transfusion to treat anemia in CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.36

USE OF RED CELL TRANSFUSION IN CHRONIC ANEMIA
Repeated transfusions or use of an erythropoiesis-stimulating
agent (ESA) are treatment options for chronic anemia in
CKD. The choice between these depends on their relative
beneﬁts and harms, which vary among patients. For example,
patients with a previous stroke have the greatest absolute risk
of ESA-related stroke,127 whereas multiparous women have
the highest risk of allosensitization with transfusion.190,191
Although the clinical
importance of allosensitization is
disputed, it may delay or reduce the possibility of future
kidney transplantation.

4.1.1: When managing chronic anemia, we recommend
avoiding, when possible, red cell transfusions to
minimize the general risks related to their use. (1B)
4.1.2: In patients eligible for organ transplantation, we
speciﬁcally recommend avoiding, when possible, red
cell transfusions to minimize the risk of allosensi-
tization. (1C)

4.1.3: When managing chronic anemia, we suggest that the
beneﬁts of red cell transfusions may outweigh the
risks in patients in whom (2C):

K ESA therapy is ineffective (e.g., hemoglobino-
pathies, bone marrow failure, ESA resistance)
K The risks of ESA therapy may outweigh its
benefits (e.g., previous or current malignancy,
previous stroke)

4.1.4: We suggest that the decision to transfuse a CKD
patient with non-acute anemia should not be based
on any arbitrary Hb threshold, but should be
determined by the occurrence of symptoms caused
by anemia. (2C)

RATIONALE
As with any treatment, the use of red cell transfusions should
be considered in terms of the balance of beneﬁt and harms.
The primary beneﬁt is in maintaining sufﬁcient oxygen-
carrying capacity and improvement
in anemia-related
symptoms.192 The harms are summarized in Tables 5 and 6
and discussed further below. This balance must also be
considered alongside the balance between the beneﬁts and
harms of ESA therapy which is an alternative treatment for
the anemia of CKD. The beneﬁts and harms of ESA therapy
are discussed in detail in Chapter 3, but, in summary, the
beneﬁts include improvement in anemia-related symptoms
and reduced need for transfusion, and the most important
harms are increased risk of stroke, thromboembolic events,
and cancer progression or
recurrence. When choosing
between these two treatments for anemia in an individual,

patient characteristics which inﬂuence the balance between
beneﬁts and harms for each treatment should be considered.
These include history of stroke and previous or current
cancer which place patients receiving ESA therapy at much
higher absolute risk of
these two problems. Conversely,
patients potentially eligible for kidney transplantation have
the greatest potential harm from transfusion, in terms of
allosensitization,191,193,194 although the clinical importance of
allosensitization is disputed. Previously transplanted patients
and multiparous women seem to have the greatest absolute
risk of allosensitization.190,191

the magnitude of

A related issue is when should the decision to treat a
patient with either an ESA or a transfusion be made? This
decision is subtly different for the two types of treatment as
ESAs may be used to avoid transfusion and therefore before
the need for transfusion has arisen i.e., in a prophylactic sense.
Furthermore,
the potential harms of
transfusion (e.g., from infection) and some of the beneﬁts
from ESAs (e.g., transfusion avoidance) is dependent on the
threshold for transfusion. If that threshold is high (i.e.,
transfusion is reserved until symptoms become severe or the
Hb reaches a very low level) the risks related to transfusion
will be low and the beneﬁt of ESA therapy in avoiding
transfusions will be small. Unfortunately,
there is no
consensus about when transfusion is indicated although we
do know that the rate of transfusion increases markedly
when the Hb falls below 10 g/dl (100 g/l);122,127 whether that
simply reﬂects practice-patterns or represents clear clinical
need is uncertain. The following trials give examples of
transfusion rates in CKD 5D and CKD ND patients. The trial
conducted by the Canadian Erythropoietin Study Group,
published in 1990, enrolled 118 CKD 5HD patients Hb
o9.0 g/dl (o90 g/l), 49 (42%) of whom were described as
‘transfusion-dependent’.122 The patients averaged approxi-
mately 7 transfusions each in the previous 12 months. These
patients were randomized, equally, to 6 months treatment
with placebo, erythropoietin with a target Hb 9.5–11.0 g/dl
(95–110 g/l), or erythropoietin with a target Hb 11.5–13.0 g/dl
(115–130 g/l). After 8 weeks, 23 patients in the placebo group
received a blood-transfusion, compared with one in each
of
the two erythropoietin groups (for a gastrointestinal
hemorrhage and following surgery). More recently, in the
Trial to Reduce Cardiovascular Events with Aranesp Therapy
(TREAT), published in 2009, 4038 patients with diabetes,
CKD ND and anemia (Hbr11.0 g/dl [r110 g/l]), were
randomized, equally, to darbepoetin-alfa with target Hb
13 g/dl (130 g/l) or to placebo, with ‘rescue’ darbepoetin-alfa
when Hb fell below 9.0 g/dl (90 g/l).127 Over a median follow-
up of 29 months, 297/2012 (15%) patients randomized to

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

311

c h a p t e r 4

Table 5 | Estimated risk associated with blood transfusions
per unit transfused

Table 6 | Estimated risk of transfusion-related infections per
unit transfused

Estimated risk*

Potential transfusion-related risks

Estimated risk*

Adverse event

Immunological

Fever/allergic reactions
Hemolytic reaction
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
Anaphylaxis
Fatal hemolysis
Graft versus host disease (GVHD)

1 in 100–200a,b
1 in 6000b
1 in 12,350a
1 in 50,000b
1 in 1,250,000a
Rare

Other

Mistransfusion

*United States data.
aData from Carson JL et al.212
bData from Klein.213
cData from Klein HG et al.214

1 in 14,000–19,000c

darbepoetin-alfa and 496/2026 (25%) assigned to placebo
received red cell transfusions (HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.49–0.65,
Po0.001).

We suggest that the decision to transfuse in the patient
with non-acute anemia related to CKD should not be based
upon any arbitrary Hb threshold and should, instead, be
determined by the occurrence of symptoms and signs caused
by anemia. We recognize that symptoms such as dyspnea and
fatigue are non-speciﬁc, and that anemia-related symptoms
may occur at different Hb levels in different patients.

citrate

Risks of blood transfusion
Risks associated with blood transfusion include transfusion
errors, volume overload, hyperkalemia,
toxicity
(leading to metabolic alkalosis and hypocalcemia), hypother-
mia, coagulopathy,
immunologically-mediated transfusion
reactions,
including transfusion-related acute lung injury
(TRALI), and iron overload, all of which are uncommon
(Table 5).190,195–207 Transmission of infections, although rare,
is a major concern and this risk varies between countries
(Table 6).208–211 These complications are reviewed extensively
elsewhere. The importance of human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) sensitization is disputed and discussed in more detail
below.

HLA sensitization. The risk of sensitization after blood
transfusion has changed over time probably, at least in part,
due to changes in blood transfusion practices and the use of
more precise methods to measure allosensitization.

In the early 1980s, Opelz et al. examined the risk of
sensitization in 737 CKD 5HD patients (Figures 3A and 3B),
of whom 331 were followed prospectively (Figure 3C).190
Approximately 90% of all transfusions were given in the form
of
‘packed cells’ and antibodies were measured by the
lymphocyte cytotoxicity test. Overall, 28% of patients
followed prospectively developed HLA antibodies. Of these,
18% developed reactivity to 10–50% of the panel, 7% to
50–90%, and o3% to 490% of the panel after up to 20
(Figure 3C). Among men, 90% remained
transfusions
the
‘unresponsive’

reactivity against

(o10% antibody

Hepatitis B
West Nile virus
Death from bacterial sepsis
Hepatitis C
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

*United States data.
aData from Carson JL et al.212
bData from Rawn J.215

1 in 282,000–1 in 357,000a
1 in 350,000b
1 in 1,000,000b
1 in 1,149,000a
1 in 1,467,000a

panel) and 10% developed reactivity to 10–50% of the panel
(Figure 3C). In contrast, after 10 transfusions, only 60% of
the women were ‘unresponsive,’ 11% demonstrated 10–50%
reactivity, 23% 51–90% reactivity, and 6% 490% reactivity
(Figure 3C). These data suggested that the main drivers of
HLA sensitization following red cell transfusion are previous
pregnancies and previous transplantation. The data also
suggested that men have a much lower risk of HLA
sensitization following transfusion than women, and women
with multiple pregnancies have a much greater risk of HLA
sensitization than nulliparous women. However, more recent
data from the US Renal Data System (USRDS) 2010 Annual
Report,191 have challenged this assumption, suggesting that
males receiving previous blood transfusions may also be at
increased risk.

Studies performed in the last two decades showed that the
risk of sensitization with blood transfusion is apparently
lower than previously reported, with an overall response rate
ranging from 2 to 21%.216–218 A possible, albeit controversial,
explanation for this lower sensitization rate is that red cell
transfusions in recent years are less immunogenic because
they contain fewer leukocytes due to widespread use of blood
ﬁlters.

Other tentative conclusions from previous studies include
the following: a) washed-red cells do not appear to be less
immunogenic than non-washed red cells;190 b) no consistent
reduction in sensitization has been demonstrated with
donor-speciﬁc217 and HLA-DR matched transfusions;219 c)
higher numbers of blood transfusions have been associated
with an increased risk of sensitization in some studies220,221
but not in others.190,222

However, more recent data from the USRDS indicates that
risk of sensitization with blood transfusions is substantial.
For example, compared with patients who have never
received a blood transfusion, patients who received transfu-
sions have an odds ratio of having panel reactive antibody
(PRA) 480% of 2.38.191 Interestingly, in this analysis the risk
of being highly sensitized at the time of transplantation was
higher for men than for women.

Effect of leukocyte-reduced blood transfusions on sensitiza-
tion. Although, leukocytes may be a contributor to, if not
the cause of, a number of adverse consequences of blood
including immunologically-mediated effects,
transfusion,

312

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

c h a p t e r 4

Figure 3 | Lymphocytotoxic antibody reactivity against random donor test panel in relation to the number of blood transfusions.
Fractions of patients reacting against o10%, 10 to 50%, 51 to 90% and 490% of the panel donors are plotted. All 737 patients were on
chronic hemodialysis, waiting for a first kidney transplant. Numbers of patients after 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 transfusions are indicated at top of
graphs. (A) Male and female patients. (B) Females patients separated by the number of previous pregnancies. (C) Lymphocytotoxic
antibodies in patients who were studied prospectively throughout the course of treatment. Reprinted from Opelz G, Graver B, Mickey MR
et al. Lymphocytotoxic antibody responses to transfusions in potential kidney transplant recipients. Transplantation 1981; 32(3): 177–183
(ref. 190) with permission from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; accessed http://journals.lww.com/transplantjournal/Abstract/1981/09000/
Lymphocytoxic_Antibody_Responses_to_Transfusions.2.aspx

infectious disease transmission, and reperfusion injury,
leukoreduction of blood products does not decrease sensi-
tization in previously transplanted or in potential future
kidney transplant candidates.223–225 One recent study re-

ported that male patients awaiting their ﬁrst organ transplant
had a fourfold increased risk of developing HLA antibody if
they had been previously transfused when compared with
those who did not have a history of a transfusion.226 Thus,

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

313

c h a p t e r 4

Table 7 | Indications for blood transfusions

Indication

Comments

When rapid correction of anemia is required to
stabilize the patient’s condition (e.g., acute
hemorrhage, unstable myocardial ischemia)

When rapid pre-operative Hb correction is required

When symptoms and signs related to anemia are
present in patients in whom ESA therapy is
ineffective (e.g., bone marrow failure,
hemoglobinopathies, ESA resistance)

When symptoms and signs related to anemia are
present in patients in whom the risks of ESA therapy
may outweigh the benefits

K Red cell transfusion in patients with acute hemorrhage is indicated in the following
situations: a) rapid acute hemorrhage without immediate control of bleeding; b)
estimated blood loss 430–40% of blood volume (1500–2000 ml) with symptoms of
severe blood loss; c) estimated blood loss o25–30% blood volume with no evidence
of uncontrolled hemorrhage, if signs of hypovolemia recur despite colloid/crystalloid
resuscitation; d) in patients with co-morbid factors, transfusions may be necessary
with lesser degrees of blood loss.234

K Studies evaluating the importance of anemia and the role of transfusion in the setting
of an acute coronary syndrome (i.e., unstable angina, myocardial infarction) have
reached differing conclusions.

K The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association and American
College of Chest Physicians guidelines do not make any recommendations
concerning the potential benefit or risk of blood transfusion in the setting of an acute
coronary syndrome.235,236 However, in a review of clinical trials of patients with a
non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome, the risk of cardiovascular mortality,
nonfatal myocardial infarction, or recurrent ischemia at 30 days was significantly
higher in patients with a Hb concentration below 11 g/dl (110 g/l) than those
with a Hb Z11 g/dl (Z110 g/l).237

K Although anemia occurs frequently in patients with heart failure, limited data are

available on treatment of anemia in this population.

K Correction of anemia is not an evidence-based therapy in heart failure as noted in the

2006 Heart Failure Society of America guidelines, 2012 European Society of
Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, and 2009 American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association guidelines.238–240

K Therefore, the general indications for red cell transfusion apply to patients with heart

failure; however, careful attention must be paid to volume status.

K Criteria have been proposed for perioperative transfusions.234 These are generally not
recommended when the Hb is Z10 g/dl (Z100 g/l) in otherwise healthy subjects, but
should be given when the Hb is less than 7 g/dl (70 g/l).

K When Hb concentration is less than 7 g/dl (70 g/l) and the patient is otherwise stable,

2 units of red cells should be transfused and the patient’s clinical status and
circulating Hb should be reassessed.

K High-risk patients (465 years and/or those with cardiovascular or respiratory disease)
may tolerate anemia poorly, and may be transfused when Hb concentration is less
than 8 g/dl (80 g/l).

K For Hb concentration between 7 and 10 g/dl (70 and 100 g/l), the correct strategy is

unclear.

K Patients with chronic anemia (e.g., bone marrow failure syndromes) may be

dependent upon red cell replacement over a period of months or years, which can
lead to iron overload.

K Approximately 200 mg of iron are delivered per unit of red cells; this iron is released

when Hb from the transfused red cells is metabolized after red cell death.
K Given the progressive loss of red cell viability which occurs during storage, the

‘‘freshest-available’’ units should be selected in order to maximize post-transfusion
survival.

K Hemosiderosis can produce organ damage when the total iron delivered approaches

15 to 20 grams, the amount of iron in 75 to 100 units of red cells.

K The issue of red cell transfusion in patients with acquired or congenital hemolytic

anemia is more complex.

K ESAs should be used with great caution, if at all, in CKD patients with active

malignancy, a history of malignancy, or prior history of stroke.

CKD, chronic kidney disease; ESA, erythropoiesis-stimulating agent; Hb, hemoglobin.

transfusion in the post-leukodepletion era still continues to
pose a signiﬁcant risk of sensitization. A possible reason for
this ﬁnding is that the number of HLA molecules contributed
by the red cells is comparable to that of leukocytes.227

Association between sensitization and delay in organ trans-
plantation. According to USRDS data reported in 2010, the
mean wait-time to transplant for patients listed between 1991
and 2008 was an average of 2 months longer for transfused
in the United States.191
than non-transfused patients

Increased PRA titers, whether due to blood transfusions or
other factors, were associated with a longer wait to ﬁnd a
compatible donor and may have completely precluded
transplantation in some patients. Non-sensitized patients
(0% PRA at the time of listing) had the shortest wait-time
(median of 2.5 years in 2005) while those with a PRA of
1–19% and 20–79% had median wait-times of 2.9 and 4.3
years, respectively. Highly sensitized patients (Z80% PRA)
waited the longest and in these patients a median wait-time

314

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

c h a p t e r 4

could not be calculated for patients listed in 2005. As a result
of the delay in ﬁnding compatible donors in patients with
PRA Z80%, the percentage of these patients increased from
7.5% at listing to 13.3% ﬁve years after listing.

Not being transplanted, or having to wait longer for
survival.228,229
transplantation,
is associated with lower
Receiving a transfusion while on the transplant wait list is
associated with a nearly 5-fold higher risk of dying while on

Acute clinical situations 

Chronic clinical situations 

Acute severe hemorrhage 
Unstable coronary artery disease 

(cid:129) When rapid preoperative Hb correction is 

required 

Chronic anemia and ESAs are ineffective 
(hemoglobinopathies, bone marrow 
failure, ESA resistance) 

Transfuse 

Special chronic clinical situations 

Chronic severe symptomatic anemia and 
a relative contraindication to an ESA 
(e.g., current or previous malignancy, 
previous stroke) 

Potential transplant recipient? 

Yes 

No

Risk of allosensitization 

Transfuse 

High

Low 

Previous transplant(s) 
Previous pregnancies 
Previous transfusions 

Untransfused males 
Untransfused females 
Nulliparous females 

Assess balance of risks and benefits before transfusing 

Figure 4 | Algorithms for red cell transfusion use in CKD patients. ESA, erythropoiesis-stimulating agent; Hb, hemoglobin.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

315

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
c h a p t e r 4

In transplanted patients,

the wait list in the ﬁrst ﬁve years, and an 11% reduction in
the likelihood of receiving a transplant within the ﬁrst ﬁve
years.191,230
the presence of
preformed HLA antibodies is associated with an increased
risk of early and late graft loss.193,194,231,232 Recent data also
suggest
that pre-existing donor-speciﬁc HLA antibodies
identiﬁed by a Luminex single-antigen assay at the time of
transplantation are associated with a higher incidence of
antibody-mediated rejection and inferior graft survival.233

URGENT TREATMENT OF ANEMIA

4.2: In certain acute clinical situations, we suggest patients
are transfused when the beneﬁts of red cell transfu-
sions outweigh the risks; these include (2C):

K When rapid correction of anemia is required to
condition (e.g., acute

stabilize the patient’s
hemorrhage, unstable coronary artery disease)
K When rapid pre-operative Hb correction is

required

RATIONALE
In certain urgent clinical situations, red cell transfusion may
be needed for the immediate correction of anemia. These
include acute severe hemorrhage and other clinical problems
caused by, or exacerbated by, anemia,
such as acute
ischemia. When urgent surgery is required,
myocardial
transfusion may also be given to achieve rapid preoperative
correction of Hb. The Hb threshold for transfusion in this
situation is uncertain but we suggest that this treatment be
considered if the Hb is o7 g/dl (o70 g/l).

Table 7 and Figure 4 summarize the approaches to the use

of red cell transfusions in patients with CKD.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
There is a lack of randomized controlled trials on the use of
blood transfusions as a primary intervention in patients with
in
anemia and CKD. Given the

logistical difﬁculties

conducting such trials, it is likely that observational data
will continue to predominate in this therapeutic area.

Future research should include:

K Prospective observational data collection on the use
of red cell transfusions in CKD patients, particularly
dialysis patients, including the reason(s) for transfu-
sion, intent to list for future kidney transplantation,
likelihood of receiving a kidney transplant, and graft
outcomes.

K Prospective observational evaluation of the impact of
red cell transfusions on the level of HLA sensitization.
K Given a striking disparity in the use of blood
transfusions between the US and Europe, Canada
and Australia in the TREAT study, and between the
US and Europe in the Phase 3 peginesatide clinical
trial program, further research is needed to ascertain
the ‘drivers’ for transfusion in CKD patients. Is this
related to practice patterns or a real higher clinical
need for transfusions in the US?

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it
clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contri-
butor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accord-
ingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and
their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no
the consequences of any such
liability whatsoever
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

for

316

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 311–316

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Methods for guideline development

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.42

AIM
The overall aim of the project was to develop an evidence-
based clinical practice guideline for management of anemia
and chronic kidney disease (CKD). The guideline consists of
recommendations, rationale statements and a summary of
systematically generated evidence on relevant predeﬁned
clinical topics.

OVERVIEW PROCESS
Guideline development process
sequential and concurrent steps:

included the following

K Appointing Work Group members and Evidence Review

Team (ERT).

K Discussing process, methods, and results.
K Developing and refining topics.
K Identifying populations, interventions or predictors, and

outcomes of interest.

K Selecting topics for systematic evidence review.
K Standardizing quality assessment methodology.
K Developing and implementing literature search strategies.
K Screening abstracts and retrieving full text articles based

on predefined eligibility criteria.
K Creating data extraction forms.
K Data extracting and performing critical appraisal of the

literature.

K Grading the methodology and outcomes in individual

studies.

K Tabulating data from individual studies into summary

tables.

K Grading quality of evidence for each outcome across
studies, and assessing the overall quality of evidence
across outcomes with the aid of evidence profiles.

K Grading the strength of recommendations based on the

quality of evidence and other considerations.

K Finalizing guideline recommendations and supporting

rationale statements.

K Sending the guideline draft for peer review to the KDIGO
Board of Directors in June 2011, and for public review in
September 2011.

K Publishing the final version of the guideline.

The Work Group, KDIGO Co-Chairs, ERT, and KDIGO
support staff met for two 2-day meetings for training in the
guideline development process, topic discussion, and con-
sensus development.

Commissioning of work group and evidence review team
KDIGO Co-Chairs appointed the Work Group Co-chairs.
Work Group Co-Chairs then assembled the Work Group

consisting of domain experts,
including individuals with
expertise in internal medicine, adult and pediatric nephrol-
ogy, cardiology, hematology, oncology, hypertension, pathol-
ogy, pharmacology, epidemiology and endocrinology. Tufts
Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and
Implementation at Tufts Medical Center in Boston, Massa-
chusetts, USA was contracted to conduct systematic evidence
review and provide expertise in guideline development
methodology. The ERT consisted of physician-methodolo-
gists with expertise in nephrology, a project coordinator and
manager, and a research assistant. The ERT instructed and
advised Work Group members in all steps of
literature
review, critical literature appraisal, and guideline develop-
ment. The Work Group and the ERT collaborated closely
throughout the project.

Defining scope and topics
Work Group Co-Chairs ﬁrst deﬁned the overall scope and
goals of the guideline. Work Group Co-Chairs then drafted a
preliminary list of topics and key clinical questions. In light
of new evidence, it was decided that an update of the topics
presented in the 2006 and 2007 KDOQI guidelines would be
the best approach. The Work Group and ERT further
developed and reﬁned each topic, speciﬁed screening criteria,
literature search strategies, and data extraction forms
(Table 8).

Establishing the process for guideline development
The ERT performed literature searches, organized abstract
and article
screening. The ERT also coordinated the
methodological and analytic process of the report, deﬁned
and standardized the methodology of performing literature
searches, data extraction, and summarizing the evidence.
Throughout the project, the ERT offered suggestions for
guideline development, led discussions on systematic review,
literature searches, data extraction, assessment of quality and
applicability of articles, evidence synthesis, grading of
evidence and guideline recommendations, and consensus
development. The Work Group took the primary role of
writing the guidelines and rationale statements and retained
ﬁnal responsibility for the content of the guideline statements
and the accompanying narrative.

The Work Group Co-Chairs prepared the ﬁrst draft of the
scope of work document as a series of topics to be considered
by Work Group members. The scope of work document was
based primarily on the existing KDOQI guidelines on
anemia. At
two-day meeting, Work Group
members revised the initial working document to include
all topics of interest to the Work Group. The inclusive,

their ﬁrst

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

317

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 8 | Systematic review topics and screening criteria

Identifying why, when and which patients to treat for anemia and iron deficiency
Population
Intervention

All CKD stages for longitudinal, cross-sectional or RCTs. Any population for systematic reviews
RBC transfusion, Iron (all forms, routes of administration, dosages), ESA (all forms, dosages, targets, protocols, schedules, etc),
pharmacological and non-pharmacological adjuvants to ESA, Hb or iron status
Other interventions, ‘‘no’’ interventions, different forms, routes of administration, dosages, targets, protocols, schedules, etc.
All-cause mortality, Cardiovascular events, ESRD, Quality of life, Progression of kidney disease, Transfusions, Major symptoms
RCTs, Large longitudinal (prospective or retrospective) observational studies or cross sectional studies with multivariate analyses
NZ50 per arm

Comparator
Outcomes
Study design

Evaluating anemia treatment, including treatment resistance
Population
Intervention

Adults and children with CKD, any stage and any comorbidity (including cancer, CVD, etc.)
RBC transfusions; Iron (all forms, routes of administration, dosages), ESA (all forms, dosages, targets, protocols, etc), pharmacological
and non-pharmacological adjuvants to ESA including L-carnitine, vitamin C, androgens, pentoxifylline; other interventions used to
treat or enhance the treatment of anemia or anemia-related symptoms
Other interventions, ‘‘no’’ interventions, different forms, routes of administration, dosages, targets, protocols, schedules, etc.
Death, Cardiac events, Stroke, CKD progression, Quality of life, Thromboembolic events, Pulmonary embolism, Symptomatic deep
vein thrombosis, Loss of vascular access, Transfusion requirements, Cognitive function, Sexual function, Other similar quality of life
measures, Objective physical function tests, Infections, Loss of transplant eligibility due to antibody sensitization, Antibody
sensitization, New cancer or progression of existing cancer, Seizure, Other clinically important adverse events, ESA dose: for
comparisons of different ESA regimens and for iron and adjuvant interventions, Achieved Hb/Hb variability for comparisons of
different ESA regimens and for iron and adjuvant interventions
RCTs
NZ50 per arm
Minimum follow-up duration: 6 months

Comparator
Outcomes

Study Design

CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ESA, erythropoiesis-stimulating agent; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; Hb, hemoglobin; RBC, red blood cell;
RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Table 9 | Hierarchy of importance of outcomes

Hierarchya

Outcomesb

Critical importance

High importance
Moderate
importance

Mortality, Cardiovascular mortality, Cardiovascular
events, ESRD
Transfusion, Quality of life
Hb (categorical and continuous), ESA dose
(categorical and continuous), adverse events

ESA, erythropoiesis-stimulating agent; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; Hb, hemo-
globin.
aOutcomes of lesser importance are excluded from review.
bThis categorization was the consensus of the Work Group for the purposes of this
guideline only. The lists are not meant to reflect outcome ranking for other areas of
kidney disease management. The Work Group acknowledges that not all clinicians,
patients or families, or societies would rank all outcomes the same.

the
combined set of questions
deliberation and discussion that followed. The Work Group
strove to ensure that all topics deemed clinically relevant and
worthy of review were identiﬁed and addressed.

formed the basis

for

Formulating questions of interest
Questions of
interest were formulated according to the
PICODD (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome,
study Design and Duration of follow up) criteria. Details of
the PICODD criteria are presented in Table 8.

Ranking of outcomes
The Work Group ranked outcomes of interest based on their
importance for informing clinical decision making (Table 9).
Mortality, cardiovascular mortality, cardiovascular events and
ESRD outcomes were graded as ‘critical,’ transfusion and
QoL outcomes were graded as ‘high,’ and all other outcomes
were graded as ‘moderate.’

Literature searches and article selection
The Work Group sought to build on the evidence base and
topics addressed in the previous Kidney Disease Outcomes
Quality Initiative (KDOQI) clinical practice guidelines and
clinical practice recommendations for anemia in chronic
kidney disease in 2006 as well as the KDOQI clinical practice
guidelines and clinical practice recommendations for anemia
in chronic kidney disease 2007 update of hemoglobin target.
Modules were created for
randomized controlled trials
(RCTs), kidney disease, anemia, and erythropoietin, transfu-
sion, iron deﬁciency, and adjuvant search terms. The search
terms were then limited to years 2006–2010 for studies related
to anemia interventions. For transfusion the literature search
was conducted from 1989–2010. A separate search was run
for observational studies on iron overload and hemoglobin
status as predictors for clinical outcomes (See Appendix 1
online).

The searches were run in MEDLINE, Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Clinical Trials and Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews. The initial search for RCTs was
conducted in April 2010 and subsequently updated in
October of 2010. The search for observational studies was
later conducted in September 2010. The search yield was also
supplemented by articles provided by Work Group members
through March 2012. MEDLINE search results were screened
by members of the ERT for relevance using pre-deﬁned
eligibility criteria.

The total yield from the search was 4,334 abstracts for
RCTs and 3,717 abstracts for observational studies. Fifty-six
abstracts and 53 full texts from RCTs were accepted and 97
abstracts and 21 full texts from observational studies were

318

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 10 | Literature search yield of primary articles for systematic review topics

Total abstracts from updated search

Abstracts accepted

Full text accepted

Full text extracted

Articles in summary tables

4,334 RCT
3,717 Observational

RCT, randomized controlled trial.

56
97

53
21

53
21

31
21

accepted. Journal articles reporting original data, meta-
analyses or systematic reviews were selected for evidence
review. Editorials, letters, abstracts, unpublished reports and
articles published in non-peer reviewed journals were not
included. The Work Group also decided to exclude publica-
supplements because of potential
tions
differences in the process of how they get solicited, selected,
reviewed and edited compared to peer-reviewed publications.
The overall search yield along with the number of abstracts
identiﬁed and articles reviewed is presented in Table 10.

from journal

Data extraction
Fifty-three full text articles from RCTs were extracted by the
in consultation with the Work Group,
ERT. The ERT,
designed forms to capture data on design, methodology,
sample characteristics, interventions, comparators, outcomes,
results and limitations of individual studies. Methodology
and outcomes were also systematically graded (see the section
on grading below) and recorded during the data extraction
process.

Summary tables
Summary tables were developed for each comparison of
interest. Studies included in the evidence base for the KDOQI
clinical practice guidelines on Anemia in CKD and update of
hemoglobin target were also incorporated if they fulﬁlled the
inclusion criteria for the current guideline.

Summary tables contain outcomes of interest, relevant
population characteristics, description of intervention and
comparator, results, and quality grading for each outcome.
Categorical and continuous outcomes were summarized
separately. Work Group members proofed all summary
table data and quality assessments. Summary tables will
be available at www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/
anemia.php.

Evidence profiles
Evidence proﬁles were constructed to assess and record
quality grading and description of effect for each outcome
across studies, and quality of overall evidence and description
of net beneﬁts or harms of intervention or comparator across
all outcomes. These proﬁles aim to make the evidence
synthesis process transparent. Decisions in the evidence
proﬁles were based on data from the primary studies listed in
corresponding summary tables, and on judgments of the ERT
and the Work Group. When the body of evidence for a
particular comparison of interest consisted of only one study,
the summary table provided the ﬁnal level of synthesis and
evidence proﬁle was not generated. Each evidence proﬁle was

Table 11 | Classification of study quality

Good
quality

Fair
quality

Poor
quality

Low risk of bias and no obvious reporting errors, complete
reporting of data. Must be prospective. If study of
intervention, must be randomized controlled study (RCT).
Moderate risk of bias, but problems with study/paper are
unlikely to cause major bias. If study of intervention, must
be prospective.
High risk of bias or cannot exclude possible significant biases.
Poor methods, incomplete data, reporting errors. Prospective
or retrospective.

initially constructed by the ERT and then reviewed, edited
and approved by the Work Group.

Grading of quality of evidence for outcomes of
individual studies

Methodological quality. Methodological quality (internal
validity) refers to the design, conduct, and reporting of
outcomes of a clinical study. Previously devised three-level
classiﬁcation system for quality assessment was used to grade
the overall study quality and quality for all relevant outcomes
in the study (Table 11). Variations of this system have
been used in most KDOQI and all KDIGO guidelines
and have been recommended for
the US Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality Evidence-based Practice
Center program (http://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/repFiles/
2007_10DraftMethodsGuide.pdf).

Each study was given an overall quality grade based on its
design, methodology (randomization, allocation, blinding,
deﬁnition of outcomes, appropriate use of statistical methods
etc), conduct (drop-out percentage, outcome assessment
methodologies, etc) and reporting (internal consistency,
clarity, thoroughness/precision, etc). Each reported outcome
was then evaluated and given an individual grade depending
on the quality of reporting and methodological issues speciﬁc
to that outcome. However, the quality grade of an individual
outcome could not exceed the quality grade for the overall
study.

Rating the quality of evidence and the strength of
guideline recommendations
A structured approach, based on GRADE241–243 and facili-
tated by the use of evidence proﬁles was used in order to
grade the quality of the overall evidence and the strength of
recommendations. For each topic, the discussion on grading
of the quality of the evidence was led by the ERT, and the
discussion regarding the strength of the recommendations
was led by the Work Group Chairs. The ‘strength of a
recommendation’ indicates the extent to which one can be

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

319

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

conﬁdent that adherence to the recommendation will do
more good than harm. The ‘quality of a body of evidence’
refers to the extent to which our conﬁdence in an estimate of
effect is sufﬁcient to support a particular recommenda-
tion.242

Grading the quality of evidence for each outcome
Following GRADE,
the quality of a body of evidence
pertaining to a particular outcome of interest was initially
categorized based on study design. For questions of
interventions, the initial quality grade was ‘High’ when the
body of evidence consisted of randomized controlled trials;
‘Low’, if it consisted of observational studies; or ‘Very Low’, if
it consisted of studies of other study designs. For questions of
interventions,
the Work Group decided to use only
randomized controlled trials. The grade for the quality of
evidence for each intervention/outcome pair was
then
lowered if there were serious limitations to the methodolo-
gical quality of
there were
the aggregate of studies,
important inconsistencies in the results across studies, if there
was uncertainty about the directness of evidence including
limited applicability of the ﬁndings to the population of
interest, if the data were imprecise (a low event rate [0 or 1
event] in either arm or conﬁdence interval spanning a range
o0.5 to 42.0) or sparse (only 1 study or total No100), or if
there was thought to be a high likelihood of bias. The ﬁnal
grade for the quality of the evidence for an intervention/
outcome pair could be one of the following four grades:
‘High’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Low’ or ‘Very Low’ (Table 12).

if

Grading the overall quality of evidence
The quality of
the overall body of evidence was then
determined based on the quality grades for all outcomes of
interest, taking into account explicit judgments about the

Table 12 | GRADE system for grading quality of evidence

relative importance of each outcome. The resulting four ﬁnal
categories for the quality of overall evidence were: ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’
or ‘D’ (Table 13).

Assessment of the net health benefit across all important
clinical outcomes
The net health beneﬁt was determined based on the anticipated
balance of beneﬁts and harms across all clinically important
outcomes (Table 14). The assessment of net beneﬁt was affected
by the judgment of the Work Group and the ERT.

Grading the strength of the recommendations
The strength of a recommendation is graded as Level 1 or
Level 2. Table 15 shows the KDIGO nomenclature for grading
the strength of a recommendation and the implications of each
level for patients, clinicians and policy makers. Recommenda-
tions can be for or against doing something. Table 16 shows
that the strength of a recommendation is determined not just
by the quality of the evidence, but also by other, often complex
judgments regarding the size of the net medical beneﬁt, values
and preferences, and costs. Formal decision analyses including
cost analysis were not conducted.

Table 13 | Final grade for overall quality of evidence

Quality of
evidence Meaning

Grade

A

B

C

D

High

We are confident that the true effect lies close to that
of the estimate of the effect.

Moderate The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of

Low

the effect, but there is a possibility that it is
substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from
the estimate of the effect.

Very low The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often will

be far from the truth.

Step 1: Starting grade for
quality of evidence based
on study design

Randomized trials = High

Observational study = Low

Any other evidence = Very
low

Step 2: Reduce grade

Step 3: Raise grade

Study quality
(cid:2)1 level if serious limitations
(cid:2)2 levels if very serious limitations

Consistency
(cid:2)1 level if important inconsistency

Strength of association
+1 level is stronga,
no plausible confounders
+2 levels if very strongb,
no major threats to validity

Directness
(cid:2)1 level if some uncertainty
(cid:2)2 levels if major uncertainty

Other
(cid:2)1 level if sparse or imprecise datac
(cid:2)1 level if high probability of
reporting bias

Other
+1 level if evidence of a
dose-response gradient
+1 level if all residual plausible
confounders would have
reduced the observed effect

Final grade for quality of evidence and
definition

High = Further research is unlikely to change
confidence in the estimate of the effect

Moderate = Further research is likely to have
an important impact on confidence in the
estimate of effect, and may change the
estimate

Low = Further research is very likely to have an
important impact on confidence in the
estimate, and may change the estimate

Very low = Any estimate of effect is very
uncertain

GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation.
aStrong evidence of association is defined as ‘significant relative risk of 42 (o0.5)’ based on consistent evidence from two or more observational studies, with no plausible
confounders.
bVery strong evidence of association is defined as ‘significant relative risk of 45 (o0.2)’ based on direct evidence with no major threats to validity.
cSparse if there is only one study or if total N o100. Imprecise if there is a low event rate (0 or 1 event) in either arm or confidence interval spanning a range o0.5 to 42.0.
Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Kidney International. Uhlig K, Macleod A, Craig J et al. Grading evidence and recommendations for clinical practice
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2006; 70: 2058–2065;243 accessed http://
guidelines in nephrology. A position statement from Kidney Disease:
www.nature.com/ki/journal/v70/n12/pdf/5001875a.pdf

320

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 14 | Balance of benefits and harm

When there was evidence to determine the balance of medical benefits and harm of an intervention to a patient, conclusions were categorized as
follows:

K For statistically significant benefit/harm report as ‘Benefit/Harm of Drug X’.
K For non-statistically significant benefit/harm, report as ‘Possible benefit/harm of Drug X’.
K In instances where studies are inconsistent, report as ‘Possible benefit/harm of Drug X’.
K ‘No difference’ can only be reported if a study is not imprecise.
K ‘Insufficient evidence’ if imprecision is a factor.

Table 15 | KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations

Grade*

Implications

Patients

Clinicians

Policy

Level 1
‘We recommend’

Most people in your situation would want
the recommended course of action and
only a small proportion would not.

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy
or a performance measure.

Level 2
‘We suggest’

The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course of
action, but many would not.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs help
to arrive at a management decision
consistent with her or his values and
preferences.

The recommendation is likely to
require substantial debate and
involvement of stakeholders before
policy can be determined.

*The additional category ‘Not Graded’ was used, typically, to provide guidance based on common sense or where the topic does not allow adequate application of evidence.
The most common examples include recommendations regarding monitoring intervals, counseling, and referral to other clinical specialists. The ungraded recommendations
are generally written as simple declarative statements, but are not meant to be interpreted as being stronger recommendations than Level 1 or 2 recommendations.

Table 16 | Determinants of strength of recommendation

Factor

Comment

Balance between desirable and
undesirable effects
Quality of the evidence
Values and preferences

Costs (resource allocation)

The larger the difference between the desirable and undesirable effects, the more likely a strong
recommendation is warranted. The narrower the gradient, the more likely a weak recommendation is warranted.
The higher the quality of evidence, the more likely a strong recommendation is warranted.
The more variability in values and preferences, or more uncertainty in values and preferences, the more
likely a weak recommendation is warranted.
The higher the costs of an intervention—that is, the more resources consumed—the less likely a strong
recommendation is warranted.

Ungraded statements
This category was designed to allow the Work Group to
issue general advice. Typically an ungraded statement
meets the following criteria:
it provides guidance based
on common sense; it provides reminders of the obvious;
it is not sufﬁciently speciﬁc to allow application of evidence
to the issue and therefore it is not based on systematic
evidence review. Common examples include recommenda-
tions about frequency of testing, referral to specialists, and
routine medical care. We strove to minimize the use of
ungraded recommendations.

for general guidance was

This grading scheme with two levels for the strength
of a recommendation together with four levels of grading
the quality of the evidence, and the option of an ungraded
adopted by the
statement
KDIGO Board in December 2008. The Work Group took
the primary role of writing the recommendations and
rationale statements and retained ﬁnal responsibility for the
content of the guideline statements and the accompanying
narrative. The ERT reviewed draft recommendations and

grades for consistency with the conclusions of the evidence
review.

the

Format for guideline recommendations
Each chapter contains one or more speciﬁc recommenda-
tions. Within each recommendation,
strength of
recommendation is indicated as level 1 or level 2 and the
quality of the supporting evidence is shown as A, B, C or D.
These are followed by a brief background with relevant
deﬁnitions of terms and the rationale summarizing the key
points of the evidence base and narrative supporting the
recommendation. Where appropriate, research recommenda-
tions are suggested for future research to resolve current
uncertainties.

Limitations of approach
While the literature searches were intended to be compre-
hensive, they were not exhaustive. MEDLINE was the only
journals were not
database searched. Hand searches of
performed, and review articles and textbook chapters were

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

321

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 17 | The Conference on Guideline Standardization (COGS) checklist245 for reporting clinical practice guidelines

Topic

Description

Discussed in KDIGO Anemia Guideline

1. Overview material

2. Focus

3. Goal

Provide a structured abstract that includes the
guideline’s release date, status (original, revised,
updated), and print and electronic sources.
Describe the primary disease/condition and intervention/
service/technology that the guideline addresses. Indicate
any alternative preventative, diagnostic or therapeutic
interventions that were considered during development.
Describe the goal that following the guideline is expected
to achieve, including the rationale for development of a
guideline on this topic.

4. User/setting

Describe the intended users of the guideline (e.g. provider
types, patients) and the settings in which the guideline is
intended to be used.

5. Target population

6. Developer

7. Funding source/
sponsor

Describe the patient population eligible for guideline
recommendations and list any exclusion criteria.
Identify the organization(s) responsible for guideline
development and the names/credentials/potential conflicts
of interest of individuals involved in the guideline’s
development.
Identify the funding source/sponsor and describe its role in
developing and/or reporting the guideline. Disclose
potential conflict of interest.

8. Evidence collection

Describe the methods used to search the scientific
literature, including the range of dates and databases
searched, and criteria applied to filter the retrieved
evidence.

9. Recommendation
grading criteria

Describe the criteria used to rate the quality of evidence
that supports the recommendations and the system for
describing the strength of the recommendations.
Recommendation strength communicates the importance
of adherence to a recommendation and is based on both
the quality of the evidence and the magnitude of
anticipated benefits and harms.

10. Method for
synthesizing evidence

Describe how evidence was used to create
recommendations, e.g., evidence tables, meta-analysis,
decision analysis.

11. Prerelease review

Describe how the guideline developer reviewed and/or
tested the guidelines prior to release.

Abstract and Methods for Guideline Development.

Management of adults and children with CKD and kidney
transplant recipients at risk for or with anemia.

This clinical practice guideline is intended to assist the
practitioner caring for patients with CKD and anemia and to
prevent deaths, cardiovascular disease events and progression
to kidney failure while optimizing patients’ quality of life.
Providers: Nephrologists (adult and pediatric), Dialysis providers
(including nurses), Internists, and Pediatricians.
Patients: Adult and children with CKD at risk for or with anemia.
Policy Makers: Those in related health fields.
CKD individuals at risk for or with anemia, adult and children.

Organization: KDIGO.

KDIGO is supported by the following consortium of sponsors:
Abbott, Amgen, Bayer Schering Pharma, Belo Foundation, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Coca-Cola Company, Dole
Food Company, Fresenius Medical Care, Genzyme, Hoffmann-
LaRoche, JC Penney, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, NATCO—The
Organization for Transplant Professionals, NKF-Board of Directors,
Novartis, Pharmacosmos, PUMC Pharmaceutical, Robert and Jane
Cizik Foundation, Shire, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Transwestern
Commercial Services, Vifor Pharma, and Wyeth. No funding is
accepted for the development or reporting of specific guidelines.
All stakeholders could participate in open review.
Refer to Work Group Financial Disclosures.
Modules were created for randomized controlled trials (RCTs),
kidney disease, anemia, and erythropoietin, transfusion, iron
deficiency, and adjuvant search terms. The search terms were
then limited to years 2006–2010 for studies related to anemia
interventions. For transfusion the literature search was
conducted from 1989–2010. A separate search was run for
observational studies on iron overload and hemoglobin status as
predictors for clinical outcomes. See Table 8 for screening
criteria.
Searches were run in MEDLINE, Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Clinical Trials and Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. The initial search for RCTs was conducted in April 2010
and subsequently updated in October of 2010. The search for
observational studies was later conducted in September 2010.
The search yield was also supplemented by articles provided by
Work Group members through March 2012.
Quality of individual studies was graded in a three-tiered
grading system (see Table 11). Quality of evidence (Table 12)
was graded following the GRADE approach. Strength of the
recommendation was graded in a two-level grading system
which was adapted from GRADE for KDIGO with the
quality of overall evidence graded on a four-tiered system
(Tables 13 and 15).
The Work Group could provide general guidance in ungraded
statements.
For systematic review topics, summary tables and evidence
profiles were generated.
For recommendations on treatment interventions, the steps
outlined by GRADE were followed.
The guideline has undergone internal review by the KDIGO
Board of Directors in June 2011 and external review in
September 2011. Public review comments were compiled and
fed back to the Work Group, which considered comments in its
revision of the guideline.

322

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

m e t h o d s f o r g u i d e l i n e d e v e l o p m e n t

Table 17 | Continued

Topic

Description

Discussed in KDIGO Anemia Guideline

12. Update plan

State whether or not there is a plan to update the
guideline and, if applicable, expiration date for this
version of the guideline.

13. Definitions

14. Recommendations
and rationale

15. Potential benefits
and harm

Define unfamiliar terms and those critical to correct
application of the guideline that might be subject to
misinterpretation.
State the recommended action precisely and the specific
circumstances under which to perform it. Justify each
recommendation by describing the linkage between
the recommendation and its supporting evidence.
Indicate the quality of evidence and the recommendation
strength, based on the criteria described in Topic 9.
Describe anticipated benefits and potential risks
associated with implementation of guideline
recommendations.

16. Patient preferences Describe the role of patient preferences when a

recommendation involves a substantial element of
personal choice or values.

17. Algorithm

18. Implementation
considerations

Provide (when appropriate) a graphical description
of the stages and decisions in clinical care described
by the guideline.
Describe anticipated barriers to application of the
recommendations. Provide reference to any auxiliary
documents for providers or patients that are intended
to facilitate implementation. Suggest review criteria for
measuring changes in care when the guideline is
implemented.

There is no date set for updating. The need for updating of the
guideline will depend on the publication of new evidence that
would change the quality of the evidence or the estimates for
the benefits and harms. Results from registered ongoing
studies and other publications will be reviewed periodically
to evaluate their potential to impact on the recommendations
in this guideline.
Abbreviations and Acronyms.

Each guideline chapter contains recommendations for
management of CKD patients at risk for or with anemia. Each
recommendation builds on a supporting rationale with evidence
tables if available. The strength of the recommendation and the
quality of evidence are provided in parenthesis within each
recommendation.
The benefits and harm for each comparison of interventions are
provided in summary tables and summarized in evidence
profiles. The estimated balance between potential benefits and
harm was considered when formulating the recommendations.
Many recommendations are Level 2 or ‘‘discretionary’’ which
indicates a greater need to help each patient arrive at a
management decision consistent with her or his values and
preferences.
See Chapter 4.

These recommendations are global. Review criteria were not
suggested because implementation with prioritization and
development of review criteria have to proceed locally.
Furthermore, most recommendations are discretionary,
requiring substantial discussion among stakeholders before they
can be adopted as review criteria.
Suggestions were provided for future research.

CKD, chronic kidney disease; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; KDIGO, Kidney Disease:
RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Improving Global Outcomes;

not systematically searched. However,
important studies
known to domain experts that were missed by the electronic
literature searches were added to retrieved articles and
reviewed by the Work Group.

the methodological process

Summary of the methodological review process
Several tools and checklists have been developed to assess the
quality of
systematic
review and guideline development. These include the
for Research and Evaluation
Appraisal of Guidelines
(AGREE) criteria,244 the Conference on Guideline Standar-
dization (COGS) checklist,245 and the Institute of Medicine’s

for

for Systematic Reviews246 and Clinical
recent Standards
Practice Guidelines We Can Trust.247 Table 17 and Appendix
2 online show,
the COGS criteria which
correspond to the AGREE checklist and the Institute of
Medicine standards, and how each one of them is addressed
in this guideline.

respectively,

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix 1: Online search strategies.
Appendix 2: Concurrence with Institute of Medicine standards for
systematic reviews and for guidelines.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/anemia.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 317–323

323

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Biographic and Disclosure Information

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.43

failure,

including heart

John J V McMurray, MD, FRCP, FESC (Work Group Co-
Chair), is Professor of Medical Cardiology at BHF Glasgow
Cardiovascular Research Centre and Head of Section of
Academic Cardiology at University of Glasgow. Dr McMur-
ray received his medical degree from University of Manche-
ster and completed additional clinical training in Edinburgh,
Dundee and Glasgow. He conducts clinical research in a wide
span of areas
left ventricular
dysfunction, coronary heart disease, diabetes, and kidney
failure. As such, Dr McMurray is a member of the Executive
Committee or Steering Committee for a number of large
ongoing multinational
trials: ARISTOTLE, ASCEND-HF,
ASPIRE, ATMOSPHERE, Dal-OUTCOMES, EMPHASIS-
HF, NAVIGATOR, PARADIGM-HF, RED-HF, TREAT and
VIVIDD. He
the Heart
Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology
and has authored close to 500 original publications,
reviews, and book chapters. Dr McMurray is currently
on a number of
including:
Cardiovascular Drugs and Therapy, Circulation: Heart Failure,
European Heart Journal, European Journal of Heart Failure,
Journal of
Heart, Heart Failure Reviews,
Cardiology and Journal of the Renin-Angiotensin-Alderosterone
System.

also Past President of

editorial boards

International

journal

is

Dr McMurray0s employer, Glasgow University, received
support from Amgen for his role as Executive Committee
member of clinical trials (RED-HF; TREAT; ATOMIC-HF).
Dr McMurray0s salary from his employer is independent
from the monies received by Glasgow University from
commercial or non-commercial organizations

Patrick S Parfrey, MD, FRCPC, FRSC (Work Group Co-
Chair),
is a University Research Professor at Memorial
University and staff nephrologist at Eastern Health, New-
foundland. Dr Parfrey received his medical degree from
University College Cork, Ireland and is active in clinical
epidemiology research in kidney disease, particularly as it
relates to cardiovascular disease, anemia and genetic diseases.
He also supervised post-graduate work of more than 50
students and has authored over 300 publications. Dr Parfrey
is past Associate Editor of CJASN, past president of the
Canadian Society of Nephrology, an Ofﬁcer of the Order of
Canada and Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and has
received ﬁnancial support from both Amgen and Ortho
Biotech, as Chair of the Data Monitoring Committee of the
Normal Hematocrit Study; Co-Primary Investigator of the
Canada–Europe Trial; Executive Committee Member of

TREAT; and Co-Chair of
EVOLVE.

the Executive Committee of

Grant/Research Support: Amgen
Speaker: Amgen

John W Adamson, MD, completed his undergraduate work
at the University of California, Berkeley, and received a MD
degree from UCLA. Following training in Internal Medicine
and Hematology at the University of Washington, he spent
two years at the NIH, returning to the faculty in Seattle in
1969. He rose through the ranks to become professor and
head of the Division of Hematology in 1980 and was named a
Clinical Research Professor of the American Cancer Society
in 1988. In 1989, he moved to New York City as President of
the New York Blood Center and director of its research
institute. In 1998 he moved to Milwaukee as Executive Vice
President for Research at the Blood Center of Wisconsin and
Director of its Blood Research Institute. Four years ago he
joined the faculty at the University of California, San Diego,
as Clinical Professor of Medicine in Hematology/Oncology
where he serves as head of the Hematology/Oncology section
at the VA Medical Center and Associate Director of the
Hematology/Oncology Fellowship program at UCSD. Dr
Adamson has published numerous scientiﬁc articles and
reviews and has previously served as Editor-in-Chief of Blood;
founding editor of Current Opinion in Hematology; President
of the American Society of Hematology; and President of the
International Society for Experimental Hematology. His
interests lie in the areas of anemia diagnosis and manage-
ment, pathophysiology of the myeloproliferative neoplasms,
and the molecular biology of iron metabolism.

Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Akebia; AMAG; Amgen;
Hospira; Watson
Speaker: AMAG; Watson

Pedro Aljama, MD, PhD,
received his MD from the
University of Cadiz in 1971 and PhD from the University
of Seville in 1975. Professor Aljama then continued his
training at the Royal Victoria lnﬁrmary, Newcastle, United
Kingdom, where he was a Medical Ofﬁcier, Registrar and
then Senior Registrar in Nephrology, and a Lecturer in Renal
the University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Medicine at
(1977–1979). He returned to Spain in 1980 as a Senior
Registrar at Reina Soﬁa Hospital, University of Cordoba, and
was appointed Professor of Medicine and Nephrology in
1987. He is past President of
the Spanish Society of
Nephrology and presently a member of the International

324

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

Society of Nephrology, the European Society for Clinical
Investigation, the British Society of Nephrology and the
European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Trans-
plant Association. Professor Aljama has authored over 250
scientiﬁc papers and 50 book chapters.

Advisor/Consultant: Amgen; Roche; Vifor
Grant/Research Support: Janssen-Cilag; Roche
Speaker: Amgen; Vifor

is Professor of Medicine at

Jeffrey S Berns, MD,
the
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylva-
nia and the Penn Presbyterian Medical Center of Philadel-
phia, University of Pennsylvania Health System. Dr Berns is
also the Associate Dean for Graduate Medical Education,
Nephrology Fellowship Program Director and Associate
Chief of Renal, Electrolyte and Hypertension Division at
the University of Pennsylvania Health System. He obtained
his medical degree from Case Western Reserve University and
completed his nephrology fellowship at Yale University
School of Medicine. His professional activities include his
service as a long-standing Work Group member of the
KDOQI Anemia guideline from 1995–2007 and currently he
is the KDOQI Vice Chair for Guideline Commentaries and
Updates and also a member of the National Quality Forum
ESRD Steering Committee. Dr Berns has authored over 130
publications and is on the editorial board of Clinical
Nephrology, CJASN, and Seminars in Dialysis. In recognition
for his contributions, he received the Leonard Berwick
Memorial Teaching Award in 2008 and the Penn Medicine
Patient Advocacy Award in 2010.

Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Amgen; Takeda

Julia Bohlius, MD, MScPH, is a physician who is trained in
both hematology/oncology and public health. Dr Bohlius is
Editor of the Cochrane Haematological Malignancies Group
and has experience in the conduct of both literature-based and
individual patient data meta-analyses. Since 2001 she is a
leading systematic reviewer on ESAs in cancer patients and has
worked on international health technology assessments and
clinical guideline projects for ESAs and other growth factors in
cancer patients. While she started her clinical and scientiﬁc
career at the University of Cologne, Germany, she now works
as a Senior Research Fellow at the Institute of Social and
Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Dr Bohlius reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Tilman B Dru¨eke, MD, FRCP,
is Emeritus Director of
the INSERM laboratory ERI-12, UFR de
Research at
Me´decine et Pharmacie, Universite´ de Picardie Jules Verne,
Amiens, France. He received his MD degree at the University
of Tu¨bingen Medical School, Germany in 1968. From 1969
through 2009, he practiced his medical and scientiﬁc
activities at Necker Hospital/Necker Medical School, Uni-

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

several

focus on chronic renal

versite´ Paris V, Paris, France. Professor Dru¨eke’s research
interests
failure, hemodialysis,
metabolic and endocrine abnormalities, anemia, cardiovas-
cular complications and arterial hypertension. He is a
scientiﬁc societies, committees and
member of
advisory boards and a former Co-Chair of the KDIGO
CKD-MBD Guideline Work Group. Professor Dru¨eke is
Editor Emeritus of Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation,
former Associate Editor of the CJASN, an editorial board
member of JASN and presently Associate Editor of Kidney
International. He has published more than 500 original
articles and reviews in peer-reviewed journals.

Advisor/Consultant: Amgen; Roche; Vifor
Speaker: Amgen; Chugai; Vifor

Fredric O Finkelstein, MD, obtained his medical degree
from Columbia University and completed his nephrology
fellowship at Yale University Medical School where he is also
presently a Clinical Professor of Medicine. Over the span of
his career, he has lectured extensively throughout the world
and has held more than 30 visiting teaching positions. In
addition, he is currently Chair of the International Liaison
Committee of the International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis.
He is also Co-Chair of
the
International Society of Nephrology and an author of over
200 publications. Dr Finkelstein has dedicated substantial
research towards the understanding of quality of life and
psychosocial
issues for dialysis and non-dialysis patients
alike. He has served on the editorial board of Peritoneal
Dialysis International since 2004 and Kidney International
since 2010.

the Dialysis Committee of

Advisor/Consultant: Akebia, Amgen; Baxter
Grant/Research Support: Amgen

Steven Fishbane, MD, received his medical degree from Albert
Einstein College of Medicine where he also completed his
nephrology fellowship. He is currently Vice President of the
North Shore-LIJ Health System in Manhasset, NY, as well as
Professor of Medicine at SUNY Stony Brook School of
Medicine. Dr Fishbane is the Director of Clinical Trials for
the Department of Medicine of North Shore-LIJ University
Hospitals. Having participated as a KDOQI Anemia Guideline
Work Group member, he maintains an active research interest
in this area and has written over 150 publications. In addition
to serving as a reviewer for numerous journals, he currently sits
on the editorial board of CJASN and Kidney International. In
recognition for his commitment on enhancing healthcare
delivery and assessment, Dr Fishbane was the recipient of the
Physician Leadership in Quality Improvement Award from
IPRO in 2002 and the Volunteerism Award of the National
Kidney Foundation Serving Greater New York in 2010.

Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Akebia; Fibrogen; Rockwell
Medical Technologies

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

325

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Tomas Ganz, PhD, MD, is Professor of Medicine and Pathology
at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. Dr Ganz
received his PhD from the California Institute of Technology in
Applied Physics and MD from UCLA. He was then trained
in Internal Medicine and Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine at
the UCLA Medical Center. His major focus was on research on
the biological role of peptide mediators in innate immunity and
iron metabolism. More recently, he has
investigated the
pathogenesis of anemia of inﬂammation and iron overload
states, and worked on the development of hepcidin agonists and
antagonists. Dr Ganz has served as an Associate Editor of Blood
and a member of the Erythrocyte and Leukocyte Biology (ELB)
Study Section of the National Institutes of Health. In 2005, he
received the Marcel Simon Award of the International Bioiron
Society for the discovery of hepcidin.

Advisor/Consultant: Alnylam; Intrinsic LifeSciences;
Merganser Biotech; Ortho Biotech/Centocor; Pieris; Xenon;
Employee: Intrinsic LifeSciences; Merganser Biotech
Equity Interest: Intrinsic LifeSciences; Merganser Biotech
Grant/Research Support: Amgen; Xenon

Iain C Macdougall, BSc, MD, FRCP,
is a Consultant
Nephrologist and Professor of Clinical Nephrology at King’s
College Hospital, London, UK. He is a combined medical
and science graduate of Glasgow University, Scotland, from
which he was awarded a First Class Honours BSc in
Pharmacology in 1980, and his medical degree in 1983.
Professor Macdougall then completed his general medical
and nephrology training at hospitals in Glasgow, Cardiff, and
London. He developed a research interest in renal anemia
while a Clinical Research Fellow in Cardiff (1988–1991) and
extended this
interest during his appointment at St
Bartholomew’s Hospital (1991–1996), where he studied the
potential role of proinﬂammatory cytokines in mediating
resistance to epoetin. He has been involved in numerous
advisory boards in renal anemia management worldwide,
including the Working Parties responsible for both the 1999
the European Best Practice
and the 2004 versions of
Guidelines, along with the Work Group that produced the
latest US KDOQI Anemia Guidelines (2006; update 2007).
He was a previous Board member of the KDIGO initiative,
and a Council member of the European Renal Association
from 2004 until 2007. He has been the UK lead on several
pivotal clinical trials of anemia management in patients with
chronic kidney disease, including CREATE and TREAT, and
he chairs the Anaemia Clinical Study Group of the UK
Kidney Research Consortium.

Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Amgen; Ortho Biotech; Roche;
Takeda; Vifor
Grant/Research Support: Affymax; Amgen; Vifor
Speaker: Amgen; Ortho Biotech; Takeda; Vifor

is Professor of Pediatrics at
Ruth A McDonald, MD,
University of Washington and Clinical Director of Nephrol-

ogy at Children’s Hospital and Regional Medical Center in
Seattle, Washington. She completed her medical degree at
University of Minneosta School of Medicine where she was a
recipient of the Top Medical Graduate: Hewlett-Packard
Award. Dr McDonald is currently involved in numerous
multicenter clinical studies including a controlled trial of
Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy in historically
unsensitized renal transplant recipients with donor-speciﬁc
study to determine safety and
antibodies; a Phase II
immunomodulatory functions of
induction therapy with
Campath 1 H, combined with mycophenolate mofetil and
sirolimus; a surveillance study of viral infections in renal
transplant recipients and many others. She is also a member
including American
of eight professional organizations
Society of Pediatric Nephrology, American Society of
Transplantation, International Pediatric Transplant Associa-
tion and past Work Group member of the KDIGO Clinical
the Care of Kidney Transplant
Practice Guideline for
Recipients. Among her teaching responsibilities, she has
trained over 25 fellows and has also served as Medical
Student Research Mentor. Dr McDonald has authored over
60 publications and has given close to 40 invited and extra-
institutional lectures in the past 10 years.

Dr McDonald reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

appointments, he was Associate Professor

Lawrence P McMahon, MBBS, MD, is Director, Department
of Renal Medicine at Eastern Health Integrated Renal Services
and Professor Nephrology at Monash University. Prior to his
at
present
University of Melbourne School of Medicine; Director of
Nephrology Services and Obstetric Medical Services at
Western Health; and Consortium Director of Physician
Training at Greater Western Consortium. Dr McMahon has
participated in guideline development activities for the
Australian and New Zealand Society of Nephrology and is
presently the President, National Council of Society of
Obstetric Medicine of Australian and New Zealand. He has
written more than 50 publications and serves as a regular
reviewer for more than a dozen journals, including his role as
Associate Editor of Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation.

Grant/Research Support: Amgen; Roche

Gregorio T Obrador, MD, MPH, is Professor of Medicine
and Dean at
the Universidad Panamericana School of
Medicine in Mexico City. He also serves as Adjunct Physician
at the Tufts Medical Center’s Division of Nephrology and as
staff nephrologist at Dalinde Medical Center in Mexico City.
He earned his medical degree from the University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain, completed his Internal Medicine residency
at the Western Pennsylvania Hospital, Pittsburgh, USA, and
obtained his Nephrology training at Boston University, USA.
While undertaking a clinical research fellowship at the Tufts-
New England Medical Center and a Master of Public Health
at Harvard University, he demonstrated that the management

326

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

of patients with CKD prior to stage 5 is suboptimal, and
that this is an important factor for the high morbidity and
mortality observed in these patients. He has been a
member of the KDOQI’s Advisory Board, the NKF/KDOQI
Anemia Work Goup, and the KDIGO Transplant Guideline
Work Group. Currently he is a member of the WHO’s
Non-Communicable diseases Network (NCDnet), Co-Chair
of the Global Kidney Disease Prevention Network (KDPN),
Co-Chair of the Latin American Clinical Practice Guidelines
for the Prevention, Diagnosis and Treatment of CKD (Stages
1–5), and President of
the
Mexican Kidney Foundation.
In 2009 he received the
National Kidney Foundation’s International Distinguished
Medal. Dr Obrador is a member of the editorial board of
CJASN and has served as reviewer for other nephrology
journals. He has given more than 100 lectures in national and
international forums and has several publications in the area
of CKD.

the Board of Directors of

Grant/Research Support: Amgen; Roche

Giovanni FM Strippoli, MD, PhD, MPH, is a nephrologist
and an epidemiologist trained both in Italy and at the
University of Sydney School of Public Health, Sydney,
Australia where he completed a Master of Public Health
and a PhD in medicine-clinical epidemiology. Dr Strippoli is
an editor of
the Cochrane Renal Group, and Adjunct
Associate Professor of Epidemiology at the School of Public
Health, and the Renal Research Coordinator at Mario Negri
Sud Consortium in Italy. He also serves as scientiﬁc director
of Diaverum AB. His research interests include evidence-
based nephrology, with a focus on systematic reviews in the
area of prognosis and treatment of renal conditions, design
and conduct of randomized controlled trials in the ﬁeld
of prevention of chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular
risk. Dr Strippoli has a substantial scientiﬁc output with
independent funding in these areas. He is also the principal
investigator of LIRICO, a trial on the Long Term Impact of
Renin Angiotensin System Inhibitors on Cardiorenal Out-
comes in people with albuminuria, and C.E. DOSE, a trial on
the clinical evaluation of the Dose of Erythropoietins in
people on hemodialysis.

Employee: Diaverum AB

Gu¨nter Weiss, MD, is Professor of Clinical Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, and
Head of research laboratory for Molecular Immunology
and Infectious Diseases at Medical University of Innsbruck.
Dr Weiss had enrolled in Leopold Franzens University and
University of Innsbruck for his medical studies and his
ongoing research encompasses a wide array of
topics
including: anemia of chronic disease; primary and secondary
iron overload; host pathogen interaction with a particular
focus on the role of macrophages and natural resistance
genes; and regulatory interactions between iron, immunity

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

and infection. Dr Weiss has authored 190 original publica-
tions in peer reviewed journals including reviews on anemia
of chronic disease and iron metabolism in inﬂammation and
infection.

Grant/Research Support: Amgen
Speaker: Vifor

Andrzej Wie˛cek, MD, PhD, FRCP, is Professor of Internal
Medicine and Chief, Department of Nephrology, Endocri-
nology and Metabolic Diseases, at Silesian University
School of Medicine, Katowice, Poland. Dr Wie˛cek’s research
interests include anemia management in CKD, treatments for
primary and secondary hypertension, elucidation of hormo-
nal abnormalities in uremia, and endocrine function of
adipose tissue. In addition to being a participating member
of
the European Renal Best Practice Anaemia Working
Group, he is Past President of Polish Society of Nephrology
and has served on the KDIGO Board. Dr Wie˛cek is now a
member of KDIGO Implementation Task Force Leader
for Eastern Europe region and Secretary-Treasurer for the
ERA-EDTA. As a proliﬁc author with over 530 publications,
he is currently Subject Editor
for Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation.

Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Affymax; Sandoz
Speaker: Amgen

KDIGO CHAIRS
Bertram L Kasiske, MD, is Professor of Medicine at the
University of Minnesota, USA. He received his medical
degree from the University of Iowa and completed his
Internal Medicine residency and fellowship training in
Nephrology at Hennepin County Medical Center where he
is currently Director of Nephrology.

Dr Kasiske is former Deputy Director of the United States
Renal Data System and former Editor-in-Chief of The
American Journal of Kidney Diseases. He has served as
Secretary/Treasurer and on the Board of Directors of the
American Society of Transplantation, and on the Organ
Procurement and Transplantation Network/United Network
of Organ Sharing Board of Directors, and the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Board of the National Kidney Foundation. He is
currently serving on the Board of Councilors of
the
International Society of Nephrology. He is the Principal
Investigator for a National Institutes of Health-sponsored,
long term outcomes after kidney
multi-center study of
donation. He is the Director of the Scientiﬁc Registry of
Transplant Recipients. He has over 160 scientiﬁc publications
in major peer reviewed journals, and 230 review articles,
editorials and textbook chapters. Dr Kasiske is also a recipient
of the NKF’s Garabed Eknoyan Award in 2003.

Advisor/Consultant: Litholink
Grant/Research Support: Bristol-Myers Squibb; Merck-
Schering Plough

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

327

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

David C Wheeler, MD, FRCP, holds an academic position
in Nephrology (Reader) at University College London, UK
and is an Honorary Consultant Nephrologist at the Royal
Free Hospital. His research is focused on the cardiovascular
complications of chronic kidney disease and the role of
vascular risk factors in progression of kidney damage. Dr
Wheeler is a member of the International Steering Commit-
tee of the Study of Heart and Renal Protection (SHARP) and
was UK National Coordinator for the trial. He is involved in
several other randomized trials and observational studies
involving patients with chronic kidney disease.

He currently serves on the executive committee of KDIGO
and previously contributed as a Work Group member to the
KDIGO Guideline on Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and
Bone Disorder. He has recently received an International
Distinguished Medal from the US National Kidney Founda-
tion in recognition of his contribution to guideline develop-
ment. In the UK, he has previously served on the executive
committee of the Renal Association and has been elected
President for the term 2012–2014.

Dr Wheeler has served on the editorial boards of the
the
American Journal of Kidney Diseases and Journal of
American Society of Nephrology and currently acts as co-
Deputy Editor for Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation.

Advisor/Consultant: Amgen
Honoraria: Abbott, Amgen, Fresenius, Shire
Grant/Research Support: Abbott, Genzyme

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM
Ethan M Balk, MD, MPH,
is Director, Evidence-based
Medicine at the Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline
Development and Implementation,
in Boston, MA, USA,
Associate Director of
the Tufts Evidence-based Practice
Center, and Assistant Professor of Medicine at Tufts
University School of Medicine. Dr Balk graduated from
Tufts University School of Medicine and completed a
fellowship in Clinical Care Research. As Project Director, he
plays a substantial role in providing methodological expertise
in the guideline development process and assists in the
collection, evaluation, grading, and synthesis of evidence and
the revisions of the ﬁnal evidence report. Dr Balk also
provides methodological guidance and training of Work
Group members during meetings regarding topic reﬁnement,
key question formulation, data extraction, study assessment,
evidence grading, and recommendation formulation. His
primary research interests are evidence-based medicine,
systematic review, clinical practice guideline development,
and critical literature appraisal.

Dr Balk reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Ashish Upadhyay, MD, is Assistant Professor, Renal Section
and Associate Director, Internal Medicine Residency Program
at Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
Dr Upadhyay was previously Assistant Professor at Tufts

University School of Medicine and staff physician in the
William B. Schwartz, MD, Division of Nephrology at Tufts
Medical Center. He joined the ERT in July 2009 and served as
the Assistant Project Director for the KDIGO Management of
Blood Pressure in CKD and Anemia in CKD Guidelines. Dr
Upadhyay coordinated and assisted in the collection, evalua-
tion, grading, and synthesis of evidence, and played a critical
role in the revisions of the ﬁnal evidence report. He also
provided methodological guidance and training of Work
Group members on topic reﬁnement, key question formula-
tion, data extraction, study assessment, evidence grading, and
recommendation formulation. Dr Upadhyay’s past research
involved studying kidney disease epidemiology in the Framing-
ham Heart Study. He has published in areas ranging from
arterial stiffness in CKD and inﬂammation in kidney disease to
dialysis complications and epidemiology of hyponatremia.

Dr Upadhyay reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Dana C Miskulin, MD, MS, is Assistant Professor of Medicine
at Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. She
completed a fellowship in Clinical Care Research and
participated in the conduct of systematic reviews and critical
literature appraisals for this guideline. Her primary research
interests are in comparative effectiveness research in dialysis
patients, blood pressure treatment in dialysis patients, and
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Dr Miskulin reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Amy Earley, BS, is a project coordinator at the Tufts Center
for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementa-
tion in Boston, MA, USA. She is key in coordinating the
guideline development activities within the ERT, especially in
the development of the evidence reports for all guidelines. Ms
Earley also heads the actual evidence review, which includes
running searches, screening, data extraction, drafting of
tables and methods sections, prooﬁng of guideline drafts and
critical literature appraisals. She participates in the conduct
of research projects at the Center and actively collaborates
with other members of the Center on independent research
topics and manuscript submissions.

Ms Earley reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Shana Haynes, MS, DHSc, is a research assistant at the Tufts
Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and
Implementation in Boston, MA, USA. She participates in
all aspects of evidence review and guideline development.
She screens abstracts and articles, extracts data, and assists in
the drafting and editing of evidence tables. Dr Haynes
also assists in the development of clinical practice guidelines
and conducts
literature
appraisals.

systematic reviews and critical

Dr Haynes reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

328

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Jenny Lamont, MS, is a project manager and medical writer
at the Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development
and Implementation in Boston, MA, USA. She participates in
all aspects of evidence review and guideline development,

assists in the preparation of talks and manuscripts, and edits
KDIGO draft guidelines currently in progress.

Ms Lamont reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 324–329

329

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Acknowledgments

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 330; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.44

A special debt of gratitude is owed to the KDIGO Co-Chairs
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, Bertram Kasiske, David Wheeler and the
KDIGO Board for their invaluable guidance throughout the
development of this guideline. In particular, we thank the
ERT members: Ethan Balk, Ashish Upadhyay, Dana Miskulin,
Amy Earley, Shana Haynes, and Jenny Lamont for their
substantial contribution to the rigorous assessment of the
available evidence. We are also especially grateful to the Work
Group members for their expertise throughout the entire
process of
review, data extraction, meeting
the
participation,
statements and rationale, which made the publication of
this guideline possible. The generous gift of their time and
dedication is greatly appreciated. Finally, and on behalf of the
Work Group, we gratefully acknowledge the careful assess-
ment of the draft guideline by external reviewers. The Work
Group considered all of the valuable comments made and,
where appropriate, suggested changes were incorporated into
the ﬁnal publication. The following individuals provided
feedback during the public review of the draft guideline:

critical writing and editing of

literature
the

Omar Abboud; Hugo Abensur; Patrı´cia Ferreira Abreu;
Matias Abuchanab; Azreen Syazril Adnan; Tekin Akpolat;
Mona Al Rukhaimi; Bulent Altun; Abdullah M Al-Zahrani;
Pablo Amair; Sukgasem Amornsuntorn; Ramnath Andhale;
Andrea Angioi; Hans-Juergen Arens; Mustafa Arici; Mariano
Arriola; Ferruh Artunc; Suheir Assady; Meredith Atkinson;
Peter Barany; Antoine Barbari; Rashad Barsoum; Don
Batisky; Josef Bautista; Thomas Bernhardt; Patrick Biggar;
Celeste Boucher; Philippe Brunet; Frederic Calaud; Rafael
Burgos Calderon; Bernard Canaud; Katie Cardone; Raul
Carlini; Fernando Carrera; Sue Cary; Arlene Chabanuk;
Jiang-Hua Chen; Massimo Cirillo; Marie Cole; Maura Conti;
Rosanna Coppo; Adrian Covic; Daniel W Coyne; Andrew J
Crannage; Ana Maria Cusumano; Elec Alina Daciana; Mary
Date; Jane S Davis; Kimberly Davis; Luca De Nicola; Rodrigo
Bueno de Oliveira; Rogerio Baumgratz de Paula; Lucia Del
Vecchio; Sebastien Delanerie; Montserrat Dı´az-Encarnacio´ n;
Valentin Ermolenko; Nancy Eschrich; Elizabeth Evans;
Stephen Z Fadem; Sandro Feriozzi; Sebastia˜o Rodrigues
Ferreira-Filho; Jorgen Folkesen; Ricardo Fonseca; Jonathan G
Fox; Susan L Furth; Jan Galle; Guillermo Garcia Garcia;
Melissa Garza; Cheryl Gilmartin; Richard J Glassock; Elaine
Go; Dr Gokulnath; Chandramohan Gundappa; Lara Had-
dock; Karen Hamacher; Jeff Harder; Brenda R Hemmelgarn;
Koen Hens; Hideki Hirakata; Elisabeth M Hodson; Hallvard
Holdaas; Cai Hong; Eero Honkanen; Lai Seong Hooi; Enyu
Imai; Goran Imamovic´; Dmytro Ivanov; Alan G Jardine;
Andrzej Jaroszynski; Deepa Jayaram; Chandra Mauli Jha;

Jacqueline Nolen; Karim Nooruddin;

Nada Kanaan; Gu¨lc¸in Kantarcı; Cecelia Kasnick;
Jenna
Kawamoto; Goh Heong Keong; Reshma Kewalramani; Vijay
Kher; Arif Khwaja; Stefan Krivoshiev; Dirk Kuypers; Bruce
Lange; Craig B Langman; Edgar V Lerma; Nathan W Levin;
Rongshan Li; Sergio Liderman; Petrica Ligia; Chin Yao Lin;
Jelka Lindic; Kirill Lipatov; Zhang-Suo Liu; Zhi-Hong Liu;
Matthias Lorenz; Antonio Lupo; Eileen MacFarlane; Fran-
cesca Mallamaci; Alberto Martinez-Castelao; Pablo Massari;
Amanda Medland; Marius Miglinas; Roberto Minutolo;
Gabriel Mircescu; Kirtida Mistry; Gerardo Mogni; Walid
Ahmed Abdel Atty Mohamed; Louise Moist; Sameh Morgan;
Eugen Mota; Ce´sar Loza Munarriz; Jessica Nagro; Judit Nagy;
Oscar Naidas; Mooppil Nandakumar; Masaomi Nangaku;
John
Alicia Neu;
Ingrid Os;
Okogbaa; Raymond V Oliva; Alberto Ortiz;
Antonino Paglialunga; Thaweepong Pajareya; Sonia Pasquali;
Saime Paydas; Breda Pecˇovnik Balon; Tammy Pennington;
Frederik Persson; Fu Ping; Allan S Pollock; Krishna Polu;
Rafael Ponikvar; Roberto Pontremoli; Kearkiat Praditporn-
silpa; Rashida K Rahman; Norma Rhines; Peter Ricci; Troels
Ring; Francisco Rivera; A Adibul Rizvi; Nicolas Roberto
Robles; Michael V Rocco; Karen Rochelle; Cibele Rodrigues;
Guillermo Rosa-Diez; Mai Ots Rosenberg; Jaroslav Rosen-
berger; Jacques Rottembourg; Irakli Rtskhiladze; Michael
Rudnicki; Luis Ruilope; Romana Rysava; Heikki Saha; Tonya
Sanders; J Santos; Bento Santos; Sergio Santos; Kenneth R
Say; Sharon Schatz; Francesco Paolo Schena; Francesco
Scolari; Jang Won Seo; Deepak Sharma; Mitesh B Sheth;
Valeriy Shilo; Hassan Abdel-Wahed Shora; Justin Silver;
Itzchak Slotki; Paul E Stevens; Claes Strom; Gere Sunder-
Plassmann; Navdeep Tangri; Miha´ly Tapolyai; Peter Thom-
son; Natalia Tomilina; Giorgio Triolo; George Tsangalis;
Dennis Tse; Yoshiharu Tsubakihara;
Jeff Unger; Vinod
Venkataraman; Alberto Vianello; Theodor Vogels; Rowan
Walker; Jian-Xin Wan; Rong Wang; Bradley A Warady; Kristy
Washinger; Talia Weinstein; Catherine Wells; Colin White;
Yvonne Wilkens; Christopher G Winearls; Sara Wolfson;
Viktoria Woronik; Mai-Szu Wu; Houqin Xiao; Wu Xiujuan;
Li Yang; Ariel Young; Elena Zakharova; Ming-hui Zhao;
Francisco Zornosa; Guimian Zou; Kim Zuber; Alessandro
Zuccala`; Mario Zu´ n˜iga; Li Zuo.

Participation in the review does not necessarily constitute
endorsement of the content of this report by the above
individuals, or the organization or institution they represent.

John J V McMurray, MD, FRCP, FESC
Patrick S Parfrey, MD, FRCPC, FRSC
Work Group Co-Chairs

330

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 330

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

r e f e r e n c e s

References

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.45

REFERENCES

2.

1. Astor BC, Muntner P, Levin A et al. Association of kidney function with
anemia: the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(1988-1994). Arch Intern Med 2002; 162: 1401–1408.
Fadrowski JJ, Pierce CB, Cole SR et al. Hemoglobin decline in children
with chronic kidney disease: baseline results from the chronic kidney
disease in children prospective cohort study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008;
3: 457–462.
Schwartz GJ, Munoz A, Schneider MF et al. New equations to estimate
GFR in children with CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20: 629–637.

3.

4. World Health Organization. Worldwide Prevalence of Anaemia 1993–2005:
WHO Global Database on Anaemia. In: de Benoist B, McLean E, Egli I
and M Cogswell (eds), 2008.

5. Hollowell JG, van Assendelft OW, Gunter EW et al. Hematological and
iron-related analytes–reference data for persons aged 1 year and over:
United States, 1988-94. Vital Health Stat 11, 2005, 1–156.

6. Nathan DG, Orkin SH. Appendix 11: Normal hematologic values in

children. In: Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, Look AT, Oski FA (eds).
Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 6th edn.
WB Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2003, p 1841.

7. Brittin GM, Brecher G, Johnson CA et al. Stability of blood in commonly
used anticoagulants. Use of refrigerated blood for quality control of the
Coulter Counter Model S. Am J Clin Pathol 1969; 52: 690–694.
Locatelli F, Aljama P, Barany P et al. Revised European best practice
guidelines for the management of anaemia in patients with chronic
renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19(Suppl 2): ii1–i47.

8.

9. Morris MW, Davey FR. Basic examination of blood. Clinical Diagnosis and

Management by Laboratory Methods. WB Saunders, 1996, pp 549–593.

10. Weiss G, Goodnough LT. Anemia of chronic disease. N Engl J Med 2005;

11.

352: 1011–1023.
Fehr T, Ammann P, Garzoni D et al. Interpretation of erythropoietin
levels in patients with various degrees of renal insufficiency and anemia.
Kidney Int 2004; 66: 1206–1211.

12. Ross RP, McCrea JB, Besarab A. Erythropoietin response to blood loss in
hemodialysis patients in blunted but preserved. ASAIO J 1994; 40:
M880–M885.
Lipschitz DA, Cook JD, Finch CA. A clinical evaluation of serum ferritin as
an index of iron stores. N Engl J Med 1974; 290: 1213–1216.
14. Rambod M, Kovesdy CP, Kalantar-Zadeh K. Combined high serum

13.

15.

ferritin and low iron saturation in hemodialysis patients: the role of
inflammation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 1691–1701.
Fernandez-Rodriguez AM, Guindeo-Casasus MC, Molero-Labarta T et al.
Diagnosis of iron deficiency in chronic renal failure. Am J Kidney Dis
1999; 34: 508–513.

16. Kalantar-Zadeh K, Hoffken B, Wunsch H et al. Diagnosis of iron
deficiency anemia in renal failure patients during the post-
erythropoietin era. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 26: 292–299.

17. Aljama P, Ward MK, Pierides AM et al. Serum ferritin concentration: a
reliable guide to iron overload in uremic and hemodialyzed patients.
Clin Nephrol 1978; 10: 101–104.

18. Barany P, Eriksson LC, Hultcrantz R et al. Serum ferritin and tissue iron in
anemic dialysis patients. Miner Electrolyte Metab 1997; 23: 273–276.
19. Blumberg AB, Marti HR, Graber CG. Serum ferritin and bone marrow iron
in patients undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. JAMA
1983; 250: 3317–3319.

22.

20. Hussein S, Prieto J, O0Shea M et al. Serum ferritin assay and iron status in
chronic renal failure and haemodialysis. Br Med J 1975; 1: 546–548.
21. Mirahmadi KS, Paul WL, Winer RL et al. Serum ferritin level. Determinant
of iron requirement in hemodialysis patients. JAMA 1977; 238: 601–603.
Tessitore N, Girelli D, Campostrini N et al. Hepcidin is not useful as a
biomarker for iron needs in haemodialysis patients on maintenance
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010; 25:
3996–4002.
Tessitore N, Solero GP, Lippi G et al. The role of iron status markers in
predicting response to intravenous iron in haemodialysis patients on
maintenance erythropoietin. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2001; 16:
1416–1423.

23.

24. Galloway M, Rushworth L. Red cell or serum folate? Results from the
National Pathology Alliance benchmarking review. J Clin Pathol 2003;
56: 924–926.

25. Mircescu G, Garneata L, Capusa C et al. Intravenous iron

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

supplementation for the treatment of anaemia in pre-dialyzed chronic
renal failure patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21: 120–124.
Silverberg DS, Iaina A, Peer G et al. Intravenous iron supplementation for
the treatment of the anemia of moderate to severe chronic renal failure
patients not receiving dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis 1996; 27: 234–238.
Fishbane S, Frei GL, Maesaka J. Reduction in recombinant human
erythropoietin doses by the use of chronic intravenous iron
supplementation. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 26: 41–46.
Sunder-Plassmann G, Horl WH. Importance of iron supply for
erythropoietin therapy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1995; 10: 2070–2076.
Fishbane S, Maesaka JK. Iron management in end-stage renal disease.
Am J Kidney Dis 1997; 29: 319–333.
Fishbane S, Kowalski EA, Imbriano LJ et al. The evaluation of iron status
in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1996; 7: 2654–2657.
Fishbane S, Shapiro W, Dutka P et al. A randomized trial of iron
deficiency testing strategies in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 2001;
60: 2406–2411.

32. Macdougall IC, Tucker B, Thompson J et al. A randomized controlled

study of iron supplementation in patients treated with erythropoietin.
Kidney Int 1996; 50: 1694–1699.
Feldman HI, Joffe M, Robinson B et al. Administration of parenteral iron
and mortality among hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15:
1623–1632.
Feldman HI, Santanna J, Guo W et al. Iron administration and clinical
outcomes in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002; 13: 734–744.

33.

34.

35. Kalantar-Zadeh K, Regidor DL, McAllister CJ et al. Time-dependent

associations between iron and mortality in hemodialysis patients. J Am
Soc Nephrol 2005; 16: 3070–3080.

38.

37.

36. Chang CH, Chang CC, Chiang SS. Reduction in erythropoietin doses by
the use of chronic intravenous iron supplementation in iron-replete
hemodialysis patients. Clin Nephrol 2002; 57: 136–141.
Senger JM, Weiss RJ. Hematologic and erythropoietin responses to iron
dextran in the hemodialysis environment. ANNA J 1996; 23: 319–323;
discussion 324–315.
Spinowitz BS, Kausz AT, Baptista J et al. Ferumoxytol for treating iron
deficiency anemia in CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19: 1599–1605.
Silverberg DS, Blum M, Agbaria Z et al. The effect of i.v. iron alone or in
combination with low-dose erythropoietin in the rapid correction of
anemia of chronic renal failure in the predialysis period. Clin Nephrol
2001; 55: 212–219.
Stancu S, Barsan L, Stanciu A et al. Can the response to iron therapy be
predicted in anemic nondialysis patients with chronic kidney disease?
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 409–416.

39.

40.

41. Besarab A, Kaiser JW, Frinak S. A study of parenteral iron regimens in

hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1999; 34: 21–28.
42. DeVita MV, Frumkin D, Mittal S et al. Targeting higher ferritin

concentrations with intravenous iron dextran lowers erythropoietin
requirement in hemodialysis patients. Clin Nephrol 2003; 60: 335–340.

43. Navarro JF, Teruel JL, Liano F et al. Effectiveness of intravenous

administration of Fe-gluconate-Na complex to maintain adequate body
iron stores in hemodialysis patients. Am J Nephrol 1996; 16: 268–272.
44. Anker SD, Comin Colet J, Filippatos G et al. Ferric carboxymaltose in

patients with heart failure and iron deficiency. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:
2436–2448.

46.

45. Van Wyck DB, Roppolo M, Martinez CO et al. A randomized, controlled
trial comparing IV iron sucrose to oral iron in anemic patients with
nondialysis-dependent CKD. Kidney Int 2005; 68: 2846–2856.
Ford BA, Coyne DW, Eby CS et al. Variability of ferritin measurements in
chronic kidney disease; implications for iron management. Kidney Int
2009; 75: 104–110.
Fishbane S. Upper limit of serum ferritin: misinterpretation of the 2006
KDOQI anemia guidelines. Semin Dial 2008; 21: 217–220.

47.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335

331

r e f e r e n c e s

48.

Fishbane S, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Nissenson AR. Serum ferritin in chronic
kidney disease: reconsidering the upper limit for iron treatment. Semin
Dial 2004; 17: 336–341.

49. National Kidney Foundation. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for
Anemia of Chronic Kidney Disease: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;
37: S182–S238.

50. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines and

Clinical Practice Recommendations for Anemia in Chronic Kidney
Disease. Am J Kidney Dis 2006; 47: S1–S146.

51. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI Clinical Practice Guideline and

52.

Clinical Practice Recommendations for anemia in chronic kidney disease:
2007 update of hemoglobin target. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 50: 471–530.
Locatelli F, Covic A, Eckardt KU et al. Anaemia management in patients
with chronic kidney disease: a position statement by the Anaemia
Working Group of European Renal Best Practice (ERBP). Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2009; 24: 348–354.

53. Coyne DW, Kapoian T, Suki W et al. Ferric gluconate is highly efficacious
in anemic hemodialysis patients with high serum ferritin and low
transferrin saturation: results of the Dialysis Patients0 Response to IV Iron
with Elevated Ferritin (DRIVE) Study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2007; 18:
975–984.

54. Canavese C, Bergamo D, Ciccone G et al. Validation of serum ferritin

55.

values by magnetic susceptometry in predicting iron overload in dialysis
patients. Kidney Int 2004; 65: 1091–1098.
Ferrari P, Kulkarni H, Dheda S et al. Serum iron markers are inadequate
for guiding iron repletion in chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2011; 6: 77–83.

56. Caramelo C, Albalate M, Bermejillo T et al. Relationships between plasma
ferritin and aminotransferase profile in haemodialysis patients with
hepatitis C virus. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11: 1792–1796.
57. Morrison ED, Brandhagen DJ, Phatak PD et al. Serum ferritin level

predicts advanced hepatic fibrosis among U.S. patients with phenotypic
hemochromatosis. Ann Intern Med 2003; 138: 627–633.

58. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines and

Clinical Practice Recommendations for Anemia in Chronic Kidney
Disease. Section III. Clinical practice recommendations for anemia
in chronic kidney disease in children. Am J Kidney Dis 2006; 47:
S86–108.

59. Agarwal R, Rizkala AR, Bastani B et al. A randomized controlled trial of

oral versus intravenous iron in chronic kidney disease. Am J Nephrol
2006; 26: 445–454.

60. Aggarwal HK, Nand N, Singh S et al. Comparison of oral versus

intravenous iron therapy in predialysis patients of chronic renal failure
receiving recombinant human erythropoietin. J Assoc Physicians India
2003; 51: 170–174.

61. Charytan C, Qunibi W, Bailie GR. Comparison of intravenous iron sucrose

to oral iron in the treatment of anemic patients with chronic kidney
disease not on dialysis. Nephron Clin Pract 2005; 100: c55–c62.
62. Rozen-Zvi B, Gafter-Gvili A, Paul M et al. Intravenous versus oral iron

63.

supplementation for the treatment of anemia in CKD: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2008; 52: 897–906.
Stoves J, Inglis H, Newstead CG. A randomized study of oral vs
intravenous iron supplementation in patients with progressive renal
insufficiency treated with erythropoietin. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2001;
16: 967–974.

71.

72.

73.

Eschbach JW, Cook JD, Scribner BH et al. Iron balance in hemodialysis
patients. Ann Intern Med 1977; 87: 710–713.
Sargent JA, Acchiardo SR. Iron requirements in hemodialysis. Blood Purif
2004; 22: 112–123.
Schaefer RM, Schaefer L. Iron monitoring and supplementation: how do
we achieve the best results? Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998; 13(Suppl 2):
9–12.

74. Besarab A, Amin N, Ahsan M et al. Optimization of epoetin therapy with

intravenous iron therapy in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol
2000; 11: 530–538.

75. Ruiz-Jaramillo Mde L, Guizar-Mendoza JM, Gutierrez-Navarro Mde J et al.

76.

Intermittent versus maintenance iron therapy in children on
hemodialysis: a randomized study. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19: 77–81.
Schroder CH. The management of anemia in pediatric peritoneal dialysis
patients. Guidelines by an ad hoc European committee. Pediatr Nephrol
2003; 18: 805–809.

77. Van Damme-Lombaerts R, Herman J. Erythropoietin treatment in
children with renal failure. Pediatr Nephrol 1999; 13: 148–152.
78. Warady BA, Kausz A, Lerner G et al. Iron therapy in the pediatric
hemodialysis population. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19: 655–661.

79. Warady BA, Zobrist RH, Wu J et al. Sodium ferric gluconate complex

therapy in anemic children on hemodialysis. Pediatr Nephrol 2005; 20:
1320–1327.

80. Warady BA, Zobrist RH, Finan E. Sodium ferric gluconate complex

maintenance therapy in children on hemodialysis. Pediatr Nephrol 2006;
21: 553–560.

81. Anbu AT, Kemp T, O0Donnell K et al. Low incidence of adverse events
following 90-minute and 3-minute infusions of intravenous iron sucrose
in children on erythropoietin. Acta Paediatr 2005; 94: 1738–1741.
82. Bailie GR, Clark JA, Lane CE et al. Hypersensitivity reactions and deaths
associated with intravenous iron preparations. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2005; 20: 1443–1449.

84.

85.

83. Charytan C, Schwenk MH, Al-Saloum MM et al. Safety of iron sucrose in
hemodialysis patients intolerant to other parenteral iron products.
Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 96: c63–c66.
Fishbane S, Ungureanu VD, Maesaka JK et al. The safety of intravenous
iron dextran in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1996; 28: 529–534.
Fletes R, Lazarus JM, Gage J et al. Suspected iron dextran-related
adverse drug events in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2001; 37:
743–749.
Jain AK, Bastani B. Safety profile of a high dose ferric gluconate in
patients with severe chronic renal insufficiency. J Nephrol 2002; 15:
681–683.
Lu M, Cohen MH, Rieves D et al. FDA report: Ferumoxytol for
intravenous iron therapy in adult patients with chronic kidney disease.
Am J Hematol 2010; 85: 315–319.

86.

87.

88. Macdougall IC, Roche A. Administration of intravenous iron sucrose as a
2-minute push to CKD patients: a prospective evaluation of 2,297
injections. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 46: 283–289.

89. Michael B, Coyne DW, Fishbane S et al. Sodium ferric gluconate complex

90.

in hemodialysis patients: adverse reactions compared to placebo and
iron dextran. Kidney Int 2002; 61: 1830–1839.
Sav T, Tokgoz B, Sipahioglu MH et al. Is there a difference between the
allergic potencies of the iron sucrose and low molecular weight iron
dextran? Ren Fail 2007; 29: 423–426.

64. Allegra V, Mengozzi G, Vasile A. Iron deficiency in maintenance

91. Ullian ME, Gadegbeku CA. Effects of intravenously administered iron on

hemodialysis patients: assessment of diagnosis criteria and of three
different iron treatments. Nephron 1991; 57: 175–182.
Li H, Wang SX. Intravenous iron sucrose in Chinese hemodialysis
patients with renal anemia. Blood Purif 2008; 26: 151–156.

65.

67.

68.

66. Ahsan N. Intravenous infusion of total dose iron is superior to oral iron in
treatment of anemia in peritoneal dialysis patients: a single center
comparative study. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998; 9: 664–668.
Johnson DW, Herzig KA, Gissane R et al. A prospective crossover trial
comparing intermittent intravenous and continuous oral iron
supplements in peritoneal dialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2001; 16: 1879–1884.
Johnson DW, Herzig KA, Gissane R et al. Oral versus intravenous iron
supplementation in peritoneal dialysis patients. Perit Dial Int 2001;
21(Suppl 3): S231–S235.
Li H, Wang SX. Intravenous iron sucrose in peritoneal dialysis patients
with renal anemia. Perit Dial Int 2008; 28: 149–154.
Singh H, Reed J, Noble S et al. Effect of intravenous iron sucrose in
peritoneal dialysis patients who receive erythropoiesis-stimulating
agents for anemia: a randomized, controlled trial. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2006; 1: 475–482.

70.

69.

systemic blood pressure in hemodialysis patients. Nephron Clin Pract
2004; 98: c83–c86.

92. Auerbach M, Al Talib K. Low-molecular weight iron dextran and iron

sucrose have similar comparative safety profiles in chronic kidney
disease. Kidney Int 2008; 73: 528–530.

93. Chertow GM, Mason PD, Vaage-Nilsen O et al. On the relative safety of

parenteral iron formulations. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:
1571–1575.

94. Chertow GM, Mason PD, Vaage-Nilsen O et al. Update on adverse drug
events associated with parenteral iron. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21:
378–382.

95. McCarthy JT, Regnier CE, Loebertmann CL et al. Adverse events in
chronic hemodialysis patients receiving intravenous iron dextran–a
comparison of two products. Am J Nephrol 2000; 20: 455–462.
96. Rodgers GM, Auerbach M, Cella D et al. High-molecular weight iron

dextran: a wolf in sheep0s clothing? J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19: 833–834.
97. Wessling-Resnick M. Iron homeostasis and the inflammatory response.

Annu Rev Nutr 2010; 30: 105–122.

98. Appelberg R. Macrophage nutriprive antimicrobial mechanisms.

J Leukoc Biol 2006; 79: 1117–1128.

332

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335

r e f e r e n c e s

99. Byrd TF, Horwitz MA. Interferon gamma-activated human monocytes
downregulate transferrin receptors and inhibit the intracellular
multiplication of Legionella pneumophila by limiting the availability of
iron. J Clin Invest 1989; 83: 1457–1465.

100. Mencacci A, Cenci E, Boelaert JR et al. Iron overload alters innate and T
helper cell responses to Candida albicans in mice. J Infect Dis 1997; 175:
1467–1476.

101. Nairz M, Theurl I, Ludwiczek S et al. The co-ordinated regulation of iron

homeostasis in murine macrophages limits the availability of iron for
intracellular Salmonella typhimurium. Cell Microbiol 2007; 9: 2126–2140.

102. Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D et al. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter

prospective study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic hemodialysis
patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998; 9: 869–876.

103. Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Kessler M. Intravenous iron administration

104.

does not significantly increase the risk of bacteremia in chronic
hemodialysis patients. Clin Nephrol 2002; 57: 457–461.
Teehan GS, Bahdouch D, Ruthazer R et al. Iron storage indices: novel
predictors of bacteremia in hemodialysis patients initiating intravenous
iron therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38: 1090–1094.

105. Bernhardt WM, Wiesener MS, Scigalla P et al. Inhibition of prolyl

hydroxylases increases erythropoietin production in ESRD. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2010; 21: 2151–2156.

106. Goodnough LT, Brecher ME, Kanter MH et al. Transfusion medicine. First
of two parts–blood transfusion. N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 438–447.
107. MacLeod AM. The blood transfusion effect: clinical aspects. Immunol Lett

125.

Furuland H, Linde T, Ahlmen J et al. A randomized controlled trial of
haemoglobin normalization with epoetin alfa in pre-dialysis and dialysis
patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2003; 18: 353–361.

126. Parfrey PS, Foley RN, Wittreich BH et al. Double-blind comparison of full
and partial anemia correction in incident hemodialysis patients without
symptomatic heart disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16: 2180–2189.

127. Pfeffer MA, Burdmann EA, Chen CY et al. A trial of darbepoetin alfa in

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2009; 361:
2019–2032.
Singh AK, Szczech L, Tang KL et al. Correction of anemia with epoetin
alfa in chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2006; 355: 2085–2098.
Foley RN, Curtis BM, Parfrey PS. Hemoglobin targets and blood
transfusions in hemodialysis patients without symptomatic cardiac
disease receiving erythropoietin therapy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008;
3: 1669–1675.
Foley RN, Curtis BM, Parfrey PS. Erythropoietin therapy, hemoglobin
targets, and quality of life in healthy hemodialysis patients: a
randomized trial. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 726–733.
FDA presentation at Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory
Committee (CRDAC) meeting, 18 October 2010. http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/
CardiovascularandRenalDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM231978.pdf.
Lewis EF, Pfeffer MA, Feng A et al. Darbepoetin alfa impact on health
status in diabetes patients with kidney disease: a randomized trial. Clin J
Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 6: 845–855.

108.

1991; 29: 123–126.
Shander A, Sazama K. Clinical consequences of iron overload from
chronic red blood cell transfusions, its diagnosis, and its management
by chelation therapy. Transfusion 2010; 50: 1144–1155.

133. Palmer SC, Navaneethan SD, Craig JC et al. Meta-analysis: erythropoiesis-
stimulating agents in patients with chronic kidney disease. Ann Intern
Med 2010; 153: 23–33.

134. Gandra SR, Finkelstein FO, Bennett AV et al. Impact of erythropoiesis-

109. Zhou YC, Cecka JM. Sensitization in renal transplantation. Clin Transpl

110.

111.

1991: 313–323.
Levin A, Thompson CR, Ethier J et al. Left ventricular mass index increase
in early renal disease: impact of decline in hemoglobin. Am J Kidney Dis
1999; 34: 125–134.
Foley RN, Parfrey PS, Harnett JD et al. The impact of anemia on
cardiomyopathy, morbidity, and and mortality in end-stage renal
disease. Am J Kidney Dis 1996; 28: 53–61.

112. Harnett JD, Foley RN, Kent GM et al. Congestive heart failure in dialysis

patients: prevalence, incidence, prognosis and risk factors. Kidney Int
1995; 47: 884–890.

113. Rigatto C, Parfrey P, Foley R et al. Congestive heart failure in renal
transplant recipients: risk factors, outcomes, and relationship with
ischemic heart disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002; 13: 1084–1090.

114. Collins AJ. Influence of target hemoglobin in dialysis patients on

morbidity and mortality. Kidney Int Suppl 2002: 44–48.

115. Ofsthun N, Labrecque J, Lacson E et al. The effects of higher hemoglobin
levels on mortality and hospitalization in hemodialysis patients. Kidney
Int 2003; 63: 1908–1914.

116. Regidor DL, Kopple JD, Kovesdy CP et al. Associations between changes
in hemoglobin and administered erythropoiesis-stimulating agent and
survival in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 17: 1181–1191.

117. Goodkin DA, Fuller DS, Robinson BM et al. Naturally occurring higher
hemoglobin concentration does not increase mortality among
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 22: 358–365.
118. Besarab A, Bolton WK, Browne JK et al. The effects of normal as

compared with low hematocrit values in patients with cardiac disease
who are receiving hemodialysis and epoetin. N Engl J Med 1998; 339:
584–590.

119. Parfrey PS, Wish T. Quality of life in CKD patients treated with

120.

erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55: 423–425.
Lietz K, Lao M, Paczek L et al. The impact of pretransplant erythropoietin
therapy on late outcomes of renal transplantation. Ann Transplant 2003;
8: 17–24.

121. Choukroun G, Kamar N, Dussol B et al. Correction of postkidney

transplant anemia reduces progression of allograft nephropathy. J Am
Soc Nephrol 2012; 23: 360–368.

122. Canadian Erythropoietin Study Group. Association between

recombinant human erythropoietin and quality of life and exercise
capacity of patients receiving haemodialysis. BMJ 1990; 300: 573–578.

135.

stimulating agents on energy and physical function in nondialysis CKD
patients with anemia: a systematic review. Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55:
519–534.
Johansen KL, Finkelstein FO, Revicki DA et al. Systematic review and
meta-analysis of exercise tolerance and physical functioning in dialysis
patients treated with erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. Am J Kidney Dis
2010; 55: 535–548.

136. Rizzo JD, Brouwers M, Hurley P et al. American Society of Clinical

Oncology/American Society of Hematology clinical practice guideline
update on the use of epoetin and darbepoetin in adult patients with
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 4996–5010.

138.

137. Rizzo JD, Brouwers M, Hurley P et al. American Society of Hematology/
American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update
on the use of epoetin and darbepoetin in adult patients with cancer.
Blood 2010; 116: 4045–4059.
Skali H, Parving HH, Parfrey PS et al. Stroke in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, and anemia treated with
Darbepoetin Alfa: the trial to reduce cardiovascular events with Aranesp
therapy (TREAT) experience. Circulation 2011; 124: 2903–2908.
139. Warady BA, Ho M. Morbidity and mortality in children with anemia at

initiation of dialysis. Pediatr Nephrol 2003; 18: 1055–1062.

140. Mitsnefes MM, Kimball TR, Kartal J et al. Progression of left ventricular
hypertrophy in children with early chronic kidney disease: 2-year follow-
up study. J Pediatr 2006; 149: 671–675.
Schaefer F. Cardiac disease in children with mild-to-moderate chronic
kidney disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2008; 17: 292–297.

141.

142. Morris KP, Sharp J, Watson S et al. Non-cardiac benefits of human

recombinant erythropoietin in end stage renal failure and anaemia. Arch
Dis Child 1993; 69: 580–586.

145.

144.

143. Gerson A, Hwang W, Fiorenza J et al. Anemia and health-related quality
of life in adolescents with chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis 2004;
44: 1017–1023.
Staples AO, Wong CS, Smith JM et al. Anemia and risk of hospitalization
in pediatric chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 48–56.
Solomon SD, Uno H, Lewis EF et al. Erythropoietic response and
outcomes in kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:
1146–1155.
Fishbane S, Berns JS. Hemoglobin cycling in hemodialysis patients
treated with recombinant human erythropoietin. Kidney Int 2005; 68:
1337–1343.

146.

123. Revicki DA, Brown RE, Feeny DH et al. Health-related quality of life

147. Yang W, Israni RK, Brunelli SM et al. Hemoglobin variability and mortality

associated with recombinant human erythropoietin therapy for
predialysis chronic renal disease patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 25:
548–554.

124. Drueke TB, Locatelli F, Clyne N et al. Normalization of hemoglobin level
in patients with chronic kidney disease and anemia. N Engl J Med 2006;
355: 2071–2084.

148.

in ESRD. J Am Soc Nephrol 2007; 18: 3164–3170.
Eckardt KU, Kim J, Kronenberg F et al. Hemoglobin variability does not
predict mortality in European hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol
2010; 21: 1765–1775.

149. Kaufman JS, Reda DJ, Fye CL et al. Subcutaneous compared with

intravenous epoetin in patients receiving hemodialysis. Department of

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335

333

r e f e r e n c e s

Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group on Erythropoietin in
Hemodialysis Patients. N Engl J Med 1998; 339: 578–583.

150. De Schoenmakere G, Lameire N, Dhondt A et al. The haematopoietic
effect of recombinant human erythropoietin in haemodialysis is
independent of the mode of administration (i.v. or s.c.). Nephrol Dial
Transplant 1998; 13: 1770–1775.

151. Chanu P, Gieschke R, Charoin JE et al. Population pharmacokinetic/

152.

pharmacodynamic model for C.E.R.A. in both ESA-naive and ESA-treated
chronic kidney disease patients with renal anemia. J Clin Pharmacol
2010; 50: 507–520.
Locatelli F, Canaud B, Giacardy F et al. Treatment of anaemia in dialysis
patients with unit dosing of darbepoetin alfa at a reduced dose
frequency relative to recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEpo).
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2003; 18: 362–369.

153. Vanrenterghem Y, Barany P, Mann JF et al. Randomized trial of

darbepoetin alfa for treatment of renal anemia at a reduced dose
frequency compared with rHuEPO in dialysis patients. Kidney Int 2002;
62: 2167–2175.
Locatelli F, Villa G, Messa P et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly
intravenous epoetin alfa in maintaining hemoglobin levels in
hemodialysis patients. J Nephrol 2008; 21: 412–420.

154.

155. Pergola PE, Gartenberg G, Fu M et al. A randomized controlled study of
weekly and biweekly dosing of epoetin alfa in CKD Patients with
anemia. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 1731–1740.

156. Carrera F, Lok CE, de Francisco A et al. Maintenance treatment of renal

anaemia in haemodialysis patients with methoxy polyethylene glycol-
epoetin beta versus darbepoetin alfa administered monthly: a randomized
comparative trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant2010; 25: 4009–4017.
157. Gobin J, Cernii A, McLean R et al. Conversion from epoetin alfa to

darbepoetin alfa for management of anaemia in a community chronic
kidney disease centre: a retrospective cohort study. Clin Drug Investig
2011; 31: 113–120.

158. Boven K, Stryker S, Knight J et al. The increased incidence of pure red

cell aplasia with an Eprex formulation in uncoated rubber stopper
syringes. Kidney Int 2005; 67: 2346–2353.

159. Casadevall N, Nataf J, Viron B et al. Pure red-cell aplasia and

antierythropoietin antibodies in patients treated with recombinant
erythropoietin. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 469–475.

160. Macdougall IC, Ashenden M. Current and upcoming erythropoiesis-

161.

stimulating agents, iron products, and other novel anemia medications.
Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 2009; 16: 117–130.
Locatelli F, Baldamus CA, Villa G et al. Once-weekly compared with
three-times-weekly subcutaneous epoetin beta: results from a
randomized, multicenter, therapeutic-equivalence study. Am J Kidney
Dis 2002; 40: 119–125.

162. Nissenson AR, Swan SK, Lindberg JS et al. Randomized, controlled trial of
darbepoetin alfa for the treatment of anemia in hemodialysis patients.
Am J Kidney Dis 2002; 40: 110–118.
Tolman C, Richardson D, Bartlett C et al. Structured conversion from
thrice weekly to weekly erythropoietic regimens using a computerized
decision-support system: a randomized clinical study. J Am Soc Nephrol
2005; 16: 1463–1470.

163.

172.

Sheashaa H, Abdel-Razek W, El-Husseini A et al. Use of nandrolone
decanoate as an adjuvant for erythropoietin dose reduction in treating
anemia in patients on hemodialysis. Nephron Clin Pract 2005; 99: c102–c106.
173. Bridges KR, Hoffman KE. The effects of ascorbic acid on the intracellular

174.

metabolism of iron and ferritin. J Biol Chem 1986; 261: 14273–14277.
Lipschitz DA, Bothwell TH, Seftel HC et al. The role of ascorbic acid in the
metabolism of storage iron. Br J Haematol 1971; 20: 155–163.

175. Deved V, Poyah P, James MT et al. Ascorbic acid for anemia

176.

management in hemodialysis patients: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 54: 1089–1097.
Shahrbanoo K, Taziki O. Effect of intravenous ascorbic acid in
hemodialysis patients with anemia and hyperferritinemia. Saudi J Kidney
Dis Transpl 2008; 19: 933–936.

177. Attallah N, Osman-Malik Y, Frinak S et al. Effect of intravenous ascorbic

178.

acid in hemodialysis patients with EPO-hyporesponsive anemia and
hyperferritinemia. Am J Kidney Dis 2006; 47: 644–654.
Sezer S, Ozdemir FN, Yakupoglu U et al. Intravenous ascorbic acid
administration for erythropoietin-hyporesponsive anemia in iron loaded
hemodialysis patients. Artif Organs 2002; 26: 366–370.

179. Rossert J, Casadevall N, Eckardt KU. Anti-erythropoietin antibodies and

180.

181.

pure red cell aplasia. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15: 398–406.
Eckardt KU, Casadevall N. Pure red-cell aplasia due to anti-erythropoietin
antibodies. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2003; 18: 865–869.
Shimizu H, Saitoh T, Ota F et al. Pure red cell aplasia induced only by
intravenous administration of recombinant human erythropoietin. Acta
Haematol 2011; 126: 114–118.

182. Casadevall N, Cournoyer D, Marsh J et al. Recommendations on

haematological criteria for the diagnosis of epoetin-induced pure red
cell aplasia. Eur J Haematol 2004; 73: 389–396.

183. Cournoyer D, Toffelmire EB, Wells GA et al. Anti-erythropoietin

antibody-mediated pure red cell aplasia after treatment with
recombinant erythropoietin products: recommendations for
minimization of risk. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15: 2728–2734.

184. Macdougall IC. Antibody-mediated pure red cell aplasia (PRCA):

epidemiology, immunogenicity and risks. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005;
20(Suppl 4): iv9–i15.

185. Verhelst D, Rossert J, Casadevall N et al. Treatment of erythropoietin-
induced pure red cell aplasia: a retrospective study. Lancet 2004; 363:
1768–1771.

186. Andrade J, Taylor PA, Love JM et al. Successful reintroduction of a

different erythropoiesis-stimulating agent after pure red cell aplasia:
relapse after successful therapy with prednisone. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2005; 20: 2548–2551.

187. Weber G, Gross J, Kromminga A et al. Allergic skin and systemic

reactions in a patient with pure red cell aplasia and anti-erythropoietin
antibodies challenged with different epoetins. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002;
13: 2381–2383.

188. Macdougall IC, Rossert J, Casadevall N et al. A peptide-based

erythropoietin-receptor agonist for pure red-cell aplasia. N Engl J Med
2009; 361: 1848–1855.
Schellekens H. Biosimilar therapeutics-what do we need to consider?
NDT Plus 2009; 2: i27–i36.

189.

164. Kilpatrick RD, Critchlow CW, Fishbane S et al. Greater epoetin alfa

190. Opelz G, Graver B, Mickey MR et al. Lymphocytotoxic antibody

responsiveness is associated with improved survival in hemodialysis
patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 1077–1083.

165. Greene T, Daugirdas J, Depner T et al. Association of achieved dialysis

dose with mortality in the hemodialysis study: an example of 00dose-
targeting bias00. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16: 3371–3380.

166. Koshy SM, Geary DF. Anemia in children with chronic kidney disease.

Pediatr Nephrol 2008; 23: 209–219.

167. Bamgbola OF, Kaskel FJ, Coco M. Analyses of age, gender and other risk
factors of erythropoietin resistance in pediatric and adult dialysis
cohorts. Pediatr Nephrol 2009; 24: 571–579.
Szczech LA, Barnhart HX, Inrig JK et al. Secondary analysis of the CHOIR
trial epoetin-alpha dose and achieved hemoglobin outcomes. Kidney Int
2008; 74: 791–798.

168.

169. Brookhart MA, Schneeweiss S, Avorn J et al. Comparative mortality risk

of anemia management practices in incident hemodialysis patients.
JAMA 2010; 303: 857–864.

170. Berns JS, Rudnick MR, Cohen RM. A controlled trial of recombinant human
erythropoietin and nandrolone decanoate in the treatment of anemia in
patients on chronic hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992; 37: 264–267.

171. Gaughan WJ, Liss KA, Dunn SR et al. A 6-month study of low-dose
recombinant human erythropoietin alone and in combination with
androgens for the treatment of anemia in chronic hemodialysis patients.
Am J Kidney Dis 1997; 30: 495–500.

responses to transfusions in potential kidney transplant recipients.
Transplantation 1981; 32: 177–183.

192.

191. USRDS System. USRDS 2010 Annual Data Report: Atlas of Chronic Kidney
Disease and End-Stage Renal Disease in the United States. National
Institutes of Health 2010, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases.
Linman JW. Physiologic and pathophysiologic effects of anemia. N Engl J
Med 1968; 279: 812–818.
Terasaki PI, Ozawa M. Predicting kidney graft failure by HLA antibodies:
a prospective trial. Am J Transplant 2004; 4: 438–443.
Terasaki PI, Ozawa M. Predictive value of HLA antibodies and serum
creatinine in chronic rejection: results of a 2-year prospective trial.
Transplantation 2005; 80: 1194–1197.

194.

193.

195. Cid J, Ramiro L, Bertran S et al. Efficacy in reducing potassium load in
irradiated red cell bags with a potassium adsorption filter. Transfusion
2008; 48: 1966–1970.

196. Dodd R. Managing the microbiological safety of blood for

transfusion: a US perspective. Future Microbiol 2009; 4: 807–818.
197. Goodnough LT, Shander A, Brecher ME. Transfusion medicine: looking

198.

to the future. Lancet 2003; 361: 161–169.
Jacobs MR, Palavecino E, Yomtovian R. Don0t bug me: the problem of
bacterial contamination of blood components–challenges and
solutions. Transfusion 2001; 41: 1331–1334.

334

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335

199. Klein H. Mollison0s Blood Transfusion in Clinical Medicine, 11th edn.

227.

Wiley-Blackwell, 2005.

200. Kleinman S, Caulfield T, Chan P et al. Toward an understanding of

transfusion-related acute lung injury: statement of a consensus panel.
Transfusion 2004; 44: 1774–1789.

203.

204.

202.

201. Kuehnert MJ, Roth VR, Haley NR et al. Transfusion-transmitted bacterial
infection in the United States, 1998 through 2000. Transfusion 2001; 41:
1493–1499.
Looney MR, Gropper MA, Matthay MA. Transfusion-related acute lung
injury: a review. Chest 2004; 126: 249–258.
Silliman CC, Ambruso DR, Boshkov LK. Transfusion-related acute lung
injury. Blood 2005; 105: 2266–2273.
Simon GE, Bove JR. The potassium load from blood transfusion. Postgrad
Med 1971; 49: 61–64.
Smith HM, Farrow SJ, Ackerman JD et al. Cardiac arrests associated with
hyperkalemia during red blood cell transfusion: a case series. Anesth
Analg 2008; 106: 1062–1069.
Stramer SL, Hollinger FB, Katz LM et al. Emerging infectious disease
agents and their potential threat to transfusion safety. Transfusion 2009;
49(Suppl 2): 1S–29S.

206.

205.

r e f e r e n c e s

Everett ET, Kao KJ, Scornik JC. Class I HLA molecules on human
erythrocytes. Quantitation and transfusion effects. Transplantation 1987;
44: 123–129.

228. Oniscu GC, Brown H, Forsythe JL. Impact of cadaveric renal

transplantation on survival in patients listed for transplantation. J Am
Soc Nephrol 2005; 16: 1859–1865.

229. Port FK, Wolfe RA, Mauger EA et al. Comparison of survival probabilities
for dialysis patients vs cadaveric renal transplant recipients. JAMA 1993;
270: 1339–1343.

230. Agarwal R. Individualizing decision-making–resurrecting the doctor-

patient relationship in the anemia debate. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010;
5: 1340–1346.

231. Cecka JM, Cho L. Sensitization. Clin Transpl 1988: 365–373.
232. Opelz G. Non-HLA transplantation immunity revealed by

233.

lymphocytotoxic antibodies. Lancet 2005; 365: 1570–1576.
Lefaucheur C, Loupy A, Hill GS et al. Preexisting donor-specific HLA
antibodies predict outcome in kidney transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol
2010; 21: 1398–1406.

234. Murphy MF, Wallington TB, Kelsey P et al. Guidelines for the clinical use

of red cell transfusions. Br J Haematol 2001; 113: 24–31.

207. Vasconcelos E, Seghatchian J. Bacterial contamination in blood

235. Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for

components and preventative strategies: an overview. Transfus Apher
Sci 2004; 31: 155–163.

208. Cable RG, Leiby DA. Risk and prevention of transfusion-transmitted

babesiosis and other tick-borne diseases. Curr Opin Hematol 2003; 10:
405–411.

209. Herwaldt BL, Neitzel DF, Gorlin JB et al. Transmission of Babesia microti
in Minnesota through four blood donations from the same donor over a
6-month period. Transfusion 2002; 42: 1154–1158.
Leiby DA, Gill JE. Transfusion-transmitted tick-borne infections: a
cornucopia of threats. Transfus Med Rev 2004; 18: 293–306.

210.

211. Wells GM, Woodward TE, Fiset P et al. Rocky mountain spotted fever

caused by blood transfusion. JAMA 1978; 239: 2763–2765.

212. Carson JL, Grossman BJ, Kleinman S et al. Red Blood Cell Transfusion: A
Clinical Practice Guideline From the AABB. Ann Intern Med 2012 (in press).

213. Klein HG. How safe is blood, really? Biologicals 2010; 38: 100–104.
214. Klein HG, Spahn DR, Carson JL. Red blood cell transfusion in clinical

practice. Lancet 2007; 370: 415–426.

215. Rawn J. The silent risks of blood transfusion. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol

2008; 21: 664–668.

216. Opelz G, Vanrenterghem Y, Kirste G et al. Prospective evaluation of
pretransplant blood transfusions in cadaver kidney recipients.
Transplantation 1997; 63: 964–967.

217. Reed A, Pirsch J, Armbrust MJ et al. Multivariate analysis of

donor-specific versus random transfusion protocols in haploidentical
living-related transplants. Transplantation 1991; 51: 382–384.

218. Vanrenterghem Y, Waer M, Roels L et al. A prospective, randomized trial
of pretransplant blood transfusions in cadaver kidney transplant
candidates. Leuven Collaborative Group for Transplantation. Transpl Int
1994; 7(Suppl 1): S243–S246.

219. Christiaans MH, van Hooff JP, Nieman F et al. HLA-DR matched

transfusions: development of donor-specific T- and B-cell antibodies and
renal allograft outcome. Transplantation 1999; 67: 1029–1035.
220. Cecka JM, Cicciarelli J, Mickey MR et al. Blood transfusions and HLA

matching–an either/or situation in cadaveric renal transplantation.
Transplantation 1988; 45: 81–86.

the management of patients with unstable angina/non-ST-Elevation
myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing
Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines for the Management of
Patients With Unstable Angina/Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction)
developed in collaboration with the American College of Emergency
Physicians, the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons endorsed by the
American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation
and the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol
2007; 50: e1–e157.

236. Harrington RA, Becker RC, Cannon CP et al. Antithrombotic therapy for
non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guidelines (8th edn). Chest 2008; 133: 670S–707S.
Sabatine MS, Morrow DA, Giugliano RP et al. Association of hemoglobin
levels with clinical outcomes in acute coronary syndromes. Circulation
2005; 111: 2042–2049.

237.

238. Heart Failure Society of America. Nonpharmacologic management and

health care maintenance in patients with chronic heart failure. J Card
Fail 2006; 12: e29–e37.

239. McMurray JJ, Adamopoulos S, Anker SD et al. ESC Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure 2012: The
Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart
Failure 2012 of the European Society of Cardiology. Developed in
collaboration with the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC. Eur
Heart J; e-pub ahead of print 19 May 2012.

240. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH et al. 2009 Focused update

incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Management of Heart Failure in Adults A Report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines Developed in Collaboration With the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2009; 53: e1–e90.

241. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength

221. Pfaff WW, Howard RJ, Scornik JC et al. Incidental and purposeful random

of recommendations. BMJ 2004; 328: 1490.

222.

donor blood transfusion. Sensitization and transplantation.
Transplantation 1989; 47: 130–133.
Sanfilippo F, Vaughn WK, Bollinger RR et al. Comparative effects of
pregnancy, transfusion, and prior graft rejection on sensitization and
renal transplant results. Transplantation 1982; 34: 360–366.

223. Karpinski M, Pochinco D, Dembinski I et al. Leukocyte reduction of red

224.

225.

blood cell transfusions does not decrease allosensitization rates in potential
kidney transplant candidates. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15: 818–824.
Sanfilippo FP, Bollinger RR, MacQueen JM et al. A randomized study
comparing leukocyte-depleted versus packed red cell transfusions in
prospective cadaver renal allograft recipients. Transfusion 1985; 25:
116–119.
Scornik JC, Ireland JE, Howard RJ et al. Role of regular and leukocyte-free
blood transfusions in the generation of broad sensitization.
Transplantation 1984; 38: 594–598.

226. Balasubramaniam GS, Morris M, Gupta A et al. Allosensitization rate of

male patients awaiting first kidney grafts after leuko-depleted blood
transfusion. Transplantation 2012; 93: 418–422.

242. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R et al. Going from evidence to

recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336: 1049–1051.

243. Uhlig K, Macleod A, Craig J et al. Grading evidence and

recommendations for clinical practice guidelines in nephrology.
A position statement from Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2006; 70: 2058–2065.
The AGREE Collaboration. Development and validation of an
international appraisal instrument for assessing the quality of clinical
practice guidelines: the AGREE project. Qual Saf Health Care 2003; 12:
18–23.
Shiffman RN, Shekelle P, Overhage JM et al. Standardized reporting of
clinical practice guidelines: a proposal from the Conference on
Guideline Standardization. Ann Intern Med 2003; 139: 493–498.
Institute of Medicine. Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for
Systematic Reviews. The National Academies Press: Washington, DC,
2011.
Institute of Medicine. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. The
National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2011.

244.

245.

246.

247.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 331–335

335

