OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF NEPHROLOGY

KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury

VOLUME 2 | ISSUE 1 | MARCH 2012

http://www.kidney-international.org

KI_SuppCover_2.1.indd   1
KI_SuppCover_2.1.indd   1

2/7/12   12:32 PM
2/7/12   12:32 PM

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

VOL 2 | SUPPLEMENT 1 | MARCH 2012

c o n t e n t s

KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury

iv

Tables and Figures

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

13

13

17

19

19

23

25

28

33

37

37

42

43

47

50

57

59

61

66

69

69

72

76

80

87

89

89

93

95

101

105

107

111

113

116

122

124

Notice

Work Group Membership

KDIGO Board Members

Reference Keys

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Abstract

Foreword

Summary of Recommendation Statements

Section 1:

Introduction and Methodology

Chapter 1.1:

Introduction

Chapter 1.2:

Methodology

Section 2:

AKI Definition

Chapter 2.1:

Definition and classification of AKI

Chapter 2.2:

Risk assessment

Chapter 2.3:

Evaluation and general management of patients with and at risk for AKI

Chapter 2.4:

Clinical applications

Chapter 2.5:

Diagnostic approach to alterations in kidney function and structure

Section 3:

Prevention and Treatment of AKI

Chapter 3.1:

Hemodynamic monitoring and support for prevention and management of AKI

Chapter 3.2:

General supportive management of patients with AKI, including management of
complications

Chapter 3.3:

Glycemic control and nutritional support

Chapter 3.4:

The use of diuretics in AKI

Chapter 3.5:

Vasodilator therapy: dopamine, fenoldopam, and natriuretic peptides

Chapter 3.6:

Growth factor intervention

Chapter 3.7:

Adenosine receptor antagonists

Chapter 3.8:

Prevention of aminoglycoside- and amphotericin-related AKI

Chapter 3.9:

Other methods of prevention of AKI in the critically ill

Section 4:

Contrast-induced AKI

Chapter 4.1:

Contrast-induced AKI: definition, epidemiology, and prognosis

Chapter 4.2:

Assessment of the population at risk for CI-AKI

Chapter 4.3:

Nonpharmacological prevention strategies of CI-AKI

Chapter 4.4:

Pharmacological prevention strategies of CI-AKI

Chapter 4.5:

Effects of hemodialysis or hemofiltration

Section 5:

Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI

Chapter 5.1:

Timing of renal replacement therapy in AKI

Chapter 5.2:

Criteria for stopping renal replacement therapy in AKI

Chapter 5.3:

Anticoagulation

Chapter 5.4:

Vascular access for renal replacement therapy in AKI

Chapter 5.5:

Dialyzer membranes for renal replacement therapy in AKI

Chapter 5.6:

Modality of renal replacement therapy for patients with AKI

Chapter 5.7:

Buffer solutions for renal replacement therapy in patients with AKI

Chapter 5.8:

Dose of renal replacement therapy in AKI

Biographic and Disclosure Information

Acknowledgments

References

c o n t e n t s

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

TABLES
Table 1.

Implications of the strength of a recommendation

Table 2.

Staging of AKI

Table 3.

Comparison of RIFLE and AKIN criteria for diagnosis and classification of AKI

Table 4.

Cross-tabulation of patients classified by RIFLE vs. AKIN

Table 5.

Causes of AKI and diagnostic tests

Table 6.

Causes of AKI: exposures and susceptibilities for non-specific AKI

Table 7. AKI diagnosis

Table 8. Overview of the approaches to determine baseline SCr in the application of RIFLE classification in previous

studies

Table 9.

Estimated baseline SCr

Table 10. AKI staging

Table 11. Definitions of AKI, CKD, and AKD

Table 12. Examples of AKI, CKD, and AKD based on GFR and increases in SCr

Table 13. Markers of kidney damage in AKD and CKD

Table 14.

Integrated approach to interpret measures of kidney function and structure for diagnosis of AKI, AKD, and CKD

Table 15. CI-AKI risk-scoring model for percutaneous coronary intervention

Table 16. Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI

Table 17. Potential applications for RRT

Table 18. Fluid overload and outcome in critically ill children with AKI

Table 19. Overview of the advantages and disadvantages of different anticoagulants in AKI patients

Table 20. Catheter and patient sizes

Table 21. Typical setting of different RRT modalities for AKI (for 70-kg patient)

Table 22. Theoretical advantages and disadvantages of CRRT, IHD, SLED, and PD

Table 23. Microbiological quality standards of different regulatory agencies

18

19

21

21

22

23

28

29

29

30

33

33

35

35

73

77

91

91

97

104

107

108

112

FIGURES
Figure 1. The RIFLE criteria for AKI

Figure 2. Overview of AKI, CKD, and AKD

Figure 3. Conceptual model for AKI

Figure 4. Stage-based management of AKI

Figure 5. Evaluation of AKI according to the stage and cause

Figure 6. Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration cohort changes in eGFR and final eGFR corresponding to

KDIGO definition and stages of AKI

Figure 7. GFR/SCr algorithm

Figure 8. Conceptual model for development and clinical course of AKI

Figure 9. Effect of furosemide vs. control on all-cause mortality

Figure 10. Effect of furosemide vs. control on need for RRT

Figure 11. Effect of low-dose dopamine on mortality

Figure 12. Effect of low-dose dopamine on need for RRT

Figure 13. Sample questionnaire

Figure 14. Risk for contrast-induced nephropathy

Figure 15. Bicarbonate vs. saline and risk of CI-AKI

Figure 16. NAC and bicarbonate vs. NAC for risk of CI-AKI

Figure 17. Flow-chart summary of recommendations

Additional information in the form of supplementary materials can be found online at http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, iv

14

20

20

25

26

34

34

38

48

48

51

52

73

78

81

85

96

iv

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Notice

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 1; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.1

SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon the best information available as of
February 2011. It is designed to provide information and assist decision-making. It is not
intended to deﬁne a standard of care, and should not be construed as one, nor should it be
interpreted as prescribing an exclusive course of management. Variations in practice will
inevitably and appropriately occur when clinicians take into account the needs of individual
patients, available resources, and limitations unique to an institution or type of practice. Every
health-care professional making use of these recommendations is responsible for evaluating the
appropriateness of applying them in the setting of any particular clinical situation. The
recommendations for research contained within this document are general and do not imply a
speciﬁc protocol.

SECTION II: DISCLOSURE
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual or
reasonably perceived conﬂicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a
personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work Group. All members of the
Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form
showing all such relationships that might be perceived or actual conﬂicts of interest. This
document is updated annually and information is adjusted accordingly. All reported information
is published in its entirety at the end of this document in the Work Group members’
Biographical and Disclosure Information section, and is kept on ﬁle at the National Kidney
Foundation (NKF), Managing Agent for KDIGO.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 1

1

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Work Group Membership

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 2; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.2

WORK GROUP CO-CHAIRS

John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Pittsburgh, PA

Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Ghent University Hospital
Ghent, Belgium

WORK GROUP

Peter Aspelin, MD, PhD
Karolinska University Hospital
Stockholm, Sweden

Rashad S Barsoum, MD, FRCP, FRCPE
Cairo University
Cairo, Egypt

Emmanuel A Burdmann, MD, PhD
University of Sa˜o Paulo Medical School
Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil

Stuart L Goldstein, MD
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital & Medical Center
Cincinnati, OH

Charles A Herzog, MD
Hennepin County Medical Center
Minneapolis, MN

Michael Joannidis, MD
Medical University of Innsbruck
Innsbruck, Austria

Andreas Kribben, MD
University Duisburg-Essen
Essen, Germany

Andrew S Levey, MD
Tufts Medical Center
Boston, MA

Alison M MacLeod, MBChB, MD, FRCP
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, United Kingdom

Ravindra L Mehta, MD, FACP, FASN, FRCP
UCSD Medical Center
San Diego, CA

Patrick T Murray, MD, FASN, FRCPI, FJFICMI
UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science
Dublin, Ireland

Saraladevi Naicker, MBChB, MRCP, FRCP,
FCP(SA), PhD
University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa

Steven M Opal, MD
Alpert Medical School of Brown University
Pawtucket, RI

Franz Schaefer, MD
Heidelberg University Hospital
Heidelberg, Germany

Miet Schetz, MD, PhD
University of Leuven
Leuven, Belgium

Shigehiko Uchino, MD, PhD
Jikei University School of Medicine
Tokyo, Japan

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM

Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementation,
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA:
Katrin Uhlig, MD, MS, Project Director; Director, Guideline Development

Jose Calvo-Broce, MD, MS, Nephrology Fellow
Aneet Deo, MD, MS, Nephrology Fellow

Amy Earley, BS, Project Coordinator

In addition, support and supervision were provided by:
Ethan M Balk, MD, MPH, Program Director, Evidence Based Medicine

2

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 2

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

KDIGO Board Members

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 3; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.3

Garabed Eknoyan, MD
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Founding KDIGO Co-Chairs

Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Bertram L Kasiske, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Omar I Abboud, MD, FRCP
Sharon Adler, MD, FASN
Rajiv Agarwal, MD
Sharon P Andreoli, MD
Gavin J Becker, MD, FRACP
Fred Brown, MBA, FACHE
Daniel C Cattran, MD, FRCPC
Allan J Collins, MD, FACP
Rosanna Coppo, MD
Josef Coresh, MD, PhD
Ricardo Correa-Rotter, MD
Adrian Covic, MD, PhD
Jonathan C Craig, MBChB, MM (Clin Epi), DCH, FRACP, PhD
Angel de Francisco, MD
Paul de Jong, MD, PhD
Ana Figueiredo, RN, MSc, PhD
Mohammed Benghanem Gharbi, MD
Gordon Guyatt, MD, MSc, BSc, FRCPC
David Harris, MD
Lai Seong Hooi, MD
Enyu Imai, MD, PhD
Lesley A Inker, MD, MS, FRCP

Michel Jadoul, MD
Simon Jenkins, MBE, FRCGP
Suhnggwon Kim, MD, PhD
Martin K Kuhlmann, MD
Nathan W Levin, MD, FACP
Philip K-T Li, MD, FRCP, FACP
Zhi-Hong Liu, MD
Pablo Massari, MD
Peter A McCullough, MD, MPH, FACC, FACP
Raﬁque Moosa, MD
Miguel C Riella, MD
Adibul Hasan Rizvi, MBBS, FRCP
Bernardo Rodriquez-Iturbe, MD
Robert Schrier, MD
Justin Silver, MD, PhD
Marcello Tonelli, MD, SM, FRCPC
Yusuke Tsukamoto, MD
Theodor Vogels, MSW
Angela Yee-Moon Wang, MD, PhD, FRCP
Christoph Wanner, MD
David C Wheeler, MD, FRCP
Elena Zakharova, MD, PhD

NKF-KDIGO GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT STAFF

Kerry Willis, PhD, Senior Vice-President for Scientiﬁc Activities

Michael Cheung, MA, Guideline Development Director

Sean Slifer, BA, Guideline Development Manager

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 3

3

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Reference Keys

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 4; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.4

NOMENCLATURE AND DESCRIPTION FOR RATING GUIDELINE
RECOMMENDATIONS

Within each recommendation, the strength of recommendation is indicated as Level 1, Level 2, or Not Graded, and the quality of the
supporting evidence is shown as A, B, C, or D.

Implications

Grade*

Patients

Clinicians

Policy

Level 1
‘‘We recommend’’

Most people in your situation would
want the recommended course of action
and only a small proportion would not.

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

The recommendation can be evaluated
as a candidate for developing a policy
or a performance measure.

Level 2
‘‘We suggest’’

The majority of people in your situation
would want the recommended course
of action, but many would not.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs
help to arrive at a management decision
consistent with her or his values and
preferences.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement
of stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

*The additional category ‘‘Not Graded’’ was used, typically, to provide guidance based on common sense or where the topic does not allow adequate application of evidence.
The most common examples include recommendations regarding monitoring intervals, counseling, and referral to other clinical specialists. The ungraded recommendations
are generally written as simple declarative statements, but are not meant to be interpreted as being stronger recommendations than Level 1 or 2 recommendations.

Grade

Quality of evidence

Meaning

A
B

C
D

High
Moderate

Low
Very low

We are confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility
that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often will be far from the truth.

Parameter

Amikacin (serum, plasma)
Blood urea nitrogen
Calcium, ionized (serum)
Creatinine (serum)
Creatinine clearance
Gentamicin (serum)
Glucose
Lactate (plasma)
Tobramycin (serum, plasma)
Urea (plasma)

CONVERSION FACTORS OF METRIC UNITS TO SI UNITS

Metric units

Conversion factor

mg/ml
mg/dl
mg/dl
mg/dl
ml/min
mg/ml
mg/dl
mg/dl
mg/ml
mg/ml

1.708
0.357
0.25
88.4
0.01667
2.09
0.0555
0.111
2.139
0.167

Note: Metric unit (cid:2) conversion factor = SI unit.

SI units

mmol/l
mmol/l
mmol/l
mmol/l
ml/s
mmol/l
mmol/l
mmol/l
mmol/l
mmol/l

4

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 4

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 5; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.5

AAMI

ACCP
ACD-A
ACE-I
ADQI
AHCPR
AKD
AKI
AKIN
ANP
aPTT
ARB
ARF
ARFTN
ATN
AUC
BMI
BUN
CDC
CHF
CI
CI-AKI
CIT
CKD
CrCl
CRF
CRRT
CT
CVC
CVVH
CVVHDF
eCrCl
EGDT
eGFR
ERT
ESRD
FDA
GFR
HDF
HES

American Association of Medical
Instrumentation
American College of Chest Physicians
Anticoagulant dextrose solution A
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor(s)
Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
Acute kidney diseases and disorders
Acute kidney injury
Acute Kidney Injury Network
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Activated partial thromboplastin time
Angiotensin-receptor blocker(s)
Acute renal failure
Acute Renal Failure Trial Network
Acute tubular necrosis
Area under the curve
Body mass index
Blood urea nitrogen
Centers for Disease Control
Congestive heart failure
Conﬁdence interval
Contrast-induced acute kidney injury
Conventional insulin therapy
Chronic kidney disease
Creatinine clearance
Chronic renal failure
Continuous renal replacement therapy
Computed tomography
Central venous catheters
Continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration
Continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration
Estimated creatinine clearance
Early goal-directed therapy
Estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
Evidence Review Team
End-stage renal disease
Food and Drug Administration
Glomerular ﬁltration rate
Hemodiaﬁltration
Hydroxyethylstarch

HF
HIT
HR
i.a.
ICU
IGF-1
IHD
IIT
i.v.
KDIGO
KDOQI
LOS
MDRD
MI
MIC
MRI
MW
NAC
NICE-SUGAR

NKD
NKF
NSF
OR
PD
PICARD

RCT
RIFLE

RR
RRT
SAFE
SCr
ScvO2
SLED
TCC
VISEP

Hemoﬁltration
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Hazard ratio
Intraarterial
Intensive-care unit
Insulin-like growth factor-1
Intermittent hemodialysis
Intensive insulin therapy
Intravenous
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative
Length of stay
Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease
Myocardial infarction
Minimum inhibitory concentration
Magnetic resonance imaging
Molecular weight
N-acetylcysteine
Normoglycemia in Intensive Care Evaluation
and Survival Using Glucose Algorithm
Regulation
No known kidney disease
National Kidney Foundation
Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis
Odds ratio
Peritoneal dialysis
Program to Improve Care in Acute Renal
Disease
Randomized controlled trial
Risk, Injury, Failure; Loss, End-Stage Renal
Disease
Relative risk
Renal replacement therapy
Saline vs. Albumin Fluid Evaluation
Serum creatinine
Central venous oxygen saturation
Sustained low-efﬁciency dialysis
Tunneled cuffed catheter
Efﬁcacy of Volume Substitution and Insulin
Therapy in Severe Sepsis

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 5

5

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Abstract

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 6; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.6

The 2011 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for
Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) aims to assist practitioners caring for adults and children at risk for
or with AKI, including contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI). Guideline development
followed an explicit process of evidence review and appraisal. The guideline contains chapters on
deﬁnition, risk assessment, evaluation, prevention, and treatment. Deﬁnition and staging of AKI
are based on the Risk, Injury, Failure; Loss, End-Stage Renal Disease (RIFLE) and Acute Kidney
Injury Network (AKIN) criteria and studies on risk relationships. The treatment chapters cover
pharmacological approaches to prevent or treat AKI, and management of renal replacement for
kidney failure from AKI. Guideline recommendations are based on systematic reviews of relevant
trials. Appraisal of the quality of the evidence and the strength of recommendations followed the
GRADE approach. Limitations of the evidence are discussed and speciﬁc suggestions are
provided for future research.

Keywords: Clinical Practice Guideline; KDIGO; acute kidney injury; contrast-induced
nephropathy; renal replacement therapy; evidence-based recommendation

CITATION
In citing this document, the following format should be used: Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline
for Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney inter., Suppl. 2012; 2: 1–138.

6

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 6

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Foreword

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 7; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.8

It is our hope that this document will serve several useful
purposes. Our primary goal is to improve patient care. We
hope to accomplish this,
in the short term, by helping
clinicians know and better understand the evidence (or lack
of evidence) that determines current practice. By providing
comprehensive evidence-based recommendations, this guide-
line will also help deﬁne areas where evidence is lacking and
research is needed. Helping to deﬁne a research agenda is an
often neglected, but very important, function of clinical
practice guideline development.

We used the GRADE system to rate the strength of evidence
and the strength of recommendations. In all, there were only
11 (18%) recommendations in this guideline for which the
overall quality of evidence was graded ‘A,’ whereas 20 (32.8%)
were graded ‘B,’ 23 (37.7%) were graded ‘C,’ and 7 (11.5%)
were graded ‘D.’ Although there are reasons other than quality
of evidence to make a grade 1 or 2 recommendation, in
general, there is a correlation between the quality of overall
evidence and the strength of the recommendation. Thus, there
were 22 (36.1%) recommendations graded ‘1’ and 39 (63.9%)
graded ‘2.’ There were 9 (14.8%) recommendations graded
‘1A,’ 10 (16.4%) were ‘1B,’ 3 (4.9%) were ‘1C,’ and 0 (0%) were
‘1D.’ There were 2 (3.3%) graded ‘2A,’ 10 (16.4%) were ‘2B,’
20 (32.8%) were ‘2C,’ and 7 (11.5%) were ‘2D.’ There were
26 (29.9%) statements that were not graded.

Some argue that recommendations should not be made
when evidence is weak. However, clinicians still need to make
clinical decisions in their daily practice, and they often ask,
‘‘What do the experts do in this setting?’’ We opted to give
guidance, rather than remain silent. These recommendations
are often rated with a low strength of recommendation and a
low strength of evidence, or were not graded. It is important
for the users of this guideline to be cognizant of this (see
Notice). In every case these recommendations are meant to
be a place for clinicians to start, not stop, their inquiries into
speciﬁc management questions pertinent to the patients they
see in daily practice.

We wish to thank the Work Group Co-Chairs, Drs John
Kellum and Norbert Lameire, along with all of the Work
Group members who volunteered countless hours of their
time developing this guideline. We also thank the Evidence
Review Team members and staff of the National Kidney
Foundation who made this project possible. Finally, we owe a
special debt of gratitude to the many KDIGO Board members
and individuals who volunteered time reviewing the guide-
line, and making very helpful suggestions.

Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Bertram L. Kasiske, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 7

7

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Summary of Recommendation Statements

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.7

Section 2: AKI Definition

2.1.1: AKI is deﬁned as any of the following (Not Graded):

K Increase in SCr by X0.3 mg/dl (X26.5 lmol/l) within 48 hours; or
K Increase in SCr to X1.5 times baseline, which is known or presumed to have occurred within the prior 7 days; or
K Urine volume o0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours.

2.1.2: AKI is staged for severity according to the following criteria (Table 2). (Not Graded)

Table 2 | Staging of AKI

Stage

Serum creatinine

1

2

3

1.5–1.9 times baseline

OR

X0.3 mg/dl (X26.5 mmol/l) increase

2.0–2.9 times baseline

3.0 times baseline

OR

Increase in serum creatinine to X4.0 mg/dl (X353.6 mmol/l)

OR

Initiation of renal replacement therapy
OR, In patients o18 years, decrease in eGFR to o35 ml/min per 1.73 m2

Urine output

o0.5 ml/kg/h for 6–12 hours

o0.5 ml/kg/h for X12 hours

o0.3 ml/kg/h for X24 hours

OR

Anuria for X12 hours

2.1.3: The cause of AKI should be determined whenever possible. (Not Graded)
2.2.1: We recommend that patients be stratiﬁed for risk of AKI according to their susceptibilities and exposures. (1B)
2.2.2: Manage patients according to their susceptibilities and exposures to reduce the risk of AKI (see relevant guideline

sections). (Not Graded)

2.2.3: Test patients at increased risk for AKI with measurements of SCr and urine output to detect AKI. (Not Graded)

Individualize frequency and duration of monitoring based on patient risk and clinical course. (Not Graded)

2.3.1: Evaluate patients with AKI promptly to determine the cause, with special attention to reversible causes.

(Not Graded)

2.3.2: Monitor patients with AKI with measurements of SCr and urine output to stage the severity, according to

Recommendation 2.1.2. (Not Graded)

2.3.3: Manage patients with AKI according to the stage (see Figure 4) and cause. (Not Graded)
2.3.4: Evaluate patients 3 months after AKI for resolution, new onset, or worsening of pre-existing CKD. (Not Graded)
K If patients have CKD, manage these patients as detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline (Guidelines 7–15).

(Not Graded)

K If patients do not have CKD, consider them to be at increased risk for CKD and care for them as detailed in

the KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for patients at increased risk for CKD. (Not Graded)

Section 3: Prevention and Treatment of AKI

3.1.1:

In the absence of hemorrhagic shock, we suggest using isotonic crystalloids rather than colloids (albumin or
starches) as initial management for expansion of intravascular volume in patients at risk for AKI or with AKI. (2B)
3.1.2: We recommend the use of vasopressors in conjunction with ﬂuids in patients with vasomotor shock with, or at risk

for, AKI. (1C)

8

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

Figure 4 | Stage-based management of AKI. Shading of boxes indicates priority of action—solid shading indicates actions that are equally
appropriate at all stages whereas graded shading indicates increasing priority as intensity increases. AKI, acute kidney injury; ICU, intensive-
care unit.

3.1.3: We suggest using protocol-based management of hemodynamic and oxygenation parameters to prevent development
or worsening of AKI in high-risk patients in the perioperative setting (2C) or in patients with septic shock (2C).
In critically ill patients, we suggest insulin therapy targeting plasma glucose 110–149 mg/dl (6.1–8.3 mmol/l). (2C)

3.3.1:
3.3.2: We suggest achieving a total energy intake of 20–30 kcal/kg/d in patients with any stage of AKI. (2C)
3.3.3: We suggest to avoid restriction of protein intake with the aim of preventing or delaying initiation of RRT. (2D)
3.3.4: We suggest administering 0.8–1.0 g/kg/d of protein in noncatabolic AKI patients without need for dialysis (2D),
1.0–1.5 g/kg/d in patients with AKI on RRT (2D), and up to a maximum of 1.7 g/kg/d in patients on continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) and in hypercatabolic patients. (2D)

3.3.5: We suggest providing nutrition preferentially via the enteral route in patients with AKI. (2C)
3.4.1: We recommend not using diuretics to prevent AKI. (1B)
3.4.2: We suggest not using diuretics to treat AKI, except in the management of volume overload. (2C)
3.5.1: We recommend not using low-dose dopamine to prevent or treat AKI. (1A)
3.5.2: We suggest not using fenoldopam to prevent or treat AKI. (2C)
3.5.3: We suggest not using atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) to prevent (2C) or treat (2B) AKI.
3.6.1: We recommend not using recombinant human (rh)IGF-1 to prevent or treat AKI. (1B)
3.7.1: We suggest that a single dose of theophylline may be given in neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia, who are at

high risk of AKI. (2B)

3.8.1: We suggest not using aminoglycosides for the treatment of infections unless no suitable,

less nephrotoxic,

therapeutic alternatives are available. (2A)

3.8.2: We suggest that, in patients with normal kidney function in steady state, aminoglycosides are administered as a

single dose daily rather than multiple-dose daily treatment regimens. (2B)

3.8.3: We recommend monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels when treatment with multiple daily dosing is used for more

than 24 hours. (1A)

3.8.4: We suggest monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels when treatment with single-daily dosing is used for more than 48

hours. (2C)

3.8.5: We suggest using topical or local applications of aminoglycosides (e.g., respiratory aerosols, instilled antibiotic

beads), rather than i.v. application, when feasible and suitable. (2B)

3.8.6: We suggest using lipid formulations of amphotericin B rather than conventional formulations of amphotericin B. (2A)
In the treatment of systemic mycoses or parasitic infections, we recommend using azole antifungal agents and/or the
3.8.7:
echinocandins rather than conventional amphotericin B, if equal therapeutic efﬁcacy can be assumed. (1A)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12

9

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

3.9.1: We suggest that off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery not be selected solely for the purpose of reducing

perioperative AKI or need for RRT. (2C)

3.9.2: We suggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in critically ill patients with hypotension. (2D)
3.9.3: We recommend not using oral or i.v. NAC for prevention of postsurgical AKI. (1A)

Section 4: Contrast-induced AKI

4.1:

Deﬁne and stage AKI after administration of intravascular contrast media as per Recommendations 2.1.1–2.1.2.
(Not Graded)
4.1.1:

In individuals who develop changes in kidney function after administration of intravascular contrast
media, evaluate for CI-AKI as well as for other possible causes of AKI. (Not Graded)

4.2.1: Assess the risk for CI-AKI and, in particular, screen for pre-existing impairment of kidney function in all patients
who are considered for a procedure that requires intravascular (i.v. or i.a.) administration of iodinated contrast
medium. (Not Graded)

4.2.2: Consider alternative imaging methods in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. (Not Graded)
4.3.1: Use the lowest possible dose of contrast medium in patients at risk for CI-AKI. (Not Graded)
4.3.2: We recommend using either iso-osmolar or low-osmolar iodinated contrast media, rather than high-osmolar

iodinated contrast media in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. (1B)

4.4.1: We recommend i.v. volume expansion with either isotonic sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate solutions,

rather than no i.v. volume expansion, in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. (1A)

4.4.2: We recommend not using oral ﬂuids alone in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. (1C)
4.4.3: We suggest using oral NAC, together with i.v. isotonic crystalloids, in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. (2D)
4.4.4: We suggest not using theophylline to prevent CI-AKI. (2C)
4.4.5: We recommend not using fenoldopam to prevent CI-AKI. (1B)
4.5.1: We suggest not using prophylactic intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) or hemoﬁltration (HF) for contrast-media

removal in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. (2C)

Section 5: Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI

5.1.1:

Initiate RRT emergently when life-threatening changes in ﬂuid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance exist.
(Not Graded)

5.1.2: Consider the broader clinical context, the presence of conditions that can be modiﬁed with RRT, and trends of
laboratory tests—rather than single BUN and creatinine thresholds alone—when making the decision to start
RRT. (Not Graded)

5.2.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer required, either because intrinsic kidney function has recovered to the point that

it is adequate to meet patient needs, or because RRT is no longer consistent with the goals of care. (Not Graded)

5.2.2: We suggest not using diuretics to enhance kidney function recovery, or to reduce the duration or frequency of RRT. (2B)
In a patient with AKI requiring RRT, base the decision to use anticoagulation for RRT on assessment of the patient’s
5.3.1:
potential risks and beneﬁts from anticoagulation (see Figure 17). (Not Graded)
5.3.1.1: We recommend using anticoagulation during RRT in AKI if a patient does not have an increased

bleeding risk or impaired coagulation and is not already receiving systemic anticoagulation. (1B)

5.3.2: For patients without an increased bleeding risk or impaired coagulation and not already receiving effective

systemic anticoagulation, we suggest the following:
5.3.2.1:

5.3.2.2:

5.3.2.3:

For anticoagulation in intermittent RRT, we recommend using either unfractionated or low-molecular-
weight heparin, rather than other anticoagulants. (1C)
For anticoagulation in CRRT, we suggest using regional citrate anticoagulation rather than heparin in
patients who do not have contraindications for citrate. (2B)
For anticoagulation during CRRT in patients who have contraindications for citrate, we suggest using
either unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin, rather than other anticoagulants. (2C)

10

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12

s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

Impaired 
coagulation?  

Yes 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation  

No 

Underlying 
condition requires 
systemic 
anticoagulation?  

No 

Choose RRT 
Modality  

Yes 

Use anticoagulation 
adapted to this 
condition  

Intermittent RRT  

No 

No 

Regional Citrate 
Anticoagulation  

Heparin  

Rec 
5.3.1.1 

Recs  
5.3.2.2 
& 
5.3.3.1 

CRRT 

Contraindication 
to Citrate?  

Yes 

Rec 
5.3.2.3 

Increased 
Bleeding Risk?  

Yes 

Rec 
5.3.3.2 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation  

Heparin  

No 

Rec 
5.3.2.1 

Increased 
Bleeding 
Risk?  

Yes 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation

Figure 17 | Flow-chart summary of recommendations. Heparin includes low-molecular-weight or unfractionated heparin.
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy.

5.3.3: For patients with increased bleeding risk who are not receiving anticoagulation, we suggest the following for

anticoagulation during RRT:
5.3.3.1: We suggest using regional citrate anticoagulation, rather than no anticoagulation, during CRRT in

a patient without contraindications for citrate. (2C)

5.3.3.2: We suggest avoiding regional heparinization during CRRT in a patient with increased risk of

bleeding. (2C)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12

11

 
s u m m a r y o f r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t a t e m e n t s

5.3.4:

In a patient with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), all heparin must be stopped and we recommend
using direct thrombin inhibitors (such as argatroban) or Factor Xa inhibitors (such as danaparoid or
fondaparinux) rather than other or no anticoagulation during RRT. (1A)
5.3.4.1:

In a patient with HIT who does not have severe liver failure, we suggest using argatroban rather than
other thrombin or Factor Xa inhibitors during RRT. (2C)

5.4.1: We suggest initiating RRT in patients with AKI via an uncuffed nontunneled dialysis catheter, rather than a

tunneled catheter. (2D)

5.4.2: When choosing a vein for insertion of a dialysis catheter in patients with AKI, consider these preferences

(Not Graded):

K First choice: right jugular vein;
K Second choice: femoral vein;
K Third choice: left jugular vein;
K Last choice: subclavian vein with preference for the dominant side.

5.4.3: We recommend using ultrasound guidance for dialysis catheter insertion. (1A)
5.4.4: We recommend obtaining a chest radiograph promptly after placement and before ﬁrst use of an internal jugular

or subclavian dialysis catheter. (1B)

5.4.5: We suggest not using topical antibiotics over the skin insertion site of a nontunneled dialysis catheter in ICU

patients with AKI requiring RRT. (2C)

5.4.6: We suggest not using antibiotic locks for prevention of catheter-related infections of nontunneled dialysis

catheters in AKI requiring RRT. (2C)

5.5.1: We suggest to use dialyzers with a biocompatible membrane for IHD and CRRT in patients with AKI. (2C)
5.6.1: Use continuous and intermittent RRT as complementary therapies in AKI patients. (Not Graded)
5.6.2: We suggest using CRRT, rather than standard intermittent RRT, for hemodynamically unstable patients. (2B)
5.6.3: We suggest using CRRT, rather than intermittent RRT, for AKI patients with acute brain injury or other causes of

increased intracranial pressure or generalized brain edema. (2B)

5.7.1: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT in

patients with AKI. (2C)

5.7.2: We recommend using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT

in patients with AKI and circulatory shock. (1B)

5.7.3: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT in

patients with AKI and liver failure and/or lactic acidemia. (2B)

5.7.4: We recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement ﬂuids in patients with AKI, at a minimum, comply with
American Association of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standards regarding contamination with bacteria and
endotoxins. (1B)

5.8.1: The dose of RRT to be delivered should be prescribed before starting each session of RRT. (Not Graded) We

recommend frequent assessment of the actual delivered dose in order to adjust the prescription. (1B)

5.8.2: Provide RRT to achieve the goals of electrolyte, acid-base, solute, and ﬂuid balance that will meet the patient’s

needs. (Not Graded)

5.8.3: We recommend delivering a Kt/V of 3.9 per week when using intermittent or extended RRT in AKI. (1A)
5.8.4: We recommend delivering an efﬂuent volume of 20–25 ml/kg/h for CRRT in AKI (1A). This will usually require

a higher prescription of efﬂuent volume. (Not Graded)

12

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 1 . 1

Section 1: Introduction and Methodology

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.31

Chapter 1.1: Introduction

The concept of acute renal failure (ARF) has undergone
signiﬁcant re-examination in recent years. Mounting evi-
dence suggests that acute, relatively mild injury to the kidney
or impairment of kidney function, manifest by changes in
urine output and blood chemistries, portend serious clinical
consequences.1–5 Traditionally, most reviews and textbook
chapters emphasize the most severe reduction in kidney
function, with severe azotemia and often with oliguria or
anuria. It has only been in the past few years that moderate
decreases of kidney function have been recognized as
potentially important, in the critically ill,2 and in studies
on contrast-induced nephropathy.4

Glomerular filtration rate and serum creatinine
The glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is widely accepted as the
best overall index of kidney function in health and disease.
However, GFR is difﬁcult to measure and is commonly
estimated from the serum level of endogenous ﬁltration
markers, such as creatinine. Recently, Chertow et al.1 found
that an increase of serum creatinine (SCr) of 40.3 mg/dl
(426.5 mmol/l) was independently associated with mortality.
Similarly, Lassnigg et al.3 saw, in a cohort of patients who
underwent cardiac surgery, that either an increase of SCr
(X44.2 mmol/l) or a decrease 40.3 mg/dl
X0.5 mg/dl
(426.5 mmol/l) was associated with worse survival. The
reasons why small alterations in SCr lead to increases in
hospital mortality are not entirely clear. Possible explanations
include the untoward effects of decreased kidney function
such as volume overload, retention of uremic compounds,
acidosis, electrolyte disorders, increased risk for infection,
and anemia.6 Although, these changes in SCr could simply be
colinear with unmeasured variables that lead to increased
mortality, multiple attempts to control for known clinical
variables has led to the consistent conclusion that decreased
kidney function is independently associated with outcome.
Furthermore, more severe reductions in kidney function tend
to be associated with even worse outcome as compared to
milder reductions.

Oliguria and anuria
Although urine output
is both a reasonably sensitive
functional index for the kidney as well as a biomarker of
tubular injury, the relationship between urine output and
GFR, and tubular injury is complex. For example, oliguria
may be more profound when tubular function is intact.

Volume depletion and hypotension are profound stimuli for
vasopressin secretion. As a consequence the distal tubules and
collecting ducts become fully permeable to water. Concen-
trating mechanisms in the inner medulla are also aided
by low ﬂow through the loops of Henle and thus, urine
volume is minimized and urine concentration maximized
(4500 m Osmol/kg). Conversely, when the tubules are
injured, maximal concentrating ability is impaired and urine
volume may even be normal (i.e., nonoliguric renal failure).
Analysis of the urine to determine tubular function has a
long history in clinical medicine. Indeed, a high urine
osmolality coupled with a low urine sodium in the face of
oliguria and azotemia is strong evidence of intact tubular
function. However,
should not be interpreted as
‘‘benign’’ or even prerenal azotemia. Intact tubular function,
particularly early on, may be seen with various forms of renal
disease (e.g., glomerulonephritis). Sepsis, the most common
condition associated with ARF in the intensive-care unit
(ICU)7 may alter renal function without any characteristic
changes in urine indices.8,9 Automatically classifying these
abnormalities as
‘‘prerenal’’ will undoubtedly lead to
incorrect management decisions. Classiﬁcation as ‘‘benign
azotemia’’ or ‘‘acute renal success’’ is not consistent with
available evidence. Finally, although severe oliguria and even
anuria may result from renal tubular damage, it can also be
caused by urinary tract obstruction and by total arterial or
venous occlusion. These conditions will result in rapid and
irreversible damage to the kidney and require prompt
recognition and management.

this

Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
When mammalian kidneys are subjected to prolonged warm
ischemia followed by reperfusion, there is extensive necrosis
destroying the proximal tubules of the outer stripe of the
medulla, and the proximal convoluted tubules become
necrotic as well.10 Distal nephron involvement
in these
animal experiments is minimal, unless medullary oxygena-
tion is speciﬁcally targeted.11 Although these animals develop
severe ARF, as noted by Rosen and Heyman, not much else
resembles the clinical syndrome in humans.12 Indeed these
authors correctly point out that the term ‘‘acute tubular
necrosis does not accurately reﬂect
the morphological
changes in this condition’’.12 Instead, the term ATN is used
to describe a clinical situation in which there is adequate
renal perfusion to largely maintain tubular integrity, but not

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

13

c h a p t e r 1 . 1

to sustain glomerular ﬁltration. Data from renal biopsies in
patients with ATN dating back to the 1950s13 conﬁrm the
limited parenchymal compromise in spite of severe organ
dysfunction.12 Thus, the syndrome of ATN has very little to
do with the animal models traditionally used to study it.
More recently,
investigators have emphasized the role of
endothelial dysfunction, coagulation abnormalities, systemic
inﬂammation, endothelial dysfunction, and oxidative stress
injury, particularly in the setting of
in causing renal
sepsis.14,15 True ATN does,
in fact, occur. For example,
patients with arterial catastrophes (ruptured aneurysms,
acute dissection) can suffer prolonged periods of warm
ischemia just
these cases
like animal models. However,
comprise only a small fraction of patients with AKI, and
ironically, these patients are often excluded from studies
seeking to enroll patients with the more common clinical
syndrome known as ATN.

ARF
In a recent review, Eknoyan notes that the ﬁrst description of
ARF, then termed ischuria renalis, was by William Heberden
in 1802.16 At the beginning of the twentieth century, ARF,
then named Acute Bright’s disease, was well described in
William Osler’s Textbook for Medicine (1909), as a consequence
of toxic agents, pregnancy, burns, trauma, or operations on the
kidneys. During the First World War the syndrome was named
‘‘war nephritis’’,17 and was reported in several publications.
The syndrome was forgotten until the Second World War,
when Bywaters and Beall published their classical paper on
crush syndrome.18 However, it is Homer W. Smith who is
credited for the introduction of the term ‘‘acute renal failure’’,
in a chapter on ‘‘Acute renal failure related to traumatic
injuries’’ in his textbook The kidney-structure and function in
health and disease (1951). Unfortunately, a precise biochemical
deﬁnition of ARF was never proposed and, until recently, there
was no consensus on the diagnostic criteria or clinical
deﬁnition of ARF, resulting in multiple different deﬁnitions.
A recent survey revealed the use of at least 35 deﬁnitions in the
literature.19 This state of confusion has given rise to wide
variation in reported incidence and clinical signiﬁcance of
ARF. Depending on the deﬁnition used, ARF has been
reported to affect from 1% to 25% of ICU patients and has
lead to mortality rates from 15–60%.7,20,21

RIFLE criteria
The Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) group developed
a system for diagnosis and classiﬁcation of a broad range of
acute impairment of kidney function through a broad
consensus of experts.22 The characteristics of this system are
summarized in Figure 1. The acronym RIFLE stands for the
increasing severity classes Risk, Injury, and Failure; and the two
outcome classes, Loss and End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD).
The three severity grades are deﬁned on the basis of the
changes in SCr or urine output where the worst of each
criterion is used. The two outcome criteria, Loss and ESRD,
are deﬁned by the duration of loss of kidney function.

Figure 1 | The RIFLE criteria for AKI. ARF, acute renal failure; GFR,
glomerular filtration rate; Screat, serum creatinine concentration;
UO, urine output. Reprinted from Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA,
et al. Acute renal failure—definition, outcome measures, animal
models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: the
Second International Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialysis
Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8: R204-212 with
permission from Bellomo R et al.;22 accessed http://ccforum.com/
content/8/4/R204

it

renal

in markers of

Indeed, as a syndrome,

AKI: acute kidney injury/impairment
Importantly, by deﬁning the syndrome of acute changes in
renal function more broadly, RIFLE criteria move beyond
ARF. The term ‘‘acute kidney injury/impairment’’ has been
proposed to encompass the entire spectrum of the syndrome
from minor changes
function to
requirement for renal replacement therapy (RRT).23 Thus,
the concept of AKI, as deﬁned by RIFLE creates a new
paradigm. AKI is not ATN, nor is it renal failure. Instead, it
severe
less
encompasses both and also includes other,
conditions.
includes patients
without actual damage to the kidney but with functional
impairment relative to physiologic demand. Including such
patients in the classiﬁcation of AKI is conceptually attractive
because these are precisely the patients that may beneﬁt from
early intervention. However, it means that AKI includes both
injury and/or impairment. Rather than focusing exclusively
on patients with renal failure or on those who receive dialysis
or on those that have a clinical syndrome deﬁned by
pathology, which is usually absent
the strong
association of AKI with hospital mortality demands that we
change the way we think about this disorder. In a study by
Hoste et al.,2 only 14% of patients reaching RIFLE ‘‘F’’
received RRT, yet
these patients experienced a hospital
mortality rate more than ﬁve times that of the same ICU
population without AKI. Is renal support underutilized or
delayed? Are there other supportive measures that should be
employed for these patients? Sustained AKI leads to profound
alterations in ﬂuid, electrolyte, acid-base and hormonal
regulation. AKI results
in the central
nervous, immune, and coagulation systems. Many patients

in abnormalities

(ATN),

14

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

with AKI already have multisystem organ failure. What is the
incremental inﬂuence of AKI on remote organ function and
how does it affect outcome? A recent study by Levy et al.
examined outcomes for over 1000 patients enrolled in the
control arms of two large sepsis trials.24 Early improvement
(within 24 hours) in cardiovascular (P ¼ 0.0010), renal
(Po0.0001), or
function was
signiﬁcantly related to survival. This study suggests that
outcomes for patients with severe sepsis in the ICU are
closely related to early resolution of AKI. While rapid
resolution of AKI may simply be a marker of a good
prognosis,
it may also indicate a window of therapeutic
opportunity to improve outcome in such patients.

respiratory (P ¼ 0.0469)

Validation studies using RIFLE
As of early 2010, over half a million patients have been
studied to evaluate the RIFLE criteria as a means of
classifying patients with AKI.25–28 Large series from the
USA,28 Europe,29,30 and Australia,25 each including several
thousand patients, have provided a consistent picture. AKI
deﬁned by RIFLE is associated with signiﬁcantly decreased
survival and furthermore, increasing severity of AKI deﬁned
by RIFLE stage leads to increased risk of death.

An early study from Uchino et al.

focused on the
predictive ability of the RIFLE classiﬁcation in a cohort
for
of 20 126 patients admitted to a teaching hospital
424 hours over a 3-year period.5 The authors used an
electronic laboratory database to classify patients
into
RIFLE-R, I, and F and followed them to hospital discharge
or death. Nearly 10% of patients achieved a maximum
RIFLE-R, 5% I, and 3.5% F. There was a nearly linear
increase in hospital mortality with increasing RIFLE class,
with patients at R having more than three times the mortality
rate of patients without AKI. Patients with I had close to
twice the mortality of R and patients with F had 10 times
the mortality rate of hospitalized patients without AKI.
The investigators performed multivariate logistic regression
analysis
to test whether RIFLE classiﬁcation was an
independent predictor of hospital mortality. They found
that class R carried an odds ratio of hospital mortality of 2.5,
I of 5.4, and F of 10.1.

Ali et al. studied the incidence of AKI in Northern
Scotland, a geographical population base of 523 390. The
incidence of AKI was 2147 per million population.31 Sepsis
in 47% of patients. RIFLE
was a precipitating factor
classiﬁcation was useful
for predicting recovery of renal
function (Po0.001), requirement for RRT (Po0.001), length
of hospital stay for survivors (Po0.001), and in-hospital
mortality (P ¼ 0.035). Although no longer
statistically
signiﬁcant, subjects with AKI had a high mortality at 3 and
6 months as well.

More recently, the Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN),
an international network of AKI researchers, organized a
summit of nephrology and critical care societies from around
the world. The group endorsed the RIFLE criteria with
a small modiﬁcation to include small changes in SCr

c h a p t e r 1 . 1

(X0.3 mg/dl or X26.5 mmol/l) when they occur within a
48-hour period.23 Two recent
studies examining large
in the USA28 and Europe29 validated these
databases
modiﬁed criteria. Thakar et al. found that increased severity
of AKI was associated with an increased risk of death
comorbidity.28 Patients with Stage 1
independent of
(X0.3 mg/dl or X26.5 mmol/l) increase in SCr but less than
a two-fold increase had an odds ratio of 2.2; with Stage 2
(corresponding to RIFLE-I), there was an odds ratio of 6.1;
and in Stage 3 (RIFLE-F), an odds ratio of 8.6 for hospital
mortality was calculated. An additional modiﬁcation to the
RIFLE criteria has been proposed for pediatric patients in
order to better classify small children with acute-on-chronic
disease.32

Limitations to current definitions for AKI
Unfortunately, the existing criteria—while extremely useful
and widely validated—are still limited. First, despite efforts to
standardize the deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of AKI, there is
still inconsistency in application.26,27 A minority of studies
have included urinary output criteria despite its apparent
ability to identify additional cases6,29 and many studies have
excluded patients whose initial SCr is already elevated.
Preliminary data from a 20 000-patient database from the
University of Pittsburgh suggests that roughly a third of AKI
cases are community-acquired33 and many cases may be
missed by limiting analysis to documented increases in SCr.
Indeed, the majority of cases of AKI in the developing world
are likely to be community-acquired. Thus, few studies can
provide accurate incidence data. An additional problem
relates to the limitations of SCr and urine output
for
detecting AKI. In the future, biomarkers of renal cell injury
may identify additional patients with AKI and may identify
the majority of patients at an earlier stage.

Rationale for a guideline on AKI
AKI is a global problem and occurs in the community, in the
hospital where it is common on medical, surgical, pediatric,
and oncology wards, and in ICUs. Irrespective of its nature,
AKI is a predictor of
immediate and long-term adverse
outcomes. AKI is more prevalent in (and a signiﬁcant risk
factor for) patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Individuals with CKD are especially susceptible to AKI
which, in turn, may act as a promoter of progression of the
underlying CKD. The burden of AKI may be most signiﬁcant
in developing countries34,35 with limited resources for the
care of these patients once the disease progresses to kidney
failure necessitating RRT. Addressing the unique circum-
stances and needs of developing countries, especially in the
detection of AKI in its early and potentially reversible stages
to prevent its progression to kidney failure requiring dialysis,
is of paramount importance.

Research over the past decade has identiﬁed numerous
preventable risk factors
for AKI and the potential of
improving their management and outcomes. Unfortunately,
these are not widely known and are variably practiced

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

15

c h a p t e r 1 . 1

worldwide, resulting in lost opportunities to improve the care
and outcomes of patients with AKI. Importantly, there is no
unifying approach to the diagnosis and care of these patients.
There is a worldwide need to recognize, detect, and intervene
to circumvent the need for dialysis and to improve outcomes
of AKI. The difﬁculties and disadvantages associated with an
increasing variation in management and treatment of
diseases that were ampliﬁed in the years after the Second
World War, led in 1989 to the creation in the USA of the
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (now the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality). This agency was
created to provide objective, science-based information to
improve decision making in health-care delivery. A major
this agency was the establishment of a
contribution of
systematic process for developing evidence-based guidelines.
It is now well accepted that rigorously developed, evidence-
based guidelines, when implemented, have improved quality,
cost, variability, and outcomes.36,37

Realizing that there is an increasing prevalence of acute
(and chronic) kidney disease worldwide and that
the
complications and problems of patients with kidney disease
are universal, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO), a nonproﬁt foundation, was established in 2003
‘‘to improve the care and outcomes of kidney disease patients
worldwide through promoting coordination, collaboration,
initiatives to develop and implement
and integration of
clinical practice guidelines’’.38

Besides developing guidelines on a number of other
important areas of nephrology,
the Board of Directors
of KDIGO quickly realized that there is room for improving
international cooperation in the development, dissemi-
nation, and implementation of clinical practice guide-
lines in the ﬁeld of AKI. At its meeting in December of
2006, the KDIGO Board of Directors determined that the
topic of AKI meets the criteria for developing clinical practice
guidelines.

These criteria were formulated as follows:

K AKI is common.
K AKI imposes a heavy burden of illness (morbidity and

mortality).

K The cost per person of managing AKI is high.
K AKI is amenable to early detection and potential prevention.
K There is considerable variability in practice to prevent,

diagnose, treat, and achieve outcomes of AKI.

K Clinical practice guidelines in the field have the potential
to reduce variations, improve outcomes, and reduce costs.

K Formal guidelines do not exist on this topic.

Summary
Small changes in kidney function in hospitalized patients are
important and associated with signiﬁcant changes in short-
and long-term outcomes. The shift of terminology from ATN
and ARF to AKI has been well received by the research and
clinical communities. RIFLE/AKIN criteria provide a uni-
form deﬁnition of AKI, and have become the standard for
diagnostic criteria. AKI severity grades represent patient
groups with increasing severity of illness as illustrated by an
increasing proportion of patients treated with RRT, and
increasing mortality. Thus, AKI as deﬁned by the RIFLE
criteria is now recognized as an important
syndrome,
alongside other syndromes such as acute coronary syndrome,
acute lung injury, and severe sepsis and septic shock. The
RIFLE/AKIN classiﬁcation for AKI is quite analogous to the
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) for
CKD staging, which is well known to correlate disease
severity with cardiovascular complications and other mor-
bidities.39 As CKD stages have been linked to speciﬁc
treatment recommendations, which have proved extremely
in managing this disease,39 we have developed
useful
evaluation and management of
recommendations
patients with AKI using this stage-based approach.

for

16

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 1 . 2

Chapter 1.2: Methodology

INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides a very brief summary of the methods
used to develop this guideline. Detailed methods are
provided in Appendix F. The overall aim of the project was
to create a clinical practice guideline with recommendations
for AKI using an evidence-based approach. After topics and
the pertinent
relevant clinical questions were identiﬁed,
scientiﬁc literature on those topics was
systematically
searched and summarized.

Group member selection and meeting process
The KDIGO Co-Chairs appointed the Co-Chairs of the Work
Group, who then assembled the Work Group to be responsible
for the development of the guideline. The Work Group consisted
including individuals with expertise in
of domain experts,
nephrology, critical care medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics,
cardiology, radiology, infectious diseases and epidemiology. For
support in evidence review, expertise in methods, and guideline
development, the NKF contracted with the Evidence Review
Team (ERT) based primarily at the Tufts Center for Kidney
Disease Guideline Development and Implementation at Tufts
Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. The ERT
consisted of physician-methodologists with expertise in nephrol-
ogy and internal medicine, and research associates and assistants.
The ERT instructed and advised Work Group members in all
steps of
literature appraisal, and
guideline development. The Work Group and the ERT
collaborated closely throughout the project. The Work Group,
KDIGO Co-Chairs, ERT, liaisons, and NKF support staff met for
four 2-day meetings for training in the guideline development
process, topic discussion, and consensus development.

literature review, critical

for

Evidence selection, appraisal, and presentation
We ﬁrst deﬁned the topics and goals for the guideline and
identiﬁed key clinical questions
review. The ERT
performed literature searches, organized abstract and article
screening, coordinated methodological and analytic processes
of the report, deﬁned and standardized the search methodol-
ogy, performed data extraction, and summarized the
evidence. The Work Group members reviewed all included
articles, data extraction forms, summary tables, and evidence
proﬁles for accuracy and completeness. The four major topic
areas of
i) deﬁnition and
classiﬁcation; ii) prevention; iii) pharmacologic treatment;
and iv) RRT. Populations of interest were those at risk for
AKI (including those after
intravascular contrast-media
exposure, aminoglycosides, and amphotericin) and those
with or at risk for AKI with a focus on patients with sepsis or
trauma, receiving critical care, or undergoing cardiothoracic

included:

for AKI

interest

surgery. We excluded studies on AKI from rhabdomyolysis,
speciﬁc infections, and poisoning or drug overdose. Overall,
we screened 18 385 citations.

Outcome selection judgments, values, and preferences
We limited outcomes to those important for decision making,
including development of AKI, need for or dependence on
RRT, and all-cause mortality. When weighting the evidence
across different outcomes, we selected as the ‘‘crucial’’ outcome
that which weighed most heavily in the assessment of the
overall quality of evidence. Values and preferences articulated
by the Work Group included: i) a desire to be inclusive in
terms of meeting criteria for AKI; ii) a progressive approach to
risk and cost such that, as severity increased, the group put
greater value on possible effectiveness of strategies, but
maintained high value for avoidance of harm; iii) intent to
guide practice but not limit future research.

Grading the quality of evidence and the strength of
recommendations
The grading approach followed in this guideline is adopted
from the GRADE system.40,41 The strength of each recom-
mendation is rated as level 1 which means ‘‘strong’’ or level 2
which means ‘‘weak’’ or discretionary. The wording corres-
ponding to a level 1 recommendation is ‘‘We recommend y
should’’ and implies that most patients should receive the
course of action. The wording for a level 2 recommendation
is ‘‘We suggest y might’’ which implies that different choices
will be appropriate for different patients, with the suggested
course of action being a reasonable choice in many patients.
In addition, each statement is assigned a grade for the quality
of the supporting evidence, A (high), B (moderate), C (low),
or D (very low). Table 1 shows the implications of the
guideline grades and describes how the strength of the
recommendations should be interpreted by guideline users.
Furthermore, on topics that cannot be subjected to
systematic evidence review, the Work Group could issue
statements that are not graded. Typically,
these provide
guidance that is based on common sense, e.g., reminders of
the obvious and/or recommendations that are not sufﬁciently
speciﬁc enough to allow the application of evidence. The
GRADE system is best suited to evaluate evidence on
comparative effectiveness. Some of our most
important
guideline topics involve diagnosis and staging or AKI, and
here the Work Group chose to provide ungraded statements.
These statements are indirectly supported by evidence on risk
relationships and resulted from unanimous consensus of the
Work Group. Thus, the Work Group feels they should not be
viewed as weaker than graded recommendations.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

17

c h a p t e r 1 . 2

Table 1 | Implications of the strength of a recommendation

Implications

Grade*

Patients

Clinicians

Policy

Level 1
‘‘We recommend’’

Most people in your situation
would want the recommended
course of action and only a
small proportion would not.

Most patients should receive the
recommended course of action.

The recommendation can be evaluated as
a candidate for developing a policy or a
performance measure.

Level 2
‘‘We suggest’’

The majority of people in your
situation would want the
recommended course of action,
but many would not.

Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients. Each patient needs help to
arrive at a management decision consistent
with her or his values and preferences.

The recommendation is likely to require
substantial debate and involvement of
stakeholders before policy can be
determined.

SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,
Novartis, Robert
and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire,
Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it clear
that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and

advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contributor,
copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accordingly, the
publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and their respective
employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no liability whatsoever for
the consequences of any such inaccurate or misleading data,
opinion or statement. While every effort is made to ensure that
drug doses and other quantities are presented accurately,
readers are advised that new methods and techniques
involving drug usage, and described within this Journal,
should only be followed in conjunction with the drug
manufacturer’s own published literature.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix F: Detailed Methods for Guideline Development.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

18

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 2 . 1

Section 2: AKI Definition

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.32

Chapter 2.1: Definition and classification of AKI

INTRODUCTION
AKI is one of a number of conditions that affect kidney
structure and function. AKI is deﬁned by an abrupt decrease
in kidney function that includes, but is not limited to, ARF. It
is a broad clinical syndrome encompassing various etiologies,
including speciﬁc kidney diseases (e.g., acute interstitial
nephritis, acute glomerular and vasculitic renal diseases);
non-speciﬁc conditions (e.g, ischemia, toxic injury); as well
as extrarenal pathology (e.g., prerenal azotemia, and acute
postrenal obstructive nephropathy)—see Chapters 2.2 and
2.3 for further discussion. More than one of these conditions
may coexist in the same patient and, more importantly,
epidemiological evidence supports the notion that even mild,
reversible AKI has important clinical consequences, including
increased risk of death.2,5 Thus, AKI can be thought of more
like acute
coronary syndrome.
Furthermore, because the manifestations and clinical con-
sequences of AKI can be quite similar (even indistinguish-
able) regardless of whether the etiology is predominantly
within the kidney or predominantly from outside stresses on
the kidney, the syndrome of AKI encompasses both direct
injury to the kidney as well as acute impairment of function.
Since treatments of AKI are dependent to a large degree on
the underlying etiology, this guideline will focus on speciﬁc
diagnostic approaches. However, since general therapeutic
and monitoring recommendations can be made regarding all
forms of AKI, our approach will be to begin with general
measures.

lung injury or

acute

Definition and staging of AKI
AKI is common, harmful, and potentially treatable. Even
a minor acute reduction in kidney function has an adverse
prognosis. Early detection and treatment of AKI may
improve outcomes. Two similar deﬁnitions based on SCr
and urine output (RIFLE and AKIN) have been proposed and
validated. There is a need for a single deﬁnition for practice,
research, and public health.

2.1.1: AKI is deﬁned as any of the following (Not Graded):
K Increase in SCr by X0.3 mg/dl (X26.5 lmol/l)

within 48 hours; or

K Increase in SCr to X1.5 times baseline, which
is known or presumed to have occurred within
the prior 7 days; or

K Urine volume o0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours.

Table 2 | Staging of AKI

Stage

Serum creatinine

1

2

3

1.5–1.9 times baseline

OR

X0.3 mg/dl (X26.5 mmol/l) increase

2.0–2.9 times baseline

3.0 times baseline

OR

Increase in serum creatinine to
X4.0 mg/dl (X353.6 mmol/l)

OR

Initiation of renal replacement therapy
OR, In patients o18 years, decrease in
eGFR to o35 ml/min per 1.73 m2

Urine output

o0.5 ml/kg/h for
6–12 hours

o0.5 ml/kg/h for
X12 hours

o0.3 ml/kg/h for
X24 hours

OR

Anuria for X12 hours

2.1.2: AKI is staged for severity according to the following

criteria (Table 2). (Not Graded)

2.1.3: The cause of AKI should be determined whenever

possible. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
Conditions affecting kidney structure and function can be
considered acute or chronic, depending on their duration.
AKI is one of a number of acute kidney diseases and
disorders (AKD), and can occur with or without other acute
or chronic kidney diseases and disorders (Figure 2). Whereas
CKD has a well-established conceptual model and deﬁnition
that has been useful in clinical medicine, research, and public
health,42–44 the deﬁnition for AKI is evolving, and the
concept of AKD is relatively new. An operational deﬁnition
of AKD for use in the diagnostic approach to alterations
in kidney function and structure is included in Chapter 2.5,
with further description in Appendix B.

The conceptual model of AKI (Figure 3) is analogous to
the conceptual model of CKD, and is also applicable to
AKD.42,45 Circles on the horizontal axis depict stages in the
development (left to right) and recovery (right to left) of
AKI. AKI (in red) is deﬁned as reduction in kidney function,
including decreased GFR and kidney failure. The criteria for
the diagnosis of AKI and the stage of severity of AKI are
based on changes in SCr and urine output as depicted in the
triangle above the circles. Kidney failure is a stage of AKI
highlighted here because of its clinical importance. Kidney
failure is deﬁned as a GFR o15 ml/min per 1.73 m2 body

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

19

c h a p t e r 2 . 1

requirement

is
surface area, or
recognized that RRT may be required earlier in the evolution
of AKI. Further description is included in Chapter 2.5 and
Appendix A.

for RRT, although it

It is widely accepted that GFR is the most useful overall
index of kidney function in health and disease, and changes
in SCr and urine output are surrogates for changes in GFR. In
clinical practice, an abrupt decline in GFR is assessed from an
increase in SCr or oliguria. Recognizing the limitations of the
use of a decrease in kidney function for the early detection
and accurate estimation of renal injury (see below), there is a
broad consensus that, while more sensitive and speciﬁc
biomarkers are needed, changes in SCr and/or urine output
form the basis of all diagnostic criteria for AKI. The ﬁrst
international
interdisciplinary consensus criteria for diag-
nosis of AKI were the RIFLE criteria32 proposed by the
ADQI. Modiﬁcations to these criteria have been proposed in
order to better account for pediatric populations (pRIFLE)32
and for small changes in SCr not captured by RIFLE (AKIN
criteria).23 Recommendations 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 represent the
combination of RIFLE and AKIN criteria (Table 3).

AKD

AKI

CKD

Figure 2 | Overview of AKI, CKD, and AKD. Overlapping ovals
show the relationships among AKI, AKD, and CKD. AKI is a subset
of AKD. Both AKI and AKD without AKI can be superimposed
upon CKD. Individuals without AKI, AKD, or CKD have no known
kidney disease (NKD), not shown here. AKD, acute kidney diseases
and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney
disease.

Existing evidence supports the validity of both RIFLE and
AKIN criteria to identify groups of hospitalized patients with
increased risk of death and/or need for RRT.2,5,25,28–30
Epidemiological studies, many multicentered, collectively
enrolling more than 500 000 subjects have been used to
establish RIFLE and/or AKIN criteria as valid methods to
diagnose and stage AKI. Recently, Joannidis et al.29 directly
compared RIFLE criteria with and without
the AKIN
modiﬁcation. While AKI classiﬁed by either criteria were
associated with a similarly increased hospital mortality, the
two criteria identiﬁed somewhat different patients. The
original RIFLE criteria failed to detect 9% of cases that were
detected by AKIN criteria. However, the AKIN criteria missed
26.9% of cases detected by RIFLE. Examination of the cases
missed by either criteria (Table 4) shows that cases identiﬁed
by AKIN but missed by RIFLE were almost exclusively Stage 1
(90.7%), while cases missed by AKIN but identiﬁed by RIFLE
included 30% with RIFLE-I and 18% RIFLE-F; furthermore,
these cases had hospital mortality similar to cases identiﬁed
by both criteria (37% for I and 41% for F). However, cases
missed by RIFLE but identiﬁed as Stage 1 by AKIN also had
hospital mortality rates nearly twice that of patients who had
no evidence of AKI by either criteria (25% vs. 13%). These
data provide strong rationale for use of both RIFLE and
AKIN criteria to identify patients with AKI.

Staging of AKI (Recommendation 2.1.2) is appropriate
because, with increased stage of AKI, the risk for death and
need for RRT increases.2,5,25,28–31 Furthermore, there is now
accumulating evidence of
long-term risk of subsequent
development of cardiovascular disease or CKD and mortality,
even after apparent resolution of AKI.47–49

For staging purposes, patients should be staged accord-
ing to the criteria that give them the highest stage. Thus
when creatinine and urine output map to different stages,

Stages defined by
creatinine and
urine output
are surrogates

GFR

Complications

Normal

Increased
risk

Damage

↓
↓

GFR

Kidney
failure

Death

Antecedents
Intermediate Stage
AKI
Outcomes

Damage

Markers such
as NGAL, KIM-1,
and IL-18 are
surrogates

Figure 3 | Conceptual model for AKI. Red circles represent stages of AKI. Yellow circles represent potential antecedents of AKI, and the
pink circle represents an intermediate stage (not yet defined). Thick arrows between circles represent risk factors associated with the
initiation and progression of disease that can be affected or detected by interventions. Purple circles represent outcomes of AKI.
‘‘Complications’’ refers to all complications of AKI, including efforts at prevention and treatment, and complications in other organ systems.
AKI, acute kidney injury; GFR, glomerular filtration rate. Adapted from Murray PT, Devarajan P, Levey AS, et al. A framework and key research
questions in AKI diagnosis and staging in different environments. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 864–868 with permission from American
Society of Nephrology45 conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; accessed http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/content/3/3/864.full

20

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

Table 3 | Comparison of RIFLE and AKIN criteria for diagnosis and classification of AKI

AKI staging

Serum creatinine

Stage 1 Increase of more than or equal to 0.3 mg/dl
(X26.5 mmol/l) or increase to more than or equal to
150% to 200% (1.5- to 2-fold) from baseline
Stage 2 Increased to more than 200% to 300%
(42- to 3-fold) from baseline
Stage 3 Increased to more than 300% (43-fold)
from baseline, or more than or equal to 4.0 mg/dl
(X354 mmol/l) with an acute increase of at least
0.5 mg/dl (44 mmol/l) or on RRT

Urine output
(common to both)

Less than 0.5 ml/kg/h for
more than 6 hours

Less than 0.5 ml/kg per hour
for more than 12 hours
Less than 0.3 ml/kg/h for
24 hours or anuria for
12 hours

Class

Risk

Injury

Failure

Loss

End-stage kidney
disease

c h a p t e r 2 . 1

RIFLE

Serum creatinine or GFR

Increase in serum creatinine (cid:2) 1.5 or GFR
decrease 425%

Serum creatinine (cid:2) 2 or GFR decreased
450%
Serum creatinine (cid:2) 3, or serum creatinine
44 mg/dl (4354 mmol/l) with an acute
rise 40.5 mg/dl (444 mmol/l) or GFR
decreased 475%
Persistent acute renal failure=complete
loss of kidney function 44 weeks
ESRD 43 months

Note: For conversion of creatinine expressed in SI units to mg/dl, divide by 88.4. For both AKIN stage and RIFLE criteria, only one criterion (creatinine rise or urine output
decline) needs to be fulfilled. Class is based on the worst of either GFR or urine output criteria. GFR decrease is calculated from the increase in serum creatinine above
baseline. For AKIN, the increase in creatinine must occur in o48 hours. For RIFLE, AKI should be both abrupt (within 1–7 days) and sustained (more than 24 hours). When
baseline creatinine is elevated, an abrupt rise of at least 0.5 mg/dl (44 mmol/l) to 44 mg/dl (4354 mmol/l) is sufficient for RIFLE class Failure (modified from Mehta et al.23 and
the report of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative consortium22).
AKI, acute kidney injury; AKIN, Acute Kidney Injury Network; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; RIFLE, risk, injury, failure, loss, and end stage; RRT,
renal replacement therapy. Reprinted from Endre ZH. Acute kidney injury: definitions and new paradigms. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 2008; 15: 213–221 with permission from
National Kidney Foundation46; accessed http://www.ackdjournal.org/article/S1548-5595(08)00049-9/fulltext

Table 4 | Cross-tabulation of patients classified by RIFLE vs. AKIN

RIFLE

AKIN

Non-AKI
Stage1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Total (RIFLE)

n*
n*
n*
n*
n*

Non-AKI

8759 (12.9%)
457 (25.2%)
36 (30.6%)
11 (18.2%)
9263 (13.6%)

Risk

Injury

Failure

Total (AKIN)

781 (27.7%)
282 (33.0%)
21 (47.6%)
8 (12.5%)
1092 (29.2%)

452 (37.4%)
243 (44.0%)
885 (25.9%)
16 (62.5%)
1596 (32.3%)

271 (41.3%)
95 (60.0%)
91 (54.9)
1948 (41.3)
2405 (42.6%)

10 263 (15.9%)
1077 (34.5%)
1033 (29.0%)
1983 (41.2%)
14 356 (21.7%)

*Number of patients classified into the respective stages of AKI by AKIN or RIFLE are cross-tabulated against each other. Hospital mortality of each group is given in
parentheses. Shaded fields denote patients assigned to the same degree of AKI by both classification systems.
AKI, acute kidney injury; AKIN, Acute Kidney Injury Network; RIFLE, risk, injury, failure, loss, and end stage. With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media:
Intensive Care Med. Acute kidney injury in critically ill patients classified by AKIN versus RIFLE using the SAPS 3 database. 35 (2009): 1692–1702. Joannidis M, Metnitz B,
Bauer P et al.29; accessed http://www.springerlink.com/content/r177337030550120/

the patient is staged according to the highest (worst) stage.
The changes in GFR that were published with the original
RIFLE criteria do not correspond precisely to changes in SCr.
As SCr is measured and GFR can only be estimated,
creatinine criteria should be used along with urine output
for the diagnosis (and staging) of AKI. One additional change
in the criteria was made for the sake of clarity and simplicity.
SCr 44.0 mg/dl
For patients
Stage
(4354 mmol/l), rather than require an acute increase of
X0.5 mg/dl (X44 mmol/l) over an unspeciﬁed time period, we
instead require that the patient ﬁrst achieve the creatinine-
based change speciﬁed in the deﬁnition (either X0.3 mg/dl
[X26.5 mmol/l] within a 48-hour time window or an increase
of X1.5 times baseline). This change brings the deﬁnition and
staging criteria to greater parity and simpliﬁes the criteria.

reaching

3 by

Recommendation 2.1.2 is based on the RIFLE and AKIN
criteria that were developed for average-sized adults. The
creatinine
an auto-
matic Stage 3 classiﬁcation for patients who develop SCr
44.0 mg/dl (4354 mmol/l) (provided that they ﬁrst satisfy

change–based deﬁnitions

include

the deﬁnition of AKI in Recommendation 2.1.1). This is
problematic for smaller pediatric patients, including infants
and children with low muscle mass who may not be able to
achieve a SCr of 4.0 mg/dl (354 mmol/l). Thus, the pediatric-
modiﬁed RIFLE AKI criteria32 were developed using a change
in estimated creatinine clearance (eCrCl) based on the
Schwartz formula. In pRIFLE, patients automatically reach
Stage 3 if they develop an eCrCl o35 ml/min per 1.73 m2.
However, with this automatic pRIFLE threshold, the SCr
change based AKI deﬁnition (recommendation 2.1.1) is
including an increase of
applicable to pediatric patients,
0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) SCr.32

There are important limitations to these recommenda-
tions, including imprecise determination of risk (see Chapter
2.2) and incomplete epidemiology of AKI, especially outside
the ICU. Clinical judgment is required in order to determine
if patients seeming to meet criteria do, in fact, have disease, as
well as to determine if patients are likely to have AKI even if
incomplete clinical data are available to apply the diagnostic
criteria. The application of the diagnostic and staging criteria

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

21

c h a p t e r 2 . 1

Table 5 | Causes of AKI and diagnostic tests

Selected causes of AKI requiring
immediate diagnosis and specific
therapies

Decreased kidney perfusion

Acute glomerulonephritis, vasculitis,
interstitial nephritis, thrombotic
microangiopathy
Urinary tract obstruction

AKI, acute kidney injury.

Recommended diagnostic tests

Volume status and urinary
diagnostic indices
Urine sediment examination,
serologic testing and
hematologic testing
Kidney ultrasound

is discussed in greater detail, along with speciﬁc examples in
Chapter 2.4.

The use of urine output criteria for diagnosis and staging
has been less well validated and in individual patients
the need for clinical judgment regarding the effects of drugs
(e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [ACE-I]),
ﬂuid balance, and other factors must be included. For very
obese patients, urine output criteria for AKI may include
some patients with normal urine output. However, these
recommendations serve as the starting point for further
evaluation, possibly involving subspecialists, for a group of
patients recognized to be at increased risk.

their disease, and thus it

Finally, it is axiomatic that patients always be managed
according to the cause of
is
important to determine the cause of AKI whenever possible.
In particular, patients with decreased kidney perfusion, acute
glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, interstitial nephritis, throm-
botic microangiopathy, and urinary tract obstruction require
immediate diagnosis and speciﬁc therapeutic intervention, in
addition to the general recommendations for AKI in the
remainder of this guideline (Table 5).

It is recognized that it is frequently not possible to deter-
mine the cause, and often the exact cause does not dictate a
speciﬁc therapy. However, the syndrome of AKI includes

some patients with speciﬁc kidney diseases (e.g., glome-
rulonephritis) for which a speciﬁc treatment is available. As
such, it is always necessary to search for the underlying cause
of AKI (see Chapter 2.3).

Research Recommendations

K The role of biomarkers other than SCr in the early
diagnosis, differential diagnosis, and prognosis of AKI
patients should be explored. Some important areas in
which to focus include:

J Early detection where the gold standard is AKI by
clinical diagnosis after the fact and the biomarker is
compared to existing markers (SCr and urine
output) at the time of presentation.

J Prognosis where a biomarker is used to predict risk

for AKI or risk for progression of AKI.

Influence of

J Prognosis where a biomarker is used to predict
recovery after AKI vs. death or need for long-term RRT.
K The influence of urinary output criteria on AKI staging
needs to be further investigated.
fluid
balance, percent volume overload, diuretic use, and
differing weights (actual, ideal body weight, lean body
mass) should be considered. Also,
it is currently not
known how urine volume criteria should be applied (e.g.,
average vs. persistent reduction for the period specified).
K The influence of SCr or eGFR criteria on AKI staging
needs to be further investigated. The use of different
relative and absolute SCr increments or eGFR decrements
at different time points and with differently ascertained
baseline values requires further exploration and valida-
tion in various populations.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix A: Background.
Appendix B: Diagnostic Approach to Alterations in Kidney Function
and Structure.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

22

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 2 . 2

Chapter 2.2: Risk assessment

insults without

suffering signiﬁcant

The kidney is a fairly robust organ that can tolerate exposure to
structural or
several
functional change. For this reason, any acute change in kidney
function often indicates severe systemic derangement and
predicts a poor prognosis. Risk for AKI is increased by exposure
to factors that cause AKI or the presence of factors that increase
susceptibility to AKI. Factors that determine susceptibility of the
kidneys to injury include dehydration, certain demographic
characteristics and genetic predispositions, acute and chronic
comorbidities, and treatments. It is the interaction between
susceptibility and the type and extent of exposure to insults that
determines the risk of occurrence of AKI.

Understanding individual

‘‘risk factors’’ may help in
preventing AKI. This is particularly gratifying in the hospital
setting, where the patient’s susceptibility can be assessed
before certain exposures as surgery or administration of
potentially nephrotoxic agents. Accordingly, some suscept-
ibility factors may be modiﬁed, and contemplated exposures
avoided or tailored to reduce the risk of AKI.

Risk assessment in community-acquired AKI is different
from hospital-acquired AKI, for two main reasons: i) Available
evidence on risk factors is largely derived from hospital data and
extrapolation to the community setting is questionable. ii) The
opportunity to intervene, prior to exposure, is quite limited.
Most patients are seen only after having suffered an exposure
(trauma, infection, poisonous plant, or animal). However, there
is still room to assess such patients, albeit after exposure, in
order to identify those who are more likely to develop AKI,
thereby requiring closer monitoring and general supportive
measures. It may also be helpful to identify such patients in
order to avoid additional injury. A more complete discussion of
the approach to identiﬁcation and management of risk for AKI
is provided in Appendices C and D.

2.2.1: We recommend that patients be stratiﬁed for risk of AKI

according to their susceptibilities and exposures. (1B)

2.2.2: Manage patients according to their susceptibilities and
exposures to reduce the risk of AKI (see relevant
guideline sections). (Not Graded)

2.2.3: Test patients at increased risk for AKI with measure-
ments of SCr and urine output to detect AKI. (Not
Graded)
Individualize frequency and duration of
monitoring based on patient risk and clinical course.
(Not Graded)

Table 6 | Causes of AKI: exposures and susceptibilities for
non-specific AKI

Exposures

Susceptibilities

Sepsis
Critical illness
Circulatory shock
Burns
Trauma
Cardiac surgery (especially
with CPB)
Major noncardiac surgery
Nephrotoxic drugs
Radiocontrast agents
Poisonous plants and animals

Dehydration or volume depletion
Advanced age
Female gender
Black race
CKD
Chronic diseases (heart, lung, liver)

Diabetes mellitus
Cancer
Anemia

CKD, chronic kidney disease; CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass.

individuals. This

However, the chances of developing AKI after exposure to the
same insult differ among different
is
attributed to a number of susceptibility factors which vary
widely from individual to individual. Our understanding of
susceptibility factors (Table 6) is based on many observa-
tional studies that address different settings with regards to
the type, severity, duration, and multiplicity of insults. While
this heterogeneity provides insight into some susceptibility
factors that are common across various populations, the
generalizability of results from one particular setting to the
next is uncertain.

The course and outcome of AKI are modiﬁed by other
factors, but since these are manifested within the context of
actual disease, they must be categorized as ‘‘prognostic’’
rather than ‘‘risk’’ factors, hence being discussed separately in
Appendix D. Lastly, the fact that some 30% of patients who
increased risk of CKD,
recover
cardiovascular disease, and death calls for the identiﬁcation
of the risk factors that can identify such patients in the hopes
of providing them with timely preventive measures.50–52

from AKI

remain at

it

Finally,

is important

to screen patients who have
undergone an exposure (e.g., sepsis, trauma) and to continue
monitor high-risk patients until the risk has subsided. Exact
intervals for checking SCr and in which individuals to
monitor urine output remain matters of clinical judgment;
however, as a general rule, high risk in-patients should have
SCr measured at least daily and more frequently after an
exposure, and critically ill patients should have urine output
monitoring. This will necessitate urinary bladder catheteriza-
tion in many cases, and the risks of infection should also be
considered in the monitoring plan.

RATIONALE
There are many types of exposures that may cause AKI
(Table 6) and these are discussed in detail in Appendix C.

A recent clinical practice assessment in the UK concluded
that only 50% of patients with AKI were considered to have
received a ‘‘good’’ overall standard of care. This ﬁgure fell to

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

23

c h a p t e r 2 . 2

just over 30% if AKI developed during a hospital admission
rather than being diagnosed before admission.53 The authors
also felt that there was an unacceptable delay in recognizing
AKI in 43% of those that developed the condition after
admission, and that in a ﬁfth of such patients its develop-
ment was predictable and avoidable. Their recommendations
were simple: risk assessment for AKI as part of the initial
evaluation of emergency admissions, along with appropriate
serum biochemistry on admission and at frequent intervals
thereafter.53

K Studies are needed to develop and validate scoring systems
for AKI risk prediction in various settings, in addition to
cardiac surgery and exposure to radiocontrast material.
K Genome-wide association studies are needed to deter-
mine risk of AKI in different hospital settings and with
respect to long-term outcomes.

K Studies are needed on risk factors for the development of,
recovery from, and long-term outcomes of community-
acquired AKI, including sepsis, trauma, tropical infec-
tions, snake bites, and ingestion of toxic plants, etc.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Better delineation of risk for hospital- and community-

acquired AKI is needed.

K Better delineation of the effects of age on the risk for AKI

is needed.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix C: Risk Determination.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

24

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 2 . 3

Chapter 2.3: Evaluation and general management of
patients with and at risk for AKI

in better outcomes

Given that AKI is associated with signiﬁcant morbidity and
mortality, and because no speciﬁc treatment is available to
reverse AKI, early recognition and management is para-
mount. Indeed, recognition of patients at risk for AKI, or
with possible AKI but prior to clinical manifestations, is
likely to result
than treating only
established AKI. Chapter 2.2 introduced the approach to
risk assessment with further detail provided in Appendix C.
evaluation
This
and general management of patients with, or even at risk
for, AKI. Further detail
is provided in Appendix D. We
highlight the importance of beginning management at the
earliest point in the development of AKI—in patients with
suspected AKI or even in those at increased risk who have
been exposed to the various factors discussed in Chapters 2.2
and Appendix C.

concern itself with the

chapter will

Although much of the remaining chapters in this guide-
line pertain to management of speciﬁc aspects of AKI, there
are general management principles that are common to all
patients and these will be discussed here and further
expounded upon in Appendix D. Treatment goals in patients

with AKI include both reducing kidney injury and complica-
tions related to decreased kidney function.

2.3.1: Evaluate patients with AKI promptly to determine
the cause, with special attention to reversible
causes. (Not Graded)

2.3.2: Monitor patients with AKI with measurements of
SCr and urine output
to stage the severity,
according to Recommendation 2.1.2. (Not Graded)
2.3.3: Manage patients with AKI according to the stage

(see Figure 4) and cause. (Not Graded)

2.3.4: Evaluate patients 3 months after AKI for resolu-
tion, new onset, or worsening of pre-existing CKD.
(Not Graded)

K If patients have CKD, manage these patients as
detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline (Guide-
lines 7–15). (Not Graded)

K If patients do not have CKD, consider them to be
at increased risk for CKD and care for them as
detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for
patients at increased risk for CKD. (Not Graded)

Figure 4 | Stage-based management of AKI. Shading of boxes indicates priority of action—solid shading indicates actions that are
equally appropriate at all stages whereas graded shading indicates increasing priority as intensity increases. AKI, acute kidney injury;
ICU, intensive-care unit.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

25

c h a p t e r 2 . 3

RATIONALE
As emphasized in Chapter 2.2, AKI is not a disease but
rather a clinical syndrome with multiple etiologies. While
much of the literature examining epidemiology and clinical
consequences of AKI appear to treat this syndrome as a
homogeneous disorder, the reality is that AKI is hetero-
geneous and often is the result of multiple insults. Figure 5
illustrates an approach to evaluation of AKI. Further
discussion of evaluation in clinical practice is provided in
Appendix D.

The clinical evaluation of AKI includes a careful history
and physical examination. Drug history should include over-
the-counter formulations and herbal remedies or recreational
drugs. The social history should include exposure to tropical
diseases (e.g., malaria), waterways or sewage systems, and
exposure to rodents (e.g., leptospirosis, hantavirus). Physical
examination should include evaluation of ﬂuid status, signs
for acute and chronic heart failure, infection, and sepsis.

Measurement of cardiac output, preload, preload respon-
siveness, and intra-abdominal pressure should be considered

Figure 5 | Evaluation of AKI according to the stage and cause.

26

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

c h a p t e r 2 . 3

in the appropriate clinical context. Laboratory parameters—
including SCr, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and electrolytes,
complete blood count and differential—should be obtained.
Urine analysis and microscopic examination as well as
in determining the
urinary chemistries may be helpful
underlying cause of AKI. Imaging tests, especially ultrasound,
are important components of the evaluation for patients with
AKI. Finally, a number of biomarkers of functional change
and cellular damage are under evaluation for early diagnosis,
risk assessment for, and prognosis of AKI (see Appendix D
for detailed discussion).

Individualize frequency and duration of monitoring based
on patient risk, exposure and clinical course. Stage is a predictor
of the risk for mortality and decreased kidney function (see
Chapter 2.4). Dependent on the stage, the intensity of future
preventive measures and therapy should be performed.

Because the stage of AKI has clearly been shown to
correlate with short-term2,5,27,29 and even longer-term out-
comes,31 it is advisable to tailor management to AKI stage.
Figure 4 lists a set of actions that should be considered for
patients with AKI. Note that for patients at increased risk (see
Chapters 2.2 and 2.4), these actions actually begin even
before AKI is diagnosed.

Note that management and diagnostic steps are both
included in Figure 4. This is because response to therapy is an
important part of the diagnostic approach. There are few
speciﬁc tests to establish the etiology of AKI. However, a
patient’s response to treatment (e.g., discontinuation of a
possible nephrotoxic agent) provides important information
as to the diagnosis.

Nephrotoxic drugs account for some part of AKI in 20–30%
of patients. Often, agents like antimicrobials (e.g., aminoglyco-
sides, amphotericin) and radiocontrast are used in patients that
are already at high risk for AKI (e.g., critically ill patients with
it is often difﬁcult to discern exactly what
sepsis). Thus,
contribution these agents have on the overall course of AKI.
Nevertheless, it seems prudent to limit exposure to these agents
whenever possible and to weigh the risk of developing or
worsening AKI against the risk associated with not using the
agent. For example, when alternative therapies or diagnostic
approaches are available they should be considered.

In order to ensure adequate circulating blood volume, it is
sometimes necessary to obtain hemodynamic variables. Static

variables like central venous pressure are not nearly as useful
as dynamic variables,
such as pulse-pressure variation,
inferior vena cava ﬁlling by ultrasound and echocardio-
graphic appearance of the heart (see also Appendix D).

Note that while the actions listed in Figure 4 provide
an overall starting point for stage-based evaluation and
management, they are neither complete not mandatory for
an individual patient. For example, the measurement of urine
output does not imply that the urinary bladder catheteriza-
tion is mandatory for all patients, and clinicians should
balance the risks of any procedures with the beneﬁts.
Furthermore, clinicians must individualize care decisions
based on the totality of the clinical situation. However, it is
advisable to include AKI stage in these decisions.

The evaluation and management of patients with AKI
requires attention to cause and stage of AKI, as well as factors
that relate to further injury to the kidney, or complications
from decreased kidney function. Since AKI is a risk factor for
CKD, it is important to evaluate patients with AKI for new
onset or worsening of pre-existing CKD. If patients have
CKD, manage patients as detailed in the KDOQI CKD
Guideline (Guidelines 7–15). If patients do not have CKD,
consider them to be at increased risk for CKD and care for
them as detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for patients
at increased risk for CKD.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
K Clinical research aimed at

testing early management
strategies is urgently needed. Such trials should also
address the risks and benefits of commonly used fluid-
management strategies, including intravenous (i.v.) fluids
and diuretics.

K Methods to better assess fluid status in critically ill and
other hospitalized patients at risk for AKI are needed.
K Research is needed, with follow-up beyond hospital stay,
to better understand the clinical consequences of AKI in
patients with and without underlying CKD.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix C: Risk Determination.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

27

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 2 . 4

Chapter 2.4: Clinical applications

This chapter provides a detailed application of the AKI
deﬁnition and staging for clinical diagnosis and management.
The deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation system discussed in
Chapter 2.1 can be used easily in many patients and requires
little clinical interpretation. However, in real time, clinicians
do not always have a complete dataset
to work with
and individual patients present with unique histories. As
discussed in the previous chapter, it is difﬁcult to distinguish
AKI from CKD in many cases. In addition, as many as
two-thirds of all cases of AKI begin prior to hospitali-
zation (community-acquired AKI). Therefore, clinicians
may be faced with patients in whom kidney function
already decreased and, during the hospitalization,
is
improves
than worsens. Finally, many patients
do not have a prior measurement of kidney function
available for comparison. This chapter provides detailed
examples of the application of these deﬁnitions to the clinical
setting.

rather

Examples of application of AKI definitions
Table 7 illustrates a number of examples whereby patients
presenting with possible AKI can be diagnosed. Cases A-F
have a measurement of baseline SCr. To simplify decision-
making, baseline estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR)
exceeds 60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 in these patients, so none has
pre-existing CKD. Cases A-F can all be diagnosed with AKI
by applying the ﬁrst two criteria in Recommendation 2.1.1. (a
documented increase of at least 0.3 mg/dl (426.5 mmol/l)
[within 48 hours or a 50% increase from presumed baseline).
Note that a patient can be diagnosed with AKI by fulﬁlling
either criterion 1 or 2 (or 3, urine output) and thus cases
B,C,D, and F all fulﬁll the deﬁnition of AKI. Note also that
patients may be diagnosed earlier using criterion 1 or 2. Early
diagnosis may improve outcome so it is advantageous to

diagnose patients as rapidly as possible. For example, case A
can be diagnosed with AKI on day 2 by the ﬁrst criterion,
whereas the second criterion is not satisﬁed until day 3
(increase from 1.3 to 1.9). However, this is only true because
the episode of AKI began prior to medical attention, and thus
the day 1 SCr level was already increased. If creatinine
measurements had available with 48 hours prior to day 1 and
if this level had been at baseline (1.0 mg/dl [88.4 mmol/l]), it
would have been possible to diagnose AKI on day 1 using the
second criterion.

Cases F-H do not have a baseline measurement of SCr
available. Elevated SCr (reduced eGFR) on day 1 of the
hospitalization is consistent with either CKD or AKD
without AKI.
In Case F, baseline SCr can be inferred
to be below the day 1 value because of the subsequent
clinical course; thus, we can infer the patient has had an
episode of AKI. In case G, AKI can be diagnosed by
application of criterion 2, but the patient may have under-
the deﬁnition for
lying CKD. Case H does not
AKI based on either criteria, and has either CKD or AKD
without AKI.

fulﬁll

The example of Case A raises several important issues.
First, frequent monitoring of SCr in patients at increased risk
of AKI will
signiﬁcantly improve diagnostic time and
accuracy. If Case A had not presented to medical attention
(or if SCr had not been checked) until day 7, the case of AKI
would likely have been missed. Frequent measurement of SCr
in high-risk patients, or in patients in which AKI is suspected,
is therefore encouraged—see Chapter 2.3. The second issue
highlighted by Case A is the importance of baseline SCr
measurements. Had no baseline been available it would still
have been possible to diagnose AKI on day 3 (by either using
criterion 2 or by using criterion 1 and accepting the baseline
SCr as 1.3); however, not only would this have resulted in a

Table 7 | AKI diagnosis

Serum creatinine mg/dl (lmol/l)

Diagnosis AKI?

Case

Baseline

Day 1

Day 2

Day 3

Day 7

Criterion 1
50% from baseline

Criterion 2
X0.3 mg/dl (X26.5 lmol/l) rise in p48 hours

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

28

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.4 (35)
1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
?
?
?

1.3 (115)
1.1 (97)
0.5 (44)
1.1 (97)
1.3 (115)
3.0 (265)
1.8 (159)
3.0 (265)

1.5 (133)
1.2 (106)
0.6 (53)
1.2 (106)
1.5 (133)
2.6 (230)
2.0 (177)
3.1 (274)

2.0 (177)
1.4 (124)
0.7 (62)
1.3 (115)
1.8 (159)
2.2 (195)
2.2 (195)
3.0 (265)

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.4 (35)
1.5 (133)
2.2 (195)
1.0 (88)
1.6 (141)
2.9 (256)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
?
?

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

c h a p t e r 2 . 4

Table 8 | Overview of the approaches to determine baseline SCr in the application of RIFLE classification in previous studies

Study

Bagshaw25
Ostermann30
Uchino5
Bell54
Hoste2

Ali31
Cruz55
Perez-Valdivieso56
Kuitunen57
Coca58
Arnaoutakis59
Abosaif60
Maccariello61
Jenq62

No. of pts
analyzed

Multi-/
single-center

Criteria
used

Method to determine baseline SCr

%
recorded

%
estimated

120123
41972
20126
8152
5383

5321
2164
1008
813
304
267
247
214
134

multi
multi
single
single
single

multi
multi
single
single
single
single
single
multi
single

cr+uo
cr
cr
cr+uo
cr+uo

cr
cr+uo
cr
cr+uo
cr
N/A
cr+uo
cr+uo
cr+uo

estimated by MDRD formula
estimated by MDRD formula
retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula
retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula
estimated by MDRD formula, or admission creatinine value,
whatever was lower
retrieved from hospital database, or admission creatinine value
retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula
estimated by MDRD formula
preoperative value
the lowest s-creatinine value in the first 5 hospital days
N/A
retrieved from hospital database, or admission creatinine value
retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula
admission creatinine value, or estimated by MDRD formula

0
0
N/A
N/A
N/A

100
78
0
100
100
N/A
100
N/A
90

100
100
N/A
N/A
N/A

0
22
100
0
0
N/A
0
N/A
10

cr, creatinine criteria; MDRD, Modification of Diet in Renal Disease; N/A, not available; pts, patients; SCr, serum creatinine; uo, urine output criteria.
Reprinted from Zavada J, Hoste E, Cartin-Ceba R et al. A comparison of three methods to estimate baseline creatinine for RIFLE classification. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010;
25(12): 3911–3918 (Ref. 64) by permission from The European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplant Association; accessed http://ndt.oxfordjournals.org/content/
25/12/3911.long

Table 9 | Estimated baseline SCr

Age (years)

Black males mg/dl (lmol/l)

Other males mg/dl (lmol/l)

Black females mg/dl (lmol/l)

Other females mg/dl (lmol/l)

1.5 (133)
1.5 (133)
1.4 (124)
1.3 (115)
1.3 (115)
1.2 (106)

20–24
25–29
30–39
40–54
55–65
465
Estimated glomerular filtration rate=75 (ml/min per 1.73 m2)=186 (cid:2) (serum creatinine [SCr]) (cid:3) 1.154 (cid:2) (age) (cid:3) 0.203 (cid:2) (0.742 if female) (cid:2) (1.210 if black)=exp(5.228 (cid:3) 1.154 (cid:2)
In [SCr]) (cid:3) 0.203 (cid:2) In(age) (cid:3) (0.299 if female) + (0.192 if black).
Reprinted from Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA et al. Acute renal failure - definition, outcome measures, animal models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: the
Second International Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8: R204-212 with permission from Bellomo R et al.22; accessed
http://ccforum.com/content/8/4/R204

1.3 (115)
1.2 (106)
1.2 (106)
1.1 (97)
1.1 (97)
1.0 (88)

1.2 (106)
1.1 (97)
1.1 (97)
1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.9 (80)

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.9 (80)
0.9 (80)
0.8 (71)
0.8 (71)

delay in diagnosis, it would have resulted in a delay in staging
(see Table 7). On day 7, it can be inferred that the patient’s
baseline was no higher than 1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) and thus
correct staging of Case A as Stage 2 (two-fold increase from
the reference SCr, see below and Table 7) on day 3 could have
been determined in retrospect. However, if a baseline SCr was
available to use as the reference, the correct stage could be
determined on day 3.

Case B illustrates why criterion 2 can detect cases of AKI
missed by criterion 1. It also clariﬁes why these cases are
unusual. Had the SCr increased to 1.5 mg/dl (132.6 mmol/l)
as opposed to peaking at 1.4 mg/dl (123.8 mmol/l), it would
have been picked up by criterion 1 as well. By contrast
Cases C, D, and even F illustrate how criterion 2 may
miss cases identiﬁed by criterion 1. Note that Case F can
it can be
only be diagnosed by inference. By day 7,
inferred that the baseline was no higher than 1.0 mg/dl
(88 mmol/l) and thus it can be determined that the patient
presented with AKI. However,
if the baseline SCr could
be estimated it would be possible to make this inference as
early as day 1.

Estimating baseline SCr
Many patients will present with AKI without a reliable
baseline SCr on record. Baseline SCr can be estimated using
the Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study
equation assuming that baseline eGFR is 75 ml/min per 1.73
m2 (Table 9).22 This approach has been used in many, but not
all, studies of AKI epidemiology using RIFLE2,5,25,30–32,54–63
(see Table 8) and has recently been validated.64 Hence, most
current data concerning AKI deﬁned by RIFLE criteria are
based on estimated baseline SCr for a large proportion of
patients.

Table 9 shows the range of estimated SCr obtained by
back-calculation for various age, sex, and race categories.
When the baseline SCr is unknown, an estimated SCr can be
used provided there is no evidence of CKD (see Appendix B).
Fortunately, when there is a history of CKD, a baseline SCr is
usually available. Unfortunately, many cases of CKD are not
identiﬁed, and thus estimating the baseline SCr may risk
labeling a patient with AKI when in reality the diagnosis was
unidentiﬁed CKD. As discussed further in Appendix B, it is
for
essential

to evaluate a patient with presumed AKI

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

29

c h a p t e r 2 . 4

Table 10 | AKI staging

Serum creatinine mg/dl (lmol/l)

Case

Baseline

Day 1

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.4 (35)
1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
?
?
?

1.3 (115)
1.1 (97)
0.5 (44)
1.1 (97)
1.3 (115)
3.0 (265)
1.8 (159)
3.0 (265)

AKI, acute kidney injury.

Day 2

1.5 (133)
1.2 (106)
0.6 (53)
1.2 (106)
1.5 (133)
2.6 (230)
2.0 (177)
3.1 (274)

Day 3

2.0 (177)
1.4 (124)
0.7 (62)
1.3 (115)
1.8 (159)
2.2 (195)
2.2 (195)
3.0 (265)

Day 7

Reference creatinine

Max AKI stage

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.4 (35)
1.5 (133)
2.2 (195)
1.0 (88)
1.6 (141)
2.9 (256)

1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
0.4 (35)
1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
1.0 (88)
?
?

2
1
1
1
2
3
X1
?

presence of CKD. Furthermore, CKD and AKI may coexist.
By using all available clinical data (laboratory,
imaging,
history, and physical exam) it should be possible to arrive at
both an accurate diagnosis as well as an accurate estimate of
baseline SCr. Importantly, excluding some cases of hemo-
dilution secondary to massive ﬂuid resuscitation (discussed
below), the lowest SCr obtained during a hospitalization
is usually equal to or greater than the baseline. This SCr
should be used to diagnose (and stage) AKI. For example, if
no baseline SCr was available in Case A, diagnosis of AKI
could be made using the MDRD estimated SCr (Table 9). If
Case A were a 70-year-old white female with no evidence or
history of CKD,
the baseline SCr would be 0.8 mg/dl
(71 mmol/l) and a diagnosis of AKI would be possible
even on day 1 (criterion 1, X50% increase from baseline).
However, if the patient was a 20-year-old black male, his
baseline SCr would be estimated at 1.5 mg/dl (133 mmol/l).
Since his admission SCr is lower, this is assumed to be the
baseline SCr until day 7 when he returns to his true baseline,
and this value can be taken as the baseline. These dynamic
changes in interpretation are not seen in epidemiologic
studies, which are conducted when all the data are present,
but are common in clinical medicine. Note that the only
way to diagnose AKI (by SCr criteria) in Case H is to use an
estimated SCr.

Examples of application of AKI stages
Once a diagnosis of AKI has been made, the next step is to
stage it (Recommendation 2.1.2). Like diagnosis, staging
requires reference to a baseline SCr when SCr criteria are
used. This baseline becomes the reference SCr for staging
purposes. Table 10 shows the maximum stage for each
Case described in Table 7. Staging for Case A was already
mentioned. The maximum stage is 2 because reference SCr is
1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) and the maximum SCr is 2.0 mg/dl
(177 mmol/l). Had the reference SCr been 0.6 mg/dl (53 mmol/
l), the maximum stage would have been 3. Case F was staged
by using the lowest SCr (1.0 mg/dl [88 mmol/l]) as the
reference. Of course, the actual baseline for this case might
have been lower but this would not affect the stage, since it is
already Stage 3. Note that if this patient was a 35-year-old
white male, his MDRD estimated baseline SCr would be

1.2 mg/dl (106 mmol/l) (Table 9) and his initial stage on
admission (day 1) would be assumed to be 2. However, once
his SCr recovered to 1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) on day 7, it would
be possible to restage him as having had Stage 3. Once he has
recovered, there may be no difference between Stage 2 or 3 in
terms of his care plan. On the other hand, accurately staging
the severity of AKI may be important for intensity of follow-
up and future risk.

Note that Cases G and H can only be staged if the
reference SCr can be inferred. Case G may be as mild as stage
1 if the baseline is equal to the nadir SCr on day 7. On the
other hand, if this case were a 70-year-old white female with
no known evidence or history of CKD, the reference SCr
would be 0.8 mg/dl (71 mmol/l) based on an estimated
baseline (Table 9). In this case, the severity on day 1 would
already be stage 2.

Urine output vs. SCr
Both urine output and SCr are used as measures of an acute
change in GFR. The theoretical advantage of urine output
over SCr is the speed of the response. For example, if GFR
were to suddenly fall to zero, a rise in SCr would not be
detectable for several hours. On the other hand, urine output
would be affected immediately. Less is known about the use
of urine output for diagnosis and staging compared to SCr,
since administrative databases usually do not capture urine
output (and frequently it is not even measured, especially
outside the ICU). However, studies using both SCr and urine
output to diagnose AKI show increased incidence, suggesting
that the use of SCr alone may miss many patients. The use
of urine output criteria (criterion 3) will also reduce the
number of cases where criterion 1 and criterion 2 are
discordant (cases B,C,D, and F in Table 7), as many of these
cases will be picked up by urine output criteria.

Timeframe for diagnosis and staging
The purpose of setting a timeframe for diagnosis of AKI is to
clarify the meaning of the word ‘‘acute’’. A disease process
that results in a change in SCr over many weeks is not AKI
(though it may still be an important clinical entity: see
Appendix B). For the purpose of this guideline, AKI is
deﬁned in terms of a process that results in a 50% increase in

30

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

SCr within 1 week or a 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) increase
within 48 hours (Recommendation 2.1.1). Importantly, there
is no stipulation as to when the 1-week or 48-hour time
periods can occur. It is stated unequivocally that it does not
need to be the ﬁrst week or 48 hours of a hospital or ICU stay.
Neither does the time window refer to duration of the
inciting event. For example, a patient may have a 2-week
course of sepsis but only develop AKI in the second week.
for
Importantly,
diagnosis of AKI, not staging. A patient can be staged over
the entire episode of AKI such that, if a patient develops a
50% increase in SCr in 5 days but ultimately has a three-fold
increase over 3 weeks, he or she would be diagnosed with AKI
and ultimately staged as Stage 3.

the 1-week or 48-hour

timeframe is

As with any clinical criteria, the timeframe for AKI is
somewhat arbitrary. For example, a disease process that
results in a 50% increase in SCr over 2 weeks would not fulﬁll
diagnostic criteria for AKI even if it ultimately resulted in
complete loss of kidney function. Similarly, a slow process
that resulted in a steady rise in SCr over 2 weeks, and then a
sudden increase of 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) in a 48-hour
period, would be classiﬁed as AKI. Such are the inevitable
vagaries of any disease classiﬁcation. However, one scenario
deserves speciﬁc mention, and that is the case of the patient
with an increased SCr at presentation. As already discussed,
the diagnosis of AKI requires a second SCr value for
comparison. This SCr could be a second measured SCr
is X0.3 mg/dl
obtained within 48 hours,
(X26.5 mmol/l) greater than the ﬁrst SCr, AKI can be
diagnosed. Alternatively, the second SCr can be a baseline
value that was obtained previously or estimated from the
MDRD equation (see Table 9). However, this poses two
dilemmas. First, how far back can a baseline value be
retrieved and still expected to be ‘‘valid’’; second, how can
we infer acuity when we are seeing the patient for the ﬁrst
time?

and if

it

Both of

these problems will

judgment. In general,

require an integrated
approach as well as clinical
it is
reasonable in patients without CKD to assume that SCr
will be stable over several months or even years, so that
a SCr obtained 6 months or even 1 year previously would
reasonable reﬂect the patient’s premorbid baseline. However,
in a patient with CKD and a slow increasing SCr over several
months, it may be necessary to extrapolate the baseline SCr
based on prior data. In terms of inferring acuity it is most
reasonable to determine the course of the disease process
thought to be causing the episode of AKI. For example, for a
patient with a 5-day history of fever and cough, and chest
radiograph showing an inﬁltrate, it would be reasonable to
infer that the clinical condition is acute. If SCr is found to be
X50% increased from baseline, this ﬁts the deﬁnition of AKI.
Conversely, a patient presenting with an increased SCr in the
absence of any acute disease or nephrotoxic exposure will
require evidence of an acute process before a diagnosis can be
in
made. Evidence that
establishing acuity.

the SCr is changing is helpful

c h a p t e r 2 . 4

Clinical judgment
While the deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation system discussed in
Chapter 2.1 provide a framework for the clinical diagnosis of
AKI, they should not be interpreted to replace or to exclude
judgment. While the vast majority of cases will
clinical
ﬁt both AKI diagnostic criteria as well as clinical judgment,
AKI is still a clinical diagnosis—not all cases of AKI will ﬁt
within the proposed deﬁnition and not all cases ﬁtting the
deﬁnition should be diagnosed as AKI. However, exceptions
should be very rare.

Pseudo-AKI. As with other clinical diagnoses deﬁned by
laboratory results (e.g., hyponatremia), the clinician must be
cautious to interpret laboratory data in the clinical context.
The most obvious example is with laboratory errors or errors
in reporting. Erroneous laboratory values should obviously
not be used to diagnose disease and suspicious lab results
should always be repeated. Another example is when two SCr
measurements are obtained by different laboratories. While
the coefﬁcient of variation for SCr is very small (o5%) by
various clinical testing methods, variation (bias) from one
laboratory to the next may be considerably higher, although
it is unlikely to approach 50%. Given that the SCr deﬁnition
of AKI always uses at least two values, the variation and bias
between each measure is further magniﬁed—the coefﬁcient
of variation for comparison of two lab tests is equal to the
square root of the sum of each coefﬁcient squared. Although
the international standardization of SCr measurements will
largely eliminate interlaboratory bias in the future, care is
needed in interpreting lab values obtained from different
labs. Furthermore, daily variation in SCr due to differences in
diet and activity may be as great as 10%. Finally, endogenous
chromogens (e.g., bilirubin, ascorbic acid, uric acid) and
exogenous chromogens and drugs (e.g., cephalosporins,
trimethoprim, cimetidine) may interfere with the creatinine
factors
effect of
assay. The
inﬂuencing precision, bias, and biological variation may
approach the level at which it could impact the diagnosis of
AKI. A similar problem exists with urine output. Particularly
outside the ICU, urine output is not often reported and urine
collections may be inaccurate, especially in noncatheterized
patients. Finally, as discussed in Chapter 2.1, a weight-based
criterion for urine output will mean that some very obese
patients will fulﬁll the deﬁnition of AKI without any kidney
abnormality. Clinical judgment should always be exercised in
interpreting such data.

these various

cumulative

Atypical AKI. A complementary problem to pseudo-AKI is
the situation where a case of AKI fails to meet the deﬁnition.
These cases should be distinguished from conditions in which
data are simply missing (discussed above) and refer to
situations in which existing data are unreliable. For example,
a patient might receive very large quantities of intravascular
ﬂuids such that SCr is falsely lowered.65 Similarly, massive
blood transfusions will result
in the SCr more closely
reﬂecting the kidney function of the blood donors than the
patient. It is unusual for these cases not to result in oliguria
and, thus, most patients will be diagnosed with AKI even if

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

31

c h a p t e r 2 . 4

increased. Nevertheless,

the clinician should
SCr is not
be cognizant of possibility that SCr may be falsely lowered
by large-volume ﬂuid resuscitation or transfusion; thus, a
normal value may not rule out AKI. Changes in creatinine
production are also well known in conditions such as muscle
breakdown where production increases and in muscle
wasting (including advanced liver disease) where production

is decreased. Creatinine production may also be decreased in
sepsis66 possibly due to decreased muscle perfusion.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix B: Diagnostic Approach to Alterations in Kidney Function
and Structure.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

32

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 2 . 5

Chapter 2.5: Diagnostic approach to alterations in
kidney function and structure

Definitions of AKI, CKD and AKD
AKI and CKD were deﬁned by separate Work Groups
according to different criteria. The deﬁnition for each is
based on alterations in kidney function or structure. AKI and
CKD have many causes which may lead to alterations of
kidney function and structure that do not meet the criteria
for the deﬁnition of either AKI or CKD, yet patients with
these diseases and disorders may need medical attention to
restore kidney function and reverse damage to kidney
structure to avoid adverse outcomes. A uniform and
systematic nomenclature could enhance understanding and
communication about these diseases and disorders, and lead
to improved medical care, research, and public health. For
these reasons, the Work Group proposed an operational
deﬁnition for AKD to provide an integrated clinical approach
to patients with abnormalities of kidney function and
structure.

Table 11 compares the deﬁnitions for AKI, CKD, and
AKD. We have also included an operational deﬁnition of ‘‘no
known kidney disease’’ (NKD) for those who do not meet
these criteria, with the understanding that clinical judgment
is required to determine the extent of the evaluation that is
necessary to assess kidney function and structure. In the
following sections, we will elaborate on each component of
these deﬁnitions.

GFR and SCr
CKD, AKD, and AKI are deﬁned by parameters expressing
the level of kidney function. Table 12 gives examples of each
condition based on GFR and different magnitudes of increase
in SCr.

To illustrate the relationship of changes in SCr to changes
in eGFR, we simulated changes in eGFR that would result
from changes in SCr corresponding to the KDIGO deﬁnition
in the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology
of AKI
Collaboration cohort.67,68 Figure 6 shows the relationship
of these changes in eGFR to the deﬁnition and stages of AKI.
Not all patients with AKI would meet the eGFR criteria for
the deﬁnition of AKD.

GFR/SCr algorithm
Figure 7 provides a diagnostic algorithm based on a
i) Is GFR
sequential approach through three questions:
decreased or is SCr increased (according to the criteria in
Table 12)?; ii) Is SCr increasing or GFR decreasing (according
to the criteria in Table 12)?; and iii) Does the decrease in GFR
or increase in SCr resolve within 3 months? Based on a ‘‘yes’’
or ‘‘no’’ response to these three sequential questions, all
combinations of AKI, AKD, and CKD can be identiﬁed. In
this section, we review the algorithm and illustrate its use
for classiﬁcation of patients with acute and chronic kidney
disease in two previously reported cohorts.

Table 11 | Definitions of AKI, CKD, and AKD

AKI

CKD

AKD

NKD

Functional criteria

Increase in SCr by 50% within 7 days, OR
Increase in SCr by 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l)
within 2 days, OR
Oliguria
GFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for
43 months
AKI, OR
GFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for
o3 months, OR
Decrease in GFR by X35% or increase
in SCr by 450% for o3 months
GFR X60 ml/min per 1.73 m2
Stable SCr

Structural criteria

No criteria

Table 12 | Examples of AKI, CKD, and AKD based on GFR and
increases in SCr

Baseline GFR
(ml/min per
1.73 m2)

Increase in
SCr during
7 consecutive days

GFR during
next
3 months

460
460
460

41.5 (cid:2)
o1.5 (cid:2)
o1.5 (cid:2)

NA
o60
460

Diagnosis

AKI
AKD without AKI
NKD

Baseline GFR
(ml/min per
1.73 m2)

Change in SCr
during next
7 days

GFR during
next
3 months

Diagnosis

Kidney damage
for 43 months
Kidney damage
for o3 months

No damage

GFR assessed from measured or estimated GFR. Estimated GFR does not reflect
measured GFR in AKI as accurately as in CKD. Kidney damage assessed by pathology,
urine or blood markers, imaging, and—for CKD—presence of a kidney transplant. NKD
indicates no functional or structural criteria according to the definitions for AKI, AKD,
or CKD. Clinical judgment is required for individual patient decision-making regarding
the extent of evaluation that is necessary to assess kidney function and structure.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease;
SCr, serum creatinine.

o60
o60

41.5 (cid:2)
o1.5 (cid:2)

NA
435% decrease

o1.5 (cid:2)

o35% decrease

o60
GFR assessed from measured or estimated GFR. Estimated GFR does not reflect
measured GFR in AKI as accurately as in CKD.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease;
SCr, serum creatinine.

AKI + CKD
AKD without
AKI + CKD
CKD

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

33

c h a p t e r 2 . 5

Figure 6 | Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration cohort changes in eGFR and final eGFR corresponding to KDIGO
definition and stages of AKI. Panels (a) and (b) show the final eGFR and the percent changes in eGFR, respectively, corresponding to the
KDIGO definition and stages of AKI. The horizontal line in panel a and b indicates the threshold value for AKD (o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 and
435% reduction in initial GFR, respectively). Points above the horizontal line indicate subjects who meet the SCr criteria for the definition of
AKI but do not meet eGFR criteria for the definition of AKD. AKD, acute kidney disorder/disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; eGFR, estimated
glomerular filtration rate; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; SCr, serum creatinine. (Lesley Inker, personal
communication.)

GFR/S cr

Is GFR decreased or is serum creatinine increased ?

No

Yes
<3 mo or
unknown

Yes
>3 mo

NKD

AKD

CKD

Is Scr increasing or GFR decreasing ?

1

2

No

Yes-D

Yes-I

No

Yes-D

Yes-I

No

Yes-D

Yes-I

NKD

AKD
without
AKI

AKI

AKD
without
AKI

AKD
without
AKI

AKI

CKD

CKD +AKD
without AKI

CKD+
AKI

Yes-D, change in Scr meets AKD criteria but not AKI criteria

CKD+
AKD without
AKI

CKD+
AKI

AKD
without
AKI

AKI

3

Does the decrease in GFR or increase in Scr
resolve within 3 months?

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

CKD
Worse

CKD
Stable

CKD
Worse

CKD
Stable

CKD
New

NKD

CKD
New

NKD

Figure 7 | GFR/SCr algorithm. See text for description. AKD, acute kidney disease/disorder; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney
disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease; SCr, serum creatinine.

The answer to Question 1 requires ascertainment of an
index GFR/SCr as well during the prior 3 months. The index
GFR/SCr can be assigned as any of the GFR/SCr measures
during the interval of observation. The answer classiﬁes

patients
into three categories: NKD, AKD, and CKD.
Question 2 requires repeat ascertainment of kidney function
after the index measure. ‘‘No’’ indicates that the increase in
SCr or decrease in GFR after the index measure does not

34

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

meet AKI or AKD criteria; ‘‘Yes-D’’ indicates that increase in
SCr and decrease in GFR meets the AKD criteria but not AKI
criteria; and ‘‘Yes-I’’ indicates that increase in SCr meets AKI
criteria. Question 3 requires repeat ascertainment of GFR/
SCr 3 months after the index measure. ‘‘Yes’’ indicates GFR
460, indicating NKD. No indicates GFR o60, and based on
prior level of GFR, may indicate stable, new, or worse CKD.

Oliguria as a measure of kidney function
Although urine ﬂow rate is a poor measure of kidney
function, oliguria generally reﬂects a decreased GFR. If GFR
is normal (approximately 125 ml/min, corresponding to
approximately 107 ml/kg/h for a 70-kg adult), then reduction
in urine volume to o0.5 ml/kg/h would reﬂect reabsorption
of more than 99.5% of glomerular ﬁltrate. Such profound
stimulation of
tubular reabsorption usually accompanies
circulatory disturbances associated with decreased GFR.
Oliguria is unusual in the presence of a normal GFR and is
usually associated with the non–steady state of solute balance
and rising SCr sufﬁcient to achieve the criteria for AKI. As a
corollary, if GFR and SCr are normal and stable over an
interval of 24 hours, it is generally not necessary to measure
urine ﬂow rate in order to assess kidney function.

In principle, oliguria (as deﬁned by the criteria for AKI)
can occur without a decrease in GFR. For example,
low
intake of ﬂuid and solute could lead to urine volume of less
than 0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours or 0.3 ml/kg/h for 24 hours. On
the other hand, severe GFR reduction in CKD usually does
not lead to oliguria until after the initiation of dialysis.

As described in Chapter 2.1, the thresholds for urine ﬂow
for the deﬁnition of AKI have been derived empirically and
are less well substantiated than the thresholds for increase
in SCr. Urinary diagnostic indices, such as the urinary
concentrations of sodium and creatinine and the fractional
to
reabsorption of
distinguish among causes of AKI, but are not used in the
deﬁnition (see Appendix D).

sodium and urea,

remain helpful

Kidney damage
Table 13 describes measures of kidney damage in AKD and
CKD. Kidney damage is most commonly ascertained by
urinary markers and imaging studies. Most markers and
abnormal images can indicate AKD or CKD, based on the
duration of abnormality. One notable exception is small
kidneys, either bilateral or unilateral, indicating CKD, which
are discussed separately below. Kidney damage is not a
criterion for AKI; however, it may be present. Renal tubular
epithelial cells and coarse granular casts, often pigmented and
described as ‘‘muddy brown’’, remain helpful in distinguish-
ing the cause of AKI, but are not part of the deﬁnition.

Small kidneys as a marker of kidney damage
Loss of renal cortex is considered a feature of CKD, and is
often sought as a speciﬁc diagnostic sign of CKD. Kidney size
is most often evaluated by ultrasound. In a study of 665
normal volunteers,69 median renal lengths were 11.2 cm on

c h a p t e r 2 . 5

Table 13 | Markers of kidney damage in AKD and CKD

Markers

Pathology

Urinary markers
RBC/casts
WBC/casts
RTE/casts
Fine and coarse granular casts
Proteinuria

Blood markers (tubular syndromes)

Imaging

Large kidneys
Small kidneys
Size discrepancy
Hydronephrosis
Cysts
Stones

History of kidney transplantation

AKD

CKD

X

X
X
X
X
X

X

X
—
—
X
X
X

—

X

X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X

Kidney damage is not required for diagnosis of AKI. In the presence of AKI, findings
of kidney damage do not indicate a separate diagnosis of AKD.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; CKD, chronic kidney disease; RBC, red
blood cells; RTE, renal tubular epithelial cells; WBC, white blood cells.

Table 14 | Integrated approach to interpret measures of
kidney function and structure for diagnosis of AKI, AKD, and
CKD

Measures

Diagnosis

GFR/SCr

Oliguria

Kidney damage

Small kidneys

AKI
AKD
CKD

X
X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X indicates that the measures can contribute to the diagnosis indicated.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease.

the left side and 10.9 cm on the right side. Renal size
decreased with age, almost entirely because of parenchymal
reduction. The lowest 10th percentiles for length of the left
and right kidney were approximately 10.5 and 10.0 cm,
respectively, at age 30 years, and 9.5 and 9.0 cm, respectively,
at age 70 years.

Integrated approach to AKI, AKD, and CKD
Clinical
evaluation is necessary for all patients with
alterations in kidney function or structure. The expectation
of the Work Group is that the diagnostic approach will
usually begin with assessment of GFR and SCr. However,
evaluation of kidney function and structure is not complete
unless markers of kidney damage—including urinalysis,
examination of the urinary sediment, and imaging studies—
have been performed. Table 14 shows a summary of the
diagnostic approach using measures for kidney function
and structure. Based on interpretation of each measure
separately, the clinical diagnosis indicated by an ‘‘X’’ can be
reached.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

35

c h a p t e r 2 . 5

SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,
Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire, Trans-
western Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make
it clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles
the
and advertisements herein are the responsibility of

for

contributor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned.
Accordingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board
and their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no
liability whatsoever
the consequences of any such
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

36

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 1

Section 3: Prevention and Treatment of AKI

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.33

Chapter 3.1: Hemodynamic monitoring and support
for prevention and management of AKI

As discussed in Chapters 2.3 and Appendix D, patients with
AKI and at increased risk for AKI require careful attention to
be paid to their hemodynamic status. This is ﬁrst because
hypotension results in decreased renal perfusion and, if severe
or sustained, may result in kidney injury. Second, the injured
kidney loses autoregulation of blood ﬂow, a mechanism that
maintains relatively constant ﬂow despite changes in pressure
above a certain point (roughly, a mean of 65 mm Hg).

Management of blood pressure and cardiac output
require careful titration of ﬂuids and vasoactive medication.
Vasopressors can further reduce blood ﬂow to the tissues if
there is insufﬁcient circulating blood volume. Conversely,
patients with AKI are also at increased risk for ﬂuid overload
(see Chapter 3.2) and continued ﬂuid resuscitation despite
increased intravascular volume can cause harm. Fluids and
vasoactive medications should be managed carefully and in
concert with hemodynamic monitoring. Hemodynamic
evaluation and monitoring are discussed in Appendix D.

In this chapter therapies aimed at correcting hemo-
dynamic instability will be discussed. Available therapies to
manage hypotension include ﬂuids, vasopressors and proto-
cols which integrate these therapies with hemodynamic goals.
There is an extensive body of literature in this ﬁeld and for a
broader as well as more in depth review the reader is directed
to the various reviews and textbooks devoted to critical care
and nephrology.70–81

FLUIDS

3.1.1:

In the absence of hemorrhagic shock, we suggest
using isotonic crystalloids rather than colloids
(albumin or starches) as initial management for
expansion of intravascular volume in patients at
risk for AKI or with AKI. (2B)

RATIONALE
Despite the recognition of volume depletion as an important
risk factor for AKI, there are no randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) that have directly evaluated the role of ﬂuids vs.
placebo in the prevention of AKI, except in the ﬁeld of
contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) (see Chapter
4.4). It is accepted that optimization of the hemodynamic

status and correction of any volume deﬁcit will have a
salutary effect on kidney function, will help minimize further
extension of the kidney injury, and will potentially facilitate
recovery from AKI with minimization of any residual func-
impairment. AKI is characterized by a continuum
tional
of
unresponsiveness
(Figure 8),78,82 and large multicenter studies have shown
that a positive ﬂuid balance is an important factor associated
with increased 60-day mortality.78,83,84

responsiveness

through

volume

The amount and selection of the type of ﬂuid that should
be used in the resuscitation of critically ill patients is still
controversial. This guideline focuses on the selection of the
ﬂuid (colloid vs. crystalloid ﬂuid in the prevention and early
management of AKI). The three main end-points of the
studies explored were the effects on mortality, need for RRT,
and—if possible—the incidence of AKI. Although many
trials have been conducted to compare ﬂuid types for
resuscitation,
studies without AKI outcomes were not
systematically reviewed for this Guideline. Suppl Table 1
summarizes the RCTs examining the effect of starch for the
prevention of AKI.

Albumin vs. Saline
The role of albumin physiology in critically ill patients, and
the pros and cons for administering albumin to hypoalbu-
minemic patients, have recently been discussed.85 Results of
the Saline vs. Albumin Fluid Evaluation (SAFE) study, a RCT
comparing 4% human albumin in 0.9% saline with isotonic
saline in ICU patients, seem to indicate that albumin is safe,
albeit no more effective than isotonic saline (the standard of
care choice of isotonic sodium chloride in most centers) for
ﬂuid resuscitation. SAFE demonstrated further no difference
in renal outcomes, at least based on the need for and
duration of RRT.86 The SAFE study was a double-blind study
and it was noted that patients in the albumin arm received
27% less study ﬂuid compared to the saline arm (2247 vs.
3096 ml) and were approximately 1 l less positive in overall
ﬂuid balance.86 Furthermore, very few patients in the trial
received large volume ﬂuid resuscitation (45 l) and thus the
results may not be applicable to all patients. The Work Group
noted that while isotonic crystalloids may be appropriate for
initial management of intravascular ﬂuid deﬁcits, colloids
may still have a role in patients requiring additional ﬂuid.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

37

c h a p t e r 3 . 1

and during the perioperative period’’ (for a summary of this
controversy, see de Saint-Aurin et al.90 and Vincent91).

The ﬁrst major randomized trial in patients with sepsis
compared HES 200/0.60 to 0.66 with gelatin and showed a
greater incidence of AKI in the HES group, but no effect on
survival.92 Criticisms of this study include a higher baseline
SCr level in the HES group, small sample size, and short
follow-up duration of 34 days. In the Efﬁcacy of Volume
Substitution and Insulin Therapy in Severe Sepsis (VISEP)
study,93 patients with severe sepsis were randomly assigned to
receive a hypertonic (10%) solution of low MW HES (HES
200/0.5), or an isotonic modiﬁed Ringer’s lactate solution.
Patients in the HES group received a median cumulative dose
of 70.4 ml per kilogram of body weight. The mortality was
not signiﬁcantly different, although showing a trend toward
greater mortality at 90 days. However, the hypertonic HES
group had a signiﬁcantly higher rate of AKI (34.9% vs.
22.8%) and more days on which RRT was required (Suppl
Table 1). Also, this study has been criticized for: i) using a
hyperoncotic colloid solution with potentially harmful renal
effects as shown in experimental research;94 ii) markedly
exceeding the pharmaceutically recommended daily dose
limit for 10% HES 200/0.5 by more than 10% in 438% of
patients; and iii) pre-existing renal dysfunction in 10% of
study patients, which represents a contra-indication for
infusion of 10% HES 200/0.5.95 Posthoc analyses of the
VISEP study showed the cumulative dose of HES to be a
signiﬁcant independent predictor for both mortality and
RRT at 90 days. The median cumulative dose of HES in the
VISEP Study was 70 ml/kg compared to 31 ml/kg in the study
by Schortgen et al.92

A systematic review of RCTs on the use of HES for ﬂuid
management in patients with sepsis totaling 1062 patients,
including 537 patients from the VISEP study, showed an
almost two-fold increased risk of AKI with HES compared to
crystalloids.96 Given these limitations, the results of these
studies should be interpreted with caution. Furthermore, a
large, prospective observational
study found that HES
infusion of any type (median volume 555 ml/d; intraquartile
range 500–1000) did not represent an independent risk factor
for renal impairment.97; however, recently in a large cohort of
critically ill patients (approximately 8000 subjects), infusion
of 10% HES 200/0.5 instead of HES 130/0.4 appeared to be
an independent risk factor for RRT.87 Finally, a recent
comprehensive Cochrane review98 concluded that there is no
evidence from RCTs that resuscitation with colloids, instead
of crystalloids, reduces the risk of death in patients with
trauma, burns, or following surgery.

The mechanisms of colloid-induced renal

injury are
incompletely understood, but may involve both direct
molecular effects and effects of elevated oncotic pressure.99
These concerns have led to the widespread adoption of lower
MW starches as iso-oncotic solution, as resuscitation ﬂuids.
Theoretically, such solutions may have lower nephrotoxicity;
however, as yet, no appropriately powered prospective
randomized studies have reported the clinical beneﬁt and

Figure 8 | Conceptual model for development and clinical
course of AKI. The concept of AKI includes both volume-
responsive and volume-unresponsive conditions. These
conditions are not mutually exclusive, and a given patient may
progress from one to the other. Time runs along the x-axis, and
the figure depicts a closing ‘‘therapeutic window’’ as injury
evolves and kidney function worsens. Biomarkers of injury and
function will begin to manifest as the condition worsens, but
traditional markers of function (e.g., urea nitrogen and creatinine)
will lag behind hypothetical ‘‘sensitive’’ markers of kidney injury.
Mortality increases as kidney function declines. AKI, acute kidney
injury. Reproduced from Himmelfarb J, Joannidis M, Molitoris B,
et al. Evaluation and initial management of acute kidney injury.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 962–967 with permission from
American Society of Nephrology82 conveyed through Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc; accessed http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/
content/3/4/962.long

is a widely used,

Hydroxyethylstarch vs. Saline
Hydroxyethylstarch (HES)
relatively
inexpensive alternative to human albumin for correcting
hypovolemia. Different HES preparations are available that
vary with regard to concentration, mean molecular weight
(MW), molar substitution, and substitution of hydroxyethyl
for hydroxyl groups. The mean MW of the different HES
preparations ranges between 70 000 and 670 000 Da. The
colloid osmotic pressure effect is strongly dependent upon
the concentration of colloid in the solution; e.g., 6% HES is
iso-oncotic, whereas 10% HES is hyperoncotic. The number
of hydroxyethyl groups per glucose molecule is speciﬁed by
the molar substitution, ranging between 0.4 (tetrastarch)
and 0.7 (heptastarch). Accordingly, HES solutions with a
molar
substitution of 0.5 or 0.6 are referred to as
‘‘pentastarch’’ or ‘‘hexastarch’’, respectively. More recently,
tetrastarches (HES 130/0.4 and HES 130/0.42) have also been
introduced.87 High molecular substitution starch may impair
coagulation by reducing the concentration of factor VIII:
VIIIc and von Willebrand factor. Platelet activity may also be
the platelet ﬁbrinogen receptor
affected by blockade of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa. Smaller starch molecules and those
with less molecular substitution produce negligible coagula-
tion defects.88

Aside from these negative effects on coagulation, develop-
ment of renal dysfunction has been a concern associated with
the use of mainly hypertonic HES. Hypertonic HES may
induce a pathological entity known as ‘‘osmotic nephrosis’’
with potential impairment of renal function.89 It has even
been recommended that ‘‘HES should be avoided in ICUs

38

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

safety of such solutions in comparison with crystalloids. A
recent study by Magder et al. compared 10% 250/0.45 HES to
isotonic saline in 262 patients who underwent cardiac
surgery.100 These investigators tested whether fewer patients
required catecholamines the morning after cardiac surgery
(a chief determinant of ICU discharge) with HES compared
to saline, and found indeed this was the case (10.9% vs.
28.8%; P ¼ 0.001). Importantly, the study found no evidence
of nephrotoxicity: no difference in the daily creatinine, deve-
lopment of AKI by RIFLE criteria during hospital stay (16%
in both groups), or need for RRT (1% in each group).
Importantly, patients in the saline group received nearly 60%
more volume for ﬂuid resuscitation in the ICU compared to
HES (887 vs. 1397 ml; Po0.0001). While overall volumes
were small, advocates for colloid resuscitation will note that
this is exactly the reason colloids are preferred for patients
requiring large-volume resuscitation.

The tonicity of colloid preparations may also vary by
agent. A recent meta-analysis101 described 11 randomized
trials with a total of 1220 patients:
seven evaluating
hyperoncotic albumin and four evaluating hyperoncotic
starch. Hyperoncotic albumin decreased the odds of AKI by
76% while hyperoncotic starch increased those odds by 92%
(odds ratio [OR] 1.92; CI 1.31–2.81; P ¼ 0.0008). Parallel
effects on mortality were observed. This meta-analysis con-
cluded that the renal effects of hyperoncotic colloid solutions
appear
to be colloid-speciﬁc, with albumin displaying
renoprotection and hyperoncotic starch showing nephro-
toxicity. A 7000-patient study comparing 6% HES 130/0.4 in
saline with saline alone was scheduled to begin in Australia
and New Zealand in 2010. This study will provide further
high-quality data to help guide clinical practice.102

Thus, the use of isotonic saline as the standard of care for
intravascular volume expansion to prevent or treat AKI is
based upon the lack of clear evidence that colloids are
superior for this purpose, along with some evidence that
speciﬁc colloids may cause AKI, in addition to higher costs. It
is acknowledged that colloids may be chosen in some patients
to aid in reaching resuscitation goals, or to avoid excessive
ﬂuid administration in patients requiring large volume
resuscitation, or in speciﬁc patient subsets (e.g., a cirrhotic
patient with spontaneous peritonitis, or in burns). Similarly,
although hypotonic or hypertonic crystalloids may be used in
speciﬁc clinical scenarios,
the choice of crystalloid with
altered tonicity is generally dictated by goals other than
intravascular volume expansion (e.g., hypernatremia or
hyponatremia). One of the concerns with isotonic saline is
that this solution contains 154 mmol/l chloride and that
administration in large volumes will result in relative or
absolute hyperchloremia (for a review, see Kaplan et al.103).
Although direct proof of harm arising from saline-induced
hyperchloremia is lacking, buffered salt solutions approxi-
mate physiological chloride concentrations and their admin-
istration is
likely to cause acid-base disturbances.
Whether use of buffered solutions results in better outcomes
is, however, uncertain.

less

c h a p t e r 3 . 1

VASOPRESSORS

3.1.2: We recommend the use of vasopressors in conjunc-
tion with ﬂuids in patients with vasomotor shock
with, or at risk for, AKI. (1C)

RATIONALE
Sepsis and septic shock are major contributing factors to
AKI7 and vasopressor requirement appears to be highly
associated with AKI in this population. Despite the high
prevalence of AKI during critical illness in general, and severe
sepsis speciﬁcally, success has been limited in improving the
outcome of this complication.104 Septic shock is the proto-
type of a high output–low resistance condition, although
severe pancreatitis, anaphylaxis, burns, and liver failure
share similar physiologic alterations. Persistent hypotension,
despite ongoing aggressive ﬂuid resuscitation or after
optimization of intravascular volume in patients with shock,
places patients at risk for development of AKI. In the setting
of vasomotor paralysis, preservation or improvement of
renal perfusion can only be achieved through use of
systemic vasopressors once intravascular volume has been
restored.105

It is not known which vasopressor agent is most effective
for prevention or treatment of patients with AKI and septic
shock. Most
studies have focused on norepinephrine,
dopamine, or vasopressin. Small open-label studies have
shown improvement in creatinine clearance (CrCl) following
a 6- to 8-hour infusion of norepinephrine106 or terlipres-
sin,107 while vasopressin reduced the need for norepinephrine
and increased urine output and CrCl.108 A large RCT109
comparing dopamine to norepinephrine as initial vasopres-
sor in patients with shock showed no signiﬁcant differences
between groups with regard to renal function or mortality.
However, there were more arrhythmic events among the
patients treated with dopamine than among those treated
with norepinephrine, and a subgroup analysis showed that
dopamine was associated with an increased rate of death at
28 days among the patients with cardiogenic shock, but not
among the patients with septic shock or those with hypo-
volemic shock. Thus, although there was no difference in
primary outcome with dopamine as the ﬁrst-line vasopressor
agent and those who were treated with norepinephrine, the
use of dopamine was associated with a greater number of
adverse events.109

it

Vasopressin is gaining popularity in the treatment of
shock refractory to norepinephrine.110 Compared to nor-
epinephrine,
increases blood pressure and enhances
dieresis, but has not as yet been proven to enhance survival
nor to reduce the need for RRT.111 A recent posthoc analysis
of the above mentioned RCT used the RIFLE criteria for AKI
to compare the effects of vasopressin vs. norepinephrine.112
In patients in the RIFLE-R category, vasopressin as compared
to norepinephrine was associated with a trend to a lower rate
of progression to F or L categories respectively, and a lower

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

39

c h a p t e r 3 . 1

rate of use of RRT. Mortality rates in the R category patients
treated with vasopressin compared to norepinephrine were
30.8 vs. 54.7%, P ¼ 0.01, but this did not reach signiﬁcance in
a multiple logistic regression analysis. This study suggests
thus that vasopressin may reduce progression to renal failure
and mortality in patients at risk of kidney injury who have
septic shock. The Work Group concluded that current
clinical data are insufﬁcient to conclude that one vasoactive
in preventing AKI, but
agent
emphasized that vasoactive agents should not be withheld
from patients with vasomotor shock over concern for kidney
perfusion. Indeed, appropriate use of vasoactive agents can
improve kidney perfusion in volume-resuscitated patients
with vasomotor shock.

to another

superior

is

PROTOCOLIZED HEMODYNAMIC MANAGEMENT

3.1.3: We suggest using protocol-based management of
hemodynamic and oxygenation parameters
to
prevent development or worsening of AKI in
high-risk patients in the perioperative setting (2C)
or in patients with septic shock (2C).

RATIONALE
A resuscitation strategy devised for patients with hypotension
from septic shock that is based upon achieving speciﬁc
physiologic end-points within 6 hours of hospital admis-
sion has been termed Early Goal-Directed Therapy (EGDT).
This approach has been endorsed by the ‘‘Surviving
Sepsis Campaign’’113 and has gained considerable acceptance
despite only one, single-center, RCT evaluating its effective-
ness. This protocolized strategy, consisting of ﬂuids, vaso-
active medication, and blood transfusions targeting physio-
logical parameters, is recommended by many experts for the
prevention of organ injury in septic-shock patients.

Similarly, protocolized care strategies in surgical patients
at high risk for postoperative AKI have been extensively
studied in an effort to provide optimal oxygen delivery to
tissues in the perioperative period. In these patients, goal-
directed therapy is deﬁned as hemodynamic monitoring with
deﬁned target values and with a time limit to reach these
stated goals. Together these protocols with bundled, hemo-
dynamic, and tissue-support measures have the potential to
reduce the risk of AKI following major surgical procedures
in high-risk patients (e.g., age 460 years, emergent surgery,
score,
elevated American Society of Anesthesiologists
preoperative comorbid illnesses).

Protocolized hemodynamic management strategies
in septic shock
Early ﬂuid resuscitation in the management of hypotensive
patients with septic shock has been a standard treatment
paradigm for decades.93,113,114 What has not been clear,
however, is how much ﬂuid to give, for how long, or what
type of ﬂuid therapy is optimal in the physiologic support of

septic shock.93,113,114 In 2001, Rivers et al.115 published the
results of a small (n ¼ 263), open-label, single-center study
that compared a treatment protocol that the authors referred
to as EGDT in the emergency management of septic shock.
EGDT is predicated upon the premise that an early,
protocolized resuscitation program with predeﬁned physio-
logic end-points will prevent organ failure and improve the
outcome of patients presenting with septic shock.

Hypotensive patients with severe infection are rapidly
assessed for evidence of tissue hypoperfusion and micro-
circulatory dysfunction by mean arterial blood pressure
measurement and plasma lactate levels.115 Blood lactate levels
are neither sensitive nor speciﬁc but are readily available
measures of tissue hypoperfusion and do correlate with
adverse outcomes in sepsis.116,117 Early recognition of septic
shock then initiates a protocol of resuscitation with the goal
of reestablishing tissue perfusion in patients within 6 hours of
i) return of mean
diagnosis. The physiologic goals are:
arterial blood pressure to X65 mm Hg; ii) central venous
pressure between 8–12 mm Hg; iii) improvement in blood
lactate levels; iv) central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2)
470%; and v) a urine output of X0.5 ml/kg/h.

In the study by Rivers et al. the protocol-driven process
resulted in more rapid use of ﬂuids, more blood transfusions,
and in a small number of patients, earlier use of dobutamine
over the 6-hour time period than standard emergency care.
The in-hospital mortality rate in the control group was
46.5% vs. 30.5% in the EGDT group (Po0.01).115 Follow-up,
predominantly observational studies, have found less dra-
matic but generally similar effects,118–122 though not without
exception.123

The Rivers study did not speciﬁcally look at AKI out-
comes, but multiple-organ function-scoring systems (i.e.,
APACHE II and SAPS 2) both showed signiﬁcant improve-
ments with EGDT. In a subsequent study, prevention of
AKI was signiﬁcantly improved in patients randomized to a
modiﬁed EGDT strategy (without measurement of ScvO2)
compared to a standard-care group.119 Criticisms of the
Rivers study include: i) a complex, multistep protocol for
which individual interventions have not been validated; ii)
the use of a treatment team in the active-therapy arm, thus
risking a Hawthorn effect; iii) high mortality in the standard-
care arm; and iv) the study was a small single-center study.
Three large multicenter clinical trials in the USA, UK, and
Australia are currently underway to deﬁnitively evaluate this
promising therapy.

Goal-directed therapy for hemodynamic support during
the perioperative period in high-risk surgical patients
Efforts to improve tissue oxygen delivery by optimizing
to
hemodynamic support
prevent AKI and other adverse patient outcomes have been
investigated for many years.124–126 A recent meta-analysis of
these studies by Brienza et al.127 concluded that protocolized
therapies (regardless of the protocol) with speciﬁc physio-
logical goals can signiﬁcantly reduce postoperative AKI.

in high-risk surgical patients

40

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

A major problem in interpreting these studies is the lack of
standardized hemodynamic and tissue oxygenation targets
and management strategies used to verify the efﬁcacy of these
measures over standard perioperative care. A heterogeneous
collection of study populations, types of surgical procedures,
monitoring methods, and treatment strategies comprise this
recent meta-analysis.127 The basic strategy of goal-directed
therapy to prevent AKI in the perioperative period is based
that avoid hypotension, optimize oxygen
on protocols
delivery, and include careful ﬂuid management, vasopressors
when indicated, and inotropic agents and blood products if
needed.127

The relative merits and risk:beneﬁt ratio of each discrete
element of EGDT in the successful resuscitation of patients
with septic shock requires further study. Given the limita-
tions of
studies and lack of comparative
effectiveness studies comparing individual protocols, we
can only conclude that protocols for resuscitation in the
setting of septic shock and high-risk surgery appear to be
superior to no protocol.

the current

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Randomized trials of

illness, high-risk surgery,

isotonic crystalloid vs. colloid
therapy for intravascular volume expansion to prevent
or treat AKI should be conducted in a variety of settings
including
(critical
patient subsets.
In particular, colloids may improve
efficiency of fluid resuscitation but some (starch) also
carry some concerns regarding effects on the kidneys. If
colloid results in less volume overload, it may lead to
improved outcomes.

sepsis),

K Comparisons of specific solutions, with specific electrolyte
composition or colloid type, for effectiveness in preventing
AKI should be conducted. Specifically, there is a need to
examine physiologic electrolyte solutions vs. saline.

c h a p t e r 3 . 1

K Studies are needed that compare different

types of
vasopressors for prevention and treatment of AKI in
hemodynamically unstable patients. Some
evidence
suggests that certain vasopressors may preserve renal
function better than others (e.g., vasopressin analogues
vs. catecholamines) and studies are needed to compare
them in this setting.

K The choice of a target mean arterial perfusion pressure
range of 65–90 mm Hg as a component of resuscitation
(perhaps in the context of age, chronic blood pressure, or
other comorbidities) also needs further study.

K The specific components of goal-directed therapy that
accrue benefits for patients at risk for AKI need to be
determined. Is it the timing of protocolized hemodynamic
management that is beneficial: prophylactically in high-
risk surgical patients, or early in the course of severe sepsis?
In contrast to the benefits of prophylactic or EGDT,
protocolized use of inotropes to normalize mixed venous
oxygen saturation or supranormalize oxygen delivery in
‘‘late’’ critical illness did not result in decreased AKI128 or
improved outcomes.128,129 Alternatively,
is it attention
that
itself
to hemodynamic monitoring,
standardizes supportive care to achieve the stated goals, or
a single or combination of the multiple possible interven-
tions that improves outcome? Thus, further research is
required to determine the specific components of goal-
directed therapy that accrue benefits for patients at risk for
AKI, if such benefits actually occur.

the protocol

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 1: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of starch for the prevention of AKI.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

41

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 2

Chapter 3.2: General supportive management of
patients with AKI, including management of
complications

Supportive management to prevent AKI was discussed in the
previous chapter and, for many patients, many of the supportive
therapies will continue even if AKI develops. Furthermore,
an important goal of early management of AKI is to prevent
further injury and to facilitate recovery of renal function. These
goals can often best be achieved by strict attention to supportive
therapy. However, as renal function deteriorates, complications
arise that require different management. Some of these issues
have been discussed in Chapter 2.3 and several books have
in large part, to management of the many
been devoted,

complications that arise from AKI130–133; the reader is referred
to these sources. Particular attention should be given to the
assessment of the circulating volume and ﬂuid administration,
the prevention and/or treatment of hyperkalemia and metabolic
acidosis, the knowledge of the changes in pharmacokinetics of
many drugs with discontinuation of all potentially nephrotoxic
drugs, and dose adaptation of drugs excreted by the kidneys to
the patient’s renal function. Finally, many of the other chapters
in this section of the guideline deal with supportive measures
(e.g., diuretics for ﬂuid management).

42

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 3

Chapter 3.3: Glycemic control and nutritional support

GLYCEMIC CONTROL IN CRITICAL ILLNESS: RENAL EFFECTS
AND OUTCOMES

3.3.1:

In critically ill patients, we suggest
insulin
therapy targeting plasma glucose 110–149 mg/dl
(6.1–8.3 mmol/l). (2C)

RATIONALE
As outlined in a recent review,134 stress hyperglycemia is a
distinctive clinical feature of critical illness. Stress mediators,
and central and peripheral insulin resistance appears pivotal
to the occurrence of stress hyperglycemia. Inﬂammatory
mediators and counter-regulatory hormones have been
shown to impede crucial elements of the insulin-signaling
pathway. Still, exogenous insulin administration normalizes
blood glucose levels in this setting. Insulin treatment may
counteract hepatic insulin resistance during acute critical
illness. Extensive observational data have shown a consistent,
almost linear, relationship between blood glucose levels in
patients hospitalized with MI and adverse clinical outcomes,
even in patients without established diabetes.135,136

It has never been entirely clear, however, whether glycemia
serves as a mediator of these outcomes or merely as a marker
of the sickest patients, who present with the well-known
counter-regulatory stress response to illness.137 Interestingly,
Kosiborod et al.135 recently showed, in a population with MI,
that while hypoglycemia was associated with increased
mortality, this risk was conﬁned to patients who developed
spontaneous hypoglycemia. In contrast,
iatrogenic hypo-
glycemia after insulin therapy was not associated with higher
mortality risk.

the beneﬁts

Tight glycemic control is frequently used in patients at risk
of AKI, and in the management of those who develop AKI. It
has been proposed that tight glycemic control can reduce the
incidence and severity of AKI. Since the landmark trial of Van
den Berghe et al.,138 additional studies provided initial
conﬁrmation of
(reduced morbidity and
mortality), and some additional mechanistic insights of tight
glycemic control in critically ill patients.139 Further secondary
analysis of the original trial, which was conducted in 1548
mechanically ventilated surgical ICU patients, found that
intensive
target plasma glucose
80–110 mg/dl (4.44–6.11 mmol/l) was associated with sub-
stantial cost
insulin
therapy (CIT) target plasma glucose 180–200 mg/dl (9.99–
11.1 mmol/l).140 However, when Van den Berghe et al.
repeated their original study in a different population of
ICU
critically ill patients (medical rather than surgical

savings compared to conventional

insulin therapy (IIT)

the CIT group (P ¼ 0.04);

patients), the primary end-point of in-hospital mortality
did not differ between groups (40% CIT group vs. 37.3% IIT
group; P ¼ 0.33).141 As in the original surgical ICU study, a
variety of secondary end-points were improved in this study,
including a lower incidence of AKI and need for RRT. In the
original surgical ICU study, severe AKI (peak SCr 42.5 mg/dl
[4221 mmol/l]) developed in 7.2% of
the IIT group,
compared to 11.2% of
the
incidence of RRT was also lower in the IIT group than the
CIT group (4.8% vs. 8.2%, respectively; P ¼ 0.007).138 In the
medical ICU study, the IIT group similarly had a signiﬁcantly
lower rate of AKI (doubling of SCr, 5.4%) than the CIT
group (8.9%, P ¼ 0.04), although RRT incidence was not
decreased.141 In a recent analysis, Schetz et al.142 combined
the renal end-points of both of these trials and used a modi-
ﬁed version of the RIFLE classiﬁcation of AKI to demonstrate
that tight glycemic control reduced the incidence of severe
AKI (peak SCr increments two- or three-fold increased from
baseline) from 7.6% to 4.5% (P ¼ 0.0006) in a combined
patient population of 2707. The need for RRT was not
decreased in the overall population or the medical ICU
population, but was signiﬁcantly lower in the surgical ICU
patients managed with IIT (4% vs. 7.4%, P ¼ 0.008).
Several newer studies have provided additional

insight
concerning the efﬁcacy and safety of tight glycemic control in
critically ill patients.93,95,143–146 Thomas et al.145 conducted a
systematic review of randomized trials of tight glycemic
control in 2864 critically ill patients, and found a 38% risk
reduction of AKI with IIT, and a nonsigniﬁcant trend towards
less acute dialysis requirement. However,
IIT was also
associated with a greater than four-fold increase in the risk
of hypoglycemia. A body of literature demonstrating that
uncontrolled hyperglycemia was associated with increased
AKI following cardiac surgery led to the conduct of a 400-
patient, single-center RCT of tight vs. conventional intra-
operative glucose control.143,144 The investigators found that
this approach did not decrease perioperative morbidity or
mortality (included in a composite end-point that included
AKI within 30 days of surgery): the composite end-point
occurred in 44% of the IIT group vs. 46% of the CIT group.
Although the incidence of hypoglycemia was similar in the
groups, there was a signiﬁcantly higher incidence of stroke in
the IIT group (4.3%) compared to the CIT group (0.54%), as
well as trends towards higher mortality and more post-
operative heart block in the IIT group, raising concerns about
the safety of this approach.

Further prospective comparison of IIT vs. CIT in critically
ill septic patients was provided in the VISEP trial, which
also incorporated a comparison on crystalloid vs. colloid

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

43

c h a p t e r 3 . 3

infusions in a 2 (cid:2) 2 factorial design.93 Patients with severe
sepsis or septic shock in 18 ICUs were randomized to IIT
(target glycemia 80–110 mg/dl [4.44–6.11 mmol/l]; n ¼ 247)
or CIT (target glycemia 180–200 mg/dl [9.99–11.1 mmol/l];
n ¼ 290) (Suppl Tables 2 and 3). There were no signiﬁcant
differences in 28-day or 90-day mortality, Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment scores, or AKI rates between the groups.
However, hypoglycemia (blood glucose level o40 mg/dl
[o2.22 mmol/l]) was more frequent in the IIT group (12%
vs. 2%; Po0.001) and led to early termination of the IIT
study arm. Following publication of this study, Thomas et al.,
updated the meta-analysis (discussed above) to include these
data, and reported that, with the addition of the VISEP data,
the analysis of a 3397-patient group found a 36% risk
reduction of AKI with IIT, but this pooled estimate was no
longer statistically signiﬁcant (relative risk [RR] 0.74; 95% CI
0.47–1.17).95 In a detailed review of the VISEP trial, Thomas
et al., also noted that another multicenter mixed ICU trial of
intensive insulin therapy (the GLUCOCONTROL Study:
Comparing the effects of two glucose control regimens by
insulin in intensive care unit patients; available at: http://
www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/show/NCT00107601) was stopped
after 1101 patients were enrolled because of greater rates of
hypoglycemia with IIT.95 Such data have raised signiﬁcant
concerns regarding the effectiveness and safety of using IIT
to prevent or ameliorate
with tight glycemic control
morbidity and mortality in patients at high risk of AKI and
other forms of organ injury.

The recent meta-analysis of IIT vs. CIT by Wiener et al.146
continued to ﬁnd a greater incidence of hypoglycemia with
IIT, but the balance of evidence now suggests no improve-
ment in survival with this approach. Twenty-nine RCTs
totaling 8432 patients contributed data for this meta-analysis.
Twenty-seven studies reported no difference in hospital
mortality (21.6% in IIT vs 23.3% in CIT) with a pooled RR
of 0.93 (95% CI 0.85–1.03; P ¼ NS). Nine studies reported no
difference in incidence of new RRT. There was a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt of tight glycemic control in reducing the incidence of
this was associated with a signiﬁcantly
septicemia but
increased risk of hypoglycemia (blood glucose o40 mg/dl
[o2.22 mmol/l]) in patients randomized to IIT with a pooled
RR of 5.13 (95% CI 4.09–6.43; Po0.05).

In summary, pooled analysis of early multicenter studies
has failed to conﬁrm the early observations of beneﬁcial
effects of IIT on renal function; the risk of hypoglycemia with
this approach is signiﬁcant, and even the survival beneﬁts of
IIT are in doubt. More recently, the international Normogly-
cemia in Intensive Care Evaluation and Survival Using
Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) study, with a
targeted enrolment of 6100 patients, set out to deﬁnitively
tight glycemic
determine the risk-beneﬁt comparison of
control in critically ill patients (Suppl Table 3).147,148 In this
trial, adult patients were randomized within 24 hours after
admission to an ICU to receive either intensive glucose
control (target blood glucose range of 81–108 mg/dl [4.50–
5.99 mmol/l]), or conventional glucose control (target of

p180 mg/dl [p9.99 mmol/l]).148 The primary outcome was
mortality from any cause within 90 days after randomization.
The two groups had similar characteristics at baseline. A total
of 829 patients (27.5%) in the intensive-control group and
751 (24.9%) in the conventional-control group died (OR
for intensive control, 1.14; 95% CI 1.02–1.28; P ¼ 0.02). The
treatment effect did not differ signiﬁcantly between surgical
patients and medical patients. There was no signiﬁcant
difference between the two treatment groups in incidence of
new RRT (15.4% vs. 14.5%), respectively. Severe hypo-
glycemia (blood glucose level p40 mg/dl [p2.22 mmol/l])
was reported in 6.8% in the intensive-control group and in
0.5% in the conventional-control group (Po0.001).
In
intensive vs.
the largest randomized trial of
summary,
conventional insulin therapy found that intensive glucose
control actually increased mortality among adults in the ICU:
a blood glucose target of p180 mg/dl (p9.99 mmol/l)
resulted in lower mortality than did a target of 81–108 mg/
dl (4.50–5.99 mmol/l). Furthermore, this trial conﬁrmed the
consistent ﬁnding of an increased incidence of hypoglycemia
associated with IIT, without any proven beneﬁt in reducing
mortality, organ dysfunction, or bacteremia.

There were some methodological differences between the
Leuven and NICE-SUGAR studies, possibly explaining the
different outcomes.149 These comprised different
target
ranges for blood glucose in control and intervention groups,
different routes for insulin administration and types of infu-
sion pumps, different sampling sites, and different accuracies
of glucometers, as well as different nutritional strategies and
varying levels of expertise. Finally, Griesdale et al.150 per-
formed a meta-analysis of trials of intensive vs. conventional
glycemic control that included most of the studies in the
Wiener meta-analysis, in addition to some newer studies,
including data supplied by the NICE-SUGAR investigators.
All 26 trials that reported mortality found a pooled RR of
death with IIT compared to CIT of 0.93 (95% CI 0.83–1.04).
Among the 14 trials reporting hypoglycemia, the pooled RR
with IIT was 6.0 (95% CI 4.5–8.0). However,
in subset
analysis, patients in surgical ICUs appeared to beneﬁt from
IIT while patients in the other ICU settings (medical or
mixed) did not. Although results from the early trials were
better in studies that included surgical138 rather than purely
medical ICU patients141, and this latest meta-analysis appears
to conﬁrm that trend,
it should be noted that no such
phenomenon was noted in the NICE-SUGAR trial. Overall,
the data do not support the use of IIT aiming to control
plasma glucose below 110 mg/dl (6.11 mmol/l) in critically ill
patients, although subset analyses suggest that further trials
may disclose beneﬁts in perioperative patients, and perhaps
through the use of less-intensive glucose control targets.

Considering the balance between potential beneﬁts and
harm (see Suppl Table 2), the Work Group suggests using
insulin for preventing severe hyperglycemia in critically ill
patients, but in view of the danger of potentially serious
hypoglycemia, we recommend that the average blood glucose
should not exceed 150 mg/dl (8.33 mmol/l), but that insulin

44

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

therapy should not be used to lower blood glucose to less
than 110 mg/dl (6.11 mmol/l). The Work Group recognizes
that these proposed thresholds have never directly been
examined in RCTs but are interpolated from the comparisons
tested in the trials so far.

NUTRITIONAL ASPECTS IN THE PREVENTION AND
TREATMENT OF CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS WITH AKI
Protein-calorie malnutrition is an important independent
predictor of in-hospital mortality in patients with AKI. In a
prospective study of 300 AKI patients, 42% presented with
signs of severe malnutrition on admission.151

The nutritional management of AKI patients must
consider the metabolic derangements and proinﬂammatory
state associated with renal failure, the underlying disease
process and comorbidities, as well as the derangements in
nutrient balance caused by RRT. Very few systematic studies
have assessed the impact of nutrition on clinical end-points
used in these guidelines (i.e., mortality, need for RRT,
and incidence of AKI). Recommendations are therefore
largely based on expert opinion. Several expert panels have
developed clinical practice guidelines for the nutritional
management of patients with AKI, whether treated with or
without RRT.152–156 A recent narrative review has also
provided updated information on this topic.157

3.3.2: We suggest achieving a total energy intake of
20–30 kcal/kg/d in patients with any stage of AKI. (2C)

is

RATIONALE
characterized by
Carbohydrate metabolism in AKI
insulin resistance158,159
hyperglycemia due to peripheral
and accelerated hepatic gluconeogenesis, mainly from con-
version of amino acids released during protein catabolism
that cannot be suppressed by exogenous glucose infusions.160
In addition, hypertriglyceridemia commonly occurs due
to inhibition of
lipolysis. The clearance of exogenously
administered lipids can be reduced.161 The modiﬁcations of
energy metabolism are usually not caused by AKI per se but
related to acute comorbidities and complications.162 Energy
consumption is not increased by AKI. Even in multiple-organ
the energy expenditure of critically ill patients
failure,
amounts
resting energy
expenditure. The optimal energy-to-nitrogen ratio during
AKI has not been clearly determined. In a retrospective study
of AKI patients undergoing continuous venovenous hemoﬁl-
tration (CVVH), less negative or weakly positive nitrogen
balance was associated with an energy intake of approxi-
mately 25 kcal/kg/d.163 In a randomized trial in AKI patients
comparing 30 and 40 kcal/kg/d energy provision, the higher
energy prescription did not induce a more positive nitrogen
balance but was associated with a higher incidence of
hyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia and a more positive
ﬂuid balance.164 These observations provide a rationale to
maintain a total energy intake of at least 20, but not more

to not more than 130% of

c h a p t e r 3 . 3

than 25–30 kcal/kg/d, equivalent to 100–130% of resting
energy expenditure. Energy provision should be composed of
3–5 (maximum 7) g per kilogram body weight carbohydrates
and 0.8–1.0 g per kilogram body weight fat.

3.3.3: We suggest to avoid restriction of protein intake
with the aim of preventing or delaying initiation of
RRT. (2D)

3.3.4: We suggest administering 0.8–1.0 g/kg/d of protein
in noncatabolic AKI patients without need for
dialysis (2D), 1.0–1.5 g/kg/d in patients with AKI on
RRT (2D), and up to a maximum of 1.7 g/kg/d in
patients on continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT) and in hypercatabolic patients. (2D)

a

is

in critically

common ﬁnding

RATIONALE
Protein hypercatabolism driven by inﬂammation, stress,
and acidosis
ill
patients.157,165,166 The optimal amount of protein supple-
mentation in AKI patients is unknown. Patients with AKI are
at high risk of malnutrition. Since malnutrition is associated
with increased mortality in critically ill patients, nutritional
management should aim at supplying sufﬁcient protein to
maintain metabolic balance. Hence, nutritional protein
administration should not be restricted as a means to
attenuate the rise in BUN associated with declining GFR. On
the other hand, there is little evidence that hypercatabolism
can be overcome simply by increasing protein intake to
supraphysiologic levels. While, in a crossover study of AKI
patients, nitrogen balance was related to protein intake
and was more likely to be positive with intakes larger than
2 g/kg/d,167 only 35% of patients achieved a positive nitrogen
balance in a study applying a nutrient intake as high as
2.5 g/kg/d protein.168 No outcome data are currently
available concerning the clinical efﬁcacy and the safety of
such high protein intakes, which may contribute to acidosis
and azotemia, and increase dialysis dose requirements.

Due to their continuous nature and the high ﬁltration
rates, CRRT techniques can better control azotemia and ﬂuid
overload associated with nutritional support but may also
result in additional losses of water-soluble, low-molecular-
weight substances, including nutrients.169 Normalized pro-
tein catabolic rates of 1.4 to 1.8 g/kg/d have been reported
in patients with AKI receiving CRRT.170–172 In a recent study
in critically ill cancer patients with AKI and treated with
sustained low-efﬁciency dialysis (SLED), those with higher
BUN and serum albumin levels, which were associated with
infusion of higher amount of total parenteral nutrition, had a
lower mortality risk.173

In CRRT, about 0.2 g amino acids are lost per liter of
ﬁltrate, amounting to a total daily loss of 10–15 g amino
acids.
In addition, 5–10 g of protein are lost per day,
depending on the type of therapy and dialyzer membrane.
Similar amounts of protein and amino acids are typically lost
by peritoneal dialysis (PD). Nutritional support should

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

45

c h a p t e r 3 . 3

account for the losses related to CRRT, including PD, by
providing a maximum of 1.7 g amino acids/kg/d.

3.3.5: We suggest providing nutrition preferentially via
the enteral route in patients with AKI. (2C)

RATIONALE
Enteral feeding may be more difﬁcult in patients with AKI
because of impaired gastrointestinal motility and decreased
secondary to bowel edema.174
absorption of nutrients
Moreover, multiple factors negatively affect gastrointestinal
function in critically ill patients, e.g., medications (sedatives,
opiates, catecholamines, etc.), glucose and electrolyte dis-
orders, diabetes, or mechanical ventilation. However, the
provision of nutrients via the gut lumen helps maintain gut
integrity, decreases gut atrophy, and decreases bacterial and
endotoxin translocation. Furthermore, AKI is a major risk
factor for gastrointestinal hemorrhage.175 Enteral nutrition
should exert protective effects on the risk of stress ulcers or
bleeding. Clinical studies have suggested that enteral feeding
is associated with improved outcome/survival
in ICU
patients.176,177 Hence, enteral nutrition is the recommended
form of nutritional support for patients with AKI. If oral
feeding is not possible, then enteral feeding (tube feeding)
should be initiated within 24 hours, and has been shown to
be safe and effective.178

Pediatric considerations
In children with AKI, physiological macronutrient require-
ments
reﬂecting the developmental
dynamics of growth and metabolism. Research exploring

age-dependent,

are

nutritional requirements in children with critical illness and
AKI is limited to observational studies. With respect to calorie
provision,
it is generally agreed that critically ill children,
like adults, should receive 100–130% of the basal energy
expenditure, which can be estimated with acceptable precision
and accuracy by the Caldwell-Kennedy equation179: (resting
energy expenditure [kcal/kg/d] ¼ 22 þ 31.05 (cid:2) weight [kg] þ
1.16 (cid:2) age [years]).

In a recent survey of the nutritional management of 195
children with AKI on CRRT, the maximal calorie prescription
in the course of treatment averaged 53, 31, and 21 kcal/kg/d,
and that for protein intake 2.4, 1.9, and 1.3 g/kg/d in children
aged o1, 1–13, and 413 years, respectively.180 Although not
these ﬁgures provide an
validated by outcome studies,
orientation for the macronutrient supply typically achieved
in and tolerated by children with AKI receiving CRRT.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K The risk-benefit ratio of diets with low, medium, and
high protein contents in different stages of AKI should be
addressed in RCTs.
K Given gastrointestinal

the
possible benefit of enteral vs. parenteral feeding in AKI
patients should be further evaluated in prospective RCTs.

tract dysfunction in AKI,

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 2: Evidence profile of RCTs examining insulin vs.
conventional glucose therapy for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 3: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of insulin for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

46

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 4

Chapter 3.4: The use of diuretics in AKI

Diuretics are frequently used in patients at risk of AKI, and in
the management of those who develop AKI. Since ﬂuid
overload is one of the major symptoms of AKI, diuretics are
often used for patients with AKI to facilitate ﬂuid manage-
ment. Recent observational studies showed that 59–70% of
patients with AKI were given diuretics at
the time of
nephrology consultation or before the start of RRT.181,182
In addition, oliguric AKI has a worse prognosis
than
nonoliguric AKI and physicians often prescribe diuretics to
convert oliguric to nonoliguric AKI.183 Diuretics are also
used to control ﬂuid balance and permit administration of
nutrition and medications. Furthermore, several diuretics
have potentially renoprotective effects that might prevent
development of AKI and hasten its recovery. However,
diuretics can also be harmful, by reducing the circulating
volume excessively and adding a prerenal insult, worsening
established AKI. Therefore,
to evaluate
usefulness of diuretics to improve outcome of patients with
AKI, not just for ﬂuid management.

is essential

it

3.4.1: We recommend not using diuretics to prevent

AKI. (1B)

3.4.2: We suggest not using diuretics to treat AKI, except
in the management of volume overload. (2C)

renal

RATIONALE
Loop diuretics have several effects that may protect against
AKI. They may decrease oxygen consumption in the loop of
Henle by inhibiting sodium transport,
thus potentially
lessening ischemic injury. Loop diuretics act at the luminal
surface of the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle and
inhibit the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter,184,185 resulting in a loss
of the high medullary osmolality and decreased ability to
reabsorb water. Inhibition of active sodium transport also
tubular oxygen consumption, potentially
reduces
decreasing ischemic damage of the most vulnerable outer
medullary tubular segments;183 therefore, furosemide might
protect kidneys against ischemic injury.186 Furosemide also
might hasten recovery of AKI by washing out necrotic debris
blocking tubules, and by inhibiting prostaglandin dehydro-
genase, which reduces renovascular resistance and increases
renal blood ﬂow.186,187 Based on these properties,
loop
diuretics might be expected to prevent or ameliorate AKI.
However, there are only minimal data to support this theory,
and there is some evidence of harm associated with loop
diuretic use to prevent or treat AKI.188–191 Furosemide is the
most commonly prescribed diuretic in the acute-care
setting,183–185 and a number of RCTs have tested whether

furosemide is beneﬁcial for prevention or treatment of AKI.
found to be
Speciﬁcally, prophylactic furosemide was
ineffective or harmful when used to prevent AKI after cardiac
surgery,189,190 and to increase the risk of AKI when given to
prevent CI-AKI.191 Epidemiologic data have suggested that
the use of loop diuretics may increase mortality in patients
with critical illness and AKI,181 along with conﬂicting data
that suggest no harm in AKI.182 Finally, furosemide therapy
was also ineffective and possibly harmful when used to treat
AKI.188,192

There is no evidence that the use of diuretics reduces the
incidence or severity of AKI. Ho et al.192,193 conducted two
comprehensive systematic reviews on the use of the loop
diuretic frusemide (furosemide) to prevent or treat AKI.
Furosemide had no signiﬁcant effect on in-hospital mortality,
risk for requiring RRT, number of dialysis sessions, or even
the proportion of patients with persistent oliguria. Results
from the most recent review193 are shown in Figure 9 and
Figure 10. The primary prevention studies included patients
who underwent cardiac surgery,189 coronary angiography,191
and major general or vascular surgery.194 In two of these
studies, all participants had mild pre-existing renal impair-
ment. Two of the three studies reported mortality in patients
randomized to furosemide (n ¼ 103) vs. placebo (n ¼ 99),
with a pooled RR of 2.67 (95% CI 0.75–7.25; P ¼ 0.15). All
three studies reported RRT incidence in patients randomized
to furosemide (n ¼ 128) vs. placebo (n ¼ 127), with a pooled
RR of 4.08 (95% CI 0.46–35.96; P ¼ 0.21). Thus, subanalysis
to separate primary and secondary prevention trials did not
alter the conclusion that, within the sample size limitations
of this study, furosemide is not effective for the prevention
of AKI.

The systematic review and meta-analysis by Ho and
Power193 also included six studies that used furosemide to
treat AKI, with doses ranging from 600 to 3400 mg/d
(Figure 9 and Figure 10).192 No signiﬁcant reduction was
found for in-hospital mortality or for RRT requirement. The
largest single study of
furosemide for treating AKI was
conducted by Cantarovich et al.,188 which included 338
patients with AKI requiring dialysis. Patients were randomly
assigned to the administration of either furosemide (25 mg/
kg/d i.v. or 35 mg/kg/d orally) or placebo. Although time to
reach 2 l/d of diuresis was shorter with furosemide (5.7 days)
than placebo (7.8 days, P ¼ 0.004), there was no difference in
survival and number of dialysis sessions. At present, the
current evidence does not suggest that furosemide can reduce
mortality in patients with AKI.

Furosemide may, however, be useful in achieving ﬂuid
balance to facilitate mechanical ventilation according to the

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

47

c h a p t e r 3 . 4

Figure 9 | Effect of furosemide vs. control on all-cause mortality. Reprinted from Ho KM, Power BM. Benefits and risks of furosemide in
acute kidney injury. Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 283–293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons193; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/j.1365-2044.2009.06228.x/full

Figure 10 | Effect of furosemide vs. control on need for RRT. Reprinted from Ho KM, Power BM. Benefits and risks of furosemide in acute
kidney injury. Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 283–293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons193; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/j.1365-2044.2009.06228.x/full

lung-protective ventilation strategy in hemodynamically
stable patients with acute lung injury. On the other hand,
the literature also suggests
that high-dose furosemide
(41 g/d) may cause ototoxicity. In the ﬁrst meta-analysis
by Ho and Sheridan,192 high doses of furosemide (range
1–3.4 g/d) caused deafness or tinnitus more frequently than
the control (RR 3.97; 95% CI 1.00–15.78; P ¼ 0.05). When
administered as continuous infusion a dose of 0.5 mg/kg/
hour was not associated with ototoxicity.195 Taken together
with several small studies showing that the prophylactic use
of diuretics to prevent AKI actually increased AKI incidence,
these data raise signiﬁcant concerns regarding use of loop
diuretics to prevent or treat AKI in any setting. We similarly

conclude that there is no evidence that the use of loop
diuretics reduces the severity of AKI, or improves outcomes
in this syndrome. Although the use of loop diuretics in early
or established AKI facilitates management of ﬂuid balance,
hyperkalemia, and hypercalcemia, and is indicated for these
clinical purposes, any putative role in the prevention or
amelioration of AKI course is unproven.

Two recent studies have investigated whether the admin-
istration of furosemide to patients treated with CVVH could
be associated with a more rapid discontinuation of the
dialysis therapy. van der Voort et al., observed, as expected,
an increased urinary volume and sodium excretion, but this
intervention did not lead to a shorter duration of renal failure

48

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

or more frequent renal recovery.195 The second study by
Uchino et al.,196 analyzed data from the B.E.S.T. kidney and
found that, from a total of 529 critically ill patients who
survived during CRRT, 313 patients were removed success-
fully from CRRT while 216 patients needed ‘‘repeat RRT’’
after temporary discontinuation. Urine output (during the 24
hours before stopping CRRT) was identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant
predictor of successful cessation, but the predictive ability of
urine output was negatively affected by the use of diuretics.
Thus, a beneﬁcial role for loop diuretics in facilitating
discontinuation of RRT in AKI is not evident.

Mannitol
Mannitol has been frequently used in the past for prevention
of AKI; however, most of
the studies are retrospective,
underpowered, and, overall, the studies did not meet the
criteria of the Work Group to be included in formulation of
recommendations. Prophylactic mannitol has been promoted
in patients undergoing surgery. While in most of these
instances mannitol increases urine ﬂow, it is highly probable
that mannitol does not convey additional beneﬁcial effects
beyond adequate hydration on the incidence of AKI.

In radiocontrast-induced nephropathy,

loop diuretics
and mannitol in one study have been shown to exacerbate
ARF.191 Weisberg et al.,197 randomized patients under-
going contrast-medium investigations to receive saline or
one of
three renal vasodilator/diuretic drugs (dopamine
[2 mg/kg/min], mannitol [15 g/dl in a one-half isotonic saline
solution given at 100 ml/h] or atrial natriuretic peptide).
Dopamine, mannitol, and atrial natriuretic peptide were
associated with a much higher incidence of renal dysfunction
in diabetic subjects compared to patients receiving saline alone.
is often added to the priming ﬂuid of the
cardiopulmonary bypass system to reduce the incidence of

Mannitol

c h a p t e r 3 . 4

renal dysfunction, but the results of these studies are not very
convincing.198 Two small randomized trials—one in patients
with pre-existing normal renal function,199 the second in
patients with established renal dysfunction200—did not ﬁnd
function.
differences for any measured variable of renal
More convincing are the results obtained with the preventive
administration of mannitol, just before clamp release, during
transplantation.201,202 The sparse controlled data
renal
available have shown that 250 ml of mannitol 20% given
immediately before vessel clamp removal reduces the inci-
dence of post-transplant AKI, as indicated by a lower require-
ment of post-transplant dialysis. However, 3 months after
transplantation, no difference is found in kidney function
compared to patients who did not receive mannitol.203

It has also been suggested that mannitol is beneﬁcial in
rhabdomyolysis by stimulating osmotic diuresis and by
lowering the intracompartmental pressure in the affected
crushed limbs204–206; again, these studies were either not
randomized or underpowered. A separate guideline on crush
injury associated with disasters, mainly earthquake victims, is
under preparation by the ISN Renal Disaster Relief Task
Force.

In summary, despite experimental animal data and the
anecdotal human evidence for the beneﬁcial effects of
mannitol, there are no adequately powered prospective RCTs
comparing mannitol vs. other strategies. Based on these
considerations, the Work Group concludes that mannitol is
not scientiﬁcally justiﬁed in the prevention of AKI.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Given the potential to mitigate fluid overload but also to
worsen renal function and possibly cause kidney injury,
further study is required to clarify the safety of loop
diuretics in the management of patients with AKI.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

49

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

Chapter 3.5: Vasodilator therapy: dopamine,
fenoldopam, and natriuretic peptides

DOPAMINE FOR THE PREVENTION OR TREATMENT OF AKI
Dopamine was once commonly used for renal protection in
the critically ill. However, with multiple negative studies,
including a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of adequate size and power,207
its use has been
abandoned by most. Low-dose dopamine administration
(1–3 mg/kg/min) to healthy individuals causes renal vasodila-
tion, natriuresis, and increased GFR; because of these effects,
it has been given as prophylaxis for AKI associated with
radiocontrast administration, repair of aortic aneurysms,
orthotopic liver
transplantation, unilateral nephrectomy,
renal transplantation, and chemotherapy with interferon.208
The majority of prevention trials with low-dose dopamine
have been small,
limited
statistical power, and with end-points of questionable clinical
signiﬁcance. Furthermore, recent data suggest that the renal
vasodilatory effect of dopamine found in healthy populations
is not preserved in patients with AKI. Using Doppler
ultrasound, Lauschke et al.209 found that dopamine signi-
ﬁcantly increased renal vascular resistance in AKI patients.
Kellum and Decker210 found no beneﬁt of dopamine for
prevention or therapy of AKI in an adequately-powered
meta-analysis, and Marik211 found no beneﬁt in a systematic
review.

inadequately randomized, of

There is also limited evidence that the use of dopamine to
prevent or treat AKI causes harm. Although the meta-analysis
by Friedrich et al.,212 found no signiﬁcant increase in adverse
events or evidence of harm from low-dose dopamine, there is
signiﬁcant literature demonstrating adverse effects of dopa-
mine, even at low doses. It can trigger tachyarrhythmias
and myocardial
ischemia, decrease intestinal blood ﬂow,
cause hypopituitarism, and suppress T-cell function.208 Taken
together with the lack of positive trials to support the use of
dopamine for AKI prevention or therapy, the aforementioned
potential deleterious effects of this drug provide additional
arguments for abandoning its use entirely for the prevention
and therapy of AKI.

3.5.1: We recommend not using low-dose dopamine to

prevent or treat AKI. (1A)

RATIONALE
In their meta-analysis, Friedrich et al.,212 did not speciﬁcally
separate prophylactic trials from trials where dopamine was
used therapeutically in patients with established AKI, because
many of the original trials failed to do so.210 The authors

in renal

analyzed 61 randomized or quasi-randomized controlled
trials of low-dose dopamine, and found no improvement of
survival (Figure 11), no decrease in dialysis requirement
function, and
(Figure 12), no improvement
improved urine output only on the ﬁrst day of dopamine
therapy.212 Similarly, although there were trends towards
transiently greater urine output, lower SCr, and higher GFR
in dopamine-treated patients on day 1 of therapy (but not
days 2 and 3), there was no evidence of a sustained beneﬁcial
effect on renal function. In an earlier systematic review,
Kellum et al.,210 performed an analysis of studies that
reported incidence of AKI as an outcome, which developed in
15.3% in the dopamine arms and 19.5% in the control arms
(RR 0.79 [0.54–1.13]). Similar to the earlier analysis by
Kellum et al., restriction of the Work Group’s analysis to
prevention trials did not disclose any beneﬁt of dopamine vs.
trials
placebo therapy. Similarly, analysis of adequate
restricted to patients treated for AKI does not suggest a
beneﬁt of dopamine therapy. Speciﬁcally, a relatively large
randomized, placebo-controlled trial
in 328 critically ill
patients with early AKI sufﬁciently powered to detect a small
beneﬁt was reported.207 There was no effect of low-dose
dopamine on renal
function, need for dialysis, ICU or
hospital length of stay (LOS), or mortality (Suppl Table 4).
found no evidence that
Taken together,
dopamine therapy is effective in the prevention or treatment
of AKI.

these analyses

FENOLDOPAM FOR THE PREVENTION OR TREATMENT OF AKI
Fenoldopam mesylate is a pure dopamine type-1 receptor
agonist
similar hemodynamic renal effects as
low-dose dopamine, without systemic a- or b-adrenergic
stimulation.213

that has

3.5.2: We suggest not using fenoldopam to prevent or

treat AKI. (2C)

RATIONALE
The results of animal experiments and small human studies
measuring perioperative GFR in patients undergoing coro-
nary artery bypass graft and aortic cross-clamp surgery
suggested that fenoldopam might prevent or ameliorate the
course of AKI.139 Cogliati et al.,214 conducted a double-blind,
randomized trial of fenoldopam infusion for renal protec-
tion in 193 high-risk cardiac surgery patients, who were
randomized to receive a continuous infusion of fenoldopam,

50

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

Figure 11 | Effect of low-dose dopamine on mortality. Reprinted from Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS et al. Meta-analysis: low-dose
dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510–524 with permission
from American College of Physicians212; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/142/7/510.full

results

a 24-hour

suggested that

0.1 mg/kg/min (95 patients) or placebo (98 patients) for
24 hours. AKI was deﬁned as a postoperative SCr level of
X2 mg/dl (X177 mmol/l) with an increase in SCr level of
X0.7 mg/dl (X61.9 mmol/l) from preoperative to maximum
postoperative values. AKI developed in 12 of 95 (12.6%)
patients receiving fenoldopam and in 27 of 98 (27.6%)
patients receiving placebo (P ¼ 0.02), and RRT was started in
0 of 95 and 8 of 98 (8.2%) patients, respectively (P ¼ 0.004).
infusion of
These
0.1 mg/kg/min of fenoldopam prevented AKI in a high-risk
population undergoing cardiac surgery. A meta-analysis of
1059 patients in 13 studies that included this trial found that
fenoldopam reduces the need for RRT and in-hospital death
in cardiovascular surgery patients.215 However, the pooled
studies included both prophylactic and early therapeutic
studies, as well as propensity-adjusted case-matched studies
(rather than purely randomized trials). A 1000-patient RCT
of fenoldopam to prevent the need for RRT after cardiac
surgery is currently underway (ClinicalTrials.gov identiﬁer:
NCT00621790); meanwhile,
remains an unproven
this
indication for fenoldopam therapy.

Finally, Morelli et al.,216 in a prospective, double-blind
trial, randomized 300 septic patients without renal dysfunc-
tion to receive infusions of fenoldopam (0.09 mg/kg/min)
and compared these individuals to a placebo group; the
treatment continued as long as the patient was in the ICU.

The fenoldopam group had a signiﬁcantly lower rate of AKI
(29 vs. 51 patients, P ¼ 0.006; OR of 0.47, P ¼ 0.005), and
shorter ICU stays, without any increase in complications. The
incidence of severe AKI, dialysis, and death were not different
between the groups. This study requires a larger conﬁrmatory
trial, which should be powered to test effectiveness in
improving dialysis-free survival.

Emerging data from experimental AKI models suggest
that fenoldopam may have multiple protective effects in AKI,
including anti-inﬂammatory effects independent of any vaso-
dilatory action.217,218 Further large studies will be required
to determine if
fenoldopam is an effective renoprotec-
tive agent.213,219 As discussed elsewhere in this guideline
(Section 4), despite promising pilot study ﬁndings, fenoldo-
pam was ultimately found to be ineffective for the prevention
of CI-AKI,220 and as a potent antihypertensive (the only
fenoldapam carries a
approved indication for the drug),
signiﬁcant risk of hypotension.

Fenoldopam mesylate has also been studied for early
treatment of AKI. Tumlin et al.,221 conducted a randomized,
fenoldopam
trial of
placebo-controlled pilot
mesylate in ICU patients with early AKI and found no
beneﬁt, though they did show a trend towards lower 21-day
mortality and decreased need for dialysis in fenoldopam-
treated patients (11% difference in dialysis-free survival).
In secondary analyses, fenoldopam tended to reduce the

low-dose

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

51

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

Figure 12 | Effect of low-dose dopamine on need for RRT. Reprinted from Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS et al. Meta-analysis:
low-dose dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510–524
with permission from American College of Physicians212; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/142/7/510.full

primary end-point in patients without diabetes and post-
operative cardiothoracic surgery patients with early ATN.

Brienza et al.,222 conducted a prospective, multicenter,
RCT of fenoldopam therapy for early AKI in critically ill
patients. The study included hemodynamically stable adults
with renal dysfunction. This 100- subject study compared 4-
day infusions of fenoldopam (0.1 mg/kg/min) or dopamine
(2 mg/kg/min); there was no placebo arm. The primary end-
point of the study was a between-group comparison of the
maximum change of SCr over time during the 4-day study
period. The peak SCr values and maximum increments
during the study did not differ between the fenoldopam and
dopamine groups; however, in the fenoldopam group at the
end of infusion, SCr had decreased by 0.29 ± 0.77 mg/dl
(25.6 ± 68.1 mmol/l), a value signiﬁcantly different from the
dopamine group (0.09 ± 0.94 mg/dl [7.96 ± 83.1 mmol/l];
P ¼ 0.05). Also, the maximum decreases of SCr levels from
study entry were signiﬁcantly larger in the fenoldopam
group. There was no difference in heart rate, blood pressure,
incidence of hypotension, or urinary output (apart from a
transiently higher value within the ﬁrst study day in the
dopamine group). The authors concluded that, for critically
ill patients with impaired renal
function, a continuous
infusion of fenoldopam 0.1 mg/kg/min improves renal func-
tion when compared to renal-dose dopamine, without
signiﬁcant adverse effects. The study has, however, a number
of deﬁciencies,
including the lack of a true control,
unblinding of the investigators, and an unorthodox AKI
deﬁnition, among other limitations, but taken together with

other positive trends in the literature, these results add to the
discourse around fenoldopam’s use to treat early AKI in
critically ill patients. Similarly, Landoni et al.,223 in a recently
published meta-analysis found that fenoldopam decreased
the risk of requiring acute RRT and resulted in a lower all-
cause, in-hospital mortality (15.1%) compared to controls
(18.9%; OR 0.64; 95% CI 0.4–0.91), along with a non-
signiﬁcant trend towards more hypotension or pressor use in
the fenoldopam group.

Our analysis revealed three suitable prophylactic studies of
adequate size and study design (Suppl Tables 5 and 6) that
reported AKI incidence in patients randomized to fenoldo-
pam (n ¼ 1790) vs. placebo (n ¼ 1839). The pooled RR and
95% CI was 0.96 (0.76–1.2), P ¼ NS. Only one study reported
mortality (8-day) in sepsis patients randomized to fenoldo-
pam (35%, n ¼ 150) vs. placebo (44%, n ¼ 150), with a RR of
0.79 (95% CI 0.59–1.05; P ¼ 0.1).

In our analysis of the two suitable studies of fenoldopam
therapy for AKI, only one study221
reported (21-day)
mortality in critically ill patients with early AKI randomized
to fenoldopam (11/80; 13.8%) vs. placebo (n ¼ 19/75, 25.3%;
P ¼ 0.068) (Suppl Tables 7 and 8). The other study222
reported the change in renal
function in AKI patients
randomized to fenoldopam (n ¼ 50) vs. dopamine (n ¼ 50),
deﬁned by the absolute SCr change between the beginning
and end of the study drug infusion and maximum decrease
from study entry, which were signiﬁcantly larger in the
fenoldopam group with a pooled RR of 0.96 (95% CI
0.76–1.2; P ¼ NS). These two studies reported new RRT

52

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

incidence in patients with AKI randomized to fenoldopam
(n ¼ 130) vs. placebo (n ¼ 125). In the study by Tumlin et al.,
no difference in requirement of RRT was found (with
fenoldopam, 13 of 80 patients; 16.25%); with placebo (19 of
75 patients; 25.3%; P ¼ 0.163). Requirement of RRT was very
rare in the study of Brienza et al., and was prescribed in a
total of only ﬁve patients; three in the dopamine group and
two in fenoldopam group (P ¼ NS). Overall, no data from
adequately powered multicenter trials with clinically sig-
niﬁcant end-points and adequate safety are available to
recommend fenoldopam to either prevent or treat AKI. The
guideline recommendation against using fenoldopam places a
high value on avoiding potential hypotension and harm
this vasodilator in high-risk
associated with the use of
perioperative and ICU patients, and a low value on potential
beneﬁt, which is currently only suggested by relatively low-
quality single-center trials.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K While randomized trials of fenoldopam to treat AKI in a
variety of settings (critical
illness, high-risk surgery—
the
particular cardiac,
pharmacologic strategy of renal vasodilatation has not
been successful to date and different approaches are likely
needed.

sepsis) may be

considered,

NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES FOR THE PREVENTION OR
TREATMENT OF AKI
in
Several natriuretic peptides are in clinical use or
failure
development
(CHF) or renal dysfunction, and could potentially be useful
to prevent or treat AKI.

treatment of congestive heart

for

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a 28-amino-acid pep-
tide with diuretic, natriuretic, and vasodilatory activity.224
ANP is mainly produced in atrial myocytes, and the rate of
release from the atrium increases in response to atrial
stretch.225 Early animal studies showed that ANP decreases
preglomerular vascular resistance and increases postglomer-
ular vascular resistance, leading to increased GFR.226 It also
inhibits renal tubular sodium reabsorption. Increases in GFR
and diuresis have also been conﬁrmed in clinical studies.227 It
for
could thus be expected that ANP might be useful
treatment of AKI, and several RCTs have been conducted to
test this hypothesis.

3.5.3: We suggest not using atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) to prevent (2C) or treat (2B) AKI.

RATIONALE
There have been several negative studies of prophylactic ANP
therapy; for example, ANP failed in two studies to prevent
primary renal transplant dysfunction228,229 and ANP pro-
phylaxis also failed to prevent CI-AKI.230 Based on the
positive results of small clinical studies using ANP to treat
AKI, a randomized placebo-controlled trial in 504 critically

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

ill patients with AKI was conducted.231 Patients received 24-
hour i.v. infusion of either ANP (0.2 mg/kg/min) or placebo.
The primary outcome was dialysis-free survival for 21 days
after treatment. Despite the large size of the trial, ANP
administration had no effect on 21-day dialysis-free survival,
mortality, or change in plasma creatinine concentration. Of
note, the mean SCr at enrollment (anaritide group: 4.4 mg/dl
[389 mmol/l]; placebo group: 5.0 mg/dl [442 mmol/l]) in this
study conﬁrms that intervention in this trial was extremely
late in the course of AKI. In subgroup analysis, dialysis-free
survival was higher in the treatment group for patients with
oliguria (o400 ml/d; ANP 27%, placebo 7%, P ¼ 0.008). A
subsequent trial in 222 patients with oliguric renal failure,
however, failed to demonstrate any beneﬁt of ANP.232 The
dose and duration of ANP treatment and primary outcome
were the same as the previous study. The dose of ANP might
have been too high (0.2 mg/kg/min)
in both studies:
hypotension (systolic blood pressure o90 mm Hg) occurred
more frequently in the ANP groups of both trials (in the ﬁrst
study, 46% vs. 18%, Po0.001; and in the second study, 97%
vs. 58%, Po0.001), and this may have negated any potential
beneﬁt of renal vasodilation in these patients. In addition to
an excessive dose, the failure of these large studies has also
been attributed in subsequent analyses to the late initiation of
the drug to patients with severe AKI and an inadequate
duration of infusion (only 24 hours).

A promising, but underpowered, study of ANP to treat
AKI
immediately following cardiac surgery showed a
decreased rate of postoperative RRT compared to placebo-
treated patients.233 In this study, Sward et al. randomized 61
patients with AKI following cardiac surgery (deﬁned as a SCr
increase X50% from a baseline o1.8 mg/dl [o159 mmol/l])
to receive infusion of ANP or placebo until the SCr decreased
below the baseline value at enrollment, the patient died, or
one of four prespeciﬁed dialysis criteria was reached. Of note,
all patients received infusions of furosemide (20–40 mg/h)
and oliguria, deﬁned as a urine output p0.5 ml/kg/h for 3
hours, was an exclusion criterion and an automatic dialysis
indication. The primary end-point was the rate of dialysis
within 21 days of enrollment. CrCl was signiﬁcantly higher
on the third study day in ANP-treated subjects (P ¼ 0.04).
Using prespeciﬁed dialysis criteria, 21% of patients in the
ANP group and 47% in the placebo group were dialyzed
within 21 days (hazard ratio [HR] 0.28; 95% CI 0.10–0.73;
P ¼ 0.009). The combined secondary end-point of death-or-
dialysis was similarly improved in the ANP group (28%)
compared to placebo (57%; HR 0.35; 95% CI 0.14–0.82;
P ¼ 0.017). The incidence of hypotension during the ﬁrst 24
hours was 59% in the ANP group and 52% in controls
(P ¼ NS).

It is intriguing to speculate on the potential reasons for the
positive outcome of this trial, compared to larger prior
studies of ANP for AKI prevention and therapy. Apart from
the possibility that this is a false-positive, underpowered
study, possible explanations include the use of ANP earlier in
the course of AKI (the mean SCr in the prior ANP studies

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

53

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

was much higher), and at lower doses (50 ng/kg/min vs.
200 ng/kg/min) that avoided the signiﬁcant rate of hypoten-
sion observed in prior trials. The use of prespeciﬁed dialysis
criteria was another strength of this trial. More recently,
Sward et al.,234 compared the renal hemodynamic effects
of ANP and furosemide in 19 mechanically ventilated
post–cardiac surgery patients with normal renal function,
measuring renal blood ﬂow, GFR, and renal oxygen
extraction. ANP infusion (25–50 ng/kg/min) increased GFR,
ﬁltration fraction, fractional excretion of sodium, and urine
output, accompanied by a 9% increase in tubular sodium
absorption and a 26% increase in renal oxygen consumption.
Furosemide infusion (0.5 mg/kg/h) increased urine output
10-fold and fractional excretion of sodium 15-fold, while
decreasing tubular sodium absorption by 28% and lowering
renal oxygen consumption by 23%. Furosemide also lowered
GFR by 12% and ﬁltration fraction by 7%. Thus, although
the balance of renal hemodynamic and tubular effects of the
two drugs appears to favor furosemide for improving renal
oxygen delivery-consumption balance, ANP is more likely to
acutely improve GFR. One might speculate that the use of
furosemide infusion in all of the subjects in the successful
ANP trial may have provided an important protection
against renal ischemia by reducing tubular sodium absorp-
tion and associated oxygen consumption, despite an increase
in GFR in the ANP group. A larger prospective trial of ANP
to improve dialysis-free survival in this setting is required,
perhaps with and without furosemide infusion.

Pooled analysis of 11 studies involving 818 participants in
the prevention cohort showed a trend toward reduction in
the need for RRT in the ANP group (OR 0.45; 95% CI
0.21–0.99; P ¼ 0.05). Restricting the analysis to studies that
used low-dose ANP preparations did not change the overall
effect for this outcome. There was no signiﬁcant difference
noted between the ANP and control groups for mortality in
the prevention category (OR 0.67; 95% CI 0.19–2.35;
P ¼ 0.53), and this effect was unchanged by restricting the
analysis to studies that used low-dose ANP preparations.
However, these studies were generally of poor quality, several
without reported baseline SCr values or clear deﬁnitions of
AKI or RRT indications (Suppl Tables 10 and 11), and only
one was of adequate quality.

the eight

treatment studies,

Nigwekar et al., recently conducted a systematic review
and meta-analysis of ANP for management of AKI.235 They
found 19 relevant studies, among which 11 studies were for
prevention and eight were for treatment of AKI. Pooled
involving 1043
analysis of
participants, did not show signiﬁcant difference for RRT
requirement between the ANP and control groups (OR 0.59;
95% CI 0.32–1.08; P ¼ 0.12). There was also no signiﬁcant
difference for mortality (OR 1.01; 95% CI 0.72–1.43;
P ¼ 0.89). However,
low-dose ANP preparations were
associated with signiﬁcant reduction in RRT requirement
(OR 0.34; 95% CI 0.12–0.96; P ¼ 0.04). The incidence of
hypotension was not different between the ANP and control
groups for low-dose studies (OR 1.55; 95% CI 0.84–2.87),

whereas it was signiﬁcantly higher in the ANP group in the
high-dose ANP studies (OR 4.13; 95% CI 1.38–12.41).
Finally, a pooled analysis of studies that examined oliguric
AKI did not show any signiﬁcant beneﬁt from ANP for RRT
requirement (OR 0.46; 95% CI 0.19–1.12; P ¼ 0.09) or
mortality (OR 0.94; 95% CI 0.62–1.43; P ¼ 0.79). Only two
of the treatment studies included in the Nigwekar analy-
sis231,232 were of adequate size and quality to meet the criteria
for our systematic review (Suppl Tables 12 and 13), which
found no signiﬁcant inconsistencies in the ﬁndings of both
trials that (combined) included 720 subjects (351 treated
with ANP) (Suppl Table 12). Thus, although subset analyses
separating low-dose from high-dose ANP trials suggest
the literature
potential beneﬁts,
suggests no beneﬁt of ANP therapy for AKI. Therefore, the
Work Group suggests that these agents not be used to prevent
or treat AKI. This conclusion is based on placing a high value
on avoiding potential hypotension and harm associated with
the use of a vasodilator in high-risk perioperative and ICU
patients, and a low value on potential beneﬁt which is
supported by relatively low-quality evidence from retro-
spective subset analyses from negative multicenter trials.

the preponderance of

Urodilatin is another natriuretic peptide that is produced
by renal tubular cells, and was found to have the same renal
hemodynamic effect as ANP without systemic hypotensive
effects.236 Limited data suggest that urodilatin improves the
course of established postoperative AKI.237 Fifty-one patients
who received orthotopic heart transplants received urodilatin
(6–20 ng/kg/min) up to 96 hours postoperatively. AKI
occurred in 6% of these patients, compared to 20% in a
historical control group that did not receive urodilatin.237
However, in another small, placebo-controlled study of 24
patients who underwent orthotopic heart transplants, the
incidence of AKI was unchanged,238 although duration of
signiﬁcantly shorter and the
hemoﬁltration (HF) was
frequency of intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) less in those
who received urodilatin. Taken together, these data suggest
that natriuretic peptides may have a role in the therapy of
early AKI following cardiac surgery, but further prospective
trials are needed to conﬁrm this potential indication.

Nesiritide (brain natriuretic peptide) is the latest natriuretic
peptide introduced for clinical use, and is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) only for the therapy
of acute, decompensated CHF. Meta-analysis of outcome
data from these and some other nesiritide CHF trials
has generated some controversy.239–241 Sackner-Bernstein
et al.,239 analyzed mortality data from 12 randomized trials;
in three trials that provided 30-day mortality data, they
found a trend towards an increased risk of death in nesiritide-
treated subjects. In another meta-analysis of ﬁve randomized
included 1269 subjects,240 the same investi-
trials
gators also found that there was a relationship between
nesiritide use and worsening renal
function, deﬁned as
a SCr increase 40.5 mg/dl (444.2 mmol/l). Nesiritide doses
p0.03 mg/kg/min signiﬁcantly increased the risk of renal
dysfunction compared to non–inotrope-based controls or

that

54

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

compared to all control groups (including inotropes). Even
at doses p0.015 mg/kg/min, nesiritide was associated with
increased renal dysfunction compared to controls. There was
no difference in dialysis rates between the groups. Another
retrospective study determined independent risk factors for
60-day mortality by multivariate analysis in a cohort of 682
elderly heart-failure patients treated with nesiritide vs. those
who were not.242 When patients were stratiﬁed according to
nesiritide usage, AKI emerged as an independent risk factor
for mortality only among patients who received the drug.
Strikingly, among these heart-failure patients who developed
AKI, nesiritide usage emerged as the only independent
predictor of mortality.

The manufacturers of nesiritide convened an expert panel,
which concluded that further trial data are needed to discern
the effects of nesiritide therapy on renal function and survival
in patients with decompensated CHF. The panel also re-
emphasized that the indication for nesiritide therapy is acute
decompensated CHF, not chronic intermittent therapy or
other uses, and in particular noted that the drug should not
be used to improve renal function or in place of diuretic
therapy in CHF patients, as there is no proof of the utility of
the drug for these purposes. A 7000-patient multicenter RCT
in acute decompensated heart failure is currently in progress
to determine the clinical effectiveness of nesiritide therapy for
failure (the Acute Study of
acute decompensated heart
Clinical Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Decompensated Heart
Failure; Clinicaltrials.gov identiﬁer NCT00475852). Mean-
while, nesiritide is approved for treatment of symptomatic
acute decompensated heart failure.

Uncontrolled studies using nesiritide for cardiovascular
support of patients with CHF undergoing cardiac surgery
have suggested beneﬁcial effects on renal function. Mentzer
et al.,243 conducted a 303-patient, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind trial of a 24- to 96-hour infusion of 0.01 mg/kg/
min of nesiritide vs. placebo in patients with chronic left
ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction p40%) under-
going cardiac surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass. The
Nesiritide Administered Peri-Anesthesia in Patients Under-
going Cardiac Surgery trial was an exploratory, safety-
oriented study with ﬁve primary end-points, including three
renal end-points and two hemodynamic end-points. There
were no signiﬁcant differences between the groups in base-
line patient characteristics; SCr values were B1.1 mg/dl
(97.2 mmol/l), with eGFR B80 ml/min per 1.73 m2. The
mean duration of study drug infusion was B40 hours in
both groups. Perioperative renal function quantiﬁed by the
three renal primary end-points was better in the nesiritide
group (peak SCr increase of 0.15 mg/dl [13.3 mmol/l] vs.
placebo group 0.34 mg/dl [30.1 mmol/l]; Po0.001; eGFR
decrease of (cid:3)10.2 ml/min per 1.73 m2 vs. placebo (cid:3)17.8 ml/
min per 1.73 m2, P ¼ 0.001; initial 24-hour urinary output
2.9 ± 1.2 l vs. placebo 2.3 ± 1 l; Po0.001). The RR of AKI in
the nesiritide group compared to placebo was 0.58
(0.27–1.21); the 180-day mortality was also reduced in the
nesiritide group (RR 0.48 [0.22–1.05]; P ¼ 0.046) (Suppl

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

Table 9). These trends were more pronounced in the small,
62-patient subset with preoperative SCr values 41.2 mg/dl
(4106 mmol/l). Although SCr increased postoperatively in
both groups, it returned to baseline within 12 hours in the
nesiritide group, and remained elevated throughout hospi-
talization in the placebo group. Use of vasoactive drugs and
hemodynamic parameters did not differ signiﬁcantly between
the groups. Adverse events also were similar between the
groups, as was 30-day and 180-day mortality (although
capture of mortality data was incomplete). Thus, it appears
that administration of nesiritide infusion during and after
cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass in patients
with preoperative left ventricular dysfunction has favorable
short-term effects on renal function, with short-term adverse
effects comparable to placebo infusion; however, as men-
tioned earlier, this is not an FDA-approved indication for this
drug. It is interesting to speculate that, based upon these
results, any renoprotective effect of this vasoactive drug
during and after cardiopulmonary bypass is not mediated by
effects on systemic perfusion (similar in both groups), but
rather suggesting an effect on regional perfusion or a
these promising
pleiotropic phenomenon. Unfortunately,
pilot study ﬁndings have not been followed up with a
conﬁrmatory prospective clinical trial.

A prospective, randomized clinical trial (the Nesiritide
Study), found no beneﬁt of nesiritide for 21-day dialysis and/
or death in patients undergoing high-risk cardiovascular
surgery.244 However, the study did demonstrate that the
prophylactic use of nesiritide was associated with reduced
incidence of AKI, the latter deﬁned by the AKIN Group, in
the immediate postoperative period (nesiritide 6.6% vs.
placebo 28.5%, P ¼ 0.004). Recently, Lingegowda et al.245
investigated whether the observed renal beneﬁts of nesiritide
had any long-term impact on cumulative patient survival and
renal outcomes. Data on all 94 patients from the Nesiritide
Study were obtained with a mean follow-up period of 20.8 ±
10.4 months. No differences in cumulative survival between
the groups were noted, but patients with in-hospital
incidence of AKI had a higher rate of mortality than those
with no AKI (41.4% vs. 10.7%; P ¼ 0.002). It seemed, thus,
that the possible renoprotection provided by nesiritide in the
immediate postoperative period was not associated with
improved long-term survival in patients undergoing high-
risk cardiovascular surgery.

In summary, although evidence from a variety of small
studies suggests the potential for therapy with natriuretic
peptides to be useful for the prevention or treatment of AKI
in a variety of settings, there are no deﬁnitive trials to support
the use of ANP, BNP, or nesiritide for these purposes. Thus,
the Work Group suggests that these agents not be used for
prevention or treatment of AKI.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K We recommend further trials of ANP at doses below
0.1 mg/kg/min, for the prevention or treatment of AKI.
There is a possibility that ANP might be effective if it is

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

55

c h a p t e r 3 . 5

given at a lower dose (0.01–0.05 mg/kg/min) in patients
prophylactically or with early AKI, and during a longer
period than in previous large studies.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 4: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dopamine vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary Table 5: Evidence profile of RCTs examining fenoldo-
pam vs. control for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 6: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of fenoldopam for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 7: Evidence profile of RCTs of fenoldopam vs.
placebo for the treatment of AKI.

Supplementary Table 8: Summary table of RCTs of examining the
effect of fenoldopam for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary Table 9: Summary table of RCTs of nesiritide vs. control
for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 10: Evidence profile of RCTs examining anaritide
vs. control for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 11: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of anaritide vs. control for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 12: Evidence profile of RCTs examining anaritide
vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary Table 13: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of ANP vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

56

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 6

Chapter 3.6: Growth factor intervention

Recovery from AKI involves increased expression of various
growth factors acting via autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine
mechanisms. The advent of recombinant growth factors has
stimulated research exploring their therapeutic potential
in AKI. Experimental studies have yielded promising results
with individual growth factors246
including insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), hepatic growth factor, and, more
recently, erythropoietin. The physiological basis for the use of
erythropoietin in the prevention of AKI has recently been
described.247

3.6.1: We recommend not using recombinant human

(rh)IGF-1 to prevent or treat AKI. (1B)

RATIONALE
IGF-1 is a peptide with renal vasodilatory, mitogenic and
anabolic properties. rhIGF-1 has been demonstrated to
accelerate the recovery of renal function in several animal
models of AKI.248–251 Three double-blind, placebo-controlled
RCTs have addressed the usefulness of IGF-1 in adults
with imminent or established AKI.252–254 Franklin et al.,252
administered rhIGF-1 every 12 hours for 3 days post-
operatively to 54 patients undergoing abdominal aortic
surgery. While no patient developed ARF, a smaller propor-
tion of IGF-1–treated patients showed a decline in GFR as
compared to the placebo group (22% vs. 33%). Hladunewich
et al.,254 administered rhIGF-1 or placebo in 43 patients
undergoing cadaveric renal transplantation at high risk of
delayed graft function. Treatment was started within 5 hours
of transplantation and continued for 6 days. On day 7,
neither inulin clearance, nor urine ﬂow or fractional sodium
excretion differed between the treatment arms, nor did
the nadir SCr after 6 weeks or the proportion of patients
require post-transplantation dialysis. Hirschberg et al.,253
treated 72 patients suffering from AKI mainly due to sepsis or
hemodynamic shock with either rhIGF-1 or placebo for a
mean of 10.6 days. No differences were observed with respect
to changes in GFR, urine output, need for RRT, and
mortality. Hence, despite its therapeutic efﬁcacy in various
animal models of ARF, rhIGF-1 largely failed to prevent
or accelerate recovery from established AKI in humans.
this treatment should be
In addition,
mentioned.

the high cost of

Based on an analysis of the three RCTs with rhIGF-1 that
are currently available and which were overall negative or at

least equivocal, and considering that there is no beneﬁt and
the concern over potential harm and cost associated with this
drug, the Work Group recommends against its use in patients
with AKI.

Erythropoietin
A small pilot trial evaluated the effectiveness of erythro-
poietin in the prevention of AKI after elective coronary
artery bypass graft.255 Patients received either 300 U/kg of
erythropoietin or saline i.v. before surgery. AKI was deﬁned
as a 50% increase in SCr levels over baseline within the
ﬁrst ﬁve postoperative days. Of 71 patients, 13 developed
postoperative AKI: three of the 36 patients in the erythro-
poietin group (8%) and 10 of the 35 patients in the placebo
group (29%; P ¼ 0.035). The increase in postoperative SCr
concentration and the decline in postoperative eGFR were
signiﬁcantly lower in the erythropoietin group than in the
placebo group.

More recently, Endre et al.,256 performed a pros-
pective randomized trial with erythropoietin in the primary
prevention of AKI in ICU patients at risk for AKI (Suppl
Table 14). As a guide for choosing the patients for treatment
the urinary levels of two biomarkers, the proximal tubular
brush border enzymes c-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline
phosphatase were measured. Randomization to either
placebo or two doses of erythropoietin was triggered by an
increase in the biomarker concentration product to levels
above 46.3. The primary outcome was the relative average
SCr increase from baseline over 4–7 days. The triggering
biomarker concentration product
selected patients with
more severe illness and at greater risk of AKI, dialysis,
or death; however,
the urinary marker elevations were
transient. The use of the biomarkers allowed randomization
within an average of 3.5 hours of a positive sample. There
was no difference in the incidence of erythropoietin-speciﬁc
adverse events; however,
there was also no difference
in the primary outcome between the placebo and treatment
groups.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Recent animal studies suggest a potential clinical benefit
of erythropoietin in AKI. In various rodent models of
AKI, erythropoietin consistently improved functional
recovery. The renoprotective action of erythropoietin
may be related to pleomorphic properties including
antiapoptotic and antioxidative effects, stimulation of cell

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

57

c h a p t e r 3 . 6

proliferation, and stem-cell mobilization.247 Although
one recent RCT in the prevention of human AKI was
negative, the usefulness of erythropoietin in human AKI
should be further tested in RCTs.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 14: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of erythropoietin vs. placebo for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

58

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 7

Chapter 3.7: Adenosine receptor antagonists

The activation of tubuloglomerular feedback in response to
elevated luminal chloride concentrations in the distal renal
tubules is an early event in ischemic AKI. Adenosine released
as part of the tubuloglomerular feedback loop binds to
glomerular adenosine A1 receptor, causing vasoconstriction
of the afferent arteriole, decreased renal blood ﬂow and GFR,
and sodium and water retention. This well-known role of
adenosine in this phenomenon has stimulated a body of
research seeking to prevent or treat AKI with adenosine
receptor antagonists, primarily in three clinical syndromes
with increased risk of AKI: perinatal asphyxia, radiocontrast
exposure, and cardiorenal
syndrome. Theophylline is a
nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist.

3.7.1: We suggest that a single dose of theophylline may
be given in neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia,
who are at high risk of AKI. (2B)

RATIONALE
AKI occurs in 60% of neonates suffering from perinatal
asphyxia.257 Experimental studies indicated an important role
of adenosine-mediated vasoconstriction in neonatal kidneys
exposed to normocapnic hypoxemia.258 A potential renoprotec-
tive effect of theophylline in perinatal asphyxia has been assessed
in three randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials,259–261
including a total of 171 term neonates. Theophylline was
uniformly administered in the ﬁrst hour of life as a single i.v.
bolus at a dose of 5 mg/kg259,261 or 8 mg/kg.260 The three studies
all observed signiﬁcantly higher GFR, higher urine output with
more negative ﬂuid balance, and lower urinary b2-microglobu-
lin excretion, with theophylline as compared to placebo during
the ﬁrst 3–5 days of life. In each study, theophylline treatment
was associated with a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of severe renal
dysfunction (17–25% vs. 55–60% in placebo group, RR
0.3–0.41). The beneﬁcial effect was selective for kidney function,
whereas the incidence of central nervous system, cardiac,
pulmonary, and gastrointestinal complications was unaltered.
Patient survival was not affected by treatment. In line with these
studies in mature neonates, a similar improvement of GFR and
urine output was observed during the ﬁrst 2 days of life by
administration of 1 mg/kg theophylline vs. placebo in 50 very
preterm neonates with respiratory distress syndrome.262 The
further evolution of renal function was followed throughout the
ﬁrst year of life by Bhat et al.,260 who found equally normal
glomerular and tubular function in both groups from 6 weeks of
age onward. Hence, while theophylline clearly improves renal
function in the ﬁrst week of life in postasphyctic neonates, the
overall beneﬁt from this intervention in neonatal intensive care

is less evident in view of the complete long-term recovery of
renal function in the placebo-treated controls and the absence
of an effect on patient survival.

In recent years, the advent of selective adenosine A1
receptor antagonists has prompted the conduct of some
interesting clinical trials, which to date have focused on the
prevention and treatment of cardiorenal syndrome. In a
double-blind placebo-controlled trial of 63 patients with
CHF, single doses of the adenosine A1 antagonist BG9719
had a marked stimulatory effect on diuresis and increased
GFR.263 When coadministered with furosemide, BG9719
showed a synergistic diuretic effect and prevented the
decrease in GFR associated with the loop diuretic.

Rolofylline, another adenosine A1 receptor antagonist,
was tested in two double-blind placebo-controlled RCTs in
patients with acute decompensated heart failure. In the ﬁrst
study,
rolofylline or placebo was administered either
concomitantly with furosemide for 3 days (146 patients), or
as a single infusion in 35 diuretic resistant patients.264 In both
substudies, rolofylline improved urine output and CrCl
compared to placebo. The second trial involved 301 patients
hospitalized for acute heart failure with renal impairment
three doses of
who received either placebo or one of
rolofylline for 3 days.265 Rolofylline administration dose-
dependently attenuated the rise in SCr observed in the
placebo group within 14 days, and tended to reduce 60-day
mortality or readmission for cardiovascular or renal causes.
Three pivotal phase III trials in a total of 2500 patients
were recently completed, aiming to corroborate the reno-
protective effects of rolofylline in patients with cardiorenal
syndrome, and to establish drug safety. The ﬁnal results of the
PROTECT trial have recently been published.266 Rolofylline,
as compared to placebo, did not provide a beneﬁt with
respect to the three primary end-points: survival, heart-
failure status, and changes in renal function. Persistent renal
impairment developed in 15.0% of patients in the rolofylline
group and in 13.7% of patients in the placebo group
(P ¼ 0.44). By 60 days, death or readmission for cardiovas-
cular or renal causes had occurred in similar proportions of
patients assigned to rolofylline and placebo (30.7% and
31.9%,
rates were
similar overall; however, only patients in the rolofylline
group had seizures, a known potential adverse effect of
A1-receptor antagonists. Thus, rolofylline does not appear to
be effective for treatment of cardiorenal AKI.

respectively; P ¼ 0.86). Adverse-event

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K It appears that if there are benefits of using adeno-
sine receptor antagonists to decrease tubuloglomerular

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

59

c h a p t e r 3 . 7

feedback-mediated vasoconstriction and increase renal
blood flow and GFR in AKI, they may be limited to very
specific populations (e. g., asphyctic neonates). These
benefits must be balanced against potential adverse
drug effects: both renal (increased renal blood flow and

distal salt delivery might harmfully increase tubular
oxygen consumption in the presence of ATN), and
nonrenal (lower seizure threshold). Thus, further studies
are still needed to clarify the role for theophylline in
neonates.

60

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 8

Chapter 3.8: Prevention of aminoglycoside- and
amphotericin-related AKI

AMINOGLYCOSIDE NEPHROTOXICITY
Aminoglycoside antimicrobial agents are highly potent,
bactericidal antibiotics effective against multiple Gram-
negative, and selected Gram-positive bacterial pathogens
when administered with beta-lactams and other cell-wall
active antimicrobial agents.267–269 Progressive antimicrobial
resistance to other antimicrobial agents and lack of new
alternatives to aminoglycoside antibiotics have caused a
recent increase in their use. Aminoglycosides have many
including their remarkable stability,
favorable attributes,
predictable pharmacokinetics,
immuno-
low incidence of
logically mediated side-effects, and lack of hematologic or
hepatic toxicity. Nephrotoxicity, and to a lesser degree
ototoxicity and neuromuscular blockade, continue to be
the major dose-limiting toxicities of the aminoglycosides.
Careful dosing and therapeutic drug monitoring of amino-
glycosides using pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
principles can mitigate the risk of AKI with these clinically
useful, yet nephrotoxic antibiotics.270 A number of meta-
analyses and treatment guidelines have been published
the risk of AKI attributable to
recently indicating that
aminoglycosides is sufﬁciently frequent that they should no
longer be added to other standard antimicrobial agents for
the empirical or directed treatment of a number of severe
Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacterial infections.271–276
The intrinsic risk of AKI with the administration of
aminoglycosides has led some authors to call for elimination
of aminoglycosides as a therapeutic option in current clinical
management of infectious diseases.277 The anticipated demise
of aminoglycosides from our therapeutic armamentarium
has not occurred, however, in light of recent developments
with progressive antimicrobial resistance to beta-lactams,
quinolones, and a number of other classes of antimicrobial
agents.

3.8.1: We suggest not using aminoglycosides for the treat-
ment of infections unless no suitable, less nephro-
toxic, therapeutic alternatives are available. (2A)

RATIONALE
Aminoglycosides exhibit a number of favorable pharmaco-
kinetic and pharmacodynamic advantages, but a major dose-
limiting toxicity of the aminoglycosides remains the risk
of drug-induced AKI.270 The risk of AKI attributable to
aminoglycosides is sufﬁciently high (up to 25% in some
series, depending upon the deﬁnition of AKI used and the

population studied)271–276,278 that they should no longer be
used for standard empirical or directed treatment, unless no
other suitable alternatives exist. The intrinsic risk of AKI with
the administration of aminoglycosides has led some authors
to recommend the elimination of aminoglycosides as a
clinical treatment option.277 Certainly their use should be
restricted to treat severe infections where aminoglycosides are
the best, or only, therapeutic option.

Aminoglycosides should be used for as short a period of
time as possible. Repeated administration of aminoglycosides
over several days or weeks can result in accumulation of
aminoglycosides within the renal
interstitium and within
the tubular epithelial cells.279 This can result in a higher
incidence of nephrotoxicity with repeated exposure to
aminoglycosides over time. Older patients (465 years),
patients with pre-existing renal dysfunction, and septic
patients with intravascular volume depletion and rapid
alterations in ﬂuid dynamics may be at greater risk for
aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity. Other risk factors for ami-
noglycoside-induced AKI are diabetes mellitus, concomitant
use of other nephrotoxic drugs, prolonged use, excessive
blood levels, or repeated exposure to separate courses of
aminoglycoside therapy over a short time interval.267–279

3.8.2: We suggest that, in patients with normal kidney
function in steady state, aminoglycosides are
administered as a single dose daily rather than
multiple-dose daily treatment regimens. (2B)

RATIONALE
Aminoglycoside demonstrates concentration-dependent bac-
tericidal activity, with a prolonged ‘‘postantibiotic effect’’,
thereby permitting extended interval dosing in an effort to
optimize efﬁcacy and minimize toxicity. This dosing strategy
and a number of other measures to limit aminoglycoside
uptake in renal tubular cells, prevent apoptosis, limit oxygen
injury, and protect mitochondrial function have all been
recommended to minimize the risk of AKI and preserve
the therapeutic value of
these important antimicrobial
agents.280–296 Single-dose daily or extended-interval dosing
theoretical and
of aminoglycosides offer a number of
practical advantages to maintain antimicrobial activity while
limiting possible nephrotoxicity. This
and
inexpensive aminoglycoside dosing strategy has been widely
adopted at many centers when using this potentially toxic, yet
highly effective, class of antibiotics.

convenient

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

61

c h a p t e r 3 . 8

When feasible in patients with normal and stable kidney
function, once-daily (often referred to as extended-interval)
dosing of aminoglycosides should be used to limit amino-
glycoside nephrotoxicity. The pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic properties of aminoglycosides favor high dosing
strategies with extended intervals between doses. The key
therapeutic parameter for efﬁcacy is peak blood level divided
by minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the infecting
to obtain 410-fold
organism (Cmax/MIC) in an effort
Cmax/MIC. Aminoglycosides induce a prolonged postanti-
biotic effect (inhibition of bacterial growth after blood levels
have fallen below the MIC of the organism). The length of the
postantibiotic effect is directly related to the peak blood
levels. These pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameters
make single-dose daily strategies an attractive option when
using aminoglycosides.

The nephrotoxicity of aminoglycosides has been very well
studied280–282,284–293,295,296 and is primarily related to uptake
of aminoglycosides through a receptor known as megalin,
expressed on epithelial cells along the proximal convoluted
tubule.293 Aminoglycosides are concentrated in the proximal
convoluted tubules, where they bind avidly to polyanionic,
phospholipid-containing membranes. Aminoglycosides in-
duce myeloid body formation,
impair protein synthesis,
degrade mitochondrial function, and culminate in apoptosis
and eventual necrosis of renal tubular epithelial cells. Direct
glomerular injury can occur288 but is usually a secondary
consequence of aminoglycoside-induced tubular impairment.
As the receptor uptake of aminoglycosides is saturable, high-
level intermittent doses of aminoglycosides actually reduced
the daily uptake and accumulation of aminoglycosides when
compared to multiple-daily dosing strategies. This should
limit the risk of nephrotoxicity, at least in principle.

The potential efﬁcacy of single-dose daily regimens (or
other extended dosing treatment programs) of aminoglyco-
sides vs. multiple-daily dosing strategies has been extensively
studied in numerous controlled and uncontrolled clinical
studies over many years297–308, and the subject has been the
formal meta-analyses.309–314 These
focus of a number of
investigations include pediatric populations, elderly popula-
tions, empirical therapy, targeted therapy, treatment directed
towards Gram-negative bacterial pathogens and Gram-
positive bacterial pathogens.

The cumulative results of this evidence-based review and
numerous meta-analyses indicate that once-daily dosing
strategies generally tend to result in less AKI when compared
to multiple-dose dosing strategies, although the beneﬁt
accrued by the single-daily dose strategy is modest and
inconsistent across a number of these studies. For this reason,
a level 2 recommendation is suggested in support of the
use of single-daily dose strategies over multiple-dose daily
strategies. It should be noted that multiple-daily dosing
strategies continue to be the standard of care for enterococcal
endocarditis; no detailed,
randomized trials have been
reported comparing single-daily vs. multiple-daily regimens
for enterococcal endocarditis.272,315–317

The use of single-daily dosing of aminoglycosides is
generally well-tolerated but bolus infusions of aminoglyco-
sides should be avoided. The high-dose, once-daily amino-
glycoside regimens should be administered over 60 minutes
to avoid untoward events such as neuromuscular blockade.
This
important when
patients are receiving other potential neuromuscular block-
ing agents, or have underlying disorders affecting neuro-
muscular transmission (e.g., myasthenia gravis).

recommendation is particularly

3.8.3: We recommend monitoring aminoglycoside drug
levels when treatment with multiple daily dosing is
used for more than 24 hours. (1A)

RATIONALE
Therapeutic drug monitoring has been the standard of care
when administering aminoglycosides for many years. Amino-
glycoside levels are variable among individuals, and subtle
changes in the volume distribution, renal blood ﬂow, and
ﬁltration rate can affect renal handling of aminoglycosides
and alter the risk of nephrotoxicity. For these reasons,
in combination with or
therapeutic drug monitoring,
independent from, single-dose daily treatment regimens is
recommended.318–321 When using therapeutic drug monitor-
ing in single-dose or extended-dose treatment strategies, the
Cmax should be at least 10-fold greater than the MIC of the
infecting microorganism. This Cmin (trough level) should be
undetectable by 18–24 hours
to limit accumulation of
aminoglycosides in renal tubular cells and to minimize the
risk of AKI. The usual dosing strategy for once-daily
aminoglycosides is 5 mg/kg/d for gentamicin and tobramycin
(with normal renal function); 6 mg/kg/d for netilmicin; and
15 mg/kg/d for amikacin. The multiple-dose daily regimen
for gentamicin and tobramycin is usually 1.7 mg/kg every
8 hours with peak blood levels at 8 ± 2 mg/ml (17±4 mmol/l)
and trough of 1–2 mg/ml (2–4 mmol/l). Amikacin levels with
the multiple-dose daily dosing strategy should be a peak
of 20±5 mg/ml (34±9 mmol/l) and a trough of 5–8 mg/ml
(9–14 mmol/l). We recommend therapeutic drug monitoring
when using prolonged courses of aminoglycosides to limit
the risk of nephrotoxicity when using multiple-daily dosing,
and suggest therapeutic drug monitoring when using single-
daily dosing strategies.

3.8.4: We suggest monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels
when treatment with single-daily dosing is used for
more than 48 hours. (2C)

RATIONALE
The timing of measurement of peak doses of aminoglycosides
with single-daily dosing strategies is not standardized and
remains somewhat controversial. Some investigators do not
measure therapeutic drug levels at all in patients receiving
this dosing strategy. Others recommend at least a single peak
measurement to ensure that the blood levels are 10-fold

62

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

the infecting organism. Many
greater than the MIC of
investigators recommend at least one or at least a weekly
Cmin level obtained at either 12, 18, or 24 hours after the
aminoglycoside dose.267–270 The Cmin level should be below
the limits of detection of the assay (o1 mg/ml) at these time
intervals.

Measuring aminoglycoside

levels with multiple-daily
dosing strategies have been standardized for Cmax to be
obtained 30 minutes after a 30-minute infusion, and Cmin
right before the next dose for trough levels. The aminoglyco-
sides should be administered in patients who are volume-
replete; volume depletion increases the risk of nephrotoxicity
in experimental studies and is suggested in clinical studies.
Additionally, potassium repletion has been shown experi-
mentally and clinically to diminish the risk of AKI related to
aminoglycoside administration.

Single-dose daily regimens are difﬁcult to apply in patients
with pre-existing kidney disease, and patients with vacillating
eGFR and hemodynamics, such as critically ill patients in the
ICU setting. The changing pharmacokinetics and pharma-
codynamics of antibiotics in general and aminoglycosides in
in the critically ill patient, are such that the
particular,
avoidance of single-daily dosing and application of frequent
therapeutic drug monitoring is indicated.322

3.8.5: We suggest using topical or local applications of
aminoglycosides (e.g., respiratory aerosols, instilled
antibiotic beads), rather than i.v. application, when
feasible and suitable. (2B)

instillation of aminoglycosides

RATIONALE
Local
for a variety of
indications is gaining more widespread use in a selected set
of clinical situations where aminoglycoside levels can be
concentrated at speciﬁc tissue sites. The use of aminoglyco-
side-loaded beads for the prevention and treatment of bone
and joint infections have become commonplace as a strategy
to limit nephrotoxicity, while providing antimicrobial
the tissue level.323 Local
activity of aminoglycosides at
concentrations of aminoglycoside are achieved for prolonged
periods when administered by this route. Aminoglycoside
aerosol delivery systems are now in use to provide high
intrapulmonary antibiotic levels with minimal systemic and
kidney concentrations of the antibiotic. This strategy has
been used successfully in cystic ﬁbrosis patients for the
management of difﬁcult-to-treat Gram-negative bacillary
pneumonia.324,325 However, signiﬁcant nephrotoxicity with
the use of inhaled tobramycin has been described in at least
two cases.326,327

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K No standard method exists for therapeutic drug moni-
toring of aminoglycosides by single daily dosing. Uniform
guidance, based upon carefully performed pharmaco-
kinetic/pharmacodynamic studies on the optimal timing

c h a p t e r 3 . 8

and method of therapeutic drug monitoring with single-
daily dosing regimens, would be of great assistance.319

K It

is generally recommended that patients receiving
extended-dosing interval aminoglycosides should have
aminoglycosides administered at even greater dosing
intervals if mild or moderate degrees of underlying renal
impairment exist. Optimal therapeutic monitoring in
the setting of infrequent dosing intervals for patients
with underlying CKD needs to be standardized and
uniform recommendations need to be provided by
careful
observa-
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
tional studies.

K The impact of IHD and high-flux CRRT upon the efficacy
and toxicity of extended-duration dosing of aminoglyco-
sides needs further study. As membranes with greater
sieving coefficients come into greater use, the impact on
aminoglycoside elimination needs to be carefully con-
sidered. This could be investigated by RCTs using
standard dosing intervals vs. individualized dosing regi-
mens, with frequent drug-level monitoring and the use
of efficacy measures and kidney injury markers as
outcomes.

K The interaction between aminoglycosides and other anti-
microbial agents, and other therapeutic agents with
to be more
nephrotoxic potential needs
carefully
aminoglycoside-induced
quantified. The degree of
nephrotoxicity alone vs. combination effects with such
drugs as vancomycin, amphotericin B, cephalosporins,
extended-spectrum penicillins, colistin,
loop diuretics,
clindamycin, cisplatin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory agents needs to be more carefully examined in
observational studies.

AMPHOTERICIN B NEPHROTOXICITY
Amphotericin B has been the standard of treatment for life-
threatening systemic mycoses for over 50 years. This polyene
antifungal agent
is insoluble in water and needs to be
solubilized with deoxycholate and given i.v. in the absence of
to maintain solubility. Despite its
electrolyte solutions
broad-spectrum fungicidal activity against a large number
of invasive systemic mycoses, drug-induced nephrotoxicity is
common and remains the principal dose-limiting toxicity of
amphotericin B.328–330 Amphotericin B has numerous other
signiﬁcant toxicities, including thrombophlebitis, electrolyte
disturbances, hypoplastic anemia, and systemic toxicity
associated with fever, chills, hypotension, and cytokine
release.331,332 AKI related to amphotericin B is clinically
signiﬁcant and is associated with higher mortality rates,
increased LOS, and increased total costs of health care when
managing patients with systemic fungal infection.328,330

Over the past two decades, three major advances in
antifungal therapy have become clinically available: i) the
lipid formulations of amphotericin B; ii) the introduction of
the echinocandin class of antifungal agents; and iii) an
expanding number of azoles with extended activity against
a variety of fungal pathogens. Therapeutic alternatives to

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

63

c h a p t e r 3 . 8

amphotericin B have been a welcome addition in the
management of systemic mycoses and selected, protozoan,
parasitic infections, but their incremental costs and tradeoffs
in spectrum of activity against fungal pathogens need to be
considered, in addition to their favorable toxicity proﬁles and
reduced potential for nephrotoxicity. A number of therapeu-
tic options are now available to the clinician when deciding
upon the choice for empiric or directed antifungal therapy.
Avoidance of risk of nephrotoxicity is one of the major, but
not the only, determinants when selecting antifungal therapy
at present.

3.8.6: We suggest using lipid formulations of ampho-
tericin B rather than conventional formulations of
amphotericin B. (2A)

RATIONALE
The broad-spectrum, polyene, antifungal agent amphotericin
B deoxycholate has been the mainstay of treatment for
systemic mycoses for decades. Despite its well-known toxicity
proﬁle, the potent antifungal activity of amphotericin B, in
addition to its activity against certain protozoan parasites
(Plasmodium spp., Leishmania spp., Naegleria spp.), indicates
that this therapy will remain a standard agent in clinical
medicine for the foreseeable future.

Amphotericin B–induced nephrotoxicity is related to
multiple mechanisms, including ischemic injury and direct
tubular- and glomerular-cell membrane toxicity. Amphoter-
icin causes vasoconstriction of the afferent renal arteriole
along with a systemic inﬂammatory response that may
reduce renal blood ﬂow. Amphotericin B also directly inserts
into human cellular membranes, where it disrupts membrane
permeability and physiology.331,332 Tubular epithelial cells
residing in the deep medullary regions of the kidney are
particularly susceptible to injury where considerable osmotic
stress exists across cell membranes even under physio-
logic conditions. The end result
loss of
renal tubular concentrating ability, renal tubular acidosis,
increasing urinary losses of potassium and magnesium, and
decreased glomerular function, resulting in azotemia and
decreased synthesis of erythropoietin. Amphotericin B–
induced nephrotoxicity is often accompanied by concomitant
administration of other potentially nephrotoxic agents
such as cyclosporine A, aminoglycosides, chemotherapeutic
agents, and a number of other potentially nephrotoxic
agents.328,329,333

is enzymuria,

Considerable efforts have been undertaken to try to limit
nephrotoxicity and permit the continued use of amphotericin
B deoxycholate for the management of systemic mycoses.
Simple maneuvers, such as salt repletion and provision of
adequate amounts of potassium, are beneﬁcial
in animal
models in the prevention of amphotericin B nephrotoxicity.
These measures have a mixed record in clinical practice, and
their capacity to prevent AKI when treating severe fungal
infections remain unclear. The relative ease and simple logic

of volume repletion and potassium supplementation during
amphotericin B therapy supports their routine use, despite
the relative lack of compelling clinical evidence to recom-
mend these maneuvers.

Various dosing strategies have also been instituted in an
attempt to limit amphotericin B–induced nephrotoxicity.
One strategy is to give amphotericin B as a continuous
infusion rather than a 2- to 4-hour infusion to limit
nephrotoxicity.329,334 While there is some suggestion that a
continuous infusion may limit nephrotoxicity, enthusiasm
for this strategy is tempered by the potential loss of some
antifungal activity. Amphotericin B exhibits concentration-
dependent antifungal activity, and continuous infusion of
low-doses of amphotericin B could result in suboptimal
protection for some patients with invasive fungal
infec-
tions.334

Another common strategy is

the administration of
alternate-day doses of amphotericin B, rather than daily
doses.335,336 This strategy is better tolerated and might reduce
nephrotoxicity without sacriﬁcing efﬁcacy in stable patients.
However, clear evidence that this strategy reduces nephro-
toxicity is not supported by large, adequately controlled
clinical trials as yet.

One of the major innovations in amphotericin B therapy
over the last 15 years has been the introduction of lipid
the problem of
formulations of amphotericin to limit
nephrotoxicity associated with conventional amphotericin B
deoxycholate. Three lipid formulations are available includ-
ing: amphotericin B colloidal dispersion, amphotericin B
lipid complex, and liposomal amphotericin B. Amphotericin
B colloidal dispersion is formulated by amphotericin B
complexed with cholesteryl sulfate. Amphotericin B lipid
complex is composed of amphotericin B complexed with
dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine and dimyristoyl phospha-
tidylglycerol. Liposomal amphotericin consists of amphoter-
icin B complexed with hydrogenated soy phosphatidyl-
choline, distearoylphosphatidylcholine, and cholesterol.337–340
Other formulations that might further reduce the risk of AKI
from amphotericin B include nanoparticle packaging in
micelles with polyaspartic acid.340

The safety and efﬁcacy (in incidence of nephrotoxicity) of
lipid formulations of amphotericin have been studied in
numerous experimental and clinical trials with conventional
amphotericin B deoxycholate as the comparator.337–339,341–350
A detailed analysis of these various trials, and a number of
meta-analyses that have analyzed this clinical question,
concluded that the lipid formulations are less nephrotoxic
than amphotericin B deoxycholate.344,346 When feasible, we
recommend that lipid formulations supplant the use of
conventional amphotericin B deoxycholate to reduce the risk
of nephrotoxicity.

The incremental costs associated with the lipid formula-
tions and their relative efﬁcacy for systemic mycoses remains
the subject of considerable debate. The existing evidence
would suggest that the overall risk-beneﬁt ratio and cost-
effectiveness with these lipid formulations is essentially

64

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

c h a p t e r 3 . 8

amphotericin B deoxycholate.337,339
cost-neutral with
Attempts to increase the doses of
lipid formulations of
amphotericin further to improve efﬁcacy have resulted in
mixed results and are not recommended at present.342,343

Lipid formulations of amphotericin are less nephrotoxic but
require different dosing strategies (three- to ﬁve-fold higher
doses than deoxycholate formulations of amphotericin B).
Some of these agents continue to induce general systemic
toxicity reactions similar to those observed with the deoxy-
cholate formulation (e.g., amphotericin B colloidal dispersion).

3.8.7:

In the treatment of systemic mycoses or parasitic
infections, we recommend using azole antifungal
than
the echinocandins
agents and/or
conventional amphotericin B, if equal therapeutic
efﬁcacy can be assumed. (1A)

rather

to the

There is currently insufﬁcient evidence as to whether the
echinocandins,
the azoles, or the lipid formulations of
amphotericin B differ signiﬁcantly from each other with
respect
risk of nephrotoxicity. No adequately
controlled, large, randomized studies have been reported to
date comparing the relative risk of nephrotoxicity amphoter-
icin B lipid formulations with either azole or echinocandin
antifungal agents. Such studies face the difﬁculty of recruiting
sufﬁcient numbers of patients with similar baseline risk for
drug-induced AKI, and with a balance of exposure to other
potentially nephrotoxic agents. Until such time as these
studies are completed, no evidence-based recommendations
can be given about the relative risk of AKI attributable
directly to these antifungal agents.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

RATIONALE
Another approach to prevent amphotericin B nephrotoxicity
is to avoid polyene antifungal agents entirely and use alte-
rnative agents, such as the azoles and echinocandins.351–355
Azole antifungal agents inhibit sterol synthesis in fungal cell
membranes by blocking the activity of the 14-demethylase
enzyme essential
for ergosterol synthesis. Nephrotoxicity
is an unusual event following the use of azole compounds.
The echinocandins are beta-glucan inhibitors that inter-
fere with cell-wall synthesis of fungal elements, and have an
entirely different mechanism of action from that of
amphotericin B. Both the azole compounds (voriconazole,
ﬂuconazole, itraconazole, and posaconazole) and the echi-
nocandins (caspofungin, anidulafungin, and micafungin)
compare favorably to amphotericin B with respect to their
efﬁcacy against a variety of the systemic mycoses. Both
classes of antifungal agents have the advantage of lacking
the intrinsic nephrotoxicity associated with amphotericin B
deoxycholate. Both the azole compounds and echinocandins
have proven to be less nephrotoxic than conventional
studies,
amphotericin B deoxycholate
historical control studies, and in small comparative trials.355
An important consideration in using these antifungal
agents is their relative efﬁcacy with respect to the likely
pathogen that is targeted for treatment. Candida krusei is
intrinsically resistant to the azoles and Candida parapsilosis is
frequently resistant
to the echinocandins. Amphotericin
B-resistant strains of selected Aspergillus spp. and Pseudal-
lescheria boydii are well described and require alternative
therapies.

in observational

K Some studies

indicate that

the liposomal

form of
amphotericin B is less nephrotoxic than amphotericin B
lipid complex or amphotericin B colloidal dispersion.
RCTs in patients with systemic mycosis, with the rate of
AKI as a primary or secondary end-point, should be
conducted to answer this question.

K Innovative strategies to formulate amphotericin B in
microvesicles, nanoparticles, or micelles should be under-
taken to limit nephrotoxicity in treating fungal infections.
Clinical trials should compare existing formulations to
these novel formulations, and could generate cost-effective,
yet non-nephrotoxic derivatives of amphotericin B.

K Carefully selected combinations of antifungal therapies to
enhance efficacy and shorten duration of therapy may
limit toxicity and reduce costs in the treatment of fungal
infections. Investigations need to be carried out in the
laboratory and in clinical studies to improve the care of
patients with severe fungal
infections. The costs and
complication rates of AKI, and other toxicities of short-
course combination treatment, should be compared to
standard dosing regimens of antifungal therapy.

K Markers of early nephrotoxicity and mechanisms to avoid
nephrotoxicity with amphotericin B formulations need
to be studied further in clinical
investigations. These
antifungal agents are given for prolonged periods, and
should allow ample opportunity to test the validity of
novel biomarkers of drug-induced nephrotoxicity. A
group monitored with novel AKI biomarkers should be
compared to conventional monitoring of AKI,
to
determine if one or more early biomarkers of kidney
injury add to standard clinical care in the prevention of
drug-induced AKI.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

65

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 3 . 9

Chapter 3.9: Other methods of prevention of AKI
in the critically ill

ON-PUMP VS. OFF-PUMP CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS
SURGERY
The type of cardiac surgery is important in the discussion on
risk for kidney problems associated with this
surgery.
Valvular procedures or aorta surgery are associated with a
higher risk. One of the most controversial risk factors is
on-pump vs. off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery.
Off-pump coronary artery bypass obviously removes the
bypass circuit but can be associated with greater hemo-
dynamic instability secondary to ventricular compression as
the heart is manipulated to access the coronary arteries.356
It is possible, with standard operative techniques, to perform
coronary artery bypass surgery (but not valve surgery)
without using cardiopulmonary bypass. This technique is
known as ‘‘off-pump’’ coronary artery bypass surgery.

It has been hypothesized that preservation of physiologic
renal perfusion by avoidance of cardiopulmonary bypass
would partially nullify the risk of AKI in patients receiving
coronary artery bypass surgery. Potential beneﬁts that have
been posited for off-pump coronary artery bypass (compared
to on-pump procedures) are reduced mortality, reduction of
AKI risk (and in particular, acute dialysis, which is associated
with a perioperative mortality of 42% in the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons database),
reduced risk of cerebral
dysfunction (due to stroke and neurocognitive dysfunction,
the latter sometimes referred to as ‘‘pump head’’), reduction
in ICU stay and days in hospital, and reduction in atrial
ﬁbrillation. As in other areas covered by these guidelines only
mortality, risk for RRT, and AKI risk are addressed as end-
point measures. It must, however, be remembered that the
potential beneﬁts of off-pump coronary artery bypass might
be predominantly outside these areas of focus.

3.9.1: We suggest that off-pump coronary artery bypass
graft surgery not be selected solely for the purpose
of reducing perioperative AKI or need for RRT. (2C)

RATIONALE
As detailed in Suppl Tables 15 and 16, which summarize
RCTs, the balance of the potential beneﬁt and harms is
uncertain and the quality of the evidence is weak, that off-
pump surgery is associated with better outcomes of the three
end-points used in these guidelines: incidence of AKI, need
for RRT, or mortality.

A recent good-quality RCT357 was performed in 2203
patients (only B8% of patients with SCr 41.5 mg/dl

[4133 mmol/l]) (Suppl Table 16). There was no signiﬁcant
difference between off-pump and on-pump coronary artery
bypass graft in the rate of the 30-day composite outcome.
The rate of the 1-year composite outcome was higher for
off-pump than for on-pump coronary artery bypass graft.
Follow-up angiograms
the patients
revealed that the overall rate of graft patency was lower in
the off-pump group than in the on-pump group (82.6% vs.
87.8%, Po0.01).

in the majority of

that

for dialysis

is apparent

A comprehensive meta-analysis

including RCTs, and
abstracts from the proceedings of scientiﬁc meetings through
February 2010, was recently published.358 AKI was deﬁned
by a mixture of criteria, including biochemical parameter,
urine output, and dialysis
requirement. Mortality was
evaluated among the studies that reported kidney-related
outcomes. This analysis compared off-pump with the more
traditional on-pump technique. Off-pump coronary artery
bypass graft was associated with a statistically signiﬁcant
40% lower odds of postoperative AKI and a nonsigniﬁcant
33% lower odds
requirement. Within the
selected trials, off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery
was not associated with a signiﬁcant decrease in mortality.
It
the trials
from this meta-analysis
were clinically heterogeneous, particularly in regards to
their deﬁnitions of kidney outcomes, and mostly were of
poor to fair quality (based on the Jadad score). The very
low event rates (often 0–1 patients) make the estimates
suspect and highly imprecise. There is also a question of
publication bias. There are several large trials in progress
that are likely to generate more deﬁnitive data. In chronic
there are observational US Renal Data
dialysis patients,
Systems data to weakly support
the use of off-pump
technique (slightly lower mortality). However, with any
is introduced in certain centers,
technical advance that
institutional familiarity with the technique, operator experi-
ence, and characteristics of
the population referred to
the center are likely to be important modulators of out-
comes. In conclusion, based on the analysis of the RCTs
and the recent meta-analysis,
the Work Group found
that there was not enough evidence to recommend off-
pump coronary artery bypass for reducing AKI or the need
for RRT.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Further studies are needed to clarify the role of off-pump
coronary artery bypass in patients with increased risk
for AKI.

66

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

N-ACETYLCYSTEINE (NAC)

3.9.2: We suggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in
critically ill patients with hypotension. (2D)

RATIONALE
NAC has been most frequently applied in the prevention
of CI-AKI, and this topic is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 4.4.

NAC is a modiﬁed form of L-cysteine, an amino acid that
is a precursor to reduced glutathione that can regenerate
glutathione stores. It is known to be a potent antioxidant that
It also has
scavenges oxygen-free radicals in the body.
vasodilatory properties derived from enhanced nitric oxide
availability.359 NAC has been shown to attenuate ischemic
and nephrotoxic ARF in a number of animal studies,360–363
and the pharmacological characteristics of NAC that could
play a role in the prevention of AKI have recently been
summarized.364 NAC undergoes extensive ﬁrst-pass metabo-
lization in the gastric mucosa and liver. This results in a very
low oral bioavailability, with substantial intrapatient varia-
bility (3–20%), as well as inconsistency between available
oral products. The plasma half-life of acetylcysteine after
i.v.
injection is approximately 6–40 minutes, and there is
extensive binding to plasma and tissue proteins through
the sulfhydryl group. Virtually no acetylcysteine can be
i.v. or oral
detected in the systemic circulation after
administration, suggesting that any potential
therapeutic
beneﬁt must be due to secondary effects such as the
induction of glutathione synthesis, rather than due to direct
effects. As these secondary effects are not directly measurable,
the determination of the optimal dosage schedule has been
necessarily empirical.365

A particularly important problem with NAC is whether it
can alter SCr independent of a change in GFR. NAC has been
reported to decrease SCr levels in subjects with normal
kidney function. This reduction in SCr was not accompanied
by a change in serum cystatin C levels. This suggests an effect
independent of a change in GFR, such as an increase in
tubular secretion of creatinine or a decrease in creatinine
production.366 By contrast, in vitro analysis on the effect of
NAC on SCr367 showed no analytical interference with the
measurement of SCr by any of the commonly used analytical
methods. Haase et al.,368 studied 30 patients with normal
kidney function who received i.v. NAC for 24 hours in
association with cardiac surgery. No change in the ratio of
SCr to cystatin C, compared to baseline values, was observed
at the end of the 24-hour infusion or 48 hours after the
cessation of the infusion. In addition, there was no effect on
urinary creatinine excretion during the infusion. However, in
clinical practice, NAC is generally recommended for patients
with CKD, with an eGFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2. Mainra
et al.,369 observed no change in SCr or cystatin C at 4, 24, or
48 hours after administration of a single 600-mg dose of NAC
to 30 patients with CKD Stage 3. Finally, Rehman et al.,370

c h a p t e r 3 . 9

tested the potentially confounding effect of NAC in a CKD
population (Stages 3–5) following doses of NAC currently
recommended for prophylaxis of AKI. There was no effect of
NAC on either SCr or cystatin C levels.

It is thus safe to conclude that NAC, in doses currently
recommended for prophylaxis of AKI, has—by itself—no
effect on SCr or cystatin C levels. In addition, NAC is
inexpensive and appears to be safe, although it may have
some detrimental effects on myocardial and coagulation
function.371–373 The ‘‘safety’’ of NAC should further be
amended, particularly when high i.v. doses are used, as in
some of the RCTs in CI-AKI. When prospectively studied in
acetaminophen poisoning, i.v. NAC produced anaphylactoid
reactions in up to 48% of participants.374 Although most of
these reactions were mild, at
least one death has been
reported in a patient with asthma.375 It should also be noted
that the doses of acetaminophen used are still much higher
than in the ‘‘high doses’’ used, particularly in AKI trials.
Besides the prevention of CI-AKI, NAC has also been tested
in the setting of cardiothoracic surgery and liver transplanta-
tion, and in hypotensive critically ill patients.

NAC IN CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS

3.9.3: We recommend not using oral or i.v. NAC for

prevention of postsurgical AKI. (1A)

RATIONALE
The above recommendation is based on an evaluation of
the available literature on prevention studies with NAC in
cardiovascular and abdominal vascular surgery, and liver
transplantation.

The tables summarize the RCTs where either oral or i.v.
NAC was compared to placebo; only studies containing a
minimum of 50 patients in each study arm have been
included. In addition, a recent meta-analysis is available,376
containing 10 studies involving a total of 1193 adult patients
undergoing major surgery. Seven studies (1003 patients)
evaluated the effects of NAC in patients undergoing cardiac
surgery, and three of these (508 patients) exclusively studied
patients with pre-existing renal
impairment. Two studies
(111 patients) evaluated the effects of NAC on patients
undergoing abdominal aneurysm repair surgery and one
study (79 patients) was of patients undergoing major
abdominal cancer surgery. End-points in most of the studies
were mortality, need for RRT, or varying increases in
postoperative SCr concentrations compared to preoperative
SCr values.

Suppl Tables 17 and 18 summarize the ﬁve studies where
NAC was compared to placebo in patients undergoing
cardiac surgery and who were not exposed to radiocontrast
media.377–381 All ﬁve studies analyzed the effects of NAC in
patients with moderate, pre-existing renal functional impair-
ment. Surgery included elective or emergency coronary artery
bypass graft operations or heart valve surgery. NAC was given

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

67

c h a p t e r 3 . 9

i.v. in most of the studies; mortality was evaluated at different
follow-up times; either in-hospital or at 30 or 90 days. Only
one study found a signiﬁcantly lower mortality at 30 days.377
None of the studies found either a difference in need for RRT,
or in AKI deﬁned as variable changes in SCr after surgery. All
studies were of A-level quality. Two relatively small studies
evaluated the effects of NAC on patients undergoing
abdominal aneurysm repair surgery382,383 and did not ﬁnd
any protective effect on renal function.

Further, one meta-analysis376 did not ﬁnd evidence that
NAC used perioperatively can alter mortality or
renal
outcomes after major cardiovascular or abdominal cancer
surgery when radiocontrast agents are not used. In none of
the studies were signiﬁcant treatment-related adverse effects
of NAC reported. These reports suggest that NAC, in the
is not associated with
context of cardiovascular surgery,
increased risk of mortality,
re-exploration, or
allogeneic transfusion.

surgical

Only one single study has compared NAC to placebo in
critically ill patients (Suppl Table 18).384 One hundred and
forty-two ICU patients with new-onset (within 12 hours) of
at least X30 consecutive minutes of hypotension and/or
vasopressor requirement were randomized to receive either
oral NAC or placebo for 7 days, in addition to standard
therapy. AKI was deﬁned as X0.5 mg/dl
supportive
(X44 mmol/l) increase in SCr. Patients who received NAC
had an incidence of AKI of 15.5%, compared to 16.9% in
those receiving placebo (NS). There were no signiﬁcant
differences between treatment arms in any of the secondary
outcomes examined, including incidence of a 50% increase in
SCr, maximal rise in creatinine, recovery of renal function,
length of ICU and hospital stay, and requirement for RRT.
Mortality in both arms was 10%. Based on this single study,
which is underpowered but did not show any beneﬁcial effect
on incidence of AKI, need for RRT, or patient mortality, we
suggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in critically ill patients
with hypotension.

SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,
Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire, Trans-
western Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it clear
that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contributor,
copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accordingly, the
publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and their respective
employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no liability whatsoever for
the consequences of any such inaccurate or misleading data,
opinion or statement. While every effort is made to ensure that
drug doses and other quantities are presented accurately,
readers are advised that new methods and techniques
involving drug usage, and described within this Journal,
should only be followed in conjunction with the drug
manufacturer’s own published literature.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 15: Evidence profile of RCT examining on vs. off
pump cardiothoracic surgery.
Supplementary Table 16: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of on vs. off pump CABG for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 17: Evidence profile of RCTs examining NAC vs.
placebo in the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 18: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo in the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

68

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4 . 1

Section 4: Contrast-induced AKI

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.34

Chapter 4.1: Contrast-induced AKI: definition,
epidemiology, and prognosis

BACKGROUND
Contrast-related acute kidney problems are frequent and
occur in both ambulatory and hospitalized patients. Since
there is accumulating evidence that many risk factors,
preventive measures, and the immediate and long-term
prognosis of these problems are common to the other causes
of AKI, the Work Group believes that there is a need for a
forms of AKI and therefore
unifying deﬁnition for all
proposes that the term contrast-induced acute kidney injury
(CI-AKI) be used for patients developing AKI secondary to
intravascular radiocontrast media exposure.

The literature on CI-AKI is predominantly related to AKI
following iodinated contrast-media administration. As will
be discussed in Appendix E, non–iodine contrast media—
notably Gd-containing contrast media—may also occasion-
ally induce AKI.

4.1: Deﬁne and stage AKI after administration of intra-
vascular contrast media as per Recommendations
2.1.1–2.1.2. (Not Graded)
4.1.1:

in
In individuals who develop changes
kidney function after administration of intra-
vascular contrast media, evaluate for CI-AKI
as well as for other possible causes of AKI.
(Not Graded)

RATIONALE
Pending the validation of future biomarkers which would
allow a more straightforward comparison and integration of
CI-AKI in the overall framework of AKI, we suggest that the
same criteria, using the changes in SCr concentrations and
urine output be used as for the other forms of AKI. The Work
Group is not aware of any pathophysiological or epidemio-
logical reason why the deﬁnition and staging of CI-AKI
should be different from the RIFLE/AKIN criteria. It should,
this
however, be stressed that
guideline, the term contrast-induced nephropathy is widely
used in the literature and usually deﬁned as a rise in SCr
of X0.5 mg/dl (X44 mmol/l) or a 25% increase from base-
line value, assessed at 48 hours after a radiological proce-
dure. This deﬁnition also consistently predicted major

for the development of

It

adverse cardiovascular events after percutaneous coronary
intervention.385 The Society of Urogenital Radiology used the
same deﬁnition, but the creatinine changes were said to occur
within 3 days after intravascular administration of contrast
media without an alternative etiology.386
should be
recognized that, in a minority of cases, the peak increase of
SCr may occur up until 5 days after contrast exposure.
However, a recent prospective study387 showed that the
percentage change of SCr 12 h after contrast vs. the basal
value was the best predictor of CI-AKI (Po0.001). A 5%
increase of
its value yielded 75% sensitivity and 72%
speciﬁcity, with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.80 and
an OR of 7.37 (95% CI 3.34–16.23) for early detection.
Furthermore, this 12-hour basal value strongly correlated
with the development of renal
impairment at 30 days
(P ¼ 0.002; sensitivity 87%, speciﬁcity 70%; AUC 0.85; OR
13.29; 95% CI 2.91–60.64).

It has been shown that substantial variation in SCr may
occur from day to day in hospitalized patients who do not
receive contrast-media injections.388 Depending on the
threshold criterion for CI-AKI chosen, this variation can
lead to rates of 6–35% of inpatients, not exposed to contrast
media, who would be labeled as having CI-AKI had they
received contrast media. The exact cause of this ‘‘hospital-
induced nephropathy’’389 is not known, but other studies
have shown that AKI (various etiologies) is common in
hospitalized patients.

the impact of

The magnitude of

the ‘‘background
ﬂuctuation of kidney function’’ in patients receiving iodinated
contrast has not been prospectively studied, but a recent retro-
spective study compared the incidence of AKI among patients
undergoing enhanced computed tomography (CT) with i.v.
low-osmolar (iohexol) or iso-osmolar (iodixanol) contrast
media to the AKI incidence among patients undergoing CT
without contrast-media administration.390 The incidence of
AKI (deﬁned as an increase of SCr of 0.5 mg/dl [44 mmol/l] or
a X25% decrease in eGFR within 3 days after CT) was similar
in all three groups (two receiving contrast agents and one not)
up to a baseline SCr level of 1.8 mg/dl (159 mmol/l). A high
incidence of
subjects undergoing
noncontrast CT was thus identiﬁed. Given the results of this
retrospective study, it is clear that AKI after i.v. administration

‘‘AKI’’ among control

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

69

c h a p t e r 4 . 1

of iodine contrast media cannot be automatically attributed
to the contrast agent, but may, in fact, reﬂect AKI from other
causes, such as worsening underlying disease or drug toxicity.
Therefore,
that
individuals showing increases of SCr compatible with the
deﬁnition of AKI after administration of intravascular contrast
media be also evaluated for other possible causes of AKI.

the Work Group strongly recommends

In a study using cystatin C as an early marker for AKI,
a cut-off cystatin C increase concentration of X10% at 24
hours after contrast-media exposure was detected in 87
patients (21.2%), and was the best cut-off value for the early
identiﬁcation of patients at risk for CI-AKI with a negative
predictive value of 100% and a positive predictive value of
39%. As in other cases of AKI, it appears that, in patients
with CKD, cystatin C may be a useful marker for the early
diagnosis of CI-AKI.

Epidemiology of CI-AKI
Keeping the above-mentioned problems of deﬁnition in
mind, it is not surprising that the reported incidence of
CI-AKI varies widely across the literature, depending on the
deﬁnitions used, the patient population, and the baseline risk
factors.

The. impact of different deﬁnitions on the incidence of
CI-AKI can be illustrated by the recent results of the Oxilan
Registry.391 In this registry, CI-AKI was deﬁned as either a
SCr increase 40.5 mg/dl (444 mmol/l), or a SCr increase
425%, or a decrease 425% of eGFR, or the composite of
all three deﬁnitions. The baseline SCr was 1.12 ± 0.3 mg/dl
(99 ± 26.5 mmol/l) and 24% had an eGFR o60 ml/min.
increase 40.5 mg/dl
CI-AKI
3.3% (SCr
[444 mmol/l]), 10.2% (SCr increase 425%), 7.6% (eGFR
decrease 425%), and 10.5% (composite), respectively.

rates were

It is accepted that, in patients with normal renal function—
even in the presence of diabetes—the risk for CI-AKI is low
(1–2%).392 However, the incidence may be as high as 25% in
patients with pre-existing renal impairment or in presence of
certain risk factors, such as the combination of CKD and
diabetes, CHF, advanced age, and concurrent administration
of nephrotoxic drugs.393 CI-AKI was described as the third
most common cause of new AKI in hospitalized patients
(after decreased renal perfusion and nephrotoxic medications)
and was responsible for 11% of cases.394

The epidemiology of de novo CI-AKI in critically ill
patients is not known. In a group of 75 ICU patients with a
normal baseline SCr who were exposed to CT scans with an
i.v. low-osmolar contrast medium, an increase in SCr 425%
was recorded in 18% of the patients. There was no change of
the SCr in a control group of patients undergoing CT scans
but not receiving contrast media.395 This rather small study
shows that in critically ill patients, even with an apparently
‘‘normal’’ renal function,
i.v. administration of iodinated
contrast media is associated with a signiﬁcant incidence of
CI-AKI.
It

radiological procedures
performed in an emergency would be associated with an

expected that

could be

increased risk of CI-AKI but, as recently summarized,396
the published evidence to support this premise is rather
scarce.397

see McCullough398).

Prognosis of CI-AKI
Many studies have now shown that patients who develop
CI-AKI have a greater risk for death or prolonged hospitali-
zation, as well as for other adverse outcomes, including early
or late cardiovascular events. The latter are more common
after, for example, percutaneous coronary interventions (for
In a retrospective analysis
review,
including 27 608 patients who underwent coronary angio-
graphy at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center during
a 12-year period, discrete proportional odds models were
used to examine the association between increases in SCr and
30-day in-hospital mortality and LOS, respectively. It appea-
red that small absolute (0.25–0.5 mg/dl [22–44 mmol/l]) and
relative (25–50%) increases in SCr were associated with
risk-adjusted OR for in-hospital mortality of 1.83 and 1.39,
respectively; larger increases in SCr generally were associated
with greater risks for these clinical outcomes.399 Moreover,
when patients with CI-AKI require dialysis, the mortality is
higher compared to those not requiring dialysis. For example,
in the study by McCullough et al.,400 the hospital mortality
was 7.1% in CI-AKI and 35.7% in patients who required
dialysis. By 2 years, the mortality rate in patients who
required dialysis was 81.2%.

The more

in Renally
recent Cardiac Angiography
Impaired Patients study401—a large, multicenter, prospective,
double-blind RCT of patients who had moderate to severe
CKD and were undergoing cardiac angiography—also
showed that the adjusted incidence rate ratio for adverse
events was twice as high in those with CI-AKI. However,
these data demonstrating a temporal association between CI-
AKI and short or long-term prognosis do not establish a
causal relationship, since most of
the patients in these
observational studies have underlying risk factors that, in
addition to increasing the patient’s risk of CI-AKI, can
directly increase their overall risk for the complications
studied. Finally, many of the retrospective studies may also
have introduced selection bias for patients who presumably
had a clinical reason for having their SCr concentration
followed.

Data on the association between risk of ESRD and CI-AKI
are scarce.
requiring
In contemporary studies, CI-AKI
dialysis developed in almost 4% of patients with underlying
renal impairment and 3% of patients undergoing primary
percutaneous coronary interventions for acute coronary
syndrome. However, only a small proportion of patients
continued on chronic dialysis.402,403 Although CI-AKI
requiring dialysis is relatively rare, the impact on patient
prognosis is considerable, with high hospital and 1-year
mortality rates (for a review, see McCullough398). Only one
study404 reported the incidence of new CKD Stage 4–5
(eGFRo30 ml/min) following percutaneous coronary inter-
ventions and found that this occurred in 0.3% of patients

70

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

c h a p t e r 4 . 1

with an eGFR 430 ml/min at baseline and newly diagnosed
kidney disease within 6 months after the procedure, and in
0.9% of patients with an eGFR460 ml/min at baseline. These
percentages are higher than the estimated annual incidence of
CKD at 0.17% that was found in a British general population
cohort over a 5.5-year period of follow-up.405 Thus, careful
long-term follow-up of SCr following contrast exposure is
warranted.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Large prospective RCTs examining the epidemiology of
CI-AKI are needed, especially on long-term outcomes,
with attention to controlling for confounders.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix E: Risks with Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agents.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

71

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4 . 2

Chapter 4.2: Assessment of the population at risk
for CI-AKI

At present, millions of doses of
intravascular contrast
media are being administered worldwide.406,407 Most of
these radiological examinations are performed in ambu-
latory populations who do not need special preventive
measures. However, contrast media are also increasingly used
in an elderly population, many of whom have CKD and
diabetes—the principal risk factors for CI-AKI. It is, thus,
of utmost importance to screen the population at risk for
CI-AKI.

4.2.1: Assess the risk for CI-AKI and,

in particular,
screen for pre-existing impairment of kidney
function in all patients who are considered for a
procedure that requires intravascular (i.v. or i.a.)
administration of
iodinated contrast medium.
(Not Graded)

impairment

functional
risk factor above all other

RATIONALE
Screening for pre-existing impairment of kidney function
the most
Pre-existing renal
important
for
developing CI-AKI408 and screening for both acute and
chronic kidney disease is highly recommended. There is no
sharp GFR threshold below which the risk for CI-AKI is
clearly increasing. Both the KDOQI guideline and KDIGO
recommend that,
in stable patients, an eGFR should be
used.409

risk factors

is

A CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel410 agreed that the risk
of CI-AKI becomes clinically important when the baseline
SCr concentration is X1.3 mg/dl (X115 mmol/l) in men and
X1.0 mg/dl (X88.4 mmol/l) in women, equivalent to an
eGFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2. However, Bruce et al.390
showed that the incidence of ‘‘true’’ AKI became signiﬁcant
only between controls and contrast-media administered
patients from a baseline SCr concentration of 41.8 mg/dl
(4159 mmol/l) onward. The CI-AKI Consensus Working
Panel410 recommended that precautions to reduce the risk
should be
implemented in patients with a baseline
eGFRo60 ml/min per 1.73 m2. In light of more recent
information, this threshold could probably be lowered to
45 ml/min per 1.73 m2.

In many institutions, point-of-care SCr testing is present,
and the results can be available quite fast. In places without
point-of-care laboratories, the appropriate blood tests should

be requested, but an emergent imaging/intervention, where
the beneﬁt of very early imaging outweighs the risk of
waiting, should not be delayed.

For its relative simplicity, only SCr is used at many
hospitals to determine whether a patient is a candidate
for intravascular contrast-media administration, but
the
thresholds used and the acceptable time between the
determined SCr value and administration of contrast media
to perform the
radiology examination differs among
radiology departments.

Risk-factor questionnaire
For outpatient radiological studies where renal function data
are unavailable, a simple survey or questionnaire may be
used to identify outpatients at higher risk for AKI in whom
appropriate precautions should be taken.

Choyke et al.411 (Figure 13) used a questionnaire and
could identify a high proportion of patients with normal SCr
concentrations, and reduced by 67% the number of patients
in whom SCr measurement was necessary before imaging
studies.

The European Society of Urogenital Radiology386 recom-
mends a risk-factor analysis based on the Choyke ques-
tionnaire to identify patients with a higher risk of abnormal
renal function. The CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel410
considered that a survey or questionnaire may be a useful
guide for identifying patients at higher risk for CI-AKI
compared to the general population.

Urinary protein screening
The CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel also supported the
use of dipstick testing for urine protein as a rapid screen to
identify patients who can undergo studies requiring contrast
media without SCr measurement.410 Of 310 patients with a
negative urine protein test and no history of diseases poten-
impairment, none had a SCr
tially associated with renal
level 42.0 mg/dl (4177 mmol/l), and only 1% had a level
41.7 mg/dl (4150 mmol/l).

Thus, the Work Group recommends that, when a recent
SCr is not available, a simple questionnaire or a dipstick
testing for urine protein may be useful
for identifying
pre-existing kidney disease. Risk stratiﬁcation hinges on age,
baseline kidney function, other comorbidities, and other risk
factors.

72

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

c h a p t e r 4 . 2

In the past 3 months have you been told there may have been a change in your kidney function?  Y/N 

In the past 3 months have you been on any medications? Please list: 

Have you used any over-the-counter pain relievers within the last 10 days? Y/N  Please list: 

In the past 3 months have you had any surgery?  Y/N 

Describe: 

Do you feel dry or thirsty? Y/N 

Circle one 

*Have you ever been told you have kidney disease of any type?
Please describe:
*Have you had kidney surgery?
*Do you have diabetes?

Do you use insulin?
Do you use metformin or glucophage?

*Do you have hypertension, heart disease, or vascular disease?
*Do you have gout?
Do you have multiple myleoma?
Have you ever had x-ray contrast media (dye) for CT, angiography, or IVP?

Have you had contrast media within the last 3 days? 
Do you have any allergies to x-ray contrast media (dye)?
Please describe:

Have you received pretreatment with medication for this study?
Do you have any allergies or asthma? Please describe:

Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

N
N

Figure 13 | Sample questionnaire. Asterisks denote questions with the highest association with abnormal renal function. Adapted from
Choyke PL, Cady J, DePollar SL et al. Determination of serum creatinine prior to iodinated contrast media: is it necessary in all patients?
Tech Urol 1998; 4: 65–69 with permission.411

risk factors

instability, use of

Other risk factors of CI-AKI
function
Besides pre-existing kidney disease with renal
impairment, other
for developing CI-AKI
include diabetes, hypertension, CHF, advanced age, volume
depletion, hemodynamic
concurrent
nephrotoxic medications, and large volume or high osmol-
ality of the contrast agent.408,412 Although there is doubt that
diabetes by itself is an independent risk factor, in a patient
with CKD it acts as a risk multiplier.398 Metabolic syndrome,
prediabetes, and hyperuricemia have been identiﬁed as
new risk factors for CI-AKI, while the use of ACE-I and
angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB), renal transplantation,
diabetes mellitus with normal renal function, low-osmolar
contrast media, multiple myeloma,
female gender, and
cirrhosis have been classiﬁed as conﬂicting risk factors for
CI-AKI.413 There are conﬂicting data on the impact of ACE-I
or ARB but, overall, there is currently insufﬁcient evidence to
recommend discontinuation of these medications prior to
contrast-media administration.

When possible,

the administration of contrast media
should be delayed in patients with circulatory collapse or
CHF until their hemodynamic status is corrected. Repeated
exposure should be delayed for 48 hours
in patients
without risk factors for CI-AKI, and for 72 hours in those
with diabetes mellitus or pre-existing chronic renal dysfunc-
tion. If acute renal dysfunction develops after contrast-media
administration,
repeated exposure should preferably be
delayed until the SCr level has returned to baseline levels.414
in
particular, NSAIDs, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, high

nephrotoxic medication—including,

Concurrent

Table 15 | CI-AKI risk-scoring model for percutaneous
coronary intervention

Risk factors

Integer score (calculate)

Hypotension
IABP
CHF
Age 475 years
Anemia
Diabetes
Contrast-media volume
SCr 41.5 mg/dl (4132.6 mmol/l)

or

eGFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2

5
5
5
4
3
3
1 per 100 ml
4

2 for 40–60
4 for 20–39
6 for o20

Note: Low risk: cumulative score o5; high risk: cumulative score 416.
CHF, congestive heart failure; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; IABP, intra-
aortic balloon pump; SCr, serum creatinine. Reprinted from Mehran R, Aymong ED,
Nikolsky E et al. A simple risk score for prediction of contrast-induced nephropathy
after percutaneous coronary intervention: development and initial validation. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2004; 44: 1393–1399 et al.,418 copyright 2004, with permission from
American College of Cardiology Foundation; accessed http://content.onlinejacc.org/
cgi/content/full/44/7/1393

doses of loop diuretics, and antiviral drugs like acyclovir
and foscarnet—should preferably be stopped. A recent
study using a so-called forced euvolemic diuresis protocol
including mannitol
signi-
and furosemide
ﬁcantly increased risk of CI-AKI.415 It can be advised that
such strategy should be abandoned, and that
furose-
mide therapy should preferably be stopped before angio-
graphy.

led to a

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

73

c h a p t e r 4 . 2

coronary

for CI-AKI

risk factors

Risk models of CI-AKI
Most
can be detected by
history-taking and physical examination, and the risk rises
exponentially with the number of risk factors present.416
Validated risk-prediction models using patient and proce-
dural risk factors to assess for CI-AKI have been developed
for patients undergoing percutaneous
inter-
vention.417,418 For example, the Mehran risk model418 is
given in Table 15. The overall occurrence of CI-AKI in the
development set of the score was 13.1% (range 7.5% to
57.3% for a low [p5] and high [X16]
risk score,
respectively); the rate of CI-AKI increased exponentially
with increasing risk score. In the validation dataset, the
increasing risk score was again strongly associated with
CI-AKI (range 8.4% to 55.9% for the low and high risk score,
respectively). These models can help in counseling about the
risks of the procedure, selecting prophylactic interventions,
and can also be used to characterize patients in studies of
CI-AKI.

4.2.2: Consider alternative imaging methods in patients
at increased risk for CI-AKI. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
The selection and advantages and disadvantages of non-
iodinated contrast media are beyond the scope of these
guidelines. Detailed discussions of all these techniques can
be found in radiology textbooks and the radiology litera-
ture. The Work Group suggests that, in patients at increased
risk for CI-AKI,
iodinated
contrast-media administration should be discussed with the
radiologist.

the risks and beneﬁts of

Because of

the great relevance for the nephrologist,
radiologist, and cardiologist of the side-effects of Gd chelates
used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a short overview
of their nephrotoxicity is given here.

Nephrotoxicity of Gd chelates
Gd chelates are widely used as MRI contrast agents, and
are considered to have a good overall safety proﬁle. Early
on, phase III trials and small studies in low-risk patients
suggested a benign renal proﬁle; however, more recent
studies raised the possibility of nephrotoxicity, although
it
is not clear whether it approaches the incidence of
AKI associated with iodine-containing contrast media.
Gd-related AKI appears to be a risk in patients with advanced
kidney disease, especially those with diabetic nephro-
pathy.419,420 Perazella et al.420 have summarized studies
showing Gd-induced nephrotoxic AKI
compared to
CI-AKI.421–425 Studies in patients with underlying kidney
disease demonstrate the importance of renal clearance in
determining the pharmacokinetic proﬁle of Gd chelates.426
More details on the pharmacokinetics of Gd chelates and
their dialyzability are provided in Appendix E.

Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)
The risk of developing NSF with Gd, particularly in patients
with severe AKI and CKD, is reviewed in detail in Appendix E.
It should be noted here that
the European Medicines
Agency stated a contraindication for use of gadodiamide in
patients with a GFR o30 ml/min per 1.73 m2, and issued a
warning for its use in patients who have a GFR between 30
and 60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 (EMEA Public assessment report.
http://www.esur.org/ﬁleadmin/NSF/Public_Assessment_Report_
NSF_Gadolinium_26_June_2007.pdf; last accessed January 5,
2012). The US FDA requested that vendors add warnings
about
the risk for developing NSF to the full prescri-
bing information on the packaging for all Gd-containing
contrast agents (gadopentetate dimeglumine, gadodiamide,
gadoversetamide, gadoteridol, gadobenate dimeglumine).427
New labeling describes the risk for NSF following expo-
sure to Gd in patients with a GFR o30 ml/min per
1.73 m2 and in patients with AKI of any severity due to
hepato-renal syndrome or in the perioperative liver trans-
plantation period. Additional
recommendations were
recently proposed by Perazella420 and were endorsed by the
Work Group:

is

(a) Use of a macrocyclic chelate (gadoteridol in the USA),
is preferred over linear chelates. The risk associated
with the various Gd-containing agents
likely
different. Gadodiamide, the linear nonionic chelate–-
based formulation, maintains the highest risk on the
basis of epidemiologic data and animal
studies.
Gadopentetate, the linear ionic chelate–based product
less than the linear
probably has a medium risk,
nonionic chelates but more than the macrocyclic
chelates. Gadoteridol, the only FDA-approved macro-
cyclic chelate, maintains less risk. Clearly, high dosages
and large cumulative dosages of all these agents will
increase risk for NSF.

(b) Demonstration of significant quantities of insoluble
Gd in the skin of NSF patients, months after expo-
sure to Gd-based contrast material and after exten-
sive tissue processing, suggests that Gd might have
undergone transmetallation in vivo. Supporting the
importance of transmetallation, all NSF cases reported
before 2009 have been associated with linear MRI
contrast agents (for a review, see Kay428) that have
inferior thermodynamic stability and a kinetic or
conditional stability that favors transmetallation. How-
ever, a recent case of NSF in a dialysis patient after
exposure to a macrocyclic chelate has been described,429
and at least two additional cases are known.430

(c) Use the lowest dosage of the agent possible to achieve

the image.

(d) Avoid repeat exposures with Gd.
(e) Consider performing IHD after the exposure (and
the next 2 days) in patients who are already main-
tained on IHD, recognizing that there are no data
that support prevention of NSF with this modality.

74

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

This recommendation is based on the pharmaco-
kinetics of Gd and the theoretical benefit of removing
it with IHD (495% plasma clearance). PD clears these
agents rather poorly.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix E: Risks with Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agents.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

c h a p t e r 4 . 2

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

75

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4 . 3

Chapter 4.3: Nonpharmacological prevention
strategies of CI-AKI

There have been a large number of strategies/agents evaluated
to prevent CI-AKI. Sterling et al.431 have recently summa-
rized most of these strategies and classiﬁed them as having
either deﬁnitive, possible, or doubtful value. From the many
these authors only retain parenteral volume
strategies,
expansion, minimizing contrast-media volume, use of low-
osmolar and iso-osmolar contrast media, and administration
of non-iodinated contrast media as strategies with deﬁnitive
value. A recent comprehensive meta-analysis by Kelly
et al.432—including RCTs that administered NAC, theophyl-
line, fenoldopam, dopamine, iloprost, statins, furosemide,
or mannitol, and covering studies up to November 2006—
provides an excellent overview.

DOSE/VOLUME OF CONTRAST-MEDIA ADMINISTRATION

4.3.1: Use the lowest possible dose of contrast medium in
patients at risk for CI-AKI. (Not Graded)

that

RATIONALE
The correlation between the volume of contrast media
administered and the risk of CI-AKI has been recognized. 433
In the vast majority of papers dealing with CI-AKI after
coronary procedures, contrast-media doses are only ex-
such
pressed in volumes. The Work Group feels
expression can be misleading, since commercially available
contrast-media concentrations
range from 140 to 400
milligrams of iodine per milliliter, a difference with almost
a factor of 3. The Work Group recommends, therefore, that
the dose of contrast medium should be better expressed in
relation to both volume and concentration, e.g., grams
iodine, which also directly relates to the diagnostic capacity,
the primary purpose of the contrast medium. Such ‘‘double’’
expression would also facilitate the comparison between
different studies on epidemiology and prognosis of CI-AKI.
is well known that, when measuring the plasma
clearance of a GFR marker (e.g., with the contrast medium
iohexol), the AUC is directly related to the dose of iohexol
and inversely related to the GFR. Thus, by mathematically
estimating the AUC and knowing the injected iodine
dose, the GFR can be calculated by dose C AUC. Thus,
AUC ¼ dose C GFR, and AUC is directly related to the
systemic exposure of a drug, including the contrast medium,
which, in turn, is mostly correlated with its efﬁcacy and
toxicity.434 An interesting experimental study435 investigated
the correlation between the calculated dose to CrCl ratio and

It

the experimentally measured AUC for the contrast agent
iodixanol. The experimentally determined AUC data correlated
highly with the dose:CrCl ratio. This ratio could thus be a rapid
and accurate way to estimate AUC for an iodinated contrast
medium, without the need for multiple blood samples.

A recent study by Nyman et al.436 in patients undergoing
coronary angioplasty calculated the probability of CI-AKI
(SCr rise 40.5 mg/dl [444.2 mmol/l] or oliguria/anuria) at
various eGFR levels based on g-I (grams iodine)/eGFR ratios
of 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1. At a ratio o1, the risk of CI-AKI
was 3%, while it was 25% at a ratio X1. This, and other
preliminary studies, indicate that a g-I/GFR ratio o1 may be
relatively safe in a patient without multiple risk factors.436–438
Finally, the association between absolute and body weight-
and SCr-adjusted contrast-media volume, CI-AKI incidence
(X25% SCr increase), and clinical outcome was prospec-
tively investigated in patients with acute MI.439 For each
patient, the maximum contrast-medium dose was calculated
according to the formula (5 (cid:2) body weight [kg]) C SCr, and
the contrast-medium ratio—deﬁned as the ratio between the
contrast-medium volume administered and the maximum
dose calculated—was assessed. Development of CI-AKI was
associated with both contrast-medium volume and ratio.
Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI can be
found in Table 16.

Route of administration of contrast media
The risk of CI-AKI appears to be greater after arterial
compared to venous administration of contrast media.
Indeed, in the rare studies where an appropriate control
group without contrast media was included, no signiﬁcant
difference was observed in the rate of CI-AKI between the
patients who received i.v. iodinated contrast media and the
control subjects who did not.440–442 Thus, the risk of CI-AKI
with i.v. contrast medium is probably very low. CI-AKI
reportedly occurs after i.v. contrast-medium injection for CT
in only 4% of patients with CKD.443 Katzberg and Lamba444
summarized the six studies on CI-AKI after i.v. contrast-
medium administration in patients at risk and all suffering
from moderate CKD. The overall incidence of CI-AKI in
these studies, using the current generation of low-osmolar
contrast media, was about 5%.

Given the logistic challenges in the outpatient setting, the
use of speciﬁc prophylactic measures prior to administration
of i.v. contrast media could be limited to those subjects
who are at higher levels of baseline risk than they would be
when an i.a. procedure was planned.445 This conclusion, may

76

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

c h a p t e r 4 . 3

Table 16 | Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI

Some CT strategies in patients at risk of CI-AKI
K Perform CT, when possible, without contrast media; scrutinize the examination and discuss with the referral physician-surgeon before deciding on

the need for contrast media.

K Dosing per kilogram body weight to reduce the amount of contrast media is needed in thin patients.
K Adapt injection duration to scan duration when performing CT-angiography, so that the injection is not still running when the scan is finished.
K Use a saline chaser to decrease the amount of contrast media, by using the contrast medium that otherwise would remain in the dead space of the

arm veins; this may save 10–20 ml of contrast media.

K Use 80 kVp; contrast-medium dose may be reduced by a factor of 1.5–1.7 compared to the dose used at 120 kVp since iodine attenuation increases,

and combine with increased tube loading (mAs) to maintain signal-to-noise ratio.

K Further reduction of contrast media may be instituted in patients with known decreased cardiac output (not unusual in patients with renal

impairment) undergoing CT-angiographic studies.

Some angiographic strategies in patients at risk of CI-AKI
K Use biplane when appropriate.
K Avoid test injections; the same amount may be enough for a diagnostic digital-subtraction angiography run.
K Scrutinize each series before performing the next; avoid unnecessary projections.
K Decrease kilovoltage in a thin patient; a lower iodine concentration may be used.
K Assess the physiologic significance of a stenosis by measurement of translesional pressure gradient and fractional flow reserve, a technique well
accepted and validated for the coronary circulation. For different arterial beds, perform manometry of a questionable stenosis instead of multiple
projections.

K Avoid ventriculography: echocardiography (and ‘‘echo contrast’’) is always a reasonable alternative.
K Use plasma isotonic contrast-media concentrations for renal artery injections.
K When renal artery stenosis is suspected, map the origin of major renal arteries with noninvasive procedures (e.g., CT without contrast media) for

proper initial renal angiographic projections to avoid unnecessary runs, or perform primary manometry.

K CO2 may be used as contrast medium in venous examinations and below the diaphragm for arterial examinations or alternatively use iodinated

contrast media with the same contrast effect, i.e., about 40 mg iodine per milliliter.

K Since the contrast effect of 0.5 M Gd-contrast media has been regarded as diagnostic by many investigators (coronary, renal, aortofemoral

arteriography, etc.), iodinated contrast media may be diluted to the same density, i.e., about 75 mg iodine per milliliter.

K Use selective or superselective catheterizations when appropriate, e.g., ‘‘single leg run-off’’.
K Reduce aortic flow and amount of contrast medium by temporal occlusion of femoral arteries with tourniquets when performing aortography.

Gd, gadolinium; kVp, peak kilovoltage.

however, be too optimistic when applied to critically ill
patients undergoing emergency CT scans.395

The majority of the literature covering CI-AKI and its
prevention involves i.a. iodinated contrast-medium admin-
istration.445,446 The higher risk of CI-AKI after i.a. admin-
istration is probably due to the more direct exposure of the
kidneys to contrast media,447 or to the fact that, in general,
i.a. contrast-media examinations are performed in patients
who carry a higher risk.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Randomized trials should explore whether there is need
for discontinuation of ACE-I and/or ARBs in patients at
risk for CI-AKI.

K Additional studies are needed to better determine the
exact relationship between the dose of contrast media and
the risk for CI-AKI.

SELECTION OF A CONTRAST AGENT

4.3.2: We recommend using either iso-osmolar or low-
osmolar iodinated contrast media, rather than
high-osmolar iodinated contrast media in patients
at increased risk of CI-AKI. (1B)

RATIONALE
This recommendation is supported by the summary tables of
the different RCTs and on the evidence proﬁle tables (Suppl
Tables 19–21).

High-osmolar vs. iso-osmolar or low-osmolar contrast media
The recommendation to avoid high-osmolar contrast media
is based on older literature, since recent RCTs comparing
high- vs. low- and iso-osmolar iodine-based contrast media
are not available. In addition, high-osmolar contrast media
have virtually been abandoned in modern radiological units.
Both the review of Goldfarb et al.,448 and the meta-analysis of
Barrett and Carlisle combining 24 randomized studies449
suggest that the risk of CI-AKI is similarly low with high-
osmolar and low-osmolar agents among otherwise stable
patients with normal renal function, but that in contrast to
high-osmolar contrast media,
low-osmolar contrast media
are less nephrotoxic in patients with pre-existing kidney
function impairment.

Low-osmolar vs. iso-osmolar contrast media
The present hotly debated question is whether iso-osmolar
contrast media are safer than low-osmolar contrast media in
high-risk patients. This question has been the subject of a
number of randomized trials as well as systematic reviews
and meta-analyses (Suppl Tables 19–21).

We separated studies meeting our inclusion criteria (see
Chapter 1.2) into those administering i.a. or i.v. contrast
media. We used the general deﬁnitions of CI-AKI provided in
the studies (an increase in SCr by 425% or 0.5 mg/dl
[44.2 mmol/l]) occurring within 72 hours after contrast-
in the absence of an alternative
medium administration,
etiology for the decrease in kidney function.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

77

c h a p t e r 4 . 3

Figure 14 | Risk for contrast-induced nephropathy. (a) Iodixanol vs. iohexol and risk for contrast-induced nephropathy; (b) iodixanol vs.
nonionic low-osmolar contrast media other than iohexol and risk for contrast-induced nephropathy. Reprinted from Heinrich MC, Haberle L,
Muller V et al. Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar iodixanol compared with nonionic low osmolar contrast media: meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Radiology 2009; 250: 68–86 with permission, copyright 2009, from Radiological Society of North America457; accessed
http://radiology.rsna.org/content/250/1/68.long

In total, 14 RCTs fulﬁlling the search criteria were found.
Ten RCTs were found with i.a. and four RCTs with i.v.
injection, respectively (Suppl Tables 19–21). There is only
moderate quality of evidence and overall, no beneﬁt—or, at
least, no consistent beneﬁt—was found of nonionic iso-
(iodixanol) contrast media compared to low-
osmolar
osmolar ionic or nonionic contrast media. In eight studies
comparing contrast media given i.a.401,450–456 some showed
superiority of
contrast media (iodixanol),
compared to iohexol450 and iopromide.455 There was no
difference when iodixanol was compared to iopamidol,401,452
iopromide,451,453 and ioversal.456

iso-osmolar

The most recent prospective, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind study compared the renal effects of iodixanol to
the nonionic, low-osmolar agent iopamidol, in 526 subjects
with CKD and diabetes mellitus undergoing diagnostic
and/or therapeutic coronary angiography.454 The overall
CI-AKI incidence was 10.5% (11.2% % in the iodixanol
arm and 9.8% in the iopamidol arm, NS). The volume of
contrast medium, volume of saline administered, frequency
of coronary interventional procedures, and severity of
baseline kidney disease and of diabetes mellitus were similar
between treatments.

Finally, a recent meta-analysis457 (Figure 14) analyzed
studies comparing iodixanol with low-osmolar contrast
media. The pooled RR was 0.68 (95% CI 0.46–1.01;
P ¼ 0.06). In studies that included patients with normal
renal function after i.a. contrast-media administration, the
RR was 0.82 (95% CI 0.45–1.51; P ¼ 0.53). In the studies that
included only patients with decreased kidney function after
i.a. contrast-media administration, the RR was 0.59 (95% CI
0.33–1.07; P ¼ 0.08). However, in all three studies in which
iohexol was the low-osmolar contrast medium used, the risk
of CI-AKI was signiﬁcantly lower with iodixanol (RR 0.38;
95% CI 0.21–0.68; Po0.01). In contrast, the risk of CI-AKI
did not signiﬁcantly differ in the two studies in which

iodixanol was compared to other low-osmolar contrast
agents (RR 0.95; 95% CI 0.50–1.78; P ¼ 0.86). Iodixanol is
thus not associated with a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of CI-
AKI compared to the low-osmolar contrast media pooled
together. However,
in patients with decreased kidney
function, iodixanol is associated with a reduced risk of CI-
AKI compared to iohexol.

The clinical heterogeneity between all these studies, as far
as basal kidney function and prevalence of diabetes mellitus
are concerned, hampers the ability to compare the results
across studies, but can widen the applicability of consistent
ﬁndings across different risk groups provided the mechan-
isms of contrast-induced nephrotoxicity are the same. One
should note, also, that in all these studies different deﬁnitions
of CI-AKI have been used and that the timing of SCr
measurements after contrast-media injection was not uni-
form. It has been shown that different time-points for the
measurement of CI-AKI can give different results.458 One
those studies with a standardized and
may expect
simultaneous measurement of renal function between the
two arms are probably the most conclusive. Finally, different
types and amounts of volume expansion and different
strategies have been used
pharmacological preventive
throughout
the studies, making conclusive comparisons
virtually impossible.

that

i.a. Iodixanol vs. ioxaglate
Two studies fulﬁlled our inclusion criteria; one study459
showed a superiority of iodixanol vs. ioxaglate, but this was
not conﬁrmed in the study by Mehran et al.,460 who found no
difference between these two contrast agents. Although
overall
there is
heterogeneity among the comparators with which iodixanol
has been compared. In addition, the cost of iodixanol is
probably higher than the cost of most of the low-osmolar
contrast agents. No studies comparing a possible difference

the number of patients

substantial,

is

78

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

among low-osmolar contrast media have been performed.
Based on evidence proﬁles (Suppl Tables 19 and 20) and
the most recent meta-analysis457 (Figure 14) of the studies
comparing i.a. administration of
low-osmolar
contrast media, the Work Group found no evidence to
recommend a preference for either type of agent.

iso- vs.

i.v. Administration
There are four studies following i.v. injections fulﬁlling our
inclusion criteria: Barrett et al.,443 Kuhn et al.,461 Thomsen
et al.,462 and Nguyen et al.463 The overall conclusion, based
on the evidence proﬁle summarized in Suppl Table 20
comparing i.v. iso- vs. low-osmolar contrast media, is that
for the nonionic iso-osmolar agent
there is no beneﬁt
(iodixanol); the overall quality of the evidence is moderate.
This conclusion is supported by the above-mentioned recent
meta-analysis457 which,
in seven studies comparing i.v.
contrast-media administration with iodixanol vs. low-osmolar
contrast media, showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference
for CI-AKI (RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.62–1.89; P ¼ 0.79). Subgroup
analysis did not show superiority of any agent in studies of
individuals with normal kidney function (RR 1.12; 95% CI
0.35–3.65; P ¼ 0.85) or in studies of individuals with reduced
kidney function (RR 1.07; 95% CI 0.56–2.02; P ¼ 0.84).

In head-to-head comparisons with different low-osmolar
to
iodixanol has been shown to be superior

agents,

c h a p t e r 4 . 3

It

to iopamidol and iomeprol.

is,
iopromide, but not
however, difﬁcult to determine whether this is simply due
to spurious ﬁndings in a smaller number of comparisons, or
due to true differences between low-osmolar agents. Until
better head-to-head comparative studies among the different
contrast media agents are available, the Work Group is
unable to draw deﬁnite conclusions on the selection of
iso-osmolar vs. low-osmolar contrast media.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Additional

studies with head-to-head comparisons
among the different contrast media should be performed
in order to draw definite conclusions on the selection
of iso-osmolar vs. low-osmolar contrast media. A more
uniform definition of CI-AKI, as suggested in this
guideline, should be used as the end-point.

intrarterial

isosmolar vs.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 19: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of
low osmolar contrast agent on the
prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 20: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
low osmolar contrast agent on the
of intravenous isosmolar vs.
prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 21: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect of
isosmolar vs. low osmolar contrast agent on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

79

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

Chapter 4.4: Pharmacological prevention strategies
of CI-AKI

FLUID ADMINISTRATION
Extracellular volume expansion at the time of radiocontrast-
media administration may serve to counteract both the
intrarenal hemodynamic alterations and the direct tubulo-
toxic effects that play a role in the pathophysiology of CI-
AKI. Neurohumoral effects of volume expansion that may
attenuate radiocontrast-induced medullary hypoxia include
suppression of vasopressin as well as inhibition of the renin-
angiotensin axis; but an increased synthesis of vasodilatory
renal prostaglandins may also play a role.464

Volume expansion may also directly reduce cellular
damage by dilution of the contrast medium, particularly in
the medullary tubular segments. Likewise, an effect of
radiocontrast media to increase tubular ﬂuid viscosity may
be diminished by intravascular volume expansion.465 It is
important to note that these potentially attenuating effects of
volume expansion are speculative, and the precise mechan-
isms by which volume expansion protects against CI-AKI
remain unknown.

4.4.1: We recommend i.v. volume expansion with either
isotonic sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate
solutions, rather than no i.v. volume expansion, in
patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. (1A)

RATIONALE
Despite the recognition of volume depletion as an important
risk factor for AKI, there are no RCTs that have directly
evaluated the role of ﬂuids vs. placebo in the prevention of
AKI. However, RCTs have compared different ﬂuids and have
combined ﬂuids with other interventions.191 Furthermore,
comparisons between outcomes seen in these trials191 and
historical untreated control subjects466 suggest a large beneﬁt
from ﬂuids. In particular, volume expansion and treatment of
dehydration are well-established interventions in the preven-
tion of CI-AKI. A recent propensity analysis, however, noted
that strategies to prevent CI-AKI are implemented rather
nonuniformly.467 Pre– and post–contrast-media administra-
tion i.v. ﬂuids were given to only 264 of 660 study patients
(40.0%), more commonly with coronary angiography than
with CT (91.2% vs. 16.6%). Other preventive measures, such
as administration of NAC or discontinuation of NSAIDs,
were equally rarely applied. Only 39.2% of patients received
NAC, while only 6.8% of patients were instructed to
discontinue NSAIDs. In a propensity analysis, the use of
i.v. ﬂuids was associated with a reduced rate of CI-AKI. The

incidence of CI-AKI was
following CT (range,
0.0–10.9%) and was highest following noncoronary angio-
graphy (range, 1.9–34.0%).

lowest

The ﬂuids that have been tested in the prevention of
CI-AKI are hypotonic saline (0.45%), isotonic saline (0.9%)
and isotonic sodium bicarbonate. The interpretation of all
these studies is hampered by the fact that not all other risk
factors
for CI-AKI were excluded or
considered in every study (i.e., age of the patient, presence
of CKD and/or diabetes prior to contrast-media administra-
tion, type and dose of contrast agent, associated therapy with
NAC, and other risk factors [see Chapter 2.2]).

(susceptibilities)

There is no clear evidence from the literature to guide the
choice of the optimal rate and duration of ﬂuid infusion in
CI-AKI prevention, but most studies suggest that the ﬂuids
should be started at least 1 h before and continued for 3–6
hours after contrast-media administration. A ‘‘good’’ urine
output (4150 ml/h) in the 6 hours after the radiological
procedure has been associated with reduced rates of AKI in
one study.468 Since not all of
i.v. administered isotonic
crystalloid remains in the vascular space, in order to achieve
a urine ﬂow rate of at least 150 ml/h, X1.0–1.5 ml/kg/h of
i.v. ﬂuid has to be administered for 3–12 hours before and
6–12 hours after contrast-media exposure.

Mueller et al.469 found that i.v. 0.9% saline solution,
in 1620
compared to 0.45% saline solution in dextrose,
patients undergoing coronary angiography signiﬁcantly
reduced CI-AKI. The sustained administration of isotonic
saline before and after radiocontrast injection seems, thus,
to be more protective than equivalent volumes of hypotonic
saline.464 Although the mechanism by which sodium
bicarbonate, beyond its volume-expanding effects, might
further reduce CI-AKI remains poorly deﬁned, it has been
postulated that sodium bicarbonate infusion may decrease
generation of free radicals mediated by the Haber-Weiss
reaction by increasing tubular pH. The Haber-Weiss reaction
is most active at lower pH levels.470 Sodium bicarbonate
infusion may also scavenge the potent oxidant peroxynitrate,
produced via a nitric oxide–mediated pathway.471 Reactive
oxygen species activate
cytokine-induced inﬂammatory
mediators, resulting in damage to proximal tubular cells,472
and it is likely that the activation of these mediators is
inﬂuenced by tissue hypoxia and intracellular medullary
acidosis.473

It is worth noting that, compared to i.v. bicarbonate, the
combination of oral azetazolamide inducing an alkaline
urine, plus i.v. saline, was more effective for the prevention of

80

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

Figure 15 | Bicarbonate vs. saline and risk of CI-AKI. Reprinted from Zoungas S, Ninomiya T, Huxley R et al. Systematic review: sodium
bicarbonate treatment regimens for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2009; 151: 631–638 with permission
from American College of Physicians481; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/151/9/631.full

CI-AKI than saline alone,
in a relatively small study in
children with stable chronic renal failure (CRF).474 It could
also be hypothesized that sodium bicarbonate has a stronger
impact in lowering the intratubular viscosity caused by the
contrast medium, compared to isotonic saline, because it
causes less tubular sodium reabsorption than saline.

Sodium bicarbonate solutions have been tested in the
prevention of CI-AKI in comparison with isotonic saline,
either with or without NAC. A number of systematic reviews
on the role of sodium bicarbonate compared to isotonic
saline in the prevention of CI-AKI are available.475–481

The most

systematic review included RCTs of

recent and probably the most complete
systematic review481 analyzed MEDLINE, PubMed, EMBASE,
and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from
1950 to December 2008; conference proceedings; and
ClinicalTrials.gov, without language restriction (Figure 15).
This
sodium
bicarbonate that prespeciﬁed the outcome of CI-AKI as a
25% increase in baseline SCr concentration or an absolute
increase of 0.5 mg/dl (44.2 mmol/l) after contrast-media
administration. Twenty-three published and unpublished
trials with information on 3563 patients and 396 CI-AKI
events were included. The pooled RR was 0.62 (95% CI
0.45–0.86), with evidence of signiﬁcant heterogeneity across

i.v.

studies. Some heterogeneity was due to the difference in the
estimates between published and unpublished studies: RR
0.43 (95% CI 0.25–0.75) vs. 0.78 (95% CI 0.52–1.17),
respectively. Meta-regression showed that small, poor-quality
studies that assessed outcomes soon after contrast-media
administration were more likely to suggest the beneﬁt of
bicarbonate (Po0.05 for all). No clear effects of treatment on
the risk for dialysis, heart failure, and total mortality were
identiﬁed.

Suppl Tables 22 and 23 summarize the evidence from
RCTs where isotonic bicarbonate was compared to isotonic
saline alone, without concomitant other ‘‘preventive’’ inter-
ventions. In all studies, a minimum of 50 patients in both
arms and publication as
full paper were required for
inclusion in the tables. Only three studies directly compared
isotonic bicarbonate to isotonic saline.470,482,483 In a fourth
study by Brar et al.,484 NAC was included in 47% and 46% of
the patients in both arms of the study (bicarbonate vs.
saline), respectively. The ﬁrst study was a small single-center
RCT470 enrolling 119 patients with stable SCr of at least
1.1 mg/dl (97.2 mmol/l), randomized to either infusion of
isotonic saline or isotonic sodium bicarbonate before and
after contrast-media administration. CI-AKI (deﬁned as an
increase of 25% in SCr from baseline within 48 hours)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

81

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

developed in 1.7% in the bicarbonate group, compared to
13.6% in the saline solution group.

Ozcan et al.483 included three prophylactic regimens:
infusion of sodium bicarbonate, sodium chloride, and sodium
chloride plus oral NAC (600 mg b.i.d.). The incidence of
CI-AKI, deﬁned as an increase in SCr level 425% or 0.5 mg/dl
(44.2 mmol/l) after 48 hours was signiﬁcantly lower in the
sodium bicarbonate group (4.5%) compared to sodium
chloride alone (13.6%, P ¼ 0.036). After adjusting for the
Mehran nephropathy risk score, the risk of CI-AKI signiﬁ-
cantly reduced with sodium bicarbonate compared to sodium
chloride alone (adjusted risk ratio 0.29; P ¼ 0.043).

By contrast, Adolph et al.482 did not ﬁnd differences in CI-
AKI between the two ﬂuid regimens on day 1 after
angiography; even on day 2, most parameters were similar
in both groups. In none of the above-mentioned studies was
there need for RRT.

(n ¼ 89)

Finally, a recent but retrospective study485 deﬁned CI-AKI
as an increase in SCr X25% within 48 hours of receiving
contrast media, and compared sodium bicarbonate to
normal saline in patients exposed to cardiac angiography.
received prophylactic
One group of patients
bicarbonate; a second group, normal saline (n ¼ 98). The
patients in the bicarbonate group had more severe renal
disease with higher baseline SCr (1.58 ± 0.5 mg/dl; 140 ±
44.2 mmol/l) vs. (1.28 ± 0.3 mg/dl; 113 ± 26.5 mmol/l),
P ¼ 0.001 and a lower eGFR, compared to the normal saline
group. After contrast-media exposure, there was signiﬁcant
drop in eGFR (6.4%) and increase in SCr (11.3%) in the
normal saline group and no signiﬁcant change in the
bicarbonate group. Three patients (3.4%) in the bicarbonate
group, as opposed to 14 patients (14.3%) in the normal saline
group, developed CI-AKI (P ¼ 0.011). Two patients in the
normal saline group and none in the bicarbonate group
i.v.
needed dialysis. This study suggests that the use of
sodium bicarbonate is more effective than normal saline in
preventing CI-AKI.

Three studies compared bicarbonate and saline solutions
associated with the administration of NAC in both study
arms.486–488 Recio-Mayoral et al.488 conducted a prospective
single-center RCT in 111 consecutive patients with acute
coronary syndrome undergoing emergency angioplasty. One
group of patients received an infusion of sodium bicarbonate
plus NAC started just before contrast-media injection and
continued for 12 hours after angioplasty. The second
(control) group received the standard ﬂuid protocol consist-
ing of i.v. isotonic saline for 12 hours after angioplasty. In
both groups, two doses of oral NAC were administered the
next day. A SCr concentration 40.5 mg/dl (444.2 mmol/l)
from baseline after emergency angioplasty was observed in
1.8% in the bicarbonate group and in 21.8% of the saline
group. Mortality and need for RRT were not signiﬁcantly
different between both groups. Briguori et al.486 randomized
326 CKD patients (SCr X2 mg/dl [X177 mmol/l] and/or
eGFR o40 ml/min per 1.73 m2), and referred for coronary
and/or peripheral procedures to three different protocols:

prophylactic administration of 0.9% saline infusion plus
NAC (n ¼ 111), sodium bicarbonate infusion plus NAC
(n ¼ 108), and 0.9% saline plus ascorbic acid plus NAC
(n ¼ 107). CI-AKI was deﬁned as an increase of X25% in the
SCr concentration 48 hours after the procedure. CI-AKI
occurred in 9.9% of the saline plus NAC group, in 1.9% of
the bicarbonate/NAC group (P ¼ 0.019 vs. saline plus NAC
group), and in 10.3% of the saline plus ascorbic acid plus
NAC group (P ¼ 1.00 vs. saline plus NAC group). There was
no difference in mortality nor in need for RRT among the
that
different groups. While these two studies
suggest
isotonic bicarbonate may provide greater beneﬁt
than
isotonic saline, either in association with NAC or not, neither
study can be considered conclusive.

Maioli et al.487 prospectively compared the efﬁcacy of
sodium bicarbonate vs. isotonic saline in addition to NAC in
a larger population of 502 patients with an estimated CrCl
o60 ml/min, and undergoing coronary angiography or
intervention. CI-AKI was deﬁned as an absolute increase of
SCr X0.5 mg/dl (X44.2 mmol/l) measured within 5 days. CI-
AKI occurred in 10.8%; 10% were treated with sodium
bicarbonate and 11.5% with saline. In patients with CI-AKI,
the mean increase in creatinine was not signiﬁcantly different
in the two study groups. Based on this last prospective study,
bicarbonate does not seem to be more efﬁcient than saline.
Furthermore, a retrospective cohort study at the Mayo Clinic
assessed the risk of CI-AKI associated with the use of sodium
bicarbonate, NAC, or the combination. Surprisingly,
i.v.
sodium bicarbonate was associated with an increased
incidence of CI-AKI.489

While one might take the position that, if in doubt, one
should choose the regimen that is potentially superior, the
Work Group also considered the potential harm. In addition,
isotonic bicarbonate solutions are usually composed by
adding 154 ml of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate (i.e., 1 mmol/
ml) to 846 ml of 5% glucose solution, resulting in a ﬁnal
sodium and bicarbonate concentration of 154 mmol/l each.
Since this mixing of the solution is often done at the bedside
or in the hospital pharmacy, there is the possibility for errors
leading to the infusion of a hypertonic bicarbonate solution.
The potential for harm from dosing errors, and the added
burden from preparation of the bicarbonate solution, has to
be taken into account in clinical practice when making a
choice between using bicarbonate rather than standard
isotonic saline solutions. Taken together, the Work Group
concluded that there is a possible but inconsistent beneﬁt of
bicarbonate solutions based on overall moderate-quality
evidence (Suppl Table 22). As discussed above, the potential
of harm and the additional burden for preparing the
bicarbonate solutions led the Work Group not to express a
preference for or against one solution (isotonic saline or
isotonic bicarbonate). Thus, either can be used for the
prevention of CI-AKI.

4.4.2: We recommend not using oral ﬂuids alone in
patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. (1C)

82

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

RATIONALE
Oral volume expansion may have some beneﬁt, but there is
not enough evidence to show that it is as effective as i.v.
volume expansion.490 One small RCT of 53 patients491 who
underwent nonemergent cardiac catheterization found that
i.v. volume expansion with saline was more effective than
unrestricted oral ﬂuid intake. A more recent trial492 examined
the effects of oral volume intake on renal function in 180
patients with preserved renal function referred for coronary
CT angiography. The patients were divided into two groups:
106 subjects with an increase in SCr after coronary CT
angiography; and 74 without. Signiﬁcant correlations were
observed between the amount of oral ﬂuid intake and the
percentage changes in SCr as well as the absolute changes in
eGFR. In multiple regression analysis, the amount of oral
ﬂuid intake was the only independent predictor for an
increase in SCr. However, a recent study compared oral ﬂuids
(water with or without bicarbonate) to i.v. ﬂuids (isotonic
saline or bicarbonate) and did not ﬁnd differences in
incidence of CI-AKI patients with mild CKD. If conﬁrmed
in larger studies, this regimen could offer an equivalent and
more practical approach in preventing a decline in renal
function after contrast exposure, without accruing additional
delay in hospital days or in-hospital mortality.493

ROLE OF NAC IN THE PREVENTION OF CI-AKI

4.4.3: We suggest using oral NAC, together with i.v. iso-
tonic crystalloids, in patients at increased risk of
CI-AKI. (2D)

RATIONALE
NAC—in many, but not all, studies—has been shown to have
a protective effect on CI-AKI when administered before the
onset of renal insult; for a review, see McCullough.494 In
addition, NAC is inexpensive and appears to be safe,
although it may have some detrimental effects on myocardial
and coagulation function.371–373 The ‘‘safety’’ of NAC should
further be amended, particularly when high i.v. doses are
used, as in some of the RCTs in CI-AKI. When prospectively
studied in acetaminophen poisoning,
i.v. NAC produced
anaphylactoid reactions in up to 48% of participants.374
Although most of these reactions were mild, at least one
death has been reported in a patient with asthma.375 It should
be noted that the doses used in acetaminophen intoxication
are still much higher than in the ‘‘high doses’’ used in CI-AKI
prevention trials. In a recent review,495 doses of NAC 300 mg/
kg i.v. over 21 hours, 980 mg/kg i.v. over 48 hours, and
1330 mg/kg p.o. over 72 hours were mentioned to have been
all comparably effective at preventing hepatotoxicity in most
uncomplicated early-presenting acute acetaminophen over-
doses. Although a variety of doses of NAC has been
administered in the prevention of CI-AKI, the i.v.
‘‘high
doses’’ used in one study496 are mostly 2 (cid:2) 1200 mg NAC per
day for 2–3 days, far below the doses used in acetaminophen

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

intoxication. A meta-analysis497 of studies using high doses
of NAC deﬁned the latter as a daily dose greater than 1200 mg
or a single periprocedural dose greater
than 600 mg
(periprocedural being described as immediately or within 4
hours of the planned contrast exposure). It should also be
remembered that no FDA label is available for NAC as a
preventive drug of AKI.

Suppl Tables 24 and 25 summarize the quite numerous
RCTs where NAC has been compared to placebo on the
impact of patient mortality, need for RRT, or prevention of
CI-AKI. In most of the studies, i.v. ﬂuids, either with isotonic
saline or with isotonic bicarbonate, was used in both arms.
Moreover, the impact of NAC on important ‘‘hard’’ patient
outcomes, such as all-cause mortality, need for RRT, or
doubling of SCr level has only rarely been studied. At present,
there is no current evidence that either oral or i.v. NAC can
alter mortality or need for RRT after contrast-media
administration to patients at risk for CI-AKI. The only study
showing a signiﬁcant decrease in hospital mortality is the
three-arm study of Marenzi et al.498 in patients undergoing
primary angioplasty. Overall in-hospital mortality was higher
in patients with CI-AKI, deﬁned as a 25% increase in SCr,
than in those without CI-AKI (26 % vs. 1 %; Po0.001).
Thirteen patients (11%) in the control group died, as did ﬁve
(4%) in the standard-dose NAC and three (3%) in the high-
dose NAC group (P ¼ 0.02). All other studies did not show a
beneﬁcial effect on mortality (Suppl Table 25). Overall, this
evidence was deemed to be of moderate quality and the
possible positive effect on mortality dubious.

The effect of NAC on the incidence of CI-AKI is quite
variable. As is shown in the evidence proﬁle (Suppl Table 24),
the evidence that NAC reduces CI-AKI, as deﬁned in the
different trials, comes from studies with rather heterogeneous
results; most of the studies were of either high or modest
quality. In one study, a protective—even dose-dependent—
effect was observed.498 In that study, the risk for CI-AKI was
reduced by 54.5% in the standard-dose NAC group and by
75.8% in the high-dose NAC group. These ﬁndings are in
sharp contrast to many other studies showing no effect and,
in particular, with the large study of Webb et al.,499 which was
terminated early after enrollment of 487 patients because
of a determination of futility by the Data Safety Monitoring
Committee. As mentioned earlier, combination studies of
NAC with bicarbonate administration486 have found a
moderate beneﬁt for this combination, compared to the
combination of NAC-saline.

As recently remarked by Fishbane,364 most of the studies
published on NAC for the prevention of CI-AKI are quite
small in size, and meta-analyses have been performed to
increase the probability of explaining the full spectrum of
utility for NAC. To date, seven out of the 11 meta-analyses
that have been published on this subject found a net beneﬁt
for NAC in the prevention of CI-AKI.364 However, as pointed
out before, marked heterogeneity in the studies, and
publication bias must lead to the conclusion that ‘‘pooling
of data to arrive at a summary estimate for treatment efﬁcacy

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

83

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

and/or

clinical

statistical

signiﬁcant

should generally be avoided in situations where the trials
exhibit
hetero-
geneity’’.500,501 A recent prospective RCT502 was performed in
patients with decreased kidney function (CrCl p60 ml/min
and/or SCr level of X1.1 mg/dl [X97.2 mmol/l]), comparing a
high oral dose of NAC with high doses of vitamin C. All
patients underwent a coronary angiography. The primary end-
point was the maximum increase of SCr level, and the
secondary end-point was the incidence of CI-AKI, deﬁned as a
relative increase in baseline SCr level of X25% and/or an
absolute increase of X0.5 mg/dl (X44.2 mmol/l) within 48
hours after contrast-media administration. The maximum
increase of SCr level was signiﬁcantly lower in the NAC group
than in the ascorbic acid group ((cid:3)0.03±0.18 mg/dl [(cid:3)2.65±
15.9 mmol/l] vs. 0.04 ± 0.20 mg/dl
[3.54±17.7 mmol/l]),
respectively (P ¼ 0.026). The incidence of CI-AKI tended to
be in favor of NAC rather than ascorbic acid, 1.2% vs. 4.4%,
signiﬁcant
respectively, although this difference was not
(P ¼ 0.370). It was concluded that an oral high dose of NAC
seemed to be more beneﬁcial than ascorbic acid in preventing
CI-AKI, particularly in diabetic patients with pre-existing CKD.
Finally, a randomized, single-blind, controlled trial was
recently published to assess NAC effects on CI-AKI and
reperfusion injury in ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (MI) patients undergoing primary angioplasty
with moderate contrast-media volumes (between 120–230 ml
of an iso-osmolar contrast medium).496 The patients under-
going primary angioplasty were randomized to either high-
dose NAC (two times 1200 mg/d for 48 hours; or placebo
plus ﬂuids). CI-AKI occurred in 14% of the NAC group and
in 20% of the placebo group (P ¼ 0.28). The myocardial
salvage index was also not different between both treatment
groups. Activated oxygen protein products and oxidized low-
density lipoprotein as markers for oxidative stress were
reduced by as much as 20% in the NAC group, whereas no
change was evident in the placebo group.

Thus, despite high-dose i.v. NAC reducing oxidative stress,
it does not provide an additional clinical beneﬁt, compared
to placebo, with respect to CI-AKI and myocardial reper-
fusion injury in nonselected patients undergoing angioplasty.
A recent meta-analysis of all prospective trials of individuals
randomized to either orally or i.v. administered high doses of
NAC, deﬁned as a daily dose greater than 1200 mg or a single
periprocedural dose (within 4 hours of contrast-media
exposure) 4600 mg, was published by Trivedi et al.497 The
overall effect size, assuming a common OR, was 0.46 (95% CI
0.33–0.63) for the occurrence of CI-AKI with the use of high-
dose NAC. The results of the more conservative random-
effects approach were similar (OR 0.52; 95% CI 0.34–0.78).
Another recently published meta-analysis of RCTs inclu-
ded published trials and conference abstracts (Figure 16).503
The primary and secondary outcomes of
interest were
CI-AKI, and renal
failure requiring dialysis, respectively.
Ten RCTs met the inclusion criteria. Nine studies compared
combination treatment (bicarbonate and NAC) to NAC and
normal saline; one study compared combination therapy to

NAC alone; one study compared combination therapy to
NAC with normal saline, and a separate arm with NAC and
ascorbic acid. Collectively, combination treatment of NAC
with i.v.
sodium bicarbonate reduced CI-AKI by 35%
compared to the other above-mentioned combinations (RR
0.65; 95% CI 0.40–1.05). However, the combination of NAC
plus sodium bicarbonate did not signiﬁcantly reduce renal
failure requiring dialysis (RR 0.47; 95% CI 0.16–1.41). It was
concluded that combination prophylaxis with NAC and
sodium bicarbonate substantially reduced the occurrence
of CI-AKI overall, but not dialysis-dependent renal failure.
This paper suggests that combination prophylaxis should
be incorporated for all high-risk patients (emergent cases
or patients with pre-existing CKD). Most of the studies
administered NAC orally; some studies used the i.v. route or
even a combination of oral and i.v. There was also a substantial
variation in doses and timing of NAC administration.

One additional study was recently published and was thus
not
included in the meta-analysis discussed above. Koc
et al.,504 investigated the efﬁcacy of prophylactic i.v. NAC and
ﬂuids for the prevention of CI-AKI in patients with mild to
moderate renal dysfunction (SCr X1.1 mg/dl [X97.2 mmol/l]
or a CrCl p60 ml/min) who were undergoing coronary
angiography. A group of patients was assigned to i.v. NAC
(bolus of 600 mg twice daily before and on the day of the
procedure) plus high-dose normal saline, a second group to
only high-dose saline, and a third (control) group received
standard saline. Patients in the NAC plus high-dose saline
group received an i.v. bolus of 600 mg of NAC twice daily
before and on the day of the coronary procedure (total 2.4 g)
plus i.v. 0.9% saline 1 ml/kg/h before, on, and after the day of
the coronary procedure. Patients in the high-dose arm
received the same amount of isotonic saline, while patients
in the control group received an i.v. dose of 0.9% saline
1 ml/kg/h for 12 hours before and 12 hours after the coronary
procedure. The rate of CI-AKI in the NAC plus high-dose
saline group was lower than in the high-dose saline group
without NAC. No signiﬁcant differences in the primary and
secondary end-points were found between the high-dose
saline and control groups.

In conclusion, based on the evidence tables and even
taking the last recent study into account, the overall beneﬁt of
NAC is not consistent or overwhelming. On the other hand,
oral NAC has a low risk of adverse events and usually a low
cost.

THEOPHYLLINE AND FENOLDOPAM IN PREVENTION OF CI-AKI
Theophylline

4.4.4: We suggest not using theophylline to prevent

CI-AKI. (2C)

RATIONALE
A rationale for the prophylactic use of adenosine antago-
nists in patients undergoing radiocontrast procedures was

84

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

Figure 16 | NAC and bicarbonate vs. NAC for risk of CI-AKI. Reprinted from Brown, JR, Block CA, Malenka DJ et al. Sodium bicarbonate
plus N-acetylcysteine prophylaxis: a meta-analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2009; 2: 1116–1124,503 copyright 2009, with permission from
American College of Cardiology Foundation; accessed http://interventions.onlinejacc.org/cgi/content/full/2/11/1116

incidence of CI-AKI

suggested by results showing increased serum levels and
urinary excretion of adenosine occurring after intravascular
administration of contrast media.505 The efﬁcacy of theo-
phylline in preventing CI-AKI has been addressed by a
systematic review and meta-analysis in 2005 (nine RCTs, 585
patients),506 and another meta-analysis in 2008 (six RCTs,
629 patients).432 Both meta-analyses indicated a nonsigni-
ﬁcant trend toward a renoprotective effect of theophylline
prophylaxis. The
tended to be
lower (Bagshaw: OR 0.4, CI 0.14–1.16, P ¼ 0.09; Kelly: OR
0.49, CI 0.23–1.06, P ¼ 0.14), SCr concentrations 48 hours
after intervention were signiﬁcantly lower ((cid:3)0.17 mg/dl;
95% CI (cid:3)0.2 to (cid:3)0.06 mg/dl [(cid:3)15.0 mmol/l, CI (cid:3)17.7 to
(cid:3)5.30 mmol/l]; P ¼ 0.002) with theophylline compared to
control therapies. However, the overall beneﬁt was small and
ﬁndings were inconsistent across
studies. The beneﬁt
attributable to the use of theophylline tended to be less
marked in patients receiving iso-osmolar, nonionic contrast
media, and in patients undergoing a predeﬁned saline
protocol.

Neither meta-analysis included a RCT published in 2006
in 150 contrast-media examinations in 91 patients, in which
the renoprotective effects of theophylline, NAC, and the
combination of both were directly compared.507 All patients
had at least one risk factor for developing CI-AKI, and
received more than 100 ml of
low-osmolar radiocontrast
agent. The incidence of CI-AKI was signiﬁcantly lower with
theophylline as compared to NAC pretreatment (2% vs. 12%;
P ¼ 0.045), and did not differ between theophylline mono-
therapy and the combination treatment. The renoprotective
superiority of theophylline, which was given as a single i.v.
200 mg dose 30 minutes prior to the procedure, was even
more signiﬁcant in patients with pre-existing renal damage as
indicated by an SCr 41.5 mg/dl (4133 mmol/l) (P ¼ 0.008).
Moreover, a recent study508 randomized 217 patients with
eGFR between 30 and 60 ml/min who were undergoing
coronary angiography to one of three prophylactic treat-
ments: i.v. isotonic saline (1 ml/kg/h for 12 hours before and
after contrast media (group 1, n ¼ 72); isotonic saline as in
group 1 together with NAC (600 mg p.o. twice daily the

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

85

c h a p t e r 4 . 4

preceding day and the day of angiography (group 2, n ¼ 73);
or isotonic saline and NAC as in group 2 together with
200 mg theophylline orally twice daily for the preceding day
and the day of angiography (group 3, n ¼ 72). The incidence
of CI-AKI (0.5 mg/dl or 44.2 mmol/l SCr increase within 48
hours of intravascular contrast-media injection) was 6.9% in
group 1, 9.6% in group 2, and 0% in group 3 (Po0.03),
suggesting a beneﬁcial effect of adding theophylline to a
standard regimen in the prevention of CI-AKI. Notably, at
least in this study, NAC administration had no additive
protective effect compared to isotonic saline alone.

A very recent study509 randomly assigned patients to
prophylactic administration of saline with sodium bicarbo-
nate plus theophylline (either orally or i.v.) or sodium
bicarbonate only. Theophylline plus bicarbonate prophylaxis
signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of CI-AKI (1.6% vs. 7.9%;
P ¼ 0.015) compared to bicarbonate alone. Theophylline was
administered either orally (200 mg b.i.d. starting the day
before the contrast administration and continuing for 24
hours thereafter) or i.v. 200 mg in a short infusion before
contrast administration and continuing orally at 200 mg
b.i.d. for 48 hours. Theophylline prophylaxis signiﬁcantly
reduced the incidence of CI-AKI in moderate and high-risk
patients (0% vs. 8.8%; P ¼ 0.022 and 9.1% vs. 42.1%;
P ¼ 0.014, respectively). This study did not mention side-
effects of theophylline.

Although these data suggest that preinterventional theo-
phylline administration might be helpful
in patients at
increased risk for CI-AKI, the possibility of cardiovascular
side-effects and the interactions with numerous drugs
associated with theophylline510,511 should be recognized
(Suppl Tables 26 and 27). As can be noted from the evidence
proﬁle tables, the evidence is low and the balance of beneﬁts
vs. harm is uncertain. In view of the low evidence and the
uncertain balance of beneﬁts vs. harm, the Work Group
does not support the use of theophylline for prevention of
CI-AKI.

Fenoldopam

4.4.5: We recommend not using fenoldopam to prevent

CI-AKI. (1B)

RATIONALE
Fenoldopam is a selective dopamine A1 receptor agonist
that might theoretically increase blood ﬂow, especially to the
(historical
renal medulla. Several uncontrolled studies
controls, retrospective review) suggested that it is effective
in reducing the risk for contrast-induced nephropathy, and
the results of a pilot trial were promising (for review, see
Stacul et al.512). However, two prospective randomized trials
showed negative results.220,513 In the ﬁrst trial,513 patients

were randomized to saline alone or with fenoldopam
(0.1 mg/kg per minute for 4 hours before and after the
procedure); a third arm was treated with NAC. The incidence
of CI-AKI was similar in the fenoldopam (15.7%) and
control (15.3%) groups, and there was no beneﬁt over
larger trial220 also conﬁrmed the
saline alone. A second,
lack of beneﬁt with fenoldopam. In this double-blind trial
of 315 patients, all with saline 0.45%, were randomized to
fenoldopam (0.05 mg/kg per minute titrated to 0.1 mg/kg
per minute) or placebo starting 1 h before the procedure and
continuing for 12 hours afterward. There was no signiﬁcant
difference in the incidence of CI-AKI within 96 hours in
the two groups (fenoldopam, 33.6%; placebo, 30.1%) or in
the rates of dialysis, rehospitalization, or death at 30 days.

Statins in the prevention of CI-AKI
Two recent studies examined the use of statins in the
prevention of CI-AKI patients with CKD. In the ﬁrst study,514
31 patients were prospectively randomized to receive atorvas-
tatin 80 mg/d or placebo for 48 hours before and 48 hours
after contrast-medium administration. All patients received i.v.
saline and oral NAC. CI-AKI occurred in 16 patients (11%) in
the placebo group and 15 patients (10%) in the atorvastatin
group. Persistent kidney injury, deﬁned as 1-month increase
from baseline creatinine value 425%, was observed in 30%
in the placebo group and in 31% in the atorvastatin group.
The second study515 followed 431 patients, 194 of whom were
receiving pravastatin treatment for hypercholesterolemia. SCr
levels were measured at baseline (preprocedure) and within 48
hours after contrast-medium exposure (peak postprocedure).
Logistic regression analysis revealed that pravastatin treatment,
preprocedure SCr, and contrast volume were independently
related to the decreased risk of CI-AKI. However, such studies
are susceptible to the so-called ‘‘healthy user effect’’ where
certain groups may have reduced risk, not because of the
drug but because of healthier lifestyles, for which use of the
medication is a marker. For example, patients taking statins
may also be more compliant with other medical-care regimens
that may reduce adverse events.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 22: Evidence profile of RCTs examining effect of
i.v. sodium bicarbonate vs. control for the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 23: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of i.v. sodium bicarbonate on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 24: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 25: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 26: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of theophylline vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 27: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of theophylline vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

86

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 4 . 5

Chapter 4.5: Effects of hemodialysis or hemofiltration

4.5.1: We suggest not using prophylactic intermittent
hemodialysis (IHD) or hemoﬁltration (HF) for
contrast-media removal
in patients at increased
risk for CI-AKI. (2C)

RATIONALE
Contrast media are excreted mainly by glomerular ﬁltration
and there is a signiﬁcant correlation between both total body
and renal clearances of contrast media and GFR; the renal
excretion of contrast media will thus be delayed in patients
with renal failure (for review, see Deray).516 Contrast media
can be efﬁciently removed from blood by IHD and a single
session effectively removes 60–90% of contrast media.516,517
On the basis of these observations, several studies have
explored the prophylactic value of IHD in patients at high
risk, but most of these studies have not demonstrated a
reduced incidence of CI-AKI.516,518 For example, Vogt
et al.518 recorded renal function and other parameters, IHD
requirements, and relevant clinical events before and during 6
days after administration of contrast media in 113 patients
with a baseline SCr 42.3 mg/dl (4203 mmol/l). Eight out of
55 patients in the prophylactic IHD group and three in the
non-IHD group (P ¼ 0.12), required IHD after contrast-
media examination. Reinecke et al.519 performed a prospec-
tive single-center trial
in 424 consecutive patients with
SCr concentrations between 1.3–3.5 mg/dl (115–309 mmol/l)
who underwent elective coronary angiography. Patients were
randomized to one of three treatment strategies with all
patients receiving pre- and postprocedural ﬂuids: one group
received no additional therapy, patients in the second group
were hemodialyzed once, and the third group received oral
NAC. The frequency of CI-AKI (deﬁned as an increase in SCr
X0.5 mg/dl or X44.2 mmol/l) from 48 to 72 hours after
catheterization was 6.1% in the ﬂuids-only group, 15.9% with
IHD treatment, and 5.3% in the NAC group (intention-
to-treat analysis; P ¼ 0.008). There were no differences
between the treatment groups with regard to increased SCr
X0.5 mg/dl (X44.2 mmol/l) after 30–60 days (4.8%, 5.1%, and
3.1%, respectively; P ¼ 0.700). Analyses of long-term follow-
up (range 63–1316 days) by Cox regressions models of the
study groups found quite similar survival rates (P ¼ 0.500).
This large study concluded that IHD, in addition to ﬂuids, for
the prevention of CI-AKI provided no evidence for any
outcome beneﬁt but showed evidence for probable harm.

A retrospective but important cohort study of 391 patients
(age 69 ± 8 years, with chronic renal insufﬁciency [SCr
X1.3 mg/dl; X115 mmol/l]) who underwent cardiac cathe-
terization, also did not ﬁnd any beneﬁcial preventive effect.520

By contrast, Lee et al.521 presented a prospective RCT
indicating that prophylactic IHD might be useful in patients
scheduled for coronary angiography or coronary intervention
with severely impaired renal function (baseline CrCl of 13 ml/
min per 1.73 m2). Patients were treated with normal saline at
1 ml/kg/h for 6 hours before and 12 hours after contrast-
media administration and randomized to receive IHD for
4 hours as soon as possible after angiography or control
treatment. Four days after angiography, SCr concentrations
were lower in the IHD group compared to the control group.
Out of 42 patients, one patient (2%) in the IHD group but 14
(35%) out of 40 patients in the control group required
temporary IHD after coronary angiography. Furthermore,
none of the 42 patients in the IHD group, but ﬁve (13%) out
of 40 patients in the control group, required maintenance
IHD after discharge from the hospital (Po0.05).

A recent meta-analysis of studies using periprocedural
extracorporeal blood puriﬁcation techniques517 concluded
that such treatments did not decrease the incidence of
CI-AKI. It could theoretically be anticipated that high-ﬂux
membranes used in HF or hemodiaﬁltration (HDF) moda-
lities
should be able to remove contrast media more
efﬁciently than low-ﬂux membranes used in routine IHD.
However, recent publications on this topic have added to the
controversy about the role of IHD or HF to prevent CI-AKI
(Suppl Tables 28 and 29). Marenzi et al.522 studied 114
consecutive patients with CRF (SCr concentration 42 mg/dl
or 4177 mmol/l) who were undergoing coronary interven-
tions. Fifty-eight patients were assigned to either HF starting
before the contrast-medium administration and continuing
for up to 24 hours after, while 56 patients were treated with
isotonic saline at a rate of 1 ml per kilogram of body weight
per hour, given in a step-down unit over the same time
interval. In-hospital mortality was 2% in the HF group and
14% in the control group (P ¼ 0.02), and the cumulative
1-year mortality was 10% and 30%, respectively (P ¼ 0.01).
Temporary RRT was required in 25% of the control group
and in only 3% of the patients in the HF group. An increase
in the SCr concentration of 425% from the baseline value
after the coronary intervention occurred less frequently
among patients in the HF group than among the control
patients (5% vs. 50%, Po0.001). The effective removal of
creatinine during HF or IHD makes it difﬁcult to be certain
that an observed lower incidence of CI-AKI is not related to
the transport removal of creatinine during the procedure.

In a subsequent study, the same authors523 randomized
92 patients with CKD (CrCl p30 ml/min) to three different
prophylactic treatments: i.v. isotonic saline (control group);
i.v. saline for 12 hours before contrast-media exposure,

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

87

c h a p t e r 4 . 5

followed by HF for 18–24 hours after contrast-media
exposure; and a third group where HF was performed for 6
hours before and for 18–24 hours after contrast-media
exposure. The incidence of CI-AKI (425% increase in
SCr) and the in-hospital clinical course were compared in the
three groups. In-hospital mortality was 20%, 10%, and 0%,
respectively, in the three groups; IHD was required in nine
(30%), 3 (10%), and zero (0%) patients,
respectively
(P ¼ 0.002). According to these results, pre-HF is required
to obtain the full clinical beneﬁt, suggesting that among
different mechanisms possibly involved, high-volume con-
trolled volume expansion before contrast-media exposure
plays a major role in prevention. This study further suggests
that bicarbonate exposure with HF may ultimately have been
the mechanism for the lower CI-AKI incidence (Suppl Table
29). In summary, the evidence proﬁle for IHD vs. HF showed
low-quality evidence and an uncertain beneﬁt vs. harm
balance of HF/IHD in preventing CI-AKI in patients with
severe CKD. Given the costs and logistical difﬁculties, the use
for CI-AKI prevention can only be
of HF modalities
advocated if
future studies will convincingly show clear
beneﬁt.

and Jane Cizik Foundation,

Shire,
Novartis, Robert
Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.

DISCLAIMER
While every effort
is made by the publishers, editorial
board, and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data,
opinion or statement appears in this Journal, they wish
to make it clear that the data and opinions appearing in
the articles and advertisements herein are the responsibility
of the contributor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned.
Accordingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board
and their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept
no liability whatsoever for the consequences of any such
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 28: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of hemodialysis or hemofiltration on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 29: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of hemodialysis or hemofiltration on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

88

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 1

Section 5: Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.35

Chapter 5.1: Timing of renal replacement therapy
in AKI

Whether or not to provide RRT, and when to start, are two of
the fundamental questions facing nephrologists and inten-
sive-care practitioners in most cases of severe AKI. In recent
publications, the timing of initiation of RRT was listed as one
of the top priorities in research on AKI.524 However, this
dimension has not been included as a factor in any of the
large RCTs in this area. The optimal timing of dialysis for
AKI is not deﬁned. In current practice, the decision to start
RRT is based most often on clinical features of volume
overload and biochemical
solute imbalance
(azotemia, hyperkalemia, severe acidosis). However, in the
absence of these factors there is generally a tendency to avoid
dialysis as long as possible, a thought process that reﬂects the
decisions made for patients with CKD Stage 5.

features of

Clinicians tend to delay RRT when they suspect that
patients may recover on their own, and because of concern
for the well-known risks associated with the RRT procedure,
including hypotension, arrhythmia, membrane bioincom-
patibility, and complications of vascular access and anti-
coagulant administration. There is also some concern that
RRT may compromise recovery of renal
function, and
increase the progression of CKD.525 Whether these risks
outweigh the potential beneﬁts of earlier initiation of RRT is
still unclear.

5.1.1:

Initiate RRT emergently when life-threatening
changes in ﬂuid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance
exist. (Not Graded)

5.1.2: Consider the broader clinical context, the presence
of conditions that can be modiﬁed with RRT, and
trends of laboratory tests—rather than single BUN
and creatinine thresholds alone—when making the
decision to start RRT. (Not Graded)

for

exist

for dialysis

RATIONALE
While no RCTs
life-threatening
indications, it is widely accepted that patients with severe
hyperkalemia, severe acidosis, pulmonary edema, and uremic
complications should be dialyzed emergently. In the absence
of kidney function, and when therapeutic measures that
promote the intracellular
shift of potassium (such as
correction of acidosis with bicarbonate, glucose and insulin

infusion, and beta-2 agonists) are exhausted, an excess of
potassium can only be eliminated with RRT. On the other
hand, when intermittent dialysis
these
therapeutic interventions,
the extracorporeal removal of
potassium will be reduced and the post-treatment rebound
of serum potassium will be more pronounced.526

is used after

Metabolic acidosis is a frequent clinical problem in
patients with severe AKI. Although the discussion as to
when metabolic acidosis in critically ill patients should be
corrected is outside the scope of this guideline, metabolic
acidosis associated with AKI can usually be corrected with
bicarbonate and should rarely require urgent dialysis if not
accompanied by volume overload or uremia.527 As the pH
and bicarbonate values to initiate dialysis for metabolic
acidosis are not supported by evidence, no standard criteria
for initiating dialysis for acidosis exist. A variety of poisons,
salicylates,
drug overdoses, and toxic compounds (e.g.,
ethylene glycol, methanol, metformin) can contribute to
acid-base problems and also lead to AKI. In these circum-
stances, RRT may also facilitate removal of the offending
drug.528–530

Only one RCT has evaluated the effect of timing of
initiation of RRT on outcome. Bouman et al.531 randomized
106 critically ill patients with AKI to early vs. late initiation
of RRT. The early initiation group started RRT within
12 hours of oliguria (o30 ml/h for 6 hours, not respond-
ing to diuretics or hemodynamic optimization), or CrCl
o20 ml/min. The late-initiation group started RRT when
classic indications were met. The study did not ﬁnd
differences in ICU or hospital mortality, or in renal recovery
among survivors, but was clearly too small to allow for
deﬁnitive conclusions (Suppl Table 30).

The remaining data come from observational studies. The
association of early initiation of dialysis with survival beneﬁt
was ﬁrst suggested by case series with historical controls
conducted in the 1960 s and 1970 s.532–535 In these studies,
levels of blood urea or BUN were used to distinguish early vs.
late start of dialysis. However, these studies mostly combined
early start with more-intensive dialysis and late start with
less-intensive dialysis. More recent studies have continued the
trend focusing on BUN as a biomarker for starting RRT.
Single-center observational studies that were restricted to
AKI after trauma536 and coronary artery bypass surgery537,538

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

89

c h a p t e r 5 . 1

suggested a beneﬁt to RRT initiation at lower BUN concen-
trations. A prospective multicenter observational cohort
study performed by the Program to Improve Care in Acute
Renal Disease (PICARD) analyzed dialysis initiation—as
inferred by BUN concentration—in 243 patients from ﬁve
geographically and ethnically diverse clinical sites. Adjusting
for age, hepatic failure, sepsis, thrombocytopenia, and SCr,
and stratiﬁed by site and initial dialysis modality, initiation of
RRT at higher BUN (476 mg/dl [blood urea427.1 mmol/l])
was associated with an increased risk of death (RR 1.85; 95%
CI 1.16–2.96).539 In a prospective multicenter observational
study conducted at 54 ICUs in 23 countries, timing of RRT
was stratiﬁed into ‘‘early’’ or ‘‘late’’ by median urea at the
time RRT started (24.2 mmol/l [BUN 67.8 mg/dl]), and also
categorized temporally from ICU admission into early (less
than 2 days), delayed (between 2–5 days), or late (more than
5 days). Timing by serum urea showed no signiﬁcant
difference in mortality. However, when timing was analyzed
in relation to ICU admission, late RRT was associated with
greater crude mortality (72.8% late vs. 62.3% delayed vs. 59%
early, P ¼ 0.001) and covariate-adjusted mortality (OR 1.95;
95% CI 1.30–2.92; P ¼ 0.001). Overall, late RRT was asso-
ciated with a longer duration of RRT and stay in hospital, and
greater dialysis dependence.540 It
is, however, not clear
whether AKI occurring later in the course of ICU stay has the
same pathophysiology and prognosis than AKI present on or
early after admission. The most recent study on this subject is
the analysis of surgical ICU patients with AKI, showing that
late initiation of RRT (deﬁned as RIFLE-I or -F) was an inde-
pendent predictor of mortality (HR 1.846; CI 1.07–3.18).541
Traditional indications for RRT, developed for patients
with advanced CKD, are not necessarily valid in the context
of AKI. For instance, massive volume overload resulting from
volume resuscitation may be an indication for RRT even in
the absence of signiﬁcant elevations in BUN or SCr. In this
instance, it may be more appropriate to consider dialytic
intervention in the ICU patient as a form of renal support
rather
the
traditional indications for dialysis (e.g., uremic pericarditis,
pleuritis, encephalopathy, coagulopathy) would be consid-
ered ‘‘complications’’ of AKI rather than indications for RRT.
Additionally, the decision to start RRT should recognize the
goals of therapy, keeping in mind the therapeutic potential of
dialysis in general, and each dialysis modality in particular.
The treatment of AKI with RRT has the following goals: i) to
maintain ﬂuid and electrolyte, acid-base, and solute homeo-
stasis; ii) to prevent further insults to the kidney; iii) to
permit renal recovery; and iv) to allow other supportive
measures (e.g., antibiotics, nutrition support) to proceed
without limitation or complication. Ideally, therapeutic inter-
ventions should be designed to achieve the above goals and a
systematic assessment of all these factors is key to determi-
ning the optimal timing for initiating dialysis (Table 17).

replacement.

than renal

some of

Indeed,

There is increasing evidence that ﬂuid overload in critical
is associated with adverse outcomes,
illness and AKI
especially in the pediatric setting.83,84,542–549 Whether this is

a causal relationship remains to be proven, although a
randomized trial in hemodynamically stable patients with
acute respiratory distress syndrome seems to suggest that
it is.549 Randomizing patients according to RRT initiation on
the basis of ﬂuid status would allow this question to be
answered. A secondary analysis of a randomized trial
comparing IHD to CRRT showed that patients receiving
RRT predominantly for solute control experienced better
outcomes than those predominantly treated for volume
overload. Patients dialyzed for control of both azotemia and
volume overload experienced the worst outcome.550 Analysis
of a multicenter observational cohort showed that mean
daily ﬂuid balance in AKI patients was signiﬁcantly more
positive among nonsurvivors than survivors.84 Data from
the PICARD group examining 396 ICU patients with AKI
requiring RRT further supports these ﬁndings. Survivors had
lower ﬂuid accumulation at dialysis initiation compared to
nonsurvivors (8.8% vs. 14.2% of baseline body weight;
P ¼ 0.01 adjusted for dialysis modality and severity score).
The adjusted OR for death associated with ﬂuid overload at
dialysis initiation was 2.07 (95% CI 1.27–3.37).83 These data
suggest that ﬂuid overload should be further evaluated as
parameter to guide the initiation of RRT (see also Pediatric
Considerations).

Other factors that might inﬂuence the decision of when to
start RRT are the severity of the underlying disease (affecting
the likelihood of recovery of kidney function), the degree of
dysfunction in other organs (affecting the tolerance to e.g.,
ﬂuid overload), the prevalent or expected solute burden (e.g.,
in tumor lysis syndrome), and the need for ﬂuid input related
to nutrition or drug therapy (Table 17). Early detection and
accurate prediction of patients that ultimately will require
RRT may allow earlier initiation in those who need it and, at
the same time, prevent harm in those who do not. Recent
evidence suggests a potential role for biomarkers in this ﬁeld.
Plasma neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin was shown
to have an area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve of 0.82 for the prediction of RRT requirement.551

Pediatric considerations
Provision of acute RRT to children requires special consi-
derations. Pediatric and adolescent patients range in age from
the premature neonate to 25 years of age, with a size range of
1.5–200 kg. In addition, the epidemiology of the pediatric
AKI has changed from primary kidney disease in the 1980 s to
injury resulting from another systemic illness or its treatment
(e.g., sepsis and nephrotoxic medications).552,553 Newborns
with inborn errors of metabolism who do not respond to
dietary and pharmacologic management require expeditious
dialytic removal of ammonia to decrease the risk of death and
long-term neurologic dysfunction,554 and infants who receive
surgical correction of congenital heart disease, often receive
PD early after cardiopulmonary bypass to prevent ﬂuid
overload and/or minimize the proinﬂammatory response.
Finally, children develop multiorgan dysfunction very rapidly
in their ICU course, with the maximal organ dysfunction

90

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

c h a p t e r 5 . 1

Table 17 | Potential applications for RRT

Applications

Comments

Renal replacement

This is the traditional, prevailing approach based on utilization of RRT when there is little or no residual kidney
function.

Life-threatening indications

Hyperkalemia

Acidemia

Pulmonary edema

Uremic complications
(pericarditis, bleeding, etc.)

Nonemergent indications

Solute control

Fluid removal
Correction of acid-base
abnormalities

Renal support

Volume control

Nutrition

Drug delivery
Regulation of acid-base
and electrolyte status
Solute modulation

No trials to validate these criteria.
Dialysis for hyperkalemia is effective in removing potassium; however, it requires frequent monitoring of potassium
levels and adjustment of concurrent medical management to prevent relapses.
Metabolic acidosis due to AKI is often aggravated by the underlying condition. Correction of metabolic acidosis with
RRT in these conditions depends on the underlying disease process.
RRT is often utilized to prevent the need for ventilatory support; however, it is equally important to manage pulmonary
edema in ventilated patients.
In contemporary practice it is rare to wait to initiate RRT in AKI patients until there are uremic complications.

BUN reflects factors not directly associated with kidney function, such as catabolic rate and volume status.
SCr is influenced by age, race, muscle mass, and catabolic rate, and by changes in its volume of distribution due to
fluid administration or withdrawal.
Fluid overload is an important determinant of the timing of RRT initiation.
No standard criteria for initiating dialysis exist.

This approach is based on the utilization of RRT techniques as an adjunct to enhance kidney function, modify fluid
balance, and control solute levels.
Fluid overload is emerging as an important factor associated with, and possibly contributing to, adverse outcomes
in AKI.
Recent studies have shown potential benefits from extracorporeal fluid removal in CHF.
Intraoperative fluid removal using modified ultrafiltration has been shown to improve outcomes in pediatric cardiac
surgery patients.
Restricting volume administration in the setting of oliguric AKI may result in limited nutritional support and RRT allows
better nutritional supplementation.
RRT support can enhances the ability to administer drugs without concerns about concurrent fluid accumulation.
Permissive hypercapnic acidosis in patients with lung injury can be corrected with RRT, without inducing fluid overload
and hypernatremia.
Changes in solute burden should be anticipated (e.g., tumor lysis syndrome). Although current evidence is unclear,
studies are ongoing to assess the efficacy of RRT for cytokine manipulation in sepsis.

AKI, acute kidney injury; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CHF, congestive heart failure; SCr, serum creatinine; RRT, renal replacement therapy.

Table 18 | Fluid overload and outcome in critically ill children with AKI

Author

Goldstein 2001545
Gillespie 2004544
Foland 2004543

Cohort (N)

Single-center (22)
Single-center (77)
Single-center (113)

Goldstein 2005546

Multicenter (116)

Hayes 2009547

Single-center (76)

Sutherland 2010548

Multicenter (297)

Outcome

Survivors 16% FO Nonsurvivors 34% FO
% FO 410% with OR death 3.02
3 organ MODS patients
Survivors 9% FO Nonsurvivors 16% FO
1.78 OR death for each 10% FO increase
2+ organ MODS patients
Survivors 14% FO Nonsurvivors 25% FO
o20% FO: 58% survival
420% FO: 40% survival
Survivors 7% FO Nonsurvivors 22% FO
OR death 6.1 for 420% FO
o10% FO: 70% survival
10–20% FO: 57% survival
420% FO: 34% survival
OR 1.03 (1.01–1.05) per % FO

P

0.03
0.002
0.01

0.002

0.001

0.001

AKI, acute kidney injury; FO, fluid overload; MODS, multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome; OR, odds ratio.
Reprinted from Goldstein SL. Advances in pediatric renal replacement therapy for acute kidney injury. Semin Dial 2011; 24:
187–191 with permission from John Wiley and Sons560; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1525-139X.2011.00834.x/full

occurring with 72 hours and mortality occurring within 7
days of ICU admission, respectively.555,556 Thus, the issue of
timing of dialysis initiation is critically important in children.

Both recommendations in this section of the guideline are
applicable to pediatric patients. A detailed discussion of the
speciﬁc pediatric clinical situations is beyond the scope of

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

91

c h a p t e r 5 . 1

this guideline, and the reader
reviews.557,558

is

referred to in-depth

Importantly, ﬂuid overload has emerged as a signiﬁcant
factor associated with mortality in children with AKI
requiring CRRT (Table 18), although the physiological link
between increasing percent volume overload and mortality is
not completely clear.543–548,559 The largest trial to assess this
relationship in children is a multicenter prospective study
showing that the percentage ﬂuid accumulation at CRRT
initiation is signiﬁcantly lower in survivors vs. non-survivors
(14.2 ± 15.9% vs. 25.4 ± 32.9%; Po0.03) even after
adjustment for severity of illness. This study also found a
signiﬁcantly higher mortality in patient with 420% ﬂuid
overload (58%) vs. o20% ﬂuid overload (40%) at CRRT
initiation.546 One retrospective study, in pediatric patients
who received stem-cell transplantation and developed AKI,
suggested that survival may be improved by an aggressive use
of diuretics and early initiation of RRT. All survivors (n ¼ 11)
maintained or remained with percentage ﬂuid accumulation
o10%, with diuretics and RRT. Among the 15 nonsurvivors,
only 6 (40%) had percentage ﬂuid accumulation o10% at
the time of death.559 The latest analysis on this issue
conﬁrmed increased mortality with increasing ﬂuid overload

in 297 children treated with RRT: 29.6% mortality with less
than 10% ﬂuid overload, 43.1% with 10–20% ﬂuid overload,
and 65.6% with 420% ﬂuid overload.548 However, strong
evidence to suggest that preventing this ﬂuid overload with
earlier RRT will improve outcome remains absent.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Determine reproducible criteria (e.g.,

fluid overload,
biomarker level, severity score) to inform the decision to
start RRT in adult and pediatric AKI patients. Such
criteria may also permit the identification of patients who
will ultimately require RRT and hence limit uncertainty
around whether to begin therapy.

K Determine whether early vs. late start of RRT, based on
the above-mentioned criteria, results in improved clinical
outcomes (e.g., mortality, evolution to CKD Stage 5) of
AKI patients.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 30: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of early vs. late CVVH in the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

92

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 2

Chapter 5.2: Criteria for stopping renal replacement
therapy in AKI

Although many patients with AKI recover kidney function
sufﬁciently to be independent of RRT, discontinuation of
RRT in AKI has received little attention in the literature. The
decision whether or when to stop RRT in a patient with AKI
in kidney function
needs to consider an improvement
adequate to meet demand, an improvement in the disorder
that prompted kidney support or futility. It
is evident
that each of
inﬂuenced by the initial
is
indication for starting RRT and is subject to individual
variation. The strategy for stopping RRT requires considera-
tion of additional factors and often involves a modality
transition.

these events

5.2.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer required,
either because intrinsic kidney function has recov-
ered to the point that it is adequate to meet patient
needs, or because RRT is no longer consistent with
the goals of care. (Not Graded)

treatments

RATIONALE
Many, but not all, patients requiring RRT will recover
enough function not to require long-term RRT. 21,394,561
The mean duration of RRT in two recent
large RCTs
was 12–13 days.562,563 Thus, daily assessment of both
intrinsic kidney function and the ongoing appropriate-
ness of RRT consistent with the goals of therapy for the
patient are required. More than 50% of patients with severe
improve, despite appropriate therapy. The
AKI will not
in
life-support
incidence of withdrawal of
critically ill patients with multiorgan failure has increased
over the last decade.564 In addition to vasoactive medication,
mechanical ventilation, and artiﬁcial nutrition, RRT is one of
the therapies most likely to be discontinued during with-
drawal of life support. In general, decisions to withdraw
therapy occur in 10% of all patients from general ICUs, and
are responsible for roughly 40% of all deaths. Analysis of a
life
database of 383 AKI patients shows withdrawal of
single-center
support
retrospective study involving 179 AKI patients requiring
RRT, therapy was withheld or withdrawn in 21.2%.566 A
posthoc analysis of the BEST KIDNEY database showed that
CRRT was withdrawn in 13% of the patients, representing
29% of those who died while on CRRT and 21% of all
nonsurvivors.196

in 72% of deaths.565

In another

solute levels prevent achieving a steady state and thus exclude
the use of clearance measurements. Native kidney function
can only be assessed during the interdialytic period by
evaluating urine volume, urinary excretion of creatinine, and
changes in SCr and/or BUN values. However, one must
realize that intermittent treatment will be associated with
post-treatment rebound in solute levels, and that changes
in BUN and creatinine levels can also be modiﬁed by
nonrenal factors, such as volume status and catabolic rate.
In CRRT, continuous solute clearance of 25–35 ml/min will
stabilize serum markers after 48 hours. This allows more
reliable measurements of CrCl by the native kidneys during
CRRT.

for at

Very few investigators have looked at urine CrCl values as
a guide for CRRT withdrawal. One small retrospective study
(published as abstract) demonstrated that a CrCl (measured
over 24 hours) 415 ml/min was associated with successful
termination of CRRT, deﬁned as the absence of CRRT
least 14 days following cessation.567
requirement
Further prospective trials will be needed to support these
ﬁndings. A large prospective observational study showed
that, in 529 patients who survived the initial period of CRRT,
313 were successfully removed from RRT, whereas 216
patients needed ‘‘repeat CRRT’’ within 7 days of discontinua-
tion. Multivariate logistic regression identiﬁed urine output
as the most signiﬁcant predictor of successful termination
(OR 1.078 per 100 ml/d). Not surprisingly, the predictive
ability of urine output was negatively affected by the use
of diuretics.196 Another retrospective observational analysis
showed that, of a total of 304 patients with postoperative
AKI requiring RRT (IHD), 31% could be weaned for more
than 5 days and 21% were successfully weaned for at least
30 days. Independent predictors for restarting RRT within
30 days were longer duration of RRT, a higher Sequential
Organ Failure Assessment score, oliguria, and age 465
years.568 In other words, urine output seems to be a very
important predictor of successful discontinuation of RRT.
requiring
too-early discontinuation of RRT,
Whether
is by itself harmful has not been properly
reinstitution,
investigated. The above-mentioned observational
studies
found a higher mortality in patients who needed to be
retreated with RRT (42.7% vs. 28.5%196 and 79.7% vs.
40%568). It is, however, not clear whether failure to wean is
simply a marker of illness severity or contributed by itself to
the adverse outcome.

Assessment of kidney function during RRT is not easy and
will depend on the modality used. In IHD, the ﬂuctuations of

The process of stopping RRT may consist of simple
discontinuation of RRT, or may include a change in the

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

93

c h a p t e r 5 . 2

frequency, or duration of RRT. For example,
modality,
switching from CRRT to IHD, or decreasing the frequency of
IHD from daily to every other day, represents different
methods of testing the ability of the patient’s own kidney to
take over. No speciﬁc guidance can be provided for how to
manage the transition of RRT from continuous to inter-
mittent. Evidence from large observational studies suggests
that large variation in practice exists.196

5.2.2: We suggest not using diuretics to enhance kidney
function recovery, or to reduce the duration or
frequency of RRT. (2B)

RATIONALE
The role of diuretics in the prevention and treatment of AKI
has already been discussed in Chapter 3.4. Only one RCT has
evaluated the potential role of diuretics in resolving AKI in
patients receiving RRT. After the end of the CVVH session,
the urine of the ﬁrst 4 hours was collected for measuring
CrCl. Seventy one patients were subsequently randomized to
receive furosemide (0.5 mg/kg/h) or placebo by continuous
infusion, continued until CrCl reached 30 ml/min. Urinary
ﬂuid losses were compensated by i.v. infusion. The primary
end-point was renal recovery (CrCl 430 ml/min or stable
SCr without RRT) in the ICU and in the hospital. CVVH
was restarted based on predeﬁned criteria. Patients treated
with furosemide (n ¼ 36) had a signiﬁcantly increased
urinary volume and greater sodium excretion compared to
placebo-treated patients (n ¼ 35). However, there were no
differences in need for repeated CVVH, or renal recovery
during ICU or hospital stay.195 An observational study of
discontinuation of RRT also found no difference in diuretic
use between patents with successful or unsuccessful dis-
continuation of IHD.568 In summary, diuretics may improve
urine volume after RRT, but do not appear to have any
signiﬁcant beneﬁt in reducing the need for RRT or promoting
renal recovery from AKI.

Pediatric considerations
The medical indications guiding discontinuation of RRT in
children do not differ from adults, except in those instances
where RRT is initiated for pediatric-speciﬁc disease, such as
inborn errors of metabolism to treat hyperammonemia557 or
immediately after surgical correction of congenital heart
disease to maintain euvolemia, and/or possibly mitigate the
postbypass proinﬂammatory response.558

Prognosis in children who survive an AKI episode is
signiﬁcantly better than in adults, and many children may have
several decades of life expectancy. Askenazi demonstrated nearly
80% 3- to 5-year survival for children discharged after an AKI
episode from a tertiary center,569 yet two-thirds of deaths occur-
red in the ﬁrst 2 years after discharge, suggesting a high prob-
ability of greater life expectancy after that period. In addition, no
data exist to deﬁne a maximal RRT duration; even data from the
Prospective Pediatric CRRT Registry show 35% survival
in
children receiving CRRT for 428 days.570 Finally, since pediatric
AKI now results more often as a secondary phenomenon from
another systemic illness or its treatment,552,553 determination of
the overall goals of therapy for children, as in for adults, must
take into consideration local standards, patient and family
wishes, as well as the probability of recovery of the underlying
illness leading to AKI and the need for RRT.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Determine clinical parameters (e.g., parameters of kidney
fluid overload, hypercatabolism) that predict

function,
successful discontinuation of RRT in AKI patients.

K Determine biomarkers that may indicate renal recovery,
and whether their levels can be used to guide disconti-
nuation of RRT.

K Determine more reliable predictors of long-term out-
comes (e.g., mortality, quality of life) in AKI patients
(including clinical severity scores, biomarkers, machine
learning techniques, or combinations of these), that—
after validation in large cohorts—could be helpful
adjuncts in the decision to withdraw treatment.

94

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 3

Chapter 5.3: Anticoagulation

In patients with AKI requiring RRT, the contact of blood with
the foreign surface of the extracorporeal circuit results in
activation of both the intrinsic and the extrinsic pathway of
plasmatic coagulation and activation of platelets.571 Preven-
tion of dialyzer/hemoﬁlter clotting often requires some
form of anticoagulation, which may represent a particular
challenge in patients with AKI. The need for continuous
anticoagulation represents a potential drawback of CRRT.

5.3.1:

In a patient with AKI requiring RRT, base the
decision to use anticoagulation for RRT on assess-
ment of the patient’s potential risks and beneﬁts
from anticoagulation (see Figure 17). (Not Graded)
5.3.1.1: We recommend using anticoagulation
during RRT in AKI if a patient does
not have an increased bleeding risk or
impaired coagulation and is not already
receiving systemic anticoagulation. (1B)

RATIONALE
The goal of anticoagulation with RRT is to prevent clotting of
the ﬁlter and/or reduction in membrane permeability, and
thus to achieve adequate RRT and to prevent blood loss in
the clotted ﬁlter. These beneﬁts have to be weighed against
the risk of bleeding, and economic issues, such as workload
and costs.

Patients with impaired coagulation (e.g., thrombocytopenia,
or prolonged prothrombin time or activated partial thrombo-
plastin time [aPTT]), due to underlying diseases such as liver
failure or dilution coagulopathy, may not beneﬁt
from
additional anticoagulation for RRT. In two recent large trials
50–60% of AKI patients requiring RRT were treated without
anticoagulant.562,563 While ﬁlter performance was not assessed,
adequate CRRT ﬁlter survival without anticoagulation has
mostly been described in patients with coagulopathies.572–575
However, no speciﬁc cut-off points have been determined for
platelet count, aPTT, International Normalized Ratio, ﬁbrino-
gen, or other coagulation factors that would indicate the
possibility to perform RRT without anticoagulation. On the
other hand, prolonged clotting times can also point to a con-
sumptive coagulopathy based on the presence of an activated
coagulation. In these patients, frequent ﬁlter clotting will occur
and necessitate a switch to some form of anticoagulation.576

In patients that are treated without anticoagulation,
special attention is required to non-anticoagulant strategies
to prolong ﬁlter survival. These include a good functioning
the reduction of blood viscosity and
vascular access,
hemoconcentration by saline ﬂushes, predilution, high blood

ﬂow rates, diffusive treatment, the reduction of blood-air
contact in the bubble trap, and assuring prompt reaction to
alarms.577,578

Many patients with AKI require systemic anticoagulation
for their underlying diseases (e.g., artiﬁcial heart valve, acute
coronary syndrome, atrial ﬁbrillation). It is evident that, in
most instances, these patients will not require additional
anticoagulation for RRT; however, this should be assessed on
a case-by-case basis.

5.3.2:

For patients without an increased bleeding
risk or impaired coagulation and not already
receiving effective systemic anticoagulation, we
suggest the following:
5.3.2.1:

5.3.2.2:

5.3.2.3:

For anticoagulation in intermittent RRT,
we recommend using either unfractio-
nated or low-molecular-weight heparin,
rather than other anticoagulants. (1C)
For anticoagulation in CRRT, we sug-
gest using regional citrate anticoagula-
tion rather than heparin in patients
who do not have contraindications for
citrate. (2B)
For anticoagulation during CRRT in
patients who have contraindications for
citrate, we suggest using either unfractio-
nated or low-molecular-weight heparin,
rather than other anticoagulants. (2C)

RATIONALE
Worldwide, unfractionated heparin is still the most widely
used anticoagulant. Many European centers, however, have
switched from unfractionated to low-molecular-weight
heparin for routine anticoagulation during IHD.579 Advan-
tages and disadvantages of each type of heparin are
summarized in Table 19.

thrombosis

A recent meta-analysis of 11 RCTs comparing unfractio-
nated to low-molecular-weight heparin in chronic IHD
concluded that both are equally safe in terms of bleed-
ing complications (RR 0.96; CI 0.27–3.43) and as effective
in preventing extracorporeal
(RR 1.15; CI
0.7–1.91).586 Mainly because of the convenience of using a
single bolus injection at the start of IHD, the reduced risk of
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), and of long-term
side-effects such as abnormal serum lipids, osteoporosis, and
hypoaldosteronism,
the European practice guideline for
prevention of dialyzer clotting suggests using low-molecu-
lar-weight rather than unfractionated heparin in chronic
dialysis patients.587 Many European centers have extrapolated

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

95

c h a p t e r 5 . 3

Rec 
5.3.1.1 

Recs  
5.3.2.2 
& 
5.3.3.1 

CRRT 

Contraindication 
to Citrate?  

Yes 

Rec 
5.3.2.3 

Increased 
Bleeding Risk?  

Yes 

Rec 
5.3.3.2 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation  

Impaired 
coagulation?  

Yes 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation  

No 

Underlying 
condition requires 
systemic 
anticoagulation?  

No 

Choose RRT 
Modality  

Yes 

Use anticoagulation 
adapted to this 
condition  

Intermittent RRT  

No 

No 

Regional Citrate 
Anticoagulation  

Heparin  

Heparin  

No 

Rec 
5.3.2.1 

Increased 
Bleeding 
Risk?  

Yes 

Proceed without 
anticoagulation

Figure 17 | Flow-chart summary of recommendations. Heparin includes low-molecular-weight or unfractionated heparin.
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy.

this to IHD for AKI, although studies in this setting are
lacking. In patients with AKI, the dose of heparin for IHD
and the target aPTT should be individualized according to
the presence or absence of coagulation abnormalities and/or
risk of bleeding.588,589 Monitoring should also include
platelet count, allowing timely detection of HIT.581 Since
low-molecular-weight heparins rely on the kidney as primary
route of elimination, patients with kidney injury are at risk
of accumulation and bleeding complications, depending

on the degree of kidney injury, and the dose and type of
low-molecular-weight heparin.590 The American College of
Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines for antithrombotic and
thrombolytic therapy therefore suggest using unfractionated
instead of low-molecular-weight heparin in patients with
severe renal insufﬁciency (CrCl o30 ml/min) who require
therapeutic anticoagulation, or to reduce the dose of low-
molecular-weight heparin by 50%.580 The doses of
low-
molecular-weight heparin that are required for IHD are

96

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

 
c h a p t e r 5 . 3

Table 19 | Overview of the advantages and disadvantages of different anticoagulants in AKI patients

Anticoagulant

Advantage

Disadvantage

References

Heparin (unfractionated) Wide availability
Large experience
Short half-life
Antagonist available
Monitoring with routine tests
(aPTT or ACT)
Low costs
More predictable kinetics
– Weight-based dosing possible
More reliable anticoagulant response
– No monitoring required
Single predialysis dose may be
sufficient in IHD
Reduced risk of HIT

Low-molecular-weight
heparin

Citrate

Strict regional anticoagulation
– reduced bleeding risk

Narrow therapeutic index – risk of bleeding
Unpredictable kinetics – monitoring required
HIT
Heparin resistance

580,581

Risk of accumulation in kidney failure

Monitoring requires nonroutine test (anti–Factor Xa)

580,582–584

Different drugs not interchangeable

Incomplete reversal by protamine
In most countries more expensive than unfractionated heparin
Risk of accidental overdose with potentially fatal consequences

Insufficient citrate metabolism in patients with reduced liver
function and shock states resulting in accumulation with metabolic
acidosis and hypocalcemia
Other metabolic complication (acidosis, alkalosis, hypernatremia,
hypocalcemia, hypercalcemia)
Increased complexity
Requires strict protocol

585

aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; ACT, activated clotting time; HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; IHD, intermittent hemodialysis

lower than those required for therapeutic anticoagulation.
The doses of low-molecular-weight heparin, as provided by
the manufacturers, should be adapted to the bleeding risk of
the individual patient. Dose reduction may also be required
in patients receiving daily dialysis, which increases the risk
of accumulation. Since many patients with AKI require
prophylaxis
scheduling this
prophylactic (or a slightly higher) dose at the beginning of
the dialysis session may serve the two purposes. Periodic
measurement of anti–Factor Xa levels may be useful with
prolonged use.

for deep-vein thrombosis,

for

Alternative anticoagulants

IHD include protease
inhibitors such as nafamostate and platelet inhibitors such
as prostacyclin or its analogues. Randomized trials compar-
ing these anticoagulants/antiaggregants with heparin in the
setting of IHD for AKI are not available, and their use in
clinical practice is limited. Nafamostat is a protease inhibitor
that is mainly used in Japan and not available in the USA or
Europe. Small observational trials in chronic dialysis patients
with increased bleeding risk suggest a reduced bleeding
incidence.591–593 Concerns with nafamostat
include the
absence of an antidote, and side-effects such as anaphylaxis,
hyperkalemia, and bone marrow suppression.594–596 Cross-
over comparisons of prostacyclin with low-molecular-weight
heparin in chronic dialysis patients show reduced efﬁ-
ciency.597 A small trial showed reduced bleeding complica-
tions compared to low-dose heparin; however, at the expense
slightly more premature terminations.598 Additional
of
drawbacks are systemic hypotension and the high costs.
Therefore, the routine use of alternative anticoagulants can
not be recommended in patients with AKI.

The anticoagulant effect of sodium citrate relies on
forming a complex with ionized calcium, thus removing an
essential component of the coagulation cascade. Part of the
citrate is removed in the extracorporeal circuit. Citrate
reaching the systemic circulation is rapidly metabolized in
the liver, muscle, and kidney,
liberating the calcium and
producing bicarbonate. The buffering effect of sodium citrate
is proportional to the sodium ions it contains: a mole of
trisodium citrate produces the same buffering effect as
3 moles of sodium bicarbonate; whereas preparations of
citrate, including hydrogen citrate, have proportionally less
buffering effect. Extracorporeal losses of calcium have to be
compensated by an exogenous infusion. Additional compli-
cations of citrate are summarized in Table 19. Regional citrate
anticoagulation requires a strict protocol, adapted to the local
treatment modality and ﬂow settings. The protocol should
include instructions for the infusion of citrate and calcium,
for the composition of the dialysate/replacement ﬂuid, and
for intensive metabolic monitoring,
including acid-base
status, sodium, and total and ionized calcium levels.

Five randomized trials have compared citrate to heparins
during CRRT (Suppl Tables 31 and 32). For ethical reasons,
these trials were performed in patients without increased
bleeding risk. The ﬁrst trial by Monchi et al. used a crossover
design to compare anticoagulation with unfractionated
heparin or citrate in 20 patients treated with postdilution
CVVH. Patients with high bleeding risk, liver cirrhosis, and
sensitivity to heparin were excluded. Forty-nine ﬁlters were
evaluated. Citrate was titrated to achieve a postﬁlter ionized
calcium level below 1.20 mg/dl (0.3 mmol/l). The dosing
regimen of heparin consisted of a bolus of 2000 to 5000 U,

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

97

c h a p t e r 5 . 3

followed by a continuous infusion of 500–2000 U/h, aiming
at an aPTT of 60–80 seconds. Despite this rather high heparin
dose, the citrate group had a longer ﬁlter lifetime and less
spontaneous ﬁlter failure. Fewer patients in the citrate group
required transfusion, and the number of transfused units was
also lower. One patient in the heparin group experienced
bleeding and one patient in the citrate group had metabolic
alkalosis.599

The second trial

randomized 30 patients with AKI
undergoing predilution continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁl-
tration (CVVHDF)
to anticoagulation with citrate or
unfractionated heparin. Patients with contra-indications to
one of the two anticoagulants (mainly high bleeding risk/
severe coagulopathy or metabolic problems that might be
aggravated by citrate) or who required systemic antic-
oagulation for medical reasons were excluded. Heparin was
titrated to achieve an aPTT of 45–65 seconds. Citrate was
titrated to a postﬁlter ionized calcium between 1.0–1.40 mg/dl
(0.25–0.35 mmol/l). Two patients in each group crossed over
to the other anticoagulant and these ﬁlters were not included
in the analysis. The trial was stopped early after 79 ﬁlters
because of an advantage using citrate, which resulted in a
signiﬁcantly improved ﬁlter survival (124.5 hours vs. 38.3
hours; Po0.001).
In addition, signiﬁcantly less citrate-
anticoagulated ﬁlters were terminated for clotting (16.7%
vs. 53.5%). The incidence of bleeding also tended to be lower
with citrate (RR 0.17; CI 0.03–1.04; P ¼ 0.06), but transfusion
requirement was not signiﬁcantly different. Three patients in
the citrate group had metabolic alkalosis and two had
hypocalcemia.600

The third trial randomized 48 patients with AKI, treated
with CVVH, to citrate or unfractionated heparin. Patients
requiring systemic anticoagulation for medical reasons and
patients with high bleeding risk, severe coagulopathy, circulatory
failure, liver failure, or hypocalcemia were excluded (n ¼ 12).
A total of 142 circuits was analyzed. Heparin was administered
as a bolus of 3000–5000 U followed by a continuous infusion of
1500 U/h adjusted to achieve an aPTT of 50–70 seconds. Citrate
(500 mmol/l) was titrated to a postﬁlter ionized calcium
between 1.0–1.20 mg/dl
(0.25–0.30 mmol/l). Neither circuit
survival nor the reasons for disconnecting the CVVH circuit
differed signiﬁcantly between the two groups. However, the
number of major bleedings and the need for transfusion was
signiﬁcantly greater in the heparin group. Two cases of
metabolic alkalosis were noted in the heparin group and two
episodes of hypocalcemia in the citrate group.601 Findings from
two studies published after the cut-off date for our literature
review are consistent with recommendation 5.3.2.2.601a,601b

A small randomized crossover study compared citrate
anticoagulation to regional heparinization in 10 CVVH
patients. Both treatment arms had a relatively short ﬁlter life
(13 hours for regional heparinization and 17 hours for
citrate) that did not differ signiﬁcantly. No bleeding occurred
in either group.602

In the largest and most recent randomized trial, 200 patients
treated with postdilution CVVH were randomized to citrate or

the low-molecular-weight heparin, nadroparin. Again, patients
with bleeding risk or liver cirrhosis were excluded. Nadroparin
was started with a bolus of 2850 U followed by 380 U/h without
further monitoring. Citrate (500 mmol/l) was administered at a
dose of 3 mmol per liter blood ﬂow, without monitoring of
postﬁlter ionized calcium. The primary outcomes were safety,
deﬁned as the absence of adverse events necessitating disconti-
nuation of the study anticoagulant, and efﬁcacy, deﬁned as circuit
survival. Safety was signiﬁcantly better in the citrate group with
only two patients requiring a change in anticoagulation regimen
vs. 20 patients in the nadroparin group (P40.001). Adverse
events were citrate accumulation (n ¼ 1) and early clotting due to
protocol violation (n ¼ 1) in the citrate group, and bleeding
(n ¼ 16) or severe thrombocytopenia (n ¼ 4) in the nadroparin
group. Circuit survival did not signiﬁcantly differ. A computer-
driven combination of buffered and nonbuffered replacement
ﬂuids was used in the citrate group, explaining why metabolic
alkalosis occurred more frequently in the nadroparin group.
Rather surprisingly, the authors also found an improved renal
recovery and an improved hospital survival in the citrate group.
This could not be attributed to differences in severity of illness,
nor in bleeding or transfusion requirement, and requires further
investigation.603

trials,

In observational

Metabolic complications were infrequent in these rando-
mized trials.
frequent
metabolic complication is metabolic alkalosis, occurring in
up to 50% of the patients.604–606 In recently published surveys
or large clinical trials, the use of regional citrate antic-
oagulation is
the patients/
still
treatments.562,563,607

limited to 0–20% of

the most

A major contra-indication for the use of citrate antic-
oagulation is severely impaired liver function or shock with
muscle hypoperfusion, both representing a risk of citrate
accumulation. Markedly reduced citrate clearances and lower
ionized calcium levels have been found in patients with acute
liver failure or with severe liver cirrhosis.608–610 These patients
were excluded in all the randomized trials. In patients at risk,
intensiﬁed monitoring is recommendable. The ratio of total
to ionized calcium appears to be the best parameter to detect
citrate accumulation611,612 with an optimal cutoff at 2.1.613
Another important drawback of citrate anticoagulation, that
might inﬂuence the decision to implement it in routine
clinical practice, is the increased complexity of the procedure,
with risk of metabolic complications and the need for a strict
protocol adapted to the local RRT modality. We, therefore,
only recommend the use of citrate for anticoagulation during
CRRT in patients that do not have shock or severe liver
failure, and in centers that have an established protocol for
citrate anticoagulation.

Unfractionated heparin still remains the most widely used
anticoagulant during CRRT,562,563,607 mostly administered as
a preﬁlter infusion, with large variability in the administered
doses. When choosing a dose of heparin, the clinician should
realize that the relationship among heparin dose, aPTT, ﬁlter
survival, and bleeding complications is not straightfor-
ward,574,614–619 but it is common practice to measure aPTT

98

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

c h a p t e r 5 . 3

for safety reasons and to adapt the target to the bleeding risk
of the patient.

Only two small prospective RCTs have compared un-
fractionated to low-molecular-weight heparin for anti-
coagulation during CRRT in patients with AKI and, thus,
no ﬁrm recommendations can be made. The ﬁrst
trial
randomized 47 patients with AKI or systemic inﬂammatory
response syndrome undergoing CVVHDF to heparin, start-
ing with a bolus of 2000–5000 U followed by an infusion of
10 U/kg/h titrated to an aPTT of 70–80 seconds, or to
dalteparin administered as bolus of 20 U/kg followed by an
infusion of 10 U/kg/h. The mean aPTT in the heparin group
was 79 seconds. The mean anti–Factor Xa level, determined in
six patients in the dalteparin group, was 0.49 U/ml. Only 37
of the 82 tested ﬁlters were stopped for coagulation. There
was no difference in ﬁlter survival (with electively discon-
tinued ﬁlters being censored). The mean time to ﬁlter failure
was 46.8 hours in the dalteparin group and 51.7 hours in the
heparin group (NS). Three patients in each group had
bleeding, with no difference in transfusion requirement
between the two groups. Daily costs, including the coagula-
tion assays, were 10% higher with dalteparin.620

The second trial used a crossover design in 40 patients
with normal coagulation parameters undergoing predilution
CVVH. Patients treated with unfractionated heparin received
a bolus of 30 U/kg followed by a continuous infusion of
7 U/kg/h titrated to achieve an aPTT of 40–45 seconds.
Enoxaparin was given as an initial bolus of 0.15 mg/kg
followed by a continuous infusion of 0.05 mg/kg/h, adjusted
to an anti–Factor Xa level of 0.25–0.30 U/ml. In the 37
patients that completed both treatment arms, mean ﬁlter life
was 21.7 hours with heparin and 30.6 hours with enoxaparin
(P ¼ 0.017). A similar difference was found in the per-
protocol analysis. The incidence of bleeding was low and not
different between the two anticoagulants. Filter life did not
correlate with aPTT or anti–Factor Xa level. Costs were
similar in the two groups.616 Interestingly, these clinical
studies did not ﬁnd a correlation between anti–Factor Xa
levels and ﬁlter life, questioning the value of anti–Factor Xa
monitoring with regard to efﬁcacy.616,621 However, if used for
more than a few days, monitoring might be useful to detect
accumulation.

Alternative anticoagulants for use during CRRT include
the protease inhibitor nafamostate and the platelet inhibitors,
prostacyclin and analogues. Both have a short half-life and a
low MW, with the theoretical advantage of extracorporeal
elimination and reduced systemic anticoagulation. Nafamo-
stat is not available in the USA and Europe; there is no
antidote and several side-effects (agranulocytosis, hyperkale-
mia, anaphylactoid reactions) have been described.594–596 A
few small trials showed improved ﬁlter survival during CRRT
when adding prostaglandins to heparin compared to heparin
alone.622–624 However, prostaglandins appear
to have a
limited efﬁcacy when used alone, induce systemic hypoten-
sion,625,626 and are expensive. Their use during CRRT can
therefore not be recommended.

5.3.3: For patients with increased bleeding risk who are
the

receiving anticoagulation, we suggest

not
following for anticoagulation during RRT:
5.3.3.1: We suggest using regional citrate anti-
coagulation, rather than no anticoagula-
tion, during CRRT in a patient without
contraindications for citrate. (2C)
5.3.3.2: We suggest avoiding regional heparini-
zation during CRRT in a patient with
increased risk of bleeding. (2C)

RATIONALE
The risk of bleeding is considered high in patients with recent
(within 7 days) or active bleeding, with recent trauma or
surgery (especially in head trauma and neurosurgery), recent
stroke, intracranial arteriovenous malformation or aneurysm,
retinal hemorrhage, uncontrolled hypertension, or presence
of an epidural catheter. In these patients, the beneﬁt of
anticoagulation may not outweigh the risk of bleeding,
and they should (at
initially) be treated without
anticoagulation, or with CRRT with regional citrate anti-
coagulation.

least

We suggest performing RRT without anticoagulation in
patients with increased bleeding risk. A possible exception
can be made for patients who do not have contraindications
for citrate. Randomized trials
comparing citrate with
heparins have been performed in patients without increased
bleeding risk. However, since citrate results in strictly regional
anticoagulation, it seems reasonable to also suggest its use
during CRRT in AKI patients with increased bleeding risk.

Another approach to achieve regional anticoagulation is
regional heparinization combining a preﬁlter dose of heparin,
aiming at a prolongation of the extracorporeal aPTT, with
postﬁlter neutralization with protamine, aiming at normali-
zing the systemic aPTT. This procedure has been described in
chronic dialysis and CRRT,572,573,624,627,628 but has not been
studied with much scrutiny. It is cumbersome and difﬁcult to
titrate because heparin has a much longer half-life than
protamine, inducing a risk of rebound. In addition, it exposes
the patient to the side-effects of both heparin (mainly the risk
of HIT) and protamine (mainly anaphylaxis, platelet dysfunc-
tion, hypotension, and pulmonary vasoconstriction with right
ventricular failure)629 and is therefore not recommended.

5.3.4:

In a patient with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
(HIT), all heparin must be stopped and we
recommend using direct thrombin inhibitors (such
as argatroban) or Factor Xa inhibitors (such as
danaparoid or fondaparinux) rather than other or
no anticoagulation during RRT. (1A)
5.3.4.1:

In a patient with HIT who does not have
severe liver failure, we suggest using
argatroban rather than other thrombin
or Factor Xa inhibitors during RRT. (2C)

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

99

c h a p t e r 5 . 3

RATIONALE
Immune-mediated HIT results
from antibodies directed
against the complex of heparin and platelet factor 4, and
occurs in 1–3% of heparin-exposed patients. Its main clinical
complication is the development of thrombocytopenia with
or without thrombosis.581 In patients with AKI undergoing
CRRT, the diagnosis should therefore also be suspected in
patients with repeated premature ﬁlter clotting.630 The
likelihood of having HIT can be predicted by the so-called
4 T score, that includes the degree of thrombocytopenia, the
timing of onset of the fall in platelet count, the presence
of thrombosis or acute systemic symptoms, and the presence
of other etiologies of thrombocytopenia.631 If HIT is likely, all
heparins have to be stopped, including any ‘‘heparin lock’’
solutions for dialysis or other catheters.

With regard to the diagnosis and management of HIT,
we refer to the recent guideline of the ACCP581 and the
European best practice guideline on chronic dialysis.587 These
guidelines recommend the use of therapeutic doses of an
alternative nonheparin anticoagulant in patients with strong
suspicion of HIT. Candidates are the direct
thrombin
inhibitors lepirudin, argatroban, or bivaluridin, or the anti-
thrombin-dependent Factor Xa inhibitors, danaparoid or
fondaparinix. Pharmacokinetic data and dosing guidelines
for these alternative anticoagulants have been published for
IHD588,632 and CRRT.633

Argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor, is eliminated
by the liver, has a short half-life, and can be monitored
with aPTT.634 A recent observational study on the use of
argatroban for anticoagulation during continuous dialysis in
30 patients with AKI and HIT derived a dosing equation,
based on illness severity scores or by use of indocyanine green
plasma clearance.635 Regional citrate anticoagulation has
been used along with reduced doses of argatroban or other
nonheparin anticoagulants in cases where bleeding occurs.
However, there are no published reports on this practice.

Pediatric considerations
Standardized protocols have been well established for both
heparin and regional citrate anticoagulation in children
receiving dialysis. The ppCRRT Registry Group has shown
that heparin- and citrate-based anticoagulation protocols
in
have been shown to confer equitable ﬁlter survival
pediatric CRRT, and the use of either is clearly supported
over the use of no anticoagulation schemes.636 The main
advantage of citrate anticoagulation was the prevention of
the patient,
systemic pharmacological anticoagulation of
which can be an issue in patients with multiorgan failure and
sepsis. Calcium is a requisite cofactor in both the intrinsic
and extrinsic coagulation cascades. Citrate functions by
binding free calcium, thereby inhibiting coagulation in both
the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways. The most

frequently studied pediatric citrate protocol636–638 uses
Anticoagulant Dextrose solution A (ACD-A, Baxter Health-
care, USA), prescribed based on the blood ﬂow rate:

ACD rate ðml=hÞ ¼ blood pump rate ðml= min (cid:2) min =hÞ(cid:2)1:5

ACD-A is infused via a stopcock at the catheter-CRRT
circuit connection leading to the CRRT machine. Since our
prescribed blood pump ﬂow is 200 ml/min, the resulting
ACD-A rate would be 300 ml/h. The second aspect of the
citrate protocol provides prevention of citrate-induced
systemic hypocalcemia by providing a calcium chloride
continuous infusion (8 g calcium chloride per liter normal
saline) to the patient via a central line. The calcium chloride
rate is also based on the blood pump rate:

Calcium chloride ðml=hÞ ¼ blood pump rate ðml= min (cid:2) min =hÞ(cid:2)0:6

The goals of regional citrate anticoagulation are to
maintain the circuit
ionized calcium between 0.8 and
1.6 mg/dl (0.2 and 0.4 mmol/l), and the patient’s systemic
ionized calcium in the normal physiologic range 4.4–5.2 mg/
dl (1.1–1.3 mmol/l). The circuit ionized calcium concentra-
tion is managed by adjustment of the citrate rate, while the
patient’s systemic ionized calcium concentration is managed
by adjustment of the calcium chloride rate.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Randomized trials should compare unfractionated to
low-molecular-weight heparin during IHD in patients
with AKI.

K Randomized trials should compare unfractionated to
low-molecular-weight heparin during CRRT in patients
with AKI.

K Randomized trials should compare citrate to unfractio-
nated to low-molecular-weight heparin during CRRT in
patients with AKI.

K Outcomes of

K Future trials should compare a strategy without anti-
coagulation against one of anticoagulation during CRRT.
interest for trials testing different anti-
coagulation strategies with RRT in AKI are clinical
end-points, including bleeding, renal recovery, mortality,
incidence of HIT, and surrogates such as circuit survival
and efficiency of dialysis, metabolic complications, and
effects on the coagulation system.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 31: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of citrate vs. heparin/nadroparin in CRRT for AKI.
Supplementary Table 32: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of citrate vs. heparin/nadroparin in CRRT for AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

100

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 4

Chapter 5.4: Vascular access for renal replacement
therapy in AKI

Functional vascular access is essential for adequate RRT. Basic
requirements are to ensure adequate and regular ﬂow with
low morbidity. Most studies on indwelling tunneled dialysis
catheters have been performed in chronic dialysis patients.
For individuals requiring acute dialysis, the evidence on
dialysis catheters is more limited, but there is a body of
literature on nondialysis central venous catheters (CVC) in
intensive-care patients. Many of the recommendations for
patients requiring acute dialysis are, therefore, based on
extrapolation of evidence from tunneled dialysis catheters or
from nondialysis nontunneled CVC.

5.4.1: We suggest initiating RRT in patients with AKI via
an uncuffed nontunneled dialysis catheter, rather
than a tunneled catheter. (2D)

RATIONALE
Since most early catheter-related infections have a cutaneous
origin, tunneling the catheter under the skin together with a
subcutaneous anchoring system, may reduce the risk of
infection. Tunneling also increases mechanical stability of
the catheter. On the other hand, the insertion of a tunneled
cuffed catheter (TCC) is a cumbersome procedure that
requires expertise (mostly performed by surgeons or inter-
ventional radiologists), time, and effort (mostly performed in
the operating room or radiology department), thus poten-
tially delaying initiation of RRT. The removal of TCCs is also
technically more difﬁcult.

A randomized trial compared the initial use of tunneled
vs. nontunneled femoral catheters in 34 patients with AKI.
Failure to insert the TCC occurred in four patients (12%)
that were excluded from the ﬁnal analysis. In the remaining
30 patients, those with tunneled catheters had an increased
insertion time and more femoral hematomas, but also less
dysfunction, fewer infectious and thrombotic complications,
and a signiﬁcantly better catheter survival.639 The small size
of this study and the absence of an intention-to-treat analysis
preclude ﬁrm conclusions (Suppl Table 33). In addition, the
use of tunneled catheters for starting acute dialysis is not
widespread practice.

Both the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines for
prevention of catheter-related infections and the KDOQI
guideline for vascular access
in chronic dialysis patients
recommend using a cuffed catheter for dialysis if a prolonged
(e.g., 41–3 weeks) period of
temporary access is antici-
pated.640,641 In two recent large randomized trials, the mean

duration of RRT for AKI was 12–13 days.562,563 This probably
does not justify the burden of an initial tunneled catheter in all
patients with AKI receiving RRT. Rather, selected use of tunneled
catheters in patients who require prolonged RRT is warranted.
No recommendation can be given regarding the optimal
timing to change the nontunneled-uncuffed catheter to a more
permanent access. It seems reasonable to create a more
permanent access when recovery of kidney function is unlikely.
The optimal timing should take into account the increased risk
of infection with untunneled catheters, but also the practical
issues related to the insertion of a tunneled catheter.

Several conﬁgurations of dialysis catheter lumen and tip
have emerged over the years with no proven advantage of one
design over another. The outer diameter varies between 11
and 14 French and it is self-evident that larger sizes decrease
the risk of inadequate blood ﬂow. In order to provide an
adequate blood ﬂow and reduce the risk of recirculation,
the tip of
the catheter should be in a large vein (see
Recommendation 5.4.2). This means that the optimal length
is 12–15 cm for the right internal jugular vein, 15–20 cm for
the left internal jugular vein, and 19–24 cm for the femoral
vein.642–644
In PD,

the Tenckhoff catheter, a soft, silicone rubber
catheter with a polyester cuff, reduced early complications such
as bowel perforation, massive bleeding, or leakage, and has
become the standard for PD. Further modiﬁcations, including
the use of swan-neck catheters, T-ﬂuted catheters, curled
intraperitoneal portions, dual cuffs, and insertion through the
rectus muscle instead of the midline, have been made to reduce
such as peritonitis, exit/tunnel
remaining complications
infection, cuff extrusion, obstruction, and dialysate leaks.645,646
Blind placement has been largely replaced by surgical
placement or placement guided by ultrasound/ﬂuoroscopy,
laparoscopy, or peritoneoscopy.647–649 Continuous-ﬂow PD
dictates the need for an efﬁcient dual-lumen catheter or two
separate catheters with ports separated maximally.646 Outside
the pediatric setting, no investigations have speciﬁcally looked
at peritoneal catheters in the setting of AKI.

5.4.2: When choosing a vein for insertion of a dialysis
catheter in patients with AKI, consider these
preferences (Not Graded):
K First choice: right jugular vein;
K Second choice: femoral vein;
K Third choice: left jugular vein;
K Last choice: subclavian vein with preference for

the dominant side.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

101

c h a p t e r 5 . 4

RATIONALE
Although generally associated with the lowest
rate of
infectious complications, the CDC guideline as well as the
KDOQI guideline recommend avoiding the subclavian vein
for RRT access,640,641 because this may lead to central vein
stenosis and jeopardize subsequent permanent access. This
recommendation is mainly derived from observational data
in ESRD patients showing a higher incidence of central vein
stenosis with subclavian than with jugular dialysis cathe-
ters.650,651 On the other hand, central vein stenosis has also
been described after jugular catheterization.652,653 Contact of
the catheter with the vessel wall is considered a primary
initiating event for catheter-related thrombosis and stenosis.
Catheters in the right internal jugular vein have a straight
course into the right brachiocephalic vein and superior vena
cava, and, therefore, the least contact with the vessel wall. A
catheter inserted through the subclavian or the left jugular
vein has one or more angulations. explaining the higher risk
of vessel contact and thrombosis/stenosis with subclavian
compared to jugular catheters,650,651 and with left-sided
compared to right-sided jugular catheters.654–656 The sub-
clavian vein should, therefore, be considered the last choice
for insertion of a dialysis catheter in patients with AKI,
especially when the risk of nonrecovery of kidney function is
substantial. Whether this recommendation should be ex-
tended to the left jugular vein remains unclear. In patients
where the subclavian vein remains the only available option,
preference should be given to the dominant side in order to
spare the nondominant side for eventual future permanent
access.

the
Because the subclavian vein should be avoided,
remaining options are the jugular and femoral veins. The
use of femoral catheters is thought to be associated with the
highest risk of infection, and avoidance of femoral lines is
part of many ‘‘central line bundles’’ that intend to reduce the
catheter-related bloodstream infection.657
incidence of
This dogma was questioned in a concealed, randomized,
multicenter, evaluator-blinded, parallel-group trial of 750
AKI patients, comparing the femoral with the jugular site for
ﬁrst catheter insertion for RRT. Ultrasound was seldom used,
probably explaining the somewhat higher rate of failure on
one side and crossover in the jugular group. The rate of
hematoma formation was also higher in the jugular group.
In both groups, 20% of
the catheters were antiseptic-
impregnated. Mean duration of catheterization was 6.2 days
for the femoral and 6.9 days for the jugular group. The major
reasons for catheter removal were death or ‘‘no longer
required’’. The incidence of catheter colonization at removal
(the primary end-point) was not
signiﬁcantly different
between the femoral and jugular group. When stratiﬁed
according to body mass index (BMI), those within the lowest
BMI tertile had a higher incidence of colonization with the
jugular site, whereas those within the highest BMI tertile had
the highest colonization rate with femoral catheters. Blood-
stream infection did not differ between the groups (2.3 per
1000 catheter-days for jugular and 1.5 per 1000 catheter-days

for femoral) but the study was not powered for this end-
point. This was also the case for thrombotic complications
(Suppl Table 34).658

Malfunction is another issue that needs to be considered
when choosing between a jugular and femoral vascular
access. Observational trials show more malfunctioning and a
shorter actuarial survival for femoral than for jugular dialysis
catheters],659–661 and more malfunction with left-sided
jugular catheters compared to right-sided.662 Recirculation
has been shown to be more frequent
than
subclavian or
jugular dialysis catheters, especially with
shorter femoral catheters.642,643 A secondary analysis of the
French multicenter trial did not ﬁnd a difference in catheter
dysfunction between jugular and femoral catheters in the
intention-to-treat analysis. However, a separate analysis of
the right and left jugular catheters showed a trend toward
more dysfunction with femoral
jugular
catheters, but signiﬁcantly more dysfunction with left jugular
compared to femoral catheters.663

than with right

in femoral

Another point to consider is that any patient who has the
option of undergoing a kidney transplantation should not
have a femoral catheter placed to avoid stenosis of the iliac
vein,
to which the transplanted kidney’s vein is anato-
mized.640 The presence of a femoral catheter also reduces the
patient’s mobilization, especially when the RRT is contin-
uous.

In summary, the right jugular vein appears to be the best
option for insertion of a dialysis catheter. Femoral catheters
are preferred over left jugular catheters because of reduced
malfunction, and the subclavian vein should only be
considered a rescue option. It is evident that individual
patient characteristics may require deviations from this order
of preferences. Catheter insertion should be performed with
strict adherence to infection-control policies,
including
maximal sterile barrier precautions (mask, sterile gown,
sterile gloves, large sterile drapes) and chlorhexidine 2% skin
antisepsis.641,664,665

5.4.3: We recommend using ultrasound guidance for

dialysis catheter insertion. (1A)

RATIONALE
For several decades, techniques involving the use of anatomic
landmarks have been the traditional mainstay of accessing the
central venous system. Using the ‘‘blind’’ landmark technique
is not without signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Compli-
cations of central venous catheterization include arterial
puncture
(0.5–6%), hematoma (0.1–4.4%), hemothorax
(0.4–0.6%), pneumothorax (0.1–3.1%), and up to 10–20%
of insertion attempts are not successful.666,667 In view of their
large size, the risk of complications of dialysis catheters is
expected to be even higher. Two meta-analyses have
addressed the role of real-time two-dimensional ultrasound
for central vein cannulation, and concluded that, compared
to the landmark method, ultrasound-guided venous access

102

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

c h a p t e r 5 . 4

increases the probability of successful catheter placement and
reduces the risk of complications, the need for multiple
catheter placement attempts, and the time required for the
procedure. The advantage appears most pronounced for the
jugular vein, whereas the evidence is scarce for the subclavian
and femoral vein.668,669 Subsequent large randomized trials
have conﬁrmed the superiority of ultrasound guidance.670,671
Trials evaluating the placement of dialysis catheters in ESRD
patients, mostly with observational design, yield a similar
conclusion.672–678 The KDOQI guideline for vascular access
also recommends using ultrasound-assisted insertion.640

5.4.4: We recommend obtaining a chest

radiograph
promptly after placement and before ﬁrst use of an
internal jugular or subclavian dialysis catheter. (1B)

RATIONALE
Uncuffed, nontunneled dialysis catheters are semirigid. Their
tip should not be in the heart, because of the risk of atrial
perforation and pericardial tamponade. On the other hand, a
position too high in the brachiocephalic vein, especially with
subclavian and left-sided catheters, should also be avoided,
because it allows a narrow contact between the catheter tip
and the vessel wall, which may result in improper catheter
function and vessel thrombosis.655,679,680 The correct position
of the tip of a semirigid dialysis catheter is at the junction of
the superior vena cava and the right atrium, allowing the
catheter to run in parallel with the long axis of the superior
vena cava.679 Tunneled catheters are usually softer and can be
positioned into the right atrium, thus allowing a higher
blood ﬂow.680

To conﬁrm the correct position and to assess for potential
complications, a postprocedural chest radiograph is conven-
tionally performed. Although this procedure has been debated
after uneventful placement of a CVC, the high blood ﬂows
used during RRT and the administration of anticoagulants
necessitate conﬁrming the correct position before initiating
dialysis therapy.640 It should, however, be remembered that
none of the radiographic landmarks (carina, right tracheo-
bronchial angle, etc) that are used to exclude intra-atrial tip
position are 100% reliable.679,680 Echocardiography might be
another tool to conﬁrm the correct position of the catheter.681

5.4.5: We suggest not using topical antibiotics over the
skin insertion site of a nontunneled dialysis cathe-
ter in ICU patients with AKI requiring RRT. (2C)

RATIONALE
The incidence of catheter-related bloodstream infection can
be reduced by implementing education-based programs and
so-called central-line bundles, that emphasize the importance
of hand hygiene, maximal barrier precautions upon inser-
tion, chlorhexidine skin antisepsis, optimal catheter site
selection, and daily review of line necessity.657 For detailed

instructions on catheter care, the reader is referred to pub-
lished guidelines.640,641,664,665 These guidelines also recom-
mend not using dialysis catheters for applications other than
RRT, except under emergency circumstances.641

A recent meta-analysis of ﬁve RCTs conﬁrmed that topical
antibiotics (mainly mupirocin) reduce the risk of bacteremia,
exit-site infection, need for catheter removal, and hospitali-
zation for infection in ESRD patients.682 The majority of the
catheters in the included studies were tunneled. However, the
CDC, National Health Service, and Infectious Diseases
Society of America guidelines strongly recommend against
topical antibiotic ointment for the care of CVC, because of
their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicro-
bial resistance.641,664,665 For patients with AKI that are treated
in an ICU, it seems reasonable to follow this last recommen-
dation. No recommendations can be given for AKI patients
that are treated outside an ICU.

5.4.6: We suggest not using antibiotic locks for preven-
tion of catheter-related infections of nontunneled
dialysis catheters in AKI requiring RRT. (2C)

RATIONALE
Four meta-analyses have evaluated the efﬁcacy of various
antibiotic lock solutions in chronic dialysis patients, and
conclude that
they signiﬁcantly reduce catheter-related
bloodstream infection. Drawbacks are the overall moderate
trial quality and the short follow-up that does not allow
excluding the development of resistance.682–685 However, the
CDC, National Health Service, and Infectious Diseases
Society of America guidelines strongly recommend against
routinely using antibiotic lock solutions in CVC, because of
their potential to promote fungal infections, antimicrobial
resistance, and systemic toxicity.641,664,665 Mentioned excep-
tions are long-term cuffed and tunneled catheters with
history of multiple catheter-related bloodstream infections
technique,641,665
despite maximal adherence
patients with limited venous access and history of recurrent
catheter-related bloodstream infection, or patients with
heightened risk of severe sequelae from a catheter-related
bloodstream infection.664

to aseptic

Pediatric considerations
Most of the guidelines for adults are applicable to children.
Functional CRRT circuit survival in children is favored by
larger catheter size686 that should be adapted to patient size
(Table 20).687 Recent data from the Prospective Pediatric
CRRT Registry group shows that internal jugular catheters
may be associated with longer functional CRRT circuit
survival, compared to femoral and subclavian access.686 In
addition, the Prospective Pediatric CRRT Registry group
showed extremely poor circuit survival with two single-
lumen 5 F catheters; these catheters should therefore be
avoided. Future permanent access in the form of an arterio-
venous graft or ﬁstula for patients who develop CKD may be

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

103

c h a p t e r 5 . 4

Table 20 | Catheter and patient sizes

Patient size

Catheter size

Site of insertion

Neonate

Double-lumen 7F

3–6 kg

6–30 kg

415 kg

430 kg

Double- or triple-lumen 7F

Double-lumen 8F

Double-lumen 9F

Double-lumen 10F or
triple-lumen 12F

Femoral artery or
vein
Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral

Reprinted from Bunchman TE, Brophy PD, Goldstein SL. Technical considerations for
renal replacement therapy in children. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28: 488–492 687, copyright
2008, with permission from Elsevier; accessed http://www.seminarsinnephrology.org/
article/S0270-9295(08)00117-4/fulltext

compromised if acute access is placed in a subclavian vein.
Clinicians must therefore consider the potential long-term
vascular needs of patients who may be expected to develop
CKD, especially children who have demonstrated excellent
long-term survival with CKD and ESRD.688

Analysis of a pediatric database (1989–1999) showed
that surgically placed Tenckhoff catheters for PD induce
less complications than more stiff percutaneously placed

catheters.689 A more recent
retrospective analysis with
historical controls reports that, compared to the surgically
placed Tenckhoff catheter, using a more ﬂexible catheter for
percutaneous insertion may achieve a comparable catheter
survival and complication rate.690

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Determine whether the initial use of a tunneled vs.
nontunneled catheter for RRT in AKI patients results in a
beneficial effect on catheter function and catheter-related
complications,
including infections and number of
additional access procedures.

K Develop better means of predicting the need for long-
term access and better methods to select access site in
individual patients by balancing various
risks and
benefits.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 33: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of access placement with tunneled versus non-tunneled catheters on
AKI.
Supplementary Table 34: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of jugular vs. femoral access placement on AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

104

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 5

Chapter 5.5: Dialyzer membranes for renal
replacement therapy in AKI

Semipermeable hollow-ﬁber dialyzers are used as standard
of care for both solute clearance and ultraﬁltration in
IHD and CRRT circuits. Membrane composition and
clearance characteristics vary among the
commercially
available dialyzers. While no RCTs exist to provide deﬁnitive
recommendations for a particular dialyzer type, the charac-
teristics and potential side-effects of each dialyzer type
require consideration.

5.5.1: We suggest to use dialyzers with a biocompatible
membrane for IHD and CRRT in patients with
AKI. (2C)

RATIONALE
Semipermeable hollow-ﬁber dialyzers currently represent the
standard of care for IHD or CRRT for patients with AKI. All
dialyzer membranes induce some degree of activation of
blood components, a phenomenon called bioincompati-
bility.691 Earlier-generation dialyzer membranes composed of
cuprophane or unmodiﬁed cellulose were more bioincom-
patible and had the potential to cause a ‘‘dialyzer membrane
reaction’’, mediated by complement activation, release of
proinﬂammatory markers, and oxidative stress, and mani-
fested clinically by acute hypotension, vasodilatation, leuco-
penia, hypoxia and fever.692–697 More recently, modiﬁed
cellulosic membranes (with substitution of the hydroxyl
groups) and synthetic membranes composed of polyacyl-
nitrile, polysulfone, or poly(methyl methacrylate) have been
less
developed. These ‘‘biocompatible membranes’’
bioincompatible membranes) produce less complement and
cytokine activation, and decrease oxidative stress.697,698
Recent studies suggest that platelet activation might also
be involved in the bioincompatibility phenomenon.698–701
Another membrane characteristic that might have clinical
importance is the ﬂux property, with membranes generally
being divided in low-ﬂux and high-ﬂux, the latter having
larger pores and thus the potential to clear larger solutes.
The question of whether membrane bioincompatibility or
ﬂux has clinical relevance in the setting of AKI has been the
subject of many clinical trials. A recent meta-analysis of 10
randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials in 1100
patients could not establish any advantage for biocompatible
or high-ﬂux membranes.702 Of note, the authors chose to
include modiﬁed cellulose membranes in the bioincompa-
tible group, although other investigators consider modiﬁed
cellulosic membranes to be biocompatible. When comparing

(or

the synthetic membranes to cuprophane, there was a trend
towards reduced mortality with the synthetic membranes.
This meta-analysis also did not assess the side-effects of
different membrane
compositions on more proximal,
temporal associations, such as acute hypotension or fever.
As a result, we agree with the authors’ conclusion that the use
of either a biocompatible or modiﬁed cellulose acetate
membrane appears to be appropriate.

Recent observations reveal speciﬁc potential side-effects
when using certain dialyzer membranes. Bradykinin release
syndrome has been observed at the start of CRRT with
uncoated AN-69 membranes.703 Bradykinin release syn-
drome is characterized by acute hypotension and pulmonary
vascular congestion. The syndrome is usually self-limited and
is pH-dependent, and therefore more pronounced in patients
with severe acidosis. Also, priming of the circuit with banked
blood (that is acidotic and contains a large amount of citrate,
inducing hypocalcemia) may evoke bradykinin release
syndrome. Numerous measures have been published to
prevent or mitigate this syndrome, including zero-balance
HF to normalize the banked blood pH and calcium,704 or a
bypass maneuver in which the blood prime is given to the
patient instead of the circuit, while the patient is bled on to
the circuit with the saline prime discarded.705 Finally, a form
of bradykinin release syndrome has been reported in patients
receiving ACE-I and IHD with AN-69 membranes,706–708
since ACE-I prevent
the conversion of bradykinin and
thereby prolong the hypotensive response when acidic blood
comes in contact with the AN-69 membrane. However,
others have disputed this interaction.704,705 Nevertheless,
clinicians should be aware of the potential for bradykinin
release syndrome if an uncoated AN-69 membrane is
employed for RRT, especially in acidotic patients or in those
receiving ACE-I. Neutralizing the electronegativity of the
AN-69 membrane by coating with polyethyleneimine sig-
niﬁcantly reduces bradykinin generation.709

Whether conventional dialysis membranes are able to
affect clinical outcomes in sepsis by removal of inﬂammatory
mediators remains highly controversial. Until further evi-
dence becomes available, the use of RRT to treat sepsis should
be considered experimental.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Future research should assess the impact of middle-
molecule clearance by high-flux membranes and/or
membrane adsorption on patient outcome in sepsis.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

105

c h a p t e r 5 . 5

The comparator group should be patients with sepsis that
do not receive extracorporeal treatment (if no AKI) or
conventional RRT (if AKI).

K The potential impact of dialyzer membrane composition
(material, flux, etc.) on outcomes in patients with AKI

remains unsettled, due to the relatively small size of trials.
It would be useful to conduct larger trials comparing
different membranes and examining patient-centered
outcomes include survival, renal recovery, and resource
utilization.

106

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 6

Chapter 5.6: Modality of renal replacement therapy
for patients with AKI

In current clinical practice,

Controversy exists as to which is the optimal RRT modality
for patients with AKI.
the
choice of the initial modality for RRT is primarily based
on the availability of, and experience with, a speciﬁc
treatment and on the patient’s hemodynamic status. Transi-
tions between CRRT and IHD are also frequent, mostly
determined by the hemodynamic status of the patient or
coagulation problems. Experience with PD in AKI is limited,
except in the pediatric setting and in regions with limited
resources.

5.6.1: Use continuous and intermittent RRT as comple-

mentary therapies in AKI patients. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
Current modalities of RRT for AKI include IHD, CRRT, and
PD. An overview of the different modalities of RRT and their
commonly used settings is given in Table 21.

Since the introduction of CRRT into clinical practice in
the early 1980 s, its use in critically ill patients with AKI has
increased steadily.710–712 The theoretical advantages of CRRT
over IHD are the slower ﬂuid removal, resulting in more
hemodynamic stability and better control of ﬂuid balance,
the slower control of solute concentration, avoiding large
ﬂuctuations and ﬂuid shifts (including a reduced risk
[worsening] of cerebral edema), the great ﬂexibility (allowing
adaptation of the treatment to the patient’s need at any time),
and the ability to perform the treatment with relatively
simple and user-friendly machines (allowing ICU nurses to
monitor the treatment). Disadvantages include the need for
immobilization, the use of continuous anticoagulation, the
risk of hypothermia and,
in some settings, higher costs.
Major advantages of IHD over CRRT are the fast removal

of
toxins and the restricted treatment period, allowing
down-time for diagnostic and therapeutic interventions.
IHD may, therefore, be the preferred treatment in patients
where immediate removal of small solutes is required, such as
severe hyperkalemia, some cases of poisoning, and tumor
lysis syndrome. Hybrid treatments, such as SLED, may share
some of the advantages of both IHD and CRRT without
having their disadvantages (Table 22).

in survivors

Several RCTs have compared CRRT to IHD in AKI
patients. The most inclusive meta-analysis was performed by
the Cochrane Collaboration, analyzing 15 RCTs in 1550 AKI
patients. This analysis concluded that outcomes were similar
in critically ill AKI patients treated with CRRT and IHD for
hospital mortality (RR 1.01; 95% CI 0.92–1.12; n ¼ 1245),
ICU mortality (RR 1.06; 95% CI 0.90–1.26; n ¼ 515), length
of hospitalization (mean deviation (cid:3)6.1; 95% CI (cid:3)26.45
to (cid:3)14.25; n ¼ 25), and renal recovery (free of dialysis on
discharge)
(RR 0.99; 95% CI 0.92–1.07;
n ¼ 161).713 Comparable results have been reported by other
meta-analyses.714,715 Individual studies used different deﬁni-
tions of AKI and were underpowered. Most of the trials
excluded patients with hypotension or maximized efforts to
improve the hemodynamic tolerance of IHD. The high rate of
crossover between the treatment modalities also complicates
the interpretation of the results. In addition, in some of the
trials,
IHD patients were treated with bioincompatible
membranes and studies were not standardized for treatment
dose. A subsequent RCT not included in the Cochrane meta-
analyses reported similar outcomes.716 Two recent studies,
conﬁned to single geographic regions, showed reduced costs
with IHD compared to CRRT.717,718 However, an analysis of
cost ranges from a multicenter, multinational observational
study found considerable heterogeneity in costs related to
IHD and CRRT, and concluded that either therapy might be

Table 21 | Typical setting of different RRT modalities for AKI (for 70-kg patient)

Blood flow (ml/min)
Predominant solute transport
principle
Ultrafiltrate (ml/h)
Dialysate flow (ml/h)
Effluent volume (l/d)
Replacement fluid for zero
balance (ml/h)
Urea clearance (ml/min)

SCUF

CVVH

CVVHD

CVVHDF

100–200
convection

150–250
convection

150–250
diffusion

150–250
diffusion þ convection

PD

N/A
diffusion

SLED

100–300
diffusion

IHD

200–300
diffusion

100–300
0
2–8
0

1500–2000
0
36–48
1500–2000

variable
1500–2000
36–48
0

1000–1500
1000–1500
36–72
1000–1500

variable
1–2 l per exchange
24–48
0

variable
100–300 ml/min
N/A
0

variable
300–500 ml/min
N/A
0

1–5

25–33

25–33

25–33

variable

80–90

variable

CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis, CVVHDF, continuous venovenous hemodialfiltration;
hemodialysis; N/A, not applicable; PD, peritoneal dialysis; SCUF, slow continuous ultrafiltration; SLED, slow low-efficiency dialysis.

IHD,

intermittent

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

107

c h a p t e r 5 . 6

Table 22 | Theoretical advantages and disadvantages of CRRT, IHD, SLED, and PD

Modality

Potential setting in AKI

Advantages

Disadvantages

IHD

Hemodynamically stable

CRRT

Hemodynamically unstable
Patients at risk of increased
intracranial pressure

SLED

Hemodynamically unstable

PD

Hemodynamically unstable
Coagulopathy
Difficult access
Patients at risk of increased
intracranial pressure
Under-resourced region

Rapid removal of toxins and low-molecular-weight
substances
Allows for ‘‘down time’’ for diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures
Reduced exposure to anticoagulation
Lower costs than CRRT
Continuous removal of toxins
Hemodynamic stability
Easy control of fluid balance
No treatment-induced increase of intracranial
pressure
User-friendly machines
Slower volume and solute removal
Hemodynamic stability
Allows for ‘‘down time’’ for diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures
Reduced exposure to anticoagulation
Technically simple
Hemodynamic stability
No anticoagulation
No need for vascular access
Lower cost
Gradual removal of toxins

Hypotension with rapid fluid removal
Dialysis disequilibrium with risk of cerebral
edema
Technically more complex and demanding

Slower clearance of toxins
Need for prolonged anticoagulation
Patient immobilization
Hypothermia
Increased costs

Slower clearance of toxins
Technically more complex and demanding

Poor clearance in hypercatabolic patients
Protein loss
No control of rate of fluid removal
Risk of peritonitis
Hyperglycemia
Requires intact peritoneal cavity
Impairs diaphragmatic movement, potential
for respiratory problems

CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; IHD, intermittent hemodialysis; PD, peritoneal dialysis; SLED, sustained low-efficiency dialysis.

more or less costly depending on local practices, especially
stafﬁng.719

Some large observational studies, including all patients
receiving RRT, suggest that CRRT is an independent predic-
tor of renal recovery among survivors.720–722 This evidence,
however, is insufﬁcient to fully elucidate the impact of choice
of therapy on this outcome. Appropriately planned prospec-
tive trials will be required to address this issue.

In conclusion, no RRT is ideal for all patients with AKI.
Clinicians should be aware of the pros and cons of different
RRTs, and tailor RRT on the basis of the individual and
potentially changing needs of their patients. Besides the
individual patient’s characteristics, the available expertise and
resources may also be an important determinant of the
ultimate choice.

5.6.2: We suggest using CRRT, rather than standard
intermittent RRT, for hemodynamically unstable
patients. (2B)

RATIONALE
Many clinicians prefer CRRT in critically ill AKI patients with
severe hemodynamic instability, because of better hemo-
dynamic tolerance due to the slower ﬂuid removal and
the absence of ﬂuid shifts induced by rapid solute removal.
The Cochrane meta-analysis could not establish a difference
in the number of patients with (however poorly deﬁned)
hemodynamic instability (RR 0.48; 95% CI 0.10–2.28;
n ¼ 205) nor with (variably deﬁned) hypotension (RR 0.92;

95% CI 0.72–1.16; n ¼ 514). On the other hand, the mean
arterial pressure at the end of the treatment was signiﬁcantly
higher with CRRT than with IHD (mean deviation 5.35; 95%
CI 1.41–9.29; n ¼ 112) and the number of patients requiring
escalation of vasopressor therapy was signiﬁcantly lower
with CRRT compared to IHD (RR 0.49; 95% CI 0.27–0.87;
n ¼ 149).713 In general, the number of patients included in
these analyses of the hemodynamic tolerance of RRT remains
limited, and none of the RCTs has speciﬁcally looked at the
effect of different modalities of RRT in patients with shock.
SLED has been proposed as an alternative to other forms
of RRT and is used in many centers worldwide for logistical
reasons. A recent review723 summarizes the results obtained
with SLED in several studies and discusses in detail the
technical aspects of this dialysis method. However, rando-
mized trials comparing IHD with SLED have not been
performed. Also, clinical experience is far more limited with
SLED compared to CRRT, and very few randomized studies
have compared SLED to CRRT. A ﬁrst small trial in 39 AKI
patients did not ﬁnd any difference in hemodynamics, and
less need for anticoagulation with SLED compared to
CRRT.724 An (even smaller) Australian study showed similar
control of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes, but a better
control of acidosis and less hypotension during the ﬁrst
hours of the treatment with CRRT.725,726 A recent retro-
spective analysis examined the mortality data from three
general ICUs in different countries that have switched their
predominant therapeutic dialysis approach from CRRT to
SLED. This change was not associated with a change in
mortality.727 In addition, Fieghen et al.728 examined the

108

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

c h a p t e r 5 . 6

relative hemodynamic tolerability of SLED and CRRT in
critically ill patients with AKI. This study also compared the
feasibility of SLED administration with that of CRRT and
IHD. Relatively small cohorts of critically ill AKI patients in
four critical-care units included 30 patients treated with
CRRT, 13 patients with SLED, and 34 patients with IHD.
Hemodynamic instability occurred during 22 (56.4%) SLED
and 43 (50.0%) CRRT sessions (P ¼ 0.51). In a multivariable
analysis that accounted for clustering of multiple sessions
within the same patient, the OR for hemodynamic instability
with SLED was 1.20 (95% CI 0.58–2.47) compared to CRRT.
Signiﬁcant session interruptions occurred in 16 (16.3%),
30 (34.9%), and 11 (28.2%) of IHD, CRRT, and SLED
therapies, respectively. This study concluded that, in critically
ill patients with AKI, the administration of SLED is feasible
and provides hemodynamic control comparable to CRRT.

In conclusion, in the presence of hemodynamic instability
in patients with AKI, CRRT is preferable to standard IHD.
SLED may also be tolerated in hemodynamically unstable
patients with AKI in settings where other forms of CRRT are
not available, but data on comparative efﬁcacy and harm are
limited. Once hemodynamic stability is achieved, treatment
may be switched to standard IHD.

5.6.3: We suggest using CRRT, rather than intermittent
RRT, for AKI patients with acute brain injury or
other causes of increased intracranial pressure or
generalized brain edema. (2B)

(dialysis-induced hypotension) or

RATIONALE
In a patient with acute brain injury, IHD may worsen
neurological
status by compromising cerebral perfusion
pressure. This may be the result of a decrease of mean
an
arterial pressure
increase of cerebral edema and intracranial pressure (dialysis
disequilibrium), and may jeopardize the potential
for
neurologic recovery. Dialysis disequilibrium results from
the rapid removal of solutes, resulting in intracellular ﬂuid
shifts. Both hypotension and disequilibrium can be avoided
by the slow progressive removal of ﬂuids and solutes that
occurs during CRRT.729 Small observational trials and case
reports in patients with intracranial pressure monitoring
indeed reported increases
in intracranial pressure with
IHD.730,731 Using CT scans to measure brain density, Ronco
et al.732 showed an increase of brain water content after IHD,
whereas no such changes were observed after CRRT.

Protocols for decreasing hemodynamic instability with
intermittent RRT
Intradialytic hypotension is a major problem during RRT in
AKI patients,
limiting its efﬁcacy and causing morbidity.
Surprisingly, there are only a few studies assessing this highly
relevant clinical problem. Paganini et al.733 performed a
small-sample (10 subjects) randomized crossover controlled
in AKI patients. They evaluated two different RRT
trial

protocols: ﬁxed dialysate sodium (140 mEq) and ﬁxed ultra-
ﬁltration rate vs. variable dialysate sodium (160 to 140 mEq)
and variable ultraﬁltration rate (50% in ﬁrst third of the
treatment and 50% in the last two-thirds of the treatment).
sodium and ultraﬁltration rate protocol
The variable
achieved better hemodynamic stability, needed fewer inter-
ventions, and induced lesser relative blood volume changes,
despite higher ultraﬁltration rates.

Schortgen et al.734 evaluated the effects of implementing
speciﬁc guidelines aiming to improve IHD hemodynamic
tolerance. The clinical practice algorithm included priming
the dialysis circuit with isotonic saline, setting dialysate
sodium concentration at 145 mEq/l, discontinuing vasodi-
lator therapy, and setting dialysate temperature to below
37 1C. A total of 289 RRT sessions were performed in 76
patients and compared to a historical series of 248 sessions in
45 patients. Hemodynamic tolerance was better in the
guideline patients. They developed less systolic drop at and
during RRT. They also had less hypotensive episodes and the
need for therapeutic interventions was less frequent. The
adoption of guidelines did not inﬂuence ICU mortality, but
death rate was signiﬁcantly lower than predicted from illness
severity in the guideline patients, but not in the historical
series subjects. Length of ICU stay was also reduced for
survivors in the protocol-oriented group, as compared to the
historical series of patients.

the risk of protein loss,

Peritoneal dialysis
In the developing world,
the development of CRRT
techniques has resulted in a substantial decline in the
expertise with, and use of, PD for treatment of AKI. The
use of PD in AKI is mainly conﬁned to pediatrics and in
regions with limited resources, because of its ease of use, low
cost, and minimal requirements on infrastructure. Other
advantages include the lack of a need for vascular access and
anticoagulation, the absence of a disequilibrium syndrome
and the relatively good hemodynamic tolerance compared to
IHD. Disadvantages are the overall
lower effectiveness
(especially in patients with splanchnic hypoperfusion or
who are on vasopressors),
the
unpredictability of solute and ﬂuid removal, the need for an
intact peritoneal cavity, risk of peritonitis, diaphragmatic
splinting leading to ventilatory compromise and ﬂuctuating
blood glucose levels. Recent developments in the technique of
PD (use of ﬂexible and cuffed catheters, automatic cycling,
and continuous ﬂow PD) have increased its potential to
become an acceptable alternative to other forms of RRT in
AKI,735–737 but direct comparative effectiveness trials are
extremely limited. Earlier reports on PD in AKI are mainly
uncontrolled observations. Only two relatively recent rando-
mized trials have compared PD to other modalities of RRT in
AKI. Phu randomized 70 patients with septic AKI to PD or
continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration (CVVH) and found
a better survival with CVVH. However,
the PD treat-
ment appeared not to be ‘‘up to date’’ with use of a rigid
catheter, manual exchanges with open drainage and acetate

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

109

c h a p t e r 5 . 6

buffering.738 The second trial compared daily IHD to high-
volume PD (with Tenckhoff catheter and automated cycler)
and showed no difference in survival or recovery of kidney
function. The duration of RRT was signiﬁcantly shorter in the
PD group (Suppl Table 35).739 However, this trial has not
been published in a peer-reviewed journal and the randomi-
zation process is unclear. Currently indications for PD in
patients with AKI may include bleeding diathesis, hemo-
dynamic instability and difﬁculty in obtaining a vascular
access. Extremely high catabolism, severe respiratory failure,
severe ileus, intra-abdominal hypertension, recent abdominal
surgery and diaphragmatic peritoneum-pleura connections
are contraindications to PD.

Pediatric considerations
RRT modality choice for children with AKI is guided by many
of the same principles used for adult patients. However, since
severe AKI is relatively rare in children compared to adults,
occurring in less than 1% of hospitalized children740 and only
4.5% of children admitted to an intensive care unit,741 the
impact of local expertise and resource restrictions may be
greater for pediatric acute RRT modality decisions. As noted
below, each modality of acute RRT can be successfully
provided to pediatric patients of all sizes. Thus, with rare
exception driven by medical indication or contraindication,
no form of acute RRT can be recommended above another at
the present
time. Each program should evaluate which
modality is provided most optimally and feasibly in its
particular setting.

Provision of RRT as IHD, PD, or CRRT is now a mainstay
of treatment for the child with severe AKI. The widely
varying size range of pediatric patients imparts technical
considerations in selection of a modality. Given their small
size and associated low blood volume, PD may provide the
least technically challenging option for infants and small
children. However, technological advances aimed at provid-
ing accurate ultraﬁltration with volumetric control incorpo-
rated into IHD and CRRT equipment, and disposable lines,
circuits, and dialyzers sized for the entire pediatric weight
spectrum have made IHD and CRRT safer and feasible for
children of all ages and sizes.570,742–744 Transition from the

use of adaptive CRRT equipment to production of high-ﬂow
machines with volumetric control allowing for accurate
ultraﬁltration ﬂows has likewise lead to a change in pediatric
RRT modality prevalence patterns in the USA. Accurate
ultraﬁltration and blood ﬂow rates are crucial for pediatric
RRT, since the extracorporeal circuit volume can comprise
more than 15% of a small pediatric patient’s total blood
volume, and small ultraﬁltration inaccuracies may represent a
large percentage of a small pediatric patient’s total body
water. Polls of USA pediatric nephrologists demonstrate
increased CRRT use over PD as the preferred modality for
treating pediatric ARF. In 1995, 45% of pediatric centers
ranked PD and 18% ranked CRRT as the most common
modality used for initial ARF treatment. In 1999, 31% of
centers chose PD vs. 36% of centers reported CRRT as their
primary initial modality for ARF treatment.745

In the 1990 s, survival rates stratiﬁed by RRT modality were
better for children receiving IHD (73–89%) than those receiving
PD (49–64%) or CRRT (34–42%).545,746 However, this analysis
did not correct for illness severity. More recent data demon-
strate much improved survival
in children receiving
CRRT,543,544,546,570 with survival rates ranging from 50–70%
for children with multiple-organ dysfunction who receive
CRRT. While no RCT exists to assess the impact of CRRT
modality on survival, convective modalities were associated with
increased survival in children with stem-cell transplants in a
prospective cohort study (59% vs. 27%, Po0.05).747

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Large RCTs should compare SLED against other forms of
should be
treatment dose, buffer, membrane,

RRT in patients with AKI. These trials
standardized for
anticoagulant, and timing of treatment.

K The effects of different modalities of RRT on the long-
term need for chronic dialysis, along with mortality,
should be evaluated in prospective randomized trials.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 35: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dialysis modality (continuous vs. intermittent RRT) in AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

110

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 7

Chapter 5.7: Buffer solutions for renal replacement
therapy in patients with AKI

One goal of CRRT is to maintain normal or near-normal
acid-base balance, thus preventing detrimental effects of
acidosis on cardiovascular performance and hormonal
response. Options
for correction of metabolic acidosis
lactate-, and bicarbonate-
include the use of acetate-,
containing replacement solutions or dialysate. Some centers
use citrate anticoagulation, and the citrate load provides an
adequate supply of anionic base to control metabolic
acidosis. Dialysate solutions for IHD are produced on-line
by the dialysis machine, by mixing specially treated
municipal water with electrolytes. Dialysate or replacement
solutions for CRRT are produced commercially or locally in
hospital pharmacies.

5.7.1: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate,
as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for
RRT in patients with AKI. (2C)

5.7.2: We recommend using bicarbonate, rather than
lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement
ﬂuid for RRT in patients with AKI and circulatory
shock. (1B)

5.7.3: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate,
as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for
RRT in patients with AKI and liver failure and/or
lactic acidemia. (2B)

RATIONALE
Options for correction of metabolic acidosis in patients with
AKI include acetate, lactate, bicarbonate, and citrate. The use
of acetate has been largely abandoned in view of
the
associated hemodynamic instability and weight loss, probably
related to excessive nitric oxide production and cytokine
synthesis.748 Citrate, used for regional anticoagulation of the
extracorporeal circuit,
is alkalinizing, and most patients
receiving citrate anticoagulation do not need an additional
buffer in the dialysate or replacement ﬂuid.

Original HF solutions contained lactate as a buffer. Under
normal circumstances, this lactate is metabolized, resulting in
adequate correction of acidosis in most patients. A survey in
34 Australian ICUs concluded that 55% of the ICU patients
with AKI were treated with lactate-based solutions710 that, in
most countries, are less expensive than bicarbonate solutions.
In addition, bicarbonate solutions have a higher risk of
bacterial contamination and the solution is unstable in the
in recent
presence of calcium and magnesium. However,
years, bicarbonate has gained popularity because of concerns

result

lactate conversion will

that lactate may not be rapidly metabolized in the setting of
multiple-organ failure.749 Since lactate is a strong anion,
insufﬁcient
in worsening
acidosis, especially since bicarbonate losses are ongoing in
the extracorporeal circuit. Hyperlactatemia has also been
linked to impaired cellular function and catabolism due to
lowering of the cellular redox state and phosphorylation
potential.750 In addition, iatrogenic increases in lactate levels
may lead to misinterpretation of the clinical situation. The
risk of ‘‘lactate intolerance’’ is highest in patients with liver
failure (impaired lactate clearance) or circulatory shock
(increased endogenous lactate production).

Few adequately designed trials have compared different
buffers during RRT in AKI patients, and most of them have
been performed during CRRT. Barenbrock et al.751 rando-
mized 117 AKI patients to CVVH with lactate or bicarbonate
replacement ﬂuid. The use of bicarbonate resulted in better
correction of acidosis and lower lactate levels. Also, the
incidence of hypotension and other cardiovascular events was
lower with bicarbonate. In the subgroup of patients with
cardiac failure, mortality tended to be lower with bicarbo-
nate, whereas in the subgroup of septic patents no difference
in outcome was found (Suppl Table 36). A nonrandomized
crossover study in 54 patients with multiple-organ dysfunc-
tion undergoing CVVHDF conﬁrmed the superior control of
acidosis and better hemodynamic tolerance with bicarbo-
nate.752 However, another RCT in 40 patients treated with
CVVH could not ﬁnd a difference in hemodynamic
tolerance, despite the higher lactate levels in the lactate-
buffered group.753 Differences in the case-mix may explain
these different results.

Two small prospective randomized crossover comparisons
of bicarbonate- and lactate-buffered solutions in AKI patients
treated with CVVH or CVVHDF found elevated serum
lactate levels with lactate, an effect that was more pronounced
in patients with hepatic insufﬁciency.754,755 An observational
trial in 27 patients found a compromised lactate tolerance in
patients with coincidental liver disease, those on inotropic
support, and in patients with initial blood lactate measure-
ments of 490.1 mg/dl
(410 mmol/l) and large base
deﬁcits.756

In conclusion, the use of bicarbonate as a buffer in the
dialysate or replacement ﬂuid of AKI patients results in better
correction of acidosis,
lower lactate levels, and improved
hemodynamic tolerance. This effect is most pronounced in
patients with circulatory problems and in those with liver
dysfunction.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

111

c h a p t e r 5 . 7

Table 23 | Microbiological quality standards of different regulatory agencies

ANSI/AAMI/ISO763–765

ERA-EDTA guidelines765a

Water for dialysis

Bacteria (CFU/ml)
Endotoxin (EU/ml)

Dialysate

Bacteria (CFU/ml)
Endotoxin (EU/ml)

Ultrapure dialysate

Bacteria (CFU/ml)
Endotoxin (EU/ml)

Substitution fluid for infusion

Bacteria (CFU/ml)
Endotoxin (EU/ml)

o100 (action level at 50)
o0.5

o100 (action level at 50)
o0.5

o0.1
o0.03

Sterile
Undetectable

o100
o0.25

o100
o0.25

o0.1
o0.03

o10(cid:3)6
o0.03

AAMI, Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; ANSI, American National Standards Institute; CFU, colony-forming units; ERA-EDTA, European Renal
Association—European Dialysis and Transplant Asssociation; EU, endotoxin units; ISO, International Organization for Standardization.

5.7.4: We recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement
ﬂuids in patients with AKI, at a minimum, comply
with American Association of Medical Instrumen-
tation (AAMI) standards regarding contamination
with bacteria and endotoxins. (1B)

RATIONALE
Replacement ﬂuids for HF or HDF are infused directly into
the patient’s circulation and should be sterile. A potential
major step forward in acute RRT, reducing the costs and the
is the on-line production of
need for storage of ﬂuids,
replacement ﬂuids, which is achieved by passing water and/or
dialysate through two or three ultraﬁlters before being
infused.757,758 On-line production of replacement ﬂuids has
not yet been approved by the FDA or by some regulatory
authorities in Europe.

Conventional IHD uses nonsterile dialysate, as there is no
direct contact between blood and dialysate. However, with the
use of high-permeability membranes, the lower blood side
pressures at the end of the dialyzer ﬁlter may allow back-
ﬁltration of dialysate to the blood,759 raising the possibility of
endotoxin or other contaminant exposure. Two studies
conﬁrmed microbial contamination of (locally prepared and

commercial) ﬂuids and circuitry during CRRT.760,761 Dialysate
for CRRT should preferably be ultrapure, and should at least
comply with quality standards for dialysis water and dialysis
ﬂuids that may differ worldwide (Table 23).762

international

Finally, an international quality standard for dialysis ﬂuid
is in preparation by the International Society for Standardi-
zation. Until
standards are in place, we
recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement ﬂuids in
patients with AKI, at a minimum, comply with AAMI
standards for bacteria and endotoxins. When local standards
exceed AAMI standards, local standards should be followed
(Table 23).

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION

K Further studies are required to explore the impact of on-
line preparation of replacement fluid for HDF on clinical
outcomes (incidence of sepsis, renal recovery, mortality)
in AKI patients requiring RRT.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 36: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of bicarbonate vs. lactate as buffer for CVVH replacement fluid on
acidosis in AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

112

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

c h a p t e r 5 . 8

Chapter 5.8: Dose of renal replacement therapy in AKI

The ﬁrst report of RRT in AKI was published in 1965.766
Despite more than six decades of clinical experience and
research, controversy remains about the best way to measure
and what constitutes optimal dose of RRT for patients with
AKI. Indeed, three of the top ﬁve questions considered most
relevant by an international expert’s panel on RRT delivery in
AKI were about dose.767

The methods used for RRT dose quantiﬁcation in AKI
have several limitations, and have not been fully validated in
this speciﬁc population. Earlier single-center trials assessing
the effects of RRT dose in AKI provided conﬂicting
results.531,768–772 Considering the complexity of AKI patients,
RRT dose, by itself, may have less impact on mortality both
in patients with very high or very low chance of surviving,
but may be most important in patients with intermediate
scores of disease severity.773 In addition, it is possible that
dose and timing are closely linked factors, i.e., a high RRT
dose may not work adequately if provided late, or an early
RRT starting may not be able to change outcomes if the dose
is not optimized. Currently, only one small RCT considered
both variables at the same time.531

5.8.1: The dose of RRT to be delivered should be
prescribed before starting each session of RRT.
(Not Graded) We recommend frequent assessment
of the actual delivered dose in order to adjust the
prescription. (1B)

5.8.2: Provide RRT to achieve the goals of electrolyte,
acid-base, solute, and ﬂuid balance that will meet
the patient’s needs. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
The judgment and awareness of how much of a particular
therapeutic procedure should be, and actually it is, delivered
is essential for a good medical practice. However, recent
surveys have shown a disappointingly low number of
physicians that report being aware of, or calculating, RRT
dose in AKI.774

In addition,

Although widely used for evaluation of RRT in CKD, Kt/V
urea has important limitations as a tool for RRT dosing in
AKI. AKI patients are metabolically unstable, with variations
in urea generation.
their urea volume of
distribution appears to exceed the patient’s total body-water
volume.775 Different ways
to measure Kt/V obtained
signiﬁcantly different results in AKI patients.776 In the same
way, the selection of a target serum urea level as an indicator
of dialysis dose is highly arbitrary, as serum urea is inﬂuenced
by several extrarenal factors, such as ethnicity, age, gender,

nutrition, presence of liver disease, sepsis, muscle injury,
drugs, etc.

Several clinical investigations have shown that the actual
delivered dose of RRT in AKI patients is frequently smaller
than the prescribed dose, and even smaller
than the
recommended minimum for CKD patients.771,773,776–778
Impediments to adequate dose delivery were hemodynamic
instability, patient size, access problems, technical problems,
need for patient transportation, and early ﬁlter clotting.

Trials studying dose in CRRT have used the amount
of efﬂuent volume normalized by the patient’s weight
and procedure time as a parameter for dose evaluation.
However, the actual efﬂuent ﬂow will be inﬂuenced by
interruptions of CRRT, and efﬂuent ﬂow will exceed actual
dose with use of predilution or with reductions in mem-
brane permeability during the treatment. In summary, it is
essential to check very carefully if the prescribed RRT dose
is really being delivered to AKI patients. Increasing ﬁlter
size, dialysis time, blood ﬂow rate, dialysate ﬂow rate, and/or
efﬂuent ﬂow rate should be considered in case of dose
inadequacy.

In determining a prescription of RRT it is mandatory to
consider parameters other than small-solute clearance, such
as patients’ ﬂuid balance, acid-base and electrolyte home-
ostasis, and nutrition, among others, as possible components
of an optimal RRT dose. In fact, positive ﬂuid balance
appears to be an independent risk factor for mortality in AKI
patients.83

5.8.3: We recommend delivering a Kt/V of 3.9 per week
when using intermittent or extended RRT in
AKI. (1A)

5.8.4: We recommend delivering an efﬂuent volume of
20–25 ml/kg/h for CRRT in AKI (1A). This will
usually require a higher prescription of efﬂuent
volume. (Not Graded)

RATIONALE
Three RCTs evaluated the dose of IHD in AKI (Suppl Tables
37 and 38). Schifﬂ et al.771 compared daily to alternate-day
IHD in 146 ICU patients with AKI. RRT was started with
rather high values of SCr (over 4.5 mg/dl [398 mmol/l]) and
BUN (around 90 mg/dl [32.1 mmol/l urea]). The daily arm
received a weekly Kt/V approximately two times higher than
the alternate-day arm (5.8 ± 0.6 vs. 3 ± 0.6, respectively).
Daily IHD resulted in lower mortality (28% vs. 46%,
P ¼ 0.01) and faster recovery of kidney function (9 ± 2 vs.
16 ± 6 days, P ¼ 0.001). Major limitations of this study were

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

113

c h a p t e r 5 . 8

inadequate randomization, a ‘‘very low dose’’ in the control
group (actually less than that recommended for CKD). Also
overall mortality in the study (34%) was lower than in other
studies in this population, suggesting that the results may not
generalize. Moreover, alternate-day IHD was associated with
signiﬁcant differences in ﬂuid removal and dialysis-associated
hypotension,
than solute
suggesting that aspects other
control might modify patient outcomes.

The Veterans Affairs/National Institutes of Health Acute
Renal Failure Trial Network (ARFTN) study563 was a RCT
assessing the effects of intensive compared to less-intensive
RRT in 1124 ICU patients with AKI in 27 Veterans Affairs–
and university-afﬁliated North-American centers. Within
each randomization arm patients were switched between
IHD and CRRT or SLED, based on their hemodynamic
status,
reﬂecting average clinical practice in the USA.
Intermittent treatments were prescribed at a Kt/V of 1.4,
with a delivered Kt/V averaging 1.3, and were performed
three (less-intensive arm) or six (more-intensive arm) times
per week. Consequently, the weekly Kt/V was approximately
6.5 in the intensive and 3.9 in the less-intensive arm.
Mortality at 60 days was similar in both groups (53.6% and
51.5%) as was the percentage of patients recovering kidney
function (15.4% and 18.4%). Limitations of
this study
include the predominance of males, and the nonstandardized
timing for initiating RRT. In addition, a signiﬁcantly higher
frequency of hypotension and electrolyte disturbances were
seen in the more-intensive arm. Similar to what has been
reported in chronic dialysis, acute IHD results in under-
dosing when Kt/V is not measured. In the ARFTN study, the
ﬁrst session of IHD had an average delivery of 1.1 Kt/V, while
the prescribed dose was 1.4.

The Hannover Dialysis Outcome Study768 randomized
148 ICU patients with AKI to two different doses of SLED: a
standard-dialysis arm dosed to maintain plasma urea levels
between 120–150 mg/dl (20–25 mmol/l), or an intensiﬁed-
dialysis arm dosed to maintain plasma urea levels o90 mg/dl
(o15 mmol/l). Patients were included with SCr around
3 mg/dl (265 mmol/l) and plasma urea around 60 mg/dl
(10 mmol/l). The mean plasma urea was kept at 68 ±
24 mg/dl (11.3 ± 4 mmol/l) in the intensiﬁed and 114 ±
36 mg/dl (19 ± 6 mmol/l) in the standard group. Mortality
at 28 days was not statistically different between groups
(38.7% and 44.4%) and the frequency of survivors recovering
kidney function at day 28 was very similar (63% and 60%).
In CKD, the analysis by Gotch and Sargent779 of the
National Cooperative Dialysis Study showed that survival
could be increased by increasing Kt/V to 1.0–1.2. Analysis of a
large database of 2311 Medicare IHD patients also showed a
strong association between the delivered IHD dose and
mortality, with a decreased mortality risk of 7% for each 0.1
higher level of delivered Kt/V in CKD patients. However,
above a Kt/V of 1.3, no further decrease in mortality was
noted.780 The HEMO study, a large RCT comparing two
different dialysis doses in CKD, also could not demonstrate a
further reduction of mortality with equilibrated Kt/V of 1.43

compared to 1.16.781 If we assume that AKI patients should
receive at least the same dose as CKD patients, it seems
reasonable to recommend a thrice-weekly Kt/V of 1.3 or a
weekly Kt/V of 3.9 (assuming at
thrice-weekly
treatment), which also represents the lowest dose in the
largest randomized trial in AKI (ARFTN study). Whether
speciﬁc subgroups of AKI patients, such as those with
hypercatabolism, may beneﬁt from higher doses will require
further investigation.

least

In conclusion, there are only two adequately designed and
executed RCTs testing intermittent or extended RRT dose in
AKI. Neither study showed improvement in mortality or renal
recovery when the dialysis dose was increased, either by
increasing Kt/V above 3.9 weekly or by achieving a plasma urea
target below 90 mg/dl (15 mmol/l) in AKI patients. However,
consistent with the data on dose of IHD in CKD, and consistent
with the lower-dose arm in the ARFTN study, we recommend
thrice-weekly Kt/V of 1.3 or a weekly Kt/V of 3.9 for IHD in AKI.
Seven RCTs have investigated the role of CRRT dose in
AKI (Suppl Tables 37 and 38).531,562,563,768–770,772 While
earlier single-center trials showed mixed results, two large
multicenter trials have reached remarkably consistent con-
clusions concerning the dose of CRRT that should be
provided to critically ill patients with AKI.

The ARFTN study563

compared standard-intensity
predilution CVVHDF with a prescribed efﬂuent ﬂow of
20 ml/kg/h to high-intensity CVVHDF at 35 ml/kg/h. As dis-
cussed in Recommendation 5.8.3 rationale, there were no
differences
in outcomes between the two study arms.
Importantly, more than 95% of the prescribed dose of CRRT
was delivered in the less-intensive group. This represents a
considerably greater intensity of delivered dose than is
typically seen in clinical practice. As in chronic dialysis,
studies in CRRT have shown that delivery usually falls
substantially short of the prescribed dose.782 Thus, it will
usually be necessary to prescribe a high dose of CRRT in
order to achieve a speciﬁc target. For example, in order to
achieve a delivered dose of 20–25 ml/kg/h, it is likely that the
prescription will need to be in the range of 25–30 ml/kg/h.
The Randomized Evaluation of Normal vs. Augmented Level
of RRT study was conducted in 35 centers in Australia and
New Zealand.562 It compared the effects of postdilution
CVVHDF at doses of 25 and 40 ml/kg/h on 28- and 90-day
mortality rates in 1464 AKI patients. The delivered dose was
88% and 84% of prescribed in the low- and high-dose
groups, respectively. As in the ARFTN study, there was no
difference in 28- or 90-day mortality between the two groups.
Apart from a higher incidence of hypophosphatemia in the
high-dose group, the complication rate was similar.562

showing no beneﬁts of

In conclusion, there are now consistent data from two
increa-
large multicenter trials
sing CRRT doses in AKI patients above efﬂuent ﬂows of
20–25 ml/kg/h. In clinical practice,
in order to achieve a
delivered dose of 20–25 ml/kg/h, it is generally necessary to
prescribe in the range of 25–30 ml/kg/h, and to minimize
interruptions in CRRT.

114

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

are

insufﬁcient data

Additional considerations
In patients who do not achieve the target dose of RRT,
despite optimization of the initial modality, a switch to
another modality or the combination of different modalities
should be considered.
Although there

supporting a
recommendation for elevated RRT doses in patients with
AKI and septic shock,
limited data suggest that a higher
dose might be beneﬁcial in some patients. A small single-
center RCT was conducted in 20 patients with septic shock
and AKI. Patients were
randomized to either high-
volume (efﬂuent ﬂow of 65 ml/kg/h) or low-volume CVVH
(efﬂuent ﬂow of 35 ml/kg/h). The primary end-point was
vasopressor dose required to maintain mean arterial pressure
at 65 mm Hg. Mean norepinephrine dose decreased more
rapidly after 24 hours of high-volume as compared to
low-volume CVVH treatment. Survival on day 28 was not
affected.783

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

K Determine the optimal dose parameter that should be
used in future trials comparing different intensities of
dialysis in AKI patients. Some possible methods to
explore are on-line Kt/V urea, urea reduction ratios, or
application of the concept of corrected equivalent renal
urea clearance for solute removal measurement and
ultrafiltration effluent volume, or
substitution fluid
volume normalized by body weight and time for CRRT.
Other aspects of intensity should also be studied, e.g.,
fluid control and acid-base and electrolyte balance. The
comparators might be the standard ways to measure dose
as Kt/V or prescribed effluent volume. Suggested outcome
parameters are 60- to 90-day mortality, ICU and hospital
LOS, and recovery of kidney function.

K Determine the optimal dose of RRT in AKI in homo-
geneous subpopulations, such as cardiac surgery or sepsis
patients, and separately in ICU and non-ICU patients.
Future RCTs should be controlled for timing of RRT
for general care of patients
initiation and, perhaps,
(antibiotics, nutrition, kind and indication for vasoactive
drugs, mode of mechanical ventilation). Studies should
also assess the efficiency of RRT (since dose does not

c h a p t e r 5 . 8

necessarily mean efficiency), assessing control of BUN,
creatinine, fluid balance, and acid-base and electrolyte
status. The comparators might be different efficiency
targets. The suggested outcomes are 60- to 90-day morta-
lity, need for vasopressor drugs, time on mechanical
ventilation, ICU and hospital stay, and renal recovery.

SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,
Shire,
Novartis, Robert
Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.

and Jane Cizik Foundation,

DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,
and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinion
or statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it
clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contri-
butor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accord-
ingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board and
their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no
liability whatsoever
the consequences of any such
inaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. While
every effort is made to ensure that drug doses and other
quantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own published
literature.

for

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 37: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of dose of continuous and intermittent RRT on AKI.
Supplementary Table 38: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dose of continuous and intermittent RRT on AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115

115

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Biographic and Disclosure Information

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.36

John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP (Work Group Co-Chair),
is Professor of Critical Care Medicine, Medicine, Bio-
engineering and Clinical and Translational Science, and Vice
Chair for Research within the Department of Critical Care
Medicine at the University of Pittsburgh. In addition, he is
the Director of the Program on Bioengineering and Organ
Support for the CRISMA (Clinical Research Investigation
and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness) Center at
the
University of Pittsburgh.

Dr Kellum is actively involved in education, research, and
administration. His research interests span various aspects
of critical-care medicine, but center in critical-care nephro-
logy, sepsis, multiorgan failure, and clinical epidemiology,
including consensus development and research methodology.
He has authored more than 300 publications and served as
editor and contributor to recent texts including Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy, Critical Care Nephrology, and
Management of Acute Kidney Problems. Dr Kellum has won
several awards for teaching and has given more than 400
seminars and invited lectures worldwide related to his
research.

Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Alere; Astute Medical; Baxter;
CytoSorbents; EBI; Eli Lilly; Fresenius; Gambro; Siemens;
Spectral Diagnostics
Speaker: Baxter; Fresenius; Gambro
Grant/Research Support: Astute Medical; Baxter; CytoSorbents;
Gambro

Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD (Work Group Co-Chair), is
Professor of Internal Medicine and former Chief of Renal
Division at the University of Ghent where he also received his
medical degree and PhD. Dr Lameire’s interests include basic
research topics such as renal circulation in experimental ARF
and peritoneal circulation, as well as clinical topics spanning
clinical ARF, PD, and organizational and economic aspects
of chronic RRT and transplantation. He currently oversees
the worldwide continuing medical education programs of
COMGAN of the International Society of Nephrology, and
serves as current Editor-in-Chief for Acta Clinica Belgica
and is emeritus Editor-in-Chief
for Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation. For his activities in the Renal Sister Program
of the International Society of Nephrology and his leadership
of the Renal Disaster Relief Task Force, he was awarded
Doctor Honoris Causa at the Kaunas Medical Academy in
Lithuania and an honorary membership of the International
Society of Nephrology (ISN). Dr Lameire also received the
Garabed Eknoyan Award from the NKF (USA) in 2007 for his
continuing work to improve dialysis therapy and PD, and his

to improving and implementing KDOQI
contributions
Guidelines. He also served as the KDIGO Co-Chair from
2004 to 2007.

Dr Lameire reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Peter Aspelin, MD, PhD, received his basic training in
radiology at Malmo¨ University Hospital (Lund University)
and was Associate Professor there for 13 years. In 1989 he
became Professor and Chairman of
the Department of
Radiology at Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital. Professor Aspelin was Vice Dean of the Medical
School at Karolinska Institutet from 1993 to 1995 and served
as Vice President at the institution from 1995 to 2001. He was
also Head of Research & Development at Huddinge
University Hospital in 2002 and Vice Chairman of Research
& Development at the Karolinska University Hospital. Other
notable accomplishments also include his roles as President
for the Scientiﬁc Board of the Swedish Council of Technology
Assessment in Health Care (1999–2005); Chairman of the
Swedish Society of Medical Radiology (2003–2005); and past
Vice Chairman and current Chairman of
the Swedish
Medical Association.

Professor Aspelin has conducted research on contrast
media since 1972 when he studied under the tutelage of
Professor Torsten Alme´n. He has written more than 170
scientiﬁc publications to date and his primary research
centers on the development of nonionic contrast media and
the examination of their effects on medical imaging and
patient safety.

Speaker: GE Healthcare
Expert witness: GE Healthcare

Rashad S Barsoum, MD, FRCP, FRCPE,
is Emeritus
Professor of Medicine at Cairo University and current
Chairman of Cairo Kidney Center and Medical Sector
Committee for Supreme Council for Egyptian Universities.
He received his medical degree from Cairo University, where
he also completed his fellowship in nephrology in 1967.
Dr Barsoum has been a primary investigator in clinical trials
involving the study of immunosuppression agents in kidney
transplantation and treatment of HCV infection in dialysis
patients. He has also authored more than 200 journal articles
and book chapters and currently serves as Associate Editor
for Nephron Clinical Practice and editorial board member for
American Journal of Kidney Diseases. Dr Barsoum is also
active in numerous medical societies, having served as Past
President for the Arab Society of Nephrology and Renal
Transplantation and Egyptian Society of Nephrology. Among

116

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

his noted achievements include the International Award from
the NKF (USA), the Roscoe Robinson Award from the
International Society of Nephrology, and the Distinguished
Researcher Award from Cairo University.

Advisor/Consultant: Wyeth
Speaker: Amgen; B. Braun; Fresenius;
Novartis; Roche; Wyeth

Janssen Cilag;

Emmanuel A Burdmann, MD, PhD, is Head of Intensive Care
Unit and Associate Professor, Division of Nephrology at
University of Sa˜o Paulo Medical School. He received his
medical degree from the University of Sa˜o Paulo, where he also
completed his fellowship. He was the Past President of the
Latin American Society of Nephrology and Hypertension and
current President of Brazilian Society of Nephrology. Dr
Burdmann has authored over 150 journal articles and book
chapters and is currently on the editorial boards of Clinical
the American Society of Nephrology, Clinical
Journal of
Nephrology, Kidney International, Nephrology Dialysis Trans-
plantation, and Nephron Clinical Practice. He is also a member
of numerous professional societies and has served on the
the International Society of Nephrology and
Council of
KDIGO Board. In addition to his research interest in AKI,
Dr Burdmann is also a coinvestigator in the TREAT study.

Dr Burdmann reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Stuart L Goldstein, MD, is Professor of Pediatrics and Director,
Center for Acute Care Nephrology at Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital Medical Center. He received his medical degree from
Columbia University and completed both clinical and research
fellowships in pediatric nephrology at the Children’s Hospital
in Boston, Massachusetts. Dr Goldstein is a member of the
American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Society of
Nephrology,
the International Pediatric Nephrology Asso-
ciation, the American Society of Pediatric Nephrology, the
International Society of Nephrology, and the Society for
Pediatric Research. In addition, he is Chairman of the Medical
Advisory Committee to the FORUM of ESRD Networks and a
member of the Medical Review Board for the ESRD Networks
9 and 10, is the Pediatric Nephrologist Representative for the
International Society of Nephrology Commission of Acute
Renal Failure, and has been elected to the Council of the
American Society of Pediatric Nephrology. Dr Goldstein has
developed and validated the pediatric modiﬁed RIFLE
(pRIFLE) AKI criteria, is Founder and Principal Investigator
for the Prospective Pediatric Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy (ppCRRT) Registry Group, and has evaluated novel
urinary AKI biomarkers in the pediatric critical care setting. He
has written over 110 journal articles and contributed book
chapters to numerous texts including, Critical Care Nephrology,
Evidence-Based Nephrology, Handbook of Dialysis Therapy,
Management of Acute Kidney Problems, Pediatric Critical Care,
Pediatric Nephrology, and Pediatric Nephrology in the ICU.

Advisor/Consultant: Baxter; Gambro
Speaker: Gambro
Grant/Research Support: Amgen; Baxter; Gambro

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Charles A Herzog, MD, is Director of the Cardiovascular
Special Studies Center, United States Renal Data System
(USRDS). An investigator at
the USRDS since 1999,
Dr Herzog has been a cardiologist at Hennepin County
Medical Center (HCMC) in Minneapolis and a member of the
University of Minnesota faculty for 27 years. He has been
a professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota since
2004 and the cardiology consultant to the ESRD program
(dialysis and renal transplant) at HCMC since 1985. He
founded the program in interventional cardiology and served
as the director of the cardiac catheterization laboratory at
HCMC from 1985 to 1991. Since 1997, Dr Herzog has been
the director of the cardiac ultrasound laboratory at HCMC.
He participated in the development of the National Kidney
Foundation’s K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for Cardio-
vascular Disease in Dialysis Patients, and co-chaired the 2010
KDIGO Controversies Conference, ‘‘Cardiovascular Disease in
CKD: What is it and What Can We Do About It?’’ The author
or co-author of more than 100 published papers and reviews,
Dr Herzog has served on the Editorial Board for the American
Heart Journal since 2005 and as liaison editor (cardiology) for
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation since 2007. His areas of
research and special
interests include cardiac disease and
chronic kidney disease, and echocardiography.

Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Affymax; Amgen; CorMedix;
FibroGen; Fresenius
Board of Trustees: Roche Foundation for Anemia Research
Honorarium: UpToDate
Grant/Research Support: Johnson & Johnson; National Institutes
of Health
Equity Interest: Boston Scientiﬁc; Cambridge Heart; Johnson
& Johnson; Merck

Michael Joannidis, MD, is Associate Professor in Medicine
and serves as Director of the Medical Intensive Care Unit,
Dept. Internal Medicine I at Medical University Innsbruck in
Austria. He is a certiﬁed specialist in critical-care medicine,
nephrology, and cardiology, and his research interests cover
several aspects of critical-care medicine with a major focus on
AKI, renal tubular epithelial pathophysiology, RRT, and sepsis.
Dr Joannidis currently serves as chair of the section Acute
Kidney Injury of the European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine (ESICM), President of the Austrian Society of
Medical and General Intensive Care Medicine (OEGIAIM)
and associate editor of Intensive Care Medicine.

Speaker: Baxter; Fresenius; Gambro

Andreas Kribben, MD, is Professor of Medicine and Head of
the Department of Nephrology at the University Hospital
Essen at the University of Duisburg-Essen. He received his
medical degree at the Johann-Wolfgang Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany in 1983. Dr Kribben was trained in
Internal Medicine and Nephrology at the Department of
Nephrology of the University Hospital Klinikum Steglitz,
Free University of Berlin, Germany and at the University
Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. From

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

117

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

1990 to 1993, he was a research fellow at the Renal Division
of the University of Colorado Health Sciences Centre in
Denver, Colorado, USA. His major scientiﬁc interests include
all aspects of AKI, CRF, as well as transplantation and
hypertension.

Dr Kribben is member of numerous professional organi-
zations, including the International Society of Nephrology,
the American Society of Nephrology, the European Dialysis
and Transplantation Association, and he is a member of the
Board of Directors of the German Society of Nephrology.
He is an editorial member of Clinical Nephrology and served
as subject editor of Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation.
Dr Kribben is also a member of
the World Health
Organization Work Group for the 11th revision of ICD.

Advisor/Consultant: Roche; Shire; Teva
Speaker: Amgen; Apherese ForschungsInstitut; Baxter;
Bayer-Schering; Berlin-Chemie; Fresenius; GE Healthcare;
Genzyme; Roche; Shire
Grant/Research Support: B. Braun; Biosite; Fresenius;
Koehler; Roche; Teva

is Dr Gerald J. and Dorothy R.
Andrew S Levey, MD,
Friedman Professor of Medicine at Tufts University School
of Medicine, Chief of the William B. Schwartz, MD Division
of Nephrology at Tufts Medical Center, Senior Scientist at
the US Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition
Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, and Professor,
Clinical Research at
the Sackler School of Graduate
Biomedical Sciences at Tufts University. His research is
mainly in the areas of epidemiology of CKD and cardio-
vascular disease in CKD, controlled trials
to slow the
progression of CKD, clinical assessment of kidney function,
assessment and improvement of outcomes in dialysis and
transplantation, and clinical practice guideline develop-
ment and implementation. Dr Levey is currently Program
Director for an NIDDK-funded clinical research training
program,
‘‘Clinical Trials, Epidemiology and Outcomes
Research in Nephrology’’. He is also the Director of the
Tufts Center for Guideline Development and Implementation
the American Journal of Kidney Disease.
and Editor of
Dr Levey is past Chair of
the NKF’s Task Force on
Cardiovascular Disease in Chronic Renal Disease, KDOQI
Work Group on Chronic Kidney Disease: Evaluation,
Classiﬁcation and Stratiﬁcation, and KDOQI Work Group
on Hypertension and Antihypertensive Agents in Chronic
Kidney Disease.

Grant/Research Support: Amgen; National
Health; National Kidney Foundation

Institutes of

Alison M MacLeod, MBChB, MD, FRCP London and
is Professor in the Department of Medicine
Edinburgh,
and Therapeutics at the University of Aberdeen Medical
School, UK. She completed her fellowship at the Royal
Colleges of Physicians of London and Edinburgh, and has
interests in epidemiology of CKD, AKI, and evidence based
medicine in nephrology. Her research group also conducts

systematic literature reviews and she is a member of the
Editorial Board of the Cochrane Review Group. Dr MacLeod
is a current committee member of the European Renal
Registry Executive Committee, Anemia Management
in
Chronic Kidney Disease–National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, Scientiﬁc Committee, and European
Renal Association Congress. In addition, she is Chairman
of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, Diagnosis
and Management of Chronic Renal Failure and was a
member of the Executive Committee of KDIGO.

Dr MacLeod reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Ravindra L Mehta, MD, FACP, FASN, FRCP, is Professor
of Medicine in the Division of Nephrology and Associate
Chair for Clinical Research in the Department of Medicine
at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) where
he directs the Acute Dialysis Program and the UCSD
CREST and Masters in Clinical Research Program. He
received the M.B.B.S. degree (1976) from the Government
Medical School
in Amritsar, India, and the M.D. (1979)
and D.M. (1981) degrees from the Post-Graduate Institute
of Medical Education and Research in Chandigarh, India.
He subsequently completed a nephrology fellowship at
the University of Rochester in Rochester, New York and
obtained his boards
in internal medicine (1986) and
Nephrology (1988). He has been on the faculty at UCSD
since 1988.

Dr Mehta is an internationally recognized expert in the
ﬁeld of ARF and has directed several clinical studies in the
management of patients with kidney disease including
comparing different dialytic modalities in the treatment of
AKI, conducting large multicenter observational studies of
AKI with the PICARD group, evaluating different predictive
models for outcomes in AKI,
investigating the role of
cytokine removal by dialysis membranes in sepsis and AKI,
and evaluating techniques for determining the amount of
excess ﬂuid in dialysis patients. In addition to his clinical and
research activities, he has worked with the American Society
of Nephrology, NKF, Society of Critical Care Medicine, and
the International Society of Nephrology in developing
courses for fellows and practicing physicians in clinical
nephrology and dialysis techniques. Dr Mehta chairs the
annual International Conference on CRRT that is now in its
15th year and he is also the Chair of the International Society
of Nephrology Committee on AKI, founding member of the
ADQI and AKIN. He has authored over 150 scientiﬁc articles,
papers and book chapters, and has been actively involved in
resident and scholar teaching. He won the house staff
teaching award on four occasions and was awarded School of
Medicine Faculty teaching award in 2003. He has been
recognized as one of the Best Doctors in San Diego and the
USA.
recognized by the American
Nephrologists of Indian Origin for his achievements in
nephrology. In March 2009, he was elected as a Fellow of the
Royal College of Physicians in the UK. Over the course of his
academic career, he has trained over 50 postdoctoral fellows

In 2008, he was

118

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

in nephrology, of whom 15 have carried out their research
projects with him.

Advisor/Consultant: Astute Medical; Eli Lilly; Takeda
Speaker: Baxter; Gambro
Grant/Research Support: Eli Lilly

is a
Patrick T Murray, MD, FASN, FRCPI, FJFICMI,
nephrologist and clinical pharmacologist at
the Mater
Misericordiae University Hospital and University College
Dublin, Ireland. Dr Murray received his medical education at
University College Dublin, Ireland and following his intern-
ship at
in
Dublin, he completed his residency in internal medicine
at Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA and fellowship training programs in nephrology, critical
care medicine, and clinical pharmacology at the University of
Chicago Hospitals in Chicago, Illinois, USA.

the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital

Dr Murray is board-certiﬁed in internal medicine,
nephrology, critical care medicine, and clinical pharmacology
and practiced as an intensivist, nephrologist, and clinical
pharmacologist at the University of Chicago Hospitals from
1996 to 2008, serving as the fellowship training program
director in nephrology and also directing the Acute Dialysis
Service. Since 2008, he has been the Professor of Clinical
Pharmacology at University College Dublin, and a Con-
sultant in Nephrology & Clinical Pharmacology at the Mater
Misericordiae University Hospital. Dr Murray has published
extensively with contributions in numerous books inclu-
ding, Critical Care Nephrology, Evidence-Based Nephrology,
Evidence-Based Practice of Critical Care, and Intensive Care in
Nephrology. He has a long-standing interest in research and
education to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and therapy
of AKI.

Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Alere; AM Pharma; Argutus
Medical; FAST Diagnostics; Reata; Sanoﬁ-Aventis
Grant/Research Support: Abbott; Alere; Argutus Medical

currently Academic Head of

Saraladevi Naicker, MBChB, MRCP, FRCP, FCP (SA), PhD,
the Department of
is
Internal Medicine and Professor of Renal Medicine and head
of the Division of Nephrology at the University of the
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. She completed her under-
graduate and postgraduate medical training primarily at the
University of Natal in Durban, South Africa and spent short
periods training in nephrology at the Universities of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg and Newcastle on Tyne in the
UK. She currently chairs the Postgraduate (Higher Degrees)
Committee of the Faculty of Health Sciences at the University
of the Witwatersrand and is a member of the Council of the
College of Physicians of the Colleges of Medicine of South
Africa. She is also a Council member of the International
Society of Nephrology (ISN) and chairs
its Education
Committee.

Dr Naicker was the recipient of the Philip Tobias/Convo-
cation Distinguished Teachers Award at the University of the
the International Distinguished
Witwatersrand in 2006,

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Medal of NKF of the USA in 2005 and was awarded the
prestigious Roscoe Robinson award for nephrology education
by the ISN at its World Congress in Milan in May 2009. She
has hosted the nephrology training of ISN Fellows from
Ethiopia, Nigeria, Botswana, Tanzania, Rwanda, Kenya and
Zambia as well as ISPD trainees from Nigeria and Tanzania.
During her period as Chair of the Africa Committee of ISN
COMGAN from 2000 to 2007, she made site visits and
participated in continuing medical education programs in
many African countries. Her research interests include areas
related to HIV and kidney disease, prevention of CKD, CVD
in renal disease, and medical education.

Advisor/Consultant: Amgen; Novartis; Roche

Steven M Opal, MD, is Professor of Medicine at The Warren
Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Chief of the
Infectious Disease Division, Memorial Hospital of Rhode
Island. He received his medical degree from Albany Medical
School, Albany, New York and completed his fellowship
training in infectious diseases at Walter Reed Army Medical
Center in Washington, DC. Dr Opal
is a member of
numerous national and international committees including,
International Steering Committee for Sepsis Clinical Trials;
Steering Committee FDA Meta-analysis Committee on
Sepsis; International Endotoxin Society; and International
Sepsis Forum. He has written extensively with over 300
publications and has given more than 100 invited presenta-
tions. Dr Opal currently serves on the editorial boards of
Advances in Sepsis, Critical Care Forum, Current Opinion in
Critical Care, and Shock. In recognition for his work, he was
awarded the Brown Medical School
Infectious Disease
Fellowship Teacher of the Year Award in 2008 and was
acknowledged in Best Doctors in America from 2003 to 2009.

Dr Opal reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Franz Schaefer, MD, is Professor of Pediatrics and Chief of
the Pediatric Nephrology Division at Heidelberg University
received his M.D. at Wu¨rzburg
Hospital. Dr Schaefer
University Medical School and performed research scholar-
ships at the Institute of Child Health, London, University of
Virginia, and Stanford University. His research interests
include
topics on physiopathology of growth failure,
cardiovascular and endocrine disorders in CKD and the role
of genetic abnormalities in congenital kidney disorders. In
clinical
research, he conducted numerous collaborative
clinical trials and established several international consortia
such as the the European Study Group on Progressive CKD
in Children, the International Pediatric Peritoneal Dialysis
Network, and the PodoNet Registry for Steroid Resistant
Nephrotic Syndrome. Dr Schaefer has published over 280
articles and book chapters, and co-edited the standard
textbooks Comprehensive Pediatric Nephrology and Pediatric
Dialysis. He received several prestigious awards for innovative
research including the Recklinghausen Prize and the IBM
Faculty Award. Dr Schaefer is a current council member of
the International Pediatric Nephrology Association and the

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

119

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis. He is a member
of several editorial boards and serves as Section Editor for
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation and Pediatric Nephrology.
Dr Schaefer reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Miet Schetz, MD, PhD, graduated from the
faculty
of Medicine of the Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium,
after which she specialized in anesthesiology and later in
intensive care medicine. Since 1981 she is staff member of
the department of Intensive Care Medicine at the University
Hospital Leuven (Chair: Greet Van den Berghe) and has
been Associate Professor at the Catholic University Leuven
since 2000. Dr Schetz completed her PhD thesis on the
‘‘The Hemostatic System and Continuous Renal
subject,
Replacement Therapy: Mutual Effects’’. Her main ﬁeld of
interest is AKI and its treatment, on which she published
several articles.

Grant/Research Support: Gambro

Shigehiko Uchino, MD, PhD, is Associate Professor and Staff
Intensivist in the Department of Anesthesiology at Jikei
University School of Medicine in Tokyo, Japan. He received
his medical degree
from Tokyo Medical and Dental
University and his PhD from Jikei University School of
Medicine. Dr Uchino is a member of the Japanese Society of
Intensive Care Medicine, Japanese Association for Acute
Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine, and the
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. In addition
to serving as a reviewer for numerous journals, he has written
book chapters in recent texts such as Critical Care Nephrology,
Evidence-Based Practice of Critical Care, and Intensive Care
in Nephrology. Dr Uchino is also a coinvestigator in the
BEST Kidney study.

Dr Uchino reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

KDIGO CHAIRS
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD, is Professor of Medicine and Chief
of Nephrology and Hypertension at
the University of
Erlangen—Nuremberg, Germany. He received his MD from
the Westfa¨lische Wilhelms-Universita¨t Mu¨nster, Germany. In
1993, following postgraduate training in internal medicine,
pathology and physiology, he was appointed Assistant
Professor of Physiology at the University of Regensburg,
Germany. Subsequently, he continued his training in internal
medicine and nephrology at the Charite´, Humboldt Uni-
versity in Berlin, where he was appointed Associate Professor
of Nephrology in 2000. His major scientiﬁc interests are in
the molecular mechanisms and physiological/pathophysio-
logical relevance of oxygen sensing and the management of
anemia. As such, he has contributed to the development of
the European Best Practice Guidelines for Anemia Manage-
ment and participated in the CREATE and TREAT studies.
Professor Eckardt is subject editor of Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation and serves on the editorial board of several
other journals. He has also authored book chapters and most
recently served as a Co-Editor of the text, Studies on Renal

Disorders. Dr Eckardt is a member of the executive committee
of KDIGO.

Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Amgen; Hexal Sandoz;
Johnson & Johnson; Roche
Speaker: Amgen; Janssen Cilag; Johnson & Johnson; Roche
Grant/Research Support: Roche

Bertram L Kasiske, MD, is Professor of Medicine at the
University of Minnesota, USA. He received his medical
degree from the University of Iowa and completed his
Internal Medicine residency and fellowship training in
Nephrology at Hennepin County Medical Center where he
is currently Director of Nephrology.

Dr Kasiske is former Deputy Director of the United States
Renal Data System and former Editor-in-Chief of The
American Journal of Kidney Diseases. He has served as
Secretary/Treasurer and on the Board of Directors of the
American Society of Transplantation, and on the Organ
Procurement and Transplantation Network/United Network
of Organ Sharing Board of Directors, and the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Board of the National Kidney Foundation. He is
the
currently serving on the Board of Councilors of
International Society of Nephrology. He is the Principal
Investigator for a National Institutes of Health-sponsored,
multi-center study of
long term outcomes after kidney
donation. He is the Director of the Scientiﬁc Registry of
Transplant Recipients. He has over 160 scientiﬁc publications
in major peer reviewed journals, and 230 review articles,
editorials and textbook chapters. Dr Kasiske is also a recipient
of the NKF’s Garabed Eknoyan Award in 2003.

Advisor/Consultant: Litholink
Grant/Research Support: Bristol-Myers Squibb; Merck-Schering
Plough

EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM
Katrin Uhlig, MD, MS, is the Director, Guideline Develop-
ment at the Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline
Development and Implementation, Boston, MA, Associate
Professor of Medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine,
and a staff nephrologist at Tufts Medical Center. Dr Uhlig
completed her training in internal medicine, nephrology, and
rheumatology in Germany (Aachen University Hospital and
Munich University Hospital) and the USA (Georgetown
University Medical Center and Tufts Medical Center). Since
2001, she has been participating in or directing the evidence
review for KDOQI and KDIGO guidelines. In 2005, she
co-chaired the KDIGO Evidence Rating Group to develop
a consensus on grading of KDIGO guidelines. From 2006
to 2007, she served as Co-Editor of the American Journal
of Kidney Diseases. Her focus in teaching and research is in
evidence-based medicine, systematic review, clinical practice
guideline development, and critical literature appraisal.
Dr Uhlig reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Jose Calvo-Broce, MD, MS, served as a research fellow at the
Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and

120

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

b i o g r a p h i c a n d d i s c l o s u r e i n f o r m a t i o n

Implementation in Boston, MA and participated in the
conduct of systematic reviews and critical literature apprai-
sals for this guideline. Dr Calvo-Broce was recently awarded
a Master of Science in Clinical Research for his thesis
on ‘‘Hospital-Acquired AKI: An Analysis of Nadir-to-Peak
Serum Creatinine Increments Stratiﬁed by Baseline Estimated
GFR’’.

Dr Calvo-Broce reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Aneet Deo, MD, MS, served as a research fellow at the
Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development
and Implementation in Boston, MA. She participated in the

conduct of systematic reviews and critical literature appraisals
for this guideline. Dr Deo was awarded a Master of Science
in Clinical Research for her thesis on ‘‘Loss to Analysis in
Randomized Controlled Trials of Chronic Kidney Disease’’.
Dr Deo reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Amy Earley, BS, is a project coordinator at the Tufts Center
for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementa-
tion in Boston, MA. She assists in the development of clinical
practice guidelines and conducts systematic reviews and
critical literature appraisals.

Ms Earley reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121

121

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

Acknowledgments

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 122–123; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.37

A special debt of gratitude is owed to the current KDIGO
Co-Chairs Kai-Uwe Eckardt and Bertram Kasiske and the
KDIGO Board for their invaluable guidance throughout
the development of this guideline. In particular, we thank the
ERT members: Katrin Uhlig, Jose Calvo-Broce, Aneet Deo,
and Amy Earley, for their substantial contribution to the
rigorous assessment of the available evidence. We are also
especially grateful to the Work Group members for their
expertise throughout the entire process of literature review,
data extraction, meeting participation, the critical writing
and editing of the statements and rationale, which made the
publication of this guideline possible. The generous gift of
their time and dedication is greatly appreciated. Finally, and
on behalf of the Work Group, we gratefully acknowledge
the careful assessment of the draft guideline by external
reviewers. The Work Group considered all of the valuable
comments made and where appropriate, suggested changes
were incorporated into the ﬁnal publication. The following
individuals and organizations provided review of the draft
guideline:

(Clinica de Nefrologia, Urologia

Omar Abboud, Mona Al–Rukhaimi (Dubai Hospital),
Mustafa Arici (Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine),
Mariano Arriola
y
Enfermedades Cardiovasculares, Argentina), Adanze Asinobi
(University of Ibadan, Nigeria), Alper Azak (Ankara Educa-
tion and Research Hospital), Gavin Becker (Royal Melbourne
Hospital), Rudy Bilous (The James Cook University Hospi-
tal), Yousef Boobes (Tawam Hospital, UAE), Catherine
Bouman (Dutch Society of Intensive Care Medicine), Carlo
Briguori (Clinica Mediterranea), Eric S Cantor (GE Health-
care), Maria Ines Carvallo, William R Clark (Gambro),
Adrian Covic (Hospital CI Parhon, Romania), Daniel Coyne
(Washington University School of Medicine), Joe Dasta
(Society of Critical Care Medicine), Jane S Davis (University
of Alabama at Birmingham), Angel de Francisco (Spanish
Society of Nephrology), Jean-Yves De Vos (AZ Werken
Glorieux Dialysis Unit), Pierre Delanaye (University of
Lie`ge), Sarah Faubel (American Society of Nephrology),
Ana Elizabeth Figueiredo (Hospital Sa˜o Lucas), Thorsten
Universita¨t
Feldkamp
Duisburg-Essen), Kevin Finkel (Society of Critical Care
Medicine), Lui G Forni (European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine), Heidi Frankel (Society of Critical Care Medicine),
Gerard Fulda
of Critical Care Medicine),
Mohammed Benghanem Gharbi (University Hospital Ibn
Rochd), Richard J Glassock (UCLA), Robert S Gold (DCBA),
Basu Gopal
Jeff Harder
(Christian Medical College),
(University of Washington Medical Center), Brenda

(Universita¨tsklinikum

(Society

Essen,

Hemmelgarn (Canadian Society of Nephrology), Hallvard
Holdaas (National Hospital - Norway), Lai Seong Hooi
(Hospital Sultanah Aminah), Atsuko Ikemori (St. Marianna
University School of Medicine), Enyu Imai (Nagoya Uni-
versity School of Medicine), Lesley Inker (Tufts-New England
Medical Center), Sarwar Iqbal (BIRDEM Hospital), Kuni-
toshi
Iseki (Ryukyn University), Simon Jenkins, Svend
Lorentz Jorgensen (Pharmacosmos A/S), Takei Kake (Chugai
Pharmaceutical), Nada Kanaan (Cliniques Universitaires
Saint Luc), Markus Ketteler (Klinikum Coburg GGmbH),
Mahmoud El-Khatib (University of Cincinnati), Pradeep
Kumar Rai (Opal Hospital, Varanasi, India), Hanife Kurtal
(Charite´-Universita¨tsmedizin, Berlin), Craig B Langman
Ingrid Ledebo
(Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago),
(Gambro AB), Edgar Lerma (University of Illinois at Chicago
College of Medicine), Nathan W Levin (Renal Research
Institute), Andrew Lewington (The Renal Association, UK),
Visnja Lezaic (Clinical Centre of Serbia), Zhi-Hong Liu
(Nanjing University School of Medicine), Raul Lombardi
(Latin American Society of Nephrology & Hypertension),
Ge´rard London (ERA/EDTA), Jose´ Anto´ nio Lopes (Hospital
de Santa Maria), Robert Mactier (The Renal Association,
UK), Constantine Manthous (American Thoracic Society),
Omar Maoujoud (Mohammed V Military Hospital), Pablo U
Massari,
John McIlwaine (American College of Chest
Physicians), Cecilia Mengarelli (Fresenuis Mansilla), Gong
Mengchun (Peking Union Medical College Hospital), Walid
Mohamed (Alexandria University Hospital), Raﬁque Moosa
(University of Stellenbosch), Jose M Morales (Hospital 12 de
Octubre, Spain; European Society for Organ Transplanta-
(Northern General Hospital),
tion), Sameh K Morcos
Toshiki Moriyama (Osaka University Health Care Center),
Abdou Niang (Cheikh Anta Diop University), Eisei Noiri
(Japanese Society of Nephrology), Fernando Nolasco
(Portuguese Society of Nephrology), Maurizio Nordio
(Dirigente Medico), Michał Nowicki (Medical University of
Lodz), Ercan Ok (Turkish Society of Nephrology), Suzanne
Oparil (University of Alabama at Birmingham), Heleen
Intensive Care), Erling
Oudemans
Pedersen (Holstebro Hospital and University of Aarhus),
Momir Polenakovic (Balkan Cities Association of Nephro-
logy, Dialysis, Transplantation and Artiﬁcial Organs), Manuel
Praga (Hospital 12 de Octubre, Spain), Wajeh Qunibi
(University of Texas Health Science Center), Enrique Andre´s
Ribes (Fundacio´ Puigvert), Eduardo Rocha (Rio de Janeiro
Federal University Medical School), Cibele Rodrigues
(Catholic University of Sa˜o Paulo), Guillermo Rosa-Diez
(Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires - Argentina), Brad Rovin

(Danish Society of

122

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 122–123

a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

(Ohio State University), Nestor Schor (Universidade Federal
de Sao Paulo-UNIFESP), Mehmet Sukru Sever (European
Renal Best Practice), Amma Sewaah-Bonsu (Nephrology
Associates of Central Florida), Deepak Sharma (Mil Hospital
Jalandhar, India), Justin Silver (Hadassah University Hospi-
tal), Richard Solomon (Fletcher Allen Health Care), Peter
Spiro (American College of Chest Physicians), Takeshi
Sugaya (St. Marianna University School of Medicine), Cem
(Anadolu Medical Center), Charles Swanepoel
Sungur
(University of Cape Town), Seng Hoe Tan (Gleneagles
Medical Centre, Singapore), Samuel A Tisherman (Society
of Critical Care Medicine), Charles Tomson (Southmead
Hospital), Ste´phan Troyanov (Hoˆ pital du Sacre´-Coeur,
Montreal), Hung-Bin Tsai (Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi General
Hospital), Hirokazu Tsukahara
(Okayama University
Hospital), Wim Van Biesen (University Hospital Ghent),

Raymond Vanholder (University Hospital Ghent), Rowan
Walker
(Royal Melbourne Hospital), Michael Walsh
(McMaster University), HaiYan Wang (Beijing University),
Jiandong Wei (SUNY Downstate Medical Center), Colin
White (University of British Columbia), Hitoshi Yokoyama
(Kanazawa Medical University), Luis Yu (University of
Sa˜o Paulo), Elena Zakharova (Moscow City Hospital),
Carmine Zoccali (CNR-IBIM Clin Research Unit Ospedali
(Metropolitan Nephrology
Riuniti,
Associates).

Italy), Kim Zuber

Participation in the review does not necessarily constitute
endorsement of the content of this report by above indivi-
duals or the organization or institution they represent.

John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP, Work Group Co-Chair
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD, Work Group Co-Chair

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 122–123

123

r e f e r e n c e s

http://www.kidney-international.org

& 2012 KDIGO

References

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.38

1. Chertow GM, Burdick E, Honour M, et al. Acute kidney injury, mortality,
length of stay, and costs in hospitalized patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16:
3365–3370.

2. Hoste EA, Clermont G, Kersten A, et al. RIFLE criteria for acute kidney
injury are associated with hospital mortality in critically ill patients: a
cohort analysis. Crit Care 2006; 10: R73.

3. Lassnigg A, Schmidlin D, Mouhieddine M, et al. Minimal changes of serum
creatinine predict prognosis in patients after cardiothoracic surgery: a
prospective cohort study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15: 1597–1605.

4. Levy EM, Viscoli CM, Horwitz RI. The effect of acute renal failure on

mortality. A cohort analysis. JAMA 1996; 275: 1489–1494.

5. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Goldsmith D, et al. An assessment of the RIFLE
criteria for acute renal failure in hospitalized patients. Crit Care Med 2006;
34: 1913–1917.

6. Hoste EA, Kellum JA. Acute renal failure in the critically ill: impact on

morbidity and mortality. Contrib Nephrol 2004; 144: 1–11.

7. Uchino S, Kellum JA, Bellomo R, et al. Acute renal failure in critically ill
patients: a multinational, multicenter study. JAMA 2005; 294: 813–818.
8. Bagshaw SM, Langenberg C, Bellomo R. Urinary biochemistry and
microscopy in septic acute renal failure: a systematic review. Am J Kidney
Dis 2006; 48: 695–705.

9. Bagshaw SM, Langenberg C, Wan L, et al. A systematic review of urinary
ﬁndings in experimental septic acute renal failure. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:
1592–1598.

10. Shanley PF, Rosen MD, Brezis M, et al. Topography of focal proximal
tubular necrosis after ischemia with reﬂow in the rat kidney. Am J Pathol
1986; 122: 462–468.

11. Heyman SN, Brezis M, Epstein FH, et al. Effect of glycine and hypertrophy
on renal outer medullary hypoxic injury in ischemia reﬂow and contrast
nephropathy. Am J Kidney Dis 1992; 19: 578–586.

12. Rosen S, Heyman SN. Difﬁculties in understanding human ‘‘acute tubular
necrosis’’: limited data and ﬂawed animal models. Kidney Int 2001; 60:
1220–1224.

13. Brun C, Munck O. Lesions of the kidney in acute renal failure following

shock. Lancet 1957; 272: 603–607.

14. Klenzak J, Himmelfarb J. Sepsis and the kidney. Crit Care Clin 2005; 21:

211–222.

15. Lameire N. The pathophysiology of acute renal failure. Crit Care Clin 2005;

21: 197–210.

16. Eknoyan G. Emergence of the concept of acute renal failure. Am J Nephrol

2002; 22: 225–230.

17. Davies F, Weldon R. A contribution to the study of ‘‘war nephritis’’. Lancet

1917; ii: 118–120.

18. Bywaters EGL, Beall D. Crush injuries with impairment of renal function.

BMJ 1947; 1: 427–432.

19. Kellum JA, Levin N, Bouman C, et al. Developing a consensus classiﬁcation
system for acute renal failure. Curr Opin Crit Care 2002; 8: 509–514.
20. Brivet FG, Kleinknecht DJ, Loirat P, et al. Acute renal failure in intensive
care units–causes, outcome, and prognostic factors of hospital mortality; a
prospective, multicenter study. French Study Group on Acute Renal Failure.
Crit Care Med 1996; 24: 192–198.

21. Liano F, Pascual J. Epidemiology of acute renal failure: a prospective,
multicenter, community-based study. Madrid Acute Renal Failure Study
Group. Kidney Int 1996; 50: 811–818.

22. Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA, et al. Acute renal failure - deﬁnition,
outcome measures, animal models, ﬂuid therapy and information
technology needs: the Second International Consensus Conference of the
Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8:
R204–212.

23. Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Network: report
of an initiative to improve outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;
11: R31.

24. Levy MM, Macias WL, Vincent JL, et al. Early changes in organ function
predict eventual survival in severe sepsis. Crit Care Med 2005; 33: 2194–2201.
25. Bagshaw SM, George C, Dinu I, et al. A multi-centre evaluation of the
RIFLE criteria for early acute kidney injury in critically ill patients. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2008; 23: 1203–1210.

26. Kellum JA, Bellomo R, Ronco C. Classiﬁcation of acute kidney injury using

RIFLE: What’s the purpose? Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 1983–1984.

27. Ricci Z, Cruz D, Ronco C. The RIFLE criteria and mortality in acute kidney

injury: A systematic review. Kidney Int 2008; 73: 538–546.

28. Thakar CV, Christianson A, Freyberg R, et al. Incidence and outcomes of
acute kidney injury in intensive care units: a Veterans Administration study.
Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2552–2558.
Joannidis M, Metnitz B, Bauer P, et al. Acute kidney injury in critically ill
patients classiﬁed by AKIN versus RIFLE using the SAPS 3 database.
Intensive Care Med 2009; 35: 1692–1702.

29.

30. Ostermann M, Chang RW. Acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit

according to RIFLE. Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 1837–1843.

31. Ali T, Khan I, Simpson W, et al. Incidence and outcomes in acute kidney
injury: a comprehensive population-based study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2007;
18: 1292–1298.

32. Akcan-Arikan A, Zappitelli M, Loftis LL, et al. Modiﬁed RIFLE criteria in
critically ill children with acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2007; 71:
1028–1035.

33. Hackworth LA, Wen X, Clermont G, et al. Hospital versus community-
acquired acute kidney injury in the critically ill: differences in epidemiology
(abstr). J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20: 115A.

34. Cerda J, Bagga A, Kher V, et al. The contrasting characteristics of acute
kidney injury in developed and developing countries. Nat Clin Pract
Nephrol 2008; 4: 138–153.

35. Cerda J, Lameire N, Eggers P, et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury.

36.

Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 881–886.
Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: a New Health System for
the 21st Century. National Academy Press: Washington, DC, 2001.

37. Eknoyan G. Are global nephrology guidelines feasible? Nat Clin Pract

Nephrol 2008; 4: 521.

38. Eknoyan G, Lameire N, Barsoum R, et al. The burden of kidney disease:

improving global outcomes. Kidney Int 2004; 66: 1310–1314.

39. Levin A, Stevens LA. Executing change in the management of chronic
kidney disease: perspectives on guidelines and practice. Med Clin North Am
2005; 89: 701–709.

40. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of

recommendations. BMJ 2004; 328: 1490.

41. Uhlig K, Macleod A, Craig J, et al. Grading evidence and recommendations
for clinical practice guidelines in nephrology. A position statement from
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2006;
70: 2058–2065.

42. National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for
chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classiﬁcation, and stratiﬁcation. Am J
Kidney Dis 2002; 39 (2 Suppl 1): S1–266.

43. Levey AS, Eckardt KU, Tsukamoto Y, et al. Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of
from Kidney Disease:

chronic kidney disease: a position statement
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2005; 67: 2089–2100.

44. Levey AS, de Jong PE, Coresh J, et al. The deﬁnition, classiﬁcation and
prognosis of chronic kidney disease: a KDIGO Controversies Conference
report. Kidney Int 2011; 80: 17–28.

45. Murray PT, Devarajan P, Levey AS, et al. A framework and key research
questions in AKI diagnosis and staging in different environments. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 864–868.

46. Endre ZH. Acute kidney injury: deﬁnitions and new paradigms. Adv

Chronic Kidney Dis 2008; 15: 213–221.

47. Amdur RL, Chawla LS, Amodeo S, et al. Outcomes following diagnosis of
acute renal failure in U.S. veterans: focus on acute tubular necrosis. Kidney
Int 2009; 76: 1089–1097.

48. Coca SG, Yusuf B, Shlipak MG, et al. Long-term risk of mortality and other
adverse outcomes after acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53: 961–973.

49. Wald R, Quinn RR, Luo J, et al. Chronic dialysis and death among survivors
of acute kidney injury requiring dialysis. JAMA 2009; 302: 1179–1185.
50. Harel Z, Chan CT. Predicting and preventing acute kidney injury after

cardiac surgery. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2008; 17: 624–628.

51. Reddy VG. Prevention of postoperative acute renal failure. J Postgrad Med

2002; 48: 64–70.

124

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

52. Venkataraman R. Can we prevent acute kidney injury? Crit Care Med 2008;

36: S166–171.

53. Stewart J, Findlay G, Smith N, et al. Adding Insult to Injury: A review of the
care of patients who died in hospital with a primary diagnosis of acute
kidney injury (acute renal failure). National Conﬁdential Enquiry into
Patient Outcome and Death: London, UK, 2009.

54. Bell M, Liljestam E, Granath F, et al. Optimal follow-up time after continuous
renal replacement therapy in actual renal failure patients stratiﬁed with the
RIFLE criteria. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20: 354–360.

55. Cruz DN, Bolgan I, Perazella MA, et al. North East Italian Prospective
Hospital Renal Outcome Survey on Acute Kidney Injury (NEiPHROS-
AKI): targeting the problem with the RIFLE Criteria. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2007; 2: 418–425.

56. Perez-Valdivieso JR, Bes-Rastrollo M, Monedero P, et al. Prognosis and
serum creatinine levels in acute renal failure at the time of nephrology
consultation: an observational cohort study. BMC Nephrol 2007; 8: 14.
57. Kuitunen A, Vento A, Suojaranta-Ylinen R, et al. Acute renal failure after
cardiac surgery: evaluation of the RIFLE classiﬁcation. Ann Thorac Surg
2006; 81: 542–546.

58. Coca SG, Bauling P, Schifftner T, et al. Contribution of acute kidney injury
toward morbidity and mortality in burns: a contemporary analysis.
Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49: 517–523.

59. Arnaoutakis GJ, Bihorac A, Martin TD, et al. RIFLE criteria for acute kidney
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 134:

injury in aortic arch surgery.
1554–1560; discussion 1560–1551.

60. Abosaif NY, Tolba YA, Heap M, et al. The outcome of acute renal failure in
the intensive care unit according to RIFLE: model application, sensitivity,
and predictability. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 46: 1038–1048.

61. Maccariello E, Soares M, Valente C, et al. RIFLE classiﬁcation in patients
with acute kidney injury in need of renal replacement therapy. Intensive
Care Med 2007; 33: 597–605.
Jenq CC, Tsai MH, Tian YC, et al. RIFLE classiﬁcation can predict short-
term prognosis in critically ill cirrhotic patients. Intensive Care Med 2007;
33: 1921–1930.

62.

63. Tallgren M, Niemi T, Poyhia R, et al. Acute renal injury and dysfunction
following elective abdominal aortic surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2007;
33: 550–555.

64. Zavada J, Hoste E, Cartin-Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three methods to
for RIFLE classiﬁcation. Nephrol Dial

estimate baseline
Transplant 2010; 25: 3911–3918.

creatinine

65. Macedo E, Bouchard J, Soroko SH, et al. Fluid accumulation, recognition
and staging of acute kidney injury in critically-ill patients. Crit Care 2010;
14: R82.

66. Doi K, Yuen PS, Eisner C, et al. Reduced production of creatinine limits its use
as marker of kidney injury in sepsis. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20: 1217–1221.
67. Levey AS, Coresh J, Greene T, et al. Using standardized serum creatinine
values in the modiﬁcation of diet in renal disease study equation for
estimating glomerular ﬁltration rate. Ann Intern Med 2006; 145: 247–254.
68. Stevens LA, Coresh J, Feldman HI, et al. Evaluation of the modiﬁcation of
diet in renal disease study equation in a large diverse population. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2007; 18: 2749–2757.

69. Emamian SA, Nielsen MB, Pedersen JF, et al. Kidney dimensions at
sonography: correlation with age, sex, and habitus in 665 adult volunteers.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993; 160: 83–86.

70. Bellomo R, Wan L, May CN. Vasoactive drugs and acute renal failure.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 416–419.

71. Bouchard J, Mehta RL. Fluid balance issues in the critically ill patient. In:
Ronco C, Costanzo MR, Bellomo R, Maisel A (eds). Fluid Overload:
Diagnosis and Management. S Karger AG: Basel, Switzerland, 2010,
pp 69–78.

72. Finfer S, Jones DA. Crystalloids and colloids. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R,
Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier:
Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 571–575.

73. Holmes CL, Walley KR. Shock. In: Murray PT, Brady HR, Hall JB (eds).
Intensive Care in Nephrology. Taylor & Francis: New York, NY, 2006,
pp 1–18.

74. Levine JS, Iglesias JI. Diuretic use and ﬂuid management. In: Murray PT,
Brady HR, Hall JB (eds). Intensive Care in Nephrology. Taylor & Francis:
New York, NY, 2006, pp 315–337.

75. McDermott G, Neligan PJ. What vasopressor agent should be used in the
septic patient? In: Deutschman CS, Neligan PJ (eds). Evidence-Based
Practice of Critical Care. Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2010, pp 206–211.
76. Neligan PJ, Fanning N. What is the best way to ﬂuid-resuscitate a patient
with sepsis? In: Deutschman CS, Neligan PJ (eds). Evidence-Based Practice
of Critical Care. Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2010, pp 198–205.

r e f e r e n c e s

77. Polanco PM, Pinsky MR. Hemodynamic monitoring in the intensive care
unit. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology,
2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 37–45.

78. Prowle JR, Bellomo R. Continuous renal replacement therapy: recent

advances and future research. Nat Rev Nephrol 2010; 6: 521–529.

79. Schetz M. Assessment of volume status. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J
(eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia,
PA, 2009, pp 499–504.

80. Venkataraman R, Kellum JA. Principles of ﬂuid therapy. In: Ronco C,
Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn. Saunders
Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 568–571.

81. Wajanaponsan N, Pinsky MR. Monitoring and management of systemic
hemodyamics. In: Jorres A, Ronco C, Kellum JA (eds). Management of
Acute Kidney Problems, 1st Edn. Springer: New York, NY, 2010, pp 147–154.
82. Himmelfarb J, Joannidis M, Molitoris B, et al. Evaluation and initial
management of acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:
962–967.

83. Bouchard J, Soroko SB, Chertow GM, et al. Fluid accumulation, survival
and recovery of kidney function in critically ill patients with acute kidney
injury. Kidney Int 2009; 76: 422–427.

84. Payen D, de Pont AC, Sakr Y, et al. A positive ﬂuid balance is associated
with a worse outcome in patients with acute renal failure. Crit Care 2008;
12: R74.

85. Vincent JL. Relevance of albumin in modern critical care medicine. Best

Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23: 183–191.

86. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al. A comparison of albumin and saline for
ﬂuid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:
2247–2256.

87. Ertmer C, Rehberg S, Van Aken H, et al. Relevance of non-albumin colloids
in intensive care medicine. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23:
193–212.

88. McMahon BA, Murray PT. Urinary liver fatty acid-binding protein: another
novel biomarker of acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2010; 77: 657–659.
89. Dickenmann M, Oettl T, Mihatsch MJ. Osmotic nephrosis: acute kidney
injury with accumulation of proximal tubular lysosomes due to adminis-
tration of exogenous solutes. Am J Kidney Dis 2008; 51: 491–503.

90. de Saint-Aurin RG, Kloeckner M, Annane D. Crystalloids versus colloids for
ﬂuid resuscitation in critically-ill patients. Acta Clin Belg Suppl 2007:
412–416.

91. Vincent JL. Fluid resuscitation: colloids vs crystalloids. Acta Clin Belg Suppl

2007: 408–411.

92. Schortgen F, Lacherade JC, Bruneel F, et al. Effects of hydroxyethylstarch
and gelatin on renal function in severe sepsis: a multicentre randomised
study. Lancet 2001; 357: 911–916.

93. Brunkhorst FM, Engel C, Bloos F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy and
pentastarch resuscitation in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 125–139.
94. Eisenbach C, Schonfeld AH, Vogt N, et al. Pharmacodynamics and organ
storage of hydroxyethyl starch in acute hemodilution in pigs: inﬂuence of
molecular weight and degree of substitution. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:
1637–1644.

95. Thomas G, Balk EM, Jaber BL. Effect of intensive insulin therapy and
pentastarch resuscitation on acute kidney injury in severe sepsis. Am J
Kidney Dis 2008; 52: 13–17.

96. Wiedermann CJ. Systematic review of randomized clinical trials on the use
of hydroxyethyl starch for ﬂuid management in sepsis. BMC Emerg Med
2008; 8: 1.

97. Sakr Y, Payen D, Reinhart K, et al. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch administration
on renal function in critically ill patients. Br J Anaesth 2007; 98: 216–224.
98. Perel P, Roberts I, Pearson M. Colloids versus crystalloids for ﬂuid
resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 4:
CD000567.

99. Schortgen F, Brochard L. Colloid-induced kidney injury: experimental

evidence may help to understand mechanisms. Crit Care 2009; 13: 130.

100. Magder S, Potter BJ, Varennes BD, et al. Fluids after cardiac surgery: a pilot
study of the use of colloids versus crystalloids. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:
2117–2124.

101. Wiedermann CJ, Dunzendorfer S, Gaioni LU, et al. Hyperoncotic colloids
and acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Care
2010; 14: R191.

102. Prowle JR, Bellomo R. Fluid administration and the kidney. Curr Opin Crit

Care 2010; 16: 332–336.

103. Kaplan LJ, Kellum JA. Fluids, pH, ions and electrolytes. Curr Opin Crit Care

2010; 16: 323–331.

104. Karlsson S, Varpula M, Ruokonen E, et al. Incidence, treatment, and
outcome of severe sepsis in ICU-treated adults in Finland: the Finnsepsis
study. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33: 435–443.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

125

r e f e r e n c e s

105. Bellomo R, Wan L, May C. Vasoactive drugs and acute kidney injury. Crit

132. Murugan R, Kellum JA. Acute kidney injury: what’s the prognosis? Nat Rev

Care Med 2008; 36: S179–186.

Nephrol 2011; 7: 209–217.

106. Redl-Wenzl EM, Armbruster C, Edelmann G, et al. The effects of
norepinephrine on hemodynamics and renal function in severe septic
shock states. Intensive Care Med 1993; 19: 151–154.

107. Albanese J, Leone M, Delmas A, et al. Terlipressin or norepinephrine in
hyperdynamic septic shock: a prospective, randomized study. Crit Care Med
2005; 33: 1897–1902.

108. Lauzier F, Levy B, Lamarre P, et al. Vasopressin or norepinephrine in early
hyperdynamic septic shock: a randomized clinical trial. Intensive Care Med
2006; 32: 1782–1789.

109. De Backer D, Biston P, Devriendt J, et al. Comparison of dopamine and
norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 779–789.
110. Delmas A, Leone M, Rousseau S, et al. Clinical review: Vasopressin and

terlipressin in septic shock patients. Crit Care 2005; 9: 212–222.

111. Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al. Vasopressin versus norepinephrine

infusion in patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 877–887.

112. Gordon AC, Russell JA, Walley KR, et al. The effects of vasopressin on acute
kidney injury in septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36: 83–91.
113. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign:
international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock:
2008. Crit Care Med 2008; 36: 296–327.

114. Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign
guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med
2004; 32: 858–873.

115. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1368–1377.
116. Mikkelsen ME, Miltiades AN, Gaieski DF, et al. Serum lactate is associated
with mortality in severe sepsis independent of organ failure and shock.
Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 1670–1677.

117. Phua J, Koay ES, Lee KH. Lactate, procalcitonin, and amino-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic peptide versus cytokine measurements and clinical
severity scores for prognostication in septic shock. Shock 2008; 29: 328–333.
Jones AE, Focht A, Horton JM, et al. Prospective external validation of the
clinical effectiveness of an emergency department-based early goal-directed
therapy protocol for severe sepsis and septic shock. Chest 2007; 132:
425–432.

118.

119. Lin SM, Huang CD, Lin HC, et al. A modiﬁed goal-directed protocol
improves clinical outcomes in intensive care unit patients with septic shock:
a randomized controlled trial. Shock 2006; 26: 551–557.

120. Nguyen HB, Corbett SW, Menes K, et al. Early goal-directed therapy,
corticosteroid, and recombinant human activated protein C for the
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock in the emergency department.
Acad Emerg Med 2006; 13: 109–113.

121. Rhodes A, Bennett ED. Early goal-directed therapy: an evidence-based

review. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: S448–450.

122. Rivers EP, Coba V, Whitmill M. Early goal-directed therapy in severe sepsis
and septic shock: a contemporary review of the literature. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2008; 21: 128–140.

123. Ho BC, Bellomo R, McGain F, et al. The incidence and outcome of septic
shock patients in the absence of early-goal directed therapy. Crit Care 2006;
10: R80.

124. Donati A, Loggi S, Preiser JC, et al. Goal-directed intraoperative therapy
reduces morbidity and length of hospital stay in high-risk surgical patients.
Chest 2007; 132: 1817–1824.

125. Lobo SM, Salgado PF, Castillo VG, et al. Effects of maximizing oxygen
delivery on morbidity and mortality in high-risk surgical patients. Crit Care
Med 2000; 28: 3396–3404.

126. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, et al. Prospective trial of supranormal
values of survivors as therapeutic goals in high-risk surgical patients. Chest
1988; 94: 1176–1186.

127. Brienza N, Giglio MT, Marucci M, et al. Does perioperative hemodynamic
optimization protect renal function in surgical patients? A meta-analytic
study. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2079–2090.

128. Gattinoni L, Brazzi L, Pelosi P, et al. A trial of goal-oriented hemodynamic
therapy in critically ill patients. SvO2 Collaborative Group. N Engl J Med
1995; 333: 1025–1032.

129. Hayes MA, Timmins AC, Yau EH, et al. Elevation of systemic oxygen
delivery in the treatment of critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 1994; 330:
1717–1722.

130. Section VII. Acute renal failure. In: Schrier RW (ed). Diseases of the Kidney
and Urinary Tract, 8th Edn, vol. 2. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
Philadelphia, PA, 2007, pp 930–1207.

131. Part VI. Diagnosis and management of speciﬁc disorders. In: Jorres A,
Ronco C, Kellum JA (eds). Management of Acute Kidney Problems, 1st Edn.
Springer: New York, NY, 2010, pp 269–467.

133. Siew ED, Himmelfarb J. Metabolic and nutritional complications of acute
kidney injury. In: Himmelfarb J, Sayegh MH (eds). Chronic Kidney Disease,
Dialysis, and Transplantation. A Companion to Brenner and Rector’s The
Kidney, 3rd Edn: London, UK, 2011, pp 654–667.

135. Kosiborod M,

Inzucchi SE, Goyal A,

134. Van Cromphaut SJ. Hyperglycaemia as part of the stress response: the
underlying mechanisms. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23: 375–386.
et al. Relationship between
spontaneous and iatrogenic hypoglycemia and mortality in patients
hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction. JAMA 2009; 301: 1556–1564.
136. Kosiborod M, Rathore SS, Inzucchi SE, et al. Admission glucose and
mortality in elderly patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction:
implications for patients with and without recognized diabetes. Circulation
2005; 111: 3078–3086.
Inzucchi SE, Siegel MD. Glucose control in the ICU–how tight is too tight?
N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 1346–1349.

137.

138. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in

the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1359–1367.

139. Palevsky PM, Murray PT. Acute kidney injury and critical care nephrology.

NephSAP 2006; 5(2): 72–120.

140. Van den Berghe G, Wouters PJ, Kesteloot K, et al. Analysis of healthcare
resource utilization with intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients.
Crit Care Med 2006; 34: 612–616.

141. Van den Berghe G, Wilmer A, Hermans G, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in

the medical ICU. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 449–461.

142. Schetz M, Vanhorebeek I, Wouters PJ, et al. Tight blood glucose control is
renoprotective in critically ill patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19: 571–578.
143. Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraoperative insulin
therapy versus conventional glucose management during cardiac surgery: a
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2007; 146: 233–243.

144. Mangano CM, Diamondstone LS, Ramsay JG, et al. Renal dysfunction after
myocardial revascularization: risk factors, adverse outcomes, and hospital
resource utilization. The Multicenter Study of Perioperative Ischemia
Research Group. Ann Intern Med 1998; 128: 194–203.

145. Thomas G, Rojas MC, Epstein SK, et al. Insulin therapy and acute kidney
injury in critically ill patients a systematic review. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2007; 22: 2849–2855.

146. Wiener RS, Wiener DC, Larson RJ. Beneﬁts and risks of tight glucose

control in critically ill adults: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2008; 300: 933–944.

147. Bellomo R. Does intensive insulin therapy protect renal

function in

critically ill patients? Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 2008; 4: 412–413.

148. Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, et al. Intensive versus conventional glucose
control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 1283–1297.
149. Van den Berghe G, Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, et al. Clinical review: Intensive
insulin therapy in critically ill patients: NICE-SUGAR or Leuven blood
glucose target? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 94: 3163–3170.

150. Griesdale DE, de Souza RJ, van Dam RM, et al. Intensive insulin therapy
and mortality among critically ill patients: a meta-analysis including
NICE-SUGAR study data. CMAJ 2009; 180: 821–827.

151. Fiaccadori E, Lombardi M, Leonardi S, et al. Prevalence and clinical
outcome associated with preexisting malnutrition in acute renal failure: a
prospective cohort study. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999; 10: 581–593.

152. Btaiche IF, Mohammad RA, Alaniz C, et al. Amino Acid requirements in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury treated with continuous renal
replacement therapy. Pharmacotherapy 2008; 28: 600–613.

153. Cano N, Fiaccadori E, Tesinsky P, et al. ESPEN Guidelines on Enteral

Nutrition: Adult renal failure. Clin Nutr 2006; 25: 295–310.

154. Druml W. Nutritional management of acute renal failure. J Ren Nutr 2005;

15: 63–70.

155. McClave SA, Hurt RT. Clinical guidelines and nutrition therapy: better
understanding and greater application to patient care. Crit Care Clin 2010;
26: 451–466, viii.

156. McClave SA, Martindale RG, Vanek VW, et al. Guidelines for the Provision
and Assessment of Nutrition Support Therapy in the Adult Critically Ill
Patient: Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Society
for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr 2009; 33: 277–316.

157. Fiaccadori E, Regolisti G, Cabassi A. Speciﬁc nutritional problems in acute
kidney injury, treated with non-dialysis and dialytic modalities. NDT Plus
2010; 3: 1–7.

158. Basi S, Pupim LB, Simmons EM, et al. Insulin resistance in critically ill
patients with acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2005; 289:
F259–264.

159. May RC, Clark AS, Goheer MA, et al. Speciﬁc defects in insulin-mediated
muscle metabolism in acute uremia. Kidney Int 1985; 28: 490–497.

126

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

r e f e r e n c e s

160. Cianciaruso B, Bellizzi V, Napoli R, et al. Hepatic uptake and release of
glucose, lactate, and amino acids in acutely uremic dogs. Metabolism 1991;
40: 261–269.

161. Druml W, Mitch WE. Metabolic abnormalities in acute renal failure. Semin

Dial 1996; 9: 484–490.

162. Schneeweiss B, Graninger W, Stockenhuber F, et al. Energy metabolism in
acute and chronic renal failure. Am J Clin Nutr 1990; 52: 596–601.
163. Macias WL, Alaka KJ, Murphy MH, et al. Impact of the nutritional regimen
on protein catabolism and nitrogen balance in patients with acute renal
failure. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1996; 20: 56–62.

164. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, et al. Effects of different energy intakes
on nitrogen balance in patients with acute renal failure: a pilot study.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20: 1976–1980.

188. Cantarovich F, Rangoonwala B, Lorenz H, et al. High-dose furosemide for
randomized, double-blind, placebo-

established ARF: a prospective,
controlled, multicenter trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 44: 402–409.

189. Lassnigg A, Donner E, Grubhofer G, et al. Lack of renoprotective effects of
dopamine and furosemide during cardiac surgery. J Am Soc Nephrol 2000;
11: 97–104.

190. Lombardi R, Ferreiro A, Servetto C. Renal function after cardiac surgery:

adverse effect of furosemide. Ren Fail 2003; 25: 775–786.

191. Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, et al. Effects of saline, mannitol, and
function induced by

furosemide to prevent acute decreases in renal
radiocontrast agents. N Engl J Med 1994; 331: 1416–1420.

192. Ho KM, Sheridan DJ. Meta-analysis of frusemide to prevent or treat acute

renal failure. BMJ 2006; 333: 420.

165. Fiaccadori E, Cremaschi E. Nutritional assessment and support in acute

193. Ho KM, Power BM. Beneﬁts and risks of furosemide in acute kidney injury.

kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care 2009; 15: 474–480.

Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 283–293.

166. Powell-Tuck J. Nutritional interventions in critical illness. Proc Nutr Soc

2007; 66: 16–24.

167. Scheinkestel CD, Adams F, Mahony L, et al. Impact of increasing parenteral
protein loads on amino acid levels and balance in critically ill anuric
patients on continuous renal replacement therapy. Nutrition 2003; 19:
733–740.

168. Bellomo R, Tan HK, Bhonagiri S, et al. High protein intake during
continuous hemodiaﬁltration: impact on amino acids and nitrogen balance.
Int J Artif Organs 2002; 25: 261–268.

169. Druml W. Metabolic aspects of continuous renal replacement therapies.

Kidney Int Suppl 1999: S56–61.

170. Chima CS, Meyer L, Hummell AC, et al. Protein catabolic rate in patients
with acute renal failure on continuous arteriovenous hemoﬁltration and
total parenteral nutrition. J Am Soc Nephrol 1993; 3: 1516–1521.

171. Leblanc M, Garred LJ, Cardinal J, et al. Catabolism in critical illness:
estimation from urea nitrogen appearance and creatinine production
during continuous renal replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32:
444–453.

172. Marshall MR, Golper TA, Shaver MJ, et al. Urea kinetics during sustained
low-efﬁciency dialysis in critically ill patients requiring renal replacement
therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 2002; 39: 556–570.

173. Salahudeen AK, Kumar V, Madan N, et al. Sustained low efﬁciency dialysis
in the continuous mode (C-SLED): dialysis efﬁcacy, clinical outcomes, and
survival predictors in critically ill cancer patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2009; 4: 1338–1346.

174. Barnert J, Dumitrascu D, Neeser G, et al. Gastric emptying of a liquid meal

in intensive care unit patients (abstr). Gastroenterology 1998; 114: A865.

175. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Clima B, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and
prognosis of gastrointestinal hemorrhage complicating acute renal failure.
Kidney Int 2001; 59: 1510–1519.

176. Metnitz PG, Krenn CG, Steltzer H, et al. Effect of acute renal failure
requiring renal replacement therapy on outcome in critically ill patients.
Crit Care Med 2002; 30: 2051–2058.

177. Scheinkestel CD, Kar L, Marshall K, et al. Prospective randomized trial to
assess caloric and protein needs of critically Ill, anuric, ventilated patients
requiring continuous renal replacement
therapy. Nutrition 2003; 19:
909–916.

178. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Giacosa R, et al. Enteral nutrition in patients

with acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2004; 65: 999–1008.

179. Caldwell MD, Kennedy-Caldwell C. Normal nutritional requirements. Surg

Clin North Am 1981; 61: 489–507.

180. Zappitelli M, Goldstein SL, Symons JM, et al. Protein and calorie
prescription for children and young adults receiving continuous renal
replacement therapy: a report from the Prospective Pediatric Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy Registry Group. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:
3239–3245.

181. Mehta RL, Pascual MT, Soroko S, et al. Diuretics, mortality, and
nonrecovery of renal function in acute renal failure. JAMA 2002; 288:
2547–2553.

194. Hager B, Betschart M, Krapf R. Effect of postoperative intravenous loop
diuretic on renal function after major surgery. Schweiz Med Wochenschr
1996; 126: 666–673.

195. van der Voort PH, Boerma EC, Koopmans M, et al. Furosemide does not
improve renal recovery after hemoﬁltration for acute renal
failure in
critically ill patients: a double blind randomized controlled trial. Crit Care
Med 2009; 37: 533–538.

196. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Discontinuation of continuous
renal replacement therapy: a post hoc analysis of a prospective multicenter
observational study. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2576–2582.

197. Weisberg LS, Kurnik PB, Kurnik BR. Risk of radiocontrast nephropathy in
patients with and without diabetes mellitus. Kidney Int 1994; 45: 259–265.
198. Schetz M. Should we use diuretics in acute renal failure? Best Pract Res Clin

Anaesthesiol 2004; 18: 75–89.

199. Yallop KG, Sheppard SV, Smith DC. The effect of mannitol on renal
function following cardio-pulmonary bypass in patients with normal
pre-operative creatinine. Anaesthesia 2008; 63: 576–582.

200. Smith MN, Best D, Sheppard SV, et al. The effect of mannitol on renal
function after cardiopulmonary bypass in patients with established renal
dysfunction. Anaesthesia 2008; 63: 701–704.

201. Schnuelle P, Johannes van der Woude F. Perioperative ﬂuid management in
renal transplantation: a narrative review of the literature. Transpl Int 2006;
19: 947–959.

202. van Valenberg PL, Hoitsma AJ, Tiggeler RG, et al. Mannitol as an
indispensable constituent of an intraoperative hydration protocol for the
prevention of acute renal failure after renal cadaveric transplantation.
Transplantation 1987; 44: 784–788.

203. Weimar W, Geerlings W, Bijnen AB, et al. A controlled study on the effect
of mannitol on immediate renal function after cadaver donor kidney
transplantation. Transplantation 1983; 35: 99–101.

204. Better OS, Rubinstein I, Winaver JM, et al. Mannitol therapy revisited

(1940–1997). Kidney Int 1997; 52: 886–894.

205. Sever MS, Vanholder R, Lameire N. Management of crush-related injuries

after disasters. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 1052–1063.

206. Vanholder R, Sever MS, Erek E, et al. Rhabdomyolysis. J Am Soc Nephrol

2000; 11: 1553–1561.

207. Bellomo R, Chapman M, Finfer S, et al. Low-dose dopamine in patients
with early renal dysfunction: a placebo-controlled randomised trial.
Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society (ANZICS) Clinical
Trials Group. Lancet 2000; 356: 2139–2143.

208. Murray PT. Use of dopaminergic agents for renoprotection in the ICU.
Yearbook of Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine. Springer-Verlag:
Berlin, Germany, 2003: 637–648.

209. Lauschke A, Teichgraber UK, Frei U, et al. ‘Low-dose’ dopamine worsens
renal perfusion in patients with acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006; 69:
1669–1674.

210. Kellum JA, M Decker J. Use of dopamine in acute renal failure: a meta-

analysis. Crit Care Med 2001; 29: 1526–1531.

211. Marik PE. Low-dose dopamine: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med

182. Uchino S, Doig GS, Bellomo R, et al. Diuretics and mortality in acute renal

2002; 28: 877–883.

failure. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: 1669–1677.

183. Karajala V, Mansour W, Kellum JA. Diuretics in acute kidney injury.

Minerva Anestesiol 2009; 75: 251–257.

184. Ponto LL, Schoenwald RD. Furosemide (frusemide). A pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic review (Part II). Clin Pharmacokinet 1990; 18: 460–471.
185. Ponto LL, Schoenwald RD. Furosemide (frusemide). A pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic review (Part I). Clin Pharmacokinet 1990; 18: 381–408.
186. Ludens JH, Hook JB, Brody MJ, et al. Enhancement of renal blood ﬂow by

furosemide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1968; 163: 456–460.

187. Ludens JH, Williamson HE. Effect of furosemide on renal blood ﬂow in the

conscious dog. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1970; 133: 513–515.

212. Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS, et al. Meta-analysis:

low-dose
dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or
death. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510–524.

213. Murray PT. Fenoldopam: renal-dose dopamine redux? Crit Care Med 2006;

34: 910–911.

214. Cogliati AA, Vellutini R, Nardini A, et al. Fenoldopam infusion for renal
protection in high-risk cardiac surgery patients: a randomized clinical
study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 21: 847–850.

215. Landoni G, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Marino G, et al. Fenoldopam reduces the
need for renal replacement therapy and in-hospital death in cardiovascular
surgery: a meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2008; 22: 27–33.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

127

r e f e r e n c e s

216. Morelli A, Ricci Z, Bellomo R, et al. Prophylactic fenoldopam for renal
protection in sepsis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot
trial. Crit Care Med 2005; 33: 2451–2456.

217. Aravindan N, Natarajan M, Shaw AD. Fenoldopam inhibits nuclear
translocation of nuclear factor kappa B in a rat model of surgical ischemic
acute renal failure. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2006; 20: 179–186.

218. Aravindan N, Samuels J, Riedel B, et al. Fenoldopam improves cortico-
medullary oxygen delivery and attenuates angiogenesis gene expression in
acute ischemic renal injury. Kidney Blood Press Res 2006; 29: 165–174.
219. Kellum JA. Prophylactic fenoldopam for renal protection? No, thank you,

not for me–not yet at least. Crit Care Med 2005; 33: 2681–2683.

220. Stone GW, McCullough PA, Tumlin JA, et al. Fenoldopam mesylate for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2003; 290: 2284–2291.

221. Tumlin JA, Finkel KW, Murray PT, et al. Fenoldopam mesylate in early
acute tubular necrosis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 46: 26–34.

222. Brienza N, Malcangi V, Dalﬁno L, et al. A comparison between fenoldopam
and low-dose dopamine in early renal dysfunction of critically ill patients.
Crit Care Med 2006; 34: 707–714.

223. Landoni G, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Tumlin JA, et al. Beneﬁcial

impact of
fenoldopam in critically ill patients with or at risk for acute renal failure:
a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49:
56–68.

224. Ricksten SE, Sward K. Atrial natriuretic peptide in acute renal failure.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 429–433.

225. Vesely DL. Natriuretic peptides and acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Renal

Physiol 2003; 285: F167–177.

226. Marin-Grez M, Fleming JT, Steinhausen M. Atrial natriuretic peptide causes
pre-glomerular vasodilatation and post-glomerular vasoconstriction in rat
kidney. Nature 1986; 324: 473–476.

227. Valsson F, Ricksten SE, Hedner T, et al. Effects of atrial natriuretic peptide
on renal function after cardiac surgery and in cyclosporine-treated heart
transplant recipients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1994; 8: 425–430.
228. Ratcliffe PJ, Richardson AJ, Kirby JE, et al. Effect of intravenous infusion of
atriopeptin 3 on immediate renal allograft function. Kidney Int 1991; 39:
164–168.

229. Sands JM, Neylan JF, Olson RA, et al. Atrial natriuretic factor does not
improve the outcome of cadaveric renal transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol
1991; 1: 1081–1086.

230. Kurnik BR, Allgren RL, Genter FC, et al. Prospective study of atrial
natriuretic peptide for the prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephro-
pathy. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 31: 674–680.

231. Allgren RL, Marbury TC, Rahman SN, et al. Anaritide in acute tubular
necrosis. Auriculin Anaritide Acute Renal Failure Study Group. N Engl J
Med 1997; 336: 828–834.

232. Lewis J, Salem MM, Chertow GM, et al. Atrial natriuretic factor in oliguric
acute renal failure. Anaritide Acute Renal Failure Study Group. Am J Kidney
Dis 2000; 36: 767–774.

233. Sward K, Valsson F, Odencrants P, et al. Recombinant human atrial
natriuretic peptide in ischemic acute renal failure: a randomized placebo-
controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: 1310–1315.

234. Sward K, Valsson F, Sellgren J, et al. Differential effects of human atrial
natriuretic peptide and furosemide on glomerular ﬁltration rate and renal
oxygen consumption in humans. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31: 79–85.
235. Nigwekar SU, Navaneethan SD, Parikh CR, et al. Atrial natriuretic peptide
for management of acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 261–272.

236. Forssmann W, Meyer M, Forssmann K. The renal urodilatin system: clinical

implications. Cardiovasc Res 2001; 51: 450–462.

237. Hummel M, Kuhn M, Bub A, et al. Urodilatin: a new peptide with
in the postoperative therapy of cardiac transplant

beneﬁcial effects
recipients. Clin Investig 1992; 70: 674–682.

238. Brenner P, Meyer M, Reichenspurner H, et al. Signiﬁcance of prophylactic
urodilatin (INN: ularitide) infusion for the prevention of acute renal failure
in patients after heart transplantation. Eur J Med Res 1995; 1: 137–143.

239. Sackner-Bernstein JD, Kowalski M, Fox M, et al. Short-term risk of death
after treatment with nesiritide for decompensated heart failure: a pooled
analysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2005; 293: 1900–1905.
240. Sackner-Bernstein JD, Skopicki HA, Aaronson KD. Risk of worsening renal
function with nesiritide in patients with acutely decompensated heart
failure. Circulation 2005; 111: 1487–1491.

241. Topol EJ. Nesiritide - not veriﬁed. N Engl J Med 2005; 353: 113–116.
242.

Iglesias JI, DePalma L, Hom D, et al. Predictors of mortality in adult
patients with congestive heart failure receiving nesiritide–retrospective

analysis showing a potential adverse interaction between nesiritide and
acute renal dysfunction. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23: 144–153.
243. Mentzer RM, Jr., Oz MC, Sladen RN, et al. Effects of perioperative nesiritide
in patients with left ventricular dysfunction undergoing cardiac surgery:the
NAPA Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49: 716–726.

244. Ejaz AA, Martin TD, Johnson RJ, et al. Prophylactic nesiritide does not
prevent dialysis or all-cause mortality in patients undergoing high-risk
cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009; 138: 959–964.

245. Lingegowda V, Van QC, Shimada M, et al. Long-term outcome of
patients treated with prophylactic nesiritide for the prevention of acute
kidney injury following cardiovascular surgery. Clin Cardiol 2010; 33:
217–221.

246. Hammerman MR. Potential role of growth factors in the prophylaxis and
treatment of acute renal failure. Kidney Int Suppl 1998; 64: S19–22.

247. Bernhardt WM, Eckardt KU. Physiological basis

the use of
erythropoietin in critically ill patients at risk for acute kidney injury.
Curr Opin Crit Care 2008; 14: 621–626.

for

248. Ding H, Kopple JD, Cohen A, et al. Recombinant human insulin-like
growth factor-I accelerates recovery and reduces catabolism in rats with
ischemic acute renal failure. J Clin Invest 1993; 91: 2281–2287.

249. Friedlaender M, Popovtzer MM, Weiss O, et al. Insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) enhances recovery from HgCl2-induced acute renal failure: the
effects on renal IGF-1, IGF-1 receptor, and IGF-binding protein-1 mRNA.
J Am Soc Nephrol 1995; 5: 1782–1791.

250. Miller SB, Martin DR, Kissane J, et al. Insulin-like growth factor I
accelerates recovery from ischemic acute tubular necrosis in the rat.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992; 89: 11876–11880.

251. Petrinec D, Reilly JM, Sicard GA, et al. Insulin-like growth factor-I
attenuates delayed graft function in a canine renal autotransplantation
model. Surgery 1996; 120: 221–225; discussion 225–226.

252. Franklin SC, Moulton M, Sicard GA, et al. Insulin-like growth factor I
preserves renal function postoperatively. Am J Physiol 1997; 272: F257–259.
253. Hirschberg R, Kopple J, Lipsett P, et al. Multicenter clinical trial of
recombinant human insulin-like growth factor I in patients with acute renal
failure. Kidney Int 1999; 55: 2423–2432.

254. Hladunewich MA, Corrigan G, Derby GC, et al. A randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of IGF-1 for delayed graft function: a human model to study
postischemic ARF. Kidney Int 2003; 64: 593–602.

255. Song YR, Lee T, You SJ, et al. Prevention of acute kidney injury by
erythropoietin in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting:
a pilot study. Am J Nephrol 2009; 30: 253–260.

256. Endre ZH, Walker RJ, Pickering JW, et al. Early intervention with
the outcome of acute kidney injury

erythropoietin does not affect
(the EARLYARF trial). Kidney Int 2010; 77: 1020–1030.

257. Karlowicz MG, Adelman RD. Nonoliguric and oliguric acute renal failure in

asphyxiated term neonates. Pediatr Nephrol 1995; 9: 718–722.

258. Gouyon JB, Guignard JP. Theophylline prevents the hypoxemia-induced

renal hemodynamic changes in rabbits. Kidney Int 1988; 33: 1078–1083.

259. Bakr AF. Prophylactic theophylline to prevent renal dysfunction in
newborns exposed to perinatal asphyxia–a study in a developing country.
Pediatr Nephrol 2005; 20: 1249–1252.

260. Bhat MA, Shah ZA, Makhdoomi MS, et al. Theophylline for renal function
in term neonates with perinatal asphyxia: a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. J Pediatr 2006; 149: 180–184.
Jenik AG, Ceriani Cernadas JM, Gorenstein A, et al. A randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of the effects of prophylactic theophylline on
renal function in term neonates with perinatal asphyxia. Pediatrics 2000;
105: E45.

261.

262. Cattarelli D, Spandrio M, Gasparoni A, et al. A randomised, double blind,
placebo controlled trial of the effect of theophylline in prevention of
vasomotor nephropathy in very preterm neonates with respiratory distress
syndrome. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2006; 91: F80–84.

263. Gottlieb SS, Brater DC, Thomas I, et al. BG9719 (CVT-124), an A1
adenosine receptor antagonist, protects against the decline in renal function
observed with diuretic therapy. Circulation 2002; 105: 1348–1353.

264. Givertz MM, Massie BM, Fields TK, et al. The effects of KW-3902, an
adenosine A1-receptor antagonist,on diuresis and renal function in patients
with acute decompensated heart failure and renal impairment or diuretic
resistance. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 1551–1560.

265. Cotter G, Dittrich HC, Weatherley BD, et al. The PROTECT pilot study:
a randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ﬁnding study of the adenosine A1
receptor antagonist rolofylline in patients with acute heart failure and renal
impairment. J Card Fail 2008; 14: 631–640.

266. Massie BM, O’Connor CM, Metra M, et al. Rolofylline, an adenosine
A1-receptor antagonist, in acute heart failure. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:
1419–1428.

128

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

267. Falagas ME, Kopterides P. Old antibiotics for infections in critically ill

294. Walker PD, Barri Y, Shah SV. Oxidant mechanisms

in gentamicin

patients. Curr Opin Crit Care 2007; 13: 592–597.

nephrotoxicity. Ren Fail 1999; 21: 433–442.

r e f e r e n c e s

268. Rea RS, Capitano B. Optimizing use of aminoglycosides in the critically ill.

Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 28: 596–603.

269. Roberts JA, Lipman J. Pharmacokinetic issues for antibiotics in the critically

ill patient. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 840–851.

270. Zahar

JR, Rioux C, Girou E,

Inappropriate prescribing of
aminoglycosides: risk factors and impact of an antibiotic control team.
J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 58: 651–656.

et al.

271. Bliziotis IA, Michalopoulos A, Kasiakou SK, et al. Ciproﬂoxacin vs an
aminoglycoside in combination with a beta-lactam for the treatment of
febrile neutropenia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Mayo
Clin Proc 2005; 80: 1146–1156.

272. Falagas ME, Matthaiou DK, Bliziotis IA. The role of aminoglycosides in
combination with a beta-lactam for the treatment of bacterial endocarditis:
a meta-analysis of comparative trials. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 57:
639–647.

273. Falagas ME, Matthaiou DK, Karveli EA, et al. Meta-analysis: randomized
controlled trials of clindamycin/aminoglycoside vs. beta-lactam mono-
therapy for the treatment of intra-abdominal infections. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2007; 25: 537–556.

274. Glasmacher A, von Lilienfeld-Toal M, Schulte S, et al. An evidence-based
evaluation of important aspects of empirical antibiotic therapy in febrile
neutropenic patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 2005; 11 (Suppl 5): 17–23.
275. Paul M, Benuri-Silbiger I, Soares-Weiser K, et al. Beta lactam monotherapy
versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside combination therapy for sepsis in
immunocompetent patients:
systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised trials. BMJ 2004; 328: 668.

276. Paul M, Silbiger I, Grozinsky S, et al. Beta lactam antibiotic monotherapy
versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside antibiotic combination therapy for
sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006: CD003344.
277. English WP, Williams MD. Should aminoglycoside

antibiotics be

abandoned? Am J Surg 2000; 180: 512–515; discussion 515–516.

278. Cosgrove SE, Vigliani GA, Fowler VG, Jr., et al. Initial low-dose gentamicin
for Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia and endocarditis is nephrotoxic. Clin
Infect Dis 2009; 48: 713–721.

279. Olaison L, Schadewitz K. Enterococcal endocarditis in Sweden, 1995–1999:
can shorter therapy with aminoglycosides be used? Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34:
159–166.

280. Ali BH. Agents ameliorating or augmenting experimental gentamicin
some recent research. Food Chem Toxicol 2003; 41:

nephrotoxicity:
1447–1452.

281. Bledsoe G, Crickman S, Mao J, et al. Kallikrein/kinin protects against
inﬂammation and

gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity by inhibition of
apoptosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21: 624–633.

282. Bledsoe G, Shen B, Yao YY, et al. Role of tissue kallikrein in prevention and
recovery of gentamicin-induced renal injury. Toxicol Sci 2008; 102: 433–443.
283. Ekor M, Farombi EO, Emerole GO. Modulation of gentamicin-induced
renal dysfunction and injury by the phenolic extract of soybean (Glycine
max). Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2006; 20: 263–271.

284. Feldman L, Efrati S, Eviatar E, et al. Gentamicin-induced ototoxicity in
hemodialysis patients is ameliorated by N-acetylcysteine. Kidney Int 2007;
72: 359–363.

285. Girton RA, Sundin DP, Rosenberg ME. Clusterin protects renal tubular
epithelial cells from gentamicin-mediated cytotoxicity. Am J Physiol Renal
Physiol 2002; 282: F703–709.

286. Horibe T, Matsui H, Tanaka M, et al. Gentamicin binds to the lectin site of
calreticulin and inhibits its chaperone activity. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2004; 323: 281–287.

287. Kaynar K, Gul S, Ersoz S, et al. Amikacin-induced nephropathy: is there any

protective way? Ren Fail 2007; 29: 23–27.

288. Martinez-Salgado C, Lopez-Hernandez FJ, Lopez-Novoa JM. Glomerular
nephrotoxicity of aminoglycosides. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007; 223: 86–98.
289. Montagut C, Bosch F, Villela L, et al. Aminoglycoside-associated severe
renal failure in patients with multiple myeloma treated with thalidomide.
Leuk Lymphoma 2004; 45: 1711–1712.

290. Morales AI, Rodriguez-Barbero A, Vicente-Sanchez C, et al. Resveratrol
inhibits gentamicin-induced mesangial cell contraction. Life Sci 2006; 78:
2373–2377.

291. Parlakpinar H, Koc M, Polat A, et al. Protective effect of aminoguanidine
against nephrotoxicity induced by amikacin in rats. Urol Res 2004; 32:
278–282.

292. Rougier F, Claude D, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity.

Curr Drug Targets Infect Disord 2004; 4: 153–162.

293. Schmitz C, Hilpert J, Jacobsen C, et al. Megalin deﬁciency offers protection
from renal aminoglycoside accumulation. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 618–622.

295. Watanabe A, Nagai J, Adachi Y, et al. Targeted prevention of renal
accumulation and toxicity of gentamicin by aminoglycoside binding
receptor antagonists. J Control Release 2004; 95: 423–433.

296. Yanagida C, Ito K, Komiya I, et al. Protective effect of fosfomycin on
tissue. Chem Biol

gentamicin-induced lipid peroxidation of rat renal
Interact 2004; 148: 139–147.

297. Baciewicz AM, Sokos DR, Cowan RI. Aminoglycoside-associated nephro-

toxicity in the elderly. Ann Pharmacother 2003; 37: 182–186.

298. Barclay ML, Kirkpatrick CM, Begg EJ. Once daily aminoglycoside therapy.
Is it less toxic than multiple daily doses and how should it be monitored?
Clin Pharmacokinet 1999; 36: 89–98.

299. Graham AC, Mercier RC, Achusim LE, et al. Extended-interval aminoglyco-
side dosing for treatment of enterococcal and staphylococcal osteomyelitis.
Ann Pharmacother 2004; 38: 936–941.

300. Kiel PJ, Lo M, Stockwell D, et al. An evaluation of amikacin nephrotoxicity

in the hematology/oncology population. Am J Ther 2008; 15: 131–136.

301. Kraus DM, Pai MP, Rodvold KA. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of extended-
interval aminoglycoside administration in pediatric patients. Paediatr Drugs
2002; 4: 469–484.

302. Nestaas E, Bangstad HJ, Sandvik L, et al. Aminoglycoside extended interval
dosing in neonates is safe and effective: a meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal
Neonatal Ed 2005; 90: F294–300.

303. Peloquin CA, Berning SE, Nitta AT, et al. Aminoglycoside toxicity: daily
treatment of mycobacterial diseases.

versus thrice-weekly dosing for
Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38: 1538–1544.

304. Peters-Volleberg GW, Dortant PM, Speijers GJ. Comparison of tobramycin
nephrotoxicity in young adult and aged female rats. Pharmacol Toxicol
1999; 84: 147–153.

305. Rougier F, Claude D, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity:
modeling, simulation, and control. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:
1010–1016.

306. Rougier F, Ducher M, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside dosages and
nephrotoxicity: quantitative relationships. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003; 42:
493–500.

307. Rybak MJ, Abate BJ, Kang SL, et al. Prospective evaluation of the effect of
an aminoglycoside dosing regimen on rates of observed nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999; 43: 1549–1555.

308. Smyth AR, Tan KH. Once-daily versus multiple-daily dosing with intra-
venous aminoglycosides for cystic ﬁbrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2006; 3: CD002009.

309. Ali MZ, Goetz MB. A meta-analysis of the relative efﬁcacy and toxicity
of single daily dosing versus multiple daily dosing of aminoglycosides.
Clin Infect Dis 1997; 24: 796–809.

310. Bailey TC, Little JR, Littenberg B, et al. A meta-analysis of extended-interval
dosing versus multiple daily dosing of aminoglycosides. Clin Infect Dis
1997; 24: 786–795.

311. Barza M, Ioannidis JP, Cappelleri JC, et al. Single or multiple daily doses of

aminoglycosides: a meta-analysis. BMJ 1996; 312: 338–345.

312. Ferriols-Lisart R, Alos-Alminana M. Effectiveness and safety of once-daily
aminoglycosides: a meta-analysis. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1996; 53:
1141–1150.

313. Hatala R, Dinh T, Cook DJ. Once-daily aminoglycoside dosing in immuno-

competent adults: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 1996; 124: 717–725.

314. Munckhof WJ, Grayson ML, Turnidge JD. A meta-analysis of studies on the
safety and efﬁcacy of aminoglycosides given either once daily or as divided
doses. J Antimicrob Chemother 1996; 37: 645–663.

315. Gavalda J, Onrubia PL, Gomez MT, et al. Efﬁcacy of ampicillin combined
with ceftriaxone and gentamicin in the treatment of experimental
endocarditis due to Enterococcus faecalis with no high-level resistance to
aminoglycosides. J Antimicrob Chemother 2003; 52: 514–517.

316. Le T, Bayer AS. Combination antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis.

Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36: 615–621.

317. Tam VH, McKinnon PS, Levine DP, et al. Once-daily aminoglycoside in the
treatment of Enterococcus faecalis endocarditis: case report and review.
Pharmacotherapy 2000; 20: 1116–1119.

318. Beauchamp D, Labrecque G. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity: do time and
frequency of administration matter? Curr Opin Crit Care 2001; 7: 401–408.
319. Kim MJ, Bertino JS, Jr., Erb TA, et al. Application of Bayes theorem
to aminoglycoside-associated nephrotoxicity: comparison of extended-
interval dosing, individualized pharmacokinetic monitoring, and multiple-
daily dosing. J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 44: 696–707.

320. Murry KR, McKinnon PS, Mitrzyk B, et al. Pharmacodynamic characteri-
zation of nephrotoxicity associated with once-daily aminoglycoside.
Pharmacotherapy 1999; 19: 1252–1260.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

129

r e f e r e n c e s

321. Streetman DS, Nafziger AN, Destache CJ, et al. Individualized pharmaco-
kinetic monitoring results in less aminoglycoside-associated nephrotoxicity
and fewer associated costs. Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21: 443–451.

322. Heintz BH, Matzke GR, Dager WE. Antimicrobial dosing concepts and
recommendations for critically ill adult patients receiving continuous renal
replacement therapy or intermittent hemodialysis. Pharmacotherapy 2009;
29: 562–577.

323. Dovas S, Liakopoulos V, Papatheodorou L, et al. Acute renal failure after
antibiotic-impregnated bone cement treatment of an infected total knee
arthroplasty. Clin Nephrol 2008; 69: 207–212.

324. Boyle MP. Adult cystic ﬁbrosis. JAMA 2007; 298: 1787–1793.
325. Ramsey BW, Pepe MS, Quan JM, et al. Intermittent administration of
inhaled tobramycin in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Cystic Fibrosis Inhaled
Tobramycin Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 23–30.

326. Cannella CA, Wilkinson ST. Acute renal failure associated with inhaled

327.

tobramycin. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2006; 63: 1858–1861.
Izquierdo MJ, Gomez-Alamillo C, Ortiz F, et al. Acute renal
failure
associated with use of inhaled tobramycin for treatment of chronic airway
colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Clin Nephrol 2006; 66:
464–467.

328. Harbarth S, Burke JP, Lloyd JF, et al. Clinical and economic outcomes of
conventional amphotericin B-associated nephrotoxicity. Clin Infect Dis
2002; 35: e120–127.

329. Ullmann AJ. Nephrotoxicity in the setting of invasive fungal diseases.

Mycoses 2008; 51 (Suppl 1): 25–30.

330. Wingard JR, Kubilis P, Lee L, et al. Clinical signiﬁcance of nephrotoxicity in
patients treated with amphotericin B for suspected or proven aspergillosis.
Clin Infect Dis 1999; 29: 1402–1407.

331. Pai MP, Norenberg JP, Telepak RA, et al. Assessment of effective renal
plasma ﬂow, enzymuria, and cytokine release in healthy volunteers
receiving a single dose of amphotericin B desoxycholate. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2005; 49: 3784–3788.

332. Varlam DE, Siddiq MM, Parton LA, et al. Apoptosis contributes to
amphotericin B-induced nephrotoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2001; 45: 679–685.

333. Furrer K, Schaffner A, Vavricka SR, et al. Nephrotoxicity of cyclosporine A
and amphotericin B-deoxycholate as continuous infusion in allogenic stem
cell transplantation. Swiss Med Wkly 2002; 132: 316–320.

334. de Rosa FG, Bargiacchi O, Audagnotto S, et al. Continuous infusion of
amphotericin B deoxycholate: does decreased nephrotoxicity couple with
time-dependent pharmacodynamics? Leuk Lymphoma 2006; 47: 1964–1966.
335. Sundar S, Chakravarty J, Rai VK, et al. Amphotericin B treatment for
leishmaniasis: response to 15 daily versus alternate-day

Indian visceral
infusions. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45: 556–561.

336. Techapornroong M, Suankratay C. Alternate-day versus once-daily adminis-
tration of amphotericin B in the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis:
a randomized controlled trial. Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39: 896–901.
337. Kleinberg M. What is the current and future status of conventional
amphotericin B? Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006; 27 (Suppl 1): 12–16.
338. Saliba F, Dupont B. Renal impairment and amphotericin B formulations in
patients with invasive fungal infections. Med Mycol 2008; 46: 97–112.
339. Ullmann AJ, Sanz MA, Tramarin A, et al. Prospective study of amphotericin
B formulations in immunocompromised patients in 4 European countries.
Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43: e29–38.

340. Yoo BK,

Jalil Miah MA, Lee ES, et al. Reduced renal
toxicity of
nanoparticular amphotericin B micelles prepared with partially benzylated
poly-L-aspartic acid. Biol Pharm Bull 2006; 29: 1700–1705.

341. Alexander BD, Wingard JR. Study of renal safety in amphotericin B lipid

complex-treated patients. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40 (Suppl 6): S414–421.

342. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B as
initial therapy for invasive mold infection: a randomized trial comparing
a high-loading dose regimen with standard dosing (AmBiLoad trial).
Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44: 1289–1297.

343. Garbino J, Adam A. Use of high-dose liposomal amphotericin B: efﬁcacy

and tolerance. Acta Biomed 2006; 77 (Suppl 4): 19–22.

344. Girois SB, Chapuis F, Decullier E, et al. Adverse effects of antifungal
therapies in invasive fungal infections: review and meta-analysis. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2005; 24: 119–130.

346.

345. Hachem RY, Boktour MR, Hanna HA, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex
versus liposomal amphotericin B monotherapy for invasive aspergillosis in
patients with hematologic malignancy. Cancer 2008; 112: 1282–1287.
Johansen HK, Gotzsche PC. Amphotericin B lipid soluble formulations vs.
amphotericin B in cancer patients with neutropenia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2000; 3: CD000969.
Johnson PC, Wheat LJ, Cloud GA, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of liposomal
amphotericin B compared with conventional amphotericin B for induction

347.

therapy of histoplasmosis in patients with AIDS. Ann Intern Med 2002; 137:
105–109.

348. Olson JA, Adler-Moore JP, Schwartz J, et al. Comparative efﬁcacies,
toxicities, and tissue concentrations of amphotericin B lipid formulations in
a murine pulmonary aspergillosis model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2006; 50: 2122–2131.

349. Veerareddy PR, Vobalaboina V. Lipid-based formulations of amphotericin B.

Drugs Today (Barc) 2004; 40: 133–145.

350. Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B for
empirical
fever and neutropenia.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group.
N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 764–771.

therapy in patients with persistent

351. Boogaerts M, Winston DJ, Bow EJ, et al. Intravenous and oral itraconazole
versus intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate as empirical antifungal
therapy for persistent fever in neutropenic patients with cancer who are
receiving broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy. A randomized, controlled
trial. Ann Intern Med 2001; 135: 412–422.
Johansen HK, Gotzsche PC. Amphotericin B versus ﬂuconazole for
infections in neutropenic cancer patients. Cochrane
controlling fungal
Database Syst Rev 2002; 2: CD000239.

352.

353. Park SH, Choi SM, Lee DG, et al. Intravenous itraconazole vs. amphotericin
B deoxycholate for empirical antifungal therapy in patients with persistent
neutropenic fever. Korean J Intern Med 2006; 21: 165–172.

354. Raad, II, Hanna HA, Boktour M, et al. Novel antifungal agents as salvage
therapy for invasive aspergillosis in patients with hematologic malignancies:
posaconazole compared with high-dose lipid formulations of amphotericin
B alone or in combination with caspofungin. Leukemia 2008; 22: 496–503.
355. Wegner B, Baer P, Gauer S, et al. Caspofungin is less nephrotoxic than
amphotericin B in vitro and predominantly damages distal renal tubular
cells. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20: 2071–2079.

356. Schwann NM, Horrow JC, Strong MD, 3rd, et al. Does off-pump coronary
artery bypass reduce the incidence of clinically evident renal dysfunction
after multivessel myocardial revascularization? Anesth Analg 2004; 99:
959–964, table of contents.

357. Shroyer AL, Grover FL, Hattler B, et al. On-pump versus off-pump
coronary-artery bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 2009; 361: 1827–1837.
358. Seabra VF, Alobaidi S, Balk EM, et al. Off-pump coronary artery bypass
surgery and acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 1734–1744.

359. Efrati S, Dishy V, Averbukh M, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine on renal
function, nitric oxide, and oxidative stress after angiography. Kidney Int
2003; 64: 2182–2187.

360. Conesa EL, Valero F, Nadal JC, et al. N-acetyl-L-cysteine improves renal
medullary hypoperfusion in acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 2001; 281: R730–737.

361. DiMari J, Megyesi J, Udvarhelyi N, et al. N-acetyl cysteine ameliorates

362.

ischemic renal failure. Am J Physiol 1997; 272: F292–298.
Jiang B, Haverty M, Brecher P. N-acetyl-L-cysteine enhances interleukin-
1beta-induced nitric oxide synthase expression. Hypertension 1999; 34:
574–579.

363. Nitescu N, Ricksten SE, Marcussen N, et al. N-acetylcysteine attenuates
kidney injury in rats subjected to renal ischaemia-reperfusion. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2006; 21: 1240–1247.

364. Fishbane S. N-acetylcysteine in the prevention of contrast-induced

nephropathy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 281–287.

365. Van Praet JT, De Vriese AS. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy:

a critical review. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2007; 16: 336–347.

367.

366. Hoffmann U, Fischereder M, Kruger B, et al. The value of N-acetylcysteine
in the prevention of radiocontrast agent-induced nephropathy seems
questionable. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15: 407–410.
Izzedine H, Guerin V, Launay-Vacher V, et al. Effect of N-acetylcysteine on
serum creatinine level. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2001; 16: 1514–1151.
368. Haase M, Haase-Fielitz A, Ratnaike S, et al. N-Acetylcysteine does not
artifactually lower plasma creatinine concentration. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2008; 23: 1581–1587.

369. Mainra R, Gallo K, Moist L. Effect of N-acetylcysteine on renal function in
patients with chronic kidney disease. Nephrology (Carlton) 2007; 12: 510–513.
J, Solomon R. N-acetylcysteine effect on serum
creatinine and cystatin C levels in CKD patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2008; 3: 1610–1614.

370. Rehman T, Fought

371. Molnar Z, Szakmany T, Koszegi T. Prophylactic N-acetylcysteine decreases
serum CRP but not PCT levels and microalbuminuria following major
abdominal surgery. A prospective, randomised, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 749–755.

372. Niemi TT, Munsterhjelm E, Poyhia R, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine
on blood coagulation and platelet function in patients undergoing open

130

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2006; 17:
29–34.

373. Peake SL, Moran JL, Leppard PI. N-acetyl-L-cysteine depresses cardiac
performance in patients with septic shock. Crit Care Med 1996; 24:
1302–1310.

374. Lynch RM, Robertson R. Anaphylactoid reactions

to intravenous
N-acetylcysteine: a prospective case controlled study. Accid Emerg Nurs
2004; 12: 10–15.

375. Appelboam AV, Dargan PI, Knighton J. Fatal anaphylactoid reaction to
N-acetylcysteine: caution in patients with asthma. Emerg Med J 2002; 19:
594–595.

376. Ho KM, Morgan DJ. Meta-analysis of N-acetylcysteine to prevent acute
renal failure after major surgery. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53: 33–40.
377. Adabag AS, Ishani A, Koneswaran S, et al. Utility of N-acetylcysteine to
prevent acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery: a randomized controlled
trial. Am Heart J 2008; 155: 1143–1149.

378. Burns KE, Chu MW, Novick RJ, et al. Perioperative N-acetylcysteine to
prevent renal dysfunction in high-risk patients undergoing CABG surgery:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005; 294: 342–350.
379. El-Hamamsy I, Stevens LM, Carrier M, et al. Effect of

intravenous
N-acetylcysteine on outcomes after coronary artery bypass
surgery:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 133: 7–12.

380. Sisillo E, Ceriani R, Bortone F, et al. N-acetylcysteine for prevention of
acute renal failure in patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency undergoing
cardiac surgery: a prospective, randomized, clinical trial. Crit Care Med
2008; 36: 81–86.

381. Wijeysundera DN, Beattie WS, Rao V, et al. N-acetylcysteine for preventing
acute kidney injury in cardiac surgery patients with pre-existing moderate
renal insufﬁciency. Can J Anaesth 2007; 54: 872–881.

382. Hynninen MS, Niemi TT, Poyhia R, et al. N-acetylcysteine for the
prevention of kidney injury in abdominal aortic surgery: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Anesth Analg 2006; 102: 1638–1645.
383. Macedo E, Abdulkader R, Castro I, et al. Lack of protection of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in acute renal failure related to elective aortic
aneurysm repair-a randomized controlled trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2006; 21: 1863–1869.

384. Komisarof JA, Gilkey GM, Peters DM, et al. N-acetylcysteine for patients
failure

for acute renal

with prolonged hypotension as prophylaxis
(NEPHRON). Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 435–441.

385. Harjai KJ, Raizada A, Shenoy C, et al. A comparison of contemporary
deﬁnitions of contrast nephropathy in patients undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention and a proposal for a novel nephropathy grading
system. Am J Cardiol 2008; 101: 812–819.

386. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. Contrast media and the kidney: European
Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) guidelines. Br J Radiol 2003; 76:
513–518.

387. Ribichini F, Graziani M, Gambaro G, et al. Early creatinine shifts predict
contrast-induced nephropathy and persistent renal damage after angio-
graphy. Am J Med 2010; 123: 755–763.

388. Newhouse JH, Kho D, Rao QA, et al. Frequency of serum creatinine changes
in the absence of iodinated contrast material: implications for studies of
contrast nephrotoxicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191: 376–382.
389. Baumgarten DA, Ellis JH. Contrast-induced nephropathy: contrast material

not required? AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191: 383–386.

390. Bruce RJ, Djamali A, Shinki K, et al. Background ﬂuctuation of kidney
function versus contrast-induced nephrotoxicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2009; 192: 711–718.
Jabara R, Gadesam RR, Pendyala LK, et al. Impact of the deﬁnition utilized
on the rate of contrast-induced nephropathy in percutaneous coronary
intervention. Am J Cardiol 2009; 103: 1657–1662.

391.

392. Berns AS. Nephrotoxicity of contrast media. Kidney Int 1989; 36: 730–740.
393. Rudnick MR, Goldfarb S, Tumlin J. Contrast-induced nephropathy: is the

picture any clearer? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 261–262.

394. Nash K, Hafeez A, Hou S. Hospital-acquired renal insufﬁciency. Am J

Kidney Dis 2002; 39: 930–936.

395. Polena S, Yang S, Alam R, et al. Nephropathy in critically Ill patients
without preexisting renal disease. Proc West Pharmacol Soc 2005; 48:
134–135.

396. Becker CR, Davidson C, Lameire N, et al. High-risk situations and

procedures. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98: 37K–41K.

397. Lameire N. Contrast-induced nephropathy in the critically-ill patient: focus
on emergency screening and prevention. Acta Clin Belg Suppl 2007:
346–352.

398. McCullough PA. Radiocontrast-induced acute kidney injury. Nephron

Physiol 2008; 109: pp 61–72.

r e f e r e n c e s

399. Weisbord SD, Chen H, Stone RA, et al. Associations of increases in serum
creatinine with mortality and length of hospital stay after coronary
angiography. J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 17: 2871–2877.

400. McCullough PA, Wolyn R, Rocher LL, et al. Acute renal failure after
coronary intervention: incidence, risk factors, and relationship to mortality.
Am J Med 1997; 103: 368–375.

401. Solomon RJ, Natarajan MK, Doucet S, et al. Cardiac Angiography in
Renally Impaired Patients (CARE) study: a randomized double-blind trial
of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Circulation 2007; 115: 3189–3196.

402. Freeman RV, O’Donnell M, Share D, et al. Nephropathy requiring dialysis
after percutaneous coronary intervention and the critical role of an adjusted
contrast dose. Am J Cardiol 2002; 90: 1068–1073.

403. Nikolsky E, Mehran R, Turcot D, et al. Impact of chronic kidney disease on
prognosis of patients with diabetes mellitus treated with percutaneous
coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol 2004; 94: 300–305.

404. Vuurmans T, Byrne J, Fretz E, et al. Chronic kidney injury in patients after
cardiac catheterisation or percutaneous coronary intervention: a compa-
rison of radial and femoral approaches (from the British Columbia Cardiac
and Renal Registries). Heart 2010; 96: 1538–1542.

405. Drey N, Roderick P, Mullee M, et al. A population-based study of the
incidence and outcomes of diagnosed chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney
Dis 2003; 42: 677–684.

406. Katzberg RW, Haller C. Contrast-induced nephrotoxicity: clinical

land-

scape. Kidney Int Suppl 2006: S3–7.

407. Persson PB. Editorial: contrast medium-induced nephropathy. Nephrol Dial

Transplant 2005; 20 (Suppl 1): i1.

408. Mehran R, Nikolsky E. Contrast-induced nephropathy: deﬁnition, epide-

miology, and patients at risk. Kidney Int Suppl 2006: S11–15.

409. Stevens LA, Coresh J, Greene T, et al. Assessing kidney function–measured
J Med 2006; 354:

and estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. N Engl
2473–2483.

410. Lameire N, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Baseline renal function screening.

Am J Cardiol 2006; 98: 21K–26K.

411. Choyke PL, Cady J, DePollar SL, et al. Determination of serum creatinine
prior to iodinated contrast media: is it necessary in all patients? Tech Urol
1998; 4: 65–69.

412. McCullough PA, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Risk prediction of contrast-

induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98: 27K–36K.

413. Toprak O. Conﬂicting and new risk factors
nephropathy. J Urol 2007; 178: 2277–2283.

for contrast

induced

414. Goldenberg I, Matetzky S. Nephropathy induced by contrast media:
pathogenesis, risk factors and preventive strategies. CMAJ 2005; 172:
1461–1471.

415. Majumdar SR, Kjellstrand CM, Tymchak WJ, et al. Forced euvolemic
diuresis with mannitol and furosemide for prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy in patients with CKD undergoing coronary angiography:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 54: 602–609.
416. Barrett BJ, Parfrey PS. Clinical practice. Preventing nephropathy induced by

contrast medium. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 379–386.

417. Brown JR, DeVries JT, Piper WD, et al. Serious renal dysfunction after
percutaneous coronary interventions can be predicted. Am Heart J 2008;
155: 260–266.

418. Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, et al. A simple risk score for prediction
of contrast-induced nephropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention:
development and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 44: 1393–1399.
419. Perazella MA. Gadolinium-contrast toxicity in patients with kidney disease:
nephrotoxicity and nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis. Curr Drug Saf 2008; 3:
67–75.

420. Perazella MA. Current status of gadolinium toxicity in patients with kidney

disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 461–469.

421. Briguori C, Colombo A, Airoldi F, et al. Gadolinium-based contrast agents
and nephrotoxicity in patients undergoing coronary artery procedures.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2006; 67: 175–180.

422. Ergun I, Keven K, Uruc I, et al. The safety of gadolinium in patients with
stage 3 and 4 renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21: 697–700.
423. Erley CM, Bader BD, Berger ED, et al. Gadolinium-based contrast media
compared with iodinated media for digital subtraction angiography in
azotaemic patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19: 2526–2531.

424. Kane GC, Stanson AW, Kalnicka D, et al. Comparison between gadolinium
and iodine contrast for percutaneous intervention in atherosclerotic renal
artery stenosis: clinical outcomes. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23:
1233–1240.

425. Sam AD, 2nd, Morasch MD, Collins J, et al. Safety of gadolinium contrast
angiography in patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency. J Vasc Surg 2003;
38: 313–318.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

131

r e f e r e n c e s

426. Swan SK, Lambrecht LJ, Townsend R, et al. Safety and pharmacokinetic
proﬁle of gadobenate dimeglumine in subjects with renal impairment.
Invest Radiol 1999; 34: 443–448.

427. Kanal E, Broome DR, Martin DR, et al. Response to the FDA’s May 23,

453.

2007, nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis update. Radiology 2008; 246: 11–14.

428. Kay J. Nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis: a gadolinium-associated ﬁbrosing
disorder in patients with renal dysfunction. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;
67 (Suppl 3): iii66–69.

429. Wollanka H, Weidenmaier W, Giersig C. NSF after Gadovist exposure: a
case report and hypothesis of NSF development. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2009; 24: 3882–3884.

430. Elmholdt TR, Jørgensen B, Ramsing M, et al. Two cases of nephrogenic
systemic ﬁbrosis after exposure to the macrocyclic compound gadobutrol.
NDT Plus 2010; 3: 285–287.

431. Sterling KA, Tehrani T, Rudnick MR. Clinical signiﬁcance and preventive
strategies for contrast-induced nephropathy. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
2008; 17: 616–623.

432. Kelly AM, Dwamena B, Cronin P, et al. Meta-analysis: effectiveness of drugs
for preventing contrast-induced nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2008; 148:
284–294.

433. Cigarroa RG, Lange RA, Williams RH, et al. Dosing of contrast material to
prevent contrast nephropathy in patients with renal disease. Am J Med
1989; 86: 649–652.

434. Chen ML, Lesko L, Williams RL. Measures of exposure versus measures of
rate and extent of absorption. Clin Pharmacokinet 2001; 40: 565–572.
435. Sherwin PF, Cambron R, Johnson JA, et al. Contrast dose-to-creatinine
clearance ratio as a potential indicator of risk for radiocontrast-induced
nephropathy: correlation of D/CrCL with area under
the contrast
concentration-time curve using iodixanol. Invest Radiol 2005; 40: 598–603.
436. Nyman U, Bjork J, Aspelin P, et al. Contrast medium dose-to-GFR ratio: a
measure of systemic exposure to predict contrast-induced nephropathy
after percutaneous coronary intervention. Acta Radiol 2008; 49: 658–667.
437. Laskey WK, Jenkins C, Selzer F, et al. Volume-to-creatinine clearance ratio:
a pharmacokinetically based risk factor for prediction of early creatinine
increase after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;
50: 584–590.

438. Nyman U, Almen T, Aspelin P, et al. Contrast-medium-induced nephro-
pathy correlated to the ratio between dose in gram iodine and estimated
GFR in ml/min. Acta Radiol 2005; 46: 830–842.

439. Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Campodonico J, et al. Contrast volume during
primary percutaneous coronary intervention and subsequent contrast-
induced nephropathy and mortality. Ann Intern Med 2009; 150: 170–177.
440. Cramer BC, Parfrey PS, Hutchinson TA, et al. Renal function following
infusion of radiologic contrast material. A prospective controlled study.
Arch Intern Med 1985; 145: 87–89.

441. Heller CA, Knapp J, Halliday J, et al. Failure to demonstrate contrast

nephrotoxicity. Med J Aust 1991; 155: 329–332.

442. Rao QA, Newhouse JH. Risk of nephropathy after intravenous adminis-
tration of contrast material: a critical literature analysis. Radiology 2006;
239: 392–397.

443. Barrett BJ, Katzberg RW, Thomsen HS, et al. Contrast-induced nephro-
pathy in patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing computed
tomography: a double-blind comparison of iodixanol and iopamidol. Invest
Radiol 2006; 41: 815–821.

444. Katzberg RW, Lamba R. Contrast-induced nephropathy after intravenous

administration: fact or ﬁction? Radiol Clin North Am 2009; 47: 789–800.

445. Katzberg RW, Barrett BJ. Risk of iodinated contrast material–induced
nephropathy with intravenous administration. Radiology 2007; 243:
622–628.

446. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. Risk of contrast-medium-induced nephropathy
in high-risk patients undergoing MDCT–a pooled analysis of
two
randomized trials. Eur Radiol 2009; 19: 891–897.

447. Ellis JH, Cohan RH. Reducing the risk of contrast-induced nephropathy:
a perspective on the controversies. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009; 192:
1544–1549.

448. Goldfarb S, Spinler S, Berns JS, et al. Low-osmolality contrast media
and the risk of contrast-associated nephrotoxicity. Invest Radiol 1993;
28 (Suppl 5): S7–10; discussion S11–12.

449. Barrett BJ, Carlisle EJ. Metaanalysis of the relative nephrotoxicity of
high- and low-osmolality iodinated contrast media. Radiology 1993; 188:
171–178.

450. Aspelin P, Aubry P, Fransson SG, et al. Nephrotoxic effects in high-risk
patients undergoing angiography. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 491–499.
451. Feldkamp T, Baumgart D, Elsner M, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar
in low risk patients. Clin

versus low-osmolar contrast media is equal
Nephrol 2006; 66: 322–330.

452. Hardiek KJ, Katholi RE, Robbs RS, et al. Renal effects of contrast media in
coronary

diabetic patients undergoing diagnostic or
angiography. J Diabetes Complications 2008; 22: 171–177.
Juergens CP, Winter JP, Nguyen-Do P, et al. Nephrotoxic effects of iodixanol
and iopromide in patients with abnormal renal function receiving N-
acetylcysteine and hydration before coronary angiography and intervention:
a randomized trial. Intern Med J 2009; 39: 25–31.

interventional

454. Laskey W, Aspelin P, Davidson C, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iodixanol versus
iopamidol in patients with chronic kidney disease and diabetes mellitus
undergoing coronary angiographic procedures. Am Heart J 2009; 158:
822–828 e823.

455. Nie B, Cheng WJ, Li YF, et al. A prospective, double-blind, randomized,
controlled trial on the efﬁcacy and cardiorenal safety of iodixanol vs.
iopromide in patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing coronary
angiography with or without percutaneous coronary intervention. Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv 2008; 72: 958–965.

456. Rudnick MR, Davidson C, Laskey W, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iodixanol
versus ioversol
in patients with chronic kidney disease: the Visipaque
Angiography/Interventions with Laboratory Outcomes in Renal Insufﬁ-
ciency (VALOR) Trial. Am Heart J 2008; 156: 776–782.

459.

457. Heinrich MC, Haberle L, Muller V, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar
iodixanol compared with nonionic low-osmolar contrast media: meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Radiology 2009; 250: 68–86.
458. Reddan D, Laville M, Garovic VD. Contrast-induced nephropathy and its
prevention: What do we really know from evidence-based ﬁndings?
J Nephrol 2009; 22: 333–351.
Jo SH, Youn TJ, Koo BK, et al. Renal toxicity evaluation and comparison
between visipaque (iodixanol) and hexabrix (ioxaglate) in patients with
renal insufﬁciency undergoing coronary angiography: the RECOVER study:
a randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 48: 924–930.
460. Mehran R, Nikolsky E, Kirtane AJ, et al. Ionic low-osmolar versus nonionic
iso-osmolar contrast media to obviate worsening nephropathy after
angioplasty in chronic renal failure patients: the ICON (Ionic versus non-
ionic Contrast to Obviate worsening Nephropathy after angioplasty in
chronic renal failure patients) study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2009; 2:
415–421.

461. Kuhn MJ, Chen N, Sahani DV, et al. The PREDICT study: a randomized
double-blind comparison of contrast-induced nephropathy after low- or
isoosmolar contrast agent exposure. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191:
151–157.

462. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Erley CM, et al. The ACTIVE Trial: comparison
of the effects on renal function of iomeprol-400 and iodixanol-320 in
patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing abdominal computed
tomography. Invest Radiol 2008; 43: 170–178.

463. Nguyen SA, Suranyi P, Ravenel JG, et al. Iso-osmolality versus low-
osmolality iodinated contrast medium at intravenous contrast-enhanced
CT: effect on kidney function. Radiology 2008; 248: 97–105.

464. Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy

with volume expansion. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 273–280.

465. Persson PB, Hansell P, Liss P. Pathophysiology of contrast medium-induced

nephropathy. Kidney Int 2005; 68: 14–22.

466. Better OS, Rubinstein I. Management of shock and acute renal failure in
casualties suffering from the crush syndrome. Ren Fail 1997; 19: 647–653.
467. Weisbord SD, Mor MK, Resnick AL, et al. Prevention, incidence, and
outcomes of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Arch Intern Med 2008;
168: 1325–1332.

468. Stevens MA, McCullough PA, Tobin KJ, et al. A prospective randomized trial
of prevention measures in patients at high risk for contrast nephropathy:
results of the P.R.I.N.C.E. Study. Prevention of Radiocontrast Induced
Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999; 33: 403–411.
469. Mueller C, Buerkle G, Buettner HJ, et al. Prevention of contrast media-
associated nephropathy: randomized comparison of 2 hydration regimens
in 1620 patients undergoing coronary angioplasty. Arch Intern Med 2002;
162: 329–336.

470. Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2004; 291: 2328–2334.

471. Caulﬁeld JL, Singh SP, Wishnok JS, et al. Bicarbonate inhibits N-nitrosation
in oxygenated nitric oxide solutions. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 25859–25863.
472. Bakris GL, Lass N, Gaber AO, et al. Radiocontrast medium-induced
declines in renal function: a role for oxygen free radicals. Am J Physiol 1990;
258: F115–120.

473. Halliwell B, Gutteridge JM. Role of free radicals and catalytic metal ions in

human disease: an overview. Methods Enzymol 1990; 186: 1–85.

474. Assadi F. Acetazolamide for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy:

a new use for an old drug. Pediatr Cardiol 2006; 27: 238–242.

132

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

475. Brar SS, Hiremath S, Dangas G, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for the
prevention of contrast induced-acute kidney injury: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 1584–1592.

476. Hogan SE, L’Allier P, Chetcuti S, et al. Current role of sodium bicarbonate-
based preprocedural hydration for the prevention of contrast-induced acute
kidney injury: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J 2008; 156: 414–421.

477. Hoste EA, De Waele JJ, Gevaert SA, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for
prevention of contrast-induced acute kidney injury: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010; 25: 747–758.
Joannidis M, Schmid M, Wiedermann CJ. Prevention of contrast media-
induced nephropathy by isotonic sodium bicarbonate: a meta-analysis.
Wien Klin Wochenschr 2008; 120: 742–748.

478.

479. Kanbay M, Covic A, Coca SG, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for the prevention
of contrast-induced nephropathy: a meta-analysis of 17 randomized trials.
Int Urol Nephrol 2009; 41: 617–627.

480. Navaneethan SD, Singh S, Appasamy S, et al. Sodium bicarbonate therapy
for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53: 617–627.

481. Zoungas S, Ninomiya T, Huxley R, et al. Systematic review: sodium
bicarbonate treatment regimens for the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2009; 151: 631–638.

482. Adolph E, Holdt-Lehmann B, Chatterjee T, et al. Renal Insufﬁciency
Following Radiocontrast Exposure Trial (REINFORCE): a randomized
comparison of sodium bicarbonate versus sodium chloride hydration for
the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Coron Artery Dis 2008; 19:
413–419.

483. Ozcan EE, Guneri S, Akdeniz B, et al. Sodium bicarbonate, N-acetyl-
cysteine, and saline for prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephropathy.
A comparison of 3 regimens for protecting contrast-induced nephropathy
in patients undergoing coronary procedures. A single-center prospective
controlled trial. Am Heart J 2007; 154: 539–544.

484. Brar SS, Shen AY, Jorgensen MB, et al. Sodium bicarbonate vs sodium
chloride for the prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy in
patients undergoing coronary angiography: a randomized trial. JAMA 2008;
300: 1038–1046.

485. Budhiraja P, Chen Z, Popovtzer M. Sodium bicarbonate versus normal
saline for protection against contrast nephropathy. Ren Fail 2009; 31:
118–123.

486. Briguori C, Airoldi F, D’Andrea D, et al. Renal Insufﬁciency Following
randomized

Contrast Media Administration Trial
comparison of 3 preventive strategies. Circulation 2007; 115: 1211–1217.

(REMEDIAL): a

487. Maioli M, Toso A, Leoncini M, et al. Sodium bicarbonate versus saline for
the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with renal
dysfunction undergoing coronary angiography or intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2008; 52: 599–604.

488. Recio-Mayoral A, Chaparro M, Prado B, et al. The reno-protective effect of
hydration with sodium bicarbonate plus N-acetylcysteine in patients
undergoing emergency percutaneous coronary intervention: the RENO
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49: 1283–1288.

489. From AM, Bartholmai BJ, Williams AW, et al. Sodium bicarbonate is
associated with an increased incidence of contrast nephropathy: a
retrospective cohort study of 7977 patients at mayo clinic. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2008; 3: 10–18.

490. Taylor AJ, Hotchkiss D, Morse RW, et al. PREPARED: Preparation for
Angiography in Renal Dysfunction: a randomized trial of inpatient vs
outpatient hydration protocols
for cardiac catheterization in mild-
to-moderate renal dysfunction. Chest 1998; 114: 1570–1574.

491. Trivedi HS, Moore H, Nasr S, et al. A randomized prospective trial to assess
the role of saline hydration on the development of contrast nephrotoxicity.
Nephron Clin Pract 2003; 93: C29–34.

492. Yoshikawa D, Isobe S, Sato K, et al. Importance of oral ﬂuid intake after
coronary computed tomography angiography: An observational study.
Eur J Radiol 2011; 77: 118–122.

493. Cho R, Javed N, Traub D, et al. Oral hydration and alkalinization is
noninferior to intravenous therapy for prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy in patients with chronic kidney disease. J Interv Cardiol 2010;
23: 460–466.

494. McCullough PA. Contrast-induced acute kidney injury. J Am Coll Cardiol

2008; 51: 1419–1428.

495. Klein-Schwartz W, Doyon S. Intravenous acetylcysteine for the treatment of

acetaminophen overdose. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2011; 12: 119–130.

496. Thiele H, Hildebrand L, Schirdewahn C, et al. Impact of high-dose
N-acetylcysteine versus placebo on contrast-induced nephropathy and
myocardial reperfusion injury in unselected patients with ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction undergoing primary percutaneous coronary
intervention. The LIPSIA-N-ACC (Prospective, Single-Blind, Placebo-

r e f e r e n c e s

Controlled, Randomized Leipzig Immediate PercutaneouS Coronary
Intervention Acute Myocardial Infarction N-ACC) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
2010; 55: 2201–2209.

497. Trivedi H, Daram S, Szabo A, et al. High-dose N-acetylcysteine for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Am J Med 2009; 122:
874.e9–874.15.

498. Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Marana I, et al. N-acetylcysteine and contrast-
induced nephropathy in primary angioplasty. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:
2773–2782.

499. Webb JG, Pate GE, Humphries KH, et al. A randomized controlled trial of
intravenous N-acetylcysteine for
the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy after cardiac catheterization: lack of effect. Am Heart J 2004;
148: 422–429.

500. Bagshaw SM, McAlister FA, Manns BJ, et al. Acetylcysteine in the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a case study of the pitfalls
in the evolution of evidence. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 161–166.
501. Vaitkus PT, Brar C. N-acetylcysteine in the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy: publication bias perpetuated by meta-analyses. Am Heart J
2007; 153: 275–280.
Jo SH, Koo BK, Park JS, et al. N-acetylcysteine versus AScorbic acid for
preventing contrast-Induced nephropathy in patients with renal insufﬁ-
ciency undergoing coronary angiography NASPI
study-a prospective
randomized controlled trial. Am Heart J 2009; 157: 576–583.

502.

503. Brown JR, Block CA, Malenka DJ, et al. Sodium bicarbonate plus
JACC Cardiovasc Interv

N-acetylcysteine prophylaxis: a meta-analysis.
2009; 2: 1116–1124.

504. Koc F, Ozdemir K, Kaya MG, et al. Intravenous N-acetylcysteine plus
high-dose hydration versus high-dose hydration and standard hydration for
the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: CASIS-A multicenter
J Cardiol 2010: doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.
prospective controlled trial.
2010.1010.1041.

Int

505. Arend LJ, Bakris GL, Burnett JC, Jr., et al. Role for intrarenal adenosine in
the renal hemodynamic response to contrast media. J Lab Clin Med 1987;
110: 406–411.

506. Bagshaw SM, Ghali WA. Theophylline for prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2005;
165: 1087–1093.

507. Huber W, Eckel F, Hennig M, et al. Prophylaxis of contrast material-
induced nephropathy in patients in intensive care: acetylcysteine, theophyl-
line, or both? A randomized study. Radiology 2006; 239: 793–804.
508. Baskurt M, Okcun B, Abaci O, et al. N-acetylcysteine versus N-acetyl-
cysteine þ theophylline for the prevention of contrast nephropathy. Eur J
Clin Invest 2009; 39: 793–799.

509. Malhis M, Al-Bitar S, Al-Deen Zaiat K. The role of theophylline in
prevention of radiocontrast media-induced nephropathy. Saudi J Kidney
Dis Transpl 2010; 21: 276–283.

510. Upton RA. Pharmacokinetic interactions between theophylline and other

medication (Part II). Clin Pharmacokinet 1991; 20: 135–150.

511. Upton RA. Pharmacokinetic interactions between theophylline and other

medication (Part I). Clin Pharmacokinet 1991; 20: 66–80.

512. Stacul F, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Strategies to reduce the risk of contrast-

induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98: 59K–77K.

513. Allaqaband S, Tumuluri R, Malik AM, et al. Prospective randomized study
of N-acetylcysteine, fenoldopam, and saline for prevention of radiocontrast-
induced nephropathy. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2002; 57: 279–283.
514. Toso A, Maioli M, Leoncini M, et al. Usefulness of atorvastatin (80 mg) in
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with chronic renal
disease. Am J Cardiol 2010; 105: 288–292.

515. Yoshida S, Kamihata H, Nakamura S, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy by chronic pravastatin treatment in patients with cardio-
vascular disease and renal insufﬁciency. J Cardiol 2009; 54: 192–198.
516. Deray G. Dialysis and iodinated contrast media. Kidney Int Suppl 2006:

S25–29.

517. Cruz DN, Perazella MA, Ronco C. The role of extracorporeal blood
puriﬁcation therapies in the prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephro-
pathy. Int J Artif Organs 2008; 31: 515–524.

518. Vogt B, Ferrari P, Schonholzer C, et al. Prophylactic hemodialysis after
insufﬁciency is potentially

radiocontrast media in patients with renal
harmful. Am J Med 2001; 111: 692–698.

519. Reinecke H, Fobker M, Wellmann J, et al. A randomized controlled trial
comparing hydration therapy to additional hemodialysis or N-acetyl-
cysteine for the prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy: the
Dialysis-versus-Diuresis (DVD) Trial. Clin Res Cardiol 2007; 96: 130–139.
520. Kawashima S, Takano H, Iino Y, et al. Prophylactic hemodialysis does
not prevent contrast-induced nephropathy after cardiac catheterization in
patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency. Circ J 2006; 70: 553–558.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

133

r e f e r e n c e s

521. Lee PT, Chou KJ, Liu CP, et al. Renal protection for coronary angiography
failure patients by prophylactic hemodialysis. A

in advanced renal
randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 1015–1020.
522. Marenzi G, Marana I, Lauri G, et al. The prevention of radiocontrast-
agent-induced nephropathy by hemoﬁltration. N Engl J Med 2003; 349:
1333–1340.

523. Marenzi G, Lauri G, Campodonico J,

two
hemoﬁltration protocols for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy
in high-risk patients. Am J Med 2006; 119: 155–162.

et al. Comparison of

524. Kellum JA, Mehta RL, Levin A, et al. Development of a clinical research
agenda for acute kidney injury using an international, interdisciplinary,
three-step modiﬁed Delphi process. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 887–894.
525. Palevsky PM, Baldwin I, Davenport A, et al. Renal replacement therapy and
therapy on

the kidney: minimizing the impact of renal replacement
recovery of acute renal failure. Curr Opin Crit Care 2005; 11: 548–554.

526. Allon M, Shanklin N. Effect of albuterol treatment on subsequent dialytic

potassium removal. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 26: 607–613.

527. Gauthier PM, Szerlip HM. Metabolic acidosis in the intensive care unit.

Crit Care Clin 2002; 18: 289–308.

528. Kraut JA, Kurtz I. Toxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis, and

management. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 208–225.

529. Pearlman BL, Gambhir R. Salicylate intoxication: a clinical review. Postgrad

Med 2009; 121: 162–168.

530. Tyagi PK, Winchester JF, Feinfeld DA. Extracorporeal removal of toxins.

Kidney Int 2008; 74: 1231–1233.

531. Bouman CS, Oudemans-Van Straaten HM, Tijssen JG, et al. Effects of
early high-volume continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration on survival and
recovery of renal function in intensive care patients with acute renal failure:
a prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 2002; 30: 2205–2211.
532. Conger JD. A controlled evaluation of prophylactic dialysis in post-

traumatic acute renal failure. J Trauma 1975; 15: 1056–1063.

the prospective pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy registry.
Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55: 316–325.

549. Wiedemann HP, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al. Comparison of two ﬂuid-
management strategies in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:
2564–2575.

550. Mehta RL, McDonald B, Pahl M, et al. Continuous vs. intermittent dialysis
for acute renal failure in the ICU: Results from a randomized multicenter
trial (abstract). J Am Soc Nephrol 1996; 7: 1456.

551. Cruz DN, de Cal M, Garzotto F, et al. Plasma neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin is an early biomarker for acute kidney injury in an adult
ICU population. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36: 444–451.

552. Hui-Stickle S, Brewer ED, Goldstein SL. Pediatric ARF epidemiology at a
tertiary care center from 1999 to 2001. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45: 96–101.
553. Williams DM, Sreedhar SS, Mickell JJ, et al. Acute kidney failure: a pediatric

experience over 20 years. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002; 156: 893–900.

554. Picca S, Dionisi-Vici C, Abeni D, et al. Extracorporeal dialysis in neonatal
hyperammonemia: modalities and prognostic indicators. Pediatr Nephrol
2001; 16: 862–867.

555. Proulx F, Fayon M, Farrell CA, et al. Epidemiology of sepsis and multiple
organ dysfunction syndrome in children. Chest 1996; 109: 1033–1037.
556. Proulx F, Gauthier M, Nadeau D, et al. Timing and predictors of death in
pediatric patients with multiple organ system failure. Crit Care Med 1994;
22: 1025–1031.

557. Picca S, Bartuli A, Dionisi-Vici C. Medical management and dialysis
therapy for the infant with an inborn error of metabolism. Semin Nephrol
2008; 28: 477–480.

558. Picca S, Ricci Z, Picardo S. Acute kidney injury in an infant after

cardiopulmonary bypass. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28: 470–476.

559. Michael M, Kuehnle I, Goldstein SL. Fluid overload and acute renal failure
in pediatric stem cell transplant patients. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19: 91–95.
560. Goldstein SL. Advances in pediatric renal replacement therapy for acute

533. Fischer RP, Griffen WO, Jr., Reiser M, et al. Early dialysis in the treatment of

kidney injury. Semin Dial 2011; 24: 187–191.

acute renal failure. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1966; 123: 1019–1023.

561. Bagshaw SM, Mortis G, Godinez-Luna T, et al. Renal recovery after severe

534. Kleinknecht D, Jungers P, Chanard J, et al. Uremic and non-uremic
complications in acute renal failure: Evaluation of early and frequent
dialysis on prognosis. Kidney Int 1972; 1: 190–196.

535. Parsons FM, Hobson SM, Blagg CR, et al. Optimum time for dialysis in
acute reversible renal failure. Description and value of an improved dialyser
with large surface area. Lancet 1961; 1: 129–134.

536. Gettings LG, Reynolds HN, Scalea T. Outcome in post-traumatic acute
renal failure when continuous renal replacement therapy is applied early vs.
late. Intensive Care Med 1999; 25: 805–813.

537. Demirkilic U, Kuralay E, Yenicesu M, et al. Timing of replacement therapy

for acute renal failure after cardiac surgery. J Card Surg 2004; 19: 17–20.

538. Elahi MM, Lim MY, Joseph RN, et al. Early hemoﬁltration improves
failure. Eur J
in post-cardiotomy patients with acute renal

survival
Cardiothorac Surg 2004; 26: 1027–1031.

539. Liu KD, Himmelfarb J, Paganini E, et al. Timing of initiation of dialysis in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 1:
915–919.

540. Bagshaw SM, Uchino S, Bellomo R, et al. Timing of renal replacement
therapy and clinical outcomes in critically ill patients with severe acute
kidney injury. J Crit Care 2009; 24: 129–140.

541. Shiao CC, Wu VC, Li WY, et al. Late initiation of renal replacement therapy
is associated with worse outcomes in acute kidney injury after major
abdominal surgery. Crit Care 2009; 13: R171.

542. Brandstrup B, Tonnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, et al. Effects of intravenous
ﬂuid restriction on postoperative complications: comparison of
two
perioperative ﬂuid regimens: a randomized assessor-blinded multicenter
trial. Ann Surg 2003; 238: 641–648.

543. Foland JA, Fortenberry JD, Warshaw BL, et al. Fluid overload before
in critically ill children: a

continuous hemoﬁltration and survival
retrospective analysis. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: 1771–1776.

544. Gillespie RS, Seidel K, Symons JM. Effect of ﬂuid overload and dose of
replacement ﬂuid on survival in hemoﬁltration. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19:
1394–1399.

545. Goldstein SL, Currier H, Graf C, et al. Outcome in children receiving

continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Pediatrics 2001; 107: 1309–1312.

546. Goldstein SL, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al. Pediatric patients with multi-
organ dysfunction syndrome receiving continuous renal replacement
therapy. Kidney Int 2005; 67: 653–658.

547. Hayes LW, Oster RA, Toﬁl NM, et al. Outcomes of critically ill children
requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. J Crit Care 2009; 24:
394–400.

548. Sutherland SM, Zappitelli M, Alexander SR, et al. Fluid overload and
mortality in children receiving continuous renal replacement therapy:

acute renal failure. Int J Artif Organs 2006; 29: 1023–1030.

562. Bellomo R, Cass A, Cole L, et al. Intensity of continuous renal-replacement
therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 361: 1627–1638.
563. Palevsky PM, Zhang JH, O’Connor TZ, et al. Intensity of renal support in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med 2008; 359: 7–20.
Increasing incidence of withholding and
withdrawal of life support from the critically ill. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1997; 155: 15–20.

564. Prendergast TJ, Luce JM.

565. Swartz R, Perry E, Daley J. The frequency of withdrawal from acute care is
impacted by severe acute renal failure. J Palliat Med 2004; 7: 676–682.
566. Ho KM, Liang J, Hughes T, et al. Withholding and withdrawal of therapy in
patients with acute renal injury: a retrospective cohort study. Anaesth
Intensive Care 2003; 31: 509–513.

567. Shealy CB, Campbell RC, Hey JC, et al. 24-hr creatinine clearance as a guide
for CRRT withdrawal: a retrospective study (abstr). Blood Purif 2003;
21: 192.

568. Wu VC, Ko WJ, Chang HW, et al. Risk factors of early redialysis after
weaning from postoperative acute renal replacement therapy. Intensive Care
Med 2008; 34: 101–108.

569. Askenazi DJ, Feig DI, Graham NM, et al. 3–5 year longitudinal follow-up of

pediatric patients after acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006; 69: 184–189.

570. Symons JM, Chua AN, Somers MJ, et al. Demographic characteristics of
pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy: a report of the prospective
pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy registry. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2007; 2: 732–738.

571. Schetz M. Anticoagulation in continuous renal replacement

therapy.

Contrib Nephrol 2001; 132: 283–303.

572. Bellomo R, Parkin G, Love J, et al. Use of continuous haemodiaﬁltration:
an approach to the management of acute renal failure in the critically ill.
Am J Nephrol 1992; 12: 240–245.

573. Morabito S, Guzzo I, Solazzo A, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapies: anticoagulation in the critically ill at high risk of bleeding.
J Nephrol 2003; 16: 566–571.

574. Tan HK, Baldwin I, Bellomo R. Continuous veno-venous hemoﬁltration
without anticoagulation in high-risk patients. Intensive Care Med 2000; 26:
1652–1657.

575. Uchino S, Fealy N, Baldwin I, et al. Continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration

without anticoagulation. ASAIO J 2004; 50: 76–80.

576. Agarwal B, Shaw S, Hari MS, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT) in patients with liver disease: is circuit life different? J Hepatol 2009;
51: 504–509.

577. Davies H, Leslie G. Maintaining the CRRT circuit: non-anticoagulant

alternatives. Aust Crit Care 2006; 19: 133–138.

134

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

r e f e r e n c e s

578.

Joannidis M, Oudemans-van Straaten HM. Clinical review: Patency of the
circuit in continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care 2007; 11: 218.
579. Davenport A. Review article: Low-molecular-weight heparin as an
alternative anticoagulant to unfractionated heparin for routine outpatient
haemodialysis treatments. Nephrology (Carlton) 2009; 14: 455–461.
580. Hirsh J, Bauer KA, Donati MB, et al. Parenteral anticoagulants: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
(8th Edition). Chest 2008; 133: 141S–159S.

581. Warkentin TE, Greinacher A, Koster A, et al. Treatment and prevention of
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest 2008; 133:
340S–380S.

582. Baglin T, Barrowcliffe TW, Cohen A, et al. Guidelines on the use and

monitoring of heparin. Br J Haematol 2006; 133: 19–34.

583. Gray E, Mulloy B, Barrowcliffe TW. Heparin and low-molecular-weight

heparin. Thromb Haemost 2008; 99: 807–818.

584. Martel N, Lee J, Wells PS. Risk for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia with
unfractionated and low-molecular-weight heparin thromboprophylaxis:
a meta-analysis. Blood 2005; 106: 2710–2715.

585. Davenport A, Tolwani A. Citrate anticoagulation for continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) in patients with acute kidney injury admitted
to the intensive care unit. NDT Plus 2009; 2: 439–447.

586. Lim W, Cook DJ, Crowther MA. Safety and efﬁcacy of low molecular
weight heparins for hemodialysis in patients with end-stage renal failure:
J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15:
a meta-analysis of randomized trials.
3192–3206.

587. European Best Practice Guidelines for Haemodialysis (Part 1). V. Chronic
intermittent haemodialysis and prevention of clotting in the extracorporal
system. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002; 17 (Suppl 7): 63–71.

588. Fischer KG. Essentials of anticoagulation in hemodialysis. Hemodial Int

2007; 11: 178–189.

589. Ouseph R, Ward RA. Anticoagulation for intermittent hemodialysis. Semin

Dial 2000; 13: 181–187.

590. Lim W, Dentali F, Eikelboom JW, et al. Meta-analysis:

low-molecular-
weight heparin and bleeding in patients with severe renal insufﬁciency.
Ann Intern Med 2006; 144: 673–684.

591. Akizawa T, Koshikawa S, Ota K, et al. Nafamostat mesilate: a regional
for hemodialysis in patients at high risk for bleeding.

anticoagulant
Nephron 1993; 64: 376–381.

592. Matsuo T, Kario K, Nakao K, et al. Anticoagulation with nafamostat
mesilate, a synthetic protease inhibitor, in hemodialysis patients with a
bleeding risk. Haemostasis 1993; 23: 135–141.

593. Yang JW, Han BG, Kim BR, et al. Superior outcome of nafamostat mesilate
as an anticoagulant in patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis with
intracerebral hemorrhage. Ren Fail 2009; 31: 668–675.

594. Maruyama H, Miyakawa Y, Gejyo F, et al. Anaphylactoid reaction induced by
nafamostat mesilate in a hemodialysis patient. Nephron 1996; 74: 468–469.
595. Muto S, Imai M, Asano Y. Mechanisms of hyperkalemia caused by

nafamostat mesilate. Gen Pharmacol 1995; 26: 1627–1632.

596. Okada H, Suzuki H, Deguchi N, et al. Agranulocytosis in a haemodialysed
patient induced by a proteinase inhibitor, nafamostate mesilate. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 1992; 7: 980.

597. Novacek G, Kapiotis S, Jilma B, et al. Enhanced blood coagulation and
enhanced ﬁbrinolysis during hemodialysis with prostacyclin. Thromb Res
1997; 88: 283–290.

598. Swartz RD, Flamenbaum W, Dubrow A, et al. Epoprostenol (PGI2,
prostacyclin) during high-risk hemodialysis: preventing further bleeding
complications. J Clin Pharmacol 1988; 28: 818–825.

599. Monchi M, Berghmans D, Ledoux D, et al. Citrate vs. heparin for
anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration: a prospective
randomized study. Intensive Care Med 2004; 30: 260–265.

600. Kutsogiannis DJ, Gibney RT, Stollery D, et al. Regional citrate versus
systemic heparin anticoagulation for continuous renal replacement in
critically ill patients. Kidney Int 2005; 67: 2361–2367.

601. Betjes MG, van Oosterom D, van Agteren M, et al. Regional citrate versus
heparin anticoagulation during venovenous hemoﬁltration in patients at
low risk for bleeding: similar hemoﬁlter survival but signiﬁcantly less
bleeding. J Nephrol 2007; 20: 602–608.

601a. Hetzel GR, Schmitz, Wissing H, et al. Regional citrate versus systemic
heparin for anticoagulation in critically ill patients on continuous
venovenous haemoﬁltration: a prospective randomized multicentre trial.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26: 232–239.

601b. Park JS, Kim GH, Kang CM, et al. Regional anticoagulation with citrate is
superior to systemic anticoagulation with heparin in critically ill patients
undergoing continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration. Korean J Intern Med
2011; 26: 68–75.

602. Fealy N, Baldwin I, Johnstone M, et al. A pilot randomized controlled
crossover study comparing regional heparinization to regional citrate
anticoagulation for continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Int J Artif
Organs 2007; 30: 301–307.

603. Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Bosman RJ, Koopmans M, et al. Citrate
anticoagulation for continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Crit Care Med
2009; 37: 545–552.

604. Mehta RL, McDonald BR, Aguilar MM, et al. Regional citrate anti-
coagulation for continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis in critically ill
patients. Kidney Int 1990; 38: 976–981.

605. Morgera S, Scholle C, Voss G, et al. Metabolic complications during
regional citrate anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemodialysis:
single-center experience. Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 97: c131–136.

606. Thoenen M, Schmid ER, Binswanger U, et al. Regional citrate anti-
coagulation using a citrate-based substitution solution for continuous
venovenous hemoﬁltration in cardiac
surgery patients. Wien Klin
Wochenschr 2002; 114: 108–114.

607. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy: a worldwide practice survey. The beginning and ending supportive
therapy for the kidney (B.E.S.T. kidney) investigators. Intensive Care Med
2007; 33: 1563–1570.

608. Apsner R, Schwarzenhofer M, Derﬂer K, et al. Impairment of citrate meta-
bolism in acute hepatic failure. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1997; 109: 123–127.
609. Durao MS, Monte JC, Batista MC, et al. The use of regional citrate
anticoagulation for continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration in acute
kidney injury. Crit Care Med 2008; 36: 3024–3029.

610. Kramer L, Bauer E, Joukhadar C, et al. Citrate pharmacokinetics and
metabolism in cirrhotic and noncirrhotic critically ill patients. Crit Care
Med 2003; 31: 2450–2455.

611. Hetzel GR, Taskaya G, Sucker C, et al. Citrate plasma levels in patients
under regional anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration.
Am J Kidney Dis 2006; 48: 806–811.

612. Meier-Kriesche HU, Gitomer J, Finkel K, et al. Increased total to ionized
calcium ratio during continuous venovenous hemodialysis with regional
citrate anticoagulation. Crit Care Med 2001; 29: 748–752.

613. Bakker AJ, Boerma EC, Keidel H, et al. Detection of citrate overdose in
critically ill patients on citrate-anticoagulated venovenous haemoﬁltration:
use of ionised and total/ionised calcium. Clin Chem Lab Med 2006; 44:
962–966.

614. Davies HT, Leslie G, Pereira SM, et al. A randomized comparative crossover
study to assess the affect on circuit life of varying pre-dilution volume
associated with CVVH and CVVHDF. Int J Artif Organs 2008; 31: 221–227.
615. Holt AW, Bierer P, Bersten AD, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
in critically ill patients: monitoring circuit function. Anaesth Intensive Care
1996; 24: 423–429.
Joannidis M, Kountchev J, Rauchenzauner M, et al. Enoxaparin vs.
unfractionated heparin for anticoagulation during continuous veno-venous
hemoﬁltration: a randomized controlled crossover study. Intensive Care
Med 2007; 33: 1571–1579.

616.

617. Stefanidis I, Hagel J, Frank D, et al. Hemostatic alterations during
continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration in acute renal failure. Clin Nephrol
1996; 46: 199–205.

618. van de Wetering J, Westendorp RG, van der Hoeven JG, et al. Heparin use
in continuous renal replacement procedures: the struggle between ﬁlter
coagulation and patient hemorrhage. J Am Soc Nephrol 1996; 7: 145–150.
619. Yang RL, Liu DW. [Clinical evaluation of hemoﬁltration without anti-
coagulation in critically ill patients at high risk of bleeding]. Zhongguo Yi
Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao 2007; 29: 651–655.

620. Reeves JH, Cumming AR, Gallagher L, et al. A controlled trial of
low-molecular-weight heparin (dalteparin) versus unfractionated heparin
as anticoagulant during continuous venovenous hemodialysis with
ﬁltration. Crit Care Med 1999; 27: 2224–2228.

621. de Pont AC, Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Roozendaal KJ, et al. Nadroparin
versus dalteparin anticoagulation in high-volume, continuous venovenous
hemoﬁltration: a double-blind, randomized, crossover study. Crit Care Med
2000; 28: 421–425.

622. Birnbaum J, Spies CD, Klotz E, et al. Iloprost for additional anticoagulation
in continuous renal replacement therapy–a pilot study. Ren Fail 2007; 29:
271–277.

623. Kozek-Langenecker SA, Spiss CK, Gamsjager T, et al. Anticoagulation with
prostaglandins and unfractionated heparin during continuous venovenous
haemoﬁltration: a randomized controlled trial. Wien Klin Wochenschr 2002;
114: 96–101.

624. Fabbri LP, Nucera M, Al Malyan M, et al. Regional anticoagulation
and antiaggregation for CVVH in critically ill patients: a prospective,
randomized, controlled pilot study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2010; 54: 92–97.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

135

r e f e r e n c e s

625. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, et al. Continuous haemoﬁltration in
acute renal failure with prostacyclin as the sole anti-haemostatic agent.
Intensive Care Med 2002; 28: 586–593.

626. Langenecker SA, Felfernig M, Werba A, et al. Anticoagulation with
prostacyclin and heparin during continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration.
Crit Care Med 1994; 22: 1774–1781.

627. Biancoﬁore G, Esposito M, Bindi L, et al. Regional ﬁlter heparinization for
continuous veno-venous hemoﬁltration in liver transplant recipients.
Minerva Anestesiol 2003; 69: 527–534; 534–528.

653. Taal MW, Chesterton LJ, McIntyre CW. Venography at

insertion of
tunnelled internal jugular vein dialysis catheters reveals signiﬁcant occult
stenosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19: 1542–1545.

654. Agarwal AK, Patel BM, Haddad NJ. Central vein stenosis: a nephrologist’s

perspective. Semin Dial 2007; 20: 53–62.

655. Puel V, Caudry M, Le Metayer P, et al. Superior vena cava thrombosis
related to catheter malposition in cancer chemotherapy given through
implanted ports. Cancer 1993; 72: 2248–2252.

656. Yevzlin AS. Hemodialysis catheter-associated central venous stenosis. Semin

628. Kaplan AA, Petrillo R. Regional heparinization for continuous arterio-

Dial 2008; 21: 522–527.

venous hemoﬁltration (CAVH). ASAIO Trans 1987; 33: 312–315.

629. Carr JA, Silverman N. The heparin-protamine interaction. A review.

J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 1999; 40: 659–666.

630. Lasocki S, Piednoir P, Ajzenberg N, et al. Anti-PF4/heparin antibodies
associated with repeated hemoﬁltration-ﬁlter clotting: a retrospective study.
Crit Care 2008; 12: R84.

631. Lo GK, Juhl D, Warkentin TE, et al. Evaluation of pretest clinical score
(4 T’s) for the diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in two
clinical settings. J Thromb Haemost 2006; 4: 759–765.

632. O’Shea SI, Ortel TL, Kovalik EC. Alternative methods of anticoagulation for
dialysis-dependent patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Semin Dial 2003; 16: 61–67.

633. Davenport A. Anticoagulation options for patients with heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia requiring renal support in the intensive care unit.
Contrib Nephrol 2007; 156: 259–266.

657. Pronovost P.

Interventions

to decrease catheter-related bloodstream
infections in the ICU: the Keystone Intensive Care Unit Project. Am J
Infect Control 2008; 36: S171 e171–175.

658. Parienti JJ, Thirion M, Megarbane B, et al. Femoral vs jugular venous
catheterization and risk of nosocomial events in adults requiring acute renal
replacement therapy: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008; 299: 2413–2422.
659. Hryszko T, Brzosko S, Mazerska M, et al. Risk factors of nontunneled
study.

catheter malfunction. A prospective

noncuffed hemodialysis
Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 96: c43–47.

660. Liangos O, Rao M, Ruthazer R, et al. Factors associated with urea reduction

ratio in acute renal failure. Artif Organs 2004; 28: 1076–1081.

661. Naumovic RT, Jovanovic DB, Djukanovic LJ. Temporary vascular catheters
for hemodialysis: a 3-year prospective study. Int J Artif Organs 2004; 27:
848–854.

662. Oliver MJ, Edwards LJ, Treleaven DJ, et al. Randomized study of temporary

634. Hursting MJ, Murray PT. Argatroban anticoagulation in renal dysfunction:

hemodialysis catheters. Int J Artif Organs 2002; 25: 40–44.

a literature analysis. Nephron Clin Pract 2008; 109: c80–94.

635. Link A, Girndt M, Selejan S, et al. Argatroban for anticoagulation in

continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 105–110.

636. Brophy PD, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al. Multi-centre evaluation of
anticoagulation in patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT). Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20: 1416–1421.

637. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Barnett J, et al. Pediatric hemoﬁltration:
Normocarb dialysate solution with citrate anticoagulation. Pediatr Nephrol
2002; 17: 150–154.

638. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Brophy PD. Pediatric convective hemoﬁltra-
tion: Normocarb replacement ﬂuid and citrate anticoagulation. Am J
Kidney Dis 2003; 42: 1248–1252.

639. Klouche K, Amigues L, Deleuze S, et al. Complications, effects on dialysis
dose, and survival of tunneled femoral dialysis catheters in acute renal
failure. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49: 99–108.

640. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical practice guidelines and
clinical practice recommendations for 2006 updates: vascular access. Am J
Kidney Dis 2006; 48: S176–S307.

641. O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Dellinger EP, et al. Guidelines for the prevention
of intravascular catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2002; 23: 759–769.

642. Leblanc M, Fedak S, Mokris G, et al. Blood recirculation in temporary

central catheters for acute hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1996; 45: 315–319.

643. Little MA, Conlon PJ, Walshe JJ. Access recirculation in temporary
hemodialysis catheters as measured by the saline dilution technique. Am J
Kidney Dis 2000; 36: 1135–1139.

644. Oliver MJ. Acute dialysis catheters. Semin Dial 2001; 14: 432–435.
645. Twardowski ZJ. History of peritoneal access development. Int J Artif Organs

2006; 29: 2–40.

646. Ronco C, Dell’Aquila R. Peritoneal access for acute peritoneal dialysis.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology, 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 1467–1471.

647. Asif A, Byers P, Vieira CF, et al. Peritoneoscopic placement of peritoneal
dialysis catheter and bowel perforation: experience of an interventional
nephrology program. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 42: 1270–1274.

648. Maya ID. Ultrasound/ﬂuoroscopy-assisted placement of peritoneal dialysis

catheters. Semin Dial 2007; 20: 611–615.

649. Schmidt SC, Pohle C, Langrehr JM, et al. Laparoscopic-assisted placement
implantation technique and results.

of peritoneal dialysis catheters:
J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2007; 17: 596–599.

650. Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, et al. Superiority of the
internal jugular over the subclavian access for temporary dialysis. Nephron
1990; 54: 154–161.

651. Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, et al. Post catheterisation vein
stenosis in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 50 subclavian
and 50 internal
jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991; 6:
722–724.

652. Oguzkurt L, Tercan F, Torun D, et al. Impact of short-term hemodialysis
catheters on the central veins: a catheter venographic study. Eur J Radiol
2004; 52: 293–299.

663. Parienti JJ, Megarbane B, Fischer MO, et al. Catheter dysfunction and
dialysis performance according to vascular access among 736 critically ill
adults requiring renal replacement therapy: a randomized controlled study.
Crit Care Med 2010; 38: 1118–1125.

664. Marschall J, Mermel LA, Classen D, et al. Strategies to prevent central line-
associated bloodstream infections in acute care hospitals. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 29 (Suppl 1): S22–30.

665. Pratt RJ, Pellowe CM, Wilson JA, et al. epic2: National evidence-based
guidelines for preventing healthcare-associated infections in NHS hospitals
in England. J Hosp Infect 2007; 65 (Suppl 1): S1–64.

666. Kusminsky RE. Complications of central venous catheterization. J Am Coll

Surg 2007; 204: 681–696.

667. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous

catheterization. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1123–1133.

668. Hind D, Calvert N, McWilliams R, et al. Ultrasonic locating devices for

central venous cannulation: meta-analysis. BMJ 2003; 327: 361.

669. Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, et al. Ultrasound guidance for
placement of central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the literature.
Crit Care Med 1996; 24: 2053–2058.

670. Karakitsos D, Labropoulos N, De Groot E, et al. Real-time ultrasound-guided
catheterisation of the internal jugular vein: a prospective comparison with
the landmark technique in critical care patients. Crit Care 2006; 10: R162.

671. Leung J, Duffy M, Finckh A. Real-time ultrasonographically-guided internal
jugular vein catheterization in the emergency department
increases
success rates and reduces complications: a randomized, prospective study.
Ann Emerg Med 2006; 48: 540–547.

672. Bansal R, Agarwal SK, Tiwari SC, et al. A prospective randomized study to
compare ultrasound-guided with nonultrasound-guided double lumen
internal
jugular catheter insertion as a temporary hemodialysis access.
Ren Fail 2005; 27: 561–564.

673. Farrell J, Gellens M. Ultrasound-guided cannulation versus the landmark-
guided technique for acute haemodialysis access. Nephrol Dial Transplant
1997; 12: 1234–1237.

674. Gallieni M. Central vein catheterization of dialysis patients with real time

ultrasound guidance. J Vasc Access 2000; 1: 10–14.

675. Kwon TH, Kim YL, Cho DK. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the femoral
vein for acute haemodialysis access. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997; 12: 1009–1012.
676. Lin BS, Huang TP, Tang GJ, et al. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the
internal jugular vein for dialysis vascular access in uremic patients. Nephron
1998; 78: 423–428.

677. Nadig C, Leidig M, Schmiedeke T, et al. The use of ultrasound for the
placement of dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998; 13: 978–981.
678. Zollo A, Cavatorta F, Galli S. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the femoral
vein for acute hemodialysis access with silicone catheters. J Vasc Access 2001;
2: 56–59.

679. Schummer W, Sakr Y, Schummer C. Towards optimal central venous
catheter tip position. In: Vincent J-L (ed). Intensive Care Medicine. Springer
Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2008, pp 581–590.

680. Vesely TM. Central venous catheter tip position: a continuing controversy.

J Vasc Interv Radiol 2003; 14: 527–534.

136

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

682.

681. Hsu JH, Wang CK, Chu KS, et al. Comparison of radiographic landmarks
and the echocardiographic SVC/RA junction in the positioning of long-
term central venous catheters. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2006; 50: 731–735.
James MT, Conley J, Tonelli M, et al. Meta-analysis: antibiotics for
prophylaxis against hemodialysis catheter-related infections. Ann Intern
Med 2008; 148: 596–605.
Jaffer Y, Selby NM, Taal MW, et al. A meta-analysis of hemodialysis catheter
locking solutions in the prevention of catheter-related infection. Am J
Kidney Dis 2008; 51: 233–241.

683.

684. Labriola L, Crott R, Jadoul M. Preventing haemodialysis catheter-related
bacteraemia with an antimicrobial
lock solution: a meta-analysis of
prospective randomized trials. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23: 1666–1672.
685. Yahav D, Rozen-Zvi B, Gafter-Gvili A, et al. Antimicrobial lock solutions for
the prevention of infections associated with intravascular catheters in
patients undergoing hemodialysis: systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized, controlled trials. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47: 83–93.

686. Hackbarth R, Bunchman TE, Chua AN, et al. The effect of vascular access
location and size on circuit
in pediatric continuous renal
survival
replacement therapy: a report from the PPCRRT registry. Int J Artif Organs
2007; 30: 1116–1121.

687. Bunchman TE, Brophy PD, Goldstein SL. Technical considerations for renal
replacement therapy in children. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28: 488–492.
688. McDonald SP, Craig JC. Long-term survival of children with end-stage

renal disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 2654–2662.

689. Chadha V, Warady BA, Blowey DL, et al. Tenckhoff catheters prove superior
to cook catheters in pediatric acute peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis
2000; 35: 1111–1116.

690. Auron A, Warady BA, Simon S, et al. Use of the multipurpose drainage
catheter for the provision of acute peritoneal dialysis in infants and
children. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49: 650–655.

691. Modi GK, Pereira BJ, Jaber BL. Hemodialysis in acute renal failure: does the

membrane matter? Semin Dial 2001; 14: 318–321.

692. Canivet E, Lavaud S, Wong T, et al. Cuprophane but not synthetic
membrane induces increases in serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha levels
during hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis 1994; 23: 41–46.

693. Marchant A, Tielemans C, Husson C, et al. Cuprophane haemodialysis
induces upregulation of LPS receptor (CD14) on monocytes: role of
complement activation. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11: 657–662.
694. Patarca R, Perez G, Gonzalez A, et al. Comprehensive evaluation of
acute immunological changes induced by cuprophane and polysulfone
membranes in a patient on chronic hemodialysis. Am J Nephrol 1992; 12:
274–278.

695. Puentes F, Pons H, Rodriguez-Iturbe B. Hemodialysis with cuprophane
membranes is associated with a reduction in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells expressing VLA-4 cell adhesion molecule. Clin Nephrol 1994; 42:
278–279.

696. Schaefer RM, Huber L, Gilge U, et al. Clinical evaluation of a new high-ﬂux

cellulose acetate membrane. Int J Artif Organs 1989; 12: 85–90.

697. Walker RJ, Sutherland WH, De Jong SA. Effect of changing from a cellulose
acetate to a polysulphone dialysis membrane on protein oxidation and
inﬂammation markers. Clin Nephrol 2004; 61: 198–206.
Itoh S, Susuki C, Tsuji T. Platelet activation through interaction with
hemodialysis membranes induces neutrophils to produce reactive oxygen
species. J Biomed Mater Res A 2006; 77: 294–303.

698.

699. Hakim RM, Schafer AI. Hemodialysis-associated platelet activation and

thrombocytopenia. Am J Med 1985; 78: 575–580.

700. Sirolli V, Strizzi L, Di Stante S, et al. Platelet activation and platelet-
erythrocyte aggregates in end-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis.
Thromb Haemost 2001; 86: 834–839.

701. Takeshita K, Susuki C, Itoh S, et al. Preventive effect of alpha-tocopherol
and glycyrrhizin against platelet-neutrophil complex formation induced by
hemodialysis membranes. Int J Artif Organs 2009; 32: 282–290.

702. Alonso A, Lau J, Jaber BL. Biocompatible hemodialysis membranes for

acute renal failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008: CD005283.

703. Brophy PD, Mottes TA, Kudelka TL, et al. AN-69 membrane reactions are
pH-dependent and preventable. Am J Kidney Dis 2001; 38: 173–178.
704. Hackbarth RM, Eding D, Gianoli Smith C, et al. Zero balance ultraﬁltration
(Z-BUF) in blood-primed CRRT circuits achieves electrolyte and acid-base
homeostasis prior
to patient connection. Pediatr Nephrol 2005; 20:
1328–1333.

705. Pasko DA, Mottes TA, Mueller BA. Pre dialysis of blood prime in
continuous hemodialysis normalizes pH and electrolytes. Pediatr Nephrol
2003; 18: 1177–1183.

706. Perez-Garcia R, Galan A, Garcia Vinuesa M, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions
during hemodialysis on AN69 membranes: role of ACE inhibitors and
back-ﬁltration. Nephron 1992; 61: 123.

r e f e r e n c e s

707. Petrie JJ, Campbell Y, Hawley CM, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions in patients
receiving ACE

on hemodiaﬁltration with AN69 membranes whilst
inhibitors. Clin Nephrol 1991; 36: 264–265.

708. Tielemans C, Madhoun P, Lenaers M, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions during
hemodialysis on AN69 membranes in patients receiving ACE inhibitors.
Kidney Int 1990; 38: 982–984.

709. Desormeaux A, Moreau ME, Lepage Y, et al. The effect of electronegativity
and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on the kinin-forming capacity
of polyacrylonitrile dialysis membranes. Biomaterials 2008; 29: 1139–1146.

710. RENAL Study Investigators. Renal replacement therapy for acute kidney
injury in Australian and New Zealand intensive care units: a practice survey.
Crit Care Resusc 2008; 10: 225–230.

711. Gatward JJ, Gibbon GJ, Wrathall G, et al. Renal replacement therapy for
acute renal failure: a survey of practice in adult intensive care units in the
United Kingdom. Anaesthesia 2008; 63: 959–966.

712. Langford S, Slivar S, Tucker SM, et al. Exploring CRRT practices in ICU:

a survey of Canadian hospitals. Dynamics 2008; 19: 18–23.

713. Rabindranath K, Adams

Intermittent versus
continuous renal replacement therapy for acute renal failure in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007: CD003773.

J, Macleod AM, et al.

714. Bagshaw SM, Berthiaume LR, Delaney A, et al. Continuous versus
intermittent renal replacement therapy for critically ill patients with acute
kidney injury: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2008; 36: 610–617.

715. Pannu N, Klarenbach S, Wiebe N, et al. Renal replacement therapy in patients
with acute renal failure: a systematic review. JAMA 2008; 299: 793–805.
716. Lins RL, Elseviers MM, Van der Niepen P, et al. Intermittent versus
continuous renal replacement therapy for acute kidney injury patients
admitted to the intensive care unit: results of a randomized clinical trial.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24: 512–518.

717. Farese S, Jakob SM, Kalicki R, et al. Treatment of acute renal failure in the
intensive care unit: lower costs by intermittent dialysis than continuous
venovenous hemodiaﬁltration. Artif Organs 2009; 33: 634–640.

718. Klarenbach S, Manns B, Pannu N, et al. Economic evaluation of continuous
renal replacement therapy in acute renal failure. Int J Technol Assess Health
Care 2009; 25: 331–338.

719. Srisawat N, Lawsin L, Uchino S, et al. Cost of acute renal replacement therapy
in the intensive care unit: results from The Beginning and Ending Supportive
Therapy for the Kidney (BEST Kidney) study. Crit Care 2010; 14: R46.
720. Bell M, Granath F, Schon S, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy is
associated with less chronic renal failure than intermittent haemodialysis
after acute renal failure. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33: 773–780.
Jacka MJ, Ivancinova X, Gibney RT. Continuous renal replacement therapy
improves renal recovery from acute renal failure. Can J Anaesth 2005; 52:
327–332.

721.

722. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Kellum JA, et al. Patient and kidney survival by
dialysis modality in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Int J Artif
Organs 2007; 30: 281–292.

723. Kielstein JT, Schiffer M, Hafer C. Back to the future: extended dialysis for
treatment of acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit. J Nephrol 2010;
23: 494–501.

724. Kielstein JT, Kretschmer U, Ernst T, et al. Efﬁcacy and cardiovascular
tolerability of extended dialysis in critically ill patients: a randomized
controlled study. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 43: 342–349.

725. Baldwin I, Bellomo R, Naka T, et al. A pilot randomized controlled
comparison of extended daily dialysis with ﬁltration and continuous veno-
venous hemoﬁltration: ﬂuid removal and hemodynamics. Int J Artif Organs
2007; 30: 1083–1089.

726. Baldwin I, Naka T, Koch B, et al. A pilot randomised controlled comparison
of continuous veno-venous haemoﬁltration and extended daily dialysis
with ﬁltration: effect on small solutes and acid-base balance. Intensive Care
Med 2007; 33: 830–835.

727. Marshall MR, Creamer JM, Foster M, et al. Mortality rate comparison after
switching from continuous to prolonged intermittent renal replacement for
acute kidney injury in three intensive care units from different countries.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:2169–2175.

728. Fieghen HE, Friedrich JO, Burns KE, et al. The hemodynamic tolerability
and feasibility of sustained low efﬁciency dialysis in the management of
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. BMC Nephrol 2010; 11: 32.
729. Davenport A. Continuous renal replacement therapies in patients with

acute neurological injury. Semin Dial 2009; 22: 165–168.

730. Bagshaw SM, Peets AD, Hameed M, et al. Dialysis Disequilibrium
Syndrome: brain death following hemodialysis for metabolic acidosis and
acute renal failure–a case report. BMC Nephrol 2004; 5: 9.

731. Lin CM, Lin JW, Tsai JT, et al. Intracranial pressure ﬂuctuation during
failure patients with intracranial hemorrhage.

in renal

hemodialysis
Acta Neurochir Suppl 2008; 101: 141–144.

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

137

r e f e r e n c e s

732. Ronco C, Bellomo R, Brendolan A, et al. Brain density changes during renal
replacement in critically ill patients with acute renal failure. Continuous
hemoﬁltration versus intermittent hemodialysis.
J Nephrol 1999; 12:
173–178.

733. Paganini EP, Sandy D, Moreno L, et al. The effect of sodium and
ultraﬁltration modelling on plasma volume changes and haemodynamic
stability in intensive care patients receiving haemodialysis for acute renal
failure: a prospective, stratiﬁed, randomized, cross-over study. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 1996; 11 (Suppl 8): 32–37.

734. Schortgen F, Soubrier N, Delclaux C, et al. Hemodynamic tolerance of
intermittent hemodialysis in critically ill patients: usefulness of practice
guidelines. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162: 197–202.

735. Bargman JM. New technologies in peritoneal dialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol

2007; 2: 576–580.

736. Chionh CY, Soni S, Cruz DN, et al. Peritoneal dialysis for acute kidney

injury: techniques and dose. Contrib Nephrol 2009; 163: 278–284.

737. Ronco C, Amerling R. Continuous ﬂow peritoneal dialysis: current state-of-
the-art and obstacles to further development. Contrib Nephrol 2006; 150:
310–320.

738. Phu NH, Hien TT, Mai NT, et al. Hemoﬁltration and peritoneal dialysis in
infection-associated acute renal failure in Vietnam. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:
895–902.

739. Gabriel DP, Caramori JT, Martim LC, et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis
vs daily hemodialysis: a randomized, controlled trial in patients with acute
kidney injury. Kidney Int Suppl 2008: S87–93.

740. Vachvanichsanong P, Dissaneewate P, Lim A, et al. Childhood acute renal
failure: 22-year experience in a university hospital in southern Thailand.
Pediatrics 2006; 118: e786–791.

741. Bailey D, Phan V, Litalien C, et al. Risk factors of acute renal failure in
critically ill children: A prospective descriptive epidemiological study.
Pediatr Crit Care Med 2007; 8: 29–35.

742. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Kershaw DB, et al. Continuous venovenous
hemodiaﬁltration in infants and children. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 25:
17–21.

743. Sadowski RH, Harmon WE, Jabs K. Acute hemodialysis of infants weighing

less than ﬁve kilograms. Kidney Int 1994; 45: 903–906.

744. Symons JM, Brophy PD, Gregory MJ, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy in children up to 10 kg. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 41: 984–989.
745. Warady BA, Bunchman T. Dialysis therapy for children with acute renal

failure: survey results. Pediatr Nephrol 2000; 15: 11–13.

746. Bunchman TE, McBryde KD, Mottes TE, et al. Pediatric acute renal failure:

758. Marshall MR, Ma T, Galler D, et al. Sustained low-efﬁciency daily
diaﬁltration (SLEDD-f) for critically ill patients requiring renal replacement
therapy: towards an adequate therapy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:
877–884.

759. Ronco C. Backﬁltration in clinical dialysis: nature of the phenomenon,

mechanisms and possible solutions. Int J Artif Organs 1990; 13: 11–21.

760. Kanagasundaram NS, Larive AB, Paganini EP. A preliminary survey of
bacterial contamination of the dialysate circuit in continuous veno-venous
hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 2003; 59: 47–55.

761. Moore I, Bhat R, Hoenich NA, et al. A microbiological survey of
bicarbonate-based replacement circuits in continuous veno-venous hemo-
ﬁltration. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 496–500.

762. Ward RA. Worldwide guidelines for the preparation and quality manage-
ment of dialysis ﬂuid and their implementation. Blood Purif 2009;
27 (Suppl 1): 2–4.

763. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Water for
Hemodialysis and Related Therapies. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 13959:2009. AAMI:
Arlington, VA, 2010.

764. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Concentrates
for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 13958:2009.
AAMI: Arlington, VA, 2011.

765. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Quality of
Dialysis Fluid for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies. ANSI/AAMI/ISO
11663:2009. AAMI: Arlington, VA, 2010.

765a. European best practice guidelines for haemodialysis (Part 1). Section IV:
Dialysis ﬂuid purity. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002; 17 (Suppl): 45–62.
766. Kolff WJ. First clinical experience with the artiﬁcial kidney. Ann Intern Med

1965; 62: 608–619.

767. Davenport A, Bouman C, Kirpalani A, et al. Delivery of renal replacement
therapy in acute kidney injury: what are the key issues? Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2008; 3: 869–875.

768. Faulhaber-Walter R, Hafer C, Jahr N, et al. The Hannover Dialysis Outcome
study: comparison of standard versus intensiﬁed extended dialysis for
treatment of patients with acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24: 2179–2186.

769. Ronco C, Bellomo R, Homel P, et al. Effects of different doses in continuous
failure:

veno-venous haemoﬁltration on outcomes of
a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 2000; 356: 26–30.

acute

renal

770. Saudan P, Niederberger M, De Seigneux S, et al. Adding a dialysis dose
to continuous hemoﬁltration increases survival in patients with acute renal
failure. Kidney Int 2006; 70: 1312–1317.

outcome by modality and disease. Pediatr Nephrol 2001; 16: 1067–1071.

771. Schifﬂ H, Lang SM, Fischer R. Daily hemodialysis and the outcome of acute

747. Flores FX, Brophy PD, Symons JM, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT) after stem cell
from the
prospective pediatric CRRT Registry Group. Pediatr Nephrol 2008; 23:
625–630.

transplantation. A report

748. Noris M, Todeschini M, Casiraghi F, et al. Effect of acetate, bicarbonate
dialysis, and acetate-free bioﬁltration on nitric oxide synthesis: implications
for dialysis hypotension. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32: 115–124.

749. Levraut J, Ichai C, Petit I, et al. Low exogenous lactate clearance as an early
predictor of mortality in normolactatemic critically ill septic patients.
Crit Care Med 2003; 31: 705–710.

750. Veech RL. The untoward effects of the anions of dialysis ﬂuids. Kidney Int

1988; 34: 587–597.

751. Barenbrock M, Hausberg M, Matzkies F, et al. Effects of bicarbonate- and
lactate-buffered replacement ﬂuids on cardiovascular outcome in CVVH
patients. Kidney Int 2000; 58: 1751–1757.

752. McLean AG, Davenport A, Cox D, et al. Effects of lactate-buffered and
lactate-free dialysate in CAVHD patients with and without liver dysfunc-
tion. Kidney Int 2000; 58: 1765–1772.

753. Thomas AN, Guy JM, Kishen R, et al. Comparison of

lactate and
bicarbonate buffered haemoﬁltration ﬂuids: use in critically ill patients.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997; 12: 1212–1217.

754. Tan HK, Uchino S, Bellomo R. The acid-base effects of continuous
hemoﬁltration with lactate or bicarbonate buffered replacement ﬂuids.
Int J Artif Organs 2003; 26: 477–483.

755. Zimmerman D, Cotman P, Ting R, et al. Continuous veno-venous
haemodialysis with a novel bicarbonate dialysis solution: prospective
cross-over comparison with a lactate buffered solution. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 1999; 14: 2387–2391.

756. Holloway P, Benham S, St John A. The value of blood lactate measurements
in ICU: an evaluation of the role in the management of patients on
haemoﬁltration. Clin Chim Acta 2001; 307: 9–13.

757. Ledebo I. On-line preparation of solutions for dialysis: practical aspects
versus safety and regulations. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002; 13 (Suppl 1): S78–83.

renal failure. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 305–310.

772. Tolwani AJ, Campbell RC, Stofan BS, et al. Standard versus high-dose
CVVHDF for ICU-related acute renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19:
1233–1238.

773. Paganini EP, Tapolyai M, Goormastic M, et al. Establishing a dialysis
therapy/patient outcome link in intensive care unit acute dialysis for
patients with acute renal failure. Am J Kidney Dis 1996; 28 (Suppl 3):
S81–S89.

774. Ricci Z, Ronco C, D’Amico G, et al. Practice patterns in the management of
acute renal failure in the critically ill patient: an international survey.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21: 690–696.
Ikizler TA, Sezer MT, Flakoll PJ, et al. Urea space and total body water
measurements by stable isotopes in patients with acute renal
failure.
Kidney Int 2004; 65: 725–732.

775.

776. Evanson JA, Ikizler TA, Wingard R, et al. Measurement of the delivery of

dialysis in acute renal failure. Kidney Int 1999; 55: 1501–1508.

777. Evanson JA, Himmelfarb J, Wingard R, et al. Prescribed versus delivered
dialysis in acute renal failure patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32: 731–738.
778. Schifﬂ H. Disease severity adversely affects delivery of dialysis in acute renal

failure. Nephron Clin Pract 2007; 107: c163–169.

779. Gotch FA, Sargent JA. A mechanistic analysis of the National Cooperative

Dialysis Study (NCDS). Kidney Int 1985; 28: 526–534.

780. Held PJ, Port FK, Wolfe RA, et al. The dose of hemodialysis and patient

mortality. Kidney Int 1996; 50: 550–556.

781. Eknoyan G, Beck GJ, Cheung AK, et al. Effect of dialysis dose and
membrane ﬂux in maintenance hemodialysis. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:
2010–2019.

782. Venkataraman R, Kellum JA, Palevsky P. Dosing patterns for continuous
renal replacement therapy at a large academic medical center in the United
States. J Crit Care 2002; 17: 246–250.

783. Boussekey N, Chiche A, Faure K, et al. A pilot randomized study comparing
high and low volume hemoﬁltration on vasopressor use in septic shock.
Intensive Care Med 2008; 34: 1646–1653.

138

Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138

