CHAPTER	45

The	Autonomic	Nervous	System

The	 autonomic	 nervous	 system	 (ANS)	 is	 the	 system	 that	 controls	 nonstriated
muscles	 and	 glands.	 There	 are	 three	 divisions	 of	 the	 ANS:	 sympathetic
(thoracolumbar),	 parasympathetic	 (craniosacral),	 and	 enteric.	 The	 sympathetic
and	parasympathetic	divisions	are	characterized	by	a	two-neuron	chain	with	two
anatomic	 elements:	 a	 preganglionic	 (first-order)	 neuron	 within	 the	 central
nervous	 system	 (CNS)	 that	 terminates	 in	 a	 ganglion	 outside	 the	 CNS	 and	 a
postganglionic	(second-order)	neuron	that	carries	impulses	to	a	destination	in	the
viscera.	 An	 overview	 of	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the	 sympathetic	 and	 parasympathetic
division	 is	 shown	 in	 Figure	45.1.	 The	 enteric	 nervous	 system	 is	 located	 in	 the
walls	 of	 the	 gastrointestinal	 tract.	 In	 addition,	 dorsal	 root	 ganglion	 neurons
in	 both	 sympathetic	 and
convey	 afferent	 visceral	
parasympathetic	 fibers.	 There	 are	 also	 autonomic	 neurons	 within	 the	 CNS	 at
various	levels	from	the	cerebral	cortex	to	the	spinal	cord.	Autonomic	functions
are	beyond	voluntary	control	and	for	the	most	part	beneath	consciousness.

that	 arise	

impulses	

THE	PERIPHERAL	AUTONOMIC	NERVOUS
SYSTEM

The	parasympathetic	division	is	composed	of	the	general	visceral	efferent	fibers
of	cranial	nerves	III,	VII,	IX,	X,	and	bulbar	portion	of	XI	(the	cranial	outflow),
together	with	fibers	arising	in	the	S2-S4	segments	of	the	spinal	cord	(the	sacral
outflow).	 The	 parts	 of	 the	 parasympathetic	 division	 are	 widely	 separated,	 but
because	 of	 anatomic	 characteristics,	 similarity	
in	 function,	 and	 similar
pharmacologic	responses,	they	are	classified	as	parts	of	one	system	rather	than
as	separate	divisions.	The	parasympathetic	nerves	have	long	preganglionic	fibers
that	 end	 in	 peripheral	 ganglia	 near	 or	 in	 the	 viscera	 they	 supply,	 and	 short

postganglionic	 fibers	that	arise	in	proximity	to	 or	within	 the	 viscus	innervated.
One	preganglionic	fiber	usually	synapses	with	only	one	postganglionic	neuron.

The	 anatomy	 of	 the	 cranial	 portion	 of	 the	 parasympathetic	 division	 is
discussed	with	the	individual	cranial	nerves.	In	brief,	it	consists	of	the	Edinger-
Westphal	 nucleus,	 the	 superior	 and	 inferior	 salivatory	 nuclei,	 the	 dorsal	 motor
nucleus	of	the	vagus,	and	neurons	in	the	vicinity	of	the	nucleus	ambiguus.	The
sacral	 parasympathetic	 fibers	 arise	 from	 cells	 in	 the	 intermediolateral	 cell
column	 at	 the	 S2-S4	 levels	 of	 the	 sacral	 spinal	 cord,	 travel	 through	 the	 sacral
nerves,	 and	 are	 collected	 into	 the	 pelvic	 splanchnic	 nerves	 (nervi	 erigentes),
which	 proceed	 to	 the	 pelvic	 plexuses	 and	 their	 branches.	 Some	 postganglionic
fibers	 may	 travel	 from	 these	 plexuses	 to	 the	 pelvic	 viscera,	 but	 most
preganglionic	fibers	continue	to	small	ganglia	in	or	near	the	viscera,	from	where
postganglionic	 fibers	 supply	 the	 bladder,	 descending	 colon,	 rectum,	 anus,	 and
genitalia.	 The	 greatest	 parasympathetic	 outflow	 is	 via	 the	 vagus	 nerves.
Peripheral	parasympathetic	ganglia	include	the	ciliary,	otic,	submandibular,	and
sphenopalatine	(Figure	45.2).

The	sympathetic	division	is	composed	of	preganglionic	fibers	that	arise	from
cells	 in	 the	 intermediolateral	 columns	 from	 the	 T1	 to	 the	 L3	 segments	 of	 the
spinal	 cord.	 The	 fibers	 exit	 through	 the	 ventral	 roots	 of	 the	 corresponding
segmental	 nerves	 (Figure	 24.3).	 These	 fibers	 terminate	 in	 the	 paravertebral
ganglionic	chain,	prevertebral	plexuses,	and	collateral	ganglia,	or	occasionally	in
terminal	 ganglia	 (Figure	 45.3).	 Postganglionic	 fibers	 go	 to	 the	 viscera.	 The
sympathetic	 preganglionic	 fibers	 are	 typically	 short	 and	 terminate	 on	 ganglia
some	distance	from	the	viscera	they	supply,	with	long	postganglionic	fibers	that
travel	from	the	ganglia	to	the	viscera.	One	preganglionic	fiber	may	synapse	with
many	postganglionic	neurons.

the	 autonomic	 nervous	 system.	 The
FIGURE	 45.1	 General	 arrangement	 of	
sympathetic	 components	 are	 shown	 in	 red	 and	 the	 parasympathetic	 component	 in
blue.	 (Reprinted	 with	 permission	 from	 Snell	 R.	 Clinical	 Neuroanatomy.	 7th	 ed.
Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009.)

The	 sympathetic	 ganglia	 are	 arranged	 into	 two	 plexuses:	 paravertebral	 and

prevertebral.	 The	 paravertebral	 ganglia	 lie	 alongside	 the	 vertebral	 column;	 the
prevertebral	ganglia	lie	anterior	to	the	vertebral	column.	The	prevertebral	ganglia
innervate	the	viscera	of	the	abdomen	and	pelvis.	The	paravertebral	sympathetic
chain	consists	of	two	elongated	plexuses,	each	composed	of	a	series	of	ganglia
that	are	segmentally	arranged	and	bound	together	by	ascending	and	descending
nerve	fibers.	The	sympathetic	trunks	have	from	22	to	24	ganglia	and	extend	from
the	level	of	C2	to	the	coccyx.	There	are	3	cervical,	10	to	12	thoracic,	4	lumbar,
and	4	to	5	sacral	ganglia.	The	chains	usually	join	at	the	level	of	the	coccyx	in	an
unpaired	 coccygeal	 ganglion	 (ganglion	 impar).	 Preganglionic	 fibers	 leave	 the
spinal	cord	through	the	anterior	root	and	mixed	spinal	nerve	to	reach	the	anterior
primary	 ramus	 and	 then	 exit	 as	 finely	 myelinated	 fibers	 (white	 rami
communicantes)	 to	 enter	 the	 ganglionic	 chain.	 They	 may	 synapse	 immediately
or	 ascend	 or	 descend	 before	 synapsing.	 The	 postganglionic	 fibers	 return	 to	 the
anterior	primary	ramus	as	unmyelinated	fibers	(gray	rami	communicantes).	The
T1-T3	segments	innervate	the	head	and	neck,	the	T3-T11	segments	innervate	the
upper	 extremities	 and	 viscera	 in	 the	 thorax	 and	 abdomen,	 and	 the	 T12-L2
segments	innervate	the	lower	extremities	and	pelvic	viscera.

FIGURE	 45.2	 The	 parasympathetic	 division.	 Preganglionic	 neurons	 are	 red,	 and
postganglionic	neurons	are	blue.	(Reprinted	with	permission	from	Kiernan	JA.	Barr’s
The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical	Viewpoint.	9th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters
Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009.)

FIGURE	 45.3	 The	 sympathetic	 outflow,	 showing	 connections	 with	 the	 paravertebral
ganglionic	chain,	splanchnic	nerves,	and	collateral	ganglia.

The	cervical	portion	of	the	sympathetic	chain	consists	of	the	superior,	middle,
and	inferior	cervical	ganglia.	These	innervate	structures	 within	the	head,	upper
extremities,	and	thorax.	The	superior	cervical	ganglion,	the	largest,	lies	opposite
the	 C2-C3	 vertebrae	 and	 behind	 the	 internal	 carotid	 artery.	 It	 is	 primarily

supplied	by	the	first	two	thoracic	segments.	The	internal	carotid	nerve,	a	direct
continuation	 of	 the	 superior	 cervical	 ganglion,	 gives	 rise	 to	 postganglionic
filaments	that	supply	the	internal	carotid,	and	terminates	as	the	internal	carotid
and	 cavernous	 plexuses.	 Anterior	 branches	 from	 the	 ganglion	 form	 plexuses
around	 the	 middle	 meningeal	 and	 external	 carotid	 and	 maxillary	 arteries.	 The
sympathetic	 innervation	 of	 the	 ciliary	 ganglia	 travels	 through	 the	 long	 ciliary
nerves	 from	 the	 cavernous	 plexus.	 The	 sphenopalatine	 ganglion	 is	 supplied	 by
the	internal	carotid	plexus	through	the	deep	petrosal	and	vidian	nerves.	The	otic
ganglion	receives	its	sympathetic	innervation	from	the	plexus	around	the	middle
meningeal	 artery,	 and	 the	 submaxillary	 ganglion	 from	 that	 around	 the	 external
maxillary	artery.	There	are	other	connections	from	the	superior	cervical	ganglion
to	other	cranial	nerves	and	the	upper	four	cervical	nerves,	the	pharyngeal	plexus,
the	carotid	sinus	and	body,	the	heart,	and	the	superior	cardiac	nerves.	The	middle
cervical	ganglion	communicates	with	the	fifth	and	sixth	cervical	nerves	to	begin
the	 middle	 cardiac	 nerve	 and	 sends	 other	 branches	 to	 the	 thyroid	 gland.	 The
inferior	 cervical	 ganglion	 communicates	 with	 the	 seventh	 and	 eighth	 cervical
nerves	to	form	the	inferior	cardiac	nerve	and	nerves	to	the	blood	vessels.
long	 unmyelinated	 axons	

to	 all
sympathetically	 innervated	 tissues	 and	 organs	 except	 those	 in	 the	 abdomen,
pelvis,	 and	 perineum.	 The	 superior	 cervical	 ganglion	 (T1-T2)	 provides
pupillodilator	 and	 sudomotor	 fibers	 to	 the	 face.	 The	 stellate	 ganglion	 (T2-T6)
innervates	 the	 upper	 limb	 through	 branches	 of	 the	 brachial	 plexus,	 and	 the
lumbar	sympathetic	ganglia	(T9-L1)	innervate	the	lower	limb	through	branches
of	 the	 lumbosacral	 plexus.	 The	 postganglionic	 sympathetic	 fibers	 join	 the
peripheral	 somatic	 nerves	 via	 the	 gray	 rami	 communicantes,	 and	 thus	 their
distribution	is	similar	to	that	of	the	corresponding	somatic	nerve.

The	 paravertebral	 ganglia	 provide	

to	 form	

The	 thoracic	 portion	 of	 the	 sympathetic	 trunk	 rests	 against	 the	 heads	 of	 the
ribs.	Occasionally	the	first	thoracic	ganglion	is	blended	with	the	inferior	cervical
ganglion	
the	 stellate	 ganglion.	 The	 stellate	 ganglion	 receives
preganglionic	 fibers	 from	 the	 T2-T6	 levels,	 and	 its	 postganglionic	 fibers	 are
distributed	 with	 the	 nerves	 of	 the	 brachial	 plexus	 to	 provide	 autonomic
innervation	 to	 the	 upper	 extremity.	 The	 sympathetic	 fibers	 traveling	 in	 somatic
nerves	 innervate	 vasomotor,	 sudomotor,	 and	 pilomotor	 structures	 in	 the
distribution	of	the	nerve	in	which	they	are	carried.

The	 upper	 five	 ganglia	 provide	 branches	 to	 the	 cardiac	 and	 pulmonary
plexuses.	The	abdominal	portion	of	the	sympathetic	trunk	is	situated	in	front	of
the	vertebral	column	along	the	medial	margin	of	the	psoas	major	muscle,	and	the

pelvic	 portion	 is	 in	 front	 of	 the	 sacrum.	 All	 of	 these	 ganglia	 send	 gray	 rami
communicantes	 to	 the	 corresponding	 spinal	 nerves	 and	 many	 branches	 to	 the
various	 plexuses	 and	 collateral	 ganglia.	 The	 postganglionic	 fibers	 terminate	 on
blood	vessels,	sweat	glands,	and	other	smooth	muscle	and	glandular	structures.

Branches	 of	 the	 lower	 seven	 thoracic	 ganglia	 unite	 to	 form	 the	 three
splanchnic	nerves	that	penetrate	the	diaphragm	and	supply	the	abdomen	and	the
pelvic	 viscera.	 These	 branches	 are	 white	 in	 color	 and	 primarily	 carry
preganglionic	 fibers	 that	 pass	 through	 the	 ganglia	 without	 synapsing	 and
terminate	 in	 the	 prevertebral	 plexuses	 or	 the	 collateral	 ganglia.	 The	 greater
splanchnic	 nerve	 is	 formed	 by	 branches	 of	 the	 5th	 through	 the	 9th	 or	 10th
thoracic	ganglia;	it	terminates	in	the	celiac	ganglion.	The	lesser	splanchnic	nerve
is	formed	by	branches	of	the	9th,	10th,	and	sometimes	the	11th	thoracic	ganglia;
it	ends	in	the	aorticorenal	ganglion.	The	lower	splanchnic	nerve	arises	from	the
last	thoracic	ganglion;	it	ends	in	the	renal	plexus.

Within	the	thoracic,	abdominal,	and	pelvic	cavities	are	aggregations	of	nerves
and	 ganglia	 known	 as	 the	 prevertebral	 plexuses	 and	 their	 collateral	 ganglia.
These	 are	 composed	 of	 both	 parasympathetic	 and	 sympathetic	 fibers.	 The
parasympathetic	fibers	are	preganglionic	and	may	synapse	in	the	plexuses	or	go
through	 without	 synapse	 to	 terminal	 ganglia.	 The	 sympathetic	 fibers,	 mainly
from	 the	 splanchnic	 nerves,	 usually	 synapse	 in	 the	 plexuses.	 From	 these
plexuses,	branches	are	given	off	to	the	abdominal	and	pelvic	viscera.	The	cardiac
plexus	 is	 supplied	 by	 the	 cardiac	 branches	 of	 the	 vagus	 nerves	 and	 the	 cardiac
nerves	 arising	 from	 the	 cervical	 and	 upper	 thoracic	 sympathetic	 ganglia.	 The
cardiac	 plexus	 also	 communicates	 with	 the	 pulmonary	 and	 the	 esophageal
plexuses,	 all	 supplied	 by	 the	 vagus	 nerve	 as	 well	 as	 the	 thoracic	 sympathetic
ganglia.

The	 celiac	 plexus	 is	 the	 largest	 of	 the	 three	 sympathetic	 plexuses	 and
innervates	 all	 the	 abdominal	 viscera	 except	 for	 the	 descending	 colon.	 The
thoracic	 splanchnic	 nerves,	 carrying	 preganglionic	 fibers	 from	 the	 T5-T12
levels,	 perforate	 the	 diaphragm	 and	 form	 the	 celiac	 plexus,	 which	 lies	 in	 the
abdomen	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 upper	 part	 of	 the	 first	 lumbar	 vertebra,	 behind	 the
stomach	and	omental	bursa,	in	front	of	the	diaphragm	and	abdominal	aorta,	and
between	 the	 adrenal	 glands.	 It	 is	 composed	 of	 the	 two	 celiac	 ganglia	 that	 are
supplied	 by	 the	 greater	 splanchnic	 nerves	 and	 filaments	 from	 the	 right	 vagus
nerve,	and	the	aorticorenal	ganglia,	which	receive	the	lesser	splanchnic	nerves.
Other	 plexuses	 arise	 from	 or	 are	 connected	 with	 the	 celiac	 plexus,	 including
phrenic,	 hepatic,	 splenic,	 and	 others.	 The	 superior	 (anterior)	 gastric	 plexus	 and

the	hepatic	plexus	also	receive	branches	from	the	left	vagus	nerve.	The	renal	and
inferior	mesenteric	plexuses	and	their	 branches	are	also	supplied	by	the	 lowest
splanchnic	nerve.

The	hypogastric	plexus	is	located	in	front	of	the	last	lumbar	vertebra	and	the
promontory	of	the	sacrum,	between	the	two	common	iliac	arteries,	and	is	formed
by	 the	 union	 of	 many	 elements	 from	 the	 aortic	 plexus	 and	 the	 lumbar
sympathetic	 chain,	 together	 with	 some	 fibers	 from	 the	 inferior	 mesenteric
plexus.	 It	 is	 divided	 into	 the	 two	 pelvic	 plexuses	 formed	 by	 fibers	 from	 the
hypogastric	plexus;	preganglionic	sympathetic	fibers	from	the	second,	third,	and
fourth	 sacral	 nerves;	 and	 a	 few	 filaments	 from	 the	 sacral	 sympathetic	 ganglia.
Branches	 are	 distributed	 to	 the	 pelvic	 viscera	 and	 the	 internal	 and	 external
genitalia	 through	 the	 middle	 hemorrhoidal,	 vesical,	 prostatic,	 vaginal,	 and
uterine	plexuses.

The	 enteric	 nervous	 system	 consists	 of	 intrinsic	 and	 extrinsic	 components.
The	 intrinsic	 component	 consists	 of	 Meissner’s	 submucosal	 and	 Auerbach’s
myenteric	plexi.	The	extrinsic	component	consists	of	preganglionic	sympathetic,
from	 prevertebral	 ganglia,	 and	 parasympathetic,	 from	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus
of	 the	 vagus	 and	 the	 sacral	 parasympathetic	 centers,	 inputs	 that	 control
peristalsis	and	secretion.

Autonomic	Afferents

General	 visceral	 afferent	 fibers	 convey	 both	 conscious	 and	 unconscious
sensations	 from	 the	 viscera	 and	 are	 involved	 in	 autonomic	 reflexes.	 Small
myelinated	 and	 unmyelinated	 fibers	 carry	 impulses	 from	 visceral	 receptors	 to
cell	 bodies	 in	 the	 dorsal	 root	 and	 cranial	 nerve	 ganglia.	 The	 visceral	 afferents
that	 enter	 the	 spinal	 cord	 synapse	 on	 neurons	 in	 the	 dorsal	 horn	 and
intermediolateral	 gray	 column.	 Centrally,	 sensation	 from	 the	 viscera	 travels
mainly	in	the	spinothalamic	and	spinoreticular	tracts,	but	some	visceral	afferents
—especially	 those	 related	 to	 bowel	 and	 bladder	 control—are	 carried	 in	 the
posterior	 columns.	 After	 a	 synapse	 in	 the	 thalamus,	 visceral	 sensory	 fibers
project	 to	 areas	 of	 the	 cortex	 involved	 in	 autonomic	 function.	 Afferent
autonomic	fibers	in	the	vagus	nerve	synapse	in	the	nodose	ganglion,	and	those	in
the	glossopharyngeal	nerve	synapse	in	the	petrosal	ganglion.	The	vagal	afferents
transmit	impulses	from	the	heart,	great	vessels,	lungs,	and	gastrointestinal	(GI)
tract;	the	glossopharyngeal	afferents	convey	information	from	the	carotid	sinus.
These	 afferents	 synapse	 in	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 solitary	 tract	 and	 are	 involved	 in

autonomic	reflexes	as	well	as	such	functions	as	coughing	and	swallowing.

Neurotransmitters

pupillary	

constriction,	

Acetylcholine	 is	 the	 neurotransmitter	 at	 sympathetic	 and	 parasympathetic
preganglionic	 neurons,	 and	 at	 postganglionic	 parasympathetic	 neurons.
Norepinephrine	 is	 the	 primary	 postganglionic	 sympathetic	 neurotransmitter,
except	 at	 sweat	 glands,	 which	 are	 cholinergic.	 There	 are	 two	 subtypes	 of
acetylcholine	 receptor:	 nicotinic	 and	 muscarinic.	 Most	 of	 the	 postganglionic
acetylcholine	 receptors	 are	 muscarinic.	 They	 mediate	 the	 cardiac	 effects	 and
cause	
secretion,
bronchoconstriction,	 and	 erection.	 They	 also	 stimulate	 GI	 tract	 motility	 and
cause	 evacuation	 of	 the	 bladder	 and	 rectum.	 There	 are	 two	 main	 subtypes	 of
adrenergic	 receptors:	 alpha	 and	 beta.	 The	 alpha-adrenergic	 receptors	 mediate
pupillary	dilatation,	 vasoconstriction,	and	ejaculation,	and	they	also	control	the
internal	sphincters	of	the	bladder	and	rectum.	Beta-adrenergic	receptors	control
the	 heart,	 cause	 vasodilation	 and	 bronchial	 dilatation,	 and	 mediate	 metabolic
effects.	 Some	 postganglionic	 sympathetic	 neurons	 also	 utilize	 adenosine
triphosphate	 and	 neuropeptide	 Y,	 and	 some	 postganglionic	 parasympathetic
endings	may	use	vasoactive	intestinal	polypeptide	or	nitric	oxide.

lacrimal	

salivary	

and	

The	Physiology	of	the	Peripheral	Autonomic
Nervous	System

The	 ANS	 governs	 the	 activities	 of	 cardiac	 and	 smooth	 muscle,	 including	 the
smooth	 muscle	 of	 the	 blood	 vessels	 and	 the	 functions	 of	 most	 glandular
structures.	 It	 regulates	 such	 important	 functions	 as	 respiration,	 circulation,
digestion,	
to	 normal
temperature	 adjustment,	 and	 metabolism—all	 vital	
existence—and	combats	forces	acting	from	within	or	without	that	would	tend	to
cause	 undesirable	 changes	 in	 the	 normal	 function	 of	 the	 body.	 By	 homeostasis
the	 constancy	 of	 the	 internal	 environment	 of	 the	 body	 and	 the	 uniformity	 and
stability	of	the	organism	are	maintained.

The	 sympathetic	 division	 supplies	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 body.	 Its	 functions	 are
catabolic	and	directed	toward	the	utilization	of	energy.	It	prepares	the	organism
for	 combat	 or	 escape	 (fight-or-flight	 response).	 It	 acts	 whenever	 rapid
adjustment	 to	 the	 environment	 is	 required.	 It	 accelerates	 the	 heart,	 dilates	 the

coronary	 vessels,	 increases	 the	 arterial	 blood	 pressure,	 empties	 the	 blood
reservoirs,	dilates	the	bronchi,	liberates	glucose,	and	inhibits	GI	activity.	It	is	an
emergency	protective	mechanism	that	is	called	into	action	under	emotional	stress
and	 causes	 the	 individual	 to	 react	 strongly	 to	 stimuli	 of	 rage	 and	 fear.	 The
parasympathetic	division	supplies	special	structures,	such	as	the	pupils,	salivary
glands,	 heart,	 lungs,	 GI	 tract,	 bladder,	 and	 portions	 of	 the	 genital	 system.	 In
certain	 parasympathetic	 functions,	 as	 in	 bladder,	 rectal,	 and	 genital	 activity,
contraction	of	striated	muscles	is	closely	integrated	with	that	of	smooth	muscle.
The	 parasympathetic	 division	 conserves	 energy.	 It	 controls	 anabolic,	 excretory,
and	 reproductive	 functions,	 and	 conserves	 and	 restores	 bodily	 resources	 and
energy.

TABLE
45.1

Effects	of	Sympathetic	and	Parasympathetic	Systems
on	Various	Effector	Organs

Organ

Pupil

Sympathetic	Effect

Parasympathetic	Effect

Pupillodilation	(alpha)

Pupilloconstriction

Accommodation

Decreased

Increased

Heart

Positive	chronotropic

Negative	chronotropic

effect	(beta)

effect

Positive	inotropic	effect

Negative	inotropic	effect

(beta)

Arteries

Vasoconstriction

Vasodilation

Veins

(alpha)

Vasodilation	(beta)

Vasoconstriction

(alpha)

Vasoconstriction	(beta)

Tracheobronchial

Bronchodilation	(beta) Bronchoconstriction

tree

	
	
	
	
	
	
Increased	bronchial	gland

secretions

Gastrointestinal

Decreased	motility

Increased	motility

tract

(beta)

Contraction	of

Relaxation	of	sphincters

sphincters	(alpha)

Bladder

Detrusor	relaxation

Detrusor	contraction

(beta)

Contraction	of

Relaxation	of	sphincter

sphincter	(alpha)

Salivary	glands

Scant,	thick,	viscid
saliva	(alpha)

Copious,	thin,	watery

saliva

Skin

Piloerection	(cutis

No	piloerection

anserina)

Sweat	glands

Increased	secretion

Decreased	secretion

(cholinergic)

Genitalia

Erection

Ejaculation

Ejaculation

Adrenal	medulla

Catecholamine	release 	

Glycogen

Glycogenolysis	(alpha

Glycogen	synthesis

and	beta)

Lipolysis	(alpha	and

beta)

The	 viscera	 receive	 a	 dual	 autonomic	 supply,	 both	 sympathetic	 and
parasympathetic.	 In	 general	 these	 two	 divisions	 are	 antagonistic	 and	 reciprocal
in	their	functions,	but	there	are	exceptions.	Table	45.1	compares	the	functions	of
the	two	divisions	in	the	innervation	of	various	effector	organs.

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
THE	CENTRAL	REGULATION	OF	AUTONOMIC
FUNCTION

The	peripheral	ANS	is	under	the	control	of	higher	centers	in	the	cerebral	cortex,
especially	 the	 amygdala,	 hypothalamus,	 basal	 forebrain,	 ventral	 striatum,
brainstem,	 and	 spinal	 cord	 that	 regulate	 and	 influence	 the	 function	 of	 its
peripheral	components.	The	centers	in	the	CNS	that	are	involved	in	autonomic
function	 are	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 central	 autonomic	 network.	 The	 neurons	 of	 the
central	 autonomic	 network	 are	 interconnected	 and	 make	 up	 a	 functional	 unit.
The	most	important	of	these	centers	is	the	hypothalamus.

The	Hypothalamus

The	 hypothalamus	 (Figure	45.4)	 is	 part	 of	 the	 ventral	 diencephalon,	 lying	 just
below	the	thalamus	and	above	the	pituitary	gland.	The	entire	area	measures	only
about	14	×	18	×	20	mm	and	weighs	only	4	g.	It	forms	most	of	the	floor	and	part
of	the	lateral	wall	of	the	third	ventricle,	extending	from	the	level	of	the	chiasm	to
the	interpeduncular	fossa.	From	a	strictly	anatomic	point	of	view	it	includes	the
optic	 chiasm,	 neurohypophysis	 (posterior	 pituitary),	
infundibulum,	 pars
supraoptica,	 tuber	 cinereum,	 and	 mammillary	 bodies,	 but	 from	 a	 physiologic
point	of	view	the	first	three	structures	are	not	included.	The	supraoptic	nucleus	is
located	just	above	the	optic	chiasm.	The	mammillary	bodies	are	a	pair	of	small
spherical	 gray	 matter	 masses	 that	 lie	 in	 the	 interpeduncular	 fossa	 rostral	 to	 the
posterior	perforated	substance	and	contain	the	mammillary	nuclei;	they	form	the
caudal	portion	of	the	hypothalamus.	Beneath	the	hypothalamus	a	hollow,	conical
process,	the	infundibulum,	or	pituitary	stalk,	projects	downward	and	forward	and
is	 attached	 to	 the	 posterior	 lobe	 of	 the	 hypophysis.	 The	 infundibulum	 contains
the	supraopticohypophyseal	and	tuberohypophyseal	tracts.	The	tuber	cinereum	is
a	prominence	that	lies	between	the	mammillary	bodies	and	the	infundibulum.

FIGURE	 45.4	 Diagrammatic	 sketch	 of	 the	 human	 hypothalamus.	 A.	 Anterior
commissure.	 B.	 Optic	 nerve.	 (1)	 Lateral	 preoptic	 area,	 permeated	 by	 the	 median
forebrain	 bundle.	 (2)	 Medial	 preoptic	 area.	 (3)	 Paraventricular	 nucleus.	 (4)	 Anterior
hypothalamic	 area.	 (5)	 Suprachiasmatic	 nucleus.	 (6)	 Supraoptic	 nucleus.	 (7)
Dorsomedial	 hypothalamic	 nucleus.	 (8)	 Ventromedial	 hypothalamic	 nucleus.	 (9)
Posterior	 hypothalamic	 area.	 (10)	 Medial	 mammillary	 nucleus.	 (11)	 Lateral
mammillary	 nucleus.	 (12)	 Premammillary	 area.	 (13)	 Supramammillary	 area.	 (14)
Interpeduncular	nucleus.	(15)	Lateral	hypothalamic	area.	(16)	 Stria	 habenularis.	 (17)
Fornix.	(18)	Habenulopeduncular	tract.

The	 boundaries	 of	 the	 hypothalamus	 are	 not	 sharply	 defined.	 Anteriorly	 it
merges	with	the	basal	olfactory	and	preoptic	areas,	and	caudally	it	is	continuous
with	 the	 central	 gray	 matter	 and	 tegmentum	 of	 the	 midbrain.	 Laterally	 it	 is
continuous	 with	 the	 subthalamic	 region;	 superiorly	 it	 is	 separated	 from	 the
thalamus	proper	by	the	hypothalamic	sulcus.	The	preoptic	area	is	the	region	just
above	and	anterior	to	the	chiasm,	extending	to	the	lamina	terminalis	and	anterior
commissure.

The	 hypothalamus	 is	 composed	 of	 numerous	 nerve	 cells,	 not	 uniformly
distributed	but	arranged	into	more	or	less	definite	regions	or	nuclear	groups.	It
can	be	divided	into	three	longitudinal	zones:	periventricular,	medial,	and	lateral,
all	 of	 which	 send	 descending	 fibers	 to	 the	 brainstem	 and	 spinal	 cord.	 The
paraventricular	 and	 supraoptic	 hypothalamic	 nuclei	 give	
the
supraopticohypophyseal	 tract	 and	 are	 important	 in	 osmotic	 balance.	 The
paraventricular	nucleus	has	subpopulations	of	neurons	that	produce	vasopressin,
oxytocin,	 corticotropin-releasing	 hormone,	 and	 other	 hormones	 involved	 in
pituitary	 function.	 Destruction	 of	 the	 paraventricular	 and	 supraoptic	 nuclei
causes	 diabetes	
in
insipidus.	 The	 paraventricular	 nucleus	
cardiovascular	 regulation.	 Afferents	 to	 the	 paraventricular	 nucleus	 come	 from
the	 medial	 prefrontal	 cortex,	 amygdalae,	 and	 insular	 and	 other	 hypothalamic
nuclei.

important	

rise	

to	

is	

The	 medial	 zone	 of	 the	 hypothalamus	 contains	 the	 medial	 preoptic	 nucleus,
which	controls	gonadotropin	release	and	is	involved	in	thermoregulation,	and	the
anterior	 nucleus,	 which	 is	 also	 involved	 in	 thermoregulation.	 The	 lateral	 zone
contains	the	lateral	preoptic	and	lateral	hypothalamic	nuclei	and	is	traversed	by
the	 medial	 forebrain	 bundle.	 Stimulation	 of	 the	 lateral	 nucleus	 causes	 eating,
whereas	ablation	causes	starvation.	The	lateral	zone	is	also	involved	in	arousal
the
and	 sleep	 mechanisms.	 The	 arcuate	 (infundibular)	 nucleus	
the
tuber	 cinereum	 and	 gives	
periventricular	
tuberohypophyseal	 tract.	 It	 contains	 releasing	 factors	 that	 control	 release	 of
hormones	from	the	anterior	pituitary.	It	also	contains	dopaminergic	neurons	that
act	to	inhibit	the	release	of	prolactin.

region	 of	

lies	
rise	

in	
to	

the	

The	 autonomic	 pathways	 that	 descend	 from	 the	 hypothalamus	 run	 primarily
in	 the	 ipsilateral	 brainstem	 tegmentum.	 In	 the	 spinal	 cord	 the	 descending
autonomic	fibers	are	in	the	anterolateral	fasciculus.	They	are	widely	distributed
but	 run	 primarily	 in	 the	 reticulospinal	 tracts.	 Some	 fibers,	 especially	 those
subserving	bladder	control,	lie	close	to	the	lateral	corticospinal	tracts.	Impulses
the
carried	
intermediolateral	column	of	the	spinal	cord.

terminate	 at	 appropriate	

these	 pathways	

through	

levels	

in	

Despite	 its	 small	 size,	 the	 hypothalamus	 has	 extensive	 and	 complex
connections,	 some	 organized	 into	 definite	 bundles	 or	 tracts,	 others	 diffuse	 and
difficult	 to	 trace	 (Figure	45.5).	 It	 is	 involved	 in	 the	 functions	 of	 the	 ANS,	 the
endocrine	 system,	 and	 the	 limbic	 system.	 The	 hypothalamus	 receives	 impulses
from	the	primary	olfactory	area,	septal	area,	and	orbitofrontal	cortex	through	the
medial	 forebrain	 bundle;	 from	 the	 amygdaloid	 nucleus	 through	 the	 stria

terminalis;	 from	 the	 hippocampal	 formation	 through	 the	 fornix;	 and	 from	 the
raphe	 nuclei,	 locus	 caeruleus,	 and	 tegmental	 nuclei	 of	 the	 brainstem.	 It	 sends
efferent	 fibers	 through	 the	 medial	 forebrain	 bundle	 to	 the	 septal	 area	 and
brainstem,	via	the	mamillothalamic	tract	to	the	anterior	nucleus	of	the	thalamus,
by	 the	 stria	 terminalis	 to	 the	 amygdala,	 and	 to	 the	 dorsomedial	 nucleus	 of	 the
thalamus.	 The	 tuberohypophyseal	 tract	 and	 hypophyseal	 portal	 system	 connect
the	hypothalamus	to	the	adenohypophysis	and	the	supraopticohypophyseal	tract
connects	it	to	the	neurohypophysis.

Other	Components	of	the	Central	Autonomic
Network

It	

include	

involved	

function.	

receives	 afferents	

important	 centers	

in	 autonomic	 control	

Other	
the
periaqueductal	 gray	 matter	 (PAG)	 in	 the	 midbrain,	 other	 brainstem	 nuclei,	 the
cerebral	 cortex,	 and	 the	 amygdala.	 The	 PAG	 is	 important	 in	 the	 micturition
reflex,	 pain	 mechanisms—including	 opiate	 responsiveness—and	 the	 fight-or-
flight	response.	Descending	pathways	from	the	PAG	modulate,	primarily	inhibit,
pain.	 The	 nucleus	 of	 the	 solitary	 tract	 (NST)	 in	 the	 medulla	 is	 involved	 in
cardiopulmonary	 and	 GI	
from	 arterial
baroreceptors	 and	 chemoreceptors,	 and	 mediates	 important	 autonomic	 reflexes.
The	medullary	cardiorespiratory	centers	consist	of	cells	in	the	reticular	formation
of	 the	 ventral	 medulla	 that	 control	 blood	 pressure	 and	 respiration	 and	 mediate
cardiorespiratory	 reflexes.	 Afferents	 from	 baroreceptors,	 chemoreceptors,	 and
cardiac	 and	 pulmonary	 receptors	 travel	 into	 the	 brainstem	 through	 the
glossopharyngeal	and	vagus	nerves	and	synapse	in	the	NST.	Projections	from	the
NST	 activate	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 and	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus	 of	 the	 vagus,
which	send	parasympathetic	fibers	to	the	heart	and	lungs.	Bilateral	lesions	of	the
NST	 cause	 acute	 neurogenic	 hypertension.	 There	 are	 also	 projections	 from	 the
NST	to	the	reticular	formation	neurons	involved	in	respiratory	rhythmogenesis,
and	to	cells	that	send	sympathetic	fibers	to	the	intermediolateral	column	of	the
spinal	 cord.	 Reticular	 formation	 interneurons,	 along	 with	 the	 NST,	 are	 also
involved	 in	 such	 functions	 as	 coughing,	 sneezing,	 and	 vomiting.	 The
reticulospinal	 pathways	 involved	 in	 cardiovascular	 and	 respiratory	 function
descend	in	the	ventral	part	of	lateral	columns	of	the	spinal	cord.

Neurons	 in	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 are	 part	 of	 the	 system	 of	 cardiac
parasympathetic	 innervation	 and	 are	 involved	 in	 the	 automatic	 control	 of

respiration.	 The	 parabrachial	 nuclear	 complex	 lies	 in	 the	 dorsolateral	 pontine
tegmentum.	 It	 includes	 the	 medial	 and	 lateral	 parabrachial	 nuclei	 and	 the
Kölliker-Fuse	 nucleus.	 The	 parabrachial	 complex	 is	 involved	 in	 the	 processing
of	visceral	information,	pain	modulation,	and	automatic	control	of	respiration.

The	primary	cortical	areas	involved	in	autonomic	function	include	the	cortex
of	the	insula,	the	medial	prefrontal	cortex,	the	cingulate	gyrus,	and	the	nucleus	of
the	amygdala.	The	medial	prefrontal	cortex	is	activated	by	stress	and	is	involved
in	autonomic	and	affective	responses.	Sensory	input	from	the	viscera	project	to
the	 insula.	 It	 connects	 with	 the	 limbic	 system	 and	 projects	 to	 the	 amygdalae.
There	are	wide	connections	with	other	cortical	regions.	It	is	an	important	area	in
cardiovascular	regulation.	Damage	to	the	insula	in	cerebrovascular	disease	may
mediate	 hypertension,	 arrhythmias,	 myocardial	 injury,	 and	 an	 increased	 risk	 of
sudden	 death.	 The	 amygdala	 communicates	 with	 the	 hypothalamus,	 PAG,	 and
the	brainstem	autonomic	nuclei.	It	is	important	in	regulating	vigilance,	memory
modulation,	emotional	learning,	and	fear	mechanisms.

FIGURE	45.5	 Direct	 and	 indirect	 neural	 connections	 of	 the	 hypothalamus	 with	 other
parts	of	the	brain	and	spinal	cord.	(Reprinted	with	permission	from	Kiernan	JA.	Barr’s
The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical	Viewpoint.	9th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters
Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009.)

EXAMINATION

The	 history	 in	 patients	 with	 autonomic	 insufficiency	 may	 reveal	 symptoms
related	to	orthostatic	hypotension,	abnormalities	 of	sweating,	 or	dysfunction	 of
the	 GI	 or	 genitourinary	 tracts.	 Symptoms	 of	 orthostasis	 include	 dizziness	 or

light-headedness,	 feelings	 of	 presyncope,	 syncope,	 palpitations,	 tremulousness,
weakness,	 confusion,	 or	 slurred	 speech,	 all	 worse	 with	 standing.	 Occasional
patients	 complain	 only	 of	 difficulty	 walking.	 The	 symptoms	 of	 orthostasis	 are
often	worse	postprandially,	after	a	hot	bath	or	ingestion	of	alcohol,	or	following
exercise.	 Sweating	 abnormalities	 may	 produce	 abnormal	 dryness	 of	 the	 skin,
sometimes	 with	 excessive	 sweating	 in	 uninvolved	 regions.	 Other	 symptoms
include	constipation,	dysphagia,	early	satiety,	anorexia,	diarrhea	(particularly	at
night),	 weight	
loss,	 erectile	 dysfunction,	 ejaculatory	 failure,	 retrograde
ejaculation,	urinary	retention,	urinary	urgency,	recurrent	urinary	tract	infections,
and	urinary	or	fecal	incontinence.

The	 general	 physical	 and	 neurologic	 examinations	 may	 reveal	 a	 variety	 of
abnormalities	in	patients	with	disorders	of	the	ANS.	Acromegaly,	dwarfism,	or
signs	of	endocrine	imbalance	or	sexual	immaturity	may	indicate	a	hypothalamic
abnormality.	Abnormal	dryness	of	the	skin	may	be	a	sign	of	sudomotor	failure
and	could	occur	in	a	localized	distribution,	as	with	a	peripheral	nerve	injury,	or
be	generalized,	as	in	diffuse	dysautonomia.	Lack	of	normal	moisture	in	the	socks
may	 indicate	 deficient	 sweating.	 A	 simple	 bedside	 test	 to	 demonstrate	 the
distribution	 of	 abnormal	 skin	 dryness	 related	 to	 loss	 of	 sweating	 is	 to	 note	 the
resistance	to	stroking	of	the	skin	with	a	finger	or	an	object	such	as	the	barrel	of	a
pen	or	a	spoon.	When	a	spoon	is	drawn	over	the	skin,	it	pulls	smoothly	over	dry
(sympathectomized)	 skin	 but	 irregularly	 and	 unevenly	 over	 moist,	 perspiring
skin.	It	is	often	possible	to	see	the	sweat	droplets	on	the	skin,	especially	on	the
papillary	 ridges	 of	 the	 fingers,	 using	 the	 +20	 ophthalmoscope	 lens.	 Other
cutaneous	signs	of	autonomic	dysregulation	include	changes	in	skin	temperature
or	 color,	 mottling,	 alopecia,	 hypertrichosis,	 thickening	 or	 fragility	 of	 the	 nails,
absent	piloerection,	decreased	hand	wrinkling	in	water,	and	skin	atrophy.	Acral
vasomotor	dysregulation	may	lead	to	pallor,	acrocyanosis,	mottling,	erythema,	or
livedo	 reticularis.	 Patients	 with	 dysautonomia	 associated	 with	 a	 regional	 pain
syndrome	 may	 have	 allodynia	 and	 hyperalgesia	 in	 addition	 to	 the	 autonomic
changes.

Assessment	of	orthostatic	changes	in	blood	pressure	(BP)	and	heart	rate	(HR)
are	 basic	 tests	 of	 cardiovascular	 autonomic	 function.	 At	 the	 bedside,	 BP	 and
pulse	 are	 taken	 with	 the	 patient	 supine	 and	 after	 standing	 for	 variable	 periods;
typically	 the	 BP	 is	 determined	 at	 1,	 3,	 and	 5	 minutes	 after	 standing.	 Tilt	 table
testing	 is	 more	 precise.	 Normally,	 systolic	 blood	 pressure	 (SBP)	 on	 standing
does	 not	 decrease	 by	 more	 than	 20	 mm	 Hg,	 and	 the	 diastolic	 blood	 pressure
(DBP)	by	not	more	than	10	mm	Hg.	There	are	more	stringent	diagnostic	criteria

that	permit	a	30-point	drop	in	SBP	or	a	15-point	drop	in	DBP	in	normals.	When
BP	measurement	is	done	with	a	standard	sphygmomanometer,	the	cuff	should	be
kept	at	heart	level	to	minimize	hydrostatic	influence	on	the	measurement.	When
routine	 measurements	 are	 unrevealing,	 orthostatic	 blood	 pressure	 declines	 can
sometimes	 be	 detected	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 perform	 5	 to	 10	 squats	 and	 then
repeating	the	measurements.

The	HR	should	not	increase	by	more	than	30	beats	per	minute	above	baseline
on	 standing.	 In	 hypovolemia,	 the	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 orthostasis,	 a	 reflex
tachycardia	 develops	 in	 response	 to	 the	 fall	 in	 standing	 blood	 pressure.	 When
autonomic	cardiovascular	reflexes	are	impaired,	the	reflex	tachycardia	may	not
occur.	 Patients	 with	 the	 postural	 tachycardia	 syndrome	 will	 develop	 a	 brisk
tachycardia	 without	 orthostatic	 hypotension	 (increased	 pulse	 rate	 more	 than	 30
beats	 per	 minute	 above	 baseline	 or	 more	 than	 120	 beats	 per	 minute).	 The
sustained	hand	grip,	mental	stress,	and	cold	pressor	tests	all	look	for	increases	in
DBP	 of	 at	 least	 15	 mm	 Hg	 or	 an	 increase	 in	 HR	 of	 greater	 than	 10	 beats	 per
minute	 in	 response	 to	 peripheral	 vasoconstriction	 induced,	 respectively,	 by
isometric	 hand	 exercise,	 mental	 arithmetic,	 or	 immersion	 of	 the	 hand	 in	 cold
water.	 The	 cold	 face	 test	 assesses	 the	 trigeminovagal	 (diving)	 reflex.	 Resting
tachycardia	may	be	a	sign	of	parasympathetic	dysfunction.

Clinical	 assessment	 of	 bladder	 function	 is	 done	 by	 looking	 for	 evidence	 of
distension	 by	 palpation	 and	 percussion,	 and	 by	 checking	 the	 anal	 wink	 and
bulbocavernosus	reflexes.	The	bulbocavernosus	and	superficial	anal	reflexes	are
somatic	 motor	 reflexes;	 the	 internal	 anal	 and	 scrotal	 reflexes	 are	 autonomic
reflexes.	The	internal	anal	sphincter	reflex	is	contraction	of	the	internal	sphincter
on	 insertion	 of	 a	 gloved	 finger	 into	 the	 anus.	 If	 the	 reflex	 is	 impaired	 there	 is
decreased	 sphincter	 tone	 and	 the	 anus	 does	 not	 close	 immediately	 after
withdrawal.	 Postvoid	 residual	 urine	 volume	 is	 determined	 by	 catheterization
after	voiding.

Tear	production	by	the	lacrimal	glands	can	be	evaluated	in	a	number	of	ways
by	 ophthalmologists.	 A	 convenient	 and	 simple	 bedside	 assessment	 can	 be
obtained	with	the	Schirmer	test,	done	by	placing	a	strip	of	sterile	filter	paper	in
the	lower	conjunctival	sac	and	measuring	the	degree	of	wetting	over	5	minutes.
Additional	eye	findings	include	excessive	dryness	with	redness	and	itching,	and
ptosis.	 Examination	 of	 the	 pupil	 is	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 14.	 When	 autonomic
failure	occurs	as	part	of	a	neurologic	illness,	there	may	be	findings	related	to	the
underlying	 condition	 such	 as	 extrapyramidal	 or	 cerebellar	 signs,	 abnormal	 eye
movements,	weakness,	sensory	loss,	or	reflex	abnormalities.

Autonomic	Function	Testing

Many	 different	 procedures	 have	 been	 developed	 to	 test	 the	 sympathetic	 and
parasympathetic	nervous	systems.	Tests	of	cardiac	vagal	tone	include	assessment
of	 heart	 rate	 variability	 to	 deep	 breathing,	 standing,	 and	 performing	 Valsalva.
The	 beat-to-beat	 changes	 in	 heart	 rate	 in	 response	 to	 autonomic	 reflexes	 occur
quickly,	often	too	quickly	for	bedside	assessment	to	be	accurate.	It	is	possible	at
the	bedside	to	determine	if	heart	rate	variability	with	respiration	or	to	Valsalva	is
present	 and	 obvious	 (probably	 normal),	 present	 but	 minimal	 (possibly
abnormal),	 or	 absent	 (abnormal).	 More	 precise	 testing	 requires	 equipment,	 and
may	include	an	indwelling	arterial	catheter	to	follow	BP	changes.

Normal	 sinus	 arrhythmia	 is	 the	 beat-to-beat	 variability	 in	 heart	 rate	 that
occurs	 with	 respiration.	 It	 is	 most	 prominent	 in	 healthy	 young	 people.	 Sinus
arrhythmia	normally	becomes	less	prominent	with	age,	and	it	may	be	markedly
impaired	or	abolished	when	vagal	innervation	of	the	heart	is	compromised.	The
heart	 rate	 response	 to	 deep	 breathing	 (HRDB)	 shows	 maximal	 variability	 at	 a
breathing	 rate	 of	 5	 to	 6	 per	 minute.	 The	 HRDB	 can	 be	 assessed	 at	 the	 bedside
simply	 by	 noting	 pulse	 variability;	 it	 can	 be	 measured	 more	 quantitatively	 by
measuring	 the	 R-R	 interval	 with	 cardiac	 monitoring.	 The	 expiratory-to-
inspiratory	 ratio	 quantitates	the	 variability	in	HRDB.	 The	 heart	rate	 response	 to
standing	 (30:15	 ratio)	 is	 another	 method	 of	 evaluating	 the	 baroreflex	 arc.	 The
most	 dramatic	 changes	 in	 HR	 normally	 occur	 in	 the	 first	 30	 seconds	 after
standing,	with	an	initial	tachycardia,	followed	by	bradycardia	about	20	seconds
later.	The	30:15	(tachycardia:bradycardia)	ratio	is	the	ratio	of	the	R-R	interval	at
beat	30/R-R	interval	at	beat	15;	normal	is	>1.04.

The	 respiratory	 variability	 in	 heart	 rate	 is	 exaggerated	 when	 a	 Valsalva
maneuver	 is	 performed.	 The	 cardiovascular	 responses	 to	 Valsalva	 are	 divided
into	four	phases.	Phases	I	and	II	occur	during	breath	holding	and	phases	III	and
IV	 after	 release.	 The	 BP	 and	 HR	 responses	 are	 mirror	 images:	 when	 BP
increases,	 HR	 reflexly	 decreases.	 Measuring	 HR	 alone	 is	 adequate	 for	 some
aspects	 of	
the	 Valsalva	 response,	 but	 a	 complete	 evaluation	 requires
measurement	 of	 BP.	 In	 phase	 I	 there	 is	 a	 brief	 rise	 in	 BP	 because	 of	 increased
intrathoracic	 pressure	 constricting	 the	 great	 vessels;	 in	 phase	 II,	 there	 is	 a
gradual	 fall	 in	 BP	 because	 of	 impaired	 venous	 return	 that	 reaches	 a	 plateau
because	 of	 peripheral	 vasoconstriction,	 with	 a	 compensatory	 tachycardia;	 in
phase	 III,	 there	 is	 a	 brief	 fall	 in	 BP	 because	 of	 removal	 of	 the	 intrathoracic
pressure	 constricting	 the	 great	 vessels.	 Phase	 IV	 occurs	 after	 the	 Valsalva	 is

released	and	the	patient	resumes	normal	breathing;	the	BP	begins	to	recover	and
slowly	rises.	About	15	to	20	seconds	after	release,	there	is	a	rebound	overshoot
of	BP	to	a	level	above	baseline,	accompanied	by	a	reflex	bradycardia	with	an	HR
below	 baseline,	 lasting	 for	 approximately	 1	 minute.	 The	 Valsalva	 ratio	 is	 the
ratio	of	the	fastest	HR	during	phase	II	to	the	slowest	HR	during	phase	IV,	or	the
longest	R-R	interval	during	phase	IV	to	the	shortest	R-R	interval	during	phase	II.
Normal	 is	 approximately	 ≥1.45,	 but	 age	 specific	 reference	 values	 are	 more
precise.	A	lack	of	rebound	overshoot	of	BP	during	phase	IV	is	an	early	indicator
of	 autonomic	 dysfunction.	 A	 lack	 of	 overshoot	 can	 also	 occur	 in	 some	 non-
neurologic	 conditions,	 such	 as	 congestive	 heart	 failure.	 The	 BP	 changes	 occur
quickly,	and	it	is	not	possible	to	follow	the	complete	cycle	at	the	bedside	with	a
BP	 cuff.	 The	 rebound	 overshoot	 in	 phase	 IV,	 however,	 can	 be	 detected	 by
inflating	 a	 cuff	 to	 just	 at	 SBP	 and	 then	 having	 the	 patient	 Valsalva.	 Without
changing	the	cuff	pressure,	the	sounds	will	disappear	during	breath	holding,	and
on	release	the	sounds	will	return	and	can	be	followed	up	to	detect	the	rebound
overshoot	in	BP.

for	 different	 durations.	

Tilt-table	 testing	 evaluates	 the	 integrity	 of	 autonomic	 reflexes.	 Autonomic
laboratories	 use	 different	 degrees	 of	 tilt,	 but	 usually	 in	 the	 range	 of	 60	 to	 80
degrees	 and	
(vasovagal,
vasodepressor)	 syncope,	 or	
is	 accompanied	 by
bradycardia,	rather	than	the	tachycardia	that	should	occur.	It	occurs	in	response
to	 emotional	 upsets	 such	 as	 fear,	 stress,	 or	 the	 sight	 of	 blood;	 occasionally	 in
relation	 to	micturition	 (micturition	 syncope)	 or	coughing	 (cough	syncope);	 and
sometimes	 without	 identifiable	 provocation.	 Tilt-table	 testing	 has	 shown	 that	 a
neurocardiogenic	mechanism	is	responsible	for	a	large	proportion	of	the	patients
with	recurrent,	unexplained	syncope.

fainting,	 hypotension	

In	 neurocardiogenic	

Tests	 for	 thermoregulatory	 and	 sudomotor	 function	 include	 the	 sympathetic
skin	response	(SSR),	QSART	(Quantitative	Sudomotor	Axon	Reflex	Test),	sweat
imprint,	 and	 thermoregulatory	 sweat	 test	 (TST).	 The	 SSR	 assesses	 peripheral
sympathetic	 function	 by	 detecting	 changes	 in	 skin	 resistance	 in	 response	 to
sudomotor	 discharges.	 The	 TST	 assesses	 both	 the	 central	 and	 peripheral
sympathetic	 components	 by	 analyzing	 the	 sweating	 response	 to	 a	 rise	 in	 body
temperature.	 The	 QSART	 assesses	 the	 postganglionic	 sudomotor	 fibers	 by
measuring	 the	 sweat	 output	 in	 response	 to	 iontophoresis	 into	 the	 skin	 of
acetylcholine.	The	sweat	imprint	test	quantitates	sweat	output	by	visualizing	the
imprints	 sweat	 droplets	 make	 on	 a	 plastic	 or	 silicone	 mold.	 A	 TST	 combined
with	a	test	of	postganglionic	function	can	localize	the	site	of	a	process	producing

anhidrosis.	 If	 the	 postganglionic	 function	 test	 is	 abnormal,	 the	 cause	 is
postganglionic.	But	if	the	postganglionic	test	is	normal	and	the	TST	is	abnormal,
the	cause	is	preganglionic.	Sudoscan	measures	electrochemical	skin	conductance
of	 the	 hands	 and	 feet	 through	 reverse	 iontophoresis.	 This	 technique	 is	 another
method	for	measuring	sudomotor	function	in	small	fiber	neuropathy.

DISORDERS	OF	THE	AUTONOMIC	NERVOUS
SYSTEM

Autonomic	disorders	can	be	divided	into	those	that	affect	the	central	autonomic
elements	 and	 are	 typically	 associated	 with	 other	 evidence	 of	 CNS	 disease	 and
those	 that	 affect	 the	 peripheral	 autonomic	 nervous	 system.	 Disorders	 may	 be
local	 or	 generalized,	 and	 primary	 or	 secondary.	 Adie’s	 pupil	 is	 an	 example	 of
localized	 and	 acute	 pandysautonomia	 an	 example	 of	 generalized	 dysfunction.
Pure	 autonomic	 failure	 is	 an	 example	 of	 primary	 and	 amyloid	 neuropathy	 an
example	of	secondary	dysautonomia.	Autonomic	dysfunction	is	usually	manifest
by	 underactivity,	 but	 hyperactivity	 occurs	 under	 some	 circumstances.
Paroxysmal	 dysautonomia	 is	 common	 in	 spinal	 cord	 injury.	 Orthostatic
hypertension	 occurs	 because	 of	 overactive	 pressor	 reflexes.	 A	 massive
trigeminal-parasympathetic	discharge	causes	the	lacrimation	and	nasal	secretion
during	attacks	of	cluster	headache.

Multiple	system	atrophy	(MSA)	is	a	degenerative	neurologic	disorder,	which
is	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 prominent	 dysautonomia	 (Chapter	 30).	 The
autonomic	failure	in	MSA	results	from	involvement	of	preganglionic	neurons	in
the	 brainstem	 and	 spinal	 cord	 in	 the	 degenerative	 process.	 Autonomic	 failure
impotence,	 constipation,	 and	 urinary
produces	 orthostatic	 hypotension,	
incontinence;	it	may	be	associated	with	respiratory	symptoms	such	as	laryngeal
stridor	and	sleep	apnea.	Autonomic	dysfunction	may	also	occur	in	patients	with
Parkinson’s	disease,	but	usually	late	in	the	illness	and	not	to	the	degree	typical	of
MSA.	 Autonomic	 disturbances	 may	
including
cardiovascular	 changes,	 flushing,	 pallor,	 sweating,	 shivering,	 piloerection,
respiratory	 abnormalities.	 Seizure-induced	 cardiovascular
vomiting,	 and	
abnormalities	 include	 sinus	 tachycardia,	 bradyarrhythmia,	 sinus	 arrest,	 and
ventricular	 tachyarrhythmias,	 including	 ventricular	 fibrillation.	 Autonomic
dysfunction	may	also	be	a	major	feature	of	dementia	with	Lewy	bodies,	MS,	and
Wernicke’s	encephalopathy.

accompany	

seizures,	

Hypothalamic	 disorders	 may	 cause	 many	 abnormalities	 of	 autonomic
function,	 including	 deficiencies	 in	 osmoregulation	 and	 thermoregulation;
abnormalities	 of	 appetite	 and	 body	 weight;	 sleep	 disturbances;	 changes	 in
carbohydrate,	fat,	and	water	metabolism;	and	respiratory	abnormalities	together
with,	 in	 many	 instances,	 behavioral	 abnormalities	 and	 personality	 changes.
lesions	 may	 cause	 either	 hyperthermia	 or	 hypothermia.
Hypothalamic	
Hyperthermia	 generally	 results	 from	 involvement	 of	 the	 tuberal	 region,
especially	 the	 supraoptic	 nuclei	 or	 the	 rostral	 portion	 of	 the	 anterior
hypothalamus.	 It	 is	 a	 common	 manifestation	 of	 third	 ventricular	 tumors,	 and
may	 occur	 after	 head	 trauma	 or	 cranial	 surgery;	 terminal	 hyperthermia	 is	 a
frequent	 manifestation	 of	 neurologic	 disease.	 Hypothermia	 tends	 to	 occur	 with
involvement	 of	 the	 posterior	 hypothalamic	 area	 and	 mammillary	 bodies.
Disorders	 of	 the	 anterior	 hypothalamus	 tend	 to	 cause	 loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to
regulate	 against	 heat	 and	 disorders	 of	 the	 posterior	 hypothalamus,	 loss	 of	 the
ability	to	regulate	against	cold.

The	hypothalamus	 is	 closely	related	 anatomically	and	physiologically	 to	the
pituitary	gland	(Figure	45.6).	Because	 the	 hypothalamus	 controls	 the	release	of
many	of	the	anterior	pituitary	hormones,	abnormalities	of	hypothalamic	function
may	 have	 a	 close	 relationship	 to	 some	 endocrine	 disorders.	 Lesions	 of	 the
supraoptic	 nuclei	 or	 the	 supraopticohypophyseal	 tract	 cause	 diabetes	 insipidus.
Diabetes	insipidus	is	a	common	manifestation	of	tumors	in	the	parasellar	region,
encephalitis,	 and	 meningitis,	 and	 it	 may	 develop	 after	 intracranial	 surgery	 or
head	injury.	Lesions	involving	the	hypothalamus	may	also	cause	disturbances	of
fat	 metabolism.	 The	 Froehlich,	 or	 adiposogenital,	 syndrome	 was	 the	 first
hypothalamic	 syndrome	 described.	 It	 is	 characterized	 by	 disturbances	 of	 fat
metabolism	and	sexual	underdevelopment.

Abnormalities	 of	 respiration	 may	 be	 caused	 by	 hypothalamic	 dysfunction.
These	include	hyperpnea,	apnea,	Cheyne-Stokes	respirations,	and	Biot	breathing.
Disturbances	of	the	sleep	cycle	may	occur	with	hypothalamic	lesions,	especially
those	 involving	 its	 posterior	 portions,	 including	 the	 mammillary	 bodies.	 There
may	 be	 hypersomnolence,	 inversion	 of	 the	 sleep	 cycle,	 or	 insomnia.	 In	 the
Kline-Levin	 syndrome	
there	 are	 periodic	 attacks	 of	 hypersomnolence,
accompanied	 by	 bulimia,	 irritability,	 behavioral	 changes,	 and	 uninhibited
sexuality.	Neurons	in	the	lateral	hypothalamus	synthesize	hypocretin,	a	chemical
involved	 in	 the	 pathogenesis	 of	 narcolepsy,	 and	 project	 to	 brainstem	 regions
involved	 in	 rapid-eye-movement	 sleep.	 Disturbances	 of	 sexual	 function	 and
sexual	 development	 occur	 with	 hypothalamic	 lesions,	 including	 precocious

puberty	and	sexual	infantilism.

FIGURE	45.6	Longitudinal	section	through	the	human	hypothalamus	and	hypophysis.

The	hypothalamus	is	involved	with	emotions.	It	is	the	center	that	coordinates
the	 neural	 and	 humoral	 mechanisms	 of	 emotional	 expression.	 Hypothalamic
lesions	 in	 animals	 may	 cause	 “sham	 rage,”	 with	 pupillary	 dilatation,	 increased
pulse	 rate	 and	 BP,	 piloerection,	 and	 other	 signs	 of	 sympathetic	 overactivity.
These	 physical	 manifestations	 suggest	 an	 intense	 emotional	 reaction	 is	 taking
place,	but	there	is	no	change	in	affect.

Brainstem	 disorders	 commonly	 cause	 autonomic	 dysfunction,	 including
paroxysmal	 hypertension,	 profound	 bradycardia,	 intractable	 vomiting,	 central
hypo-	 and	 hyperventilation,	 neurogenic	 pulmonary	 edema,	 and	 Horner’s
syndrome.	The	automatic	and	the	voluntary	breathing	pathways	are	separated	in
the	 brainstem	 and	 upper	 spinal	 cord.	 Selective	 damage	 of	 the	 pathways
subserving	automatic	breathing	may	cause	respiratory	insufficiency	during	sleep,
with	 preserved	 respiration	 during	 wakefulness	 (Ondine’s	 curse).	 The	 Cushing
reflex,	 or	 Cushing	 triad,	 is	 bradycardia,	 hypertension,	 and	 slow,	 irregular
respirations	 due	 to	 brainstem	 compromise	 and	 has	 ominous	 prognostic
implications.	Myelopathy,	particularly	spinal	cord	injury,	is	often	associated	with
severe	dysautonomia.

Peripheral	 autonomic	 failure	 results	 from	 disorders	 that	 involve	 the
autonomic	 ganglia	 or	 postganglionic	 nerve	 fibers.	 The	 syndrome	 of	 pure
autonomic	failure	is	a	slowly	progressive,	degenerative	disorder	of	the	ANS	in
which	 dysautonomia	 occurs	 in	 isolation,	 without	 other	 evidence	 of	 neurologic
disease.	Dysautonomia	occurs	commonly	in	some	peripheral	nerve	disorders.	It
may	 develop	 acutely	 in	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome,	 porphyria,	 and	 some
paraneoplastic	 neuropathies.	 Acute	 pandysautonomia	 is	 a	 condition	 probably
akin	to	Guillain-Barré	syndrome	but	in	which	dysautonomia	occurs	in	isolation.
Chronic	neuropathies	often	associated	with	major	autonomic	dysfunction	include
diabetes	 mellitus,	 alcoholism,	 amyloidosis,	 hereditary	 sensory	 autonomic
neuropathy	 type	 III	 (Riley-Day	 syndrome),	 Fabry’s	 disease,	 and	 vincristine
toxicity.	The	most	common	cause	of	autonomic	neuropathy	is	diabetes	mellitus.
Patients	 typically	 develop	 orthostatic	 hypotension,	 impotence,	 gastroparesis,
constipation	alternating	with	diarrhea,	nocturnal	diarrhea,	and	difficulty	voiding.
Autoimmune	attack	on	autonomic	ganglia	may	cause	severe	autonomic	failure.

Dysautonomia	 may	 accompany	 disorders	 of	 neuromuscular	 transmission,
particularly	 Lambert-Eaton	 syndrome	 and	 botulism,	 in	 which	 the	 defect	 is
presynaptic	and	acetylcholine	release	is	impaired	at	autonomic	synapses	as	well
as	 at	 neuromuscular	 junctions.	 Some	 autonomic	 disorders	 occur	 in	 a	 restricted
distribution	 or	 involve	 a	 particular	 organ	 system.	 Autonomic	 disorders	 of	 the
pupil	include	Argyll	Robertson	and	Adie’s	pupils,	Horner’s	syndrome,	and	third
cranial	nerve	palsy.	Dysautonomia	primarily	involving	the	vascular	system	may
cause	 Raynaud’s	 phenomenon,	 acrocyanosis,	 erythromelalgia	 (Weir	 Mitchell
syndrome),	 and	 livedo	 reticularis.	 Autonomic	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 genitalia
causing	 erectile	 dysfunction	 and	 other	 abnormalities	 is	 common,	 especially	 in
diabetes	mellitus.	Abnormalities	of	sweating	occur	frequently	and	are	sometimes

the	only	manifestation	of	the	autonomic	disturbance.	Autonomic	dysregulation	is
a	common	component	of	complex	regional	pain	syndromes	(reflex	sympathetic
dystrophy)	and	occurs	in	the	same	distribution	as	the	pain.

The	Bladder

Bladder	 function	 involves	 both	 the	 autonomic	 and	 the	 voluntary	 nervous
systems,	and	disorders	of	bladder	function	may	follow	lesions	of	the	paracentral
lobule,	 hypothalamus,	 descending	 pathways	 in	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 pre-	 or
postganglionic	parasympathetic	nerves,	or	pudendal	nerve.	The	detrusor	muscle
of	 the	 bladder	 is	 innervated	 by	 parasympathetic	 neurons	 located	 in	 the	 S2-S4
intermediolateral	 column	 (Figure	 45.7).	 Onuf’s	 nucleus	 consists	 of	 additional
motor	neurons	located	in	the	nearby	anterior	horn	at	the	same	levels.	The	axons
from	Onuf’s	nucleus	innervate	the	external	urethral	sphincter.	There	is	a	curious
preservation	 of	 the	 Onuf	 nucleus	 neurons	 in	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis.	 The
internal	urethral	sphincter	at	the	neck	of	the	bladder	receives	its	innervation	from
the	 intermediolateral	 column	 at	 the	 T12-L1	 level,	 via	 the	 sympathetic
prevertebral	plexus	and	the	hypogastric	nerve.

Micturition	 is	 a	 spinobulbospinal	 reflex.	 In	 response	 to	 stretch,	 afferent
impulses	are	carried	to	the	sacral	spinal	cord.	Sacral	cord	projections	to	the	PAG
are	 relayed	 to	 the	 pontine	 micturition	 center	 (Barrington’s	 nucleus)	 in	 the
dorsomedial	 pontine	 tegmentum,	 near	 the	 locus	 caeruleus,	 which	 sends
descending	 fibers	 to	 the	 preganglionic	 parasympathetic	 motoneurons	 in	 the
sacral	cord	innervating	the	bladder.	The	pontine	micturition	center	is	under	the
control	 of	 centers	 in	 the	 forebrain.	 Descending	 impulses	 activate	 the	 efferent
centers	 in	 the	 sacral	 cord,	 causing	 contraction	 of	 the	 detrusor	 muscle	 and
relaxation	 of	 the	 internal	 sphincter.	 In	 the	 infant,	 bladder	 function	 is	 purely
reflex,	but	with	cortical	maturation	and	the	completion	of	myelination	inhibitory
control	over	this	reflex	develops,	as	well	as	voluntary	regulation	of	the	external
sphincter.	 Normal	 micturition	 requires	 intact	 autonomic	 and	 spinal	 pathways,
and	cerebral	inhibition	and	control	of	the	external	sphincter	must	be	normal.

Forebrain	 lesions	 may	 cause	 loss	 of	 voluntary	 bladder	 control,	 but	 do	 not
affect	 the	 spinobulbospinal	 reflex	 mechanisms.	 Disruption	 of	 the	 bulbospinal
pathway	 from	 the	 pontine	 micturition	 center	 to	 the	 sacral	 cord,	 and	 lesions
affecting	the	afferent	and	efferent	connections	between	the	bladder	and	the	conus
medullaris,	may	cause	severe	disturbances	in	bladder	function.

The	term	neurogenic	bladder	refers	to	bladder	dysfunction	caused	by	disease

of	 the	 nervous	 system.	 Symptoms	 of	 bladder	 dysfunction	 are	 often	 among	 the
earliest	 manifestations	 of	 nervous	 system	 disease.	 Frequency,	 urgency,
precipitate	micturition,	massive	or	dribbling	incontinence,	difficulty	in	initiating
urination,	 urinary	 retention,	 and	 loss	 of	 bladder	 sensation	 may	 occur.	 One
practical	 classification	 of	 neurogenic	 bladder	 dysfunction	
is	 based	 on
urodynamic	 criteria	 and	 includes	 the	 following	 types:	 uninhibited,	 reflex,
autonomous,	sensory	paralytic,	and	motor	paralytic.

FIGURE	45.7	Innervation	of	the	urinary	bladder.

In	the	uninhibited	neurogenic	bladder,	there	is	a	loss	of	the	cortical	inhibition
of	 reflex	 voiding,	 although	 bladder	 tone	 remains	 normal.	 Bladder	 distention
causes	contraction	in	response	to	the	stretch	reflex.	There	is	frequency,	urgency,

and	 incontinence	 that	 are	 not	 associated	 with	 dysuria.	 Hesitancy	 may	 precede
urgency.	 Bladder	 sensation	 is	 usually	 normal.	 There	 is	 no	 residual	 urine.	 The
reflex	 neurogenic	 bladder	 occurs	 with	 severe	 myelopathy	 or	 extensive	 brain
lesions	 causing	 interruption	 of	 both	 the	 descending	 autonomic	 tracts	 to	 the
bladder	 and	 the	 ascending	 sensory	 pathways	 above	 the	 sacral	 segments	 of	 the
cord.	 The	 bladder	 capacity	 is	 small,	 and	 micturition	 is	 reflex	 and	 involuntary.
The	residual	urine	volume	is	variable.	An	autonomous	neurogenic	bladder	is	one
without	external	innervation.	It	is	caused	by	neoplastic,	traumatic,	inflammatory,
and	other	lesions	of	the	sacral	spinal	cord,	conus	medullaris	or	cauda	equina,	S2-
S4	 motor	 or	 sensory	 roots,	 or	 the	 peripheral	 nerves,	 and	 with	 congenital
anomalies	 such	 as	 spina	 bifida.	 There	 is	 destruction	 of	 the	 parasympathetic
supply.	 Sensation	 is	 absent,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 reflex	 or	 voluntary	 control	 of	 the
bladder;	 contractions	 occur	 as	 the	 result	 of	 stimulation	 of	 the	 intrinsic	 neural
plexuses	within	the	bladder	wall.	The	amount	of	residual	urine	is	large,	but	the
bladder	 capacity	 is	 not	 greatly	 increased.	 A	 sensory	 paralytic	 bladder	 is	 found
with	lesions	that	involve	the	posterior	roots	or	posterior	root	ganglia	of	the	sacral
nerves,	or	the	posterior	columns	of	the	spinal	cord.	Sensation	is	absent,	and	there
is	 no	 desire	 to	 void.	 There	 may	 be	 distention,	 dribbling,	 and	 difficulty	 both	 in
initiating	 micturition	 and	 in	 emptying	 the	 bladder.	 There	 is	 a	 large	 amount	 of
residual	urine.	A	motor	paralytic	bladder	develops	when	the	motor	nerve	supply
to	 the	 bladder	 is	 interrupted.	 The	 bladder	 distends	 and	 decompensates,	 but
sensation	is	normal.	The	residual	urine	and	bladder	capacity	vary.

Sexual	Function

Disturbed	 sexual	 function	 is	 common	 in	 dysautonomia.	 In	 the	 genital	 (sex,
ejaculatory,	 coital)	 reflex,	 arousal	 causes	 penile	 erection	 and	 sometimes
ejaculation.	 Erection	 is	 a	 parasympathetic	 function	 mediated	 through	 S2-S4;
ejaculation	 is	 a	 largely	 sympathetic	 function	 mediated	 by	 the	 lumbar	 nerves.
Autonomic	insufficiency	usually	causes	impotence,	but	pathologic	exaggeration
of	the	sexual	reflex	may	occur	as	part	of	the	mass	reflex,	a	spinal	defense	reflex
seen	 in	 severe	 myelopathy	 (see	 Chapter	 40),	 and	 may	 produce	 priapism	 and
occasionally	 ejaculation	 after	 minimal	 stimulation.	 In	 autonomic	 neuropathy,
especially	from	diabetes,	retrograde	ejaculation	may	precede	the	development	of
impotence.	 Because	 the	 internal	 vesical	 sphincter	 does	 not	 close,	 semen	 goes
into	 the	 bladder	 rather	 than	 externally	 through	 the	 urethra.	 The	 patient	 with
retrograde	ejaculation	may	notice	milky-appearing	urine.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adkisson	 WO,	 Benditt	 DG.	 Syncope	 due	 to	 autonomic	 dysfunction:	 diagnosis

and	management.	Med	Clin	North	Am	2015;99:691–710.

Alexander	 MS.	 Autonomic	 function	 and	 spinal	 cord	 injury:	 are	 we	 at	 a

crossroads?	Spinal	Cord	2008;46:402–405.

Ay	H,	Koroshetz	WJ,	Benner	T,	et	al.	Neuroanatomic	correlates	of	stroke-related

myocardial	injury.	Neurology	2006;66:1325–1329.

Baguley	 IJ.	 Autonomic	 complications	 following	 central	 nervous	 system	 injury.

Semin	Neurol	2008;28:716–725.

Baranchuk	 A,	 Nault	 MA,	 Morillo	 CA.	 The	 central	 nervous	 system	 and	 sudden

cardiac	death:	what	should	we	know?	Cardiol	J	2009;16:105–112.

Benarroch	 EE.	 The	 central	 autonomic	 network:	 functional	 organization,

dysfunction,	and	perspective.	Mayo	Clin	Proc	1993;68:988–1001.

Benarroch	EE.	Brainstem	respiratory	control:	substrates	of	respiratory	failure	of

multiple	system	atrophy.	Mov	Disord	2007;22:155–161.

Benarroch	 EE,	 Chang	 Fl.	 Central	 autonomic	 disorders.	 J	 Neurophysiol

1993;10:39–50.

Benarroch	 E,	 Freeman	 R,	 Kaufmann	 H.	 Autonomic	 nervous	 system.	 In:	 Goetz

CG,	ed.	Textbook	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:	Saunders,	2003.

Blok	 BF,	 Holstege	 G.	 Direct	 projections	 from	 the	 periaqueductal	 gray	 to	 the
pontine	micturition	center	(M-region).	An	anterograde	and	retrograde	tracing
study	in	the	cat.	Neurosci	Lett	1994;166:93–96.

Blok	BF,	Holstege	G.	The	central	nervous	system	control	of	micturition	in	cats

and	humans.	Behav	Brain	Res	1998;92:119–125.

Cheshire	 WP.	 Autonomic	 disorders	 and	 their	 management.	 In:	 Goldman	 L,
Schafer	 AI,	 eds.	 Goldman-Cecil	 Medicine.	 25th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 W.B.
Elsevier/Saunders,	2016.

Cheshire	 WP	 Jr,	 Saper	 CB.	 The	 insular	 cortex	 and	 cardiac	 response	 to	 stroke.

Neurology	2006;66:1296–1297.

Drummond	 PD.	 Mechanisms	 of	 autonomic	 disturbance	 in	 the	 face	 during	 and

between	attacks	of	cluster	headache.	Cephalalgia	2006;26:633–641.

Duchesne	M,	Richard	L,	et	al.	Assessing	sudomotor	impairment	in	patients	with
peripheral	neuropathy:	comparison	between	electrochemical	skin	conductance
and	skin	biopsy.	Clin	Neurophysiol	2018;129:1341–1348.

England	JD,	Gronseth	GS,	Franklin	G,	et	al.	Practice	parameter:	the	evaluation
of	 distal	 symmetric	 polyneuropathy:	 the	 role	 of	 autonomic	 testing,	 nerve

biopsy,	and	skin	biopsy	(an	evidence-based	review).	Report	of	the	American
Academy	 of	 Neurology,	 the	 American	 Association	 of	 Neuromuscular	 and
Electrodiagnostic	Medicine,	and	the	American	Academy	of	Physical	Medicine
and	Rehabilitation.	PM	R	2009;1:14–22.

Elmquist	JK,	Elias	CF,	Saper	CB.	From	lesions	to	leptin:	hypothalamic	control

of	food	intake	and	body	weight.	Neuron	1999;22:221–232.

Etienne	 M,	 Weimer	 LH.	 Immune-mediated	 autonomic	 neuropathies.	 Curr

Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2006;6:57–64.

Fessel	 J,	 Robertson	 D.	 Orthostatic	 hypertension:	 when	 pressor	 reflexes

overcompensate.	Nat	Clin	Pract	Nephrol	2006;2:424–431.

Freeman	R.	Autonomic	peripheral	neuropathy.	Neurol	Clin	2007;25:277–301.
Freeman	R,	Chapleau	MW.	Testing	the	autonomic	nervous	system.	Handb	Clin

Neurol	2013;115:115–136.

Freeman	 R,	 Dover	 JS.	 Autonomic	 neurodermatology	 (Part	 I):	 erythromelalgia,
reticularis.	 Semin	 Neurol

livedo	

reflex	 sympathetic	 dystrophy,	 and	
1992;12:385–393.

Freeman	R,	Schachter	SC.	Autonomic	epilepsy.	Semin	Neurol	1995;15:158–166.
Freeman	 R,	 Waldorf	 HA,	 Dover	 JS.	 Autonomic	 neurodermatology	 (Part	 II):

disorders	of	sweating	and	flushing.	Semin	Neurol	1992;12:394–407.

Goldstein	DS,	Robertson	D,	Esler	M,	et	al.	Dysautonomias:	clinical	disorders	of

the	autonomic	nervous	system.	Ann	Intern	Med	2002;137:753–763.

Haensch	 CA,	 Jorg	 J.	 Autonomic	 dysfunction	 in	 multiple	 sclerosis.	 J	 Neurol

2006;253(suppl	1):I3–I9.

Jones	PK,	Gibbons	CH.	Autonomic	function	testing:	an	important	diagnostic	test

for	patients	with	syncope.	Pract	Neurol	2015;15:346–351.

Kandel	 ER.	 Principles	 of	 Neural	 Science.	 5th	 ed.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-Hill

Medical,	2013.

Kaufmann	H.	Neurally	mediated	syncope	and	syncope	due	to	autonomic	failure:

differences	and	similarities.	J	Clin	Neurophysiol	1997;14:183–196.

Kimpinski	K,	Iodice	V,	Sandroni	P,	et	al.	Sudomotor	dysfunction	in	autoimmune

autonomic	ganglionopathy.	Neurology	2009;73:1501–1506.

Klein	CM.	Evaluation	and	management	of	autonomic	nervous	system	disorders.

Semin	Neurol	2008;28:195–204.

Klein	 CM,	 Vernino	 S,	 Lennon	 VA,	 et	 al.	 The	 spectrum	 of	 autoimmune

autonomic	neuropathies.	Ann	Neurol	2003;53:752–758.

Leone	 M,	 Bussone	 G.	 Pathophysiology	 of	 trigeminal	 autonomic	 cephalalgias.

Lancet	Neurol	2009;8:755–764.

Low	 PA,	 Opfer-Gehrking	 TL,	 Textor	 SC,	 et	 al.	 Postural	 tachycardia	 syndrome

(POTS).	Neurology	1995;45:S19–S25.

Low	 PA,	 Vernino	 S,	 Suarez	 G.	 Autonomic	 dysfunction	 in	 peripheral	 nerve

disease.	Muscle	Nerve	2003;27:646–661.

Luigetti	 M,	 Primiano	 G,	 Cuccagna	 C,	 et	 al.	 Small	 fibre	 neuropathy	 in
sudoscan.	 Clin	 Neurophysiol

mitochondrial	 diseases	 explored	 with	
2018;129:1618–1623.

Mehr	 SE,	 Barbul	 A,	 Shibao	 CA.	 Gastrointestinal	 symptoms	 in	 postural
tachycardia	syndrome:	a	systematic	review.	Clin	Auton	Res	2018;28:411–421.
Pasnoor	 M,	 Dimachkie	 MM.	 Chronic	 autonomic	 neuropathies.	 In:	 Roos	 RP,
Editor-in-Chief.	 MedLink	 Neurology.	 San	 Diego:	 MedLink	 Corporation.
www.medlink.com.	Accessed	January	7,	2016.

Perkes	 I,	 Baguley	 IJ,	 Nott	 MT,	 et	 al.	 A	 review	 of	 paroxysmal	 sympathetic

hyperactivity	after	acquired	brain	injury.	Ann	Neurol	2010;68:126–135.

Pischik	 E,	 Kauppinen	 R.	 Neurological	 manifestations	 of	 acute	 intermittent

porphyria.	Cell	Mol	Biol	(Noisy-le-grand)	2009;55:72–83.

Rajan	 S,	 Campagnolo	 M,	 Callaghan	 B,	 et	 al.	 Sudomotor	 function	 testing	 by
electrochemical	skin	conductance:	does	it	really	measure	sudomotor	function?
Clin	Auton	Res	2018.	[Epub	ahead	of	print].

Ravits	 JM.	 AAEM	 minimonograph	 #48:	 autonomic	 nervous	 system	 testing.

Muscle	Nerve	1997;20:919–937.

Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Saper	CB.	“All	fall	down”:	the	mechanism	of	orthostatic	hypotension	in	multiple

systems	atrophy	and	Parkinson’s	disease.	Ann	Neurol	1998;43:149.

Sedy	 J,	 Zicha	 J,	 Kunes	 J,	 et	 al.	 Mechanisms	 of	 neurogenic	 pulmonary	 edema

development.	Physiol	Res	2008;57:499–506.

Shields	 RW.	 Functional	 anatomy	 of	 the	 autonomic	 nervous	 system.	 J

Neurophysiol	1993;10:2–13.

Shivaprasad	 C,	 Amit	 G,	 Anish	 K,	 et	 al.	 Clinical	 correlates	 of	 sudomotor
dysfunction	 in	 patients	 with	 type	 2	 diabetes	 and	 peripheral	 neuropathy.
Diabetes	Res	Clin	Pract	2018;139:188–194.

Tabbaa	 MA,	 Leshner	 RT,	 Campbell	 WW.	 Malignant	

thymoma	 with
dysautonomia	 and	 disordered	 neuromuscular	 transmission.	 Arch	 Neurol
1986;43:955–957.

Vernino	 S.	 Antibody	 testing	 as	 a	 diagnostic	 tool	 in	 autonomic	 disorders.	 Clin

Auton	Res	2009;19:13–19.

Vernino	S,	Sandroni	P,	Singer	W,	et	al.	Invited	article:	autonomic	ganglia:	target

and	novel	therapeutic	tool.	Neurology	2008;70:1926–1932.

Vianna	 DM,	 Brandao	 ML.	 Anatomical	 connections	 of	 the	 periaqueductal	 gray:
specific	 neural	 substrates	 for	 different	 kinds	 of	 fear.	 Braz	 J	 Med	 Biol	 Res
2003;36:557–566.

Weimer	 LH.	 Autonomic	 testing:	 common	 techniques	 and	 clinical	 applications.

Neurologist	2010;16:215–222.

Zilliox	 L,	 Russell	 JW,	 Weimer	 LH.	 Acute	 autonomic	 neuropathies.	 In:	 Weimer
LH,	 Editor-in-Chief.	MedLink	 Neurology.	 San	 Diego:	 MedLink	 Corporation.
www.medlink.com.	Accessed	May	24,	2018.

Zimmerman	 M,	 Pourhamidi	 K,	 Rolandsson	 O,	 et	 al.	 Autonomic	 neuropathy-a
prospective	 cohort	 study	 of	 symptoms	 and	 E/I	 ratio	 in	 normal	 glucose
tolerance,	 impaired	 glucose	 tolerance,	 and	 type	 2	 diabetes.	 Front	 Neurol
2018;9:154.

