CHAPTER	21

Brainstem	and	Multiple	Cranial
Nerve	Syndromes

The	 brainstem	 is	 a	 compact	 structure,	 with	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN)	 nuclei,	 nerve
fascicles,	 and	 long	 ascending	 and	 descending	 tracts	 all	 closely	 juxtaposed.
Structures	 and	 centers	 in	 the	 reticular	 formation	 control	 many	 vital	 functions.
Brainstem	 diseases	 are	 serious	 and	 often	 life	 threatening.	 Involvement	 of	 the
intricate	network	of	neural	structures	often	causes	a	plethora	of	clinical	findings.
Brainstem	 syndromes	 typically	 involve	 dysfunction	 of	 one	 or	 more	 CNs.
Deficits	 due	 to	 dysfunction	 of	 individual	 nerves	 are	 covered	 in	 the	 preceding
chapters.	 This	 chapter	 discusses	 conditions	 that	 cause	 dysfunction	 beyond	 the
distribution	 of	 a	 single	 CN,	 involving	 more	 than	 one	 CN,	 or	 conditions	 that
involve	brainstem	structures	in	addition	to	the	CN	nucleus	or	fascicles.	The	first
part	covers	intramedullary	disorders	of	the	brainstem,	and	the	second	part	covers
disorders	that	involve	multiple	CNs	in	their	extramedullary	course.

Some	may	argue	it	is	sufficient	to	recognize	that	a	brainstem	disorder	exists
and	to	define	the	process	more	precisely	with	an	imaging	study.	However,	some
important	 clinical	 conditions	 may	 cause	 major	 brainstem	 dysfunction	 without
dramatically	 changing	 the	 appearance	 of	 the	 imaging	 study.	 Examples	 of
processes	easily	missed	radiographically	include	Wernicke’s	disease,	progressive
bulbar	 palsy	 (PBP),	 progressive	 supranuclear	 palsy,	 basilar	 artery	 migraine,
Whipple’s	disease,	syringobulbia,	olivopontocerebellar	atrophy,	and	Gerstmann-
Sträussler-Scheinker	syndrome.	With	disorders	causing	multiple	CN	deficits,	the
imaging	studies	are	often	not	helpful.

BRAINSTEM	SYNDROMES

In	 the	 brainstem,	 descending	 motor	 tracts	 prior	 to	 decussation,	 as	 well	 as

ascending	sensory	pathways	that	have	already	crossed,	lie	in	intimate	relation	to
the	lower	motor	neurons	of	the	CN	nuclei.	With	a	few	exceptions,	CNs	innervate
structures	 of	 the	 head	 and	 neck	 ipsilaterally.	 A	 process	 affecting	 the	 brainstem
long	tracts	on	one	side	causes	clinical	abnormalities	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
body.	 For	 this	 reason,	 focal	 brainstem	 lesions	 are	 characterized	 by	 “crossed”
syndromes	of	ipsilateral	CN	dysfunction	and	contralateral	long	motor	or	sensory
tract	dysfunction.	For	instance,	in	the	right	side	of	the	pons,	the	nuclei	for	CNs
VI	and	VII	lie	in	proximity	to	the	right	corticospinal	tract,	which	is	destined	to
decussate	in	the	medulla	to	innervate	the	left	side	of	the	body.	The	patient	with	a
lesion	 in	 the	 right	 pons	 will	 have	 CN	 findings	 on	 the	 right,	 such	 as	 a	 sixth	 or
seventh	nerve	palsy,	and	a	hemiparesis	on	the	left.

This	 crossed	 deficit	 will	 often	 be	 associated	 with	 symptoms	 reflecting
dysfunction	 of	 other	 brainstem	 structures	 or	 their	 connections.	 Because	 of	 the
rich	vestibular	and	cerebellar	connections,	patients	with	brainstem	disease	often
have	 dizziness	 or	 vertigo,	 unsteadiness,	 imbalance,	 incoordination,	 difficulty
walking,	nausea,	and	vomiting.	Pharyngeal	and	laryngeal	muscles	are	innervated
by	 neurons	 in	 the	 brainstem,	 and	 patients	 often	 have	 dysarthria	 or	 dysphagia.
Dysfunction	 of	 CNs	 III,	 IV,	 and	 VI	 or	 their	 connections	 may	 cause	 ocular
motility	 abnormalities.	 Unless	 the	 process	 has	 impaired	 the	 reticular	 activating
system,	 these	 patients	 are	 normal	 mentally—awake,	 alert,	 able	 to	 converse
(though	 perhaps	 dysarthric),	 not	 demented,	 not	 confused,	 and	 not	 aphasic.	 The
fourth	ventricle	and	cerebral	aqueduct	lie	nearby;	if	these	are	involved,	patients
may	 develop	 obstructive	 hydrocephalus.	 Although	 most	 pathologic	 processes
that	involve	the	brainstem	occur	in	other	parts	of	the	brain,	some	disorders	are
characterized	 by	 primarily	 brainstem	
involvement	 (e.g.,	 central	 pontine
myelinolysis,	 medulloblastoma,	 and	 olivopontocerebellar	 atrophy).	 With
vascular	 lesions,	 the	 clinical	 deficit	 depends	 on	 whether	 the	 occlusive	 process
has	 involved	 the	 paramedian	 perforating,	 short	 circumferential,	 or	 long
circumferential	branches	of	the	basilar	artery.

From	 an	 anatomical	 standpoint,	 brainstem	 syndromes	 may	 be	 localized	 by
considering	the	rostral	to	caudal	level	and	the	medial	to	lateral	level.	The	rostral
to	caudal	localization	is	determined	by	the	CN	involvement.	Abnormality	of	CN
III	or	IV,	or	a	vertical	gaze	abnormality,	indicates	a	midbrain	lesion;	CN	VI	or
VII,	 or	 a	 horizontal	 gaze	 palsy—a	 pontine	 lesion;	 CN	 VIII—a	 pontomedullary
junction	lesion;	and	CNs	IX,	X,	XI,	or	XII—a	medullary	lesion.	Because	of	the
vast	longitudinal	extent	of	the	spinal	tract	of	CN	V,	facial	sensory	abnormalities
can	occur	with	lesions	anywhere	from	the	pons	to	the	cervical	spinal	cord.

The	long	motor	tracts	tend	to	lie	medial,	and	the	long	sensory	tracts	lateral,	in
the	 brainstem.	 Somatic	 motor	 nuclei	 (extraocular	 and	 hypoglossal)	 are
paramedian;	branchiomotor	nuclei	are	more	lateral.	Involvement	 of	descending
motor	 tracts	 or	 somatic	 motor	 nuclei	 indicates	 medial	 lesions;	 involvement	 of
long	 sensory	 tracts,	 branchiomotor	 nuclei,	 and	 special	 sensory	 nuclei	 indicates
lateral	lesions.	The	cerebellar	peduncles	also	lie	laterally.	The	alar	plate–derived
sensory	nuclei	lie	laterally	and	are	separated	from	the	basal	plate–derived	motor
nuclei	 by	 the	 sulcus	 limitans	 (Figures	 11.2	 and	 11.4).	 Paramedian	 perforators
from	 the	 basilar	 artery	 perfuse	 the	 midline	 structures;	 circumferential	 arteries
perfuse	 the	 lateral	 structures.	 There	 are	 therefore	 medial	 and	 lateral	 medullary
syndromes;	medial	and	lateral	inferior,	middle,	and	superior	pontine	syndromes;
and	 the	 midbrain	 syndromes.	 The	 posterior	 inferior	 cerebellar	 artery	 (PICA)
supplies	 the	 lateral	 medulla;	 the	 anterior	 inferior	 cerebellar	 artery	 (AICA)
supplies	 the	 inferior	 lateral	 pons;	 and	 the	 superior	 cerebellar	 artery	 (SCA)
supplies	 the	 superior	 lateral	 pons.	 Paramedian	 lesions	 are	 typically	 lacunar;
lateral	lesions	are	more	often	from	disease	of	the	larger	circumferential	vessels.
The	 lateral	 medullary	 and	 pontine	 syndromes	 are	 often	 referred	 to	 by	 their
vascular	territory	designations:	PICA,	AICA,	and	SCA.

Occlusion	 of	 medial	 pontine	 branches	 of	 the	 basilar	 artery	 may	 cause
involvement	of	the	nuclei	of	CNs	VI	and	VII	or	their	emerging	fibers,	the	medial
longitudinal	fasciculus	(MLF),	the	corticospinal	tract,	the	medial	lemniscus,	and
the	pontine	paramedian	reticular	formation.	Clinical	manifestations	may	include
ipsilateral	facial	nerve	palsy,	abducens	palsy,	horizontal	gaze	palsy,	internuclear
ophthalmoplegia	 (INO),	 or	 impaired	 taste,	 with	 contralateral	 corticospinal
weakness	 and	 impaired	 lemniscal	 sensation.	 Thrombosis	 of	 the	 lateral	 pontine
branches	of	the	basilar	artery	produces	ischemia	that	may	involve	the	middle	and
superior	cerebellar	peduncles,	the	vestibular	and	cochlear	nuclei,	the	facial	and
trigeminal	 motor	 nuclei,	 the	 trigeminal	 sensory	 nucleus,	 and	 the	 spinothalamic
tract.	Findings	may	include	ipsilateral	cerebellar	ataxia	and	dysfunction	of	CNs
V,	VII,	and	VIII,	with	contralateral	loss	of	pain	and	temperature	sensation	on	the
trunk	and	extremities.	Occlusion	of	the	internal	auditory	artery	causes	unilateral
deafness	and	impaired	vestibular	function.

CLASSICAL	BRAINSTEM	SYNDROMES

Many	 of	 the	 early	 neurologic	 pioneer	 clinicians	 described	 the	 clinical	 findings

due	to	a	focal	process	affecting	the	brainstem.	These	physicians	practiced	in	an
era	when	disorders	such	as	tuberculoma,	syphilitic	gumma,	and	tumor	were	seen
much	 more	 often	 than	 today.	 Many	 of	 the	 classical	 brainstem	 syndromes	 as
originally	 described	 were	 not	 due	 to	 ischemia,	 and	 the	 effects	 of	 tuberculoma,
gumma,	 and	 similar	 lesions	 are	 not	 limited	 to	 vascular	 distributions.	 Some
degree	of	mismatch	has	therefore	resulted	between	the	classic	 descriptions	and
the	 current	 environment	 when	 most	 brainstem	 syndromes	 are	 due	 to	 ischemia.
There	 has	 also	 been	 significant	 drift	 of	 many	 of	 the	 eponymic	 syndromes
through	failure	to	honor	precisely	the	original	descriptions.	Liu	et	al.	pointed	out
the	variability	in	textbook	descriptions	of	Claude’s,	Benedikt’s,	and	Nothnagel’s
syndromes	 and	 noted	 the	 difference	 in	 textbook	 descriptions	 compared	 to	 the
original	 papers.	 Box	 21.1	 contains	 a	 discussion	 of	 the	 classical	 eponymic
brainstem	 syndromes,	 largely	 from	 a	 historical	 perspective,	 and	 Table	 21.1
summarizes	the	clinical	features.

Wallenberg	 described	 the	 lateral	 medullary	 syndrome	 (LMS),	 the	 most
common	 form	 of	 brainstem	 stroke.	 Wallenberg’s	 original	 patient	 had	 an
occlusion	 of	 the	 PICA,	 but	 LMS	 is	 most	 often	 due	 to	 ischemia	 in	 the	 PICA
distribution	 because	 of	 vertebral	 artery	 occlusion	 (Figure	 21.1).	 Typical
manifestations	 include	 vertigo,	 nausea	 and	 vomiting,	 nystagmus,	 hoarseness,
dysphagia,	 dysphonia,	 singultus,	 ipsilateral	 hemiataxia,	 and	 numbness	 of	 the
ipsilateral	face	and	contralateral	body.	Occipital	headache	or	pain	in	the	back	of
the	 neck	 may	 occur	 at	 the	 onset;	 prominent	 pain	 raises	 the	 possibility	 of
vertebral	 artery	 dissection.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 talk	 and	 swallow
initially.	Clinical	findings	are	summarized	in	Table	21.1.

BOX	21.1

Classical	Brainstem	Syndromes

Midbrain	Syndromes
Weber	described	a	patient	with	a	hematoma	of	one	cerebral	peduncle,	which
damaged	 the	 corticospinal	 and	 corticobulbar	 tracts	 and	 the	 exiting	 third
nerve.	 The	 patient	 had	 a	 contralateral	 hemiparesis	 involving	 face,	 arm,	 and
leg	 and	 an	 ipsilateral	 complete	 third	 nerve	 palsy.	 Benedikt	 described	 one
patient	 with	 a	 similar	 peduncular	 lesion	 due	 to	 a	 midbrain	 tuberculoma,
which	extended	further	into	the	tegmentum	and	involved	the	regions	of	the
substantia	nigra	and	red	nucleus,	causing	tremor	and	involuntary	movements

of	 the	 hemiparetic	 limbs.	 Two	 clinically	 similar	 patients	 were	 not	 studied
pathologically;	 one	 probably	 had	 meningovascular	 syphilis.	 Claude
described	 a	 patient	 with	 a	 midbrain	 infarction	 in	 whom	 the	 corticospinal
pathways	 were	 not	 involved;	 the	 clinical	 picture	 was	 ipsilateral	 third	 nerve
palsy	 and	 contralateral	 cerebellar	 ataxia	 due	 to	 involvement	 of	 the	 superior
cerebellar	 peduncle.	 Debate	 remains	 about	 how	 much	 red	 nucleus
involvement	occurs	in	Claude’s	and	Benedikt’s	syndrome.	Seo	concluded	on
the	basis	of	clinical	and	magnetic	resonance	imaging	(MRI)	studies	that	the
lesion	 usually	 lies	 just	 caudal	 and	 medial	 to	 the	 red	 nucleus	 and	 that	 the
tremor	and	ataxia	are	due	to	involvement	of	the	cerebellar	outflow	pathways
in	the	superior	cerebellar	peduncle.

These	three	midbrain	syndromes	are	variations	on	a	theme.	The	lesion	is
anterior—in	
the	 cerebral	 peduncle—in	 Weber’s	 syndrome,	 causing
hemiparesis.	It	is	more	posterior—in	the	tegmentum—in	Claude’s	syndrome,
causing	 hemiataxia.	 In	 Benedikt’s	 syndrome,	 the	 lesion	 is	 more	 extensive,
involving	 both	 the	 tegmentum	 and	 the	 peduncle,	 causing	 hemiparesis	 with
tremor	and	ataxia	of	the	involved	limbs;	Benedikt’s	is	essentially	Weber’s	+
Claude’s.	Because	the	fascicles	of	cranial	nerve	(CN)	III	are	scattered	in	their
course	through	the	midbrain,	the	third	nerve	palsy	in	any	of	these	syndromes
may	be	partial.

Nothnagel’s	 (ophthalmoplegia-ataxia)	syndrome	is	different;	it	is	more	a
variant	of	Parinaud’s	syndrome,	with	unilateral	or	bilateral	third	nerve	palsy
and	ataxia	accompanied	by	vertical	gaze	deficits	and	other	neurologic	signs.
The	 lesion	 affects	 the	 midbrain	 tectum	 and	 is	 often	 neoplastic.	 Nothnagel’s
original	patient	had	a	pineal	sarcoma.

Pontine	Syndromes
Millard	 and	 Gubler	 separately	 described	 patients	 with	 an	 ipsilateral	 lower
motor	neuron	facial	nerve	palsy	and	contralateral	hemiparesis	due	to	a	lesion
involving	 the	 pons.	 Gubler’s	 cases	 included	 three	 with	 a	 tumor,	 one	 with	 a
stroke,	and	one	with	a	brownish	softening.	Millard	reported	one	case	due	to
pontine	 hemorrhage	 as	 a	 letter	 to	 the	 editor	 in	 the	 journal	 where	 Gubler
reported	his	cases.	In	all	cases,	the	lesion	lay	in	the	lateral	pons	and	did	not
involve	CN	VI;	the	patients	had	no	ocular	motility	disturbance.	Nevertheless,
it	 is	 common	 to	 see	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy	 included	 in	 textbook	 descriptions	 of
Millard-Gubler	 syndrome.	 Gubler	 was	 a	 senior	 clinician	 reporting	 several
cases;	 Millard	 had	 just	 graduated	 from	 medical	 school,	 was	 essentially	 a
resident,	and	reported	only	one.	Gubler	instructed	the	journal	editor	to	give

Millard	precedence,	hence	the	eponym.

Foville	 described	 a	 patient	 with	 an	 ipsilateral	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 facial
palsy	and	a	horizontal	gaze	palsy,	with	a	contralateral	hemiparesis;	there	was
no	pathology	but	the	onset	was	apoplectic.	Landry,	in	a	letter	commenting	on
Foville’s	 case,	 described	 a	 patient	 with	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy	 and	 contralateral
hemiplegia,	 including	 the	 face,	 due	 to	 pontine	 ischemia	 in	 a	 patient	 with
syphilis.	 Yelloly	 had	 described	 a	 case	 of	 abducens	 palsy	 with	 contralateral
hemiplegia	 50	 years	 previously.	 Raymond	 described	 a	 patient	 with	 sixth
nerve	 palsy	 and	 contralateral	 hemiplegia,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 clear	 that	 the
hemiplegia	was	of	pontine	origin.

Medullary	Syndromes
There	are	two	primary	medullary	syndromes,	the	lateral	(Wallenberg)	and	the
medial	 (Dejerine).	 The	 rare	 medial	 medullary	 syndrome	 is	 summarized	 in
Table	 21.1.	 In	 a	 study	 of	 clinical	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 (MRI)
correlation	 in	 medial	 medullary	 infarction,	 classical	 Dejerine’s	 syndrome
(ipsilateral	 tongue	 weakness	 with	 contralateral	 hemiparesis	 and	 lemniscal
sensory	loss)	was	seen	in	64%	of	patients;	the	remainder	had	partial	lesions,
which	 may	 be	 less	 readily	 recognized.	 In	 a	 series	 of	 18	 patients,	 the	 most
common	 manifestation	 of	 medial	 medullary	 stroke	 was	 a	 unilateral
sensorimotor	 deficit.	 The	 extremely	 rare	 bilateral	 medial	 medullary
syndrome	 causes	 quadriparesis	 and	 other	 abnormalities.	 Isolated	 tongue
weakness	has	been	reported	because	of	bilateral	medullary	infarction.	Other
syndromes	of	the	medulla	(Avellis’s,	 Jackson’s,	Schmidt’s,	Céstan-Chenais,
and	 Babinski-Nageotte)	 are	 described	 in	 Table	 21.1.	 Except	 for	 the
occasional	upper	motor	neuron	facial	palsy	in	Wallenberg’s	syndrome,	there
is	sparing	of	facial	motor	function	in	all	of	the	medullary	syndromes.

In	a	series	of	MRI-verified	LMS,	the	most	common	findings	were	ipsilateral
Horner’s	 syndrome	 and	 ataxia	 and	 contralateral	 body	 hypalgesia.	 The
spontaneous	 nystagmus	 is	 usually	 horizontal	 or	 mixed	 horizontal-torsional.
Horizontal	nystagmus	beats	away	from	the	side	of	the	lesion	and	may	be	second
or	third	degree.	Torsional	nystagmus	with	the	upper	poles	beating	away	from	the
side	of	the	lesion	is	also	common.	The	nystagmus	is	influenced	by	head	and	eye
position	 and	 by	 fixation.	 Dysphagia	 is	 common.	 It	 is	 often	 more	 severe	 than
would	be	expected	simply	from	a	lesion	of	the	nucleus	ambiguus,	and	disruption
of	connections	to	a	premotor	swallowing	center	in	the	dorsolateral	medulla	has

been	postulated.	Partial	resolution	and	survival	is	the	rule;	the	ability	to	swallow
and	 talk	 returns,	 although	 residual	 hoarseness,	 persistent	 ataxia,	 and	 sensory
changes	 may	 remain.	 Aspiration	 is	 a	 major	 threat.	 The	 presence	 of	 dysphonia,
soft	 palate	 dysfunction,	 or	 facial	 sensory	 loss	 suggests	 an	 increased	 risk.
Although	 LMS	 is	 usually	 ischemic,	 it	 has	 also	 been	 described	 with	 aneurysm,
abscess,	 hematoma,	 arteriovenous	 malformation,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 and
metastatic	 neoplasm.	 The	 LMS	 may	 have	 many	 unusual	 manifestations	 (Box
21.2).

ANATOMIC	BRAINSTEM	SYNDROMES

The	other	approach	to	organizing	brainstem	syndromes	is	by	the	anatomical	area
or	the	major	blood	vessel	involved.	The	midbrain	syndromes	are	variations	and
combinations	of	an	ipsilateral	third	nerve	palsy	and	weakness,	ataxia,	or	tremor
of	 the	 contralateral	 limbs;	 this	 is	 due	 to	 ischemia	 in	 the	 distribution	 of
paramedian	 penetrating	 vessels	 from	 the	 rostral	 basilar	 artery.	 The	 LMS	 is
discussed	 in	 the	 previous	 section,	 and	 the	 medial	 medullary	 syndrome	 is
discussed	in	Box	21.1.

The	 vascular	 pontine	 syndromes	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 medial	 and	 lateral	 and
into	 superior,	 middle,	 and	 inferior.	 The	 medial	 pontine	 syndromes	 are	 due	 to
disease	of	the	paramedian	perforators;	the	lateral	pontine	syndromes	are	due	to
disease	 of	 the	 circumferential	 arteries.	 The	 AICA	 supplies	 the	 lateral	 inferior
pons	and	upper	medulla,	whereas	the	SCA	supplies	the	lateral	upper	pons.	The
midpons	 is	 supplied	 by	 a	 short	 circumferential	 artery.	 Just	 as	 PICA	 ischemia
causes	 the	 LMS,	 ischemia	 in	 the	 AICA	 distribution	 causes	 the	 lateral	 inferior
pontine	 syndrome;	 and	 ischemia	 in	 the	 SCA	 distribution	 causes	 the	 lateral
superior	 pontine	 syndrome.	 The	 generally	 recognized	 pontine	 syndromes	 are
therefore	the	medial	inferior	pontine,	lateral	inferior	pontine	(AICA),	medial	and
lateral	midpontine,	medial	superior	pontine,	and	lateral	superior	pontine	(SCA).
The	 vascular	 pontine	 syndromes	 are	 summarized	 in	 Table	 21.2.	 In	 a	 series	 of
patients	 with	 lesions	 involving	 the	 AICA	 distribution,	 only	 29%	 had	 the
complete	AICA	syndrome.	Partial	syndromes	were	characteristic	of	small	vessel
disease;	more	widespread	involvement	indicated	basilar	artery	occlusive	disease.
The	SCA	syndrome	is	also	often	partial.	Basilar	branch	occlusion	may	involve
any	 of	 the	 branches	 of	 the	 basilar	 artery.	 The	 mechanism	 is	 atherothrombotic
occlusion	at	the	point	of	origin	of	the	branch,	and	the	infarction	typically	extends

to	the	ventral	surface	of	the	pons.

Vertebrobasilar	transient	ischemic	attacks	(vertebrobasilar	insufficiency,	VBI)
are	 episodes	 of	 brainstem	 ischemia	 due	 to	 occlusive	 disease	 involving	 the
posterior	 circulation.	 Symptoms	 depend	 upon	 which	 region	 of	 the	 brainstem	 is
ischemic.	The	clinical	manifestations	of	an	attack	of	VBI	are	typically	bilateral,
with	 varying	 degrees	 of	 weakness,	 numbness,	 and	 CN	 dysfunction.
Accompanying	symptoms	indicative	of	brainstem	dysfunction	include	diplopia,
dysarthria,	 dysphagia,	 vertigo,	 nausea,	 and	 vomiting.	 There	 may	 be	 impaired
vision	 due	 to	 ischemia	 in	 the	 posterior	 cerebral	 artery	 distribution.	 Bilateral
sensory	 complaints	 are	 common,	 especially	 circumoral	 paresthesias.	 Attacks
usually	last	from	a	few	minutes	to	half	an	hour,	sometimes	longer.

TABLE
21.1

Summary	of	the	Classical	Named	Brainstem
Syndromes

FIGURE	 21.1	 Cross	 section	 of	 the	 medulla	 illustrating	 the	 lesion	 in	 the	 lateral
medullary	syndrome.

Basilar	artery	occlusion	may	have	a	gradual	onset	or	a	fluctuating	course	with
prodromata,	 but	 often,	 the	 symptoms	 appear	 apocalyptically;	 death	 may	 occur

within	 a	 short	 period	 of	 time.	 When	 the	 onset	 is	 acute,	 there	 is	 sudden	 loss	 of
consciousness	 with	 gradually	 increasing	 coma	 and	 flaccid	 extremities	 or
decerebrate	rigidity.	The	onset	may	be	subacute	with	prodromal	vertigo,	nausea,
headache,	 and	 paresthesias,	 which	 may	 occur	 up	 to	 2	 weeks	 before	 the	 stroke,
followed	 by	 bilateral	 CN	 and	 long	 tract	 abnormalities	 (progressive	 basilar
in	 basilar	 artery
thrombosis).	 Fisher	 described	 a	 “herald	 hemiparesis”	
thrombosis,	frequently	present	at	an	early	stage,	when	brainstem	signs	are	absent
or	inconspicuous,	followed	within	a	few	hours	by	bilateral	hemiplegia	and	coma
or	a	locked-in	state	(Chapter	51).	With	total	occlusion,	there	is	either	hemiplegia
on	one	side	and	partial	hemiplegia	on	the	other,	or	quadriplegia.	Involvement	of
ascending	 sensory	 pathways	 causes	 a	 disturbance	 of	 both	 deep	 and	 superficial
sensations	on	the	body,	the	extremities,	and	sometimes	the	face.	The	pupils	are
usually	miotic	and	poorly	reactive.	Ocular	bobbing	and	palatal	myoclonus	may
occur.	 The	 neurologic	 signs	 are	 characteristically	 variable	 and	 complex.	 Coma
and	decerebrate	rigidity	with	respiratory	and	circulatory	instability	are	common.
Patients	with	coma	at	the	outset	have	a	grave	prognosis.	The	site	of	occlusion
is	 usually	 in	 the	 lower	 third	 of	 the	 basilar	 artery.	 The	 outcome	 with	 severe
brainstem	 ischemic	 disease	 is	 usually	 poor.	 Death	 is	 a	 common	 outcome	 of
complete	 basilar	 artery	 occlusion.	 Patients	 may	 be	 left	 in	 a	 locked-in	 state
(Chapter	51).

BOX	21.2

Unusual	Manifestations	of	Lateral	Medullary	Syndrome

Patients	 may	 have	 an	 ipsilateral	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 facial	 palsy	 due	 to
involvement	of	Dejerine’s	aberrant	pyramidal	tract	(see	facial	nerve	chapter).
In	the	series	of	Sacco	et	al.,	mild	ipsilateral	facial	weakness	was	present	in
42%	 of	 patients,	 usually	 limited	 to	 the	 lower	 face.	 The	 hypalgesia	 may
involve	only	the	ipsilateral	face	or	only	the	contralateral	body;	the	classical
crossed	pattern	occurs	only	in	a	minority.	Other	patterns	of	sensory	loss	are
discussed	in	Chapter	15.	Ocular	motor	abnormalities	are	common,	including
skew	 deviation	 with	 ipsilateral	 hypotropia,	 ocular	 tilt	 reaction,	 bizarre
environmental	 tilt	 illusions	 including	 world	 inversion	 (floor	 on	 ceiling
phenomenon),	ipsilateral	gaze	deviation	with	impaired	contralateral	pursuit,
saccadic	 abnormalities,	 seesaw	 nystagmus,	 and	 eyelid	 nystagmus.	 Ocular
abnormalities	and	facial	weakness	are	common	and	do	not	imply	extension

of	 the	 lesion	 beyond	 the	 lateral	 medulla.	 There	 may	 be	 contralateral
hemiparesis	 due	 to	 inferior	 extension	 of	 the	 zone	 of	 ischemia	 to	 the
medullary	 pyramid	 prior	 to	 decussation	 or	 ipsilateral	 hemiparesis	 due	 to
inferior	extension	to	the	lateral	funiculus	of	the	rostral	spinal	cord	(Opalski’s
submedullary	syndrome,	Figure	21.2).	Rarely,	there	is	impaired	sensation	of
the	ipsilateral	arm	and	leg	due	to	inferior	extension	to	the	gracile	and	cuneate
nuclei,	 ipsilateral	 loss	 of	 taste,	 or	 contralateral	 facial	 hypalgesia.	 Other
unusual	 manifestations	 include	 wild	 unilateral,	 proximal	 arm	 ataxia;
neurotrophic	ulceration	of	the	face;	inability	to	sneeze;	paroxysmal	sneezing;
loss	 of	 taste;	 Ondine’s	 curse;	 and	 weakness	 of	 the	 sternocleidomastoid.
Chronic	central	facial	pain	develops	in	some	patients.

FIGURE	 21.2	 Imaging	 features	 of	 Opalski	 syndrome.	 Fluid-attenuated	 inversion
recovery	MRI.	A.	Directionally	encoded	map	with	hues	reflecting	tensor	orientation.	B.
Superimposed	 images.	 C,D.	 A	 yellow	 halo	 represents	 the	 infarct	 and	 blue	 lines
represent	 the	 pyramidal	 tracts	 (coronal);	 the	 tracts	 fuse	 at	 the	 decussation
(transverse).	Caudal	extension	of	the	lesion	involves	the	ipsilateral	corticospinal	tract
(arrows)	after	the	decussation	(arrowheads).	(Reprinted	from	Nakamura	S,	Kitami	M,

Furukawa	 Y.	 Opalski	 syndrome:	 ipsilateral	 hemiplegia	 due	 to	 a	 lateral-medullary
infarction.	Neurology	2010;75[18]:1658,	with	permission.)

TABLE
21.2

Summary	of	the	Vascular	Pontine	Syndromes	Organized
by	Anatomical	Region	and	Blood	Vessel	Involved

The	“top	of	the	basilar”	syndrome	is	caused	by	ischemia	in	the	distribution	of
the	 distal	 basilar	 artery,	 usually	 embolic,	 involving	 the	 rostral	 brainstem,
thalamus,	and	portions	of	the	cerebral	hemispheres	fed	by	the	posterior	cerebral
arteries.	 A	 variety	 of	 oculomotor	 and	 pupillary	 abnormalities	 may	 occur,	 along
with	 visual	 and	 behavioral	 abnormalities,	 often	 without	 significant	 extremity
weakness.

Patients	 with	 pontine	 hemorrhage	 have	 a	 clinical	 picture	 similar	 to	 basilar
artery	occlusion,	but	warning	symptoms	are	less	apt	to	occur.	They	are	comatose
and	 quadriplegic	 and	 have	 bilateral	 facial	 paralysis,	 bilateral	 horizontal	 gaze
palsies,	and	pinpoint	poorly	reactive	pupils.	Hyperthermia	is	common.	Imaging
studies	often	show	a	large	hematoma	in	the	midpons.	Few	patients	survive	such
an	 event.	 The	 initial	 level	 of	 consciousness	 and	 the	 size	 of	 the	 hematoma	 are
strongly	related	to	the	outcome.

Pressure	on	the	brainstem	due	to	 supratentorial	mass	effect	can	cause	either

lateral	transtentorial	herniation	(uncal	syndrome),	with	third	nerve	involvement
and	 signs	 of	 lateral	 midbrain	 compression,	 or	 central	 transtentorial	 herniation,
with	constricted	pupils,	Cheyne-Stokes	respirations,	bilateral	corticospinal	tract
signs,	decorticate	rigidity,	and	progressive	impairment	of	diencephalic,	midbrain,
pontine,	 and	 medullary	 function.	 Because	 of	 the	 patterns	 of	 venous	 drainage,
increased	intracranial	pressure	and	herniation	at	either	the	foramen	magnum	or
the	tentorium	may	cause	secondary	bleeding	into	the	midbrain,	pons,	or	medulla.
Duret	 hemorrhages	 are	 secondary	 hemorrhages	 into	 the	 upper	 brainstem	 that
occur	 with	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 and	 descending	 transtentorial
herniation.	 Brainstem	 hemorrhage	 may	 cause	 hyperthermia,	 respiratory
abnormalities,	 coma,	 and	 finally	 death	
tumors,
subarachnoid	 hemorrhage,	 cerebral	 hemorrhage,	 trauma,	 rapidly	 expanding
supratentorial	 mass	 lesions,	 or	 similar	 conditions	 causing	 an	 increase	 in
intracranial	 pressure.	 Affected	 patients	 rarely	 survive;	 Stiver	 et	 al.	 reported	 an
exception	in	a	young	adult	traumatic	brain	injury	patient.

in	 patients	 with	 brain	

When	

increased	

tonsillar	 herniation,	

intracranial	 pressure	 causes	

the
cerebellar	tonsils	and	lower	medulla	are	forced	downward	through	the	foramen
magnum.	 Although	 tonsillar	 herniation	 is	 a	 feared	 complication	 of	 lumbar
puncture	 done	 in	 the	 face	 of	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure,	 it	 is	 in	 fact	 rare.
Medullary	compression	causes	profound	impairment	of	all	vital	functions,	with
bradycardia,	 either	 a	 fall	 or	 rise	 in	 blood	 pressure,	 slow	 or	 rapid	 respirations,
soaring	 temperature,	 convulsions,	 unconsciousness,	 and	 death.	 The	 Cushing
(vasopressor)	 reflex	 (response,	 reaction,	 or	 effect)	 is	 hypertension,	 increased
pulse	pressure,	bradycardia,	and	slow,	irregular	respirations	seen	in	patients	with
increased	intracranial	pressure	and	brainstem	compression.	The	full	triad	occurs
in	 only	 about	 one-third	 of	 cases,	 and	 some	 patients	 may	 have	 isolated
hypertension.	On	postmortem	examination,	a	pressure	cone	may	be	seen	on	the
medulla.

BOX	21.3

Other	Brainstem	Syndromes

The	 one-and-a-half	 syndrome	 is	 a	 horizontal	 gaze	 palsy	 and	 ipsilateral
internuclear	 ophthalmoplegia,	 or	 INO	 (Chapter	 14).	 The	 association	 of	 an
ipsilateral	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 facial	 nerve	 palsy	 and	 a	 one-and-a-half
syndrome	 has	 been	 termed	 the	 eight-and-a-half	 syndrome.	 The	 Brissaud-

is	

ipsilateral	 hemifacial	 spasm	 and	 contralateral
Sicard	 syndrome	
hemiparesis	 due	 to	 a	 pontine	 lesion.	 The	 lateral	 pontomedullary	 syndrome
consists	 of	 the	 findings	 of	 the	 lateral	 medullary	 syndrome	 with	 additional
involvement	of	CNs	VII	and	VIII	consistent	with	extension	of	the	lesion	to
the	 inferior	 pons.	 Raymond-Cestan	 syndrome	 is	 horizontal	 or	 vertical	 gaze
palsy,	 contralateral	 hemiparesis	 or	 quadriparesis,	 hemianesthesia,	 and
athetosis	 due	 to	 basilar	 branch	 occlusion.	 Rasdolsky’s	 syndrome	 is
contracture	and	paresis	of	the	masseter	and	facial	muscles	due	to	neoplasm
of	 ipsilateral	 pontine	 tegmentum.	 Marie-Foix	 syndrome	 is	 contralateral
hemiparesis	and	hypalgesia	with	ipsilateral	cerebellar	ataxia	due	to	a	lesion
involving	the	lateral	pons.	Other	unusual	manifestations	of	brainstem	disease
isolated
include	 pontine	 anosognosia,	 cognitive	 dysfunction,	 painful	
Horner’s	 syndrome,	 head	 shaking	 nystagmus,	 jaw	 opening	 dystonia,
hemidystonia,	facial	pain	syndromes,	a	sensory	level	on	the	trunk,	unilateral
hyper-	 or	 hypohidrosis,	 upside-down	 reversal	 of	 vision,	 tonic	 seizures,	 and
convulsive-like	movements.

Aneurysms	 of	 the	 basilar	 or	 vertebral	 arteries	 or	 their	 branches,	 and
hemangiomas,	 may	 cause	 extramedullary	 compression	 and	 CN	 involvement.
Arteriovenous	 malformations	 may	 cause	 intramedullary	 or	 extramedullary
dysfunction,	 depending	 on	 their	 extent	 and	 location.	 Extravasation	 of	 blood
about	the	base	of	the	brain	from	subarachnoid	or	intracerebral	hemorrhage	may
affect	the	CNs	as	they	leave	the	skull.

Lacunes	 are	 small,	 deep	 infarctions	 in	 the	 territory	 of	 a	 deep	 penetrating
arteriole.	 Hypertension	 is	 the	 major	 predisposing	 factor.	 The	 brainstem,
particularly	 the	 pons,	 is	 a	 common	 location	 for	 lacunar	 infarction.	 Brainstem
lacunar	 syndromes	
include	 pure	 motor	 stroke,	 dysarthria–clumsy	 hand
syndrome,	 and	 ataxic	 hemiparesis	 (homolateral	 ataxia	 and	 crural	 paresis).	 Pure
motor	 stroke	 is	 the	 most	 common	 lacunar	 syndrome.	 Although	 lacunar
syndromes,	 especially	 pure	 sensory	 stroke	 and	 ataxic	 hemiparesis,	 are	 highly
predictive	 of	 lacunar	 infarction,	 in	 about	 one	 in	 four	 patients	 the	 etiology
involves	a	nonlacunar	mechanism.

Other	unusual,	typically	vascular,	brainstem	syndromes	are	briefly	described

in	Box	21.3.

Nonvascular	Brainstem	Disorders

Brainstem	gliomas	are	astrocytomas	that	diffusely	infiltrate	the	brainstem.	Most
involve	 the	 pons,	 but	 they	 may	 affect	 any	 level	 of	 the	 brainstem,	 typically
causing	 a	 combination	 of	 multiple	 cranial	 nerve	 palsies	 (MCNPs),	 gaze	 palsy,
long	tract	signs,	and	ataxia.	Because	of	the	slow	evolution,	there	is	sometimes	a
paucity	 of	 neurologic	 signs	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 size	 of	 the	 tumor.	 Ventricular
obstruction	 may	 produce	 hydrocephalus	 and	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure.
Ependymomas	 and	 medulloblastomas	 may	 also	
the	 brainstem.
Extramedullary	
schwannomas,	 meningiomas,
hemangiomas,	metastases)	may	cause	pressure	effects.	The	course	of	a	brainstem
neoplasm	 is	 progressive.	 Increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 may	 appear	 late,
particularly	 in	 brainstem	 gliomas.	 Extrinsic	 metastases	 and	 neoplasms	 that
spread	 by	 direct	 extension	 from	 the	 nasopharynx	 and	 neighboring	 sites	 may
cause	 widespread	 CN	 involvement	 and	 bone	 erosion	 with	 signs	 of	 brainstem
compression.	 Tuberculomas,	 sarcoidosis,	 and	 other	 granulomas	 may	 produce	 a
picture	similar	to	neoplasms.

(neurofibromas,	

involve	

tumors	

Brainstem	 encephalitis	 (Bickerstaff’s	 encephalitis)	 is	 a	 clinical	 syndrome	 of
acute	diffuse	or	multifocal	brainstem	dysfunction	with	cerebrospinal	fluid	(CSF)
pleocytosis	and	increased	protein.	Actual	viral	infection	has	seldom,	if	ever,	been
documented,	 and	 the	 disease	 is	 usually	 immunologically	 mediated.	 Patients
develop	ophthalmoplegia	and	ataxia	followed	by	gradual	brainstem	dysfunction
and	 altered	 consciousness.	 The	 illness	 is	 usually	 preceded	 by	 a	 viral	 infection.
Some	 patients	 have	 serum	 anti-GQ1b	 IgG	 autoantibodies,	 the	 same	 antibody
found	 in	 Miller	 Fisher	 syndrome	 (ophthalmoplegia,	 ataxia,	 and	 areflexia).
Bickerstaff’s	 brainstem	 encephalitis	 is	 not	 to	 be	 confused	 with	 Bickerstaff’s
(basilar	 artery)	 migraine	 (see	 below).	 Brainstem	 encephalitis	 may	 be
paraneoplastic.	 Rhombencephalitis	 refers	 to	 inflammatory	 disease	 affecting	 the
hindbrain	 (brainstem	 and	 cerebellum).	 It	 has	 a	 wide	 variety	 of	 etiologies,
including	 multiple	 sclerosis	 (MS),	 Behcet’s	 disease,	 paraneoplastic	 syndrome,
lupus,	and	viral	and	tuberculous	infection.	Listeria	monocytogenes	is	particularly
likely	to	cause	rhombencephalitis;	it	accounted	for	9%	of	cases	in	one	series.

Demyelinating	 disease	 frequently	 involves	 the	 brainstem.	 INO	 due	 to	 a
demyelinating	lesion	involving	the	MLF	is	a	very	common	clinical	manifestation
of	 MS.	 MS	 can	 cause	 lesions	 elsewhere	 in	 the	 brainstem	 and	 can	 occasionally
simulate	one	of	the	vascular	syndromes.	Acute	disseminated	encephalomyelitis
may	 affect	 the	 brainstem,	 and	 the	 involvement	 is	 occasionally	 limited	 to	 the
brainstem.

In	 central	 pontine	 myelinolysis	 (osmotic	 demyelination	 syndrome),	 there	 is

widespread,	 symmetric	 myelin	 loss	 in	 the	 central	 portion	 of	 the	 pons.	 Lesions
commonly	 occur	 in	 other	 sites	 as	 well	 (extrapontine	 myelinolysis).	 Central
pontine	 myelinolysis	 occurs	 especially	 in	 alcoholics	 or	 other	 malnourished	 or
debilitated	 individuals	 and	 after	 correction	 of	 severe	 hyponatremia.	 It	 typically
begins	 with	 diplopia,	 dysphagia,	 dysarthria,	 and	 other	 evidence	 of	 brainstem
dysfunction,	 followed	 by	 quadriplegia,	 mutism,	 and	 extensor	 rigidity.	 Central
pontine	myelinolysis	runs	a	fulminating	course	and	is	often	fatal.

Developmental	 or	 congenital	 anomalies	 of	 the	 craniocervical	 junction	 are
frequently	associated	with	brainstem	dysfunction.	The	bony	walls	of	the	foramen
magnum	 and	 upper	 spinal	 canal	 lie	 in	 close	 anatomic	 relationship	 to	 the	 lower
brainstem,	upper	spinal	cord,	and	cerebellum.	Neurologic	abnormalities	may	be
produced	 by	 mechanical	 compression	 by	 the	 bony	 abnormality,	 but	 often	 the
bony	 abnormality	 and	 the	 neural	 abnormality	 are	 part	 of	 the	 same	 process.
Platybasia,	 basilar	 impression,	 occipitalization	 of	 the	 atlas,	 and	 cervical	 spina
bifida	are	examples	of	primary	bony	abnormalities.	Klippel-Feil	syndrome	is	the
congenital	 fusion	 of	
two	 or	 more	 cervical	 vertebrae.	 There	 may	 be
accompanying	craniocervical	junction	abnormalities.	The	associated	neurologic
abnormalities	may	include	myelopathy,	radiculopathy,	syringomyelia,	and	mirror
movements.

Arnold-Chiari	 (or	 simply	 Chiari,	 who	 made	 the	 greater	 contribution)
malformation	is	a	congenital	maldevelopment	of	the	brainstem	and	cerebellum.
The	 cerebellar	 tonsils	 are	 herniated	 or	 displaced	 down	 into	 the	 upper	 cervical
spinal	 canal.	 With	 more	 severe	 maldevelopment,	 the	 inferior	 vermis,	 lower
medulla,	and	fourth	ventricle	may	also	be	displaced	below	the	foramen	magnum.
Clinical	manifestations	include	headache,	cerebellar	ataxia,	nystagmus	(typically
downbeat),	and	other	brainstem	deficits.	Three	varieties	commonly	occur.	Type	1
is	 the	 hindbrain	 malformation	 only;	 it	 can	 present	 in	 adulthood.	 Mild	 type	 1
Chiari	 malformations	 are	 not	 uncommonly	 found	 on	 MRI	 imaging	 done	 for
other	 reasons	 and	 may	 be	 totally	 asymptomatic.	 Type	 2	 is	 a	 more	 severe
hindbrain	defect	usually	associated	with	a	lumbar	meningomyelocele.	Type	3	is
the	same	as	type	2	except	that	the	meningomyelocele	or	encephalocele	occurs	in
the	 occipitocervical	 region.	 The	 Dandy-Walker	 syndrome	 is	 agenesis	 of	 the
cerebellar	 vermis	 with	 a	 massively	 dilated	 fourth	 ventricle	 forming	 a	 cystic
structure	that	occupies	most	of	the	posterior	fossa.

Syringobulbia	 is	 a	 slit-like	 cavity	 in	 the	 brainstem.	 A	 brainstem	 syrinx	 is
usually	 a	 rostral	 extension	 of	 a	 syringomyelic	 cavity	 from	 the	 cervical	 spinal
cord	in	a	patient	with	a	Chiari	malformation,	but	syringobulbia	may	rarely	occur

de	novo.	In	syringobulbia,	the	syrinx	most	often	involves	the	lateral	medullary
tegmentum.	 The	 cavity	 is	 usually	 restricted	 to	 the	 lower	 brainstem	 but	 may
extend	to	the	pons	and	rarely	higher.	The	cavity	and	the	resultant	clinical	picture
are	 typically	 asymmetric,	 with	 lower	 CN	 dysfunction,	 facial	 numbness,	 and
nystagmus.	The	facial	sensory	loss	may	be	in	an	onion-skin	distribution,	initially
sparing	the	nasal	tip	and	perioral	region.	Hypoglossal	weakness	and	atrophy	may
occur.	 Facial	 myokymia	 is	 an	 unusual	 feature.	 There	 may	 be	 autonomic
involvement	and	respiratory	compromise.

A	strategically	placed	lesion	involving	the	pyramidal	decussation	may	cause
unusual	 patterns	 of	 weakness.	 The	 corticospinal	 fibers	 innervating	 the	 upper
extremities	are	thought	to	decussate	more	rostrally	and	medially	than	the	fibers
innervating	 the	 lower	 extremities,	 although	 this	 concept	 has	 been	 questioned
(Figure	11.12).	 The	 term	 cruciate	 paralysis	 is	 used	 in	 two	 ways.	 One	 refers	 to
weakness	of	both	arms,	brachial	diplegia,	with	relative	sparing	of	the	legs,	due	to
a	lesion	involving	the	rostral	portion	of	the	pyramidal	decussation.	The	findings
are	similar	to	those	of	a	central	cord	syndrome	of	the	cervical	spine	or	the	man-
in-the-barrel	syndrome	because	of	watershed	cerebral	infarction.	Most	cases	are
due	to	trauma.	The	other	use	refers	to	corticospinal	paralysis	of	one	arm	and	the
opposite	 leg	 (cruciate	 hemiplegia,	 pyramidal	 decussation	 syndrome).	 This	 may
occur	because	a	lesion	involves	arm	fibers	that	have	already	decussated	but	leg
fibers	that	have	not,	which	causes	a	crossed	pattern	of	weakness.	Triparesis,	with
weakness	 of	 one	 arm	 and	 both	 legs,	 has	 been	 reported	 after	 unilateral	 medial
medullary	infarction.

Gerstman-Sträussler-Schinker	(GSS)	syndrome	is	a	rare	autosomal	dominant
spongiform	encephalopathy	due	to	a	mutation	of	the	prion	protein	gene.	It	begins
in	 midlife	 and	 runs	 a	 progressive	 course	 with	 ataxia,	 spasticity,	 dysarthria,
nystagmus,	and	dementia.	GSS	is	genetically	and	phenotypically	heterogeneous;
among	 the	 different	 prion	 diseases,	 it	 has	 the	 longest	 clinical	 course	 and	 the
potential	 to	 mimic	 other	 neurologic	 disorders,	 such	 as	 cerebellar	 degeneration
and	demyelinating	disease.

Basilar	 artery	 (Bickerstaff’s,	 basilar	 type,	 vertebrobasilar,	 posterior	 fossa)
migraine	is	an	unusual	type	of	complicated	migraine	with	prominent	brainstem
symptoms	 similar	 to	 those	 of	 VBI.	 The	 disorder	 occurs	 primarily	 in	 young
females	and	is	usually	followed	by	an	occipital	headache.

The	 foramen	 magnum	 syndrome	 can	 cause	 some	 unusual	 and	 puzzling
clinical	 deficits.	 Lesions	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 foramen	 magnum	 are	 typically
compressive	extramedullary	mass	lesions	(e.g.,	meningioma).	Patients	may	have

crossed	 hemiparesis,	 involving	 one	 arm	 and	 the	 opposite	 leg,	 because	 of
involvement	of	the	pyramidal	decussation	(see	above).	There	may	be	weakness
and	 wasting	 of	 the	 small	 hand	 muscles	 for	 reasons	 that	 remain	 unclear.	 Such
hand	muscle	wasting	may	also	occur	as	a	false	localizing	sign	in	upper	cervical
spinal	cord	compression.	Downbeat	nystagmus	in	primary	gaze	is	suggestive	of
a	lesion	at	the	cervicomedullary	junction,	and	the	nystagmus	is	often	greatest	in
eccentric	 downgaze.	 Other	 symptoms	 suggestive	 of	 a	 foramen	 magnum	 lesion
include	 occipital	 headache,	 neck	 pain,	 and	 stiffness;	 Lhermitte’s	 sign;	 C2
sensory	 loss;	 and	 shawl	 distribution	 upper	 extremity	 sensory	 loss.	 Tumors	 are
generally	 histologically	 benign	 and	 often	 become	 large	 before	 the	 diagnosis	 is
made.	 Masses	 usually	 intrude	 from	 posteriorly,	 so	 that	 posterior	 column	 signs,
including	 pseudoathetosis,	 are	 common.	 Lower	 CN	 palsies	 are	 uncommon.
There	may	be	a	fluctuating	course	simulating	MS.

Bulbar	Palsy

There	 are	 two	 principal	 types	 of	 bulbar	 palsy:	 PBP	 and	 pseudobulbar	 palsy.	 In
both,	the	outstanding	symptoms	are	dysphagia	and	dysarthria;	both	run	a	chronic
course.	Despite	the	similarities,	the	etiologies	are	different.

PBP	is	a	form	of	motor	neuron	disease	involving	bulbar	innervated	muscles,
causing	 weakness	 and	 atrophy	 of	 muscles	 supplied	 by	 the	 lower	 CNs,	 often
accompanied	 by	 fasciculations.	 It	 is	 closely	 related	 to	 progressive	 spinal
muscular	atrophy,	in	which	the	process	is	limited	to	the	anterior	horn	cells	of	the
spinal	 cord,	 and	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 (ALS),	 in	 which	 there	 is
involvement	of	the	bulbar	nuclei,	the	anterior	horn	cells,	and	the	pyramidal	cells
in	the	motor	cortex.

In	PBP,	there	is	a	relentlessly	progressive	degeneration	of	the	neurons	of	the
brainstem	motor	nuclei,	primarily	those	in	the	medulla.	It	usually	occurs	in	late
adult	life	with	onset	in	the	sixth	and	seventh	decades.	The	disease	usually	starts
in	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 CN	 XII	 and	 ascends.	 Typical	 initial	 manifestations	 are
atrophy,	 weakness,	 and	 fasciculations	 of	 the	 tongue.	 Involvement	 is	 bilateral
from	 the	 outset.	 In	 advanced	 cases,	 the	 patient	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 protrude	 the
tongue	or	to	manipulate	food	in	the	mouth.	The	lingual	involvement	is	followed
or	 accompanied	 by	 dysphagia	 and	 dysarthria.	 Nasal	 regurgitation	 of	 liquids	 is
common	and	may	lead	to	choking	and	aspiration.	Involvement	of	the	soft	palate,
larynx,	 and	 tongue	 causes	 flaccid	 dysarthria.	 Early,	 the	 most	 pronounced
difficulty	 is	 with	 pronunciation	 of	 linguals	 and	 velars;	 later,	 the	 labials	 are

the	

facial	 and	

trigeminal	 motor	 nuclei.	 Occasionally,	

affected.	In	advanced	cases,	speech	is	reduced	to	unintelligible	laryngeal	noises.
There	is	often	marked	drooling	of	saliva.	Patients	may	keep	a	tissue	or	rag	at	the
chin	 to	 absorb	 unswallowed	 secretions.	 Sometimes,	 atrophy	 and	 fasciculations
extend	 to	 the	 palate	 and	 pharynx,	 and	 the	 condition	 may	 eventually	 ascend	 to
involve	
the
sternocleidomastoid	and	trapezius	muscles	are	affected.	There	may	be	autonomic
involvement	with	tachycardia.	The	palatal	and	pharyngeal	gag	reflexes	disappear
early.	There	are	no	sensory	changes.	PBP	is	aggressive	and	relentless,	with	death
usually	caused	by	aspiration	pneumonia.	PBP	may	be	the	first	manifestation	of
ALS.	When	ALS	causes	prominent	bulbar	weakness,	it	is	referred	to	as	bulbar
ALS.	 In	 bulbar	 palsy	 due	 to	 ALS,	 there	 are	 also	 corticospinal	 tract
manifestations.	 In	 a	 series	 of	 32	 patients	 with	 PBP,	 all	 but	 two	 progressed	 to
ALS,	regardless	of	the	presence	of	upper	motor	signs	or	generalized	denervation
on	limb	electromyography	(EMG).	The	other	two	died	at	the	PBP	stage.

Severe	bulbar	involvement	 occurs	 in	other	 motor	 neuronopathies.	It	is	often
the	 terminal	 aspect	 of	 Werdnig-Hoffmann	 disease	 (hereditary	 spinal	 muscular
atrophy	 type	 1).	 Fazio-Londe	 disease	 is	 PBP	 occurring	 in	 children.	 Kennedy’s
disease	(X-linked	recessive	bulbospinal	 neuronopathy)	 causes	 a	clinical	picture
resembling	 ALS	 but	 with	 slow	 progression	 and	 other	 atypical	 features;
dysphagia	 or	 dysarthria	 may	 be	 prominent	 late	 in	 the	 course.	 Bulbar
polioencephalitis	may	occur	as	part	of	paralytic	poliomyelitis,	causing	paralysis
of	 the	 throat,	 tongue,	 and	 respiratory	 muscles.	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob	 disease	 may
present	as	bulbar	palsy.

Pseudobulbar	 palsy	 also	 causes	 marked	 difficulty	 with	 bulbar	 function,
especially	 speech	 and	 swallowing.	 Although	 the	 clinical	 manifestations	 are
similar,	 the	 underlying	 mechanism	 is	 entirely	 different.	 Pseudobulbar	 palsy	 is
caused	 by	 bilateral	 supranuclear	 lesions,	 which	 involve	 the	 corticobulbar
pathways	to	the	bulbar	nuclei.	PBP	and	bulbar	ALS	cause	lower	motor	neuron
weakness;	pseudobulbar	palsy	causes	upper	motor	neuron	weakness.	In	patients
with	 bulbar	 ALS,	 both	 processes	 may	 be	 at	 work.	 Because	 of	 bilateral
supranuclear	innervation,	unilateral	lesions	of	the	corticobulbar	tract	rarely	cause
significant	bulbar	dysfunction.	But	with	bilateral	supranuclear	lesions,	the	bulbar
dysfunction	 may	 be	 severe.	 It	 is	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 other	 upper	 motor
neuron	 signs.	 There	 may	 be	 weakness	 and	 spasticity	 of	 the	 muscles	 of
mastication,	an	exaggerated	jaw	jerk,	and	frontal	release	signs	such	as	snout	and
suck	
reflexes.	 Difficulty	 with	 emotional	 control	 causing	 spontaneous,
unprovoked	 laughing	 and	 crying	 (pseudobulbar	 affect,	 emotional	 incontinence)

is	common.	Pathologic	laughing	(crazy	laughter	or	“fou	rire	prodromique”)	and
crying	 have	 also	 been	 reported	 with	 brainstem	 lesions.	 Some	 patients	 have
paresis	of	the	muscles	of	facial	expression	causing	masking	of	the	facies.	There
are	typically	significant	neurologic	abnormalities	beyond	the	distribution	of	the
CN	nuclei,	with	bilateral	cortical	spinal	tract	signs.

The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 pseudobulbar	 palsy	 is	 multiple	 cerebral
infarctions.	The	syndrome	may	also	occur	in	encephalitis,	MS,	trauma,	cerebral
anoxia,	 primary	 lateral	 sclerosis,	 or	 other	 disease	 processes	 that	 cause	 bilateral
corticobulbar	 tract	 lesions.	 The	 lesions	 may	 be	 in	 the	 cortex	 or	 in	 the	 corona
radiata,	internal	capsule,	cerebral	peduncles,	or	brainstem	rostral	to	the	nuclear
centers.	 Speech	 is	 thick	 and	 slurred	 but	 may	 have	 an	 explosive	 quality.	 There
may	be	dysphagia,	nasal	regurgitation,	choking,	and	drooling.	Patients	may	keep
food	 in	 the	 mouth	 for	 prolonged	 periods.	 There	 is	 less	 of	 a	 tendency	 to	 choke
than	 in	 true	 bulbar	 palsy	 because	 the	 gag	 reflexes	 are	 intact	 and	 may	 be
hyperactive.	 Although	 the	 tongue	 may	 be	 strikingly	 immobile,	 atrophy	 and
fasciculations	do	not	develop.	 The	 prognosis	 in	 pseudobulbar	palsy	is	no	more
favorable	than	in	PBP.	The	eventual	outcome	in	both	conditions	is	death,	often
because	of	aspiration.	Two	types	of	pseudobulbar	palsy	have	been	described;	one
is	 due	 to	 lesions	 affecting	 the	 corticobulbar	 fibers,	 and	 the	 other	 is	 due	 to
involvement	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia	 or	 extrapyramidal	 pathways.	 In	 striatal
pseudobulbar	 palsy,	 there	 are	 additional	 signs	 of	 basal	 ganglia	 involvement,
including	rigidity,	hyperkinesias,	and	a	parkinsonian	picture.

Other	 conditions	 that	 may	 cause	 prominent	 weakness	 of	 bulbar	 muscles	 or
other	 evidence	 of	 brainstem	 dysfunction	 include	 neuromuscular	 transmission
disorders,	 some	 neuropathies	 and	 myopathies,	 and	 certain	 rare	 neurologic
conditions.	 The	 dysarthria	 and	 dysphagia	 of	 myasthenia	 gravis	 (MG)	 may
resemble	 bulbar	 palsy.	 Early	 in	 the	 course,	 it	 may	 be	 difficult	 to	 distinguish
bulbar	ALS	or	PBP	from	MG.	The	characteristic	eye	signs	of	MG	are	not	always
present.	 Bulbar	 signs	 and	 symptoms	 similar	 to	 those	 of	 MG	 can	 occur	 in
botulism	and	Lambert-Eaton	syndrome.

tend	

Patients	 with	 MUSK	 antibody	 MG	

to	 have	 prominent	 bulbar
dysfunction,	neck	and	shoulder	girdle	weakness,	and	respiratory	symptoms	and
may	 develop	 muscle	 atrophy.	 Bulbar	 muscle	 weakness	 can	 occur	 in	 muscular
dystrophies,	 especially	 oculopharyngeal	 dystrophy,	 and	 other	 myopathies.
Bulbar	 weakness	 may	 complicate	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome	 and	 other
polyneuropathies.	 CN	
diphtheritic
polyneuropathy.	 In	 tetanus,	 pharyngeal	 spasms	 may	 accompany	 trismus.	 In

characteristic	

involvement	

of	

is	

rabies,	 spasmodic	 contractions	 of	 the	 muscles	 occur	 on	 attempts	 to	 swallow.
Whipple’s	 disease	 involving	 the	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)	 may	 have
prominent	 brainstem	 findings.	 Oculomasticatory	 myorhythmia,	 a	 striking
movement	 disorder	 involving	 the	 eyes	 and	 jaw,	 is	 characteristic,	 perhaps
pathognomonic,	 of	 CNS	 Whipple’s	 disease.	 Brainstem	 involvement	 may	 be	 a
striking	 feature	 of	 Leigh’s	 disease	 (subacute	 necrotizing	 encephalomyopathy).
The	brainstem	can	also	be	damaged	by	radiation.

MULTIPLE	CRANIAL	NERVE	PALSIES

Intracranial-extramedullary	or	extracranial	processes	may	involve	more	than	one
CN.	A	disease	may	involve	homologous	nerves	on	the	two	sides	(e.g.,	bilateral
facial	 palsy)	 or	 different	 nerves	 on	 the	 same	 or	 opposite	 sides.	 In	 some
conditions,	 a	 cluster	 of	 nerves	 is	 involved	 in	 a	 discrete	 anatomical	 region.	 The
progression	may	follow	some	anatomical	pattern	or	appear	capricious.	Multiple
CNs	may	be	affected	from	the	outset,	or	the	process	may	begin	with	one	nerve
and	progress	to	involve	others.	Pain	may	or	may	not	be	present.	Table	21.3	lists
some	conditions	that	may	cause	MCNPs.	Table	21.4	covers	some	of	the	named
multiple	CN	syndromes.

In	Keane’s	series	of	979	patients	with	MCNP,	the	most	commonly	involved
nerves	 were	 CNs	 VI,	 VII,	 V,	 and	 VIII.	 The	 most	 common	 combinations	 were
involvement	 of	 CNs	 III	 and	 IV,	 V	 and	 VI,	 and	 V	 and	 VII.	 The	 most	 common
locations	 were	 cavernous	 sinus,	 brainstem,	 and	 individual	 nerve	 trunks.	 The
most	 common	 causes	 were	 neoplasm,	 vascular	 disease,	 trauma,	 infection,	 and
the	 Guillain-Barré	 and	 Miller	 Fisher	 syndromes.	 A	 MCNP	 variant	 of	 Guillain-
Barré	 has	 been	 described.	 The	 most	 common	 causes	 of	 recurrent	 cranial
neuropathies	were	diabetes	and	idiopathic.

A	 major	 consideration	 when	 there	 is	 MCNP	 is	 some	 process	 affecting	 the
meninges	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 skull.	 Although	 infectious	 and	 inflammatory
conditions	 are	 possible,	 the	 major	 consideration	 when	 there	 is	 painless
dysfunction	 of	 several	 CNs	 over	 a	 period	 of	 days	 to	 weeks	 is	 neoplastic
meningitis,	 which	 can	 be	 either	 carcinomatous	 or	 lymphomatous	 (meningeal
carcinomatosis	 or	 lymphomatosis).	 Neoplastic	 meningitis	 occurs	 in	 as	 many	 as
15%	 of	 patients	 with	 systemic	 malignancy	 and	 may	 be	 the	 presenting
manifestation	in	5%	to	10%.	The	most	common	neoplastic	processes	to	involve
the	meninges	are	small	cell	carcinoma	of	the	lung,	melanoma,	and	myeloblastic

leukemia.	 Carcinoma	 of	 the	 breast	 seldom	 spreads	 to	 the	 meninges	 but	 is	 a
common	cause	of	meningeal	neoplasia	because	of	its	frequency.

TABLE
21.3

Some	Disease	Processes	That	May	Involve	Multiple
Cranial	Nerves	(CNs)

Acute	infectious	meningitis
Chronic	infectious	meningitis
Syphilis
Lyme	disease
Viral	infection	(Herpes	zoster,	herpes	simplex,	EBV,	HIV,	HTLV-1,	CMV)
Meningeal	neoplasia	(leptomeningeal	metastases,	carcinomatous
meningitis,	lymphomatous	meningitis,	primary	leptomeningeal
lymphoma,	neurolymphomatosis)

Pituitary	apoplexy
Nasopharyngeal	carcinoma	(Schmincke	tumor)
Primary	clivus	or	skull	base	neoplasm	(glomus	tumor,	meningioma,

chordoma,	others)

Metastatic	clivus	or	skull	base	neoplasm	(prostate,	breast,	lung,	head,

and	neck	tumors)

Cavernous	sinus	disease	(Tolosa-Hunt	syndrome,	mass	lesion,	others)
Sarcoidosis	(special	predilection	for	CNs	II,	VII,	and	VIII)
Granulomatosis	with	polyangiitis	(Wegener’s	granulomatosis)
Vasculitis	(polyarteritis	nodosa,	Churg-Strauss,	lymphomatoid
granulomatosis,	giant	cell	arteritis,	granulomatous	angiitis)

Connective	tissue	disease	(systemic	lupus	erythematosis,	Sjögren’s

syndrome,	scleroderma,	mixed	connective	tissue	disease)

Cryoglobulinemia
Prepontine	mass	lesion
Skull	base	trauma
Aneurysm	(carotid	dissection,	fusiform	basilar)
Carotid	endarterectomy
Bony	disease	of	skull	base	(Paget’s	disease,	osteopetrosis)

Diabetes	mellitus
Guillain-Barré	syndrome
Miller	Fisher	syndrome
Polyneuritis	cranialis
Amyloidosis
Craniocervical	junction	anomalies
Cranial	irradiation
Idiopathic	cranial	polyneuropathy
Idiopathic	hypertrophic	cranial	pachymeningitis

CMV,	cytomegalovirus;	EBV,	Epstein-Barr	virus;	HTLV-1,	human	T-cell	lymphocytotrophic	virus.

Patients	 with	 neoplastic	 meningitis	 typically	 have	 accompanying	 headache,
meningeal	 signs,	 and	 evidence	 of	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure.	 Facial
numbness	in	association	with	a	multiple	lower	CN	palsy	syndrome	is	ominous.
A	 combination	 of	 CNs	 VI	 and	 XII	 palsies	 is	 particularly	 suggestive	 of	 a
neoplastic	process	involving	the	clivus.	Leptomeningeal	metastatic	disease	from
solid	tumors	is	more	likely	to	present	with	spinal	cord	or	radicular	involvement.
Diffuse	meningeal	involvement	from	hematologic	malignancies	is	more	likely	to
present	 with	 MCNP.	 Obtaining	 CSF	 cytologic	 confirmation	 is	 often	 difficult
initially;	biochemical	markers	may	be	helpful.

TABLE
21.4

Summary	of	Syndromes	with	Involvement	of	Multiple
CNs*

Other	neoplastic	processes	and	mass	lesions	at	the	base	of	the	skull	may	also
produce	an	MCNP	syndrome.	A	skull	base	neoplasm	accounted	for	13%	of	cases
in	 Keane’s	 MCNP	 series.	 Nasopharyngeal	 carcinomas	 (NPCs),	 such	 as
lymphoepithelioma	(Schmincke	tumor),	occur	in	younger	patients	than	do	other
head	 and	 neck	 cancers;	 there	 may	 be	 an	 association	 with	 Epstein-Barr	 virus
infection.	 NPC	 often	 arises	 in	 Rosenmuller’s	 fossa	 and	 spreads	 laterally	 to	 the
paranasopharyngeal	 space	 and	 then	 to	 the	 skull	 base.	 The	 tumor	 may	 infiltrate

the	pterygopalatine	fossa,	and	the	maxillary	nerve,	and	may	spread	to	involve	the
cavernous	sinus.	About	20%	of	patients	have	CN	involvement	at	the	time	of	the
diagnosis	 of	 NPC.	 Radiotherapy	 for	 the	 tumor	 may	 itself	 cause	 cranial
neuropathy,	particularly	of	CN	XII.	Distinguishing	radiation-induced	neuropathy
from	tumor	recurrence	may	be	difficult.

NPCs	may	erode	the	clivus.	Other	tumors	involving	the	clivus	may	also	cause
MCNP.	A	chordoma,	a	rare	primary	bone	tumor,	usually	presents	in	males	in	the
sixth	 decade.	 The	 tumor	 is	 histologically	 benign	 but	 locally	 invasive	 and
destructive.	 When	 it	 extends	 posteriorly,	 it	 may	 cause	 CN	 palsies	 or	 brainstem
compression.	 Other	 skull	 base	 neoplasms	 include	 metastasis,	 meningiomas,
lymphoma,	 myeloma,	
tumor,
hemangiopericytoma,	 and	 various	 primary	 bone	 tumors.	 Osteopetrosis	 (Albers-
Schonberg	or	marble	bone	disease)	causes	a	generalized	increase	in	bone	density
and	 can	 narrow	 exit	 foramina,	 causing	 MCNP.	 Other	 bone	 disorders	 that	 may
behave	 similarly	 include	 Paget’s	 disease,	 fibrous	 dysplasia,	 and	 hyperostosis
cranialis	interna.

histiocytosis,	

neurinoma,	

giant	

cell	

Mass	lesions	lying	along	the	clivus,	even	though	not	arising	from	it	directly,
may	 cause	 MCNP.	 Vertebrobasilar	 dolichoectasia	 may	 cause	 cranial
neuropathies	 because	 of	 compression	 or	 ischemia.	 Patients	 with	 a	 tortuous
basilar	 artery	 of	 normal	 caliber	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 have	 isolated	 cranial
neuropathy;	 those	 with	 basilar	 artery	 ectasia	 or	 with	 fusiform,	 giant	 aneurysm
are	more	likely	to	have	MCNP.	Rarely,	hematoma	lying	along	the	clivus	in	the
prepontine	 region	 affects	 multiple	 CNs.	 Other	 processes	 that	 may	 affect	 the
prepontine	region	include	exophytic	glioma	and	dermoid,	epidermoid,	and	other
cystic	lesions.

Infectious	 disease	 accounted	 for	 10%	 of	 Keane’s	 MCNP	 cases.	 Conditions
include	 Lyme	 disease,

to	 cause	 cranial	 neuropathy	
particularly	 prone	
tuberculosis,	neurosyphilis,	cryptococcosis,	and	HIV.

The	 nervous	 system	 is	 involved	 in	 5%	 to	 15%	 of	 patients	 with	 sarcoidosis.
The	 disease	 may	 present	 neurologically	 and	 rarely	 remains	 confined	 to	 the
nervous	 system.	 About	 half	 of	 the	 patients	 with	 neurosarcoidosis	 have	 CN
involvement.	 The	 CNs	 most	 commonly	 involved	 are	 II,	 VII,	 and	 VIII.	 A
peripheral	 facial	 palsy	 is	 the	 most	 common	 manifestation.	 About	 half	 of	 the
patients	 with	 CN	 involvement	 have	 a	 cranial	 polyneuropathy,	 most	 commonly
bilateral	 facial	 nerve	 palsy.	 Other	 common	 neurologic	 complications	 include
chronic	 meningitis,	 hydrocephalus,	 hypothalamic-pituitary	 dysfunction,
myelopathy,	 myopathy,	 and	 peripheral	 neuropathy.	 Neurologic	 involvement

occurs	 in	 as	 many	 as	 20%	 of	 patients	 with	 Behcet’s	 disease,	 including	 MCNP
due	to	meningeal	or	brainstem	lesions.	The	most	commonly	involved	nerves	are
CN	II	and	CN	VIII.

Several	forms	of	systemic	vasculitis	may	cause	MCNP;	the	most	common	is
granulomatosis	 with	 polyangiitis	 (Wegener’s	 granulomatosis).	 In	 one	 series,
cranial	neuropathies	were	the	most	common	neurologic	abnormality.	Giant	cell
arteritis	may	cause	the	combination	of	optic	and	extraocular	neuropathies.	Other
vasculitic	 processes	 of	 concern	 include	 lymphomatoid	 granulomatosis,	 a
lymphoreticular	 malignancy,	 and	 vasculitis	 due	 to	 connective	 tissue	 disease,
especially	polyarteritis	nodosa.

Polyneuritis	cranialis	is	an	MCNP	syndrome	that	may	represent	a	variant	of
Guillain-Barré	 syndrome	 involving	 the	 lower	 CNs.	 An	 acute,	 painful,	 steroid-
responsive	 MCNP	 syndrome	 that	 may	 be	 on	 a	 continuum	 with	 Tolosa-Hunt
syndrome	 (see	 section	 on	 Cavernous	 Sinus	 Syndrome)	 but	 involving	 nerves
(idiopathic	 cranial
outside	
polyneuropathy).	 Bannwarth’s	 syndrome	 (meningopolyradiculitis)	 refers	 to
MCNP	and	painful	polyradiculopathies	due	to	Lyme	disease.	Most	patients	have
an	 acute	 peripheral	 facial	 paresis	 with	 additional	 involvement	 of	 other	 nerves
and	spinal	roots.

the	 cavernous	 sinus	 has	 been	 described	

CN	 palsy	 occurs	 occasionally	 in	 carotid	 artery	 dissection;	 rarely,	 it	 is	 the
dominant	 or	 only	 manifestation.	 Ipsilateral	 headache,	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 and
lower	 CN	 palsy	 are	 suggestive	 of	 carotid	 dissection	 even	 in	 the	 absence	 of
cerebral	 ischemic	 symptoms.	 CN	 XII	 is	 invariably	 affected,	 and	 in	 some
patients,	other	CNs	may	be	involved	as	well.	The	etiology	is	not	certain.	There
may	be	compression	or	stretching	by	the	aneurysmal	dilatation	or	ischemia	due
to	 involvement	 of	 the	 segmental	 arteries	 supplying	 the	 nerves,	 particularly	 the
ascending	pharyngeal	artery.	CN	palsy	also	occurs	as	a	complication	of	carotid
endarterectomy.

Trauma	accounted	for	12%	of	MCNP	cases	in	Keane’s	series.	Blunt	trauma,
such	 as	 MVA	 or	 falling,	 is	 twice	 as	 common	 as	 penetrating	 trauma.	 Iatrogenic
trauma	 accounts	 for	 a	 significant	 minority,	 especially	 radical	 head	 or	 neck
dissections.

DISORDERS	OF	CRANIAL	NERVE	GROUPS

In	some	locations,	two	or	more	CNs	are	bundled	in	a	common	anatomical	space,

such	 as	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 or	 jugular	 foramen.	 A	 focal	 disease	 process	 may
involve	 the	 entire	 cluster	 of	 nerves.	 Intradural,	 extramedullary	 pathology
involves	 the	 nerves	 after	 they	 exit	 the	 brainstem	 but	 before	 they	 exit	 the	 skull
(e.g.,	 in	 the	 cerebellopontine	 angle	 [CPA]).	 Extracranial	 pathology	 involves	 a
group	of	nerves	just	after	they	exit	the	skull	but	before	they	disperse	(e.g.,	in	the
retroparotid	 space).	 As	 with	 brainstem	 syndromes,	 the	 many	 syndromes	 that
involve	 multiple	 CNs	 carry	 an	 eponym	 and	 an	 anatomical	 description.	 The
anatomical	regions	involved	are	often	so	arcane	that	the	eponym	serves	just	as
well.	 Table	21.4	 summarizes	 these	 syndromes.	 Most	 of	 the	 disorders	 affecting
CN	groups	are	due	to	mass	effect.	The	mass	is	often	neoplastic.	Primary	neural
tumors,	such	as	schwannoma	or	neurofibroma,	arising	from	one	CN	may	cause
compression	of	adjacent	nerves.	Many	of	these	syndromes	are	rare	in	neurologic
practice.	The	relatively	common	ones	are	the	cavernous	sinus,	CPA,	and	jugular
foramen	syndromes.

FIGURE	21.3	A.	The	cavernous	sinus	lies	just	lateral	to	the	sella	turcica.	Within	it	lie
the	 carotid	 artery	 and	 cranial	 nerves	 (CNs)	 III,	 IV,	 and	 VI	 and	 branches	 of	 CN	 V.	 B.
Pathologic	 findings	 involving	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 are	 not	 rare	 and	 can	 usually	 be
recognized	by	the	pattern	of	CN	involvement.

Cavernous	Sinus	Syndrome

The	cavernous	sinuses	are	complex	venous	channels	that	lie	on	either	side	of	the
sphenoid	bone	and	sella	turcica,	extending	from	the	superior	orbital	fissure	to	the
apex	of	the	petrous	temporal	bone	(Figure	21.3).	The	two	sides	are	connected	by
an	anterior	and	posterior	intercavernous	sinus.	A	thin	layer	of	dura,	the	pituitary
capsule,	forms	the	medial	wall	of	the	cavernous	sinus.	The	internal	carotid	artery
with	its	pericarotid	sympathetic	plexus	runs	through	the	sinus.	CNs	III,	IV,	and	V

lie	in	the	wall	of	the	sinus	from	above	to	below.	CN	VI	lies	free	in	the	lumen	of
the	 sinus	 inferolateral	 to	 the	 carotid	 artery.	 The	 ophthalmic	 division	 of	 CN	 V
traverses	 the	 sinus;	 the	 maxillary	 division	 runs	 for	 a	 short	 distance	 through	 its
posterior-inferior	part.

Conditions	 of	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 were	 recognized	 by	 Gowers	 in	 1888,	 but
some	years	 later,	 the	 writings	of	 C.	Foix	(French	neurologist)	 and	G.	Jefferson
(English	 neurosurgeon,	 best	 known	 for	 describing	 C1	 fracture)	 brought	 wide
recognition	 to	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 syndrome.	 The	 cavernous
sinus	may	be	involved	by	tumor,	thrombosis	(bland	or	septic),	carotid	aneurysm,
carotid-cavernous	fistula,	inflammation,	infection,	and	other	processes.	There	is
variable	involvement	of	the	CNs	crossing	the	sinus.	Severe	processes	may	affect
all	of	the	nerves,	but	isolated	sixth	nerve	palsy	also	occurs.	In	Keane’s	series	of
151	 patients,	 the	 most	 common	 etiologies	 were	 tumor,	 trauma,	 self-limited
inflammation,	carotid	aneurysms	and	fistulas,	and	infection.	These	accounted	for
88%	 of	 the	 cases.	 Other	 causes	 of	 cavernous	 sinus	 syndrome	 include	 pituitary
apoplexy,	 metastasis,	
leukemia,	 myeloma,	 neuroblastoma,
mucormycosis,	aspergillosis,	tuberculosis,	carotid-cavernous	fistula,	trauma,	and
sarcoidosis.

lymphoma	 or	

Intracavernous	 carotid	 aneurysms	 may	 compress	 and	 distort	 the	 contents	 of
the	 cavernous	 sinus	 (Figure	 21.3B).	 A	 carotid-cavernous	 fistula	
is	 a
communication	between	the	carotid	artery	and	the	cavernous	sinus.	Fistulas	may
be	traumatic	or	 develop	 spontaneously	because	 of	rupture	 of	 an	intracavernous
carotid	 aneurysm.	 In	 addition	 to	 CN	 palsies,	 patients	 may	 have	 pulsatile
proptosis,	chemosis,	an	ocular	bruit,	and	evidence	of	increased	venous	pressure
in	the	eye.	Dilated,	arteriolized	conjunctival	and	episcleral	blood	vessels	with	a
tortuous,	corkscrew	shape	are	characteristic	(Figure	21.4).	Neoplasms	commonly
involve	 the	 cavernous	 sinus.	 Common	 tumor	 types	 include	 NPC,	 metastases,
lymphoma,	pituitary	adenoma,	and	meningioma.

Two	 neurosurgeons,	 E.	 S.	 Tolosa	 (Spanish)	 and	 W.	 E.	 Hunt	 (American),
described	 indolent,	 idiopathic,	 granulomatous	 inflammation	 of	 the	 cavernous
sinus	 causing	 pain	 and	 ophthalmoplegia.	 Pathologically,	 there	 is	 noncaseating,
granulomatous	inflammation	similar	to	that	seen	in	orbital	pseudotumor.	Patients
present	with	severe	periorbital	headache	and	dysfunction	of	one	or	more	of	the
intracavernous	 CNs.	 Tolosa-Hunt	 syndrome	 is	 exquisitely	 responsive	 to	 even
small	doses	of	steroids,	and	steroid	responsiveness	has	been	used	as	a	diagnostic
criterion.	 However,	 other	 conditions	 involving	 the	 cavernous	 sinus,	 including
tumors,	 infection,	 and	 aneurysm,	 may	 also	 improve	 with	 steroids.	 MRI	 may

show	 T2	 isointense	 tissue	 that	 enhances	 with	 gadolinium.	 Another	 condition
related	 to	 cavernous	 sinus	 syndrome	 is	 Raeder’s	 paratrigeminal	 (or	 the
paratrigeminal	oculosympathetic)	syndrome	(Chapter	15).

FIGURE	 21.4	 Corkscrew	 conjunctival	 and	 episcleral	 vessels	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 a
carotid-cavernous	fistula.

Cerebellopontine	Angle	Syndrome

A	mass	lesion	in	the	CPA	is	usually	an	acoustic	neuroma,	but	other	tumors	and
masses	may	arise	in	the	region	(Chapter	17).	An	acoustic	neuroma	usually	arises
from	the	vestibular	portion	of	CN	VIII	within	the	internal	auditory	meatus.	The
initial	symptoms	are	usually	hearing	loss	and	tinnitus.	Examination	early	in	the
course	 shows	 sensorineural	 hearing	 loss	 and	 impaired	 labyrinthine	 function	 on
the	 involved	 side.	 Vertigo	 is	 unusual	 because	 the	 tumor	 grows	 slowly	 and	 the
vestibular	 system	 compensates,	 although	 patients	 may	 have	 impaired	 balance.
As	the	mass	expands,	compression	of	CN	V	causes	ipsilateral	facial	sensory	loss
and	impairment	of	the	corneal	reflex.	Pressure	on	the	cerebellum	or	its	peduncles
causes	ataxia	and	incoordination.	There	may	be	involvement	of	CN	VII,	with	a
peripheral	facial	palsy,	and	of	CNs	VI,	IX,	and	X.	Late	in	the	course,	increased
intracranial	 pressure	 may	 cause	 headache,	 papilledema,	 and	 occasional	 loss	 of
consciousness.	 Nystagmus	 is	 common;	 it	 may	 be	 coarse	 and	 slow	 on	 gaze
toward	the	side	of	the	lesion	(gaze	paretic	nystagmus)	and	fine	and	rapid	on	gaze
away	 from	 the	 lesion	 (vestibular	 nystagmus).	 This	 unusual	 combination	 is
referred	 to	 as	 Bruns’	 nystagmus	 (for	 Ludwig	 Bruns,	 German	 neurologist,	 see
Video	Link	21.1).

