SECTION	H	Coordination	and	Gait

CHAPTER	43

Cerebellar	Function

The	 cerebellum	 is	 tasked	 with	 bringing	 finesse	 to	 the	 motor	 system.	 Although
not	primarily	involved	in	the	mechanisms	for	production	of	muscle	power,	it	is
necessary	 for	 normal	 control	 and	 regulation	 of	 muscle	 contraction.	 The	 major
function	of	the	cerebellum,	from	a	clinical	point	of	view,	is	the	coordination	of
movement.	The	cerebellum	is	the	portion	of	the	brain	through	which	the	cerebral
motor	 cortex	 achieves	 the	 synthesis	 and	 coordination	 of	 individual	 muscle
contractions	 required	 for	 normal	 voluntary	 movements.	 Without	 it,	 movements
are	 gross,	 uncoordinated,	 clumsy,	 and	 tremulous,	 and	 precise	 movements
become	impossible.	Lesions	of	the	cerebellum	do	not	cause	weakness,	but	rather
loss	of	coordination	and	inability	to	gauge	and	regulate,	as	Gordon	Holmes	said,
the	 “rate,	 range,	 and	 force”	 of	 movement.	 Although	 motor	 strength	 and	 power
are	preserved,	active	movements	are	severely	compromised.

In	order	to	perform	any	movement—especially	a	complex	act	involving	many
muscle	 groups—contractions	 of	 the	 agonists,	 antagonists,	 synergists,	 and
muscles	of	fixation	must	be	adequately	coordinated.	To	begin	a	movement,	the
agonists	contract	to	execute	the	movement;	the	antagonists	relax	or	modify	their
tone	 to	 facilitate	 it;	 the	 synergists	 reinforce	 the	 movement;	 and	 the	 fixating
muscles	prevent	displacements	and	maintain	the	appropriate	posture	of	the	limb.
To	terminate	the	movement,	the	antagonists	contract	and	the	agonists	relax.	The
individual	muscles	that	enter	into	the	act	must	be	controlled	and	coordinated,	as
a	 conductor	 would	 direct	 an	 orchestra,	 precisely	 regulating	 the	 action	 of	 the
individual	parts.	The	cerebellum	is	the	conductor.	It	is	essential	to	the	synergy	of
muscle	contraction	and	is	the	center	of	coordination	for	voluntary	movement.	It
does	 not	 provide	 power	 and	 does	 not	 play	 an	 instrument,	 but	 without	 it	 the
symphony	 of	 normal	 movement	 degenerates	 into	 a	 cacophony	 of	 disorganized
muscle	contractions.

A	 major	 manifestation	 of	 cerebellar	 lesions	 is	 ataxia	 (Gr.	 a	 “without,”	 taxis

“order”);	 a	 rough	 translation	 is	 “not	 orderly.”	 The	 essential	 feature	 in	 ataxia	 is
that	movements	are	not	normally	organized.	Although	the	term	is	a	general	one,
indicating	chaotic	and	disorganized	movement,	it	is	used	clinically	primarily	to
refer	to	the	motor	control	abnormalities—including	incoordination,	tremor,	and
impaired	 rapid	 alternating	 movements	 (RAMs)—that	 occur	 with	 cerebellar
lesions.	Ataxia	is	not	specific	for	cerebellar	disease,	and	lesions	in	other	parts	of
the	 nervous	 system	 must	 be	 excluded	 before	 attributing	 ataxia	 to	 cerebellar
disease.	 Impaired	 proprioception	 may	 cause	 sensory	 ataxia,	 and	 lesions
involving	 pathways	 that	 originate	 in	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 may	 cause	 frontal	 lobe
ataxia.	 Other	 common	 manifestations	 of	 cerebellar	 disease	 include	 nystagmus,
impaired	balance,	and	difficulty	walking.

ANATOMY

The	cerebellum	is	located	in	the	posterior	fossa,	beneath	the	tentorium	cerebelli.
Below	and	anteriorly,	it	is	separated	from	the	dorsal	pons	by	the	fourth	ventricle
and	 from	 the	 medulla	 and	 the	 dura	 mater	 covering	 the	 atlanto-occipital
membrane	by	the	cisterna	magna.	Grossly,	there	are	three	parts:	(a)	the	cerebellar
hemispheres,	two	larger,	lateral	masses;	(b)	the	vermis,	a	small,	unpaired	median
portion	 that	 connects	 the	 hemispheres	 (Figures	 43.1	 and	 43.2);	 and	 (c)	 the
flocculonodular	(FN)	lobe,	a	small,	midline	structure	that	lies	on	the	anterior	part
of	the	inferior	surface.	The	FN	lobe	consists	of	the	paired	lateral	flocculi	and	the
midline	nodulus	(Figure	43.3).	The	vermis	is	separated	from	the	hemispheres	by
the	 paramedian	 sulci.	 The	 cerebellar	 tonsils	 are	 small,	 rounded	 lobules	 on	 the
inferior	aspect	of	the	cerebellar	hemispheres,	just	above	the	foramen	magnum.

Gross	Anatomy

Anatomically,	the	cerebellum	is	divided	into	three	lobes:	anterior,	posterior,	and
FN.	 Each	 has	 a	 vermis	 and	 hemisphere	 portion	 (Figure	 43.3).	 The	 deep
transverse	 primary	 fissure	 divides	 the	 cerebellum	 into	 anterior	 and	 posterior
lobes.	 The	 posterolateral	 fissure	 separates	 the	 FN	 lobe	 from	 the	 posterior	 lobe.
Anatomists	 further	 divide	 the	 cerebellum	 by	 fissures	 and	 sulci	 into	 10	 lobules
that	bear	arcane	names	of	no	clinical	relevance	(Figure	43.4).	In	terms	of	afferent
and	 efferent	 connections,	 the	 cerebellum	 can	 also	 be	 organized	 into	 three
parallel,	 sagittal	 zones:	 vermian,	 paravermian,	 and	 lateral.	 As	 mentioned

the	 cerebellum	

previously,	clinicians	divide	the	cerebellum	functionally	into	three	parts:	(a)	the
hemispheres,	responsible	for	appendicular	coordination;	(b)	the	anterior,	superior
vermis	(or	simply	the	vermis),	responsible	for	gait	and	other	axial	functions;	and
(c)	 the	 FN	 lobe,	 or	 vestibulocerebellum.	 The	 FN	 lobe	 is	 phylogenetically	 the
oldest	 and	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 archicerebellum.	 The	 FN	 lobe	 has	 extensive
connections	 with	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei	 and	 is	 concerned	 primarily	 with	 eye
movements	and	gross	balance.	It	also	receives	visual	afferents	from	the	superior
colliculi	and	the	visual	cortex.	The	primary	concerns	of	the	archicerebellum	are
eye	movement	control	and	gross	orientation	in	space,	such	as	up	and	down.	The
next	 area	 of	
the	 paleocerebellum	 or
spinocerebellum.	 In	 humans,	 the	 paleocerebellum	 consists	 of	 the	 anterior,
superior	vermis	and	adjacent	paravermal	cortex;	it	corresponds	approximately	to
the	anatomical	anterior	lobe.	The	paleocerebellum	developed	during	a	period	of
evolution	 when	 extremity	 control	 was	 not	 a	 concern;	 it	 is	 concerned	 primarily
with	 posture,	 muscle	 tone,	 axial	 muscle	 control,	 and	 locomotion.	 There	 are
extensive	connections	 between	the	vermis	and	 spinal	cord	pathways.	The	 most
phylogenetically	 recent	 part	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 is	 the	 neocerebellum,	 or	 the
cerebellar	 hemispheres,	 which	 make	 up	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 cerebellum.	 The
neocerebellum	 corresponds	 approximately	
lobe.	 The
hemispheres	 are	 concerned	 with	 coordinating	 movement	 and	 providing	 fine
motor	control	for	precise	movements	of	the	extremities.	The	primary	afferents	to
the	 hemispheres	 are	 from	 the	 pontine	 nuclei,	 which	 receive	 the	 corticopontine
fibers	from	the	cerebral	cortex.

to	 evolve	 was	

the	 posterior	

to	

FIGURE	43.1	Ventral	(A)	and	dorsal	(B)	views	of	the	human	cerebellum.	See	Figure
43.4	for	names	of	lobes	and	lobules.

FIGURE	43.2	Median	longitudinal	section	through	the	human	cerebellum,	pons,	and
medulla.

FIGURE	 43.3	 Horizontal	 section	 through	 the	 human	 cerebellum	 showing	 the
arrangement	 of	 the	 cortical	 gray	 matter	 and	 locations	 of	 the	 nuclei	 within	 the	 white

matter.

FIGURE	43.4	Diagram	of	the	cerebellum	showing	the	lobes	and	lobules.

Another	 way	 to	 view	 the	 cerebellum	 is	 in	 terms	 of	 its	 primary	 afferent
connections:	 the	 vestibulocerebellum	 (input	 from	 vestibular	 nuclei	 to	 the	 FN
lobe),	the	spinocerebellum	(input	from	the	spinocerebellar	tracts	to	the	anterior
vermis),	 and	 the	 pontocerebellum	 (input	 from	 the	 pontine	 nuclei	 to	 the
hemispheres).

The	cerebellum	is	made	up	of	a	white	matter	core,	covered	with	a	thin	layer
of	gray	matter,	the	cerebellar	cortex.	Deep	in	the	white	matter	are	several	gray
masses,	 the	 cerebellar	 nuclei.	 The	 dentate	 nuclei,	 the	 largest	 of	 the	 cerebellar
nuclei,	 are	 gray	 matter	 structures	 situated	 deep	 in	 the	 white	 matter	 of	 each
hemisphere	(Figure	43.3).	In	the	hilus	of	each	dentate	nucleus	lie	the	emboliform
nuclei;	 medial	 to	 the	 emboliform	 are	 the	 globose	 nuclei.	 The	 globose	 and
emboliform	 nuclei	 together	 are	 called	 the	 nucleus	 interpositus.	 In	 the	 white
matter	of	the	vermis,	at	the	roof	of	the	fourth	ventricle,	are	the	fastigial,	or	roof,
nuclei.	 From	 medial	 to	 lateral,	 the	 deep	 nuclei	 are	 the	 fastigial,	 globose,
emboliform,	and	dentate.	The	major	cerebellar	connections	are	to	the	vestibular
system,	the	spinal	cord,	and	the	cerebral	cortex	(Figure	43.5).	Microscopically,
the	cortex	is	made	up	of	three	layers:	the	outer,	nuclear,	or	molecular	layer;	the

layer	of	Purkinje	cells;	and	the	inner,	or	granular,	layer	(Figure	43.6).

The	 FN	 lobe	 is	 a	 primitive	 part	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 primarily	 concerned	 with
vestibular	function.	The	connections	of	the	FN	lobe	are	primarily,	if	not	entirely,
vestibular.	 The	 FN	 lobe	 receives	 afferent	 impulses	 from	 the	 labyrinths	 and
vestibular	centers,	spinal	cord,	and	brainstem—including	the	reticular	formation
and	olivary	bodies—and	projects	to	the	vestibular	nuclei,	vestibulospinal	tracts,
and	reticular	formation.	The	cerebellum	and	vestibular	centers	function	together
to	maintain	equilibrium,	the	orientation	of	the	body	in	space,	and	the	regulation
of	muscle	tone	and	posture.	The	clinical	manifestations	of	disease	of	the	FN	lobe
are	 difficult	 to	 separate	 from	 the	 invariably	 accompanying	 vestibular	 findings,
primarily	 nystagmus.	 Isolated	 FN	 lobe	 dysfunction	 is	 usually	 caused	 by
ependymomas	and	medulloblastomas	in	children.

FIGURE	43.5	Principal	afferent	and	efferent	connections	of	the	cerebellum.

FIGURE	43.6	 Transverse	 section	 of	 cerebellar	 folia	 showing	 the	 three	 layers	 of	 the
cortex	 and	 the	 underlying	 white	 matter	 (cresyl	 violet).	 (Reprinted	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.
Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 9th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:
Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009,	with	permission.)

The	 paleocerebellum	 communicates	 with	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 brainstem,	 and
vestibular	centers.	The	principal	afferent	connections	of	the	anterior	lobe	come
from	 the	 anterior	 spinocerebellar	 tract,	 although	 it	 receives	 trigeminocerebellar
fibers,	 input	 from	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei,	 and	 some	 corticocerebellar	 fibers.	 The
discharges	are	to	the	vestibular	nuclei,	brainstem,	and	spinal	cord.

The	 neocerebellum	 (pontocerebellum)	 communicates	 with	 the	 cerebral
cortex.	It	is	enormously	developed	in	mammals	in	association	with	growth	of	the
cerebral	 hemispheres.	 In	 primates,	 the	 hemispheres	 overshadow	 the	 rest	 of	 the
cerebellum.	
Its	 afferent	 connections	 are	 principally	 corticopontine,	 or
corticopontocerebellar,	 although	 there	 are	 some	 spinocerebellar	 fibers;	 it
discharges	through	the	dentate	nucleus	to	the	red	nucleus	and	thalamus,	and	thus
to	the	cerebral	cortex.

The	 cerebellum	 is	 connected	 to	 the	 brainstem	 by	 the	 three	 cerebellar
peduncles.	The	inferior	cerebellar	peduncle	(ICP)	connects	the	cerebellum	with

the	 olivocerebellar,	

the	 spinal	 cord	 and	 the	 medulla.	 The	 ICP	 lies	 medial	 to	 the	 middle	 cerebellar
peduncle	(MCP,	brachium	pontis).	The	ICP	has	two	parts:	the	restiform	body	and
the	 juxtarestiform	 body.	 Ascending	 fibers	 in	 the	 restiform	 body	 include	 the
posterior	 spinocerebellar	 and	 cuneocerebellar	 (from	 the	 accessory	 cuneate
nucleus)	 tracts,	 the	 dorsal	 and	 ventral	 external	 arcuate	 fibers	 from	 the	 nuclei
trigeminocerebellar,	 and
gracilis	 and	 cuneatus,	 and	
reticulocerebellar	pathways.	Lying	just	medial	to	ICP	is	the	juxtarestiform	body,
made	 up	 of	 fibers	 traveling	 directly	 between	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei	 and	 the	 FN
lobe.	The	restiform	body	is	an	afferent	system;	the	juxtarestiform	body	contains
both	vestibulocerebellar	and	cerebellovestibular	fibers.	The	juxtarestiform	body
is	mainly	efferent.	Although	it	carries	primary	afferent	vestibulocerebellar	fibers
from	 the	 vestibular	 nerve	 and	 secondary	 vestibulocerebellar	 fibers	 from	 the
vestibular	 nuclei,	 its	 primary	 component	 is	 cerebellovestibular	 fibers	 from	 the
vermis	 and	 the	 FN	 lobe	 (fastigiobulbar	 tract).	 Other	 cerebellovestibular	 fibers
run	from	the	fastigial	nucleus	to	the	vestibular	nuclei	in	the	uncinate	fasciculus,
which	 enters	 the	 brainstem	 adjacent	 to	 the	 ICP.	 The	 MCP	 connects	 the
cerebellum	with	the	pons,	and	through	it	run	the	pontocerebellar	tracts;	these	are
the	final	neurons	of	the	corticopontocerebellar	pathway	that	comes	mainly	from
the	 frontal,	 temporal,	 and	 other	 areas	 of	 the	 cortex	 to	 communicate	 with	 the
contralateral	cerebellar	hemisphere.

The	superior	cerebellar	peduncle	(SCP,	brachium	conjunctivum)	contains	the
principal	 efferent	 fibers	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 and	 the	 dentatorubral	 and	 the
dentatothalamic	 pathways.	 It	 also	 carries	 the	 afferent	 anterior	 spinocerebellar
tract,	 as	 well	 as	 cerebellovestibular	 fibers	 in	 the	 uncinate	 fasciculus.	 The
cerebellotegmental,	 cerebellotectal,	 and	 tectocerebellar	 tracts	 also	 travel	 in	 the
SCP.	 The	 afferent	 fibers	 to	 the	 cerebellar	 cortex	 arrive	 primarily	 by	 tracts	 that
enter	through	the	middle	and	inferior	peduncles,	but	the	anterior	spinocerebellar
tract	enters	via	the	SCP.

Microscopic	Anatomy

The	molecular	layer	of	the	cerebellar	cortex	contains	the	dendritic	arborizations
of	 the	 Purkinje	 cells,	 radial	 fibers	 of	 the	 Bergmann	 glial	 cells,	 basket	 cells,
stellate	 cells,	 climbing	 fibers,	 and	 parallel	 fibers	 (Figure	 43.6).	 The	 flattened
dendritic	trees	of	the	Purkinje	cells	spread	out	perpendicular	to	the	long	axis	of
the	 cerebellar	 folium.	 Climbing	 fibers	 are	 the	 terminal	 ramifications	 of	 fibers
from	 the	 inferior	 olivary	 nucleus	 that	 ascend	 through	 the	 granular	 layer	 to

contact	Purkinje	dendrites	in	the	molecular	layer.	Each	climbing	fiber	forms	an
excitatory	synapse	with	a	single	Purkinje	cell.	Climbing	fibers	also	synapse	on
the	neurons	of	the	deep	cerebellar	nuclei.	Parallel	fibers	are	granule	cell	axons
that	 extend	 upward	 into	 the	 molecular	 layer	 where	 they	 bifurcate	 to	 send
branches	 in	 opposite	 directions	 along	 the	 axis	 of	 a	 folium	 to	 terminate	 on	 the
Purkinje	 cell	 dendrites.	 The	 parallel	 fibers	 intersect	 the	 Purkinje	 cell	 dendrites
like	telephone	wires	over	the	cross	pieces	of	a	telephone	pole.

The	Purkinje	cell	layer	contains	the	perikarya	of	the	large	Purkinje	cells	and
the	smaller	Bergmann	(epithelial)	glial	cells.	The	granule	cell	layer	lies	between
the	white	matter	and	the	Purkinje	cell	layer;	it	contains	granule	cells,	Golgi	cells,
brush	 cells,	 and	 the	 cerebellar	 glomeruli	 (Figure	43.7).	 The	 granule	 cells	 send
their	 axons	 to	 the	 molecular	 layer	 where	 they	 branch	 to	 form	 parallel	 fibers.
Mossy	fibers	are	the	predominant	afferent	system	to	the	cerebellum.	They	arise
from	the	spinal	cord,	the	trigeminal,	reticular	formation,	vestibular	and	pontine
nuclei	of	the	brainstem.	The	mossy	fibers	terminate	as	mossy	fiber	rosettes	that
lie	at	the	center	of	each	cerebellar	glomerulus.	Like	the	climbing	fibers,	mossy
fibers	 are	 excitatory.	 The	 mossy	 fibers	 primarily	 use	 glutamate;	 the	 climbing
fibers	 release	 glutamate	 or	 aspartate.	 Cerebellar	 glomeruli	 are	 synaptic
formations	 with	 mossy	 fiber	 rosettes	 at	 the	 center,	 surrounded	 by	 granule	 and
Golgi	cell	dendrites	(Figure	43.8).

The	 Purkinje	 cells	 are	 excited	 by	 the	 parallel	 and	 climbing	 fibers	 and	 send
inhibitory	 GABA-ergic	 projections	 to	 the	 deep	 cerebellar	 and	 the	 vestibular
nuclei.	 Input	 from	 the	 basket	 and	 stellate	 cells	 inhibit	 the	 Purkinje	 cells.	 The
granule	cells	are	excitatory,	glutaminergic	neurons.	The	parallel	fibers	that	arise
from	the	granule	cells	excite	the	Purkinje,	basket,	stellate,	and	Golgi	cells.	The
granule	 cell	 is	 excited	 by	 mossy	 fiber	 input	 at	 the	 cerebellar	 glomerulus	 and
inhibited	by	Golgi	cells.	The	mossy	fiber	input	excites	Purkinje	cells	indirectly
through	the	granule	cell–parallel	fiber	system	and	produces	simple	spikes	from
the	Purkinje	cell.	The	climbing	fibers	are	entwined	around	the	Purkinje	cell,	like
a	vine	around	a	tree	trunk,	and	excite	it	directly,	producing	complex	spikes.	The
cerebellar	 cortex	 also	 receives	 noradrenergic	 fibers	 from	 the	 locus	 coeruleus,
dopaminergic	fibers	from	the	substantia	nigra,	and	serotonergic	fibers	from	the
raphe	nuclei.	All	the	aminergic	afferents	are	probably	inhibitory.	Afferents	to	the
cerebellar	 cortex	 and	 deep	 nuclei	 generally	 produce	 an	 increase	 in	 excitability.
The	 Purkinje	 cells	 impose	 inhibitory	 control	 over	 the	 cells	 of	 the	 deep	 nuclei.
Mossy	 fiber	 input	 causes	 strong	 direct	 excitation	 of	 the	 deep	 nuclei;	 the
additional	 input	 via	 the	 granule	 cell-parallel	 fiber	 system	 provides	 inhibitory

control	 and	 modulation	 of	 the	 direct	 excitatory	 pathway.	 The	 climbing	 fibers
modulate	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 Purkinje	 cells	 by	 controlling	 the	 influence	 of	 the
different	systems	that	converge	on	it.

FIGURE	 43.7	 Neurons	 in	 the	 cerebellar	 cortex	 showing	 excitatory	 and	 inhibitory
synapses.	The	diagram	represents	a	longitudinally	sectioned	folium,	with	an	edge-on
view	of	the	dendritic	tree	of	the	Purkinje	cell.	Glutaminergic	(excitatory)	neurons	are
red;	GABA-ergic	(inhibitory)	neurons	are	blue.	(Reprinted	from	Kiernan	JA.	Barr’s	The
Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 9th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters
Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	 43.8	 Ultrastructure	 of	 a	 synaptic	 glomerulus	 in	 the	 granule	 cell	 layer.	 The
astrocytic	 processes	 (yellow)	 prevent	 diffusion	 of	 neurotransmitters	 to	 adjacent
synapses.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An
Anatomical	Viewpoint.	9th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2009,	with	permission.)

The	efferent	fibers	from	the	Purkinje	cells	in	the	cerebellar	cortex	are	nearly
all	 relayed	 to	 the	 deep	 nuclei,	 where	 the	 cerebellar	 outflow	 originates	 (Figure
43.5).	The	output	from	the	deep	cerebellar	nuclei	is	excitatory	and	glutaminergic
except	for	the	projection	to	the	inferior	olive,	which	uses	gamma-aminobutyric
acid.	The	fastigial	nucleus,	the	oldest	of	the	cerebellar	nuclei,	receives	afferent
fibers	 from	 the	 paleocerebellum	 and	 also	 from	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei	 and	 the
eighth	 cranial	 nerve.	 Its	 efferent	 impulses,	 many	 of	 them	 crossing	 in	 the	 roof,
pass	into	the	brainstem	to	the	vestibular	nuclei—especially	the	lateral	vestibular
nucleus—and	 to	 the	 reticular	 formation.	 Some	 of	 these	 go	 through	 the	 ICP;
others	 travel	 in	 the	 SCP	 in	 the	 uncinate	 fasciculus.	 The	 fastigial	 nucleus	 also
projects	 to	 the	 ventral	 lateral	 (VL)	 nucleus	 of	 the	 thalamus,	 which	 in	 turn
projects	 to	 the	 trunk	 area	 of	 the	 motor	 strip.	 The	 interposed	 nuclei	 receive
afferents	 primarily	 from	 the	 paravermal	 cortex	 and	 project	 to	 VL	 and	 to	 the

magnocellular	 part	 of	 the	 contralateral	 red	 nucleus,	 which	 gives	 rise	 to	 the
rubrospinal	tract.	The	dentate	nuclei,	the	most	important	of	the	nuclear	masses	in
terms	of	clinical	function,	receive	afferents	principally	from	the	Purkinje	cells	of
the	 neocerebellum.	 The	 dentate	 projects	 to	 the	 ipsilateral	 VL	 and	 intralaminar
thalamic	nuclei	and	to	the	contralateral	red	nucleus	and	inferior	olivary	nucleus.

The	 cerebellum	 is	 part	 of	 complex	 feedback	 loops	 that	 are	 involved	 in	 the
coordination	of	motor	activity	(Figures	43.9	to	43.11).	Large	myelinated	muscle
spindle	 and	 Golgi	 tendon	 organ	 afferents	 travel	 to	 the	 cerebellum	 via	 the
spinocerebellar	 tracts	 and	 enter	 primarily	 through	 the	 ICP.	 This	 information	 is
processed	in	the	hemispheres	and	influences	the	activity	of	Purkinje	cells	in	the
deep,	midline	(primarily	dentate)	nucleus.	The	Purkinje	cells	send	axons	via	the
SCP	to	the	contralateral	VL	nucleus	of	the	thalamus,	which	in	turn	projects	to	the
motor	 cortex.	 Descending	 corticopontine	 fibers	 then	 synapse	 on	 pontine	 nuclei
in	the	basis	pontis,	which	in	turn	send	pontocerebellar	axons	via	the	MCP	to	the
cerebellar	 hemispheres.	 Other	 descending	 corticomotor	 fibers	 actually	 execute
the	 task	 at	 hand.	 The	 cerebellum	 can	 thereby	 communicate	 the	 need	 for	 fine
adjustment	of	movement	to	the	cortex,	and	the	cortex	can	take	corrective	action
while	simultaneously	informing	the	cerebellum	of	the	extent	of	the	correction	so
further	adjustments	can	be	made	(see	Chapter	22).	The	motor	thalamus	serves	to
integrate	cerebellar,	basal	ganglia,	and	cortical	activity.	Another	loop	consists	of
fibers	 that	 arise	 from	 the	 inferior	 olive	 and	 travel	 via	 the	 ICP	 to	 the	 dentate
nucleus,	with	projections	from	the	dentate	going	to	the	red	nucleus,	which	then
projects	 to	 the	 inferior	 olive	 (Guillain-Mollaret	 triangle,	 see	 Chapter	 30).	 The
direct	 vestibulocerebellar	 and	 returning	 cerebellovestibular	 fibers	 form	 yet
another	circuit.	The	cerebellum	also	receives	input	from	the	hypothalamus.

FIGURE	43.9	Connections	of	the	vestibulocerebellum	and	vestibular	nuclei.	Afferents
to	the	cerebellum	are	blue,	cerebellar	efferents	are	red,	and	other	neurons	are	black.
(Reprinted	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical
Viewpoint.	9th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,
2009,	with	permission.)

CLINICAL	MANIFESTATIONS	OF	CEREBELLAR
DYSFUNCTION

Patients	with	cerebellar	dysfunction	suffer	from	various	combinations	of	tremor,
incoordination,	difficulty	walking,	dysarthria,	and	nystagmus,	depending	on	the
parts	of	the	cerebellum	involved	(see	Table	22.1).	Ataxia	is	the	cardinal	sign	of
cerebellar	disease;	it	consists	of	varying	degrees	of	dyssynergia,	dysmetria,	lack
of	agonist-antagonist	coordination,	and	tremor.	Ataxia	may	affect	the	limbs,	the
trunk,	 or	 the	 gait.	 Cerebellar	 disease	 may	 also	 cause	 hypotonia,	 asthenia	 or
slowness	of	movement,	and	deviation	or	drift	of	the	outstretched	limbs.	Disease
involving	 the	 cerebellar	 connections	 in	 the	 brainstem	 causes	 abnormalities
indistinguishable	 from	 disease	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 itself.	 When	 cerebellar	 ataxia

results	from	dysfunction	of	the	cerebellar	connections	in	the	brainstem,	there	are
usually	other	brainstem	signs.

Dyssynergia

The	essential	disturbance	in	cerebellar	disease	is	dyssynergia.	Normally,	there	is
harmonious,	 coordinated	 action	 between	 the	 various	 muscles	 involved	 in	 a
movement	so	that	they	contract	with	the	proper	force,	timing,	and	sequence	of
activation	to	carry	out	the	movement	smoothly	and	accurately.	Cerebellar	disease
impairs	 the	 normal	 control	 mechanisms	 that	 organize	 and	 regulate	 the
contractions	 of	 the	 different	 participating	 muscles	 and	 muscle	 groups	 to	 insure
smooth,	 properly	 coordinated	 movement.	 There	 is	 a	 lack	 of	 speed	 and	 skill	 in
performing	movements	that	require	the	coordinated	activity	of	several	groups	of
muscles	or	of	several	movements.	The	cerebellum	is	instrumental	in	timing	the
activation	of	the	different	muscles	involved	in	a	movement.	Lack	of	integration
of	the	components	of	the	act	results	in	decomposition	of	movement—the	act	is
broken	 down	 into	 its	 component	 parts	 and	 carried	 out	 in	 a	 jerky,	 erratic,
awkward,	 disorganized	 manner.	 The	 cerebellum	 is	 particularly	 important	 in
coordinating	multijoint	movements.

FIGURE	43.10	 Connections	 of	 the	 spinocerebellum.	 Afferents	 to	 the	 cerebellum	 are
blue,	 cerebellar	 efferents	 are	 red,	 and	 other	 neurons	 are	 black.	 (Reprinted	 from
Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 9th	 ed.
Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,	 2009,	 with
permission.)

Dysmetria

Dysmetria	 refers	 to	 errors	 in	 judging	 distance	 and	 gauging	 the	 distance,	 speed,
power,	 and	 direction	 of	 movement.	 Cerebellar	 dysfunction	 leads	 to	 loss	 of	 the
normal	 collaboration	 between	 agonist	 and	 antagonist.	 When	 reaching	 for	 an
object	 50	 cm	 away,	 the	 hand	 shoots	 out	 55	 cm,	 overshooting	 the	 target
(hypermetria),	 or	 fails	 to	 reach	 the	 target	 (hypometria).	 Hypermetria	 is	 more
common.	The	movement	may	be	carried	out	too	slowly	or	too	rapidly	with	too
much	or	too	little	force.	The	patient	with	dysmetria	does	not	make	a	movement
along	 a	 straight	 line	 between	 two	 points	 but	 erratically	 deviates	 from	 the

intended	 track.	 Electromyographic	 studies	 have	 shown	 that	 dysmetria	 is
associated	 with	 abnormalities	 of	 the	 timing	 and	 force	 of	 antagonist	 contraction
necessary	 to	 decelerate	 the	 movement.	 Hypermetria	 is	 associated	 with	 a	 more
gradual	 buildup	 and	 prolongation	 of	 agonist	 activity	 with	 a	 delayed	 onset	 of
antagonist	 activity	 or	 with	 a	 slower	 rate	 of	 rise	 of	 activity	 in	 the	 antagonists.
Evidence	suggests	that	different	mechanisms	may	underlie	dysmetria,	depending
on	the	anatomical	location	of	the	cerebellar	lesion.

FIGURE	43.11	Connections	of	the	pontocerebellum	and	vestibular	nuclei.	Afferents	to
the	 cerebellum	 are	 blue,	 cerebellar	 efferents	 are	 red,	 and	 other	 neurons	 are	 black.
(Reprinted	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical
Viewpoint.	9th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,
2009,	with	permission.)

Agonist-Antagonist	Coordination

A	disturbance	in	reciprocal	innervation	results	in	a	loss	of	the	ability	to	stop	the
contraction	 of	 the	 agonists	 and	 rapidly	 contract	 the	 antagonists	 to	 control	 and
regulate	movement.	In	patients	with	cerebellar	deficits	attempting	to	make	rapid,
voluntary	 movements,	 the	 first	 agonist	 burst	 is	 frequently	 prolonged,	 the
acceleration	 time	 is	 longer	 than	 normal,	 and	 the	 acceleration	 time	 may	 exceed
the	deceleration	time.	The	normal	triphasic	agonist-antagonist-agonist	sequence
of	 activity	 is	 disturbed	 by	 a	 too	 long	 or	 too	 short	 agonist	 burst,	 or	 an	 agonist
burst	that	continues	into	the	antagonist	activity.	Impairment	of	the	ability	to	carry
out	successive	movements	and	to	stop	one	act	and	follow	it	immediately	by	its
diametric	opposite	causes	dysdiadochokinesia,	loss	of	checking	movements,	and
the	rebound	phenomenon.	Dysdiadochokinesia	(or	adiadochokinesia)	is	a	clumsy
term	 (coined	 by	 Babinski)	 that	 means	 inability	 to	 make	 rapid	 alternating
movements	or	RAMs.	The	patient	with	impaired	RAMs	has	difficulty	with	such
tests	as	patting	the	palm	of	one	hand	alternately	with	the	palm	and	dorsum	of	the
other	 hand,	 rapid	 tapping	 of	 the	 fingers,	 tapping	 out	 a	 complex	 rhythm,	 or
tapping	the	foot	in	steady	beat.	Inability	to	rapidly	reverse	an	action	also	causes
impairment	of	the	check	response,	producing	the	Holmes	rebound	phenomenon
(see	section	on	“Impaired	Check	and	the	Rebound	Phenomenon”).

Tremor

The	 most	 common	 type	 of	 cerebellar	 tremor	 is	 an	 intention	 (active,	 kinetic,	 or
terminal)	 tremor	 that	 is	 not	 present	 at	 rest	 but	 becomes	 evident	 on	 purposeful
movement.	In	the	upper	extremity,	when	the	patient	reaches	to	touch	an	object,
there	 are	 irregular,	 to-and-fro,	 jerky	 movements	 perpendicular	 to	 the	 path	 of
movement	 that	 increase	 in	 amplitude	 as	 the	 hand	 approaches	 the	 target.	 A
postural	 tremor	 of	 the	 outstretched	 limbs	 may	 also	 occur,	 without	 the	 patient
reaching	 for	 a	 target.	 Cerebellar	 tremor	 often	 involves	 the	 proximal	 muscles.
When	severe,	cerebellar	tremor	may	involve	not	only	the	extremities	but	also	the
head	or	even	the	entire	body.	Severe	cerebellar	tremor	may	at	times	take	on	an

almost	 myoclonic	 character.	 The	 tremors	 and	 other	 movements	 probably	 result
from	disease	involving	the	cerebellar	efferent	pathways	or	their	connections	with
the	 red	 nucleus	 and	 thalamus	 (dentatorubral	 and	 dentatothalamic	 pathways,	 or
SCP)	 and	 are	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 a	 cerebellar	 outflow	 tremor.	 A	 rubral
tremor	is	present	at	rest	but	worsens	with	action	and	probably	also	results	from	a
lesion	involving	the	cerebellar	outflow	tracts	(see	Chapter	30).

Hypotonia

Hypotonia,	 or	 muscle	 flaccidity,	 with	 a	 decrease	 in	 resistance	 to	 passive
movement,	is	often	seen	in	cerebellar	disease.	Cerebellar	dysfunction	results	in	a
decrease	 in	 the	 tonic	 output	 of	 the	 cerebellar	 nuclei,	 causing	 loss	 of	 cerebellar
facilitation	 to	 the	 motor	 cortex.	 The	 muscles	 are	 flabby	 and	 assume	 unnatural
attitudes;	the	parts	of	the	body	can	be	moved	passively	into	positions	of	extreme
flexion	 or	 extension.	 The	 stretch	 reflexes	 are	 normal	 or	 diminished	 in	 disease
limited	 to	 the	 cerebellum.	 Occasionally,	 the	 tendon	 reflexes	 are	 “pendular.”
Tapping	the	patellar	tendon	with	the	foot	hanging	free	results	in	a	series	of	to-
and-fro	 movements	 of	 the	 foot	 and	 leg	 before	 the	 limb	 finally	 comes	 to	 rest.
Pendular	 reflexes	 are	 caused	 by	 muscle	 hypotonicity	 and	 the	 lack	 of	 normal
checking	 of	 the	 reflex	 response.	 The	 superficial	 reflexes	 are	 unaffected	 by
cerebellar	disease.	Cerebellar	disease	may	also	cause	a	characteristic	position	of
the	 extended	 hand,	 probably	 because	 of	 hypotonia.	 The	 wrist	 is	 flexed	 and
arched	 dorsally,	 with	 the	 fingers	 hyperextended,	 and	 a	 tendency	 toward
overpronation.	 The	 hand	 is	 similar	 to	 that	 seen	 in	 Sydenham’s	 chorea.	 A
cerebellar	lesion	may	cause	a	decrease	in	the	normal	pendular	movement	of	the
affected	 arm	 when	 walking.	 A	 decreased	 arm	 swing	 may	 also	 occur	 with
extrapyramidal	 disorders	 and	 with	 mild	 hemiparesis.	 In	 the	 shoulder-shaking
test,	a	cerebellar	lesion	causes	an	increase	in	the	range	and	duration	of	swinging
of	the	involved	arm,	although	the	movements	may	be	irregular	and	nonrhythmic
(see	Chapter	28).

Dysarthria

Cerebellar	disease	often	affects	speech.	Articulation	may	be	slow,	ataxic,	slurred,
drawling,	 jerky,	 or	 explosive	 in	 type	 because	 of	 dyssynergy	 of	 the	 muscles	 of
phonation.	 A	 scanning	 type	 of	 dysarthria	 is	 particularly	 characteristic	 of
cerebellar	disease	(see	Chapter	9).	The	scanning	speech	of	multiple	sclerosis	and

the	 staccato	 speech	 of	 Friedreich’s	 ataxia	 (FA)	 are	 probably	 the	 result	 of
cerebellar	 dysfunction.	 Dysarthria	 may	 be	 an	 isolated	 manifestation	 of
paravermal	cerebellar	infarction.

Nystagmus

Nystagmus	and	other	disturbances	of	ocular	motility	may	occur	with	lesions	of
the	 cerebellum.	 Nystagmus	 often	 indicates	 involvement	 of	 vestibulocerebellar
pathways.	 The	 ocular	 abnormalities	 often	 result	 from	 involvement	 of	 the
connections	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 with	 other	 centers	 rather	 than	 actual	 cerebellar
dysfunction.	Cerebellar	disease	may	cause	gaze	paretic	nystagmus.	The	patient	is
unable	to	sustain	eccentric	gaze	and	requires	repeated	saccades	to	gaze	laterally.
With	 a	 lesion	 of	 one	 hemisphere,	 the	 eyes	 at	 rest	 may	 be	 deviated	 10	 to	 30
degrees	toward	the	unaffected	side.	When	the	patient	attempts	to	gaze	elsewhere,
the	eyes	saccade	toward	the	point	of	fixation	with	slow	return	movements	to	the
resting	point.	The	movements	are	more	marked	and	of	greater	amplitude	when
the	patient	looks	toward	the	affected	side.	When	a	tumor	of	the	cerebellopontine
angle	is	present,	the	nystagmus	is	coarse	on	looking	toward	the	side	of	the	lesion
and	fine	and	rapid	on	gaze	to	the	opposite	side	(Bruns’	nystagmus).	Other	ocular
motility	disturbances	seen	with	cerebellar	disease	include	skew	deviation,	ocular
dysmetria,	ocular	flutter,	opsoclonus,	ocular	tilt	reaction,	and	saccadic	intrusions.
Rebound	 nystagmus	 is	 a	 type	 of	 nystagmus	 that	 may	 be	 unique	 to	 cerebellar
disease;	 the	 fast	 component	 is	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 lateral	 gaze	 but	 transiently
reverses	 direction	 when	 the	 eyes	 come	 back	 to	 primary	 position	 (see	 Chapter
14).	For	a	detailed	discussion	of	cerebellar	eye	signs,	see	Cerebellar	 Eye	Signs
from	 Dr.	 Robert	 B.	 Darroff,	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 Virtual	 Education	 Library
(NOVEL),	University	of	Utah,	Video	Link	43.1.

Other	Abnormalities

Abnormalities	 of	 posture	 and	 gait	 with	 abnormal	 attitudes	 and	 spontaneous
deviation	of	the	head	and	parts	of	the	body	may	be	seen	in	cerebellar	disease.	In
unilateral	cerebellar	disease,	there	may	be	deviation	of	the	head	and	body	toward
the	affected	side,	with	past	pointing	of	the	extremities	toward	the	affected	side.
When	 standing,	 there	 is	an	 inclination	to	fall,	 and	 when	 walking	a	tendency	to
deviate,	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion.	 The	 outstretched	 extremities	 deviate
laterally,	 toward	 the	 affected	 side.	 There	 may	 be	 a	 decrease	 or	 absence	 of	 the

normal	pendular	movement	of	the	arm	in	walking.	In	midline,	or	vermis,	lesions,
the	 patient	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 stand	 erect	 and	 may	 fall	 either	 backward	 or
forward.	 The	 gait	 is	 staggering,	 reeling,	 or	 lurching	 in	 character,	 without
laterality.	 “Cerebellar	 fits”	 is	 an	 antiquated	 term,	 referring	 to	 episodes	 of
decerebrate	 rigidity	 because	 of	 brainstem	 dysfunction	 due	 to	 mass	 effect	 from
lesions	in	the	cerebellum.

EXAMINATION	OF	COORDINATION	AND
CEREBELLAR	FUNCTION

Clinical	 tests	 for	 cerebellar	 dysfunction	 are	 basically	 designed	 to	 detect
dyssynergia,	 decomposition	 of	 movement,	 and	 dysmetria.	 The	 combination	 of
incoordination,	awkwardness,	errors	in	the	speed,	range	and	force	of	movement,
along	with	dysdiadochokinesia,	and	intention	tremor	is	referred	to	as	cerebellar
ataxia.	 Simple	 observation	 can	 be	 as	 informative	 as	 a	 detailed	 clinical
examination.	 Watching	 as	 the	 patient	 is	 standing,	 walking,	 dressing	 and
undressing,	buttoning	and	unbuttoning	clothing,	and	tying	shoelaces	may	reveal
tremor,	 incoordination,	 clumsiness,	 and	 disturbed	 postural	 fixation.	 The	 patient
may	be	asked	to	write,	use	simple	tools,	drink	from	a	glass,	and	trace	lines	with	a
lightweight	 pen	 while	 no	 support	 is	 given	 at	 the	 elbow.	 The	 examination	 of
infants	 and	 children	 may	 be	 limited	 to	 simple	 observation,	 noting	 the	 child’s
ability	 to	 reach	 for	 and	 use	 toys	 and	 objects.	 Tests	 for	 coordination	 may	 be
divided	into	those	concerned	with	equilibratory	and	nonequilibratory	functions.

Equilibratory	Coordination

Equilibratory	 coordination	 refers	 to	 the	 maintenance	 of	 balance	 and	 the
coordination	 of	 the	 body	 as	 a	 whole.	 The	 examination	 of	 station	 and	 gait
assesses	equilibratory	coordination;	these	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	44.

Nonequilibratory	Coordination

Tests	 of	 nonequilibratory	 coordination	 assess	 the	 patient’s	 ability	 to	 carry	 out
discrete,	oftentimes	relatively	fine,	intentional	movements	with	the	extremities.
Although	these	are	primarily	tests	of	coordination,	other	neural	systems	must	be
intact	 for	 normal	 performance.	 The	 other	 components	 affecting	 fine	 motor

control	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	27.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 consider	 handedness	 in
judging	 coordination	 and	 to	 allow	 for	 the	 normal	 slight	 clumsiness	 of	 the
nondominant	side.	Patients	who	are	fatigued	or	sedated	may	have	incoordination
that	 is	 not	 normal	 for	 the	 individual.	 Fine	 motor	 skills	 may	 also	 be	 assessed
functionally	by	asking	the	patient	to	do	such	things	as	thread	a	needle,	pick	up	a
pin,	string	beads,	pour	water,	or	draw	circles.

The	Finger-to-Nose	(Finger-Nose-Finger)	Test
There	are	several	variations	on	the	theme	of	having	the	patient	touch	the	index
finger	to	the	nose,	all	of	which	will	be	included	as	the	finger-to-nose	(FTN)	test.
All	 may	 be	 carried	 out	 with	 the	 patient	 lying,	 seated,	 or	 standing.	 The	 patient
extends	the	arm	completely	and	then	touches	the	tip	of	the	index	finger	to	the	tip
of	the	nose,	slowly	at	first,	then	rapidly,	with	the	eyes	open	and	then	closed.	The
examiner	may	place	the	outstretched	extremity	in	various	positions	and	have	the
test	carried	out	in	different	planes	and	from	various	angles.	The	patient	may	be
asked	 to	 touch	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 index	 finger	 to	 his	 nose,	 then	 touch	 the	 tip	 of	 the
examiner’s	 finger,	 and	 then	 back	 to	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 nose.	 It	 is	 helpful	 to
demonstrate	 the	 requested	 movement,	 lest	 the	 patient	 make	 some	 odd
interpretation	of	the	verbal	request;	an	occasional	patient	will	attempt	to	put	his
index	 finger	 on	 the	 examiner’s	 finger	 without	 removing	 it	 from	 his	 own	 nose.
The	examiner’s	finger	may	be	moved	about	during	the	test,	and	the	patient	asked
to	try	to	touch	the	moving	target	as	the	finger	is	placed	in	different	locations	at
different	distances	and	to	move	both	slowly	and	quickly.	The	examiner	may	pull
his	finger	away	and	make	the	patient	chase	it	(finger	chase	test).	Fully	extending
the	arm	in	this	way	can	bring	out	mild	intention	tremor.

During	 these	movements,	note	 the	smoothness	 and	 accuracy	with	 which	 the
act	 is	 executed	 and	 look	 for	 oscillations,	 jerkiness,	 and	 tremor.	 An	 intention
tremor	becomes	more	marked,	coarse,	and	irregular	as	the	finger	approaches	the
target.	There	may	be	little	tremor	during	the	midrange	of	the	movement,	but	near
the	end,	the	tremor	erupts;	when	the	finger	contacts	the	target,	the	tremor	stops.
In	 cerebellar	 ataxia,	 the	 difficulty	 may	 vary	 from	 slight	 incoordination,	 with	 a
blundering	type	of	movement,	to	wild	oscillations	causing	complete	inability	to
execute	 the	 act.	 A	 patient	 with	 severe	 appendicular	 ataxia	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to
touch	hand	to	head,	much	less	finger	to	nose.	Video	43.1	demonstrates	a	patient
with	appendicular	ataxia.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	43.1	Cerebellar	ataxia	with	titubation	and	severe	appendicular	ataxia
causing	intention	tremor	on	finger	to	nose	and	heel	to	shin	testing.

With	 dysmetria,	 the	 patient	 may	 stop	 before	 he	 reaches	 his	 nose,	 pause	 and
then	complete	the	act	slowly	and	unsteadily,	or	overshoot	the	mark	and	bring	the
finger	to	the	nose	with	too	much	speed	and	force.	With	dyssynergy,	the	act	is	not
carried	 out	 smoothly	 and	 harmoniously;	 there	 may	 be	 irregular	 stops,
accelerations,	 and	 deflections,	 or	 the	 movement	 may	 disintegrate	 into	 its
component	 parts.	 Performing	 the	 FTN	 test	 against	 slight	 resistance	 may	 cause
mild	ataxia	to	become	more	obvious,	or	latent	ataxia	evident.	The	examiner	may
apply	resistance	by	placing	his	fingers	against	the	patient’s	forearm	and	exerting
slight	pressure	as	the	patient	moves	his	arm	toward	the	nose,	or	by	placing	a	long
rubber	 band	 around	 the	 patient’s	 wrist	 and	 pulling	 gently	 on	 it	 during	 the	 test.
Another	test	is	to	have	the	patient	draw	a	line,	starting	and	then	stopping	at	fixed
points.	He	may	have	difficulty	in	starting	at	the	correct	point	and	may	either	stop
short	 of	 the	 second	 point	 or	 overshoot	 the	 mark.	 This	 may	 also	 demonstrate
tremor,	 with	 side-to-side	 oscillations	 along	 the	 intended	 tract.	 The	 patient	 with
cerebellar	 disease	 may	 have	 macrographia,	 using	 large	 characters	 that	 become
larger	 across	 the	 page,	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 writing	 disturbance	 seen	 in
Parkinson’s	disease.

In	the	finger-to-finger	(fingertips	in	the	midline)	test,	the	patient	abducts	the
arms	widely	to	the	horizontal	and	then	brings	in	the	tips	of	the	index	or	middle
fingers	 through	 a	 wide	 arc	 to	 touch	 them	 exactly	 in	 the	 midline.	 This	 is	 done
slowly	 and	 rapidly,	 with	 the	 eyes	 first	 open	 and	 then	 closed.	 With	 unilateral
cerebellar	disease,	the	finger	on	the	involved	side	may	fail	to	reach	the	midline,
and	the	finger	on	the	normal	side	may	cross	the	midline	to	reach	it.	Also,	the	arm
on	the	affected	side	may	sag	or	rise,	causing	the	finger	on	that	side	to	be	below

or	above	the	one	on	the	normal	side.

In	 hysteria	 or	 malingering,	 there	 may	 be	 bizarre	 responses	 of	 various	 types.
The	patient	may	act	as	if	unable	to	touch	the	finger	to	the	nose,	or	circle	around
it	with	widespread,	wandering	movements	but	eventually	touch	the	very	tip.	Or
the	 patient	 may	 repeatedly	 but	 precisely	 touch	 some	 other	 part	 of	 the	 face,
implying	there	is	no	loss	of	sensation	or	coordination.

Similar	 tests	 may	 be	 used	 to	 evaluate	 the	 lower	 extremities.	 In	 the	 heel-to-
shin	(heel-knee-shin/toe)	test,	the	patient	is	asked	to	place	the	heel	of	one	foot	on
the	opposite	knee,	tap	it	up	and	down	on	the	knee	several	times,	push	the	point
of	the	heel	(not	the	instep)	along	the	shin	in	a	straight	line	to	the	great	toe,	and
then	 bring	 it	 back	 to	 the	 knee.	 The	 patient	 with	 cerebellar	 disease	 is	 likely	 to
raise	the	foot	too	high,	flex	the	knee	too	much,	and	place	the	heel	down	above
the	 knee.	 The	 excursions	 along	 the	 shin	 are	 jerky	 and	 unsteady.	 With	 sensory
ataxia,	 the	 patient	 may	 have	 difficulty	 locating	 the	 knee	 with	 the	 heel,	 groping
around	for	it;	there	is	difficulty	keeping	the	heel	on	the	shin,	and	it	may	slip	off
to	 either	 side	 while	 sliding	 down	 the	 shin.	 In	 the	 toe-to-finger	 test,	 the	 patient
tries	 to	 touch	 his	 great	 toe,	 knee	 bent,	 to	 the	 examiner’s	 finger.	 If	 there	 is
dysmetria,	 the	 patient	 will	 undershoot	 or	 overshoot	 the	 mark;	 intention	 tremor
and	oscillations	may	also	be	evident.	The	patient	may	be	asked	to	draw	a	circle
or	 a	 figure	 eight	 with	 his	 foot,	 either	 in	 the	 air	 or	 on	 the	 floor;	 in	 ataxia,	 the
movement	will	be	unsteady	and	the	figure	irregular.

Rapid	Alternating	Movements
With	 dysdiadochokinesia,	 one	 act	 cannot	 be	 immediately	 followed	 by	 its
diametric	 opposite;	 the	 contraction	 of	 one	 set	 of	 agonists	 and	 relaxation	 of	 the
antagonists	 cannot	 be	 followed	 immediately	 by	 relaxation	 of	 the	 agonists	 and
contraction	 of	 the	 antagonists.	 Patients	 with	 cerebellar	 ataxia	 may	 have	 great
difficulty	making	these	kinds	of	movements	(Video	43.1).	A	 common	 test	 for
dysdiadochokinesia	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 alternately	 pronate	 and	 supinate	 his
hands,	 as	 in	 patting	 alternately	 with	 the	 palm	 and	 dorsum	 of	 the	 hand	 on	 the
thigh	or	on	the	palm	or	dorsum	of	the	other	hand,	or	imitating	screwing	in	a	light
bulb	 or	 turning	 a	 doorknob.	 The	 movements	 are	 performed	 repetitively	 and	 as
rapidly	 as	 possible.	 Any	 movement	 involving	 reciprocal	 innervation	 and
alternate	 action	 of	 agonists	 and	 antagonists	 can	 be	 used,	 such	 as	 alternate
opening	 and	 closing	 of	 the	 fists,	 quickly	 flexing	 and	 extending	 individual
fingers,	touching	the	tip	of	the	index	finger	to	the	tip	or	extended	interphalangeal
joint	of	the	thumb,	or	patting	rapidly	against	a	table	top	with	hand	or	fingertips.

A	good	test	is	to	have	the	patient	touch	the	tip	of	his	thumb	with	the	tip	of	each
finger	rapidly	and	in	sequence—starting	with	the	index	finger	and	proceeding	to
the	little	finger,	repeating	with	the	little	finger	and	going	to	the	index	finger,	and
so	forth.	Another	good	test	is	to	have	the	patient	tap	out	a	simple	rhythm	with
each	 hand	 (e.g.,	 1-2-3/pause	 in	 steady	 beat),	 and	 then	 a	 more	 complex	 but
familiar	 rhythm	 (e.g.,	 Happy	 Birthday	 song).	 Testing	 RAMs	 in	 the	 lower
extremity	 is	 much	 more	 limited.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 asked	 to	 pat	 the	 foot
steadily,	 against	 the	 floor	 if	 standing,	 and	 against	 the	 examiner’s	 palm	 if
recumbent	 or	 to	 repetitively	 touch	 the	 heel	 up	 and	 down	 to	 the	 knee	 if	 supine.
RAMs	of	the	tongue	may	be	tested	by	having	the	patient	move	the	tongue	in	and
out	or	from	side	to	side	as	rapidly	as	possible.

In	 all	 of	 these	 tests,	 note	 the	 rate,	 rhythm,	 accuracy,	 and	 smoothness	 of	 the
movements.	In	patients	with	ataxia,	the	RAMs	are	carried	out	either	slowly	and
hesitantly,	 with	 pauses	 during	 transition	 between	 the	 opposing	 motions,	 or
unsteadily	and	irregularly,	with	loss	of	rhythm.	There	may	be	a	rapid	fatigability:
The	movements	may	be	executed	satisfactorily	in	the	beginning,	but	after	a	few
attempts,	 they	 become	 awkward	 and	 clumsy.	 The	 two	 extremities	 are	 usually
compared,	 but	 patients	 with	 bilateral	 abnormalities	 are	 common,	 and	 the
examiner	 must	 rely	 on	 experience	 or	 use	 another	 control.	 Demonstrating	 the
movements	 to	 the	 patient	 provides	 an	 opportunity	 for	 the	 examiner	 to	 be	 the
control.	 For	 some	 maneuvers,	 such	 as	 rapid,	 repetitive	 finger	 movements,	 the
two	extremities	can	be	examined	simultaneously	and	one	side	compared	with	the
other.	 Simultaneous	 testing	 may	 also	 cause	 accentuation	 of	 the	 abnormality	 on
the	affected	side.

Impaired	Check	and	the	Rebound	Phenomenon
Checking	 movements	 involve	 contraction	 of	 the	 antagonists	 after	 a	 load	 is
unexpectedly	 removed	 during	 strong	 contraction	 of	 the	 agonists.	 The	 agonists
must	 immediately	 relax	 and	 the	 antagonists	 must	 contract	 to	 provide	 braking
after	 the	 sudden	 release	 of	 resistance.	 Because	 cerebellar	 dysfunction	 causes
impairment	 of	 the	 reciprocal	 relationship	 between	 agonist	 and	 antagonist,
patients	may	have	impairment	of	the	checking	response.

In	 the	 Holmes	 (Stewart-Holmes)	 rebound	 test,	 the	 patient	 holds	 the	 arm
adducted	at	the	shoulder	and	flexed	at	the	elbow,	with	the	forearm	supinated	and
the	fist	firmly	clenched.	The	elbow	may	rest	on	a	table	or	be	held	unsupported
close	 to	 the	 body.	 The	 examiner	 pulls	 on	 the	 wrist,	 and	 the	 patient	 strongly
resists	the	examiner’s	attempt	to	extend	the	elbow.	The	examiner	then	suddenly

releases	 his	 grip	 on	 the	 wrist.	 Normally,	 with	 the	 sudden	 unloading,	 the
contraction	of	the	elbow	flexors	immediately	ceases	and	is	rapidly	followed	by
contraction	 of	 the	 elbow	 extensors	 to	 arrest	 the	 sudden	 flexion	 movement	 and
stop	 the	 patient	 from	 hitting	 himself.	 The	 normal	 patient	 is	 able	 to	 control	 the
unexpected	 flexion	 movement	 of	 the	 elbow.	 In	 cerebellar	 disease,	 when	 the
strongly	flexed	extremity	is	suddenly	released,	the	patient	cannot	stop	the	flexor
contraction	 and	 engage	 the	 extensors	 to	 stop	 the	 elbow	 movement.	 Because	 of
loss	 of	 the	 checking	 response,	 the	 fist	 flies	 up	 to	 the	 shoulder	 or	 mouth,	 often
with	considerable	force.	The	examiner’s	free	arm	should	be	placed	between	the
patient’s	fist	and	face	to	block	the	blow.	The	prevalent	description	of	this	as	the
Holmes	rebound	phenomenon	is	not	precisely	correct.	Stewart	and	Holmes	used
rebound	to	refer	to	the	jerk	back	in	the	opposite	direction,	the	recoil,	on	release
of	the	restraint.	The	rebound	phenomenon	is	present	normally	and	exaggerated
in	spastic	limbs.	It	is	the	absence	of	rebound	(usually	accompanied	by	impaired
checking)	in	limbs	affected	by	cerebellar	disease	that	is	abnormal.	It	is	the	loss
of	 rebound	 that	 is	 abnormal	 and	 characteristic	 of	 cerebellar	 disease,	 not	 its
presence.

The	rebound	test	may	be	carried	out	in	other	ways.	Elbow	extension	against
resistance	may	be	tested	instead	of	flexion.	With	both	arms	outstretched	in	front
of	the	patient,	the	examiner	may	press	either	down	or	up	on	them	as	the	patient
resists	 and	 then	 suddenly	 lets	 go.	 This	 allows	 comparison	 of	 the	 rebound
phenomenon	 and	 loss	 of	 checking	 movements	 on	 the	 two	 sides.	 In	 the	 lower
extremities,	 rebound	 can	 be	 tested	 by	 sudden	 release	 after	 the	 patient	 has	 been
resisting	either	flexion	or	extension	at	the	knee,	hip,	or	ankle.	Impaired	checking
and	 loss	 of	 rebound	 are	 not	 invariably	 present	 in	 cerebellar	 disease	 and	 may
sometimes	 be	 present	 in	 normal	 limbs.	 Loss	 of	 rebound	 is	 more	 significant
unilaterally	than	bilaterally.	In	the	arm-stopping	test,	the	patient	holds	both	arms
overhead	or	by	his	sides,	the	examiner	holds	his	arms	outstretched	horizontally,
and	 then	 the	 patient	 tries	 to	 quickly	 bring	 his	 arms	 up	 or	 down	 so	 that	 his
fingertips	 are	 at	 the	 exact	 same	 level	 as	 the	 examiner’s.	 With	 a	 unilateral
hemispheric	 lesion,	 the	 good	 arm	 will	 stop	 on	 target,	 the	 affected	 arm	 often
overshoots	 and	 then	 corrects	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction,	 oscillating	 around	 the
target	before	eventually	coming	to	rest.

Deviation	and	Past	Pointing
Patients	 with	 cerebellar	 disease	 often	 have	 difficulty	 maintaining	 normal
alignment	of	the	limbs	or	body	when	performing	a	task	such	as	holding	the	arms

outstretched	or	walking,	especially	with	eyes	closed.	The	patient	may	miss	when
trying	 to	 reach	 out	 to	 touch	 a	 target	 (past	 pointing),	 drift	 to	 one	 side	 when
walking	eyes	closed,	or	have	drift	of	the	outstretched	arm	(Video	43.2).	Similar
findings	may	occur	with	vestibular	lesions.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	43.2	Vestibular	and	cerebellar	past	pointing	and	the	stepping	test.

To	 perform	 the	 traditional	 test	 for	 past	 pointing,	 the	 patient	 and	 examiner
should	be	 facing,	either	 seated	 or	 standing,	 the	 outstretched	 upper	 extremity	of
each	 held	 horizontally	 with	 the	 index	 fingers	 in	 contact.	 The	 patient	 raises	 his
arm	 to	 a	 vertical	 position,	 finger	 pointed	 directly	 upward,	 and	 then	 returns	 to
horizontal	to	again	touch	the	examiner’s	finger.	The	maneuver	should	be	tried	a
few	times	with	the	eyes	open	and	then	executed	with	the	eyes	closed.	The	arms
may	 be	 tested	 sequentially	 or	 simultaneously.	 The	 test	 is	 less	 commonly	 done
with	the	patient	raising	the	arm	from	below	up	to	the	horizontal.	Normally,	the
patient	will	return	to	the	starting	position	fairly	accurately,	without	any	drift	or
deviation.	 In	 labyrinthine	 disease	 or	 with	 a	 cerebellar	 hemispheric	 lesion,	 the
arm	will	deviate	to	the	involved	side	on	the	return	track,	more	so	with	the	eyes
closed.	 This	 deviation	 is	 called	 past	 pointing.	 A	 simpler	 way	 to	 test	 for	 past
pointing	is	to	have	the	patient	close	his	eyes	while	doing	the	finger-nose-finger
test.	With	 eyes	open,	 the	pointing	is	 accurate,	 but	with	 eyes	closed,	 the	 patient
points	off	to	the	side	of	the	target.	Repeating	the	test	several	times	may	produce
greater	 deviation.	With	severe	 lesions,	past	pointing	may	occur	 even	with	 eyes
open.	The	pattern	is	different	in	vestibular	as	opposed	to	cerebellar	past	pointing.
In	vestibular	disease,	past	pointing	occurs	with	both	upper	extremities	toward	the
involved	 side;	 in	 unilateral	 cerebellar	 disease,	 past	 pointing	 occurs	 toward	 the
side	of	the	lesion,	or	erratically	to	either	side,	but	only	in	the	ipsilateral	arm.	Past

pointing	is	discussed	further	in	Chapter	17.

A	cerebellar	lesion	may	also	cause	drift	of	the	outstretched	upper	extremities.
Three	 types	 of	 drift	 may	 occur	 when	 the	 patient	 attempts	 to	 hold	 the	 arms
outstretched	with	eyes	closed:	pyramidal	drift,	parietal	drift,	and	cerebellar	drift.
In	 pronator	 drift	 (Barré’s	 sign)	 due	 to	 a	 pyramidal	 lesion,	 the	 arm	 sinks
downward	and	there	is	accompanying	pronation	of	the	forearm	(see	Chapter	27).
In	 parietal	 drift,	 the	 arm	 usually	 rises	 and	 strays	 outward	 (updrift).	 With
cerebellar	drift,	the	arm	drifts	mainly	outward,	either	at	the	same	level,	rising,	or
less	often	sinking.	Testing	is	done	with	arms	outstretched	and	eyes	closed.	With
disease	 involving	 one	 cerebellar	 hemisphere,	 the	 arm	 drifts	 toward	 the	 side	 of
the	 lesion.	 The	 deviation	 may	 be	 accentuated	 by	 tapping	 the	 patient’s
outstretched	 wrists.	 Tapping	 on	 the	 wrists	 may	 also	 create	 an	 up-and-down
oscillation	because	of	impaired	checking,	so	that	the	arm	swings	up	and	down	a
few	times	and	gradually	drifts	laterally	and	often	upward.

Position	holding	can	also	be	tested	in	the	lower	extremities.	The	patient,	lying
supine,	raises	the	legs	one	at	a	time.	When	there	is	ataxia,	the	leg	cannot	be	lifted
steadily	 or	 in	 a	 straight	 line.	 There	 may	 be	 adduction,	 abduction,	 rotation,
oscillations,	or	jerky	movements	from	one	position	to	another.	When	the	limb	is
lowered,	 the	 patient	 may	 throw	 it	 down	 heavily,	 and	 it	 may	 not	 return	 to	 its
original	position	beside	its	mate	but	may	be	deviated	across	it	or	away	from	it.
When	 the	 seated	 patient	 extends	 the	 legs	 without	 support	 and	 attempts	 to	 hold
them	 steady,	 a	 unilateral	 cerebellar	 lesion	 may	 cause	 oscillations	 and	 lateral
deviation	 of	 the	 ipsilateral	 extremity.	 If	 the	 prone	 patient	 bends	 the	 knees	 and
tries	to	maintain	the	shins	vertically,	there	may	be	marked	oscillations	and	lateral
deviation	of	the	leg	on	the	side	of	the	lesion.

Deviation	and	drift	may	also	occur	when	the	patient	tries	to	walk	with	eyes
closed.	 As	 in	 vestibulopathy,	 the	 patient	 drifts	 to	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 (see
Chapter	17).	Walking	back	and	forth	with	eyes	closed	may	reveal	a	“compass”
or	“star”	gait	due	to	deviation	toward	the	involved	side.	When	walking	around	a
chair,	the	patient	shows	a	tendency	to	fall	toward	the	affected	side.

CEREBELLAR	SYNDROMES

Cerebellar	disease	may	affect	all	or	only	a	specific	part	of	the	cerebellum.	There
are	two	clearly	defined	cerebellar	syndromes:	a	midline	or	vermis	syndrome	and
a	 lateral	 or	 hemispheric	 syndrome.	 With	 the	 vermis,	 or	 midline,	 syndrome,	 the

outstanding	symptoms	 are	abnormalities	of	 station	 and	 gait,	with	 abnormalities
ranging	from	slight	widening	of	the	base	on	walking	in	mild	disease	(gait	ataxia)
to	 total	 inability	 to	 sit	 or	 walk	 in	 severe	 disease.	 Disease	 of	 the	 cerebellar
hemispheres	 produces	 appendicular	 ataxia,	 disturbance	 in	 coordination	 of	 the
ipsilateral	 extremities,	 the	 arm	 more	 than	 the	 leg.	 The	 primary	 clinical
manifestations	of	dysfunction	of	the	FN	lobe	or	its	connections	are	disturbances
of	 equilibrium;	 nystagmus,	 often	 positional;	 and	 other	 abnormalities	 of
extraocular	 movement.	 There	 is	 no	 limb	 ataxia.	 Table	 43.1	 summarizes	 the
clinical	manifestations	of	disease	of	these	parts	of	the	cerebellum.

TABLE
43.1

Clinical	Manifestations	of	Disorders	of	the	Cerebellum
(Related	to	the	Different	Zones	of	the	Cerebellum)

Zone	of	Cerebellum Clinical	Manifestation

Possible
Disorder

Flocculonodular	lobe
(archicerebellum)

Nystagmus;	extraocular

Medulloblastoma

movement	abnormalities

Vermis

Gait	ataxia

(paleocerebellum)

Alcoholic

degeneration

Hemisphere

(neocerebellum)

Appendicular	ataxia

Tumor;	stroke

Pancerebellar

All	of	the	above

Paraneoplastic

The	 manifestations	 of	 cerebellar	 disease	 differ	 markedly	 in	 severity,
depending	 upon	 the	 acuteness	 or	 chronicity	 of	 the	 process.	 The	 ability	 of	 the
nervous	system	to	compensate	for	a	cerebellar	lesion	can	be	remarkable.	If	the
lesion	is	acute,	the	symptoms	are	profound;	if	it	is	slowly	progressive,	they	are
much	less	severe.	There	may	be	considerable	recovery	from	an	acute	lesion.	If	a
lesion	 develops	 insidiously,	 there	 may	 be	 extensive	 involvement	 of	 the
hemispheres	without	much	in	the	way	of	clinical	findings.	The	neural	plasticity
and	 compensation	 are	 such	 that	 some	 patients	 with	 little	 remaining	 cerebellar
tissue	can	eventually	function	quite	well.	The	symptoms	of	cerebellar	disease	are
similar	regardless	of	the	etiology	of	the	disease	process,	and	whether	the	lesion
is	congenital	or	acquired.

Midline	Syndrome

The	 vermis	 is	 important	 in	 the	 control	 of	 axial	 structures,	 or	 those	 that	 are
bilaterally	 innervated;	 vermian	 lesions	 primarily	 affect	 midline	 functions,	 such
as	walking	and	coordination	of	the	head	and	trunk.	A	patient	with	mild	vermian
disease	has	gait	ataxia.	The	base	is	widened,	tandem	gait	is	particularly	difficult,
and	there	may	be	decompensation	on	turning.	The	Romberg	test	is	negative—the
imbalance	 does	 not	 worsen	 significantly	 with	 eyes	 closed.	 With	 severe
dysfunction	 of	 the	 vermis,	 there	 may	 be	 gross	 postural	 and	 locomotor
disturbances	 of	 the	 entire	 body.	 There	 is	 no	 lateralization,	 and	 the	 tendency	 to
fall	may	be	either	backward	or	forward.	The	gait	is	wide	based	and	characterized
by	swaying	 and	 staggering;	 the	patient	may	 reel	 in	 a	 drunken	 manner	 to	either
side.	Cerebellar	ataxia	is	discussed	further	in	Chapter	44.

With	truncal	ataxia,	there	is	swaying	and	unsteadiness	when	standing,	and	the
patient	may	be	unable	to	maintain	an	upright	position.	There	may	be	loss	of	the
ability	 to	 remain	 erect	 when	 seated	 or	 to	 hold	 the	 neck	 and	 head	 steady	 and
upright;	 when	 severe,	 the	 standing	 and	 sitting	 balance	 disturbance	 leads	 to
constant,	to-and-fro	swaying,	nodding,	and	weaving	movements	of	the	head	and
trunk	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 upright	 known	 as	 titubation.	 The	 head	 movements	 in
titubation	 are	 primarily	 anteroposterior	 (yes-yes)	 at	 3	 to	 4	 Hz.	 Vermis
dysfunction	 causes	 little	 or	 no	 abnormality	 of	 the	 extremities,	 especially	 the
upper	 extremities,	 although	 all	 coordinated	 movements	 may	 be	 poorly
performed.	Muscle	tone	and	reflexes	are	normal.	Nystagmus	may	be	present	but
is	 usually	 not	 marked.	 Ocular	 dysmetria,	 rebound	 nystagmus,	 and	 pursuit
abnormalities	 may	 also	 occur.	 Lesions	 involving	 the	 vermis	 may	 cause	 upbeat
nystagmus.	Dysarthria	is	often	present.	There	is	sometimes	an	abnormal	rotated
or	tilted	head	posture.

Common	 causes	 of	 a	 midline	 cerebellar	 syndrome	 are	 alcoholic	 cerebellar
degeneration	 and	 medulloblastoma.	 Alcohol	 preferentially	 poisons	 the	 vermis,
leading	 to	 a	 characteristic	 syndrome	 of	 gait	 ataxia	 with	 sparing	 of	 the	 limbs.
Such	 patients	 may	 have	 no	 demonstrable	 lower-extremity	 ataxia	 while	 lying
supine,	 yet	 be	 totally	 unable	 to	 walk.	 Unwary	 examiners	 may	 conclude	 such
findings	represent	hysteria.	Medulloblastomas	occur	most	often	in	the	cerebellar
vermis.

Hemispheric	Syndrome

With	 a	 lesion	 involving	 one	 cerebellar	 hemisphere,	 the	 manifestations	 are
appendicular	rather	than	axial.	Cerebellar	hemispheric	deficits	are	unilateral	and
ipsilateral	 to	 the	 lesion,	 as	 the	 pathways	 are	 uncrossed	 (or,	 more	 correctly,
double	crossed).	There	is	a	disturbance	of	skilled	movements	of	the	extremities,
with	 ataxia,	 dysmetria,	 dyssynergy,	 dysdiadochokinesia,	 and	 hypotonicity
affecting	 the	 arm	 and	 hand	 more	 than	 the	 leg	 and	 foot.	 Distal	 movements	 are
affected	 more	 than	 proximal	 and	 fine	 movements	 more	 than	 gross	 ones.
Movements	are	performed	irregularly,	and	there	may	be	intention	tremor	or	other
hyperkinesias	if	the	dentate	nucleus	or	its	efferent	pathways	are	involved.

Posture	and	gait	are	not	impaired	as	severely	as	in	the	vermis	syndrome,	but
abnormalities	do	occur.	There	may	be	swaying	and	falling	toward	the	side	of	the
lesion.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 able	 to	 stand	 one	 legged	 using	 the	 contralateral	 but
not	the	ipsilateral	foot.	He	may	be	unable	to	bend	his	body	toward	the	involved
side	 without	 falling.	 The	 abnormalities	 often	 resemble	 those	 of	 a	 unilateral
vestibular	 lesion.	 On	 walking,	 there	 may	 be	 unsteadiness,	 with	 deviation	 or
rotation	toward	the	involved	side.	There	may	be	drift	and	past	pointing	toward
the	 involved	 side.	 Dysarthria	 may	 occur,	 although	 disturbances	 of	 articulation
are	not	as	severe	as	in	vermis	lesions.	Nystagmus	is	a	common	finding,	usually
horizontal	 but	 sometimes	 rotatory.	 It	 is	 usually	 more	 prominent	 when	 looking
toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion.	 Common	 causes	 of	 a	 cerebellar	 hemispheric
syndrome	 include	 cerebellar	 astrocytoma,	 multiple	 sclerosis,	 and	 lateral
medullary	stroke.

Diffuse	Cerebellar	Dysfunction

Some	 conditions	 affect	 the	 cerebellum	 diffusely,	 causing	 midline	 and	 bilateral
hemispheric	abnormalities.	Patients	may	have	nystagmus,	gait	and	truncal	ataxia,
and	
hereditary
spinocerebellar	 ataxia	 (SCA)	 syndromes,	 drugs	 (especially	 phenytoin),	 toxins,
and	paraneoplastic	cerebellar	degeneration.

incoordination.	 Etiologies	

appendicular	

include	

the	

Sensory	Ataxia

Incoordination	 may	 also	 result	 from	 a	 lack	 of	 proprioceptive	 input	 from	 the
limbs.	 Sensory	 ataxia	 results	 from	 peripheral	 nerve	 disease	 affecting	 primarily
sensory	 fibers;	 pathology	 involving	 the	 dorsal	 root	 ganglia,	 dorsal	 roots,	 or
posterior	columns	of	the	spinal	cord;	interruption	of	the	proprioceptive	pathways

in	 the	 brainstem;	 or	 disease	 of	 the	 parietal	 lobe.	 Incoordination	 due	 to	 sensory
ataxia	can	 closely	mimic	that	of	cerebellar	ataxia	 (Table	43.2).	 With	 cerebellar
ataxia,	it	makes	little	difference	whether	the	patient’s	eyes	are	open	or	closed.	In
sensory	ataxia,	performance	is	not	normal	with	eyes	open	but	worsens	markedly
with	 eyes	 closed.	 The	 different	 components	 of	 the	 abnormality	 may	 behave
slightly	differently	when	visual	input	is	removed.	Some	of	the	tremor	in	sensory
ataxia	 is	 due	 to	 visually	 guided	 voluntary	 corrections	 of	 deviations	 from	 the
intended	 track.	 Because	 of	 loss	 of	 appreciation	 of	 limb	 position	 in	 space,	 with
eyes	closed,	the	patient	may	be	unable	to	find	his	nose	or	the	examiner’s	finger,
but	the	tremor	may	actually	abate	because	the	patient	cannot	see	that	a	deviation
is	occurring	and	does	not	attempt	to	correct	it.	He	may	be	wildly	off	target	but
move	in	a	straighter	line.	The	distinction	between	cerebellar	and	sensory	ataxia
is	also	made	by	the	associated	findings	(Table	43.2).

TABLE
43.2

Associated	Findings	Helpful	in	Distinguishing	Sensory
from	Cerebellar	Ataxia

Sensory	Ataxia

Cerebellar	Ataxia

Sensory	loss,

Nystagmus,	ocular	dysmetria,	and	other	eye

especially	for	joint
position	and
vibration

movement	abnormalities

Steppage	gait

Reeling,	ataxic	gait

Decreased	reflexes Other	signs	of	cerebellar	disease	(dyssynergia,

dysmetria,	dysdiadochokinesia,	hypotonia,
rebound,	impaired	check	response)

Other	Abnormalities

There	are	many	potential	causes	for	a	lack	of	coordination	of	movement.	All	of
the	levels	of	the	motor	system	are	involved	in	performing	smooth	and	accurate
movement.	 Weakness	 of	 any	 origin	 may	 interfere	 with	 skill	 and	 precision.
Abnormalities	of	tone	of	any	type	may	interfere	with	coordination.	Diseases	of
the	extrapyramidal	system	may	impair	motor	control	because	of	rigidity,	akinesia

or	 bradykinesia,	 lack	 of	 spontaneity,	 and	 loss	 of	 associated	 movements.	 A
corticospinal	tract	lesion	may	cause	jerkiness	and	clumsiness	of	movement,	loss
of	 motor	 control,	 and	 poor	 integration	 of	 skilled	 acts.	 Nonorganic	 illness	 may
true	 ataxia.	 Hyperkinetic
cause	 difficulty	 with	 coordination	 simulating	
movement	 disorders	 may	 cause	 irregularity	 in	 the	 timing	 and	 excursion	 of
impair	 motor
successive	 movements.	 Proprioceptive	 abnormalities	 may	
performance.	 To	 always	 attribute	 ataxia	
is	 an
oversimplification	 because	 many	 conditions	 can	 cause	 incoordination	 and
clumsiness.	 Often,	 the	 cause	 is	 multifactorial.	 A	 good	 general	 rule	 is	 to	 avoid
drawing	conclusions	about	the	meaning	of	“cerebellar	signs”	in	the	face	of	any
significant	 degree	 of	 weakness,	 spasticity,	 rigidity,	 or	 sensory	 loss.	 When	 the
examination	 shows	no	 other	abnormalities,	incoordination	 and	 awkwardness	 of
movement	are	usually	due	to	cerebellar	disease.

to	 cerebellar	 disease	

Frontal	lobe	ataxia	refers	to	disturbed	coordination	due	to	dysfunction	of	the
contralateral	frontal	lobe;	it	may	resemble	the	deficits	due	to	abnormalities	of	the
ipsilateral	 cerebellar	 hemisphere.	 Frontal	 lobe	 ataxia	 results	 from	 disease
involving	 the	 frontopontocerebellar	 fibers	 en	 route	 to	 synapse	 in	 the	 pontine
nuclei.	 Frontal	 lobe	 lesions	 may	 produce	 other	 abnormalities,	 such	 as
hyperreflexia,	increased	tone,	and	pathologic	reflexes,	whereas	purely	cerebellar
lesions	 typically	 cause	 hypotonia,	 diminished	 or	 pendular	 reflexes,	 and	 no
pathologic	 reflex	 responses.	 Pressure	 on	 the	 brainstem	 by	 a	 cerebellar	 mass
lesion	may	cause	corticospinal	tract	findings	that	can	confuse	the	picture.	Bruns’
ataxia	 refers	 to	 a	 gait	 disturbance	 seen	 primarily	 in	 frontal	 lobe	 lesions	 (see
Chapter	44).

A	variety	of	other	functions	have	been	attributed	to	the	cerebellum,	and	there
has	 been	 increasing	 awareness	 of	 its	 nonmotor	 functions.	 Roles	 for	 the
cerebellum	in	learning,	planning,	emotion,	and	cognition	have	been	proposed.	It
may	 play	 a	 role	 in	 sensory-motor	 integration,	 motor	 coordination,	 motor
learning,	 and	 timing.	 A	 cerebellar	 cognitive	 affective	 syndrome	 has	 been
function,	 visuospatial
described,	 characterized	 by	 disturbed	 executive	
disorganization	 and	 impaired	 visuospatial	 memory,	 personality	 change,	 and
linguistic	difficulties	such	as	dysprosodia,	agrammatism,	and	mild	anomia.	The
cerebellum	 has	 considerable	 influence	 in	 language	 processing.	 Children	 with
cerebellar	 malformations	 have	 a	 high	 prevalence	 of	 nonmotor	 developmental
and	 functional	 disabilities	 including	 cognitive,	 language,	 and	 social-behavioral
deficits.	The	cerebellar	mutism	syndrome	(posterior	fossa	syndrome)	consists	of
diminished	 speech	 progressing	 to	 mutism,	 emotional	 lability,	 hypotonia,	 and

ataxia.	 It	 is	 common	 following	 resection	 of	 a	 midline	 posterior	 fossa	 tumor	 in
children,	 particularly	 medulloblastoma.	 Dysarthria	 may	 occur	 as	 a	 sequela.
Nonmotor	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 has	 been	 implicated	 in	 conditions	 as
diverse	as	autism,	dyslexia,	and	schizophrenia.

CEREBELLAR	DISORDERS

Conditions	 causing	 a	 relatively	 acute	 ataxia	 include	 metabolic	 disorders,
infections,	 toxins,	 neoplasms,	 infarction,	 hemorrhage,	 and	 demyelinating
disease.	An	idiopathic	condition,	acute	cerebellar	ataxia	or	“cerebellitis,”	is	most
common	 in	 children.	 Autoimmunity	 may	 account	 for	 some	 cases	 of	 idiopathic
include	 Wernicke’s
sporadic	 cerebellar	 ataxia.	 The	 metabolic	 disorders	
encephalopathy,	 biotinidase	 deficiency,	 and	 hyperammonemia.	 Conditions
causing	 episodic	 or	 recurrent	 ataxia	 include	 channelopathies,	 such	 as	 the
episodic	 ataxia	 syndromes,	 basilar	 artery	 migraine,	 recurrent	 toxin	 exposure
(alcohol	 is	 the	 archetypal	 cerebellar	 toxin),	 and	 metabolic	 disorders	 such	 as
Hartnup’s	disease,	Leigh’s	syndrome,	and	organic	acidurias.

Chronic	 ataxia	 may	 be	 relatively	 fixed	 or	 progressive.	 Static	 forms	 include
alcoholic	cerebellar	degeneration	and	malformations,	such	as	the	Dandy-Walker
and	Chiari	malformations.	The	Chiari	I	malformation	is	relatively	common.	It	is
often	 asymptomatic	 and	 discovered	 incidentally	 on	 neuroimaging.	 When
symptomatic,	 typical	 other	 manifestations	 include	 headache	 and	 neck	 pain
(worsened	 by	 cough	 or	 Valsalva	 maneuver),	 evidence	 of	 lower	 brainstem
dysfunction	(e.g.,	dysarthria,	dysphagia,	downbeat	nystagmus),	myelopathy,	and
syringomyelia.	Causes	of	chronic	progressive	ataxia	include	the	hereditary	SCAs
and	 acquired	 disorders	 such	 as	 hypothyroidism,	 paraneoplastic	 cerebellar
degeneration,	and	multiple	sclerosis.

TABLE
43.3

Name

SCA1

The	Common	Forms	of	Spinocerebellar	Ataxia	(SCA)

Genetics

Phenotype

6p22–p23;	CAG

Ataxia;	ophthalmoparesis;

repeats;	ataxin-1

pyramidal	and	extrapyramidal
findings

SCA2

12q23–q24.1;	CAG;

ataxin-2

SCA3

(Machado-
Joseph
disease)

SCA6

SCA7

14q24.3–q32;	CAG
repeats;	ataxin-3

19p13.2;	CAG	repeats;
CACNA1A	protein,
P/Q-type	calcium
channel	subunit

3p14.1–p21.1;	CAG
repeats;	ataxin-7
binding	protein

Ataxia;	slow	saccades;	minimal
pyramidal	and	extrapyramidal
findings

Ataxia;	ophthalmoparesis;

variable	pyramidal,
extrapyramidal,	and
amyotrophic	signs

Ataxia;	dysarthria;	nystagmus;
mild	proprioceptive	sensory
loss

Ophthalmoparesis;	visual	loss;
ataxia;	dysarthria;	extensor
plantar	response;	pigmentary
retinal	degeneration

SCA8

13q21	with	CTG

Gait	ataxia;	dysarthria;

repeats;	noncoding;
3′	untranslated
region	of	transcribed
RNA

nystagmus;	leg	spasticity;
reduced	vibratory	sensation

Modified	from	Rosenberg	RN.	Ataxic	disorders.	In:	Longo	D,	Fauci	AS,	Kasper	DL,	et	al.,	eds.
Harrison’s	Principles	of	Internal	Medicine.	18th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill,	2011.

The	 inherited	 ataxias	 may	 be	 transmitted	 through	 autosomal	 dominant,
autosomal	 recessive,	 or	 maternal	 (mitochondrial)	 modes	 of	 inheritance.	 A
genomic	 classification	 has	 now	 largely	 superseded	 previous	 ones	 based	 on
clinical	 expression	 alone.	 The	 clinical	 manifestations	 and	 neuropathologic
findings	 of	 cerebellar	 disease	 dominate	 the	 clinical	 picture;	 there	 may	 also	 be
characteristic	changes	in	the	basal	ganglia,	brainstem,	spinal	cord,	optic	nerves,
retina,	 and	 peripheral	 nerves.	 The	 conditions	 clinically	 range	 from	 purely
cerebellar	syndromes	to	mixed	cerebellar	and	brainstem	disorders,	cerebellar	and
basal	ganglia	syndromes,	and	spinal	cord	or	peripheral	nerve	disease.

The	 most	 common	 form	 of	 hereditary	 ataxia	 is	 the	 autosomal	 recessive
condition	 called	 FA.	 The	 most	 common	 molecular	 abnormality	 in	 FA	 is	 a

trinucleotide	 repeat	 expansion	 in	 the	 gene	 encoding	 frataxin.	 The	 condition	 is
characterized	 by	 progressive	 gait	 and	 limb	 ataxia	 with	 associated	 limb	 muscle
weakness,	 absent	 lower	 limb	 reflexes,	 extensor	 plantar	 responses,	 dysarthria,
decreased	vibratory	and	proprioception	sense,	scoliosis,	pes	cavus,	hammer	toes,
and	cardiac	abnormalities.	Onset	is	usually	in	the	first	or	second	decade,	before
the	 end	 of	 puberty.	 The	 triad	 of	 hypoactive	 knee	 and	 ankle	 jerks,	 signs	 of
progressive	 cerebellar	 dysfunction,	 and	 preadolescent	 onset	 is	 commonly
regarded	as	sufficient	for	diagnosis.	Uncommon	features	and	atypical	forms	have
been	 recognized.	 As	 many	 as	 one-quarter	 of	 the	 patients,	 even	 homozygotes,
have	 atypical	 features,	 including	 older	 age	 at	 presentation	 and	 intact	 tendon
reflexes.	 Smaller	 trinucleotide	 repeat	 expansions	 correlate	 with	 later	 onset	 and
longer	times	to	loss	of	ambulation.

The	 autosomal	 dominant	 SCAs	 include	 SCA	 types	 1	 through	 47	 (at	 this
writing).	 The	 most	 common	 disorders	 are	 SCA	 1,	 2,	 3	 (Machado-Joseph
disease),	6,	7,	and	8	(Table	43.3).	Many	of	the	conditions	are	nucleotide	repeat
disorders;	others	are	channelopathies.	Most	of	the	CAG	repeat	disorders	result	in
proteins,	 termed	 ataxins,	 that	 produce	 a	 toxic	 gain	 of	 function.	 Although	 the
phenotype	is	variable	for	any	given	disease	gene,	a	pattern	of	neuronal	loss	with
gliosis	is	produced	that	is	relatively	unique	for	each	ataxia.

Video	Links

Video	Link	43.1.	Cerebellar	eye	signs.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?

id=188448

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Almeida	J,	Afonso	JG.	Cerebellum	and	schizophrenia:	from	concepts	to	clinical

practice.	Eur	Psychiatry	2011;26:1340.

Amarenco	P,	Chevrie-Muller	C,	Roullet	E,	et	al.	Paravermal	infarct	and	isolated

cerebellar	dysarthria.	Ann	Neurol	1991;30:211–213.

Andreasen	 NC,	 Pierson	 R.	 The	 role	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 in	 schizophrenia.	 Biol

Psychiatry	2008;64:81–88.

Angel	 RW.	 The	 rebound	 phenomenon	 of	 Gordon	 Holmes.	 Arch	 Neurol

1977;34:250.

Baier	 B,	 Dieterich	 M.	 Ocular	 tilt	 reaction:	 a	 clinical	 sign	 of	 cerebellar

infarctions?	Neurology	2009;72:572–573.

Bertini	E,	des	Portes	V,	Zanni	G,	et	al.	X-linked	congenital	ataxia:	a	clinical	and

genetic	study.	Am	J	Med	Genet	2000;92:53–56.

Bolduc	ME,	Du	Plessis	AJ,	Sullivan	N,	et	al.	Spectrum	of	neurodevelopmental
disabilities	in	children	with	cerebellar	malformations.	Dev	Med	Child	Neurol
2011;53:409–416.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Cruz-Marino	 T,	 Gonzalez-Zaldivar	 Y,	 Laffita-Mesa	 JM,	 et	 al.	 Uncommon
features	 in	 Cuban	 families	 affected	 with	 Friedreich	 ataxia.	 Neurosci	 Lett
2010;472:85–89.

Daum	I,	Ackermann	H.	Cerebellar	contributions	to	cognition.	Behav	Brain	Res

1995;67:201–210.

Diehl	 B,	 Lee	 MS,	 Reid	 JR,	 et	 al.	 Atypical,	 perhaps	 under-recognized?	 An

unusual	phenotype	of	Friedreich	ataxia.	Neurogenetics	2010;11:261–265.

Diener	 HC,	 Dichgans	 J.	 Pathophysiology	 of	 cerebellar	 ataxia.	 Mov	 Disord

1992;7:95–109.

Durr	A,	Cossee	M,	Agid	Y,	et	al.	Clinical	and	genetic	abnormalities	in	patients

with	Friedreich’s	ataxia.	N	Engl	J	Med	1996;335:1169–1175.

Fenichel	GM,	Phillips	JA.	Familial	aplasia	of	the	cerebellar	vermis.	Possible	X-

linked	dominant	inheritance.	Arch	Neurol	1989;46:582.

Fine	 EJ,	 Ionita	 CC,	 Lohr	 L.	 The	 history	 of	 the	 development	 of	 the	 cerebellar

examination.	Semin	Neurol	2002;22:375–384.

Fogel	 BL,	 Perlman	 S.	 Clinical	 features	 and	 molecular	 genetics	 of	 autosomal

recessive	cerebellar	ataxias.	Lancet	Neurol	2007;6:245–257.

Fuller	 G.	 Neurological	 Examination	 Made	 Easy.	 5th	 ed.	 New	 York:	 Churchill

Livingstone,	2013.

Gilman	 S.	 Clinical	 Examination	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-

Hill,	2000.

Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Goldstein	 BH,	 Birk	 CL,	 Van	 HM,	 et	 al.	 Ovarian	 cancer	 and	 late	 onset
paraneoplastic	 cerebellar	 degeneration.	 Arch	 Gynecol	 Obstet	 2009;280:99–
101.

Gomez	 CM,	 Subramony	 SH.	 Dominantly	 inherited	 ataxias.	 Semin	 Pediatr

Neurol	2003;10:210–222.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	

JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters

Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Gudrunardottir	T,	Sehested	A,	Juhler	M,	et	al.	Cerebellar	mutism:	review	of	the

literature.	Childs	Nerv	Syst	2011;27:355–363.

Hallett	M,	Berardelli	A,	Matheson	J,	et	al.	Physiological	analysis	of	simple	rapid
movements	in	patients	with	cerebellar	deficits.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry
1991;54:124–133.

Hallett	 M,	 Massaquoi	 SG.	 Physiologic	 studies	 of	 dysmetria	 in	 patients	 with

cerebellar	deficits.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	1993;20(Suppl	3):S83–S92.

Hore	 J,	 Wild	 B,	 Diener	 HC.	 Cerebellar	 dysmetria	 at	 the	 elbow,	 wrist,	 and

fingers.	J	Neurophysiol	1991;65:563–571.

Iannicelli	M,	Brancati	F,	Mougou-Zerelli	S,	et	al.	Novel	TMEM67	mutations	and
genotype-phenotype	 correlates	 in	 meckelin-related	 ciliopathies.	 Hum	 Mutat
2010;31:E1319–E1331.

Inhoff	AW,	Diener	HC,	Rafal	RD,	et	al.	The	role	of	cerebellar	structures	in	the

execution	of	serial	movements.	Brain	1989;112:565.

Ivry	 RB,	 Keele	 SW,	 Diener	 HC.	 Dissociation	 of	 the	 lateral	 and	 medial
cerebellum	 in	 movement	 timing	 and	 movement	 execution.	 Exp	 Brain	 Res
1988;73:167.

Karmon	 Y,	 Inbar	 E,	 Cordoba	 M,	 et	 al.	 Paraneoplastic	 cerebellar	 degeneration
mimicking	acute	post-infectious	cerebellitis.	Cerebellum	2009;8:441–444.
Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	 10th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer/Lippincott	 Williams	 &
Wilkins,	2014.

Klockgether	 T,	 Ludtke	 R,	 Kramer	 B,	 et	 al.	 The	 natural	 history	 of	 degenerative
ataxia:	a	retrospective	study	in	466	patients.	Brain	1998;121(Pt	4):589–600.
Landau	 WM.	 Ataxic	 hindbrain	 thinking:	 the	 clumsy	 cerebellum	 syndrome.

Neurology	1989;39:315.

Lechtenberg	 R,	 Gilman	 S.	 Speech	 disorders	 in	 cerebellar	 disease.	 Ann	 Neurol

1978;3:285–290.

Lee	H,	Sohn	SI,	Cho	YW,	et	al.	Cerebellar	infarction	presenting	isolated	vertigo:
frequency	 and	 vascular	 topographical	 patterns.	 Neurology	 2006;67:1178–
1183.

Leiner	 HC,	 Leiner	 AL,	 Dow	 RS.	 Reappraising	 the	 cerebellum:	 what	 does	 the
hindbrain	contribute	to	the	forebrain?	Behav	Neurosci	1989;103:998–1008.
Manto	 M,	 Godaux	 E,	 Jacquy	 J,	 et	 al.	 Cerebellar	 hypermetria	 associated	 with	 a
selective	 decrease	 in	 the	 rate	 of	 rise	 of	 antagonist	 activity.	 Ann	 Neurol
1996;39:271–274.

Manto	 MU,	 Setta	 F,	 Jacquy	 J,	 et	 al.	 Different	 types	 of	 cerebellar	 hypometria
associated	with	a	distinct	topography	of	the	lesion	in	cerebellum.	J	Neurol	Sci

1998;158:88–95.

Massey	 EW,	 Pleet	 AB,	 Scherokman	 BJ.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A
Photographic	 Guide	 to	 Bedside	 Techniques.	 Chicago:	 Year	 Book	 Medical
Publishers,	Inc.,	1985.

Masur	 H,	 Elger	 CE,	 Ludolph	 AC,	 et	 al.	 Cerebellar	 atrophy	 following	 acute

intoxication	with	phenytoin.	Neurology	1989;39:432.

Miquel	 M,	 Toledo	 R,	 García	 LI,	 et	 al.	 Why	 should	 we	 keep	 the	 cerebellum	 in
mind	when	thinking	about	addiction?	Curr	Drug	Abuse	Rev	2009;2:26–40.
Morrison	PJ.	Paediatric	and	adult	autosomal	dominant	ataxias	(update	6).	Eur	 J

Paediatr	Neurol	2010;14:261–263.

Narabayashi	 H.	 Analysis	 of	
1992;94(Suppl):S130–S132.

intention	

tremor.	 Clin	 Neurol	 Neurosurg

Oberdick	 J,	 Sillitoe	 RV.	 Cerebellar	 zones.	 History,	 development,	 and	 function.

Cerebellum	2011;10:301–306.

Pernet	 CR,	 Poline	 JB,	 Demonet	 JF,	 et	 al.	 Brain	 classification	 reveals	 the	 right

cerebellum	as	the	best	biomarker	of	dyslexia.	BMC	Neurosci	2009;10:67.

Pestronk	

A.	

Hereditary	

ataxias.

http://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/aindex.html.	Accessed	May	28,	2018.
Piven	 J,	 Saliba	 K,	 Bailey	 J,	 et	 al.	 An	 MRI	 study	 of	 autism:	 the	 cerebellum

revisited.	Neurology	1997;49:546–551.

Pollack	 IF,	 Polinko	 P,	 Albright	 AL,	 et	 al.	 Mutism	 and	 pseudobulbar	 symptoms
after	 resection	 of	 posterior	 fossa	 tumors	 in	 children:	 incidence	 and
pathophysiology.	Neurosurgery	1995;37:885–893.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Rosenberg	RN.	Ataxic	disorders.	In:	Longo	D,	Fauci	AS,	Kasper	DL,	et	al.,	eds.
Harrison’s	Principles	of	Internal	Medicine.	18th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill,
2011.

Ross	RT.	How	to	Examine	the	Nervous	System.	4th	ed.	Totowa:	Humana	Press,

2006.

Sabater	 L,	 Bataller	L,	 Suarez-Calvet	 M,	 et	 al.	 ZIC	antibodies	 in	paraneoplastic
cerebellar	 degeneration	 and	 small	 cell	 lung	 cancer.	 J	 Neuroimmunol
2008;201–202:163–165.

Sacchetti	 B,	 Scelfo	 B,	 Strata	 P.	 Cerebellum	 and	 emotional	 behavior.

Neuroscience	2009;162:756–762.

Schmahmann	 JD,	 MacMore	 J,	 Vangel	 M.	 Cerebellar	 stroke	 without	 motor
deficit:	clinical	evidence	for	motor	and	non-motor	domains	within	the	human
cerebellum.	Neuroscience	2009;162:852–861.

Schmahmann	 JD,	 Sherman	 JC.	 The	 cerebellar	 cognitive	 affective	 syndrome.

Brain	1998;121(Pt	4):561–579.

Schols	 L,	 Bauer	 P,	 Schmidt	 T,	 et	 al.	 Autosomal	 dominant	 cerebellar	 ataxias:
clinical	features,	genetics,	and	pathogenesis.	Lancet	Neurol	2004;3:291–304.
Serrao	 M,	 Pierelli	 F,	 Ranavolo	 A,	 et	 al.	 Gait	 pattern	 in	 inherited	 cerebellar

ataxias.	Cerebellum	2011;11:194–211.

Spencer	 RM,	 Zelaznik	 HN,	 Diedrichsen	 J,	 et	 al.	 Disrupted	 timing	 of
discontinuous	 but	 not	 continuous	 movements	 by	 cerebellar	 lesions.	 Science
2003;300:1437–1439.

Subramony	SH.	Approach	to	ataxic	diseases.	Handb	Clin	Neurol	2011;103:127–

134.

Subramony	 SH.	 Overview	 of	 autosomal	 dominant	 ataxias.	 Handb	 Clin	 Neurol

2011;103:389–398.

Timmann	 D,	 Drepper	 J,	 Frings	 M,	 et	 al.	 The	 human	 cerebellum	 contributes	 to
motor,	 emotional	 and	 cognitive	 associative	 learning.	 A	 review.	 Cortex
2010;46:845–857.

Turgut	M.	Cerebellar	mutism.	J	Neurosurg	Pediatr	2008;1:262.
Wartenberg	 R.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology,	 A	 Selection	 for	 Office	 Use.

Chicago:	Year	Book	Medical	Publishers,	1953.

Weibers	 DO,	 Dale	 AJD,	 Kokmen	 E,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Examinations	 in

Neurology.	7th	ed.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	1998.

Wild	 B,	 Klockgether	 T,	 Dichgans	 J.	 Acceleration	 deficit	 in	 patients	 with
cerebellar	 lesions.	 A	 study	 of	 kinematic	 and	 EMG-parameters	 in	 fast	 wrist
movements.	Brain	Res	1996;713:186–191.

Wu	JP,	Jedynak	CP,	Pidoux	B,	et	al.	Quantitative	study	of	Stewart-Holmes	test.

Electromyogr	Clin	Neurophysiol	1998;38:237–245.

Zanni	 G,	 Barresi	 S,	 Travaglini	 L,	 et	 al.	 FGF17,	 a	 gene	 involved	 in	 cerebellar
development,	is	downregulated	in	a	patient	with	Dandy-Walker	malformation
carrying	a	de	novo	8p	deletion.	Neurogenetics	2011;12:241–245.

Zanni	G,	Bertini	ES.	X-linked	disorders	with	cerebellar	dysgenesis.	Orphanet	 J

Rare	Dis	2011;6:24.

Zanni	 G,	 Bertini	 E,	 Bellcross	 C,	 et	 al.	 X-linked	 congenital	 ataxia:	 a	 new	 locus

maps	to	Xq25–q27.1.	Am	J	Med	Genet	A	2008;146:593–600.

Zanni	G,	Saillour	Y,	Nagara	M,	et	al.	Oligophrenin	1	mutations	frequently	cause

X-linked	 mental	
2005;65:1364–1369.

retardation	 with	 cerebellar	 hypoplasia.	 Neurology

Zhang	N,	Ottersen	OP.	In	search	of	the	identity	of	the	cerebellar	climbing	fiber
in	 rats.	 Can	 J	 Neurol	 Sci

immunocytochemical	 studies	

transmitter:	
1993;20(Suppl	3):S36–S42.

CHAPTER	44

Gait	and	Station

It	is	likely	possible	to	learn	more	about	neurologic	status	from	watching	a	patient
walk	 than	 from	 any	 other	 single	 procedure,	 and	 observation	 of	 gait	 should
always	be	part	of	a	neurologic	examination.	Abnormalities	of	gait	are	a	common
clinical	 problem	 with	 numerous	 causes,	 both	 neurologic	 and	 nonneurologic.	 A
careful	general	evaluation	is	always	necessary	to	exclude	a	nonneurologic	cause.
Station	is	the	way	a	patient	stands	and	gait	the	way	she	walks.	Standing	and
walking	 are	 active	 processes	 that	 depend	 upon	 a	 number	 of	 factors	 and	 reflex
responses.	The	mechanisms	are	complex,	especially	in	the	human,	whose	biped
gait	 and	 erect	 position	 over	 a	 narrow	 base	 require	 more	 efficient	 maintenance
and	control	of	equilibrium	than	is	necessary	in	quadrupeds.	Normal	resting	tone,
especially	 in	 the	 antigravity	 muscles,	 is	 essential.	 The	 postural	 and	 righting
reflexes	 described	 in	 Chapter	 41	 are	 particularly	 important.	 Standing	 may	 be
considered	a	postural	reflex	that	is	dependent	on	reflexes	mediated	through	the
brainstem	 and	 influenced	 to	 a	 major	 degree	 by	 tonic	 neck	 and	 labyrinthine
reflexes.	If	the	mechanisms	mediating	static	and	postural	reflexes	are	impaired,
normal	 standing	 and	 walking	 will	 be	 impaired.	 In	 addition,	 proprioceptive
sensation	must	be	received,	the	skeletal	system	must	be	intact,	the	muscles	must
be	 functioning	 normally,	 and	 coordination	 must	 be	 adequate.	 Gait	 and	 station
may	 be	 affected	 by	 abnormalities	 of	 proprioception,	 abnormalities	 of	 muscle
power	 or	 tone,	 and	 abnormalities	 of	 vestibular	 function	 and	 by	 dysfunction	 of
the	basal	ganglia,	the	cerebellum,	or	their	connections.

Neurologic	 causes	 of	 an	 abnormal	 gait	 include	 conditions	 as	 varied	 as
footdrop	 due	 to	 peroneal	 nerve	 palsy,	 myopathy,	 hydrocephalus,	 and	 cerebellar
degeneration.	The	various	gait	abnormalities	have	different	findings	on	physical
examination	in	regard	to	the	gait	itself,	such	as	a	steppage	pattern	as	opposed	to
a	 pelvic	 waddle.	 The	 differential	 diagnosis	 of	 the	 gait	 abnormality	 is	 also	 very
dependent	on	the	history	and	the	other	clinical	signs	present.	Some	of	the	more

common	abnormal	gait	patterns	are	summarized	in	Table	44.1.

EXAMINATION	OF	STATION

Station	 is	 the	 patient’s	 attitude,	 posture,	 or	 manner	 of	 standing.	 The	 healthy
individual	 stands	 erect	 with	 her	 head	 up,	 chest	 out,	 and	 abdomen	 in.
Abnormality	 of	 station	 may	 be	 an	 important	 indicator	 of	 neurologic	 disease.
Station	 is	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 stand,	 feet	 closely	 together,	 noting	 any
unsteadiness	or	swaying.	More	rigorous	testing	includes	having	the	patient	stand
eyes	open	and	eyes	closed,	on	one	foot	at	a	time,	on	toes	and	heels,	and	tandem
with	 one	heel	in	front	 of	 the	 toes	of	the	other	foot.	She	may	be	 given	a	gentle
push	to	see	whether	she	falls	to	one	side,	forward,	or	backward.

Patients	 with	 unsteadiness	 standing	 often	 attempt	 to	 compensate	 by	 placing
the	feet	wide	apart	in	order	to	stand	on	a	broader	and	steadier	base.	In	cerebellar
disease,	the	patient	usually	stands	on	a	broad	base	and	there	is	swaying,	to	more
or	less	an	equal	degree,	with	eyes	open	and	closed.	With	a	lesion	of	the	vermis,
the	patient	may	sway	backward,	forward,	or	to	either	side.	With	a	lesion	of	one
hemisphere,	 she	 sways	 or	 falls	 toward	 the	 affected	 side.	 Unilateral	 vestibular
disease	 also	 causes	 falling	 toward	 the	 affected	 side.	 In	 a	 unilateral,	 cerebellar
hemispheric	lesion,	or	in	a	unilateral	vestibulopathy,	the	patient	may	tilt	the	head
toward	 the	 involved	 side	 with	 the	 chin	 rotated	 toward	 the	 sound	 side,	 with	 the
shoulder	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 somewhat	 higher	 than	 the	 other	 and	 slightly	 in
front	of	it.	If	the	patient	with	a	cerebellar	hemispheric	lesion	is	given	a	light	push
—first	 toward	 one	side	 and	then	toward	the	other—she	will	lose	 balance	more
easily	when	pushed	toward	the	involved	side.	If	asked	to	stand	on	one	foot	at	a
time,	the	patient	with	a	cerebellar	hemispheric	lesion	may	be	unable	to	maintain
equilibrium	standing	on	the	ipsilateral	foot	but	may	stand	without	difficulty	on
the	contralateral	foot.

TABLE
44.1

Some	of	the	More	Common	Neurologic	Abnormalities
of	Gait

Gait
Disorder

Gait	Characteristics

Usual	Associated
Findings

Spastic

Stiff	legged,	scissoring	(wooden

Hyperreflexia,

soldier)

extensor	plantar

Cerebellar
ataxia

Sensory
ataxia

Wide	based,	reeling,	careening

Heel-to-shin

responses

(drunken	sailor)

Wide	based,	steppage

ataxia,	other
cerebellar	signs

Positive	Romberg,
impaired	joint
position	sense

Hemiparetic

Involved	leg	spastic,	circumduction,

Weakness,

often	with	footdrop

Parkinsonian Small	steps,	flexed	posture,

shuffling,	festination

Marche	à

Small	steps,	slow	shuffling

petits	pas

Footdrop

High	steppage	pattern	to	clear	the

(unilateral
or
bilateral)

toes	from	the	floor,	double	tap	with
toe	strike	before	heel	strike

hyperreflexia,
extensor	plantar
response

Tremor,	rigidity,
bradykinesia

Dementia,	frontal

lobe	signs

Foot	dorsiflexion
weakness

Myopathic

Exaggerated	“sexy”	hip	motion,

Hip	girdle

waddling,	lumbar	hyperlordosis

weakness

Other	 abnormalities	 may	 be	 apparent	 during	 station	 testing,	 particularly
movement	disorders.	Patients	with	chorea	seem	unusually	fidgety	and	often	have
small	 adventitial	 finger	 movements	 (Video	 30.4).	 Skeletal	 changes	 (such	 as
kyphosis,	 scoliosis,	 or	 lordosis);	 abnormalities	 in	 the	 position	 of	 the	 head,
shoulders,	 hips,	 or	 extremities;	 asymmetries;	 anomalies	 of	 development;	 and
abnormalities	of	contour	may	be	apparent.	Patients	who	are	weak	or	debilitated
may	need	support	to	stand	erect.	If	the	patient	is	unable	to	stand	alone,	or	unable
to	 stand	 at	 all,	 document	 how	 much	 support	 and	 assistance	 is	 required	 (e.g.,
stands	 with	 a	 walker,	 chair	 bound).	 If	 the	 patient	 is	 chair	 bound	 or	 bed	 bound,
describe	 the	 sitting	 or	 recumbent	 posture.	 The	 patient	 with	 a	 hemiparesis	 may

stand	 with	 the	 upper	 extremity	 flexed	 and	 pronated	 and	 the	 lower	 extremity
extended.	 Patients	 with	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 stand	 in	 a	 flexed	 posture,	 stooped
over	 with	 head	 and	 shoulders	 bent	 forward	 and	 arms	 and	 knees	 flexed.	 Pelvic
girdle	 weakness	 may	 cause	 pronounced	 lordosis,	 especially	 in	 muscular
dystrophy	(Figure	4.5).	Depressed	patients	may	appear	stooped	and	dejected;	in
manic	 states,	 an	 erect,	 domineering,	 aggressive	 posture	 may	 be	 present.	 In
schizophrenia,	the	patient	may	assume	bizarre	postures	and	hold	them	for	long
periods	 of	 time.	 Hyperkinesias,	 such	 as	 athetoid	 and	 choreic	 movements,	 may
become	evident	during	the	evaluation	of	station.

The	Romberg	Sign

When	 proprioception	 is	 disturbed,	 the	 patient	 may	 be	 able	 to	 stand	 with	 eyes
open	but	sways	or	falls	with	eyes	closed	(Romberg	sign).	The	Romberg	sign	is
often	 misunderstood	 and	 misinterpreted.	 The	 essential	 finding	 is	 a	 difference
between	 standing	 balance	 with	 eyes	 open	 and	 closed.	 In	 order	 to	 test	 this
function,	the	patient	must	have	a	stable	stance	eyes	open	and	then	demonstrate	a
decrease	 in	 balance	 with	 eyes	 closed	 when	 visual	 input	 is	 eliminated,	 and	 the
patient	must	rely	on	proprioception	to	maintain	balance	(see	Video	Link	44.1).
Romberg	 described	 this	 sign	 in	 patients	 with	 tabes	 dorsalis	 and	 thought	 it	 was
pathognomonic.	 He	 said,	 “If	 he	 is	 ordered	 to	 close	 his	 eyes	 while	 in	 the	 erect
posture,	he	at	once	commences	to	totter	or	swing	from	side	to	side;	the	insecurity
of	his	gait	also	exhibits	itself	more	in	the	dark.”	Romberg	did	not	state	that	the
feet	should	be	placed	together;	that	was	a	later	addition.	Nor	did	he	comment	on
where	the	arms	were	to	be	positioned.	It	is	common	practice	to	have	the	patient
hold	the	arms	outstretched	in	front,	but	this	is	in	order	to	check	simultaneously
for	 pronator	 drift	 or	 to	 perform	 finger-to-nose	 testing;	 it	 is	 not	 what	 Romberg
described.	Some	authorities	recommend	the	arms	be	held	at	the	sides,	others	that
the	arms	be	crossed	on	the	chest.	Whether	arm	position	makes	any	difference	in
test	 sensitivity	 is	 unknown.	 Turning	 the	 head	 side	 to	 side	 eliminates	 vestibular
clues	 and	 increases	 the	 reliance	 on	 proprioception	 (Ropper’s	 refined	 Romberg
test).

The	Romberg	test	can	be	difficult	to	interpret.	There	is	some	variability,	even
among	expert	examiners,	in	how	the	Romberg	test	is	performed	and	interpreted.
Many	 patients	 sway	 slightly	 with	 eyes	 closed,	 and	 minimal	 amounts	 of	 sway,
especially	 in	 elderly	 patients,	 are	 seldom	 significant.	 Minor,	 normal	 swaying
may	 stop	 if	 the	 patient	 is	 simply	 asked	 to	 stand	 perfectly	 still.	 Most	 clinicians

discount	sway	at	the	hips	and	insist	on	seeing	sway	at	the	ankles	before	calling
the	test	positive,	some	require	the	patient	take	a	corrective	step	to	the	side,	and
others	 that	 the	 patient	 nearly	 fall.	 Some	 require	 the	 patient	 be	 barefoot.	 The
“sharpened”	or	tandem	Romberg	is	done	by	having	the	patient	stand	in	tandem
position	with	eyes	open	and	closed;	the	limits	of	normality	for	this	variation	are
conjectural.

The	Romberg	sign	is	used	primarily	as	a	test	of	proprioceptive,	not	cerebellar,
function.	 The	 pioneering	 19th-century	 clinicians	 thought	 it	 was	 particularly
useful	in	separating	tabes	dorsalis	from	cerebellar	disease.	In	fact,	patients	with
cerebellar	 disease,	 particularly	 disorders	 of	
the	 vestibulocerebellum	 or
spinocerebellum,	may	have	some	increase	in	instability	with	eyes	closed,	but	not
usually	to	the	degree	seen	with	impaired	proprioception.	A	patient	with	an	acute
unilateral	 vestibulopathy	 may	 fall	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 when	 standing
with	eyes	closed.	Patients	with	cerebellar	disease,	or	those	with	severe	weakness,
may	 not	 have	 a	 stable	 base	 eyes	 open.	 It	 may	 help	 to	 have	 the	 patients	 widen
stance	 to	 the	 point	 where	 they	 are	 stable	 eyes	 open,	 then	 close	 the	 eyes,	 and
check	for	any	difference.	Only	a	marked	worsening	of	balance	with	eyes	closed
qualifies	as	a	positive	Romberg	sign.	A	patient	who	cannot	maintain	balance	feet
together	and	eyes	open	does	not	have	a	positive	Romberg.

Some	 histrionic	 patients	 will	 sway	 with	 eyes	 closed	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 any
organic	 neurologic	 impairment	 (false	 Romberg	 sign).	 The	 swaying	 is	 usually
from	the	hips	and	may	be	exaggerated.	If	the	patient	takes	a	step,	the	eyes	may
remain	closed,	which	never	happens	with	a	bona	fide	Romberg.	The	instability
can	often	be	eliminated	by	diverting	the	patient’s	attention.	Effective	distracters
are	to	ask	the	patient	to	detect	numbers	the	examiner	writes	with	her	finger	on
the	 forehead,	 to	 wiggle	 the	 tongue,	 or	 to	 perform	 the	 finger-to-nose	 testing.
Having	the	shoes	off	and	watching	the	toe	movements	may	be	very	informative.
The	toes	of	the	patient	with	histrionic	sway	are	often	extended;	the	patient	with
organic	imbalance	flexes	the	toes	strongly	and	tries	to	grip	the	floor.

PHYSIOLOGY	OF	GAIT

The	 brainstem	 and	 spinal	 cord	 in	 lower	 forms	 contain	 “central	 pattern
generators,”	 which	 are	 groups	 of	 interneurons	 that	 coordinate	 the	 activity	 in
pools	of	motor	neurons	to	produce	patterned	movements.	Although	the	existence
of	 such	 cell	 groups	 in	 humans	 is	 unproven,	 locomotion	 likely	 depends	 on

activity	in	pattern	generators.	The	pattern	generators	control	the	activity	in	lower
motor	 neurons	 that	 execute	 the	 mechanics	 of	 walking.	 Higher	 centers	 in	 the
subthalamus	and	midbrain,	particularly	the	pedunculopontine	nucleus,	modulate
the	activity	in	the	spinal	cord	pattern	generators	through	the	reticulospinal	tracts.
The	 gait	 cycle	 refers	 to	 the	 events	 that	 transpire	 between	 the	 time	 that	 one
heel	strikes	the	ground	and	the	time	the	same	heel	strikes	the	ground	again	(see
Video	Link	44.2).	The	gait	cycle	begins	when	the	forward	foot	hits	the	ground
(heel	strike	or	initial	contact).	During	the	stance	 phase,	the	stance	leg	 supports
all	or	most	of	the	weight.	At	the	end	of	the	stance	phase,	there	is	a	push	off	(toe-
off	or	preswing	phase)	after	which	the	leg	swings	forward	to	contact	the	ground
again.	 The	 stance	 period	 is	 divided	 into	 four	 phases:	 initial	 contact,	 loading,
midstance,	and	terminal	stance.	The	swing	phase	is	also	divided	into	four	parts:
preswing,	 initial	 swing,	 midswing,	 and	 terminal	 swing.	 The	 functional	 task
during	the	stance	phase	is	to	bear	weight;	the	functional	task	during	swing	phase
is	to	advance	the	limb.	Periods	of	single	limb	support	(one	foot	on	the	ground)
alternate	with	periods	of	double	limb	support	(two	feet	on	the	ground).

Various	parameters	are	used	to	measure	and	characterize	gait,	including	gait
velocity,	stride	time,	step	time,	stride	length,	step	width,	and	step	length.	Stride
length	is	the	distance	covered	by	a	gait	cycle;	step	length	is	the	distance	covered
by	the	swing	phase	of	one	leg.	When	walking,	at	least	one	foot	is	in	contact	with
the	ground	at	all	times,	and	there	are	two	periods	of	double	limb	support.	When
there	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 moment	 in	 time	 when	 both	 limbs	 are	 in	 contact	 with	 the
ground,	walking	has	become	running.	A	typical	adult	walking	comfortably	on	a
level	surface	walks	at	a	velocity	of	about	80	m/min,	taking	about	113	steps	per
minute,	with	a	stride	length	of	1.41	m.	About	60%	of	the	gait	cycle	is	spent	in
stance,	40%	in	swing,	and	10%	in	double	limb	support.	Periods	of	double	limb
increase	quickly	to	compensate	for	instability.

The	body’s	center	of	mass	is	located	just	anterior	to	the	S2	vertebral	body.	An
efficient	gait	minimizes	the	displacement	of	the	center	of	mass	by	rotating	and
tilting	 the	 pelvis	 and	 flexing	 and	 extending	 the	 various	 joints	 involved.	 Gait
disturbances	that	increase	the	normal	displacement	of	the	center	of	mass	are	less
efficient	 and	 require	 an	 increased	 expenditure	 of	 energy.	 Patients	 typically
compensate	by	walking	more	slowly	and	employing	compensatory	maneuvers	to
regain	lost	efficiency.	In	addition	to	the	increased	energy	requirement,	abnormal
gaits	increase	the	risk	of	falling	and	the	susceptibility	to	biomechanical	injury.

EXAMINATION	OF	GAIT

The	 first	 step	 in	 analyzing	 gait	 is	 to	 check	 the	 width	 of	 the	 base,	 or	 the	 step
width.	The	wider	the	base,	the	better	the	balance,	and	spreading	the	feet	farther
apart	 is	 the	 first	 compensatory	 effort	 in	 most	 gait	 disorders.	 Under	 normal
circumstances,	 the	 medial	 malleoli	 pass	 within	 about	 2	 in	 of	 each	 other	 during
the	stride	phase,	a	narrow	and	well-compensated	gait.	Any	spread	more	than	this
may	signal	some	problem	with	gait	or	balance.

The	forefoot	on	each	side	should	clear	the	ground	to	about	the	same	degree;
asymmetry	 of	 toe	 lift	 may	 be	 the	 earliest	 evidence	 of	 footdrop.	 A	 shortened
stride	 length	 may	 be	 early	 evidence	 of	 bifrontal	 or	 extrapyramidal	 disease.
Excessive	movement	of	the	hips	may	occur	with	any	process	causing	proximal
muscle	weakness.	Note	the	reciprocal	arm	swing;	a	decreased	swing	on	one	side
is	sometimes	an	early	indicator	of	hemiparesis	or	hemiparkinsonism.	Watch	the
hands	for	tremor	or	chorea.

Tandem	 walking	 stresses	 the	 gait	 and	 balance	 mechanisms	 even	 further.
Elderly	 patients	 may	 have	 difficulty	 with	 tandem	 gait	 because	 of	 obesity	 or
deconditioning.	In	relatively	young	patients	with	a	low	likelihood	of	neurologic
disease,	a	quick	and	effective	substitute	for	the	Romberg	 is	 simply	to	have	the
patient	 close	 her	 eyes	 while	 walking	 tandem.	 This	 is	 a	 difficult	 maneuver	 and
has	high	value	as	a	screening	test.	Having	the	patient	walk	briskly	and	then	stop
abruptly	on	command,	or	make	quick	turns,	first	in	one	direction	and	then	in	the
other,	 may	 bring	 out	 ataxia	 and	 incoordination	 not	 noticeable	 on	 straightaway
walking.	 Rather	 than	 turning	 easily,	 the	 patient	 may	 have	 to	 turn	 in	 small,
staccato	 steps.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 asked	 to	 walk	 sideways,	 backward,	 and
overstep,	or	cross	one	foot	over	the	other.	Having	the	patient	walk	on	heels	and
toes	 may	 bring	 out	 weakness	 of	 dorsiflexion	 or	 plantar	 flexion.	 An	 excellent
screening	 test	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 hop	 on	 either	 foot.	 This	 simultaneously
assesses	 lower-extremity	 strength,	 especially	 of	 the	 gastrosoleus,	 plus	 balance
functions.	 Individuals	 who	 can	 hop	 adroitly	 on	 either	 foot	 are	 unlikely	 to	 have
significant	 neurologic	 disease.	 Note	 if	 the	 patient	 is	 able	 to	 maintain	 balance
with	a	sudden	push	or	pull	backward,	forward,	or	to	the	side.	This	can	be	done
by	 gently	 tapping	 the	 upper	 chest	 or	 pulling	 on	 the	 shoulders	 while	 standing
behind	the	patient,	reassuring	the	patient,	“I	will	catch	you	if	you	begin	to	fall.”
Note	whether	the	patient	has	any	obvious	orthopedic	limitations,	such	as	a	varus
deformity	of	the	knee,	genu	recurvatum,	pelvic	tilt,	or	any	other	abnormalities.
Also	 note	 whether	 there	 is	 any	 difficulty	 rising	 from	 a	 chair	 or	 initiating	 gait.

Note	 posture,	 arm	 swing,	 extraneous	 movements,	 step	 height,	 and	 any	 side	 to
side	lurching.

ABNORMAL	GAITS

A	nosology	has	been	suggested	that	classifies	abnormal	gait	syndromes	into	low-
,	mid-,	and	high-level	disorders.	Low-level	disorders	are	due	to	peripheral	motor
or	 sensory	 abnormalities;	 mid-level	 disorders	 include	 hemiplegic,	 paraplegic,
cerebellar	 ataxic,	 parkinsonian,	 choreic,	 and	 dystonic	 disorders.	 Highest-level
disorders	 include	 cautious	 gait,	 subcortical	 and	 frontal	 disequilibrium,	 isolated
gait	ignition	failure,	frontal	gait	disorder,	and	psychogenic	gait	disorder	(PGD).
Description	of	the	clinical	semiology	of	gait	disorders	continues	to	be	the	most
common	approach.

Cerebellar	Ataxia

The	 gait	 of	 cerebellar	 disease	 is	 caused	 by	 involvement	 of	 the	 coordinating
mechanisms	 in	 the	 cerebellum	 and	 its	 connecting	 systems	 (Video	 44.1).	 The
only	sign	of	mild	ataxia	may	be	the	inability	to	walk	tandem.	Sudden	stopping	or
turning	 may	 bring	 out	 a	 stagger.	 With	 more	 severe	 disease,	 there	 is	 a	 clumsy,
staggering,	unsteady,	irregular,	lurching,	titubating,	and	wide-based	gait,	and	the
patient	 may	 sway	 to	 either	 side,	 back,	 or	 forward.	 Leg	 movements	 are	 erratic,
and	 step	 length	 varies	 unpredictably.	 The	 patient	 may	 compensate	 by	 avoiding
periods	of	single	limb	support,	creating	a	shuffling	gait.	The	patient	is	unable	to
walk	 tandem	 or	 follow	 a	 straight	 line	 on	 the	 floor.	 There	 may	 be	 tremors	 and
oscillatory	movements	involving	the	entire	body.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	44.1	Composite	video	demonstrating	cerebellar	ataxia,	sensory	ataxia	in	a
patient	with	sensory	neuropathy,	spastic	gait	with	pronounced	scissoring	in
siblings	with	hereditary	spastic	paraplegia,	gait	apraxia	in	a	patient	with	normal
pressure	hydrocephalus,	steppage	gait	due	to	dense	bilateral	foot	drops	in	a
patient	with	Charcot-Marie-Tooth	disease,	and	hemiparetic	gait	following	stroke.
(Cerebellar	ataxia	video	courtesy	John	C.	Pearson,	PhD,	and	Thomas	Mathews,
MD,	Neurological	Teaching	Videos,	Wright	State	University	Boonshoft	School
of	Medicine.)

Ataxia	 of	 the	 lower	 extremities	 when	 tested	 separately	 usually	 accompanies
cerebellar	gait	ataxia,	except	when	disease	is	limited	to	the	vermis	(see	below).
With	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 cerebellar	 vermis,	 the	 patient	 will	 exhibit	 a	 lurching,
staggering	 gait,	 but	 without	 laterality,	 the	 ataxia	 will	 be	 as	 marked	 toward	 one
side	as	the	other.	Cerebellar	ataxia	is	present	with	eyes	both	open	and	closed;	it
may	increase	slightly	with	eyes	closed,	but	not	so	markedly	as	in	sensory	ataxia.
A	gait	resembling	cerebellar	ataxia	is	seen	in	acute	alcohol	intoxication.	With	a
cerebellar	 hemispheric	 lesion,	 the	 patient	 will	 stagger	 and	 deviate	 toward	 the
involved	side.	In	disease	localized	to	one	cerebellar	hemisphere	or	in	unilateral
vestibular	disease,	there	is	persistent	swaying	or	deviation	toward	the	abnormal
side.	 As	 the	 patient	 attempts	 to	 walk	 a	 straight	 line	 or	 to	 walk	 tandem,	 she
deviates	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion.	 Walking	 a	 few	 steps	 backward	 and
forward	with	eyes	closed	may	bring	out	“compass	deviation”	or	a	“star-shaped
gait”	(see	Chapter	17).	 When	 attempting	 to	 walk	 a	 fixed	 circle	 around	 a	 chair,
clockwise	then	counterclockwise,	the	patient	will	tend	to	fall	toward	the	chair	if
it	 is	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion,	 or	 to	 spiral	 out	 away	 from	 the	 chair	 if	 on	 the
opposite	side.

Either	unilateral	cerebellar	or	vestibular	disease	may	cause	turning	toward	the

side	of	the	lesion	on	the	Unterberger-Fukuda	stepping	test	(Chapter	17).	For	all
the	tests	that	bring	out	deviation	in	one	direction,	other	findings	must	be	used	to
differentiate	 between	 vestibulopathy	 and	 a	 cerebellar	 hemispheric	 lesion.
Unilateral	ataxia	may	be	demonstrated	by	having	the	patient	attempt	to	jump	on
one	foot,	with	the	eyes	either	open	or	closed.	The	patient	with	bilateral	vestibular
disease	may	seek	to	minimize	head	movement	during	walking,	holding	the	head
stiff	 and	 rigid;	 having	 the	 patient	 turn	 the	 head	 back	 and	 forth	 during	 walking
may	 bring	 out	 ataxia.	 Cerebellar	 gait	 ataxia	 is	 common	 in	 multiple	 sclerosis
(MS),	alcoholic	cerebellar	degeneration,	cerebellar	tumors,	stroke,	and	cerebellar
degenerations.	With	alcoholic	cerebellar	degeneration,	pathology	is	restricted	to
the	vermis.	Nystagmus,	dysarthria,	and	appendicular	ataxia,	even	of	the	legs,	are
typically	absent.

Sensory	Ataxia

Sensory	 ataxia	 occurs	 when	 the	 nervous	 system	 is	 deprived	 of	 the	 sensory
information,	 primarily	 proprioceptive,	 necessary	 to	 coordinate	 walking	 (Video
44.1).	 Deafferentation	 may	 result	 from	 disease	 of	 the	 posterior	 columns	 (e.g.,
tabes	 dorsalis	 or	 subacute	 combined	 degeneration)	 or	 disease	 affecting	 the
peripheral	nerves	(e.g.,	sensory	peripheral	neuropathy).	The	term	“spinal	ataxia”
is	sometimes	used,	but	the	pathology	is	not	always	in	the	spinal	cord.	The	patient
loses	awareness	of	the	position	of	the	lower	extremities	in	space,	or	even	of	the
body	 as	 a	 whole,	 except	 as	 provided	 by	 the	 visual	 system.	 The	 patient	 is
extremely	dependent	on	visual	input	for	coordination.	When	deprived	of	visual
input,	 as	 with	 eyes	 closed	 or	 in	 the	 dark,	 the	 gait	 deteriorates	 markedly.	 The
difference	in	walking	ability	with	and	without	visual	input	is	the	key	feature	of
sensory	ataxia.	If	the	condition	is	mild,	locomotion	may	appear	normal	when	the
patient	 walks	 eyes	 open;	 more	 commonly,	 it	 is	 wide	 based	 and	 poorly
coordinated.

The	term	“steppage	gait”	refers	to	a	manner	of	walking	in	which	the	patient
takes	unusually	high	steps.	Sensory	ataxia	is	one	of	the	causes	of	a	steppage	gait.
The	patient	takes	a	high	step,	throws	out	her	foot,	and	slams	it	down	on	the	floor
in	order	 to	increase	the	proprioceptive	feedback.	The	heel	may	land	before	the
toe,	 creating	 an	 audible	 “double	 tap.”	 An	 additional	 sound	 effect	 may	 be	 the
tapping	of	a	cane,	creating	a	“slam,	slam,	tap”	cadence.	The	sound	effects	may
be	so	characteristic	that	the	trained	observer	can	make	the	diagnosis	by	listening
to	the	footfalls.	The	patient	with	sensory	ataxia	watches	her	feet	and	keeps	her

eyes	on	the	floor	while	walking.	With	eyes	closed,	the	feet	seem	to	shoot	out,	the
staggering	 and	 unsteadiness	 are	 increased,	 and	 the	 patient	 may	 be	 unable	 to
walk.	There	is	less	reeling	and	lurching	in	sensory	ataxia	than	with	a	comparable
degree	 of	 cerebellar	 ataxia.	 The	 difficulty	 is	 even	 worse	 walking	 backward,
because	 the	 patient	 cannot	 see	 where	 she	 is	 going.	 The	 patient	 with	 bilateral
footdrops,	 however,	 also	 has	 a	 steppage	 gait	 and	 a	 double	 tapping	 sound	 (see
“Steppage	Gait”	below).	For	a	striking	illustration	of	a	tabetic	gait	in	sequential
photographs	by	Eadweard	Muybridge	in	1887,	see	Lanska	and	Goetz.

In	all	of	these	tests,	sensory	ataxia	can	be	differentiated	from	predominantly
cerebellar	ataxia	by	accentuation	of	the	difficulty	with	eyes	closed;	and	unilateral
cerebellar	 or	 vestibular	 disease	 from	 vermis	 involvement	 by	 laterality	 of
unsteadiness.	 Ropper	 and	 Samuels	 point	 out	 the	 similarity	 of	 the	 wide	 based,
stamping	gait	of	sensory	ataxia	to	film	depictions	of	Frankenstein.

The	Gait	of	Spastic	Hemiparesis

The	 gait	 of	 spastic	 hemiparesis	 may	 be	 caused	 by	 a	 lesion	 interrupting	 the
corticospinal	 pathways	 to	 one-half	 of	 the	 body,	 most	 commonly	 stroke.	 The
patient	 stands	 with	 a	 hemiparetic	 posture,	 arm	 flexed,	 adducted,	 and	 internally
rotated,	and	leg	extended.	There	is	plantar	flexion	of	the	foot	and	toes,	either	due
to	 foot	 dorsiflexion	 weakness	 or	 to	 heel	 cord	 shortening,	 rendering	 the	 lower
extremity	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 functionally	 slightly	 longer	 than	 on	 the	 normal
side,	 referred	 to	 as	 an	 equinus	 deformity.	 (A	 horse’s	 foot	 is	 digitigrade;	 horses
stand	on	the	tips	of	their	toes.	The	human	foot	is	normally	plantigrade,	with	the
whole	 plantar	 surface	 in	 contact	 with	 the	 ground.	 The	 human	 foot	 with	 a
footdrop	 or	 shortened	 heel	 cord	 resembles	 a	 horse’s,	 hence	 the	 term.)	 When
walking,	the	patient	holds	the	arm	tightly	to	the	side,	rigid	and	flexed,	extends	it
with	difficulty,	and	does	not	swing	it	in	a	normal	fashion	(Video	44.1).	The	leg
is	held	stiffly	in	extension	and	the	patient	drags	or	shuffles	the	foot	and	scrapes
the	 toes.	 With	 each	 step,	 the	 pelvis	 tilts	 upward	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 to	 aid	 in
lifting	 the	 foot	 off	 the	 floor	 (hip	 hike),	 and	 during	 swing	 phase,	 the	 entire
extremity	 sweeps	 around	 in	 a	 semicircle	 from	 the	 hip	 (circumduction).	 The
stance	phase	is	shortened	because	of	weakness,	and	the	swing	phase	 shortened
because	 of	 spasticity	 and	 slowing	 of	 movement.	 The	 sound	 produced	 by	 the
scraping	 of	 the	 toes,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 wear	 of	 the	 shoe	 at	 the	 toe,	 may	 be	 quite
characteristic.	The	patient	is	able	to	turn	toward	the	paralyzed	side	more	easily
than	toward	the	normal	side.	Loss	of	normal	arm	swing	and	slight	circumduction

of	the	leg	may	be	the	only	gait	abnormalities	in	very	mild	hemiparesis.

Spastic	Gait,	Scissoring

This	 gait	 pattern	 occurs	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 severe	 spasticity	 of	 the	 legs.	 It
occurs	in	patients	who	have	congenital	spastic	diplegia	(Little’s	disease,	cerebral
palsy)	and	related	conditions	and	in	chronic	myelopathies	due	to	conditions	such
as	 MS	 and	 cervical	 spondylosis.	 It	 is	 essentially	 a	 bilateral	 hemiplegic	 gait
affecting	the	legs.	There	is	characteristic	tightness	of	the	hip	adductors	causing
adduction	 of	 the	 thighs,	 so	 that	 the	 knees	 may	 cross,	 one	 in	 front	 of	 the	 other,
with	each	step	(scissors	gait).	The	patient	walks	on	an	abnormally	narrow	base,
with	 a	 stiff	 shuffling	 gait,	 dragging	 both	 legs	 and	 scraping	 the	 toes	 (Video
44.1).	 The	 steps	 are	 short	 and	 slow;	 the	 feet	 seem	 to	 stick	 to	 the	 floor.	 There
may	 be	 a	 marked	 compensatory	 sway	 of	 the	 trunk	 away	 from	 the	 side	 of	 the
advancing	 leg.	 Swaying	 and	 staggering	 may	 suggest	 an	 element	 of	 ataxia,	 but
usually	 there	 is	 no	 true	 loss	 of	 coordination.	 The	 shuffling,	 scraping	 sound—
together	with	worn	areas	at	the	toes	of	the	shoes—are	characteristic.	The	equinus
position	of	the	feet	and	heel	cord	shortening	often	cause	the	patient	to	walk	on
tiptoe.

The	Spastic-Ataxic	Gait

Some	neurologic	disorders	cause	involvement	of	both	the	corticospinal	and	the
proprioceptive	 pathways	 (e.g.,	 combined	 system	 disease	 due	 to	 vitamin	 B12
deficiency,	 or	 MS),	 resulting	 in	 a	 gait	 that	 has	 features	 of	 both	 spasticity	 and
ataxia.	The	relative	proportion	of	each	abnormality	depends	on	the	particulars	of
the	case.	The	ataxic	component	may	be	either	cerebellar	or	sensory.	In	vitamin
B12	 deficiency,	 it	 is	 predominantly	 sensory;	 in	 MS,	 both	 components	 may	 be
present.

The	Parkinsonian	Gait

The	 gait	 in	 most	 akinetic-rigid,	 parkinsonian	 syndromes	 is	 characterized	 by
rigidity,	bradykinesia,	and	loss	of	associated	movements.	The	patient	is	stooped,
with	head	and	neck	forward	and	knees	flexed;	the	upper	extremities	are	flexed	at
the	 shoulders,	 elbows,	 and	 wrists,	 but	 the	 fingers	 are	 usually	 extended	 (Figure

30.1).	The	gait	is	slow,	stiff,	and	shuffling;	the	patient	walks	with	small,	mincing
steps.	 Other	 features	 include	 involuntary	 acceleration	 (festination),	 decreased
arm	 swing,	 en	 bloc	 turning,	 start	 hesitation,	 and	 freezing	 when	 encountering
obstacles	such	as	doorways	(Video	30.2).

The	 patient	 loses	 balance	 easily	 with	 a	 gentle	 shove	 or	 pull.	 Difficulty
walking	 may	 be	 one	 of	 the	 earliest	 symptoms	 of	 the	 disease.	 The	 gait	 of
Parkinson’s	 disease	 is	 further	 described	 in	 Chapter	30.	 The	 same	 gait	 disorder
can	 occur	 with	 any	 condition	 causing	 parkinsonism,	 such	 as	 drug	 side	 effects.
Gait	 difficulty	 and	 a	 tendency	 to	 fall	 is	 particularly	 prominent	 in	 progressive
supranuclear	palsy	(PSP).

Frontal	Lobe	Gait	Disorders

A	 number	 of	 gait	 disorders	 have	 been	 ascribed	 to	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 frontal
lobes.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe,	 or	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 connections	 with	 the
basal	 ganglia	 and	 cerebellum,	 may	 lead	 to	 a	 gait	 disorder	 characterized	 by	 a
slightly	flexed	posture,	short,	shuffling	steps,	a	widened	base,	and	an	inability	to
integrate	 and	 coordinate	 lower-extremity	 movements	 to	 accomplish	 normal
ambulation.	There	is	particular	difficulty	with	starts	and	turns.	Some	of	these	are
poorly	 understood	 and	 the	 relationship	 between	 them	 unclear.	 In	 some,	 the
frontal	lobe	“dysfunction”	has	been	attributed	to	normal	aging.	Many	terms	have
been	 used,	 which	 refer	 to	 more	 or	 less	 the	 same	 phenomenon,	 including	 gait
apraxia,	 frontal	 disequilibrium	 or	 ataxia,	 Bruns’	 apraxia/ataxia,	 magnetic	 gait,
and	lower	half/body	or	vascular	(arteriosclerotic)	parkinsonism.	Some	of	the	gait
disorders	often	included	under	this	rubric	include	gait	apraxia,	the	gait	of	normal
pressure	 hydrocephalus	 (NPH),	 marche	 à	 petits	 pas,	 and	 the	 cautious	 (senile)
gait.

Marche	à	Petits	Pas

The	marche	à	petits	pas	(walk	of	little	steps)	gait	resembles	that	of	parkinsonism
but	 lacks	 the	 rigidity	 and	 bradykinesia.	 Locomotion	 is	 slow,	 and	 the	 patient
walks	with	very	short,	mincing,	shuffling,	and	somewhat	irregular	footsteps.	The
length	of	the	step	may	be	less	than	the	length	of	the	foot.	There	is	often	a	loss	of
associated	movements.	This	type	of	gait	may	be	seen	in	normal	elderly	persons
but	 also	 occurs	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 diffuse	 cerebral	 hemispheric	 dysfunction,
particularly	involving	the	frontal	lobes.	It	may	also	occur	as	part	of	the	syndrome

of	NPH	and	in	other	types	of	hydrocephalus.	The	same	gait	disturbance	is	typical
of	multi-infarct	dementia	or	lacunar	state.	In	some	patients	with	marche	à	petits
pas,	 there	 are	 bizarre	 movements	 such	 as	 dancing	 or	 hopping.	 There	 may	 be
generalized	 weakness	 of	 the	 lower	 extremities	 or	 of	 the	 entire	 body,	 with	 the
patient	fatiguing	easily.

Gait	Apraxia

Apraxia	 of	 gait	 is	 the	 loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 use	 the	 legs	 properly	 in	 walking,
without	 demonstrable	 sensory	 impairment,	 weakness,	 incoordination,	 or	 other
apparent	explanation.	The	term	has	been	criticized	as	not	being	loss	of	a	learned
skill.	Gait	apraxia	is	seen	in	patients	with	extensive	cerebral	lesions,	especially
of	the	frontal	lobes.	It	is	a	common	feature	of	NPH	and	may	occur	in	frontal	lobe
neoplasms,	Binswanger’s	disease,	frontotemporal	dementia,	and	other	conditions
that	 cause	 diffuse	 frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction.	 The	 patient	 cannot	 carry	 out
purposeful	movements	with	the	legs	and	feet,	such	as	making	a	circle	or	kicking
an	imaginary	ball.	In	rising,	standing,	and	walking,	there	is	difficulty	in	initiating
movement,	 and	 the	 automatic	 sequence	 of	 component	 movements	 is	 lost.	 The
gait	is	slow	and	shuffling,	with	short	steps.	The	patients	may	have	the	greatest
difficulty	 initiating	 walking,	 making	 small,	 feeble,	 stepping	 movements	 with
minimal	 forward	 progress.	 Eventually,	 the	 patient	 may	 be	 essentially	 unable	 to
lift	 the	 feet	 from	 the	 floor,	 as	 if	 they	 were	 stuck	 or	 glued	 down,	 or	 may	 raise
them	in	place	without	advancing	them	(magnetic	gait,	gait	ignition	failure,	start
hesitation).	After	a	few	hesitant	shuffles,	the	stride	length	may	increase	(slipping
clutch	 gait).	 When	 trying	 to	 turn,	 the	 patient	 may	 freeze	 (turn	 hesitation).	 The
patient	may	be	able	to	imitate	normal	walking	movements	when	sitting	or	lying
down,	 but	 eventually,	 even	 this	 ability	 is	 often	 lost.	 In	 addition,	 perseveration,
hypokinesia,	 rigidity,	 and	 stiffness	 of	 the	 limb	 in	 response	 to	 contact
(gegenhalten)	are	often	seen.	In	the	syndrome	of	isolated	gait	ignition	failure,	or
freezing	 of	 gait,	 patients	 have	 difficulty	 starting	 to	 walk,	 but	 with	 continued
stepping,	 the	 gait	 improves.	 They	 may	 again	 freeze	 when	 turning	 or
encountering	an	obstacle.

Gait	of	Normal	Pressure	Hydrocephalus

Gait	difficulty	is	typically	the	initial	and	most	prominent	symptom	of	NPH.	The
primary	changes	are	slow	walking,	widened	base,	short	steps,	and	shuffling,	all

nonspecific	features	and	natural	compensations	seen	in	patients	with	various	gait
disorders.	 It	 may	 range	 from	 mild,	 with	 only	 a	 cautious	 gait	 or	 difficulty	 with
tandem	walking,	to	severe,	when	unaided	gait	is	impossible	(Video	44.1).	It	has
been	 referred	 to	 as	 a	 gait	 apraxia.	 Features	 in	 common	 with	 other	 frontal	 lobe
gait	 disorders	 include	 reduced	 velocity,	 stride	 length,	 and	 step	 height.	 NPH
causes	 more	 widening	 of	 the	 base	 and	 outwardly	 rotated	 feet	 and	 is	 less
responsive	 to	 external	 cues	 such	 as	 marching	 to	 a	 cadence	 or	 in	 step	 with	 the
examiner.	As	with	other	disorders	of	frontal	lobe	function,	patients	may	mimic
stepping	motions	while	supine	or	sitting.

Cautious	(Senile)	Gait

A	cautious	gait	is	seen	in	older	patients	who	have	no	neurologic	disease	but	are
uncertain	 of	 their	 balance	 and	 postural	 reflexes.	 The	 gait	 takes	 on	 the
characteristics	 seen	 when	 a	 healthy	 person	 walks	 on	 an	 icy	 surface:	 velocity
slows,	 steps	 shorten,	 double	 support	 time	 increases,	 and	 the	 base	 widens.	 The
foot-floor	clearance	is	not	decreased,	and	the	patient	does	not	shuffle.	There	is
no	difficulty	with	gait	initiation,	nor	is	there	freezing.

There	is	an	ostensible	“multimodal”	gait	disorder	in	the	elderly,	attributed	to
aging	of	the	vestibular	system,	impaired	proprioceptive	function	caused	by	distal
neuropathy	in	the	elderly,	and	impaired	vision.	Baloh	et	al.	found	that	age-related
decreases	in	vestibular,	visual,	auditory,	and	somatosensation	occurred	in	normal
older	people	but	were	only	weakly	correlated	with	changes	in	gait	and	balance.
White	matter	hyperintensities	on	magnetic	resonance	imaging	were	more	highly
correlated	with	changes	in	gait.

Steppage	Gait

A	 problem	 arises	 with	 the	 use	 of	 the	 term	 “steppage,”	 which	 means	 that	 the
patient	 is	 lifting	 one	 or	 both	 legs	 high	 during	 her	 respective	 swing	 phases,	 as
though	 she	 were	 walking	 up	 steps	 though	 the	 surface	 is	 level.	 Patients	 with
footdrop	may	do	this	in	order	to	help	the	foot	clear	the	floor	and	avoid	tripping.
Patients	with	sensory	ataxia,	classically	tabes	dorsalis,	may	also	lift	the	feet	up
high	 and	 then	 slap	 them	 down	 smartly	 to	 improve	 proprioceptive	 feedback.
Because	 both	 of	 these	 gaits	 are	 “high	 stepping,”	 both	 have	 been	 referred	 to	 as
steppage	gaits,	but	the	causes	and	mechanisms	are	quite	different.

A	patient	with	footdrop	has	weakness	of	the	dorsiflexors	of	the	foot	and	toes.

When	mild,	this	may	be	manifest	only	as	a	decrease	in	toe	clearance	during	the
swing	phase.	With	more	severe	footdrop,	the	patient	is	in	danger	of	tripping,	and
may	 drag	 the	 toe	 when	 she	 walks,	 characteristically	 wearing	 out	 the	 toe	 of	 her
shoe.	When	footdrop	is	severe,	the	foot	dangles	uncontrollably	during	the	swing
phase.	To	compensate,	she	lifts	the	foot	as	high	as	possible,	hiking	the	hip	and
flexing	the	hip	and	knee	(Video	44.1).	The	foot	is	thrown	out	and	falls	to	the
floor,	toe	first.	The	touching	of	the	toe,	followed	by	the	heel	creates	a	“double
tap”	 that	 has	 a	 different	 sound	 than	 the	 heel	 first	 double	 tap	 of	 sensory	 ataxia.
The	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 stand	 on	 her	 heel,	 and	 when	 standing	 with	 her	 foot
projecting	 over	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 step,	 the	 forefoot	 drops.	 The	 footdrops	 and
steppage	 gait	 may	 be	 unilateral	 or	 bilateral.	 Common	 causes	 of	 unilateral
footdrop	 and	 steppage	 gait	 include	 peroneal	 nerve	 palsy	 and	 L5	 radiculopathy.
Causes	 of	 bilateral	 footdrop	 and	 steppage	 gait	 include	 amyotrophic	 lateral
sclerosis,	Charcot-Marie-Tooth	disease	and	other	severe	peripheral	neuropathies,
and	 certain	 forms	 of	 muscular	 dystrophy.	 In	 severe	 polyneuropathies,	 the
steppage	gait	may	have	components	of	both	sensory	ataxia	and	footdrop.

The	Myopathic	(Waddling)	Gait

Myopathic	 gaits	 occur	 when	 there	 is	 weakness	 of	 the	 hip	 girdle	 muscles,	 most
often	due	to	myopathy	and	most	characteristically	due	to	muscular	dystrophy.	If
the	hip	flexors	are	weak,	there	may	be	a	pronounced	lordosis	(Chapter	27).	The
hip	 abductor	 muscles	 are	 vital	 in	 stabilizing	 the	 pelvis,	 while	 walking.
Trendelenburg’s	sign	is	an	abnormal	drop	of	the	pelvis	on	the	side	of	the	swing
leg	 because	 of	 hip	 abductor	 weakness	 (Chapter	 27).	 When	 the	 weakness	 is
bilateral,	there	is	an	exaggerated	pelvic	swing	that	results	in	a	waddling	gait.	The
patient	 walks	 with	 a	 broad	 base,	 with	 an	 exaggerated	 rotation	 of	 the	 pelvis,
rolling	or	throwing	the	hips	from	side	to	side	with	every	step	to	shift	the	weight
of	the	body.	In	the	extreme	forms,	this	gait	pattern	has	a	bizarre	appearance.	The
patient	 walks	 with	 a	 pronounced	 waddle,	 shoulders	 thrown	 back	 and	 pelvis
thrust	forward	(see	Video	Link	44.3).	This	form	of	gait	is	particularly	common
in	 facioscapulohumeral	 muscular	 dystrophy.	 The	 myopathy	 patient	 has	 marked
difficulty	 climbing	 stairs,	 often	 needing	 to	 pull	 herself	 up	 with	 the	 hand	 rail.
Patients	 also	 have	 difficulty	 going	 from	 a	 lying	 to	 standing	 position	 without
placing	 the	 hands	 on	 the	 knees	 and	 hips	 to	 push	 themselves	 up	 (Gower’s	 sign,
Figure	29.4).	 For	 a	 vintage	 motion	 picture	 showing	 a	 myopathic	 gait	 with	 calf
pseudohypertrophy,	 toe	 walking,	 and	 Gower’s	 sign	 in	 a	 boy	 with	 Duchenne’s

dystrophy,	see	Video	Link	44.4).

Hyperkinetic	Gait

In	conditions	such	as	Sydenham’s	chorea,	Huntington’s	disease,	other	forms	of
transient	or	persistent	chorea,	athetosis,	and	dystonia,	the	abnormal	movements
may	become	more	marked	while	the	patient	is	walking,	and	the	manifestations
of	the	disease	more	evident.	Walking	may	accentuate	not	only	the	hyperkinesias
but	 also	 the	 abnormalities	 of	 power	 and	 tone	 that	 accompany	 them.	 In
Huntington’s	 disease,	 the	 gait	 may	 be	 grotesque,	 dancing	 or	 prancing	 with
abundant	extraneous	movement.	It	may	look	histrionic	but	is	all	too	real	(Video
Link	44.5).	The	distal	movements	in	athetosis	and	the	proximal	movements	in
dystonia	 may	 be	 marked	 during	 walking,	 and	 in	 both,	 there	 are	 accompanying
grimaces.	 Some	 movement	 disorders	 may	 present	 as	 a	 gait	 disturbance.
Oppenheim	 termed	 the	 walking	 pattern	 in	 dystonia	 musculorum	 deformans
“dromedary”	because	of	the	exaggerated	lumbar	lordosis	and	hip	flexion.

Gaits	Associated	with	Focal	Weakness

In	addition	to	the	steppage	gait	that	accompanies	footdrop,	weakness	limited	to
other	 muscle	 groups	 may	 cause	 gait	 difficulties.	 With	 paralysis	 of	 the
gastrocnemius	and	soleus	muscles,	the	patient	is	unable	to	stand	on	the	toes,	and
unable	to	push	off	to	enter	the	swing	phase	with	the	affected	leg.	This	may	cause
a	 shuffling	 gait	 that	 is	 devoid	 of	 spring.	 In	 weakness	 of	 the	 quadriceps	 muscle
(e.g.,	femoral	neuropathy),	there	is	weakness	of	knee	extension,	and	the	patient
can	 only	 accept	 weight	 on	 the	 affected	 extremity	 by	 bracing	 the	 knee.	 When
walking,	the	knee	is	held	stiffly,	and	there	is	a	tendency	to	fall	if	the	knee	bends.
The	 patient	 has	 less	 difficulty	 walking	 backward	 than	 forward.	 Lumbosacral
radiculopathy	may	cause	either	footdrop	or	a	unilateral	Trendelenburg’s	gait,	or
both	(see	Chapters	27	and	47).	In	addition,	the	patient	with	acute	radiculopathy
may	 walk	 with	 a	 list	 or	 pelvic	 tilt,	 accompanied	 by	 flattening	 of	 the	 normal
lumbar	lordosis	because	of	low	back	muscle	spasm.	The	patient	may	walk	with
small	 steps;	 if	 the	 pain	 is	 severe,	 she	 may	 place	 only	 the	 toes	 on	 the	 floor,
because	 dorsiflexion	 of	 the	 foot	 aggravates	 the	 pain.	 Patients	 commonly	 use	 a
cane	to	avoid	bearing	weight	on	the	involved	leg.

Other	Gait	Disorders

Patients	with	unilateral	thalamic	lesions	may	have	an	inability	to	stand	or	sit	out
of	proportion	to	weakness	or	sensory	loss,	with	a	tendency	to	fall	backward	or	to
the	side	contralateral	to	the	lesion	(thalamic	astasia).	A	toppling	gait	refers	to	a
tendency	 to	 totter	 and	 fall	 seen	 with	 brainstem	 and	 cerebellar	 lesions,	 perhaps
due	 to	 a	 failure	 of	 righting	 reflexes	 and	 slow	 motor	 responses.	 Primary
progressive	 freezing	 gait	 causes	 early	 and	 progressive	 gait	 freezing;	 it	 is	 not	 a
distinct	disorder	but	a	syndrome	with	diverse	causes.

NONNEUROLOGIC	GAIT	DISORDERS

Abnormalities	 of	 gait	 may	 occur	 for	 many	 other	 reasons	 and	 may	 be	 confused
with	neurologic	disorders.	An	antalgic	gait	is	one	in	which	walking	is	disordered
because	 of	 pain.	 Pain	 in	 a	 lower	 extremity,	 for	 whatever	 reason,	 causes	 a
shortening	of	the	stance	phase	on	the	involved	limb	as	the	patient	seeks	to	avoid
bearing	 weight.	 On	 more	 than	 one	 occasion,	 neurologic	 consultation	 has	 been
requested	 in	 a	 patient	 who	 ultimately	 proved	 to	 have	 acute	 podagra	 or	 a	 hip
fracture.	 An	 antalgic	 gait	 may	 also	 occur	 with	 peripheral	 neuropathy	 causing
painful	 dysesthesias	 and	 allodynia	 of	 the	 feet.	 The	 patient	 walks	 as	 if	 on	 hot
coals.	Arthritis	may	cause	difficulties	with	 gait	that	are	 secondary	to	 both	pain
and	 deformity.	 In	 pregnancy,	 ascites,	 and	 abdominal	 tumors,	 there	 may	 be	 a
lordosis	that	resembles	that	seen	in	the	muscular	dystrophies.	With	dislocation	of
the	hips,	there	may	be	waddling	suggestive	of	a	myopathic	gait.	A	waddling	gait
is	 also	 typical	 of	 advanced	 pregnancy.	 Patients	 with	 severe	 orthostatic
hypotension	 may	 complain	 of	 difficulty	 walking	 rather	 than	 dizziness.	 Marked
stooping	 in	 ankylosing	 spondylitis	 may	 resemble	 parkinsonism.	 A	 gait
abnormality	due	to	generalized	weakness	may	occur	after	a	period	of	bed	rest,	or
in	 wasting	 and	 debilitating	 diseases.	 It	 is	 characterized	 mainly	 by	 unsteadiness
and	the	wish	for	support.	The	patient	staggers	and	sways	from	side	to	side	with	a
suggestion	 of	 ataxia.	 She	 moves	 slowly,	 and	 the	 knees	 may	 tremble.	 If	 the
difficulty	is	marked,	she	may	fall.

NONORGANIC	(FUNCTIONAL)	GAIT
ABNORMALITIES

Derangements	 of	 station	 and	 gait	 on	 a	 nonorganic	 basis	 are	 common.	 Affected
patients	may	be	unable	either	to	stand	or	walk,	despite	the	absence	of	weakness
or	 other	 objective	 neurologic	 abnormalities.	 Testing	 for	 strength,	 tone,	 and
coordination	is	normal	if	carried	out	supine.	Astasia-abasia	is	an	old	term	meant
largely	 to	 describe	 the	 gait	 in	 conversion	 disorders.	 PGD	 is	 preferable	 and
includes	gait	changes	related	to	depression,	anxiety,	and	phobic	states.

The	 gait	 may	 suggest	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 monoparesis,	 hemiparesis,	 or
paraparesis,	yet	the	limbs	can	be	used	in	an	emergency.	In	Keane’s	series	of	60
patients,	 23	 mimicked	 paresis	 and	 most	 of	 the	 remainder	 had	 various	 ataxic	 or
histrionic	patterns.	Several	authors	have	noted	that	knee	buckling	is	a	common
type	 of	 PGD.	 The	 histrionic	 type	 of	 PGD	 is	 nondescript	 and	 bizarre	 and	 may
take	 any	 number	 of	 forms	 that	 do	 not	 conform	 to	 a	 specific	 organic	 disease
pattern	(see	Video	Link	44.6).	The	gait	is	irregular	 and	 variable,	 with	a	 great
deal	of	superfluous	movement	and	often	marked	swaying	from	side	to	side.	The
patient	 may	 appear	 to	 be	 in	 great	 danger	 of	 falling	 but	 rarely	 does	 so,	 often
demonstrating	 superb	 balance	 during	 the	 contortions.	 If	 she	 does	 fall,	 it	 is	 in	 a
theatrical	 manner	 without	 injury.	 The	 bizarre	 movements	 often	 require	 better
than	 normal	 coordination.	 The	 patient	 may	 balance	 on	 the	 stance	 leg	 for	 a
prolonged	period	of	time,	while	bringing	up	the	swing	leg	with	a	great	show	of
effort.	 The	 gait	 may	 show	 skating,	 hopping,	 dancing,	 or	 zigzag	 characteristics;
the	 legs	 may	 be	 thrown	 out	 wildly,	 or	 there	 may	 be	 a	 tendency	 to	 kneel	 every
few	 steps.	 Tremulousness	 of	 the	 extremities	 or	 tic-like	 or	 compulsive	 features
may	be	present.	Although	the	patient	cannot	walk	forward,	she	may	be	able	to
walk	backward	or	to	one	side	or	to	run	without	difficulty.	Better	ability	to	propel
a	wheeled,	swivel	chair	than	to	walk	(“chair	test”)	favors	PGD.	In	most	patients
with	 PGD,	 the	 similarity	 to	 neurologic	 disease	 is	 slight.	 Hyperkinetic	 gait
disorders	are	most	likely	to	be	confused	with	functional	conditions.

The	term	astasia-abasia	originated	in	an	1888	monograph	by	Blocq,	and	the
condition	 is	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 Blocq’s	 syndrome.	 Blocq	 described
patients	who	were	able	to	jump,	or	walk	on	all	fours,	but	unable	to	stand	upright
(astasia)	 or	 to	 walk	 (abasia).	 There	 is	 normal	 lower-extremity	 function	 when
recumbent,	 yet	 an	 inability	 to	 walk.	 This	 same	 pattern	 can	 occur	 in	 lesions
involving	 the	 cerebellar	 vermis,	 such	 as	 alcoholic	 cerebellar	 degeneration	 or
medulloblastoma,	and	in	frontal	lobe	disorders.	Astasia-abasia	is	sometimes	used
to	refer	to	any	inability	to	either	stand	or	walk	normally	but	generally	refers	to	a
histrionic	and	dramatic	gait	disturbance	with	wild	lurching	and	near	falls.

