CHAPTER	5

General	Outline	of	the	Neurologic
Examination

The	 neurologic	 examination,	 as	 commonly	 done,	 includes	 the	 major	 categories
listed	 in	 Table	 5.1.	 The	 examination	 does	 not	 have	 to	 be	 performed	 in	 any
particular	 sequence,	 and	 every	 physician	 develops	 his	 own	 routine	 for	 the
examination.	It	is	customary	to	record	the	neurologic	examination	in	the	general
format	outlined	in	Table	5.1	or	with	minor	modifications.

The	 complete	 neurologic	 examination	 can	 be	 a	 complex	 and	 arduous
undertaking.	In	fact,	few	neurologists	do	a	truly	complete	exam	on	every	patient.
As	 with	 the	 general	 physical	 examination,	 the	 history	 focuses	 the	 neurologic
examination	so	that	certain	aspects	are	emphasized	in	a	given	clinical	situation.
The	exam	done	on	a	typical	patient	with	headache	is	not	the	same	as	that	done
on	 a	 patient	 with	 low	 back	 pain,	 or	 dementia,	 or	 cerebrovascular	 disease.	 The
examination	 should	 also	 be	 adapted	 for	 the	 circumstances.	 If	 the	 patient	 is	 in
pain	 or	 feels	 apprehensive,	 it	 may	 initially	 focus	 on	 the	 area	 of	 complaint,
followed	later	by	a	more	thorough	assessment.	Only	a	brief	examination	may	be
possible	for	unstable	or	severely	ill	persons	until	their	condition	stabilizes.	With
comatose,	 combative,	 or	 uncooperative	 patients,	 a	 compulsively	 complete
examination	 is	 an	 impossibility.	 However,	 in	 each	 of	 these	 situations,	 at	 least
some	 maneuvers	 are	 employed	 to	 screen	 for	 neurologic	 dysfunction	 that	 is	 not
necessarily	 suggested	 by	 the	 history.	 A	 rapid	 screening	 or	 mini	 neurologic
examination	 may	 initially	 be	 adequate	 for	 persons	 with	 minor	 or	 intermittent
symptoms.	Every	patient	does	not	require	every	conceivable	test,	but	all	require
a	 screening	 examination.	 The	 findings	 on	 such	 a	 screening	 examination
determine	the	emphasis	of	a	more	searching	subsequent	examination.	There	are	a
number	of	ways	 to	perform	a	screening	examination.	Table	5.2	 details	 such	 an
abbreviated	examination	from	previous	editions	of	this	book.

There	 are	 two	 basic	 ways	 to	 do	 a	 traditional	 neurologic	 examination—
regional	and	systemic.	A	system	approach	evaluates	the	motor	system,	then	the
sensory	 system,	 and	 so	 on.	 A	 regional	 approach	 evaluates	 all	 the	 systems	 in	 a
given	region,	such	as	the	upper	extremities	and	then	the	lower	extremities.	The
screening	exam	outlined	in	Table	5.3	is	an	amalgam	of	the	regional	and	system
approaches	geared	for	speed	and	efficiency.	The	concept	is	an	examination	that
requires	 the	 nervous	 system	 to	 perform	 at	 a	 high	 level,	 relying	 heavily	 on
sensitive	 signs,	 especially	 the	 flawless	 execution	 of	 complex	 functions.	 If	 the
nervous	system	can	perform	a	complex	task	perfectly,	it	is	very	unlikely	there	is
significant	pathology	present,	and	going	through	a	more	extensive	evaluation	is
not	likely	to	prove	productive.	A	neurologic	examination	that	assesses	complex
functions	 and	 seeks	 signs	 that	 are	 sensitive	 indicators	 of	 pathology	 is	 efficient
and	not	overly	time	consuming.

Educators	 have	 proposed	 a	 third	 type	 of	 exam,	 especially	 for	 teaching:	 the
hypothesis-driven	examination.	This	approach	evolves	naturally	with	experience
but	has	not	been	used	previously	in	teaching	the	exam.	Teaching	a	hypothesis-
driven	neurologic	exam	evolved	from	a	similar	approach	to	the	general	physical
exam.	 Examination	 maneuvers	 were	 focused	 by	 the	 history.	 Using	 the
hypothesis-driven	 approach	 produced	 greater	 sensitivity	 but	 lower	 specificity
and	 was	 performed	 in	 less	 time.	 Learning	 to	 develop	 a	 hypothesis	 from	 the
history	and	how	to	test	it	is	of	course	a	paramount	challenge	in	neurology.

The	 examination	 begins	 with	 taking	 the	 medical	 history,	 which	 serves	 as	 a
fair	barometer	of	the	mental	status.	Patients	who	can	relate	a	logical,	coherent,
pertinent,	and	sensible	narrative	of	their	problem	will	seldom	have	abnormalities
on	 more	 formal	 bedside	 mental	 status	 testing.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 a	 rambling,
Table	5.1	disjointed,	incomplete	history	may	be	a	clue	to	the	presence	of	some
cognitive	 impairment,	 even	 though	 there	 is	 no	 direct	 complaint	 of	 thinking	 or
memory	problems	from	the	patient	or	the	family.	Similarly,	psychiatric	disease	is
sometimes	 betrayed	 by	 the	 patient’s	 demeanor	 and	 style	 of	 history	 giving.	 If
there	 is	 any	 suggestion	 of	 abnormality	 from	 the	 interaction	 with	 the	 patient
during	 the	 history-taking	 phase	 of	 the	 encounter,	 then	 a	 more	 detailed	 mental
status	 examination	 should	 be	 carried	 out.	 Other	 reasons	 to	 do	 a	 formal	 mental
status	 examination	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 8.	 Simple	 observation	 is	 often
useful.	 The	 patient’s	 gait,	 voice,	 mannerisms,	 ability	 to	 dress	 and	 undress,	 and
even	handshake	(grip	myotonia)	may	suggest	the	diagnosis.

TABLE	5.1

Major	Sections	of	the	Neurologic	Examination

Mental	status
Cranial	nerves
Motor
Sensory
Reflexes
Cerebellar	function,	coordination
Gait	and	station
Other	signs

Functions	 requiring	 the	 use	 of	 the	 penlight	 having	 been	 completed,	 observe
the	nasolabial	folds	for	depth	and	symmetry	and	compare	the	forehead	wrinkles
on	both	sides.	Then	have	the	patient	grimace,	vigorously	baring	the	teeth,	while
closing	the	eyes	tightly.	Note	the	symmetry	of	the	grimace,	how	many	teeth	are
seen	 on	 each	 side,	 and	 the	 relative	 amplitude	 and	 velocity	 of	 the	 lower	 facial
contraction,	as	well	as	the	symmetry	of	the	upper	facial	contraction	(see	Chapter
16).	 How	 completely	 the	 patient	 buries	 the	 eyelashes	 on	 the	 two	 sides	 is	 a
sensitive	indicator	of	orbicularis	oculi	strength.

TABLE
5.2

Components	of	a	Screening	Initial	Neurologic
Examination	(Abnormalities	or	Specific	Symptoms
Should	Lead	to	More	Complete	Evaluations)

1.	Mentation	and	communication	during	conversation	with	examiner
2.	Cranial	nerves	II,	III,	IV,	VI:	visual	acuity,	gross	fields,	funduscopic,

pupillary	reactions,	extraocular	movements

3.	Cranial	nerves	VII,	VIII,	IX,	X,	XII:	facial	musculature	and	expression,

gross	hearing,	voice,	inspection	of	the	tongue

4.	Muscle	tone,	strength,	and	bulk	proximally	and	distally	in	all

extremities;	abnormal	movements

5.	Sensory:	pain	or	temperature	medially	and	laterally	in	all	extremities;

vibration	at	ankles

6.	Coordination:	rapid	alternating	movements	of	hands,	finger-nose	test,

gait,	station

7.	Reflexes:	biceps,	triceps,	brachioradialis,	quadriceps,	Achilles,

plantar,	clonus

If	 the	 patient	 has	 no	 complaints	 of	 hearing	 loss,	 tinnitus,	 vertigo,	 facial
numbness,	or	weakness	and	there	is	no	specific	reason	suggested	by	the	history
to	 do	 so,	 routine	 examination	 of	 hearing	 is	 seldom	 productive.	 Examination	 of
hearing	 is	 discussed	 further	 in	 Chapter	 17.	 Complete	 the	 cranial	 nerve
examination	by	checking	the	visual	fields	and	fundi	(see	Chapter	13).

The	 screening	 examination	 detailed	 in	 Table	 5.3	 continues	 by	 doing
everything	 that	 requires	 use	 of	 a	 penlight.	 Begin	 by	 noting	 the	 position	 of	 the
eyelids	 and	 the	 width	 of	 the	 palpebral	 fissures	 bilaterally.	 Check	 the	 pupils	 for
light	reaction	with	the	patient	fixing	at	distance.	If	the	pupillary	light	reaction	is
normal	 and	 equal	 in	 both	 eyes,	 checking	 the	 pupillary	 near	 reaction	 is	 not
necessary.	 Continue	 by	 assessing	 extraocular	 movements	 in	 the	 six	 cardinal
positions	of	gaze,	having	the	patient	follow	the	penlight.	Be	sure	that	the	patient
has	no	diplopia	or	limitation	of	movement	and	that	ocular	pursuit	movements	are
smooth	and	fluid.	With	the	eyes	in	primary	and	eccentric	positions,	look	for	any
nystagmus.	The	eye	examination	is	discussed	in	more	detail	in	Chapter	14.	With
the	 light	 still	 in	 hand,	 prepare	 to	 examine	 the	 pharynx	 and	 oral	 cavity.
Examination	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 motor	 function	 is	 accomplished	 merely	 by
watching	 the	 patient’s	 jaw	 drop	 open	 prior	 to	 examining	 the	 mouth	 and	 throat.
When	 the	 pterygoids	 are	 unilaterally	 weak,	 the	 jaw	 invariably	 deviates	 toward
the	weak	side	on	opening.	This	deviation,	while	subtle,	is	a	sensitive	indicator	of
trigeminal	 motor	 root	 pathology	 (see	 Chapter	 15).	 Observe	 the	 tongue	 for
atrophy	or	fasciculations	(see	Chapter	20).	Have	the	patient	phonate,	and	be	sure
the	median	raphe	of	the	palate	elevates	in	the	midline	(see	Chapter	18).	There	is
little	to	be	gained	by	checking	the	gag	reflex	if	the	patient	has	no	complaints	of
dysphagia	 or	 dysarthria	 and	 if	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 from	 the	 history	 to	 suspect	 a
brainstem	or	cranial	nerve	lesion.	Routine	elicitation	of	the	gag	reflex	is	rarely
informative	 and	 is	 unpleasant	 for	 the	 patient.	 Have	 the	 patient	 protrude	 the
tongue	and	move	it	from	side	to	side.

TABLE	5.3

Steps	in	a	Screening	Neurologic	Examination

Mental	status	examination	(during	history	taking	or	dispersed	during	the

rest	of	the	examination)

Using	a	penlight

Pupils	(at	distance)

Extraocular	movements

Pharynx	and	tongue	(watch	the	jaw	on	mouth	opening	to	be	sure	it

drops	vertically	to	screen	for	trigeminal	motor	dysfunction)

Facial	motor	functions	(grimace,	close	eyes	tightly)
Visual	fields
Fundi
Upper	extremity	formal	strength	examination—deltoid,	triceps,	wrist

extensors,	and	hand	intrinsics

Examination	for	pronator	drift,	eyes	closed
Examination	of	upper	extremity	stereognosis	and	upper	and	lower

extremity	double	simultaneous	stimulation,	while	waiting	for	drift,	eyes
closed	(evaluate	fine	motor	control	during	the	patient’s	manipulation
of	the	stereognosis	test	objects)

Examination	of	finger-to-nose	coordination,	eyes	closed
Examination	of	arm	and	finger	roll
Examination	of	lower	extremity	strength
Completion	of	the	sensory	assessment
Examination	of	deep	tendon	reflexes,	upper	and	lower	extremities
Elicitation	of	plantar	responses
Examination	of	station	and	gait,	heel	and	toe	walking,	hopping	on	each

foot,	tandem	gait,	Romberg	or	eyes	closed	tandem

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

Screening	examination	of	motor	function,	sensory	function,	and	coordination
in	 the	 upper	 extremities	 can	 be	 completed	 as	 one	 compound,	 multifaceted
maneuver.	 In	 most	 clinical	 situations	 in	 which	 a	 screening	 examination	 is
appropriate,	the	primary	concern	is	to	detect	a	lesion	involving	the	corticospinal
tract	(CST).	The	CST	preferentially	innervates	certain	muscle	groups,	and	these
are	the	groups	most	likely	to	be	weak	because	of	an	upper	motor	neuron	lesion.
In	 the	 upper	 extremity,	 the	 CST-innervated	 muscles	 are	 the	 finger	 extensors,
wrist	extensors,	forearm	supinators,	external	rotators	of	the	shoulder,	triceps,	and
deltoid.	The	cardinal	CST	muscles	in	the	lower	extremity	are	the	hip	flexors,	the
hamstrings,	and	the	dorsiflexors	of	the	foot	and	toes.	In	addition,	one	of	the	most
important	functions	of	the	CST	is	to	provide	fine	motor	control	to	distal	muscles.

Fine	 motor	 control,	 including	 rapid	 alternating	 movements,	 would	 furthermore
be	 impossible	 without	 normal	 cerebellar	 function.	 The	 screening	 examination
focuses	on	detecting	weakness	in	the	 CST	distribution	and	impaired	distal	fine
motor	 control.	 In	 the	 upper	 extremity,	 the	 best	 muscles	 for	 strength	 testing	 are
the	 deltoid,	 triceps,	 wrist	 and	 finger	 extensors,	 and	 intrinsic	 hand	 muscles,
especially	the	interossei.	Although	commonly	done,	it	is	very	poor	technique	to
use	 grip	 power	 to	 assess	 strength.	 The	 finger	 and	 wrist	 flexors	 are	 not
corticospinal	 innervated,	 and	 they	 are	 not	 likely	 to	 be	 weak	 with	 a	 mild	 CST
lesion.	 In	 addition,	 grip	 is	 a	 complex	 function	 with	 many	 different	 muscles
involved,	so	it	is	insensitive	to	peripheral	pathology	as	well.	Although	strength	is
the	primary	focus	of	the	motor	examination,	it	is	important	to	note	any	changes
in	 muscle	 bulk,	 for	 example,	 atrophy,	 hypertrophy,	 or	 pseudohypertrophy;	 or
muscle	 tone,	 for	 example,	 rigidity,	 spasticity,	 or	 hypotonia;	 and	 to	 note	 any
abnormal	involuntary	movements,	for	example,	tremor,	fasciculations,	or	chorea.
When	 patients	 with	 mild	 CST	 lesions	 retain	 normal	 strength,	 ancillary
maneuvers	 may	 detect	 the	 deficit.	 The	 most	 important	 of	 these	 is	 the
examination	 for	 pronator	 drift	 (see	 Chapter	 27).	 With	 the	 patient’s	 upper
extremities	outstretched	to	the	front,	palms	up,	and	with	the	eyes	closed,	observe
the	position	of	each	extremity.	Normally,	the	palms	will	remain	flat,	the	elbows
straight,	and	the	limbs	horizontal.	With	a	CST	lesion,	the	strong	muscles	are	the
pronators,	 the	 biceps,	 and	 the	 internal	 rotators	 of	 the	 shoulder.	 As	 these
overcome	the	weakened	CST-innervated	muscles,	the	hand	pronates,	the	elbow
flexes,	and	the	arm	drifts	downward.

A	 screening	 sensory	 examination	 assesses	 sensory	 function	 by	 tasking	 the
nervous	 system	 with	 performing	 a	 complex	 and	 difficult	 function.	 If	 this
function	 is	 executed	 flawlessly,	 the	 likelihood	 of	 finding	 clinically	 significant
sensory	loss	through	a	more	detailed	examination	is	low.	Testing	for	stereognosis
and	 performing	 double	 simultaneous	 stimulation	 are	 efficient	 and	 sensitive
screening	 tools.	 The	 period	 of	 time	 waiting	 for	 pronator	 drift	 to	 occur	 is	 a
convenient	 time	 to	 begin	 examining	 upper	 extremity	 sensory	 functions.	 While
the	patient	is	still	in	“drift	position”—arms	outstretched	in	front,	palms	up,	and
eyes	closed—ask	him	to	indicate	which	side	is	touched.	Then	lightly	touch	first
one	hand,	then	the	other,	and	then	both,	using	minimal	finger	pressure,	a	cotton
wisp,	or	a	tissue.	A	set	of	stimuli	to	the	lower	extremities	is	also	convenient	at
this	point.	Continue	by	testing	for	stereognosis.	Place	an	object,	such	as	a	coin,	a
key,	a	safety	pin,	or	a	paper	clip,	into	one	of	the	patient’s	still	upturned	palms,
and	ask	him	to	feel	and	identify	it.	Stereognosis	is	the	ability	to	recognize	and

identify	 an	 object	 by	 feel;	 the	 inability	 to	 do	 so	 is	 astereognosis.	 Stereognosis
can	 only	 be	 normal	 when	 all	 the	 peripheral	 sensory	 pathways	 and	 the	 parietal
lobe	association	areas	are	intact;	only	when	the	primary	sensory	modalities	are
normal	does	astereognosis	indicate	a	parietal	lobe	lesion.	A	patient	with	severe
carpal	 tunnel	 syndrome	 and	 numb	 fingers	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 identify	 a	 small
object	 by	 feel;	 this	 finding	 is	 NOT	 astereognosis.	 As	 a	 screening	 test,
stereognosis	is	an	excellent	modality	because	it	tests	the	entire	sensory	pathway,
from	the	fingertips	to	the	parietal	lobe.	If	stereognosis	is	rapid	and	accurate,	then
all	the	sensory	pathways	must	be	functioning	normally,	and	detailed	examination
is	not	likely	to	be	productive.	If	a	deficit	is	found	on	this	preliminary	assessment,
a	detailed	examination	of	sensory	function	is	necessary	to	localize	the	site	of	the
abnormality.	Additional	useful	information	can	be	gained	by	dropping	the	small
stereognosis	object	more	or	less	in	the	center	of	the	palm.	A	patient	with	normal
fine	motor	control	will	adroitly	manipulate	the	object,	move	it	to	the	fingertips,
rub	it	between	the	thumb	and	opposed	fingers,	and	announce	the	result.	A	patient
with	 a	 mild	 corticospinal	 lesion,	 producing	 relatively	 subtle	 clinical	 signs
without	 major	 weakness,	 may	 be	 clumsy	 in	 manipulating	 the	 object	 and	 will
occasionally	drop	it.	The	sensory	examination	is	discussed	further	in	Chapters	31
to	36.

After	 testing	 double	 simultaneous	 stimulation	 and	 stereognosis,	 with	 the
patient’s	eyes	still	closed,	the	hand	and	arm	position	is	examined	to	determine	if
any	drift	has	occurred.	Then,	eyes	still	closed,	the	patient	is	instructed	to	spread
the	fingers	and	touch	first	one	index	finger	and	then	the	 other	to	the	tip	of	the
nose.	 This	 is	 the	 finger-to-nose	 (FTN)	 test,	 which	 is	 used	 to	 look	 for	 intention
tremor,	incoordination,	and	past-pointing.	Ordinarily,	the	FTN	test	is	carried	out
with	 the	 patient’s	 eyes	 open.	 For	 purposes	 of	 the	 screening	 exam,	 the	 more
difficult	maneuver	of	eyes	closed	FTN	is	performed	first.	If	it	is	done	perfectly,
then	 neither	 cerebellar	 nor	 vestibular	 disease	 is	 likely.	 Complete	 the	 upper
extremity	 examination	 by	 examining	 forearm	 roll,	 finger	 roll,	 and	 rapid
alternating	movements	(see	Chapter	27).

After	 completing	 examination	 of	 motor,	 sensory,	 and	 cerebellar	 function	 in
the	 upper	 extremities,	 attention	 is	 turned	 to	 strength	 assessment	 of	 the	 lower
extremities.	 The	 important	 muscles	 to	 examine	 are	 the	 CST-innervated	 groups:
hip	flexors,	knee	flexors,	and	the	dorsiflexors	of	the	foot.	Further	sensory	testing
is	 convenient	 at	 this	 point,	 comparing	 primary	 modality	 sensibility	 on	 the	 two
sides;	 comparing	 proximal	 to	 distal	 in	 the	 lower	 extremities	 if	 peripheral
neuropathy	is	a	diagnostic	consideration;	and	examining	vibratory	sensation	over

the	great	toes.

Continue	 by	 eliciting	 the	 biceps,	 triceps,	 brachioradialis,	 knee,	 and	 ankle
reflexes;	 then	 assess	 the	 plantar	 responses.	 Conclude	 the	 examination	 by
checking	 station	 and	 gait.	 Excellent	 tests	 for	 gait	 and	 balance	 functions	 are
tandem	walking	with	eyes	closed	and	hopping	on	either	foot	(see	Chapter	44).

The	 rest	 of	 this	 book	 is	 devoted	 to	 the	 detailed	 assessment	 of	 the	 functions

touched	on	in	the	screening	examination.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon	 RP.	 Practical	 Primer	 of	 Clinical	 Neurology.

Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

Caplan	 LC,	 Hollander	 J.	 The	 Effective	 Clinical	 Neurologist.	 3rd	 ed.	 Shelton:

People’s	Medical	Publishing	House-USA,	2011.

Dhand	 A,	 Engstrom	 J,	 Dhaliwal	 G.	 How	 experienced	 community	 neurologists
make	diagnoses	during	clinical	encounters.	Neurology	2013;81:1460–1466.
Fuller	 G.	 Neurological	 Examination	 Made	 Easy.	 5th	 ed.	 Edinburgh:	 Churchill

Livingstone,	2013.

Gilman	 S.	 Clinical	 Examination	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-

Hill,	2000.

Glick	TH.	Toward	a	more	efficient	and	effective	neurologic	examination	for	the

21st	century.	Eur	J	Neurol	2005;12:994–997.

Kamel	H,	Dhaliwal	G,	Navi	BB,	et	al.	A	randomized	trial	of	hypothesis-driven

vs	screening	neurologic	examination.	Neurology	2011;77:1395–1400.

Louis	ED,	Pascuzzi	RM,	Roos	KL,	eds.	The	neurological	examination	(with	an
emphasis	on	its	historical	underpinnings).	Semin	Neurol	2002;22:329–418.
Massey	 EW,	 Pleet	 AB,	 Scherokman	 BJ.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A
Photographic	 Guide	 to	 Bedside	 Techniques.	 Chicago:	 Year	 Book	 Medical
Publishers,	Inc.,	1985.

Moore	FG,	Chalk	C.	The	essential	neurologic	examination:	what	should	medical

students	be	taught?	Neurology	2009;	72:2020–2023.

Nishigori	 H,	 Masuda	 K,	 Kikukawa	 M,	 et	 al.	 A	 model	 teaching	 session	 for	 the

hypothesis-driven	physical	examination.	Med	Teach	2011;33:410–417.

Ross	RT.	How	to	Examine	the	Nervous	System.	4th	ed.	Totowa:	Humana	Press,

2006.

Strub	 RL,	 Black	 FW.	 The	 Mental	 Status	 Examination	 in	 Neurology.	 4th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	F.A.	Davis,	2000.

Wartenberg	 R.	 The	 Examination	 of	 Reflexes:	 A	 Simplification.	 Chicago:	 Year

Book	Medical	Publishers,	1945.

Wartenberg	 R.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Selection	 for	 Office	 Use.

Chicago:	Year	Book	Medical	Publishers,	1953.

Weibers	 DO,	 Dale	 AJD,	 Kokmen	 E,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Examinations	 in

Neurology.	7th	ed.	St.	Louis:	The	C.V.	Mosby	Co.,	1998.

Yudkowsky	 R,	 Otaki	 J,	 Lowenstein	 T,	 et	 al.	 A	 hypothesis-driven	 physical
examination	 learning	 and	 assessment	 procedure	 for	 medical	 students:	 initial
validity	evidence.	Med	Educ	2009;	43:729–740.

SECTION	C	Mental	Status	Examination
and	Higher	Cortical	Functions

CHAPTER	6

Gross	and	Microscopic	Anatomy	of
the	Cerebral	Hemispheres

The	 major	 fissures	 and	 sulci	 of	 the	 cerebral	 hemispheres	 are	 shown	 in	 Figures
6.1	 and	 6.2.	 Cytoarchitectonic	 maps	 are	 based	 on	 regional	 differences	 in	 the
microscopic	anatomy	of	the	cortical	layers	(Figure	6.3).	The	frontal	lobe	extends
from	the	frontal	pole	to	the	central	sulcus	above	the	sylvian	fissure.	It	makes	up
about	the	anterior	one-half	of	each	hemisphere	in	man.	The	frontal	lobe	is	made
up	of	four	principal	gyri:	precentral,	superior	frontal,	middle	frontal,	and	inferior
frontal.	The	precentral	gyrus	(motor	strip)	lies	just	anterior	to	the	central	sulcus
(Figure	6.4).	A	homunculus	is	a	distorted	figure	with	the	size	of	an	anatomical
part	 proportional	 to	 the	 amount	 of	 the	 cortex	 to	 which	 it	 is	 related.	 The	 motor
homunculus	 depicts	 the	 organization	 of	 the	 motor	 strip	 according	 to	 body	 part
innervated	(Figure	6.5).	On	the	medial	surface,	the	frontal	lobe	extends	down	to
the	 cingulate	 sulcus	 (Figure	 6.2).	 The	 paracentral	 lobule	 consists	 of	 the
extensions	 of	 the	 precentral	 and	 postcentral	 gyri	 onto	 the	 medial	 hemispheric
surface	 above	 the	 cingulate	 sulcus;	 it	 is	 important	 in	 bladder	 control.	 The
supplementary	 motor	 and	 premotor	 regions	 lie	 in	 area	 6,	 anterior	 to	 the
precentral	 gyrus.	 The	 supplementary	 motor	 area	 is	 a	 portion	 of	 the	 superior
frontal	gyrus	that	lies	on	the	medial	surface;	the	premotor	area	lies	on	the	lateral
surface.	The	frontal	eye	fields	lie	in	the	middle	frontal	gyrus,	in	part	of	area	8.
The	inferior	frontal	gyrus	is	divided	into	the	pars	orbitalis,	pars	triangularis,	and
the	pars	opercularis.	The	pars	opercularis	and	triangularis	of	the	inferior	frontal
gyrus	of	the	dominant	hemisphere	contain	the	motor	(Broca’s)	speech	area	(areas
44	 and	 45).	 On	 the	 inferior	 surface	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe,	 medial	 to	 the	 inferior
frontal	 gyrus,	 are	 the	 orbital	 gyri.	 They	 are	 separated	 by	 the	 olfactory	 sulcus
from	the	gyrus	rectus,	which	is	the	most	medial	structure	on	the	orbital	surface
(Figure	6.6).	The	olfactory	bulbs	and	tracts	overlie	the	olfactory	sulcus.

The	parietal	lobe	lies	posterior	to	the	central	sulcus,	anterior	to	the	occipital
lobe,	 and	 superior	 to	 the	 temporal	 lobe.	 An	 imaginary	 line	 drawn	 between	 the
parietooccipital	 sulcus	 and	 the	 preoccipital	 notch	 separates	 the	 parietal	 and
occipital	 lobes.	 An	 imaginary	 line	 extending	 from	 the	 sylvian	 fissure	 to	 the
midpoint	 of	 the	 preceding	 line	 separates	 the	 parietal	 lobe	 above	 from	 the
temporal	 lobe	 below.	 The	 parietal	 lobe	 consists	 of	 the	 following	 five	 principal
parts:	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus,	 the	 superior	 parietal	 lobule,	 the	 inferior	 parietal
lobule,	 the	 precuneus,	 and	 the	 posterior	 portion	 of	 the	 paracentral	 lobule.	 The
postcentral	gyrus	(areas	1,	2,	and	3)	is	the	primary	sensory	cortex;	it	lies	between
the	 central	 sulcus	 and	 the	 postcentral	 sulcus.	 The	 sensory	 homunculus	 depicts
the	representation	of	 body	parts	 in	the	primary	sensory	cortex;	it	is	 similar	but
the	 motor	 homunculus	 (Figure	 6.7).	 The	 secondary
not	
somatosensory	 cortex	 lies	 in	 the	 inferior	 portion	 of	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus,
abutting	 the	 sylvian	 fissure.	 The	 superior	 parietal	 lobule	 is	 a	 somatosensory
association	area	that	lies	posterior	to	the	trunk	and	upper	extremity	segments	of
the	 postcentral	 gyrus.	 The	 inferior	 parietal	 lobule	 lies	 posterior	 to	 the	 face	 and
tongue	 segments	 of	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus,	 and	 it	 has	 the	 following	 two	 major
components:	 the	 supramarginal	 gyrus,	 which	 caps	 the	 upturned	 end	 of	 the
sylvian	fissure,	and	the	angular	gyrus,	which	is	at	the	end	of	the	parallel	superior
temporal	sulcus	(Figure	6.1).	The	inferior	parietal	lobule	is	association	cortex	for
somatosensory,	 visual,	 and	 auditory	 functions.	 The	 precuneus	 is	 an	 area	 of	 the
cortex	just	anterior	to	the	occipital	lobe	on	the	medial	hemispheric	surface.

identical	

to	

FIGURE	6.1	 Lobes,	 sulci,	 and	 gyri	 of	 the	 lateral	 aspect	 of	 the	 cerebral	 hemisphere.
The	frontal	and	occipital	lobes	are	finely	stippled,	the	temporal	lobe	coarsely	stippled,
and	the	parietal	lobe	unstippled.

The	temporal	lobe	is	a	tongue-shaped	anterior	projection	that	originates	as	an
evagination	 of	 the	 developing	 cerebral	 hemisphere;	 it	 carries	 along	 its	 central
cavity,	forming	the	temporal	horn	of	the	lateral	ventricle.	The	temporal	lobe	lies
below	 the	 sylvian	 fissure,	 extending	 from	 the	 temporal	 pole	 to	 the	 arbitrary
limits	of	the	parietal	and	occipital	lobes.	The	ventral	surface	lies	on	the	floor	of
the	middle	cranial	fossa.	The	lateral	surface	has	three	gyri:	the	superior,	middle,
and	inferior,	which	are	separated	by	the	superior,	middle,	and	inferior	temporal
sulci	 (Figure	 6.1).	 Buried	 in	 the	 sylvian	 fissure	 at	 the	 posterior	 end	 of	 the
superior	 temporal	 gyrus	 on	 its	 dorsal	 surface—running	 at	 right	 angles	 to	 the
gyrus	 and	 stretching	 toward	 the	 medial	 geniculate	 body—are	 the	 transverse
temporal	gyri	(of	Heschl).	The	transverse	temporal	gyri	are	the	primary	auditory
cortex	(areas	41	and	42).	Immediately	adjacent	to	the	primary	auditory	cortex	is
the	 auditory	 association	 cortex	 (area	 22);	 in	 the	 dominant	 hemisphere,	 part	 of
this	 is	 the	 Wernicke’s	 speech	 area.	 The	 planum	 temporale	 lies	 just	 behind	 the
Heschl	gyri	and	is	part	of	Wernicke’s	area.	The	planum	temporale	is	larger	in	the

left	 hemisphere	 in	 most	 individuals	 and	 is	 probably	 related	 to	 cerebral
dominance	for	language.	On	the	base	of	the	temporal	lobe,	the	inferior	temporal
gyrus	 is	 continuous	 medially	 with	 the	 lateral	 occipitotemporal	 gyrus.	 The
occipitotemporal	sulcus	separates	the	lateral	occipitotemporal	(inferior	temporal)
gyrus	from	the	medial	occipitotemporal	(fusiform)	gyrus.	Medial	to	the	fusiform
gyrus,	separated	by	the	collateral	sulcus,	is	the	parahippocampal	(hippocampal)
gyrus,	 part	 of	 the	 limbic	 lobe.	 Posterior	 to	 the	 isthmus	 of	 the	 cingulate,	 the
parahippocampal	 gyrus	 stretches	 toward	 the	 occipital	 pole	 and	 becomes	 the
lingual	gyrus.

FIGURE	6.2	Lobes,	sulci,	and	gyri	of	the	medial	aspect	of	the	cerebral	hemisphere.
The	 frontal	 lobe	 is	 lined	 horizontally	 and	 the	 temporal	 vertically,	 the	 parietal	 lobe	 is
dashed,	the	limbic	lobe	is	stippled,	and	the	occipital	lobe	plain.

The	 occipital	 lobe	 is	 only	 a	 small	 part	 of	 the	 dorsolateral	 surface	 of	 the
hemisphere,	 but	 it	 occupies	 a	 large	 triangular	 field	 on	 the	 medial	 aspect	 of	 the
brain	between	the	parietal	and	temporal	lobes.	The	calcarine	fissure	separates	the
medial	 surface	 of	 the	 occipital	 lobe	 into	 the	 cuneus	 above	 and	 the	 lingual

(medial	 occipitotemporal)	 gyrus	 below.	 The	 occipital	 lobe	 is	 the	 visual	 cortex
(areas	17,	18,	and	19).	The	cuneus	forms	the	upper	bank,	and	the	lingual	gyrus
the	lower	bank,	of	the	calcarine	cortex.

The	 limbic	 lobe	 is	 sometimes	 considered	 a	 separate	 lobe	 of	 the	 brain,	 more
because	of	its	function	than	its	anatomy.	Components	of	the	limbic	lobe	include
the	following:	the	hippocampus,	which	lies	deep	in	the	medial	temporal	lobe	and
becomes	 continuous	 with	 the	 fornix;	 the	 mammillary	 bodies	 (part	 of	 the
hypothalamus);	the	anterior	nucleus	of	the	thalamus;	the	cingulate	gyrus;	and	the
parahippocampal	 gyrus.	 As	 with	 several	 other	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)
structures,	 the	 limbic	 lobe	 morphologically	 is	 a	 C-shaped	 structure.	 It	 begins
anteriorly	and	superiorly	in	the	paraterminal	gyrus	and	subcallosal	area	beneath
the	rostrum	of	the	corpus	callosum.	The	body	of	the	C	is	formed	by	the	cingulate
gyrus,	 which	 merges	 at	 the	 isthmus	 of	 the	 cingulate	 into	 the	 parahippocampal
(hippocampal)	 gyrus.	 The	 end	 of	 the	 C	 is	 the	 hippocampal	 formation.	 The
cingulate	gyrus	lies	just	above	the	corpus	callosum.	The	parahippocampal	gyrus
begins	at	the	isthmus	of	the	cingulate	and	runs	to	the	temporal	tip,	lying	between
the	 collateral	 sulcus	 and	 the	 hippocampus;	 it	 curls	 around	 the	 hippocampal
fissure	 to	 form	 the	 uncus.	 The	 hippocampal	 formation	 is	 composed	 of	 the
hippocampus	 proper	 (Ammon’s	 horn),	 the	 dentate	 gyrus,	 and	 the	 subiculum.
When	not	regarded	as	part	of	the	limbic	lobe,	the	anterior	and	posterior	parts	of
the	 cingulate	 gyrus	 are	 considered	 parts	 of	 the	 frontal	 and	 parietal	 lobes,
respectively.	 The	 parahippocampal	 gyrus	 and	 hippocampal	 formation	 are
considered	 part	 of	 the	 temporal	 lobe.	 The	 structures	 of	 the	 limbic	 lobe	 are
connected	 in	 Papez	 circuit	 (cingulate	 gyrus	 →	 parahippocampal	 gyrus	 →
hippocampus	→	fornix	→	mammillary	body	→	anterior	nucleus	of	the	thalamus
→	cingulate	gyrus).

FIGURE	 6.3	 Areas	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex,	 each	 of	 which	 possesses	 a	 distinctive
structure.	 A.	 Lateral	 surface.	 B.	 Medial	 surface.	 (Modified	 from	 Brodmann	 K.
Vergleichende	Lokalisationslehre	der	Grosshirnrinde	in	ihren	Prinzipien	dargestellt	auf
Grund	des	Zellenbaues.	Leipzig:	Johann	Ambrosius	Barth,	1909.)

FIGURE	6.4	Gross	structure	of	the	cerebral	hemispheres	as	seen	from	above.

The	 rhinencephalon	 (nose	 brain)	 is	 a	 primitive,	 basal	 forebrain	 region
involved	with	olfaction	and	emotion	that	is	closely	related	to	the	limbic	lobe.	It
consists	 of	 the	 olfactory	 bulbs	 and	 tracts,	 the	 olfactory	 stria,	 olfactory	 trigone
(olfactory	tubercle,	anterior	perforated	substance,	and	diagonal	band	of	Broca),
the	 piriform	 lobe	 (uncus,	 entorhinal	 area,	 and	 limen	 insulae),	 and	 part	 of	 the
amygdala.	 The	 hippocampal	 formation	 is	 sometimes	 included	 as	 part	 of	 the
rhinencephalon.

CORTICAL	LAYERS

The	 cerebral	 cortex	 begins	 as	 an	 outpouching	 of	 the	 rostral	 end	 of	 the	 neural

tube,	and	it	culminates	as	a	complex	cellular	layer	that	covers	the	surface	of	the
brain.	After	formation	of	the	marginal	and	mantle	layers,	cells	migrate	from	the
marginal	 layer	 to	 form	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 Migrational	 defects	 are	 a	 common
cause	 of	 congenital	 brain	 malformations,	 such	 as	 gray	 matter	 heterotopias.
Between	the	6th	and	8th	month	of	fetal	life,	the	migrating	cells	reach	the	cortex
and	become	organized	into	strata,	which	eventually	become	the	cortical	layers.
The	cortex	covers	the	gyri	and	convolutions	and	dips	into	the	fissures	and	sulci.
About	one-third	is	on	the	exposed	surface,	and	the	rest	is	buried	in	the	fissures
and	sulci.	There	are	about	15	to	30	billion	nerve	cells	in	the	cortex.	Its	thickness
varies	from	4.5	mm	in	the	precentral	gyrus	to	1.3	mm	near	the	occipital	pole.

FIGURE	 6.5	 Motor	 homunculus,	 showing	 the	 relationship	 of	 the	 motor	 centers	 to
cortical	 representation.	 1,	 toes;	 2,	 ankle;	 3,	 knee;	 4,	 hip;	 5,	 trunk;	 6,	 shoulder;	 7,
elbow;	8,	wrist;	9,	 hand;	 10,	 little	 finger;	 11,	 ring	 finger;	 12,	 middle	 finger;	 13,	 index
finger;	14,	thumb;	15,	neck;	16,	 brow;	 17,	 eyelid	 and	 eyeball;	 18,	 face;	 19,	 lips;	 20,
jaw;	 21,	 tongue;	 22,	 swallowing;	 23,	 mastication;	 24,	 salivation;	 25,	 vocalization.
(Modified	 from	 Penfield	 W,	 Rasmussen	 T.	 The	 Cerebral	 Cortex	 of	 Man.	 New	 York:
Macmillan,	1950.)

Most	of	the	cortical	mantle	has	six	identifiable	layers;	some	areas	of	the	brain
have	less	(Figure	6.8).	Six-layered	cortex	is	referred	to	as	neocortex,	isocortex,
or	heterogenetic	cortex.	The	six	layers,	from	superficial	to	deep,	are	as	follows:
(I)	 molecular	 (plexiform),	 (II)	 external	 granular,	 (III)	 external	 pyramidal,	 (IV)

internal	 granular,	 (V)	 internal	 pyramidal	 (ganglion),	 and	 (VI)	 multiform.	 The
molecular	layer	is	most	superficial,	covered	by	pia.	It	consists	of	a	dense	tangle
of	fibers	composed	of	dendrites	of	deeper	lying	cells.	Pyramidal	cells	are	sparse
and	 small.	 Layer	 2,	 the	 external	 granular	 layer,	 is	 made	 up	 of	 small,	 densely
packed	 neurons.	 Layer	 3,	 the	 external	 pyramidal	 layer,	 consists	 of	 medium	 to
large	 pyramidal-shaped	 neurons.	 It	 is	 sometimes	 subdivided	 into	 a	 superficial
layer	of	medium	pyramidal	cells	and	a	deep	layer	of	large	pyramidal	cells.	Layer
4,	 the	 internal	 granular	 layer,	 consists	 of	 many	 small,	 multipolar	 granule	 cells
with	 short	 axons	 and	 scattered	 small	 pyramidal	 cells.	 Granule	 cells	 are	 most
numerous	 in	 this	 layer.	 Layer	 5,	 the	 internal	 pyramidal	 (ganglion	 cell)	 layer,
consists	 of	 medium	 and	 large	 pyramidal	 cells,	 among	 which	 are	 the	 largest
neurons	found	in	the	cortex.	In	the	precentral	gyrus,	this	layer	contains	the	giant
pyramidal	 cells	 of	 Betz,	 the	 neurons	 whose	 axons	 form	 the	 corticospinal	 and
corticobulbar	 tracts.	 The	 deepest	 cortical	 layer	 is	 the	 multiform	 layer,	 which
consists	 of	 polymorphic	 cells	 whose	 short	 axons	 enter	 the	 subjacent	 white
matter.

FIGURE	6.6	Base	of	the	human	brain.

Isocortex	 is	 found	 in	 the	 neopallium,	 which	 makes	 up	 about	 90%	 of	 the
cortical	 surface.	 Severe	 compromise	 of	 brain	 energy	 supplies,	 such	 as	 in
hypoxia,	ischemia,	or	hypoglycemia,	may	lead	to	selective	destruction	of	certain
cortical	 layers,	 mainly	 the	 third—a	 condition	 termed	 cortical	 laminar	 necrosis.
The	archipallium	and	paleopallium	both	have	three-layered	cortex,	referred	to	as
allocortex.

FIGURE	 6.7	 Homunculus	 showing	 cortical	 sensory	 representation.	 (Modified	 from
Penfield	W,	Rasmussen	T.	The	Cerebral	Cortex	of	Man.	New	York:	Macmillan,	1950.)

Different	areas	of	the	cortex	have	characteristic	appearances,	with	differences
in	 the	 overall	 thickness	 of	 the	 cortical	 layer,	 the	 thickness	 and	 arrangement	 of
specific	 cellular	 layers,	 the	 cell	 structure,	 the	 number	 of	 afferent	 and	 efferent
myelinated	 fibers,	 and	 the	 number	 and	 position	 of	 white	 stria.	 How	 regional
differences	in	the	cytoarchitecture	correlate	with	differences	in	function	remains
a	 matter	 of	 conjecture.	 Maps	 based	 on	 differences	 in	 cellular	 structure	 are
referred	 to	 as	 cytoarchitectonic	 and	 on	 differences	 in	 fiber	 structure	 as
myelotectonic.	 The	 best	 known	 cytoarchitectonic	 map	 is	 that	 of	 Brodmann

(Figure	6.3).	Modern	imaging	and	the	use	of	other	cortical	markers	may	lead	to	a
newer	generation	of	more	accurate	maps.

The	 cortex	 sends	 and	 receives	 fibers	 to	 and	 from	 other	 areas	 of	 the	 brain.
Layer	 4	 contains	 a	 dense	 horizontal	 band	 of	 fibers—the	 external	 band	 of
Baillarger.	This	band	contains	the	terminal	ramifications	of	the	thalamocortical
projections	 from	 the	 specific	 thalamic	 relay	 nuclei.	 The	 external	 band	 of
Baillarger	 is	 particularly	 prominent	 in	 the	 calcarine	 cortex,	 forming	 a	 grossly
visible	white	stripe—the	line	or	band	of	Gennari—that	gives	the	striate	cortex	its
name.	The	specific	thalamic	sensory	nuclei	synapse	in	layer	4.	The	external	band
of	 Baillarger	 is	 made	 up	 of	 the	 terminal	 ramifications	 of	 thalamic	 nuclei	 that
subserve	specific	sensory	modalities,	such	as	vision	and	exteroceptive	sensation.
In	 contrast,	 the	 nonspecific	 thalamic	 nuclei	 (reticular,	 intralaminar)	 project
diffusely	to	all	layers	of	the	cortex.

FIGURE	 6.8	 Cell	 layers	 and	 fiber	 arrangement	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 A.	 Weigert
stain.	 B.	 Nissl	 stain.	 C.	 Golgi	 stain.	 Layers:	 I,	 molecular	 layer;	 II,	 external	 granular
layer;	 III,	 external	 pyramidal	 layer;	 IV,	 internal	 granular	 layer;	 V,	 internal	 pyramidal
layer;	VI,	multiforme	layer.

Isocortex	 can	 also	 be	 simply	 divided	 into	 supragranular	 and	 infragranular
layer)	 are
layers.	 Layers	 above	
supragranular;	 those	 below	 layer	 4	 are	 infragranular.	 The	 supragranular	 cortex

layer	 4	 (the	 dense	

internal	 granular	

(primarily	 layer	 2	 and	 layer	 3)	 is	 highly	 differentiated	 and	 phylogenetically
recent.	 Supragranular	 afferents	 and	 efferents	 are	 primarily	 associative;	 they	 are
concerned	 with	 higher-level	
functions	 and	 corticocortical
integrative	
connections.	The	infragranular	cortex	is	more	primitive.	It	is	well	developed	in
lower	 forms,	 and	 it	 primarily	 sends	 descending	 projection	 fibers	 to	 lower
centers.	 Six-layered	 isocortex	 is	 formed	 essentially	 by	 the	 presence	 of
supragranular	cortex	atop	three-layered	allocortex.	The	supragranular	layers	are
not	present	in	the	archipallium	and	paleopallium.

Isocortex	 may	 be	 either	 homotypical,	 in	 which	 six	 layers	 can	 be	 easily
discerned,	or	heterotypical,	in	which	lamination	is	less	obvious.	The	cortex	can
also	 be	 divided	 into	 granular	 and	 agranular	 types.	 In	 agranular	 cortex,	 the
granule	 cell	layers	are	poorly	developed,	whereas	the	pyramidal	cell	layers	are
prominent.	 Agranular	 cortex	 is	 characteristic	 of	 the	 precentral	 gyrus.	 Granular
cortex	(koniocortex)	is	thin	and	contains	dense	granule	cell	layers;	the	pyramidal
cell	 layers	 are	 less	 conspicuous.	 Granular	 cortex	 is	 characteristic	 of	 areas	 that
receive	 heavy	 afferent	 input,	 such	 as	 the	 calcarine	 cortex.	 There	 is	 a	 striking
paucity	of	granule	cells	in	the	agranular	cortex,	for	example,	the	motor	strip,	and
a	 paucity	 of	 pyramidal	 cells	 in	 the	 granular	 cortex,	 for	 example,	 the	 primary
sensory	areas.	Koniocortex	is	seen	only	in	areas	that	receive	projections	from	the
specific	 thalamic	 relay	 nuclei.	 Cortical	 areas	 that	 receive	 thalamocortical
projections	from	the	specific	thalamic	relay	nuclei	therefore	have	the	following
two	morphologic	characteristics:	granular	type	cortex	and	a	prominent	external
band	of	Baillarger.

In	 addition	 to	 its	 horizontal,	 laminated	 organization,	 the	 cortex	 is	 also
organized	 vertically	 into	 columns.	 Neurons	 subserving	 the	 same	 modality	 and
with	similar	receptive	fields	are	organized	into	vertical	rows	that	extend	from	the
cortical	surface	to	the	white	matter,	which	is	referred	to	as	cortical	columns.	The
vertical	 column	 organization	 is	 particularly	 prominent	 in	 the	 occipital,	 parietal,
and	temporal	lobes.

Beneath	 the	 cortical	 mantle	 of	 gray	 matter	 lies	 the	 white	 matter,	 which
consists	of	association,	commissural,	and	projection	axons—as	well	as	glial	cells
and	blood	vessels.	The	association	and	commissural	fibers	connect	one	area	of
the	cortex	with	another.	Association	fibers	connect	cortical	areas	within	the	same
hemisphere;	 commissural	 fibers	 connect	 to	 areas	 in	 the	 opposite	 hemisphere.
Association	 and	 commissural	 fibers	 come	 primarily	 from	 the	 supragranular
cortex	 (layer	 1	 to	 layer	 3).	 Projection	 fibers	 connect	 the	 cortex	 with	 lower
centers	 (Figures	 6.9	 and	 6.10).	 Projection	 fibers	 arise	 primarily	 from	 the

infragranular	cortex	(layer	5	and	layer	6)	and	go	to	lower	centers	of	the	nervous
system.	The	corticospinal	tract	is	composed	of	projection	fibers	that	arise	from
neurons	 in	 the	 deeper	 layers	 of	 the	 precentral	 gyrus.	 The	 number	 of	 projection
fibers	is	surprisingly	small	in	comparison	to	the	total	number	of	neurons	in	the
cortex.

Corticocortical	 association	 fibers	 may	 be	 short	 or	 long.	 Some	 association
fibers	are	very	short,	synapsing	near	their	origin	and	remaining	within	the	cortex.
Other	short	association	fibers	loop	from	one	gyrus	to	an	adjacent	gyrus,	running
in	the	depths	of	a	sulcus	in	the	most	superficial	layer	of	the	cortical	white	matter.
These	are	referred	to	as	arcuate	fibers	or	U-fibers.	There	is	characteristic	sparing
of	 the	 U-fibers	 in	 the	 leukodystrophies,	 as	 opposed	 to	 acquired	 demyelinating
disorders.	Long	association	fibers	travel	over	greater	distances.	Some	gather	into
discrete	 bundles,	 which	 can	 be	 dissected	 and	 visualized.	 The	 long	 association
fibers	run	deeper	into	the	white	matter	than	the	short	association	fibers	do.	Some
of	 the	 long	 association	 bundles	 are	 named	 for	 their	 points	 of	 origin	 and
termination,	 but	 they	 gain	 and	 lose	 axons	 all	 along	 their	 course,	 connecting
intermediate	 areas.	 The	 major	 long	 association	 bundles	 are	 the	 superior	 and
inferior	longitudinal	fasciculi,	the	superior	and	inferior	occipitofrontal	fasciculi,
the	 uncinate	 fasciculus,	 and	 the	 cingulum.	 The	 superior	 longitudinal	 fasciculus
runs	 longitudinally	 between	 the	 occipital	 and	 frontal	 poles.	 The	 arcuate
fasciculus	 provides	 communication	 between	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 and	 the	 parietal,
temporal,	 and	 occipital	 lobes.	 Many	 of	 its	 fibers	 curve	 downward	 into	 the
temporal	 lobe.	 The	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 arches	 around	 the	 posterior	 end	 of	 the
sylvian	fissure	and	lies	deep	in	the	parietal	and	frontal	white	matter,	joining	the
superior	 longitudinal	 fasciculus.	 Fibers	 of	 the	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 provide
communication	 between	 the	 posterior,	 receptive	 (Wernicke’s)	 and	 the	 anterior,
longitudinal
motor	 (Broca’s)	 speech	 centers	 (Figure	 9.1).	 The	
(occipitotemporal)	fasciculus	is	a	thin	layer	of	fibers	that	runs	inferiorly,	near	the
geniculocalcarine	 tract,	 connecting	 the	 occipital	 and	 temporal	 lobes.	 The
superior	 occipitofrontal	 (subcallosal)	 fasciculus	 is	 a	 compact	 bundle	 that	 lies
deep	in	the	hemisphere	just	below	the	corpus	callosum;	it	connects	the	posterior
portions	 of	 the	 hemisphere	 with	 the	 frontal	 lobe.	 The	 inferior	 occipitofrontal
fasciculus	 runs	 near	 the	 temporal	 lobe.	 The	 uncinate	 fasciculus	 arches	 through
the	stem	of	the	sylvian	fissure	to	connect	the	inferior	temporal	lobe	to	the	orbital
surface	of	the	frontal	lobe.	The	cingulum	is	a	white	matter	tract	that	runs	deep	to
the	cortex	of	the	cingulate	gyrus.	It	is	part	of	the	limbic	system	and	interconnects
the	 cingulate	 gyrus,	 parahippocampal	 gyrus,	 and	 the	 septal	 area.	 Lesions

inferior	

these	

long	 association	 bundles	 are	

for	 cortical
involving	
disconnection	 syndromes—disorders	 in	 which	 a	 clinical	 deficit	 occurs	 because
of	the	inability	of	one	portion	of	the	hemisphere	to	communicate	normally	with
another	portion.

responsible	

FIGURE	6.9	Sagittal	view	demonstrating	short	association	fibers	(arcuate	or	U-fibers),
long	association	bundles,	and	major	commissures.

FIGURE	 6.10	 Coronal	 view	 demonstrating	 major	 association,	 commissural,	 and
projection	fiber	systems.

COMMISSURAL	FIBERS

Commissural	fibers	connect	an	area	of	one	hemisphere	with	the	corresponding,
mirror-image	area	of	the	other	hemisphere.	The	primary	brain	commissures	are
the	corpus	callosum,	the	anterior	commissure,	and	the	hippocampal	commissure
(Figures	6.9	and	6.10).	There	are	many	smaller	commissures.

lobes.	 Fibers	

that	 sweep	 around	

The	corpus	callosum	is	the	largest	of	the	commissural	systems.	It	consists	of	a
broad	 band	 of	 fibers	 located	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 interhemispheric	 fissure	 that
connects	 the	 neocortical	 areas	 of	 the	 two	 hemispheres.	 It	 is	 composed	 of	 the
body,	the	major	portion;	the	anterior	genu,	which	tapers	into	the	rostrum;	and	a
thickened	 posterior	 termination,	 the	 splenium.	 Fibers	 connecting	 the	 anterior
portions	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobes,	 including	 the	 speech	 areas,	 course	 through	 the
anterior	 third;	 the	 body	 carries	 fibers	 from	 the	 posterior	 portions	 of	 the	 frontal
lobes	and	the	parietal	lobes;	the	splenium	contains	fibers	from	the	temporal	and
the
occipital	
interhemispheric	fissure,	forming	the	genu,	are	referred	to	as	the	forceps	minor
(forceps	 frontalis);	 fibers	 that	 sweep	 around	 posteriorly,	 forming	 the	 splenium,
are	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 forceps	 major	 (forceps	 occipitalis).	 The	 corpus	 callosum
does	 not	 contain	 crossing	 fibers	 from	 the	 striate	 cortex	 or	 the	 hand	 area	 of	 the
motor	 or	 sensory	 cortices.	 These	 areas	 communicate	 by	 the	 transcallosal
connections	 of	 their	 respective	 association	 cortex.	 The	 rostrum	 lies	 just	 below
the	 frontal	 horn	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle.	 It	 is	 continuous	 with	 the	 lamina
terminalis,	which	forms	the	anterior	wall	of	the	third	ventricle.	The	subcallosal
and	paraterminal	gyri,	part	of	the	limbic	system,	lie	just	beneath	the	rostrum.	The
tapetum	 is	 a	 thin	 sheet	 of	 radiating	 callosal	 fibers	 that	 forms	 the	 roof	 of	 the
temporal	horn	and	the	roof	and	lateral	wall	of	the	occipital	horn.

the	 anterior	 portion	 of	

The	corpus	callosum	may	be	involved	in	several	clinical	syndromes.	Agenesis
of	the	corpus	callosum	is	a	common	developmental	defect	that	may	be	complete
or	 incomplete.	 Rather	 than	 crossing,	 commissural	 fibers	 cluster	 along	 the
ventricular	 wall,	 forming	 the	 bundle	 of	 Probst.	 Agenesis	 is	 most	 often
discovered	 incidentally	 by	 autopsy	 or	 imaging	 study	 in	 patients	 with	 no
symptoms,	 but	 there	 may	 be	 severe	 clinical	 deficits	 in	 some	 patients.	 These
deficits	are	likely	related	to	other,	accompanying	brain	malformations	or	defects
of	 neuronal	 migration	 and	 organization.	 There	 may	 be	 mental	 retardation,

seizures,	 and	 motor	 deficits	 resulting	 from	 lesions	 affecting	 contiguous
structures.	Marchiafava-Bignami	disease	is	a	rare	condition,	probably	related	to
chronic	 alcoholism	 and	 undernutrition,	 characterized	 by	 necrosis	 and
degeneration	 of	 the	 middle	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum.	 Clinical
manifestations	 range	 from	 dementia,	 apraxia,	 gait	 abnormalities,	 spasticity,
seizures,	incontinence,	and	psychiatric	disturbances	to	stupor	and	coma.	Tumors,
particularly	 gliomas,	 may	 involve	 the	 corpus	 callosum	 (butterfly	 glioma).
Anterior	cerebral	artery	thrombosis	may	cause	softening	of	a	large	portion	of	the
corpus	 callosum.	 Mental	 symptoms	 are	 prominent	 and	 include	 the	 following:
apathy,	 drowsiness,	 loss	 of	 memory,	 difficulty	 in	 concentration,	 personality
changes,	and	other	manifestations	typical	of	a	frontal	lobe	lesion.

Commissurotomy	is	division	of	the	corpus	callosum,	now	rarely	used,	to	treat
intractable	 epilepsy.	 Commissurotomy	 disrupts	
the	 major	 corticocortical
connections	between	the	two	hemispheres.	Split-brain	patients—with	agenesis	of
the	 corpus	 callosum	 or	 postcommissurotomy—have	 been	 used	 to	 investigate
hemispheric	lateralization	and	interhemispheric	communication,	because	stimuli
can	 be	 presented	 selectively	 to	 one	 hemisphere	 and	 the	 functions	 of	 the	 two
hemispheres	studied	separately.

The	 anterior	 commissure	 arose	 phylogenetically	 as	 part	 of	
the
rhinencephalon;	 it	 connects	 the	 olfactory	 bulbs,	 amygdala,	 and	 basal	 forebrain
regions	 of	 the	 two	 sides.	 It	 lies	 in	 the	 lamina	 terminalis,	 forming	 part	 of	 the
anterior	wall	of	the	third	ventricle,	above	the	optic	chiasm,	behind	and	below	the
rostrum	of	the	corpus	callosum	(Figure	6.9).	The	fornix	splits	around	the	anterior
commissure	 into	 pre-	 and	 postcommissural	 parts.	 The	 anterior	 commissure
connects	the	olfactory	bulbs	and	temporal	lobes	of	the	two	hemispheres.	It	has
several	 subsystems	 connecting	 different	 temporal	 lobe	 components;	 the	 major
component	in	primates	consists	of	neocortical	connections	between	the	temporal
lobes.	The	hippocampal	commissure	(psalterium,	commissure	of	the	fornix)	runs
between	 the	 two	 crura	 of	 the	 fornix,	 beneath	 the	 body	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum,
and	connects	the	hippocampal	formations	(Figure	6.9).

PROJECTION	FIBERS

Association	 and	 commissural	 fibers	 arise	 from	 the	 supragranular	 layers	 of	 the
cortex.	Efferent	projection	fibers	arise	from	infragranular	cortex,	primarily	layer
5,	and	descend	to	more	caudal	structures,	including	the	basal	ganglia,	thalamus,

reticular	formation,	brainstem	motor	nuclei,	and	spinal	cord.	Afferent	projection
fibers	 ascend	 from	 deeper	 structures,	 such	 as	 the	 thalamus	 and	 striatum,	 and
project	 to	 the	 cortex.	 Afferent	 projection	 fibers	 terminate	 in	 the	 supragranular
cortex.

THE	INTERNAL	CAPSULE

The	various	fibers	coming	to	and	proceeding	from	the	cortex	make	up	the	fan-
shaped	corona	radiata.	Fibers	of	the	corona	radiata	converge	into	a	broad	band,
which	is	the	internal	capsule.	Early	CNS	dissectors	saw	the	profusion	of	fibers
going	in	all	directions	as	a	“radiating	crown”	perched	atop	the	internal	capsule.
The	internal	capsule	contains	most	of	the	fibers,	both	efferent	and	afferent,	that
communicate	 with	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 A	 large	 part	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 is
composed	of	the	thalamic	radiations;	the	rest	consists	of	efferent	fibers	to	lower
structures.	 Below	 the	 level	 of	 the	 thalamus,	 the	 internal	 capsule	 becomes	 the
cerebral	 peduncle	 of	 the	 midbrain.	 In	 horizontal	 section,	 the	 internal	 capsule,
from	 anterior	 to	 posterior,	 has	 three	 parts:	 anterior	 limb,	 genu,	 and	 posterior
limb.	 The	 shorter	 anterior	 limb	 (lenticulocaudate	 division)	 lies	 between	 the
lenticular	 nucleus	 laterally	 and	 the	 caudate	 nucleus	 anteromedially.	 Early	 in
development,	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 are	 fused.	 They	 separate	 but	 remain
attached	by	strands	of	gray	matter.	The	fibers	of	the	anterior	limb	of	the	capsule
weave	 between	 the	 gray	 matter	 bridges,	 giving	 the	 anterior	 limb	 a	 striated
appearance	in	some	sections.	The	marbling	created	by	the	internal	capsule	fibers
led	to	the	name	corpus	striatum	for	the	caudate	and	putamen	(see	Chapter	26).
The	junction	between	the	anterior	and	posterior	limbs	is	the	genu,	the	apex	of	the
obtuse	angle	formed	by	the	two	limbs.	The	apex	of	the	globus	pallidus	fits	into
the	 angle	 of	 the	 genu.	 A	 line	 drawn	 between	 the	 genua	 of	 the	 two	 internal
capsules	lies	just	posterior	to	the	foramen	of	Monro.	The	longer	posterior	limb	of
the	 internal	 capsule	 (lenticulothalamic	 division)	 lies	 between	 the	 lenticular
nucleus	 laterally	 and	 the	 thalamus	 posteromedially.	 The	 posterior	 limb	 has	 a
retrolenticular	portion,	which	projects	behind	the	lenticular	nucleus	to	reach	the
occipital	 cortex,	 and	 a	 sublenticular	 portion,	 which	 passes	 below	 the	 posterior
part	of	the	nucleus	to	reach	the	temporal	lobe.

The	 anterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 is	 composed	 of	 the	 frontopontine
tract	and	the	anterior	thalamic	radiations.	Fibers	of	the	frontopontine	tract	arise
in	 the	 motor	 and	 premotor	 regions	 of	 the	 frontal	 cortex.	 They	 descend	 in	 the

medial	 part	 of	 the	 cerebral	 peduncle	 to	 the	 ipsilateral	 pontine	 nuclei.	 After	 a
synapse,	an	impulse	is	transmitted	through	the	middle	cerebellar	peduncle	to	the
opposite	 cerebellar	 hemisphere.	 Related	 fibers	 from	 other	 cortical	 areas,	 the
parietotemporopontine	 and	 occipitopontine	 tracts,	 travel	 in	 the	 retrolentiform
part	 of	 the	 capsule	 and	 descend	 in	 the	 lateral	 portion	 of	 the	 cerebral	 peduncle.
The	anterior	limb	also	contains	the	corticostriatal	projections.

In	 general,	 any	 area	 of	 the	 cortex	 that	 receives	 thalamic	 afferents	 sends
efferents	back	to	the	same	thalamic	nucleus,	and	these	also	run	in	the	thalamic
radiations.	 The	 anterior	 thalamic	 radiations	 (anterior	 thalamic	 peduncle)
primarily	 consist	 of	 fibers	 connecting	 the	 dorsomedial	 (DM)	 thalamic	 nucleus
and	 the	 prefrontal	 cortex.	 There	 are	 also	 connections	 between	 the	 frontal	 lobe
and	the	anterior	thalamic	nuclei,	the	hypothalamus,	and	limbic	structures.

The	genu	of	the	internal	capsule	contains	the	corticobulbar	tracts,	which	carry
impulses	 from	 the	 lower	 portion	 of	 the	 precentral	 (and	 premotor)	 cortex	 to	 the
motor	nuclei	of	the	cranial	nerves.	The	corticobulbar	fibers	pass	largely,	but	not
entirely,	to	contralateral	nuclei.

The	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 has	 many	 important	 components,
most	 notably	 the	 corticospinal	 tract.	 Since	 observations	 by	 Charcot,	 Dejerine,
and	Dejerine-Klumpke,	the	corticospinal	fibers	were	thought	to	lie	in	the	anterior
two-thirds	 of	 the	 posterior	 limb.	 It	 now	 appears	 that	 the	 fibers	 of	 the
corticospinal	tract	lie	in	scattered	bundles	more	posteriorly.	The	tract	lies	more
anteriorly	 in	 its	 course	 through	 the	 rostral	 capsule	 and	 shifts	 posteriorly	 as	 it
descends.	Fibers	destined	for	the	upper	limb	are	more	anterior.	The	somatotopic
organization	 in	 the	 rostral	 internal	 capsule,	 from	 anterior	 to	 posterior,	 is
face/arm/leg.	 In	 its	 descent,	 the	 frontopontine	 tract	 gradually	 moves	 from	 the
anterior	limb	to	the	anterior	part	of	the	posterior	limb	as	the	corticospinal	tract
transitions	to	a	more	posterior	position.	Other	descending	fibers	in	the	posterior
limb	 include	 corticostriatal,	 corticorubral,	 corticoreticular,	 and	 cortico-olivary.
Ascending	 fibers	 in	 the	 posterior	 limb	 include	 the	 middle	 thalamic	 radiations
(middle	 thalamic	 peduncle),	 which	 carry	 fibers	 from	 the	 ventral	 posterior
thalamic	nuclei	to	the	sensory	cortex,	and	fibers	from	the	ventral	anterior	(VA)
and	 ventral	 lateral	 (VL)	 thalamic	 nuclei	 to	 the	 motor,	 premotor,	 and
supplementary	motor	areas.

The	 posterior	 thalamic	 radiations	 (posterior	 thalamic	 peduncle),	 composed
mainly	 of	 the	 optic	 radiations	 (geniculocalcarine	 tract),	 make	 up	 most	 of	 the
retrolenticular	 part	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule.	 The	 optic	 radiations	 are	 separated
from	 the	 temporal	 horn	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle	 by	 the	 tapetum	 of	 the	 corpus

callosum.	Other	retrolenticular	fibers	include	the	parietopontine,	occipitopontine,
occipitocollicular,	 occipitotectal,	 and	 connections	 between	 the	 occipital	 lobes
and	 the	 pulvinar.	 The	 sublenticular	 part	 of	 the	 capsule	 is	 made	 up	 primarily	 of
the	 auditory	 radiations	 (inferior	 thalamic	 peduncle),	 carrying	 fibers	 from	 the
medial	geniculate	body	below	and	behind	the	lenticular	nucleus	to	the	auditory
cortex	 in	 the	 temporal	 lobe.	 Other	 sublenticular	 fibers	 include	 temporopontine,
thalamopallidal,	and	pallidothalamic.

The	 internal	 capsule	 is	 frequently	 involved	 in	 cerebrovascular	 disease,
especially	 small	 vessel	 lacunar	 infarcts	 related	 to	 hypertension.	 Because	 all	 of
the	 descending	 motor	 fibers	 are	 grouped	 compactly	 together,	 a	 single	 small
lesion	 may	 impair	 the	 function	 in	 all	 of	 them	 and	 produce	 a	 hemiparesis	 with
equal	 involvement	 of	 face,	 arm,	 and	 leg	 without	 sensory	 abnormalities:	 the
syndrome	of	capsular	pure	motor	hemiparesis.

Lateral	 to	 the	 lenticular	 nuclei	 lie,	 in	 order,	 the	 external	 capsule,	 claustrum,
and	 extreme	 capsule.	 The	 external	 and	 extreme	 capsules	 are	 part	 of	 the
subcortical	 white	 matter	 of	 the	 insula.	 Their	 function	 is	 largely	 unknown.	 The
external	capsule	contains	some	corticostriatal	and	corticoreticular	fibers.

THALAMUS

The	thalamus	serves	primarily	as	a	relay	station	that	modulates	and	coordinates
the	 function	 of	 various	 systems.	 It	 is	 a	 locus	 for	 integration,	 modulation,	 and
intercommunication	between	various	systems	and	has	important	motor,	sensory,
arousal,	memory,	behavioral,	limbic,	and	cognitive	functions.	The	largest	source
of	 afferent	 fibers	 to	 the	 thalamus	 is	 the	 cerebral	 cortex,	 and	 the	 cortex	 is	 the
primary	destination	for	thalamic	projections.	Many	systems	and	fibers	converge
on	the	thalamus	(Gr.	“meeting	place”	or	“inner	chamber”).	Except	for	olfaction,
all	of	the	ascending	sensory	tracts	end	in	the	thalamus,	from	which	projections
are	sent	to	the	cortex.	The	thalamus	allows	crude	appreciation	of	most	sensory
modalities;	only	very	fine	discriminative	sensory	functions	such	as	stereognosis,
two-point	 discrimination,	 graphesthesia,	 and	 precise	 tactile	 localization	 require
the	 cortex	 (see	 Chapter	 32).	 Similarly,	 the	 thalamus	 synchronizes	 the	 motor
system,	 integrating	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 motor	 cortex,	 basal	 ganglia,	 and
cerebellum.	The	motor	cortex	in	turn	sends	fibers	to	the	thalamus.	The	thalamus
also	integrates	function	between	the	limbic,	emotional	brain,	and	the	cortex;	it	is
important	in	arousal	mechanisms,	subserves	important	memory	circuits,	and	has

specialized	relay	nuclei	for	visual	and	auditory	function.

The	thalamus	lies	medially	in	the	cerebrum	(Figures	6.11	and	6.12).	It	is	the
largest	 constituent	 of	 the	 diencephalon.	 Its	 dorsal	 aspect	 forms	 the	 floor	 of	 the
lateral	ventricle,	and	it	is	bounded	medially	by	the	third	ventricle	and	laterally	by
the	 internal	 capsule	 and	 basal	 ganglia;	 ventrally,	 it	 is	 continuous	 with	 the
subthalamus.	The	lateral	dorsal	wall,	at	the	point	of	attachment	of	the	roof	of	the
third	 ventricle,	 is	 demarcated	 by	 the	 stria	 medullaris	 thalami.	 The	 stria
medullaris	thalami	carry	projections	from	the	septal	area	to	the	habenular	nuclei.
Neuroanatomists	 often	 divide	 the	 thalamus	 into	 the	 dorsal	 thalamus,	 the
thalamus	 proper,	 and	 the	 ventral	 thalamus,	 which	 consists	 of	 the	 subthalamic
region,	including	the	zona	incerta,	the	fields	of	Forel,	and	other	structures.	The
epithalamus	 is	 made	 up	 of	 the	 paraventricular	 nuclei,	 the	 habenular	 nuclei,	 the
stria	medullaris	thalami,	the	posterior	commissure,	and	the	pineal	body.

FIGURE	6.11	The	thalamus	showing	major	nuclei.	The	internal	medullary	lamina	fork
anteriorly	 to	 enclose	 the	 anterior	 nucleus.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon
RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,
2002,	with	permission.)

The	 superior	 surface	 of	 the	 thalamus	 is	 covered	 by	 a	 thin	 layer	 of	 white
matter,	the	stratum	zonale.	The	upper,	lateral	border	is	separated	from	the	body
of	the	caudate	nucleus	by	the	stria	terminalis	and	thalamostriate	vein.	Laterally,
the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 separates	 the	 thalamus	 and	 the
lenticular	 nucleus.	 The	 lateral	 wall	 of	 the	 third	 ventricle	 makes	 up	 the	 medial
surface	of	the	thalamus,	which	is	usually	connected	to	the	opposite	thalamus	by
the	 interthalamic	 adhesion	 (massa	 intermedia).	 The	 hypothalamic	 sulcus
separates	 the	 thalamus	 above	 from	 the	 hypothalamus	 below.	 Inferiorly,	 the
thalamus	merges	with	the	rostral	midbrain	tegmentum.	Laterally,	the	thalamus	is

covered	 by	 a	 thin	 layer	 of	 myelinated	 axons,	 the	 external	 medullary	 lamina.
Scattered	within	it	are	the	cells	of	the	reticular	nucleus	of	the	thalamus.

The	 thalamus	 is	 divided	 by	 internal	 medullary	 lamina	 into	 large	 nuclear
groups—medial,	lateral,	and	anterior—which	are	in	turn	divided	into	component
nuclei	 (Figure	 6.12).	 The	 intralaminar	 nuclei	 lie	 scattered	 along	 the	 internal
medullary	laminae;	they	essentially	comprise	a	rostral	extension	of	the	brainstem
reticular	 formation.	 The	 intralaminar	 nuclei	 receive	 input	 from	 the	 reticular
formation	and	the	ascending	reticular	activating	system	and	project	widely	to	the
neocortex.	These	nuclei	are	primarily	concerned	with	arousal.	The	reticular	and
intralaminar	 nuclei	 are	 classified	 as	 nonspecific	 nuclei,	 as	 their	 projections	 are
diffuse.	The	specific	nuclei	receive	afferents	from	specific	systems	and	project	to
dedicated	 cortical	 areas,	 for	 example,	 somatic	 sensation,	 the	 ventral	 posterior
nuclei,	and	the	 somatosensory	 cortex.	The	largest	 and	 most	easily	identified	of
the	intralaminar	nuclei	is	the	centromedian	nucleus.	It	has	connections	with	the
motor	 cortex,	 globus	 pallidus,	 and	 striatum,	 and	 it	 has	 extensive	 projections	 to
the	 cortex.	 Lesions	
the
centromedian-parafascicular	complex,	may	cause	thalamic	neglect,	with	neglect
of	the	contralateral	body	and	extrapersonal	space.	Bilateral	lesions	involving	the
posterior	intralaminar	nuclei	may	produce	akinetic	mutism.

intralaminar	 nuclei,	 especially	

involving	

the	

FIGURE	 6.12	 Cross	 section	 of	 the	 human	 thalamus	 showing	 the	 principal	 nuclear
masses	at	three	levels.	A.	Anterior	thalamus.	B.	Midthalamus.	C.	Posterior	thalamus.
3V,	third	ventricle;	AV,	nucleus	anteroventralis;	CM,	nucleus	centrum	medianum;	GP,
globus	pallidus;	HA,	habenula;	IC,	internal	capsule;	LD,	nucleus	lateralis	dorsalis;	LG,
lateral	geniculate	body;	LP,	nucleus	lateralis	posterior;	MD,	nucleus	medialis	dorsalis;
MG,	medial	geniculate	body;	NC,	caudate	nucleus;	NR,	red	nucleus;	OT,	optic	tract;
PL,	 lateral	 nuclear	 group	 of	 pulvinar;	 PM,	 medial	 nuclear	 group	 of	 pulvinar;	 PU,
putamen;	 R,	 nucleus	 reticularis;	 S,	 subthalamic	 nucleus;	 VL,	 nucleus	 ventralis
lateralis;	 VPL,	 nucleus	 ventralis	 posterolateralis;	 VPM,	 nucleus	 ventralis
posteromedialis.

The	 internal	 medullary	 lamina	 diverges	 anteriorly,	 and	 the	 anterior	 nucleus

lies	 between	 the	 arms	 of	 this	 Y-shaped	 structure.	 The	 mammillothalamic	 tract
ascends	from	the	mammillary	bodies	bound	primarily	for	the	anterior	nucleus	of
the	thalamus,	which	sends	its	major	output	to	the	cingulate	gyrus.	The	anterior
nucleus	is	part	of	the	limbic	lobe	and	Papez	circuit,	and	it	is	related	to	emotion
and	 memory	 function.	 It	 receives	 input	 from	 the	 hippocampus	 through	 the
fornix.	 Lesions	of	the	 anterior	 nucleus	 are	 associated	with	 loss	of	memory	 and
impaired	executive	function.

The	medial	nucleus	is	a	single,	large	structure	that	lies	on	the	medial	side	of
the	 internal	 medullary	 lamina.	 Because	 its	 position	 is	 also	 slightly	 dorsal,	 it	 is
usually	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 mediodorsal	 or	 DM	 nucleus.	 It	 sends	 or	 receives
projections	from	the	amygdala,	olfactory	and	limbic	systems,	hypothalamus,	and
prefrontal	cortex.	There	are	extensive	connections	with	the	intralaminar	nuclei.
The	DM	has	functions	related	to	cognition,	judgment,	affect,	olfaction,	emotions,
sleep	and	waking,	executive	function,	and	memory.

In	 contrast	 to	 the	 straightforward	 anterior	 and	 medial	 nuclear	 groups,	 the
lateral	 nuclear	 group	 is	 subdivided	 into	 several	 component	 nuclei.	 The	 major
division	 is	into	the	 dorsal	 tier	and	the	 ventral	 tier.	In	 general,	the	lateral	nuclei
serve	 as	 specific	 relay	 stations	 between	 motor	 and	 sensory	 systems	 and	 the
related	 cortex.	 The	 dorsal	 tier	 nuclei	 consist	 of	 the	 lateral	 dorsal	 and	 lateral
posterior	 nuclei	 and	 the	 pulvinar.	 The	 pulvinar	 is	 a	 large	 mass	 that	 forms	 the
caudal	extremity	of	the	thalamus;	it	is	the	largest	nucleus	in	the	thalamus.	Fibers
project	to	it	from	other	thalamic	nuclei,	from	the	geniculate	bodies,	and	from	the
superior	 colliculus;	 and	 it	 has	 connections	 with	 the	 peristriate	 area	 and	 the
posterior	 parts	 of	 the	 parietal	 lobes.	 The	 lateral	 posterior	 nucleus	 and	 the
pulvinar	 have	 reciprocal	 connections	with	 the	occipital	 and	 parietal	 association
cortex;	they	may	play	a	role	in	extrageniculocalcarine	vision.

The	 ventral	 tier	 subnuclei	 of	 the	 lateral	 nucleus	 are	 true	 relay	 nuclei,
connecting	 lower	 centers	 with	 the	 cortex	 and	 vice	 versa.	 The	 ventral	 posterior
lateral	(VPL)	nucleus	and	ventral	posterior	medial	(VPM)	nucleus	are	the	major
sensory	 relay	 nuclei.	 The	 VPL	 receives	 the	 termination	 of	 the	 lemniscal	 and
spinothalamic	 sensory	 pathways	 for	 the	 body;	 it	 projects	 in	 turn	 to	 the
somesthetic	cortex	(Brodmann	areas	1,	2,	and	3).	VPM	serves	the	same	function
for	the	head,	receiving	the	trigeminothalamic	tracts	as	well	as	taste	fibers	from
the	solitary	nucleus;	it	projects	to	the	somesthetic	cortex.

The	 VL	 nucleus	 coordinates	 the	 motor	 system.	 The	 VL	 receives	 input	 from
the	 basal	 ganglia	 (globus	 pallidus),	 substantia	 nigra,	 and	 cerebellum	 (dentate
nucleus	via	superior	cerebellar	peduncle	and	the	dentatothalamic	tract).	The	VL

then	projects	to	the	motor	and	supplementary	motor	areas.	The	motor	cortex,	in
turn,	 projects	 to	 the	 striatum,	 which	 projects	 to	 the	 globus	 pallidus,	 which
projects	 to	 VL.	 The	 VA	 nucleus	 also	 receives	 projections	 from	 the	 globus
pallidus,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 substantia	 nigra;	 it	 projects	 primarily	 to	 the	 premotor
cortex.	It	is	via	VL	and	VA	that	the	basal	ganglia	and	cerebellum	influence	motor
activity	(Chapter	26).	The	thalamus	anchors	two	extensive	sensorimotor	control
loops:	the	cerebello-rubro-thalamo-cortico-pontocerebellar	loop	and	the	cortico-
striato-pallido-thalamo-cortical	loop.

The	geniculate	bodies	are	also	part	of	the	ventral	tier.	The	medical	geniculate
body	 receives	 the	 termination	 of	 the	 auditory	 pathways	 ascending	 through	 the
brainstem;	it	projects	to	the	auditory	cortex.	The	axons	in	the	optic	tract	synapse
in	the	lateral	geniculate	body,	from	which	arise	the	optic	radiations	destined	for
the	occipital	lobe.

The	pulvinar	is	the	most	posterior	of	the	lateral	nuclear	group	and	the	largest
the	 visual	 and
It	 has	 extensive	 connections	 with	
thalamic	 nucleus.	
somatosensory	 association	 areas,	 and	 the	 cingulate,	 posterior	 parietal,	 and
prefrontal	 areas.	 It	 facilitates	visual	attention	for	 language-related	functions	 for
the	left	hemisphere	and	visuospatial	tasks	for	the	right.

The	 blood	 supply	 to	 the	 thalamus	 comes	 primarily	 via	 thalamoperforating
arteries	 off	 the	 posterior	 communicating	 and	 posterior	 cerebral	 arteries;	 the
anterior	choroidal	artery	supplies	the	lateral	geniculate	body.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bogousslavsky	J.	Frontal	stroke	syndromes.	Eur	Neurol	1994;	34:306–315.
Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Carpenter	 MB.	 Core	 Text	 of	 Neuroanatomy.	 4th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Lippincott

Williams	&	Wilkins,	1991:115–223.

Corballis	MC,	McLean	A.	Interhemispheric	comparisons	in	a	man	with	complete

forebrain	commissurotomy.	Neuropsychology	2000;14:519–525.

Ferracci	 F,	 Conte	 F,	 Gentile	 M,	 et	 al.	 Marchiafava-Bignami	 disease:	 computed
tomographic	 scan,	 99mTc	 HMPAO-SPECT,	 and	 FlAIR	 MRI	 findings	 in	 a
patient	 with	 subcortical	 aphasia,	 alexia,	 bilateral	 agraphia,	 and	 left-handed
deficit	of	constructional	ability.	Arch	Neurol	1999;56:107–110.

FitzGerald	 MJT,	 Folan-Curran	 J.	 Clinical	 Neuroanatomy	 and	 Related

Neuroscience.	4th	ed.	Edinburgh:	W.	B.	Saunders,	2002.

Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Hanaway	 J,	 Young	 RR.	 Localization	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 in	 the	 internal

capsule	of	man.	J	Neurol	Sci	1977;34:63–70.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Macchi	 G,	 Jones	 EG.	 Toward	 an	 agreement	 on	 terminology	 of	 nuclear	 and
subnuclear	divisions	of	the	motor	thalamus.	J	Neurosurg	1997;86:670–685.
Parent	 A.	 Carpenter’s	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 9th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Lippincott

Williams	&	Wilkins,	1996.

Ross	 ED.	 Localization	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 in	 the	 internal	 capsule	 by	 whole

brain	dissection.	Neurology	1980;30:59–64.

Sakakibara	 R,	 Hattori	 T,	 Yasuda	 K,	 et	 al.	 Micturitional	 disturbance	 after	 acute
hemispheric	 stroke:	 analysis	 of	the	 lesion	 site	by	CT	 and	 MRI.	 J	 Neurol	 Sci
1996;137:47–56.

Serrano	 Ponz	 M,	 Ara	 Callizo	 JR,	 Fayed	 Miquel	 N,	 et	 al.	 Hypoxic
encephalopathy	and	cortical	laminar	necrosis.	Rev	Neurol	2001;32:843–847.
Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Tham	 WW,	 Stevenson	 RJ,	 Miller	 LA.	 The	 role	 of	 the	 mediodorsal	 thalamic

nucleus	in	human	olfaction.	Neurocase	2011;	17:148–159.

Turk	 DJ,	 Heatherton	 TF,	 Kelley	 WM,	 et	 al.	 Mike	 or	 me?	 Self-recognition	 in	 a

split-brain	patient.	Nat	Neurosci	2002;5:841–842.

Van	 der	 Werf	 YD,	 Scheltens	 P,	 Lindeboom	 J,	 et	 al.	 Deficits	 of	 memory,
executive	 functioning	 and	 attention	 following	 infarction	 in	 the	 thalamus;	 a
study	 of	 22	 cases	 with	 localised	 lesions.	 Neuropsychologia	 2003;41:1330–
1344.

Van	 der	 Werf	 YD,	 Witter	 MP,	 Groenewegen	 HJ.	 The	 intralaminar	 and	 midline
nuclei	 of	 the	 thalamus.	 Anatomical	 and	 functional	 evidence	 for	 participation
in	processes	of	arousal	and	awareness.	Brain	Res	Brain	 Res	 Rev	 2002;39(2–
3):107–140.

Ward	R,	Arend	I.	An	object-based	frame	of	reference	within	the	human	pulvinar.

Brain	2007;130(Pt	9):2462–2469.

Ward	 R,	 Calder	 AJ,	 Parker	 M,	 et	 al.	 Emotion	 recognition	 following	 human

pulvinar	damage.	Neuropsychologia	2007;45:1973–1978.

Zilles	 K,	 Amunts	K.	Centenary	of	Brodmann’s	map—conception	 and	 fate.	Nat

Rev	Neurosci	2010;11:139–145.

Zimmerman	RS,	Sirven	JI.	An	overview	of	surgery	for	chronic	seizures.	Mayo

Clin	Proc	2003;78:109–117.

CHAPTER	7

Functions	of	the	Cerebral	Cortex
and	Regional	Cerebral	Diagnosis

It	 has	 not	 always	 been	 accepted	 that	 parts	 of	 the	 brain	 have	 specific	 functions.
Flourens	 (1823)	 thought	 that	 all	 cerebral	 tissue	 was	 equipotential,	 and	 his
influential	 views	 held	 sway	 for	 the	 better	 part	 of	 a	 century.	 Broca’s	 seminal
aphasic	patient	(1861)	demonstrated	that	speech	functions	were	localized	to	the
left	 inferior	 frontal	 gyrus.	 Based	 on	 his	 studies	 of	 epilepsy,	 Hughlings	 Jackson
was	 the	 first	 to	 point	 out	 that	 there	 is	 a	 motor	 cortex.	 Many	 subsequent
experiments	 have	 amply	 demonstrated	 that	 certain	 areas	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex
have	 specific	 functions.	 Brodmann	 created	 maps	 based	 on	 regional	 histologic
differences	 (Figure	 6.3).	 The	 correlation	 between	 histology	 and	 function	 is
imprecise.	Many	areas	with	identical	histology	have	differing	functions.	Disease
involving	 specific	 areas	 can	 cause	 widely	 differing	 clinical	 manifestations.
Destruction	 of	 an	 inhibitory	 area	 can	 cause	 the	 same	 clinical	 manifestations	 as
overactivity	 of	 the	 area	 inhibited.	 Because	 of	 the	 plasticity	 of	 the	 nervous
system,	 other	 structures	 or	 areas	 may	 assume	 the	 function	 of	 a	 diseased	 or
injured	part.

In	addition	to	being	localized	in	a	specific	brain	region,	a	function	can	also	be
lateralized	to	one	or	the	other	hemisphere.	The	hemisphere	to	which	a	function	is
lateralized	 is	 said	 to	 be	 dominant	 for	 that	 function.	 In	 lower	 animals,	 both
hemispheres	 seem	 to	 have	 equal	 influence.	 A	 particular	 attribute	 of	 the	 human
brain,	 however,	 is	 the	 dominance	 of	 one	 hemisphere	 over	 the	 other	 for	 certain
functions.	 This	 is	 especially	 true	 for	 language,	 gnosis	 (the	 interpretation	 of
sensory	stimuli),	and	praxis	(the	performance	of	complex	motor	acts).

Modern	functional	imaging	techniques	such	as	positron	emission	tomography
(PET),	 functional	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 (fMRI),	 and	 other	 methods	 of
studying	the	metabolic	activity	of	the	brain	have	provided	another	dimension	to

the	 traditional	 notions	 of	 cerebral	 localization.	 For	 even	 simple	 tasks,	 such
studies	 have	 shown	 a	 pattern	 of	 involvement	 of	 multiple	 brain	 regions
overlapping	 the	 anatomical	 divisions	 into	 discrete	 lobes.	 The	 fact	 that	 a	 lesion
produces	 defects	 in	 a	 particular	 function	 does	 not	 necessarily	 imply	 that	 under
normal	 circumstances,	 that	 function	 is	 strictly	 localized	 to	 a	 particular	 region.
Despite	 these	 limitations,	 it	 remains	 clinically	 useful	 to	 retain	 the	 traditional
concepts	 of	 localization	 of	 functions	 in	 the	 various	 lobes	 of	 the	 dominant	 and
nondominant	hemispheres.

THE	FRONTAL	LOBES

Chapter	6	discusses	the	gross	anatomy	of	the	frontal	lobe.	Clinically,	important
areas	 include	 the	 motor	 strip,	 the	 premotor	 and	 supplementary	 motor	 areas
(SMAs),	the	prefrontal	region,	the	frontal	eye	fields,	and	the	motor	speech	areas.
The	 frontal	 lobe	 anterior	 to	 the	 premotor	 area	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 prefrontal
cortex.	The	anterior	portion	of	the	cingulate	gyrus	is	sometimes	considered	part
of	 the	 frontal	 lobe,	 although	 its	 connections	 are	 primarily	 with	 limbic	 lobe
structures.	Frontal	lobe	areas	related	to	motor	function	are	discussed	in	Chapter
25.	The	frontal	eye	fields	are	discussed	in	Chapter	14,	and	the	motor	speech	area
is	covered	in	Chapter	9.	Figure	7.1	shows	some	of	these	areas.

THE	PREFRONTAL	AREA

The	portions	of	the	frontal	lobe	anterior	to	area	6,	area	8,	and	the	motor	speech
centers	are	areas	referred	to	as	the	prefrontal	cortex.	It	includes	areas	9	to	12,	32,
45,	 47,	 and	 others.	 These	 areas	 are	 connected	 with	 the	 somesthetic,	 visual,
auditory,	 and	 other	 cortical	 areas	 by	 long	 association	 bundles	 and	 with	 the
thalamus	and	the	hypothalamus	by	projection	fibers.	The	prefrontal	cortex	is	the
main	projection	site	for	the	dorsomedial	nucleus	of	the	thalamus.	The	prefrontal
cortex	projects	to	the	basal	ganglia	and	substantia	nigra;	it	receives	dopaminergic
fibers	 that	 are	 part	 of	 the	 mesocortical	 projection	 from	 the	 midbrain.	 The
dopaminergic	neurons	are	associated	with	reward,	attention,	short-term	memory
tasks,	planning,	and	drive.

FIGURE	7.1	Motor	areas	of	the	frontal	lobe	in	monkeys	(A)	and	homologous	areas	in
the	human	(B).	In	humans,	the	border	between	areas	6	and	4	on	the	lateral	surface	is
located	in	the	anterior	bank	of	the	central	sulcus.	FEF,	frontal	eye	field;	M1,	primary
motor	 cortex;	 PMd,	 dorsal	 premotor	 cortex;	 PMv,	 ventral	 premotor	 cortex;	 RCZa,
anterior	 rostral	 cingulate	 zone;	 RCZp,	 posterior	 rostral	 cingulate	 zone;	 SMA,
supplementary	motor	area.	(Reprinted	from	Picard	N,	Strick	PL.	Imaging	the	premotor
areas.	 Curr	 Opin	 Neurobiol	 2001;11[6]:663–672.	 Copyright	 ©	 2001	 Elsevier.	 With
permission.)

Clinically,	the	prefrontal	region	can	be	divided	into	the	dorsolateral	prefrontal
cortex	 (DLPFC),	 the	 medial	 prefrontal	 cortex	 (MPC),	 and	 the	 orbitofrontal
cortex	 (OFC).	 The	 cellular	 structure	 of	 the	 prefrontal	 region	 is	 strikingly
different	from	areas	4	and	6	(the	motor	and	premotor	areas).	The	cortex	is	thin
and	granular;	the	pyramidal	cells	in	layer	5	are	reduced	in	both	size	and	number.
These	 brain	 areas	 are	 highly	 developed	 in	 humans,	 and	 they	 have	 long	 been
considered	 the	 seat	 of	 higher	 intellectual	 functions.	 Much	 of	 the	 information
about	 the	 functions	 of	 the	 frontal	 association	 areas	 has	 come	 from	 clinical
observation	of	patients	with	degeneration,	injuries,	or	tumors	of	the	frontal	lobes
and	 from	 examination	 of	 patients	 who	 have	 had	 these	 regions	 surgically
destroyed.	 Beginning	 with	 Phineas	 Gage,	 many	 examples	 of	 patients	 with
dramatic	changes	in	personality	or	behavior	after	frontal	lobe	damage	have	been
reported	(Figure	7.2;	 Box	7.1).	 Mataro	et	al.	reported	a	modern	case	similar	to

Phineas	Gage	with	a	60-year	follow-up.

There	 is	 a	 paucity	 of	 information	 regarding	 the	 functions	 of	 the	 different
regions	of	the	prefrontal	cortex.	The	DLPFC	is	important	in	the	organization	of
self-ordered	 tasks.	 It	 plays	 a	 critical	 role	 in	 the	 neural	 network	 subserving
working	memory	(Chapter	8).	The	responsibility	for	executive	function	largely
resides	with	the	DLPFC	and	its	connections.	Frontal	lobe	executive	function	is
the	 ability	 to	 plan,	 carry	 out,	 and	 monitor	 a	 series	 of	 actions	 intended	 to
accomplish	 a	 goal.	 It	 is	 concerned	 with	 planning	 and	 organizational	 skills,	 the
ability	to	benefit	from	experience,	 abstraction,	motivation,	cognitive	flexibility,
and	problem	solving.	Disturbed	executive	function	is	common	with	frontal	lobe
lesions.	 Defects	 in	 executive	 function	 occur	 with	 frontal	 lobe	 lesions,	 but	 may
occur	with	lesions	elsewhere	because	of	the	extensive	connections	of	the	frontal
lobes	 with	 all	 other	 parts	 of	 the	 brain.	 The	 DLPFC	 is	 also	 important	 in
oculomotor	 control,	 which	 is	 responsible	 for	 decision-making	 regarding
voluntary	eye	movements	and	inhibiting	unwanted	reflex	saccades.	It	may	also
play	 a	 role	 in	 pain	 perception.	 There	 is	 evidence	 of	 DLPFC	 dysfunction	 in
schizophrenia.	The	prefrontal	region	likely	plays	a	role	as	well	in	the	ability	to
predict	 the	 consequences	 of	 actions,	 emotional	 expression	 (affect),	 “go/no-go”
decision-making,	 personality,	 and	 the	 sense	 of	 time.	 Widespread	 changes	 in
prefrontal	activation	are	associated	with	calculating	and	thinking.

FIGURE	 7.2	 Phineas	 Gage,	 a	 three-dimensional	 computer	 reconstruction	 of	 the
original	skull	from	a	thin-slice	computed	tomographic	image	and	of	the	tamping	iron.
(Reprinted	 from	 Ratiu	 P,	 Talos	 IF.	 Images	 in	 clinical	 medicine.	 The	 tale	 of	 Phineas
Gage,	 digitally	 remastered.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med	 2004;351:e21.	 Copyright	 ©	 2004
Massachusetts	 Medical	 Society.	 Reprinted	 with	 permission	 from	 Massachusetts
Medical	Society.)

BOX	7.1

Frontal	Lobotomy

In	 a	 famous	 incident	 in	 1848,	 Mr.	 Phineas	 Gage,	 a	 25-year-old	 railroad
worker,	sustained	severe	damage	to	his	frontal	lobes	when	a	metal	tamping
rod	 was	 blasted	 through	 his	 head	 after	 a	 freak	 accident	 (the	 “case	 of	 the
crowbar	 skull”).	 The	 rod	 entered	 through	 the	 left	 cheek	 and	 exited	 in	 the
midline	near	the	intersection	of	the	sagittal	and	coronal	sutures.	Surprisingly,
he	survived	and	has	become	a	celebrated	patient	in	the	annals	of	medicine.

Following	 the	 accident,	 there	 was	 a	 dramatic	 change	 in	 his	 character	 and
personality.	 He	 died	 13	 years	 later	 after	 having	 traveled	 extensively	 and
having	 been,	 for	 a	 period	 of	 time,	 exhibited	 in	 a	 circus.	 He	 reportedly
became	irreverent,	profane,	impatient,	and	unable	to	hold	a	job.	He	was	“a
child	 in	 his	 intellectual	 capacities,	 with	 the	 general	 passions	 of	 a	 strong
man.”	 Reports	 of	 the	 case	 strengthened	 prevailing	 ideas	 about	 cerebral
localization,	 particularly	 about	 the	 importance	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobes	 in
personality.	Gage’s	accidental	frontal	lobotomy	laid	some	of	the	groundwork
for	 the	 surgical	 procedure	 of	 frontal	 (prefrontal)	 lobotomy	 or	 leukotomy,
which	was	thought	to	decrease	emotional	and	affective	responses	and	relieve
anxiety,	 apprehension,	 and	 “nervous	 tension.”	 The	 operation	 consisted	 of
cutting	 the	 white	 matter	 coronally	 in	 each	 frontal	 lobe,	 dividing	 the
association	fibers	that	connect	the	prefrontal	areas	with	other	brain	regions.
This	 operation	 became	 popular	 in	 the	 mid-20th	 century;	 it	 was	 done
extensively	over	a	period	of	years	as	a	treatment	not	only	for	psychosis	but
also	for	neurosis	and	depression.	It	was	even	used	to	control	the	behavior	of
criminals	 and	 recommended	 for	 “difficult”	 children.	 A	 popular	 procedure
was	the	“ice-pick”	lobotomy	in	which	an	ice	pick	was	inserted	above	the	eye
and	pounded	through	the	orbital	roof	with	a	mallet,	then	swept	to	and	fro	to
sever	the	connections	of	the	prefrontal	region	from	the	rest	of	the	brain.	The
primary	 proponent	 of	 this	 technique	 used	 a	 gold-plated	 ice	 pick	 and	 kept
speed	records	for	the	procedure.	A	lobotomy	was	once	done	on	an	eccentric
actress	 who	 had	 no	 mental	 illness.	 The	 abuse	 of	 frontal	 lobotomy	 was
dramatized	 in	 the	 motion	 picture	 One	 Flew	 Over	 the	 Cuckoo’s	 Nest.	 The
procedure	 has	 been	 abandoned.	 See	 Ginat	 for	 an	 illustration	 of	 the
neuroradiologic	sequelae.

The	 MPC	 has	 connections	 with	 the	 several	 thalamic	 nuclei,	 particularly	 the
dorsomedian,	and	with	the	superior	temporal	cortex.	There	are	connections	with
other	portions	of	the	frontal	lobe,	including	the	OFC,	the	DLPFC,	and	the	medial
motor	 areas.	 The	 MPC	 is	 important	 in	 auditory	 and	 visual	 associations.	 The
ventrolateral	 prefrontal	 cortex	 is	 concerned	 with	 mnemonic	 processing	 of
objects.	 The	 OFC	 has	 important	 connections	 with	 the	 limbic	 system,	 including
the	amygdala.	Disinhibition	syndromes,	ranging	from	mildly	inappropriate	social
behavior	 to	 full-blown	 mania,	 may	 occur	 with	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 OFC,
particularly	 of	 the	 right	 hemisphere.	 Patients	 with	 OFC	 dysfunction	 are	 also

prone	to	display	emotional	lability,	poor	judgment	and	insight,	and	distractibility.
Frontal	association	areas	may	be	involved	in	various	degenerative	processes,
especially	 those	 such	 as	 frontotemporal	 dementia,	 which	 are	 likely	 to	 affect
frontal	lobe	function.	The	earliest	change	is	often	a	loss	of	memory,	especially	of
recent	 memory	 or	 of	 retention	 and	 immediate	 recall.	 This	 may	 be	 followed	 by
impaired	 judgment,	 especially	 in	 social	 and	 ethical	 situations.	 Absence	 of	 the
inhibitions	 acquired	 through	 socialization	 may	 lead	 to	 inappropriate	 behavior
and	 carelessness	 in	 dress	 and	 personal	 hygiene.	 Sexual	 promiscuity	 may
develop.	 Loss	 of	 ability	 to	 carry	 out	 business	 affairs	 and	 attend	 to	 personal
finance	 is	 common.	 The	 ability	 to	 perceive	 abstract	 relationships	 is	 impaired
early.	 The	 patient	 may	 carry	 out	 simple	 well-organized	 actions,	 but	 he	 may	 be
incapable	of	dealing	with	new	problems	within	the	scope	and	range	expected	for
a	 person	 of	 similar	 age	 and	 education.	 Tasks	 requiring	 a	 deviation	 from
established	routine	and	adaptation	to	unfamiliar	situations	are	the	most	difficult.
There	 is	 loss	 of	 attentiveness,	 and	 distractibility	 may	 be	 marked.	 There	 are
problems	 with	 comprehension	 and	 loss	 of	 ability	 to	 make	 associations.
Acquisition	 and	 synthesis	 of	 new	 material	 is	 difficult.	 The	 time	 needed	 for
solving	intellectual	problems	is	prolonged,	and	the	patient	fatigues	rapidly.

Emotional	lability	may	be	prominent,	with	vacillating	moods	and	outbursts	of
crying,	rage,	or	laughter,	despite	a	previously	even	temperament.	There	may	be
marked	irritability.	The	mood	is	often	euphoric,	with	an	increased	sense	of	well-
being.	 Facetiousness,	 levity,	 and	 senseless	 joking	 and	 punning	 (witzelsucht)	 or
moria	 (Gr.	 “silliness”),	 or	 apathy,	 indifference,	 emotional	 blunting,	 and	 lack	 of
initiative	and	spontaneity	may	be	present.	Abulia	refers	to	difficulty	in	initiating
and	
in	 emotional
responsiveness,	spontaneous	speech,	and	social	interaction.	It	is	characteristic	of
frontal	 lobe	 and	 basal	 ganglia	 lesions.	 The	 patient	 may	 fail	 to	 link	 immediate
impressions	with	past	experience,	leading	to	confusion	and	disorientation.	There
is	 usually	 progressive	 deterioration	 and	 increasing	 difficulty	 with	 intellectual
functions.	 Extensive	 bilateral	 prefrontal	 lesions	 may	 culminate	 in	 akinetic
mutism	or	a	state	of	persistent	unresponsiveness	(see	Chapter	51).

spontaneous	 movements	 and	

sustaining	

reduction	

Similar	symptoms	may	occur	with	frontal	lobe	neoplasms.	Either	witzelsucht
and	euphoria	or	indifference	and	apathy	are	early	manifestations,	and	they	may
be	evident	before	memory	loss	and	difficulties	with	judgment	become	apparent.
There	 are	 often	 other	 signs	 of	 intracranial	 disease,	 such	 as	 weakness,	 focal	 or
generalized	 seizures,	 frontal	 ataxia,	 forced	 grasping,	 anosmia,	 or	 visual	 field
defects.	 Evidence	 of	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 usually	 occurs	 late.

Although	severe	impairment	of	function	may	occur	with	lesions	of	the	anterior
frontal	 lobes,	 further	 localization	 may	 not	 be	 possible	 from	 the	 examination
alone.	 There	 is	 no	 definite	 focus	 for	 which	 removal	 leads	 to	 dementia,	 and
massive	 lesions	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe,	 especially	 if	 unilateral,	 may	 cause	 few
symptoms,	particularly	if	the	lesion	is	in	the	nondominant	hemisphere.

The	 severe	 disability	 that	 may	 result	 from	 a	 frontal	 lobe	 lesion	 is	 strikingly
illustrated	 by	 Eslinger	 and	 Damasio’s	 patient	 “EVR”	 (Box	 7.2).	 Following
frontal	lobotomy,	patients	often	developed	indifference,	lack	of	insight,	euphoria,
ineptitude,	 but	 without
tactlessness,	 and	
emotional	 outbursts,	
demonstrable	memory	or	cognitive	deficits.

social	

BOX	7.2

Frontal	Lobe	Dysfunction

At	the	age	of	35,	a	previously	healthy	patient,	“EVR,”	underwent	removal	of
a	 large	 orbitofrontal	 meningioma.	 Surgical	 recovery	 was	 uneventful,	 and
there	 was	 never	 any	 evidence	 of	 tumor	 recurrence.	 Although	 he	 seemed
superficially	normal,	with	a	verbal	IQ	of	120	and	normal	neuropsychological
testing,	the	patient’s	behavior,	judgment,	and	social	interactions	were	forever
impaired.	 He	 invested	 and	 lost	 his	 life’s	 savings	 in	 an	 ill-advised	 business
venture.	 He	 was	 fired	 from	 a	 succession	 of	 jobs	 because	 of	 tardiness	 and
disorganization.	His	wife	divorced	him,	and,	unemployed,	he	moved	back	in
with	his	parents.	He	required	2	hours	to	prepare	for	work	each	morning.	He
took	job	100	miles	from	his	home	but	was	fired	for	lack	of	punctuality.	He
spent	 entire	 days	 shaving	 and	 washing	 his	 hair.	 Minor	 decisions	 were
scrutinized	 ad	 infinitum,	 including	 simple	 purchases	 and	 deciding	 where	 to
eat.	He	collected	outdated	and	useless	items	(see	also	Volle	et	al.),	including
dead	houseplants,	old	phone	books,	6	broken	fans,	5	broken	television	sets,	3
bags	of	empty	orange	juice	cans,	15	cigarette	lighters,	and	countless	stacks	of
old	 newspapers.	 The	 New	 York	 Times	 provided	 a	 poignant	 and	 very
personalized	 description	 of	 the	 personality	 changes	 and	 other	 effects	 of
frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction	 in	 When	 Illness	 Makes	 a	 Spouse	 a	 Stranger	 (D.
Grady,	May	5,	2012),	an	article	on	frontotemporal	dementia.

FRONTAL	MOTOR	AREAS

The	motor	areas	of	the	frontal	lobe	include	the	primary	motor	cortex	(area	4)	as
well	 as	 the	 premotor	 and	 SMAs.	 The	 motor	 cortex	 contains	 the	 large	 motor
neurons	 (Betz	 cells)	 that	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 corticospinal	 and	 corticobulbar	 tracts.
The	 premotor	 cortex	 lies	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 primary	 cortex,	 squeezed	 between
the	precentral	gyrus	and	the	posterior	border	of	the	prefrontal	area	(area	6);	it	is
involved	in	the	planning	and	execution	of	movements,	particularly	sequences	of
movements	(the	basis	for	Luria’s	hand	sequence	or	fist-edge-palm	test,	Chapter
8).	 It	 receives	 afferents	 from	 other	 areas	 of	 the	 cortex,	 including	 the	 sensory
cortex	and	elsewhere	in	the	frontal	cortex,	and	projects	to	the	motor	cortex	and
the
the	 motor	
extrapyramidal	system.

thalamus.	 Some	 fibers	 descend	 and	 make	 up	 part	 of	

The	 SMA	 consists	 of	 areas	 of	 cortex	 lying	 on	 the	 medial	 aspect	 of	 the
hemisphere	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 primary	 motor	 cortex	 at	 the	 posterior	 medial
aspect	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 (area	 6).	 The	 SMA	 functions	 in	 planning	 motor
movements,	 such	 as	 a	 sequence	 of	 actions	 provided	 from	 memory.	 The	 SMA
areas	 are	 crucial	 for	 the	 temporal	 organization	 of	 multiple	 movements.	 In
animals,	 lesions	 of	 the	 SMA	 impair	 memory-based	 sequencing	 of	 movements.
The	 SMA	 also	 coordinates	 movements	 between	 the	 hands,	 and	 lesions	 in	 this
area	may	cause	the	alien	hand	syndrome	(see	Chapter	10).	Lesions	of	the	more
anterior	 and	 medial	 parts	 of	 the	 motor	 cortex	 cause	 less	 paralysis	 and	 more
spasticity	and	may	allow	the	emergence	of	primitive	reflexes,	such	as	grasping
and	groping	responses.

The	syndrome	of	the	SMA	is	not	well	recognized	and	can	easily	be	confused
with	corticospinal	weakness.	Patients	have	reduced	spontaneous	movements	and
difficulty	 in	 performing	 volitional	 motor	 acts	 to	 command	 in	 the	 contralateral
limbs,	 although	 the	 limbs	 function	 normally	 in	 automatic	 motor	 activities,	 for
example,	dressing.	Hemineglect	and	apraxia	may	also	be	present,	but	the	deficit
results	from	a	frontal	lobe	rather	than	a	parietal	lobe	lesion.	Unilateral	prefrontal
lesions	may	cause	imitation	and	utilization	behavior	(Chapter	8).

Seizures	may	arise	from	the	frontal	lobe	and	may	either	be	simple	partial	or
complex	partial.	Seizures	arising	from	the	motor	cortex	typically	produce	focal
Jacksonian	 epilepsy	 of	 the	 contralateral	 limbs.	 Partial	 complex	 seizures	 arising
from	the	frontal	lobe	resemble	those	arising	from	the	temporal	lobe	but	are	more
bizarre	and	likely	to	be	confused	with	pseudoseizures.	Seizures	arising	from	the
SMA	 often	 involve	 tonic	 posturing	 that	 is	 either	 unilateral	 or	 asymmetric	 and

often	 accompanied	 by	 facial	 grimacing	 and	 automatisms,	 as	 well	 as	 vocal
symptoms	 such	 as	 laughing	 or	 speech	 arrest.	 Seizures	 arising	 from	 the
orbitofrontal	 or	 frontopolar	 area	 often	 involve	 pedaling,	 thrashing	 movements
easily	confused	with	pseudoseizures.	Seizures	arising	from	the	DLPFC	are	often
adversive,	with	turning	of	the	head	and	eyes	to	the	contralateral,	less	commonly
ipsilateral,	side.

The	frontal	eye	fields	lie	in	the	middle	frontal	gyrus	and	control	movement	of
the	 eyes	 to	 the	 contralateral	 side.	 Destructive	 lesions	 in	 this	 area	 cause	 gaze
deviation	 ipsilaterally,	 whereas	 epileptiform	 activity	 causes	 gaze	 deviation
contralaterally.	 Gaze	 palsies	 and	 gaze	 deviations	 are	 discussed	 more	 fully	 in
Chapter	 14.	 The	 motor	 speech	 areas	 (Broca’s	 area)	 lie	 in	 the	 inferior	 frontal
gyrus	anterior	to	the	motor	strip.	Lesions	in	this	area	cause	aphasia	(Chapter	9).
Lesions	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 may	 also	 cause	 incontinence,	 particularly	 with
involvement	of	the	paracentral	lobule,	or	a	gait	disorder	(Chapter	44).

THE	PARIETAL	LOBES

Chapter	6	discusses	the	gross	anatomy	of	the	parietal	lobe.	The	primary	sensory
(somesthetic)	cortex	(S1;	areas	3,	1,	and	2)	occupies	all	but	the	lowest	part	of	the
postcentral	gyrus,	continuing	onto	the	medial	surface	into	the	adjoining	part	of
the	 paracentral	 lobule.	 Recent	 work	 suggests	 that	 the	 designation	 primary
sensory	 cortex	 should	 be	 restricted	 to	 area	 3.	 The	 secondary	 somatosensory
cortex	(S2)	lies	in	the	parietal	operculum	adjacent	to	the	lower	portion	of	S1	near
the	 sylvian	 fissure.	 In	 the	 depth	 of	 the	 central	 sulcus,	 area	 3	 abuts	 area	 4.	 The
postcentral	 cortex	 is	 homotypical	 (granular)	 cortex	 with	 six	 well-developed
layers.	 The	 interparietal	 sulcus	 extends	 posteriorly	 from	 the	 midpoint	 of	 the
postcentral	gyrus	and	divides	the	remainder	of	the	parietal	lobe	into	the	superior
parietal	 lobule	 above	 and	 the	 inferior	 parietal	 lobule	 below.	 Area	 5a—the
preparietal	area,	in	the	upper	part	of	the	parietal	lobe	just	posterior	to	area	2—
contains	large,	deep	pyramidal	cells,	some	as	large	as	the	smaller	Betz	cells	in
area	4.	Area	5b,	the	superior	parietal	area,	occupies	a	large	part	of	the	superior
parietal	lobule,	extending	over	the	medial	surface	of	the	hemisphere	to	include
the	precuneus.	Area	7,	the	inferior	parietal	area,	constitutes	the	major	portion	of
the	 parietal	 lobule;	 it	 includes	 the	 supramarginal	 and	 angular	 gyri	 and	 receives
many	 afferents	 from	 the	 occipital	 lobe.	 S1	 receives	 enormous	 projections	 from
the	 ventral	 posterolateral	 and	 ventral	 posteromedial	 nuclei	 of	 the	 thalamus.

These	 relay	 impulses	 from	 the	 spinothalamic	 tracts,	 medial	 lemnisci,	 and
trigeminothalamic	 tracts,	 which	 send	 fibers	 through	 the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the
internal	capsule	to	the	postcentral	gyrus.	Body	regions	are	represented	in	specific
parts	 of	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus;	 the	 pattern	 roughly	 parallels	 the	 motor
homunculus	 localization	 of	 the	 precentral	 gyrus	 but	 is	 not	 as	 well	 defined
(Figure	6.7).	Cortical	sensory	functions	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	35.	The
superior	and	inferior	parietal	lobules	are	sensory	association	areas.	They	connect
with	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus	 by	 means	 of	 the	 association	 pathways,	 and	 they
receive	fibers	from	the	nuclei	lateralis	dorsalis	and	posterior.

The	 functions	 of	 the	 parietal	 lobe	 are	 essentially	 those	 of	 reception,
correlation,	analysis,	synthesis,	integration,	interpretation,	and	elaboration	of	the
primary	sensory	impulses	received	from	the	thalamus.	S1	is	the	initial	reception
center	 for	 afferent	 impulses,	 especially	 for	 tactile,	 pressure,	 and	 position
sensations.	 It	 is	 necessary	 for	 discriminating	 finer,	 more	 critical	 grades	 of
sensation	and	for	recognizing	intensity.	Stimulation	produces	paresthesias	on	the
opposite	 side	 of	 the	 body,	 with	 tactile	 and	 pressure	 sensations,	 numbness,
tingling,	 sensations	 of	 constriction	 and	 movement,	 and	 occasional	 thermal
sensations,	 but	 rarely	 pain.	 Such	 sensations	 may	 precede	 or	 accompany
Jacksonian	convulsions	as	part	of	a	seizure;	the	spread	of	the	sensory	disturbance
follows	the	same	general	pattern	as	in	the	motor	area.

The	sensory	association	areas	are	essential	for	the	synthesis	and	interpretation
of	impulses,	appreciation	of	similarities	and	differences,	interpretation	of	spatial
relationships	 and	 two-dimensional	 qualities,	 evaluations	 of	 variations	 in	 form
and	 weight,	 and	 localization	 of	 sensation.	 Overactivity	 of	 these	 areas	 causes
minimal	 symptoms,	 for	 example,	 vague	 paresthesias	 or	 hyperesthesias	 on	 the
opposite	 side	 of	 the	 body.	 Destructive	 lesions	 affect	 mainly	 the	 gnostic
(knowing,	 recognition)	 aspects	 of	 sensation.	 Simple	 appreciation	 of	 primary
sensations	 remains,	 but	 associative	 functions	 are	 impaired.	 These	 deficits	 are
discussed	 further	 in	 Chapters	 10	 and	 35.	 Parietal	 lobe	 lesions	 produce
abnormalities	 of	 higher-level	 sensory	 functions,	 which	 require	 association
cortex:	 stereognosis,	 graphesthesia,	
tactile
localization.	Patients	with	nondominant	parietal	lobe	lesions	may	display	various
forms	 of	 apraxia,	 hemi-inattention,	 hemineglect,	 and	 denial	 of	 disability,
culminating	 in	 the	 striking	 syndrome	 of	 anosognosia,	 in	 which	 patients	 may
deny	 owning	 their	 contralateral	 limbs	 (see	 Chapter	 10).	 The	 parietal	 lobes,
through	 connections	 with	
integrate
somatosensory	with	visual	and	auditory	information.

two-point	 discrimination,	 and	

temporal	 and	 occipital	

lobes,	

the	

The	 inferior	 parietal	 lobule—especially	 the	 angular	 and	 supramarginal	 gyri
and	 the	 areas	 in	 close	 proximity	 to	 the	 occipital	 and	 temporal	 lobes—is
functionally	 associated	 with	 the	 visual	 and	 auditory	 systems.	 The	 angular	 and
supramarginal	 gyri	 of	 the	 dominant	 hemisphere	 are	 important	 in	 relation	 to
language	 and	 related	 functions.	 Lesions	 in	 these	 areas	 may	 cause	 aphasia,
agnosia,	 and	 apraxia;	 these	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 10.	 The	 optic	 radiations
course	through	the	deep	parietal	lobe	to	reach	the	visual	cortex.	A	deeply	placed
parietal	lesion	may	cause	either	an	inferior	quadrantic	or	hemianopic	visual	field
defect.	 Parietal	 lesions	 have	 been	 reported	 to	 cause	 contralateral	 muscular
atrophy	 and	 trophic	 skin	 changes.	 Deafferentation	 may	 produce	 hypotonia,
slowness	 of	 movement—especially	 of	 the	 proximal	 muscles—ataxia,	 updrift
(Figure	 27.59),	 and	 pseudoathetoid	 movements	 (sensory	 wandering)	 of	 the
opposite	side	of	the	body	(Figure	30.6).	Incoordination	of	movement	because	of
sensory	 loss	 from	 a	 parietal	 lobe	 lesion	 may	 mimic	 cerebellar	 ataxia
(pseudocerebellar	 syndrome).	 Dystonia	 has	 also	 been	 described.	 Focal	 motor
seizures	 and	 partial	 paralysis	 involving	 the	 contralateral	 parts	 of	 the	 body	 can
occur	with	parietal	lesions.	These	may	be	due	to	impaired	communication	with
areas	 6	 and	 4,	 or	 they	 may	 indicate	 that	 the	 parietal	 lobes	 also	 possess	 some
motor	function.

THE	OCCIPITAL	LOBES

Chapter	 6	 discusses	 the	 gross	 anatomy	 of	 the	 occipital	 lobe,	 which	 is	 more
nearly	 a	 structural	 and	 functional	 entity	 than	 the	 other	 cerebral	 lobes;	 all	 of	 its
functions	are	concerned	either	directly	or	indirectly	with	vision.	It	is	composed
of	 Brodmann’s	 areas	 17,	 18,	 and	 19.	 The	 primary	 visual	 cortex	 (area	 17)	 is
located	 on	 the	 lips	 of	 the	 calcarine	 fissure	 and	 adjacent	 portions	 of	 the	 cuneus
above	and	the	lingual	gyrus	below.	The	cortex	is	granular	in	type	and	extremely
thin.	Layer	4	is	relatively	thick	with	a	prominent	outer	band	of	Baillarger	(line	or
band	of	Gennari),	which	is	visible	grossly	and	gives	the	area	its	designation	of
striate	 cortex.	 Area	 17	 receives	 the	 geniculocalcarine	 projection,	 which	 is
retinotopically	 organized	 (see	 Chapter	 13).	 The	 striate	 area	 receives	 primary
visual	impressions:	color,	size,	form,	motion,	and	illumination.	Ictal	activity	or
electrical	 stimulation	 of	 the	 calcarine	 cortex	 produces	 unformed	 visual
hallucinations,	such	 as	scotomas	and	flashes	of	light.	Destructive	lesions	cause
defects	in	the	visual	field	supplied	by	the	affected	areas.	The	most	familiar	and

classical	deficit	is	a	congruous,	contralateral,	macular-sparing	hemianopia	with	a
preserved	optokinetic	nystagmus	response.

The	 parastriate	 region	 (area	 18)	 and	 the	 peristriate	 region	 (area	 19)	 receive
and	 interpret	 impulses	 from	 area	 17.	 Areas	 18	 and	 19	 are	 visual	 association
cortex,	 essential	 for	 the	 recognition	 and	 identification	 of	 objects.	 The	 visual
association	cortex	projects	to	the	angular	gyrus,	lateral	and	medial	temporal	gyri,
the	 frontal	 lobe,	 the	 limbic	 system,	 and	 to	 corresponding	 areas	 in	 the	 opposite
hemisphere	 through	 the	 splenium	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum.	 Interruption	 of	 these
pathways	 leads	 to	 disconnection	 syndromes	 (see	 Chapter	 10).	 There	 are	 other
extrastriate	 visual	 areas	 beyond	 areas	 18	 and	 19.	 Some	 cortical	 areas	 mediate
special	visual	functions.	The	posterior	parts	of	the	lingual	and	fusiform	gyri	are
important	for	color	vision,	the	posterior	portion	of	the	middle	temporal	gyrus	is
involved	in	recognition	of	movement	(motor	vision),	and	the	fusiform	gyrus	is
important	in	facial	recognition.

Visual	 memories	 are	 stored	 in	 the	 association	 cortex.	 It	 functions	 in	 more
complex	 visual	 recognition	 and	 perception,	 revisualization,	 visual	 association,
and	spatial	orientation.	The	association	cortex	is	thicker	than	the	striate	cortex,
with	an	increase	in	the	size	and	number	of	cells	in	layer	3,	but	almost	complete
absence	 of	 large	 cells	 in	 layer	 5;	 no	 line	 of	 Gennari	 is	 present.	 Stimulation	 of
these	regions	causes	formed	visual	hallucinations.	Destruction	causes	difficulty
with	 ocular	 fixation	 and	 with	 maintaining	 visual	 attention,	 loss	 of	 stereoscopic
vision,	 impairment	 of	 visual	 memory,	 difficulty	 with	 accurate	 localization	 and
discernment	of	objects,	and	disturbances	in	the	spatial	orientation	of	the	visual
image,	especially	for	distance.	There	is	loss	of	ability	to	discriminate	size,	shape,
and	color.	The	patient	may	lose	the	ability	to	localize	either	himself	or	objects	in
space,	 and	 he	 may	 have	 impaired	 perception	 of	 visual	 spatial	 relationships.
There	may	be	distortion	of	objects	(metamorphopsia).

Lesions	 involving	 the	 occipital	 lobes	 bilaterally	 result	 in	 various	 degrees	 of
visual	 loss,	 often	 accompanied	 by	 other	 deficits	 (cortical	 blindness,	 biposterior
syndrome).	 Adjacent	 parietal	 and	 temporal	 cortical	 areas	 are	 often	 involved	 as
well.	 There	 may	 be	 bilateral	 hemianopia	 with	 or	 without	 macular	 sparing,
bilateral	 superior	 or	 bilateral	 inferior	 altitudinal	 hemianopia,	 or	 bilateral
homonymous	 scotomas.	 Pupillary	 light	 reflexes	 are	 preserved.	 Patients	 with
bilateral	 occipital	 or	 occipitoparietal	 lesions	 may	 have	 other	 defects	 of	 higher
cortical	function,	such	as	color	agnosia,	prosopagnosia,	and	simultanagnosia	(see
Chapter	10).	 In	 addition,	 patients	 may	 lack	 awareness	 of	 their	 deficit,	 or	 they
may	 have	 awareness	 but	 deny	 that	 the	 deficit	 exists	 (Anton’s	 or	 denial	 visual

hallucination	 syndrome;	 cortical	 blindness;	 anosognosia	 for	 blindness).	 The
patient	 may	 behave	 as	 if	 he	 can	 see—try	 to	 walk,	 bump	 into	 objects,	 and	 fall
over	things.	There	is	the	belief	that	the	patient	confabulates	or	“hallucinates	his
environment.”	 Cortical	 blindness	 may	 occur	 after	 stroke,	 cardiorespiratory
arrest,	head	trauma,	bacterial	meningitis,	progressive	multifocal	encephalopathy,
and	 even	 as	 a	 postictal	 phenomenon.	 The	 occipital	 lobe	 is	 also	 important	 in
ocular	motility.	The	central	control	of	eye	movements	is	discussed	in	the	chapter
on	the	ocular	motor	nerves	(see	Chapter	14).	Balint’s	(Balint-Holmes)	syndrome
consists	 of	 “psychic”	 impairment	 of	 visual	 fixation	 and	 alterations	 in	 visual
attention.	The	patient	has	an	inability	to	reach	for	objects	using	visual	guidance
despite	 normal	 visual	 acuity	 and	 intact	 visual	 fields	 (optic	 ataxia)	 and	 an
inability	to	voluntarily	direct	gaze	(optic	apraxia).	The	patient	can	see	only	one
object	 and	 cannot	 move	 his	 eyes	 from	 it,	 but	 he	 cannot	 reach	 out	 and	 take	 it.
Balint’s	 syndrome	 is	 typically	 seen	 in	 patients	 with	 bilateral	 parietooccipital
lesions.	 Recovery	 from	 cortical	 blindness	 typically	 evolves	 through	 a	 stage	 of
visual	agnosia	(see	Chapter	10).

THE	TEMPORAL	LOBES

The	 temporal	 lobe	 includes	 the	 superior,	 middle	 and	 inferior	 temporal,	 lateral
occipitotemporal,	 fusiform,	 lingual,	 parahippocampal,	 and	 hippocampal	 gyri.
Heschl’s	gyri	and	the	planum	temporale	lie	on	the	superior	surface.	The	superior
temporal	 gyrus	 subserves	 auditory	 and	 language	 functions.	 The	 middle	 and
inferior	 gyri	 receive	 abundant	 projections	 from	 the	 occipital	 lobe	 and	 serve	 to
integrate	 vision	 with	 temporal	 lobe	 auditory	 and	 language	 functions.	 The
hippocampal	formation	is	a	center	for	learning	and	memory.	There	are	abundant
connections	between	the	temporal	lobe	and	the	limbic	system.

The	auditory	radiations	run	from	the	medial	geniculate	body	to	the	auditory
cortex	(areas	41	and	42)	in	the	superior	temporal	gyrus.	Area	41	is	composed	of
granular	cortex	similar	to	that	in	the	parietal	and	occipital	regions;	area	42	has
large	pyramidal	cells	in	layer	3.	Hearing	is	bilaterally	represented	in	the	temporal
lobes,	 although	 there	 is	 a	 contralateral	 predominance.	 Nearby	 areas	 in	 the
superior	 temporal	 gyrus	 allow	 for	 the	 differentiation	 and	 the	 interpretation	 of
sounds.	 The	 superior	 temporal	 gyrus	 may	 also	 receive	 vestibular	 impulses.
Electrical	stimulation	of	the	auditory	area	causes	vague	auditory	hallucinations
(tinnitus,	 sensations	 of	 roaring	 and	 buzzing),	 and	 stimulation	 of	 adjacent	 areas

causes	 vertigo	 and	 a	 sensation	 of	 unsteadiness.	 Because	 hearing	 is	 bilaterally
represented,	unilateral	destruction	of	the	auditory	cortex	does	not	cause	deafness,
although	there	may	be	difficulty	with	sound	localization	and	a	bilateral	dulling
of	 auditory	 acuity.	 Sophisticated	 audiometric	 testing	 may	 reveal	 mild	 hearing
defects	in	the	contralateral	ear	in	a	patient	with	a	unilateral	temporal	lobe	lesion.
Bilateral	 temporal	 lobe	 destruction	 may	 cause	 deafness.	 Patients	 with	 cortical
deafness	may	seem	unaware	of	their	deficit	similar	to	the	way	in	which	patients
with	 Anton’s	 syndrome	 are	 unaware	 of	 their	 blindness.	 Temporal	 lobe	 lesions
that	do	not	disturb	hearing	may	cause	auditory	distortions	and	illusions.	Auditory
hallucinations	 may	 also	 occur,	 especially	 in	 temporal	 lobe	 epilepsy,	 sometimes
with	accompanying	visual,	olfactory,	and	gustatory	hallucinations.	Involvement
of	the	temporal	lobe	vestibular	areas	may	cause	difficulty	with	equilibrium	and
balance.	 A	 destructive	 lesion	 in	 the	 posterior	 superior	 temporal	 area	 of	 the
dominant	hemisphere	causes	Wernicke’s	aphasia	(see	Chapter	9).

Lesions	 involving	 the	 temporal	 lobe	 geniculocalcarine	 pathways	 (Meyer’s
loop)	may	have	contralateral	upper	visual	field	defects.	Bilateral	ablation	of	the
temporal	lobes,	particularly	the	anterior	regions,	in	experimental	animals	causes
a	 characteristic	 constellation	 of	 abnormalities	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 Kluver-Bucy
syndrome.	Affected	animals	have	psychic	blindness	or	visual	agnosia.	They	can
see	 objects	 but	 do	 not	 recognize	 them	 until	 they	 are	 explored	 and	 identified
nonvisually,	 particularly	 orally.	 There	 is	 loss	 of	 fear	 and	 rage	 reactions,
hypersexuality,	bulimia,	and	severe	memory	loss.	There	is	an	excessive	tendency
to	 attend	 and	 react	 to	 every	 visual	 stimulus.	 Partial	 forms	 of	 Kluver-Bucy
syndrome	 occur	 in	 patients	 with	 temporal	 lobe	 lesions,	 but	 the	 complete
syndrome	occurs	only	rarely.

Patients	 with	 temporal	 lobe	 lesions	 may	 have	 visual	 hallucinations	 and
perversions.	 These	 occur	 most	 often	 during	 complex	 partial	 (partial	 complex,
temporal	 lobe,	 psychomotor)	 seizures	 (CPS).	 The	 visual	 hallucinations	 in
temporal	 lobe	 CPS	 are	 complex	 and	 often	 include	 the	 patient	 (autoscopy).
Autoscopy	has	been	invoked	as	an	explanation	for	some	of	the	phenomenology
of	 near	 death	 experiences.	 Visual	 perceptions	 may	 be	 distorted	 with	 objects
appearing	too	large	(macropsia)	or	too	small	(micropsia),	or	too	near	or	too	far
away.	 The	 complex	 hallucinations	 may	 have	 an	 auditory	 component;	 the
hallucinated	 figure	 may	 speak.	 Electrical	 stimulation	 of	 the	 temporal	 lobe	 may
cause	 hallucinations,	 illusions,	 automatisms,	 and	 emotional	 responses,	 and	 call
forth	memories.	Hughlings	Jackson	described	seizures	characterized	by	olfactory
and	 visual	 hallucinations,	 dreamy	 states	 and	 reminiscences,	 automatisms,	 and

gastric	and	autonomic	symptoms.	He	observed	that	these	occurred	with	lesions
involving	 the	 medial	 temporal	 lobe	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 uncus	 and	 referred	 to
them	as	uncinate	fits.	Currently,	the	term	uncinate	fits	is	generally	used	only	for
those	CPS	that	include	olfactory	hallucinations.	CPS	may	include	some	or	all	of
the	 following:	 automatisms;	 illusions	 and	 hallucinations	 (visual,	 auditory,
olfactory,	 or	 gustatory);	 and	 pilomotor	 erection	 (gooseflesh).	 Automatisms	 are
common	 and	 consist	 of	 brief	 or	 prolonged	 inappropriate	 but	 seemingly
purposeful	 automatic	 movements	 such	 as	 chewing,	 swallowing,	 and	 lip
smacking.	 There	 is	 alteration	 of	 consciousness,	 usually	 with	 amnesia	 for	 the
period	of	the	event.	Disorders	of	recognition	and	recall	are	common.	Déjà	vu	(Fr.
“already	seen”)	refers	to	the	delusion	or	misperception	that	something	new	and
novel	 has	 been	 seen	 or	 experienced	 before.	 There	 are	 many	 variations	 on	 the
theme	of	déjà,	of	something	new	seeming	strangely	familiar	(déjà	pensée,	déjà
vacu,	 and	 others),	 but	 déjà	 vu	 is	 typically	 used	 to	 include	 all	 of	 them.	 The
converse,	 jamais	 vu,	 is	 the	 misperception	 or	 illusion	 that	 something	 familiar	 is
strange	 or	 new.	 Tornado	 epilepsy	 refers	 to	 vertigo	 due	 to	 involvement	 of	 the
vestibular	cortex	in	a	seizure	discharge.

CPS	 may	 include	 psychic	 manifestations,	 such	 as	 anxiety,	 fear,	 rage,
obsessive	thoughts,	compulsive	speech	or	actions,	or	feelings	of	unreality.	These
phenomena	 are	 associated	 with	 abnormal	 electrical	 discharges	 or	 lesions
involving	 the	 anterior	 and	 medial	 portions	 of	 the	 temporal	 lobes,	 including	 the
hippocampal	gyrus,	uncus,	amygdaloid	complex,	parahippocampal	gyrus,	or	the
connections	of	these	structures.	Impulses	from	these	structures	may	be	relayed	to
the	 thalamus,	 hypothalamus,	 or	 mesencephalic	 reticular	 formation.	 Some
instances	 of	 CPS	 may	 also	 involve	 the	 insula,	 posterior	 orbital	 surface	 of	 the
frontal	 lobe,	 basal	 ganglia,	 frontal	 association	 areas,	 or	 contiguous	 structures.
Surgical	 extirpation	 of	 abnormal	 foci	 may	 be	 curative.	 A	 syndrome	 similar	 to
that	 described	 by	 Kluver	 and	 Bucy	 in	 animals	 has	 been	 seen	 in	 humans	 when
temporal	lobe	surgery	was	attempted	bilaterally.	A	variety	of	tools	are	currently
used	 to	 localize	 and	 characterize	 abnormal	 seizure	 foci,	 including	 imaging—
MRI,	 PET,	 and	 single	 photon	 emission	 computed	
tomography—and
electroencephalographic	recordings,	both	from	the	scalp	and	intracranially.

Neoplasms	of	the	temporal	lobe	are	second	only	to	those	of	the	frontal	lobes
in	 the	 frequency	 with	 which	 they	 cause	 mental	 symptoms.	 These	 may	 include
the	following:	psychic	manifestations	varying	from	vague	personality	changes	to
frank	 behavioral	 disturbances;	 emotional	 abnormalities	 such	 as	 anxiety,
depression,	 fear,	 and	 anger;	 paranoia;	 memory	 defects;	 learning	 and	 cognitive

disabilities;	and	apathy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alexander	 MP,	 Stuss	 DT.	 Disorders	 of	 frontal	 lobe	 functioning.	 Semin	 Neurol

2000;20:427–437.

Bannur	 U,	 Rajshekhar	 V.	 Post	 operative	 supplementary	 motor	 area	 syndrome:

clinical	features	and	outcome.	Br	J	Neurosurg	2000;14:204–210.

Bell	B,	Lin	JJ,	Seidenberg	M,	et	al.	The	neurobiology	of	cognitive	disorders	in

temporal	lobe	epilepsy.	Nat	Rev	Neurol	2011;7:154–164.

Benson	 DF,	 Stuss	 DT,	 Naeser	 MA,	 et	 al.	 The	 long-term	 effects	 of	 prefrontal

leukotomy.	Arch	Neurol	1981;38:165–169.

Berthoz	 S,	 Armony	 JL,	 Blair	 RJ,	 et	 al.	 An	 fMRI	 study	 of	 intentional	 and
unintentional	 (embarrassing)	 violations	 of	 social	 norms.	 Brain	 2002;125(Pt
8):1696–1708.

Bisley	JW,	Goldberg	ME.	Attention,	intention,	and	priority	in	the	parietal	lobe.

Annu	Rev	Neurosci	2010;33:1–21.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Carr	VA,	Rissman	J,	Wagner	AD.	Imaging	the	human	medial	temporal	lobe	with

high-resolution	fMRI.	Neuron	2010;	65:298–308.

Chatterjee	A,	Southwood	MH.	Cortical	blindness	and	visual	imagery.	Neurology

1995;45(12):2189–2195.

Damasio	 H,	 Grabowski	 T,	 Frank	 R,	 et	 al.	 The	 return	 of	 Phineas	 Gage:	 clues
about	 the	 brain	 from	 the	 skull	 of	 a	 famous	 patient.	 Science	1994;264:1102–
1105.

Dolan	RJ,	Bench	CJ,	Liddle	PF,	et	al.	Dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	dysfunction
in	the	major	psychoses;	symptom	or	disease	specificity?	J	Neurol	Neurosurg
Psychiatry	1993;56:1290–1294.

El-Hai	J.	The	Lobotomist:	A	Maverick	Medical	Genius	and	His	Tragic	Quest	to

Rid	the	World	of	Mental	Illness.	Hoboken:	John	Wiley,	2005.

Eslinger	PJ,	Damasio	AR.	Severe	disturbance	of	higher	cognition	after	bilateral

frontal	lobe	ablation:	patient	EVR.	Neurology	1985;35:1731–1741.

Filley	 CM.	 Clinical	 neurology	 and	 executive	 dysfunction.	 Semin	 Speech	 Lang

2000;21:95–108.

Fogassi	L,	Luppino	G.	Motor	functions	of	the	parietal	lobe.	Curr	Opin	Neurobiol

2005;15:626–631.

Fraser	 JA,	 Newman	 NJ,	 Biousse	 V.	 Disorders	 of	 the	 optic	 tract,	 radiation,	 and

occipital	lobe.	Handb	Clin	Neurol	2011;102:205–221.

Freund	HJ.	Somatosensory	and	motor	disturbances	in	patients	with	parietal	lobe

lesions.	Adv	Neurol	2003;93:179–193.

Gaber	 TA.	 Rehabilitation	 of	 cortical	 blindness	 secondary	

to	 stroke.

NeuroRehabilitation	2010;27:321–325.

Ginat	DT.	Frontal	lobotomy.	Neurology	2012;79:1830.
Godefroy	 O.	 Frontal	 syndrome	 and	 disorders	 of	 executive	 functions.	 J	 Neurol

2003;250:1–6.

Godefroy	O,	Brigitte	A,	Philippe	A,	et	al.	Frontal	dysexecutive	syndromes.	Rev

Neurol	(Paris)	2004;160:899–909.

Goldberg	 E,	 Bougakov	 D.	 Neuropsychologic	 assessment	 of	 frontal	 lobe

dysfunction.	Psychiatr	Clin	North	Am	2005;28:567–569.

Goldenberg	G,	Oder	W,	Spatt	J,	et	al.	Cerebral	correlates	of	disturbed	executive
function	 and	 memory	 in	 survivors	 of	 severe	 closed	 head	 injury:	 a	 SPECT
study.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1992;55:362–368.

Haas	LF.	Phineas	Gage	and	the	science	of	brain	localisation.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg

Psychiatry	2001;71:761.

Joseph	JM,	Louis	S.	Transient	ictal	cortical	blindness	during	middle	age.	A	case

report	and	review	of	the	literature.	J	Neuroophthalmol	1995;15:39–42.

Kaga	 K,	 Nakamura	 M,	 Takayama	 Y,	 et	 al.	 A	 case	 of	 cortical	 deafness	 and

anarthria.	Acta	Otolaryngol	2004;124:202–205.

Kaufman	LD,	Pratt	J,	Levine	B,	et	al.	Antisaccades:	a	probe	into	the	dorsolateral
prefrontal	 cortex	 in	 Alzheimer’s	 disease.	 A	 critical	 review.	 J	 Alzheimers	 Dis
2010;19:781–793.

Kroger	 JK,	 Sabb	 FW,	 Fales	 CL,	 et	 al.	 Recruitment	 of	 anterior	 dorsolateral
prefrontal	 cortex	 in	 human	 reasoning:	 a	 parametric	 study	 of	 relational
complexity.	Cereb	Cortex	2002;12:477–485.

Leiguarda	RC.	Apraxias	and	the	lateralization	of	motor	functions	in	the	human

parietal	lobe.	Adv	Neurol	2003;93:235–248.

Manes	 F,	 Sahakian	 B,	 Clark	 L,	 et	 al.	 Decision-making	 processes	 following

damage	to	the	prefrontal	cortex.	Brain	2002;125	(Pt	3):624–639.

Mataro	 M,	 Jurado	 MA,	 Garcia-Sanchez	 C,	 et	 al.	 Long-term	 effects	 of	 bilateral
frontal	 brain	 lesion:	 60	 years	 after	 injury	 with	 an	 iron	 bar.	 Arch	 Neurol
2001;58:1139–1142.

McGeoch	 PD,	 Brang	 D,	 Song	 T,	 et	 al.	 Xenomelia:	 a	 new	 right	 parietal	 lobe

syndrome.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2011;82:1314–1319.

Mega	 MS,	 Cummings	 JL.	 Frontal-subcortical	 circuits	 and	 neuropsychiatric

disorders.	J	Neuropsychiatry	Clin	Neurosci	1994;6:358–370.

Mirsky	 JB,	 Heuer	 HW,	 Jafari	 A,	 et	 al.	 Anti-saccade	 performance	 predicts
executive	 function	 and	 brain	 structure	 in	 normal	 elders.	 Cogn	Behav	Neurol
2011;24:50–58.

Nielsen	JM.	Tornado	epilepsy	simulating	Meniere’s	syndrome:	report	of	4	cases.

Neurology	1959;9:794–796.

Olson	 IR,	 Berryhill	 M.	 Some	 surprising	 findings	 on	 the	 involvement	 of	 the

parietal	lobe	in	human	memory.	Neurobiol	Learn	Mem	2009;91:155–165.

Paradiso	S,	Chemerinski	E,	Yazici	KM,	et	al.	Frontal	lobe	syndrome	reassessed:
comparison	of	patients	with	lateral	or	medial	frontal	brain	damage.	J	 Neurol
Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1999;67:664–667.

Picard	 N,	 Strick	 PL.	 Imaging	 the	 premotor	 areas.	 Curr	 Opin	 Neurobiol

2001;11:663–672.

Pochon	JB,	Levy	R,	Poline	JB,	et	al.	The	role	of	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex	in
the	 preparation	 of	 forthcoming	 actions:	 an	 MRI	 study.	 Cereb	 Cortex
2001;11:260–266.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Rafal	RD.	Oculomotor	functions	of	the	parietal	lobe:	effects	of	chronic	lesions	in

humans.	Cortex	2006;42(5):730–739.

Ratiu	P,	Talos	IF.	Images	in	clinical	medicine.	The	tale	of	Phineas	Gage,	digitally

remastered.	N	Engl	J	Med	2004;351:e21.

Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Shima	 K,	 Tanji	 J.	 Both	 supplementary	 and	 presupplementary	 motor	 areas	 are
crucial	for	the	temporal	organization	of	multiple	movements.	J	Neurophysiol
1998;80:3247–3260.

Spierer	 L,	 Meuli	 R,	 Clarke	 S.	 Extinction	 of	 auditory	 stimuli	 in	 hemineglect:

space	versus	ear.	Neuropsychologia	2007;45:540–551.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Stuss	 DT.	 Traumatic	 brain	 injury:	 relation	 to	 executive	 dysfunction	 and	 the

frontal	lobes.	Curr	Opin	Neurol	2011;24:584–589.

Stuss	DT,	Alexander	MP.	Is	there	a	dysexecutive	syndrome?	Philos	Trans	R	Soc

Lond	B	Biol	Sci	2007;362(1481):901–915.

Sveinbjornsdottir	 S,	 Duncan	 JS.	 Parietal	 and	 occipital	 lobe	 epilepsy:	 a	 review.

Epilepsia	1993;34:493–521.

Tanji	J.	Sequential	organization	of	multiple	movements:	involvement	of	cortical

motor	areas.	Annu	Rev	Neurosci	2001;24:631–651.

Tanji	J,	Shima	K.	Supplementary	motor	cortex	in	organization	of	movement.	Eur

Neurol	1996;36(Suppl	1):13–19.

Thiebaut	 de	Schotten	M,	Dell’Acqua	F,	 Ratiu	P,	et	al.	From	 Phineas	Gage	 and
Monsieur	 Leborgne	 to	 H.M.:	 revisiting	 disconnection	 syndromes.	 Cereb
Cortex	2015;25:4812–4827.

Thimble	 MR.	 Psychopathology	 of	 frontal	 lobe	 syndromes.	 Semin	 Neurol

1990;10:287–294.

Vijayaraghavan	 L,	 Krishnamoorthy	 ES,	 Brown	 RG,	 et	 al.	 Abulia:	 a	 delphi
survey	 of	 British	 neurologists	 and	 psychiatrists.	 Mov	 Disord	 2002;17:1052–
1057.

Volle	E,	Beato	R,	Levy	R,	et	al.	Forced	collectionism	after	orbitofrontal	damage.

Neurology	2002;58:488–490.

Wunderlich	 G,	 Suchan	 B,	 Volkmann	 J,	 et	 al.	 Visual	 hallucinations	 in	 recovery
from	cortical	blindness:	imaging	correlates.	Arch	Neurol	2000;57:561–565.

CHAPTER	8

The	Mental	Status	Examination

The	mental	status	examination	(MSE)	is	used	to	help	determine	if	a	patient	has
neurologic	 disease	 as	 opposed	 to	 psychiatric	 disease,	 to	 identify	 psychiatric
disease	 possibly	 related	 to	 underlying	 neurologic	 disease,	 and	 to	 distinguish
focal	neurologic	deficits	from	diffuse	processes.	Abnormalities	of	mental	status
could	 be	 caused	 by	 a	 focal	 lesion	 such	 as	 a	 stroke	 or	 a	 tumor;	 diffuse	 disease,
such	 as	 metabolic	 encephalopathy;	 or	 a	 degenerative	 process,	 such	 as
Alzheimer’s	disease	(AD).	The	extent	of	the	MSE	should	be	appropriate	for	the
patient	 and	 the	 presenting	 problem.	 The	 psychiatric	 MSE	 is	 longer	 and	 more
involved	than	the	neurologic	MSE;	it	explores	elements	of	psychiatric	function
that	 are	 not	 usually	 included	 in	 a	 neurologic	 mental	 evaluation.	 One	 possible
organization	of	the	psychiatric	interview	and	the	elements	of	the	structured	MSE
is	 shown	 in	 Table	 8.1.	 The	 additional	elements	of	the	psychiatric	mental	status
are	listed	in	Table	8.2.

MENTAL	STATUS	EXAMINATION

The	MSE	begins	with	careful	observation	of	the	patient	during	the	history,	which
may	 aid	 in	 evaluating	 emotional	 status,	 memory,	 intelligence,	 powers	 of
observation,	character,	and	personality.	Observe	the	general	appearance,	attitude,
and	 behavior.	 Note	 the	 patient’s	 manner,	 speech,	 and	 posture,	 and	 look	 for
abnormalities	of	facial	expression.	There	may	be	odd	or	unusual	dress,	gait,	and
mannerisms;	 prominent	 tattoos;	 excessive	 jewelry;	 or	 other	 evidence	 of
eccentricity.	 Unkempt,	 disheveled	 patients	 may	 have	 dementia,	 frontal	 lobe
dysfunction,	 a	 confusional	 state,	 or	 schizophrenia.	 Depression	 and	 substance
abuse	may	lead	to	evidence	of	self-neglect.	Flamboyant	dress	may	suggest	mania
or	hysteria.	Patients	with	visuospatial	disturbances	or	dressing	apraxia	due	to	a
nondominant	parietal	lesion	may	not	be	able	to	get	into	their	clothes	properly.

The	patient	may	show	interest	in	the	interview,	understand	the	situation,	and
be	in	touch	with	the	surroundings	or	may	appear	anxious,	distracted,	confused,
absorbed,	preoccupied,	or	inattentive.	The	patient	may	be	engaged,	cooperative,
and	 pleasant	 or	 indifferent,	 hostile	 or	 belligerent.	 She	 may	 be	 alert,	 even
hypervigilant,	 or	 dull,	 somnolent,	 or	 stuporous.	 Patients	 who	 are	 disinhibited,
aggressive,	 or	 overly	 familiar	 may	 have	 frontal	 lobe	 lesions.	 Silliness	 and
incessant	joking	and	punning	(witzelsucht)	may	occur	with	frontal	lobe	lesions,
as	 may	 apathy	 and	 emotional	 blunting.	 Abnormal	 motor	 activity	 may	 include
restlessness;	repetitive,	stereotypical	movements;	bizarre	mannerisms;	catatonia;
and	posturing.	Inertia	and	psychomotor	slowing	suggest	depression,	dementia,	or
parkinsonism.	 Restlessness,	 agitation,	 and	 hyperactivity	 may	 occur	 with	 mania
or	 drug	 ingestion.	 Patients	 who	 are	 jumpy	 and	 hyperalert	 with	 autonomic
hyperactivity	 may	 be	 in	 drug	 withdrawal.	 Note	 any	 tendency	 to	 emotional
lability	(pseudobulbar	affect)	or	apparent	unconcern	(la	belle	indifference).

If	there	is	any	suggestion	of	abnormality	from	the	interaction	with	the	patient
during	 the	 history-taking	 phase	 of	 the	 encounter,	 then	 a	 more	 formal	 MSE
should	be	carried	out.	The	formal	MSE	is	a	more	structured	process	that	expands
on	the	information	from	the	history.	A	detailed	MSE	should	also	be	carried	out	if
there	 is	 any	 complaint	 from	 the	 patient	 or	 family	 of	 memory	 difficulties,
cognitive	 slippage,	 or	 a	 change	 in	 character,	 behavior,	 or	 personality.	 For
instance,	 formerly	 personable	 and	 affable	 patients	 who	 have	 become	 irascible
and	 contentious	 may	 have	 early	 dementia.	 Other	 reasons	 to	 proceed	 further
include	 symptoms	 that	 are	 vague	 and	 circumstantial,	 known	 or	 suspected
psychiatric	disease	or	substance	abuse,	or	when	other	aspects	of	the	neurologic
investigation	 indicate	 subtle	 or	 covert	 cognitive	 impairment	 could	 be	 present,
such	as	anosmia,	suggesting	a	frontal	lobe	tumor.

TABLE
8.1

Sample	Organization	of	the	Psychiatric	Interview	and	the
Mental	Status	Examination	(MSE)

Interview

MSE

Appearance

Attention	and	concentration

Motoric	behavior

Language

Mood	and	affect

Memory

Verbal	output

Constructions

Thought

Perception

Calculation	skills

Abstraction

Insight	and	judgment

Praxis

A	number	of	short	screening	mental	status	evaluation	instruments	have	been
developed	for	bedside	use.	The	most	widely	used	of	these	is	the	Folstein	Mini–
Mental	State	Examination	(MMSE,	Table	8.3),	but	there	 are	many	others,	such
as	 the	 Cognistat	 and	 the	 Montreal	 Cognitive	 Assessment	 (MoCA)	 battery.	 The
MoCa	 includes	 executive	 function	 testing.	 The	 Blessed	 Short	 Orientation
Memory	Concentration	(SOMC)	test	is	simple,	efficient	and	useful	(Table	8.4).
The	 SOMC	 is	 easier	 to	 incorporate	 into	 the	 other	 elements	 of	 the	 neurologic
exam	 than	 the	 MMSE	 (Video	 8.1).	 The	 MMSE	 takes	 about	 10	 minutes	 to
administer,	 and	 the	 maximum	 score	 is	 30.	 Minimum	 normal	 performance
depends	on	age	and	educational	level,	but	it	has	been	variously	stated	as	between
24	and	27	(Table	8.5).	One	heuristic	is	an	MMSE	score	of	≥27	for	high	school
graduates	and	≥29	for	college	graduates.	A	“one-minute”	MSE	comparing	verbal
fluency	for	semantic	(category)	naming	compared	with	letter	(phonemic)	naming
has	 been	 proposed	 to	 identify	 patients	 with	 probable	 AD.	 In	 one	 study,	 there
were	fewer	scoring	errors	with	the	SOMC	than	with	the	MMSE.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	8.1	Demonstration	of	incorporation	of	the	mental	status	examination	into
the	physical	examination	using	the	Blessed	Orientation	Memory	Concentration

	
	
test.	(Courtesy	Nandedkar	Productions,	LLC,	EMG	on	DVD	Series:	Volume
XIII.)

The	MMSE	has	limitations	in	both	sensitivity	and	specificity	and	should	not
be	used	as	more	than	a	screening	instrument	for	diagnosis.	It	is	affected	not	only
by	age	and	education	but	also	by	gender	and	cultural	background.	A	cutoff	score
of	23	has	a	sensitivity	of	86%	and	a	specificity	of	91%	for	detecting	dementia	in
a	 community	 sample.	 But	 this	 score	 is	 insensitive	 and	 will	 not	 detect	 mild
cognitive	 impairment	 (MCI),	 especially	 in	 well-educated	 or	 high-functioning
patients	 (ceiling	 effect).	 A	 normal	 MMSE	 score	 does	 not	 reliably	 exclude
dementia.	 There	 is	 also	 a	 relatively	 high	 false-positive	 rate.	 The	 MMSE	 is	 not
sensitive	 to	 nondominant	 hemisphere	 or	 frontal	 lobe	 pathology.	 Weaknesses	 of
the	MMSE	are	an	overemphasis	on	language	functions	and	an	underemphasis	on
memory,	 constructions,	 and	 abstract	 reasoning.	 A	 15-item	 extension,	 the
modified	MMSE,	addresses	some	of	the	limitations	of	the	traditional	MMSE.

A	 comparison	 of	 the	 MMSE,	 Abbreviated	 Mental	 Test,	 and	 Short	 Portable
Mental	 Status	 Questionnaire	 showed	 sensitivities	 of	 80%,	 77%,	 and	 70%	 and
specificities	of	98%,	90%,	and	89%,	respectively.	The	Dementia	Rating	Scale,	a
36-item	 measure	 of	 cognition	 with	 five	 subsets,	 takes	 longer	 to	 administer	 but
assesses	 more	 cognitive	 domains	 and	 is	 less	 likely	 to	 miss	 impairments.	 In
patients	 in	 whom	 there	 is	 a	 question	 of	 cognitive	 impairment	 or	 a	 change	 in
behavior	 and	
is	 normal,	 formal
neuropsychological	testing	may	provide	more	detail	regarding	the	mental	status.
Formal	neuropsychological	testing	may	be	useful	in	other	situations	as	well	(Box
8.1).	 The	 MMSE	 score	 in	 normal	 adults	 is	 reasonably	 stable	 over	 time;	 in
patients	with	AD,	it	declines	at	an	average	rate	of	three	points	per	year.

the	 MMSE	 or	 a	 similar	

instrument	

Before	 making	 judgments	 about	 the	 patient’s	 mental	 status,	 especially
memory,	 the	 examiner	 should	 ensure	 that	 the	 patient	 is	 alert,	 cooperative,	 and
attentive	 and	 has	 no	 language	 impairment.	 Mental	 status	 cannot	 be	 adequately
evaluated	in	a	patient	who	is	not	alert	or	is	aphasic.	Evaluation	of	patients	with
altered	consciousness	is	discussed	in	Chapter	51.	To	avoid	upsetting	the	patient,
it	is	desirable,	when	possible,	to	examine	the	mental	functions	unobtrusively	by
asking	 questions	 that	 gently	 probe	 memory,	 intelligence,	 and	 other	 important
functions	without	obvious	inquisition.

TABLE	8.2 Elements	of	the	Psychiatric	Mental	Status	Interview

Attitude

Cooperative,	hostile,	evasive,	threatening,	obsequious,

belligerent

Affect

Range	(expansive,	flat);	appropriateness;	stability	(labile,

shallow);	quality	(silly,	anxious)

Mood

Stated	mood	in	response	to	questions	such	as	“How	are

your	spirits?”	and	“How’s	your	mood	been?”

Behavior

Psychomotor	agitation	or	retardation

Speech

Rate	(rapid,	slow,	pressured);	volume	(loud,	soft,

monotonous,	histrionic);	quality	(fluent,	neologisms,	word
salad)

Thought

Disorganized,	illogical,	loose	associations,	tangential,

process

circumstantial,	flight	of	ideas,	perseveration,	incoherent

Thought

Preoccupations,	obsessions,	ideas	of	reference,	delusions,

content

thought	broadcasting,	suicidal	or	homicidal	ideation

Perception Delusions,	illusions,	hallucinations	(auditory,	visual,	other);
spontaneously	reported	or	in	response	to	direct	question,
patient	attending	or	responding	to	hallucination

TABLE	8.3

Mini-Mental	State	Exam

Maximum
Score

Procedure

Orientation

5

5

3

What	are	the	day,	date,	month,	season,	and	year?

Where	are	we?	Country,	state,	city,	hospital,	floor?

Registration

Name	3	objects:	1	s	to	say	each.	Then	ask	the	patient	to
repeat	all	three.	Give	1	point	for	each	correct	answer.

	
	
5

3

9

Then	repeat	until	all	three	are	registered.

Attention	and	calculation

Serial	7s.	One	point	for	each	correct.	Stop	after	5
answers.	Alternatively,	spell	world	backward.

Recall

Ask	for	the	3	objects	repeated	above.	Give	1	point	for

each	correct.

Language

Name	a	pencil	and	a	watch.	(2	points.)
Repeat	the	following:	“No	its,	ands,	or	buts.”	(1	point.)
Follow	a	three-stage	command:	“Take	a	piece	of	paper	in
your	right	hand,	fold	it	in	half,	and	put	it	on	the	floor.”	(3
points.)

Read	and	obey	the	following:	“Close	your	eyes.”	(1	point.)
Write	a	sentence.	(1	point.)
Copy	design.	(1	point.)

Reprinted	from	Folstein	MF,	Folstein	S,	McHugh	P.	“Mini-mental	state”:	a	practical	method	for
grading	the	cognitive	state	of	patients	for	the	clinician.	J	Psychiatr	Res	1975;12(3):189–198.
Copyright	©	1975	Elsevier.	With	permission.

TABLE
8.4

Short	Orientation-Memory-Concentration	Test	for
Cognitive	Impairment

Ask	the	patient	to:

1.	Name	the	month
2.	Name	the	year
3.	State	the	time	of	day
4.	Remember	the	following	memory	phrase:	“John	Brown,	42	Market

Street,	Chicago”

5.	Count	backward	from	20	to	1
6.	Name	the	months	of	the	year	in	reverse
7.	Recall	the	memory	phrase

See	Katzman	R,	Brown	T,	Fuld	P,	et	al.	Validation	of	a	short	orientation-memory-concentration	test

	
	
	
of	cognitive	impairment.	Am	J	Psychiatry	1983;140:734,	for	expected	scores	in	various	age
groups.

TABLE
8.5

Mean	(Standard	Deviation)	Mini-Mental	State
Examination	Scores

BOX	8.1

Neuropsychological	Testing

Formal	 neuropsychological	 testing	 is	 a	 long	 and	 complex	 undertaking	 that
requires	many	hours	of	patient	and	neuropsychologist	time.	Testing	is	often
done	as	a	battery	of	individual	tests	that	provide	a	structured	assessment	of
mental	 status.	 The	 two	 batteries	 in	 widespread	 use	 are	 the	 Halstead-Reitan
battery	(HRB)	and	the	Luria-Nebraska	neuropsychological	battery	(LNNB).
The	HRB	is	the	most	commonly	used.	It	consists	of	13	subtests	(intelligence,
abstract	reasoning,	tactile	performance,	tactile/visuospatial	memory,	rhythm
perception	 and	 memory,	 speech-sound	 perception,	 psychomotor	 speed,
sequencing	 abilities,	 language	 function,	 sensory	 function,	 primary	 motor
speed,	grip	strength,	and	personality	functioning).	The	HRB	is	not	sensitive
for	 MCI,	 and	 localization	 is	 imprecise.	 The	 LNNB	 grew	 out	 of	 the
pioneering	 work	 of	 Aleksander	 Luria,	 a	 Russian	 neurologist.	 There	 are	 14
scales	 that	 measure	 various	 functions.	 The	 LNNB	 requires	 less	 time	 to
administer	and	score	than	does	the	HRB,	but	reference	values	and	reliability
are	not	as	well	accepted.

The	 Wechsler	 Adult	 Intelligence	 Scale	 (WAIS)	 is	 the	 most	 commonly
performed	intelligence	test	in	adults;	it	provides	summary	measures	of	verbal
IQ,	performance	IQ,	and	full-scale	IQ.	For	each,	the	mean	score	is	100,	and
the	 standard	 deviation	 is	 15.	 Patients	 with	 an	 IQ	 score	 of	 more	 than	 two
standard	 deviations	 below	 the	 mean	 are	 generally	 considered	 to	 have
cognitive	 impairment.	 The	 verbal	 IQ	 score	 has	 been	 thought	 to	 reflect
dominant	 hemisphere	 and	 the	 performance	 IQ	 nondominant	 hemisphere
integrity,	 but	 this	 is	 an	 oversimplification.	 The	 performance	 pattern	 on	 the

WAIS	subtests	may	also	have	diagnostic	significance.

ORIENTATION	AND	ATTENTION

The	 formal	 MSE	 usually	 begins	 with	 an	 assessment	 of	 orientation.	 Normally,
patients	 are	 said	 to	 be	 “oriented	 times	 three”	 if	 they	 know	 who	 they	 are,	 their
location,	 and	 the	 date.	 Some	 examiners	 assess	 insight	 or	 the	 awareness	 of	 the
situation	 as	 a	 fourth	 dimension	 of	 orientation.	 The	 details	 of	 orientation	 are
sometimes	telling.	The	patient	may	know	the	day	of	the	week	but	not	the	year.
Orientation	can	be	explored	further	when	necessary	by	increasing	or	decreasing
the	difficulty	level	of	the	questions.	Patients	may	know	the	season	of	the	year	if
not	the	exact	month;	conversely,	they	may	be	oriented	well	enough	to	know	their
exact	 location	 down	 to	 the	 street	 address.	 Most	 patients	 can	 estimate	 the	 time
within	 1	 hour.	 Orientation	 questions	 can	 be	 used	 as	 a	 memory	 test	 for	 patients
who	 are	 disoriented.	 If	 the	 patient	 is	 disoriented,	 she	 may	 be	 told	 the	 day,	 the
month,	the	year,	the	city,	etc.,	and	implored	to	try	to	remember	the	information.
Failure	 to	 remember	 this	 information	 by	 a	 patient	 who	 is	 attentive	 and	 has
registered	 it	 suggests	 a	 severe	 memory	 deficit.	 Occasionally,	 patients	 cannot
remember	 very	 basic	 information,	 such	 as	 the	 year	 or	 the	 city,	 despite	 being
repeatedly	 told,	 for	 more	 than	 a	 few	 seconds.	 In	 the	 presence	 of	 disease,
orientation	to	time	is	impaired	first	and	then	orientation	to	place;	only	rarely	is
there	disorientation	to	person.

Poor	performance	on	complex	tests	of	higher	intellectual	function	cannot	be
attributed	 to	 cortical	 dysfunction	 if	 the	 patient	 is	 not	 attentive	 to	 the	 tasks.
Defective	 attention	 taints	 all	 subsequent	 testing.	 Patients	 may	 appear	 grossly
alert	but	are	actually	inattentive,	distractible,	and	unable	to	concentrate.	An	early
manifestation	 of	 toxic	 or	 metabolic	 encephalopathy	 is	 often	 a	 lack	 of	 attention
and	concentration	in	an	apparently	alert	patient,	which	may	progress	to	delirium
or	to	a	confused	state.	Confusion,	inattention,	and	poor	concentration	may	also
be	 seen	 with	 frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction,	 posterior	 nondominant	 hemisphere
lesions,	 and	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure.	 Lesions	 causing	 apathy	 or	 abulia
also	 impair	 attention.	 Patients	 with	 dementing	 illnesses	 are	 not	 typically
inattentive	 until	 the	 cognitive	 deficits	 are	 severe.	 Consider	 the	 possibility	 of	 a
central	 nervous	 system	 toxic	 or	 metabolic	 disturbance	 when	 the	 patient	 is
inattentive.

Having	 the	 patient	 signal	 whenever	 the	 letter	 A	 is	 heard	 from	 a	 string	 of

random	letters	dictated	by	the	examiner	or	having	the	patient	cross	out	all	of	the
A’s	on	a	written	sheet	may	reveal	a	lack	of	attention	or	task	impersistence.	In	the
line	cancellation,	or	line	bisection,	test,	the	patient	is	requested	to	bisect	several
lines	 randomly	 placed	 on	 a	 page.	 Inattentive,	 distractible	 patients	 may	 fail	 to
complete	the	task.	Patients	with	hemineglect	may	fail	to	see	the	left	half	of	the
line	and	bisect	all	of	the	lines	off	center,	or	they	may	ignore	the	lines	on	one	side
of	the	page.	The	proportion	and	placement	of	lines	left	uncrossed	relates	to	the
severity	of	the	neglect	and	localization	of	the	lesion.

Digit	span	forward	is	a	good	test	of	attention,	concentration,	and	immediate
memory.	The	examiner	dictates	a	series	of	random	numbers	of	increasing	length,
beginning	with	3	or	4,	at	a	rate	of	about	one	per	second;	the	patient	is	asked	to
repeat	 them.	 Backward	 digit	 span	 is	 a	 more	 complex	 mental	 process	 that
involves	 working	 memory;	 it	 requires	 the	 ability	 to	 retain	 and	 manipulate	 the
string	of	numbers.	Expected	performance	is	7	±	2	forward	and	5	±	1	backward.
Reverse	digit	span	should	not	be	more	than	two	digits	less	than	the	forward	span.
Forward	 digit	 span	 is	 also	 a	 test	 of	 repetition	 and	 may	 be	 impaired	 in	 aphasic
patients.	 Another	 test	 of	 attention	 and	 concentration	 is	 a	 three-step	 task.	 For
instance,	tear	a	piece	of	paper	in	half,	then	tear	half	of	it	in	half,	and	then	tear
one	half	in	half	again,	so	that	there	are	three	different	sizes.	Give	the	patient	an
instruction	such	as	“Give	the	large	piece	of	paper	to	me,	put	the	small	piece	on
the	 bed,	 and	 keep	 the	 other	 piece”	 (Marie’s	 paper	 test,	 see	 Chapter	 9).	 Other
multistep	 tasks	 might	 be	 “Stand	 up,	 face	 the	 door,	 and	 hold	 out	 your	 arms”	 or
“Touch	your	right	ear	with	your	left	thumb	and	put	out	your	tongue.”

Attention	has	an	important	spatial	component,	and	patients	may	fail	to	attend
to	 one	 side	 of	 space	 (hemi-inattention	 or	 hemineglect).	 The	 nondominant
hemisphere	has	special	responsibilities	regarding	attention.	It	seems	to	maintain
attention	in	both	right	and	left	hemispace.	The	dominant	hemisphere	in	contrast
only	attends	to	contralateral	hemispace.	Patients	with	right	parietal	lesions	often
have	 hemineglect	 for	 the	 left	 side	 of	 space.	 They	 may	 also	 ignore	 even	 a
profound	 neurologic	 deficit	 involving	 the	 left	 side	 of	 the	 body	 (anosognosia).
With	dominant	lesions,	the	nondominant	hemisphere	can	attend	well	enough	to
both	 sides	 of	 space	 that	 hemineglect	 does	 not	 occur	 as	 a	 prominent	 feature.
Bilateral	lesions	may	be	required	to	cause	neglect	of	right	hemispace.	Thalamic
lesions,	 especially	 those	 involving	 the	 medial	 thalamus,	 may	 produce	 similar
findings,	often	accompanied	by	a	tendency	not	to	use	the	involved	limbs	without
any	weakness	(thalamic	neglect).

Mental	 control	 or	 concentration	 is	 a	 higher-level	 function	 that	 requires	 the

patient	not	only	to	attend	to	a	complex	task	but	also	to	marshal	other	intellectual
resources,	 such	 as	 the	 ability	 to	 mentally	 manipulate	 items.	 Tests	 of	 mental
control	 and	 working	 memory	 include	 serial	 7s	 or	 3s,	 spelling	 world	 backward
(part	 of	 MMSE),	 and	 saying	 the	 days	 of	 the	 week	 or	 months	 of	 the	 year	 in
reverse.	Most	normal	adults	can	recite	the	months	of	the	year	backward	in	less
than	30	seconds.	When	underlying	functions,	for	example,	calculation	ability,	are
intact,	defective	mental	control	may	indicate	dorsolateral	frontal	lobe	(executive)
dysfunction,	usually	on	the	left.

LANGUAGE

Evaluation	of	language	includes	assessment	of	fluency,	comprehension,	naming,
repetition,	 reading,	 and	 writing.	 Language	 function	 is	 discussed	 further	 in
Chapter	9.

MEMORY

Structures	 important	 in	 memory	 function	 include	 the	 hippocampus,	 the
parahippocampal	 gyrus,	 the	 fornix,	 the	 septal	 nucleus,	 the	 mammillary	 bodies,
the	 mammillothalamic	 tract,	 the	 cingulate	 gyrus,	 and	 the	 anterior	 and	 medial
dorsal	 nuclei	 of	 thalamus	 (Chapter	 6).	 Memory	 has	 many	 facets	 and	 may	 be
tested	 in	 different	 ways.	 Memory	 terminology	 is	 not	 used	 consistently,	 with
different	 terms	 in	 use	 in	 general	 neurology	 and	 in	 behavioral	 neurology.	 A
precise	description	of	the	task	attempted	is	often	more	useful	than	describing	the
patient’s	“recent	memory.”	The	generally	used	classification	includes	immediate,
short-term	 or	 recent,	 and	 long-term	 or	 remote	 memory.	 These	 correspond
approximately	 to	 the	 terms	 working,	 episodic,	 and	 semantic	 memory	 used	 by
behavioral	 neurologists	 and	 cognitive	 neuropsychologists.	 These	 designations
attempt	to	reflect	the	neurophysiology	of	memory.	Remote	memory	is	typically
much	better	than	recent	memory	in	patients	with	memory	disturbances.

Memory	terminology	is	not	used	consistently,	and	a	precise	description	of	the
task	 attempted	 is	 often	 more	 useful	 than	 describing	 the	 patient’s	 “recent
memory.”	 A	 commonly	 used	 memory	 classification	 includes	 immediate
(working)	 memory,	 recent	 (short-term)	 memory,	 and	 remote	 (long-term)
memory.	 Episodic	 memory	 refers	 to	 the	 system	 involved	 in	 remembering
particular	episodes	or	experiences,	such	as	the	movie	you	saw	last	weekend	or

the	meeting	you	attended	yesterday.

The	 first	 stage	 of	 memory—immediate	 or	 working	 memory—involves	 the
circuits	used	to	register,	recall,	and	mentally	manipulate	transitory	information.
The	 prefrontal	 cortex	 mediates	 much	 of	 this	 function.	 This	 is	 a	 short-lived
operation	in	which	material	is	not	actually	committed	to	memory.	Normal	people
can	 typically	 retain	 seven	 digits,	 a	 telephone	 number,	 in	 immediate	 memory.
Retaining	longer	numbers,	or	supraspan	numbers,	and	tasks	such	as	reverse	digit
span	require	more	active	memory	processing.	Working	memory	tends	to	decline
with	 advancing	 age.	 Working	 memory	 also	 depends	 on	 executive	 function,	 the
ability	 to	 remain	 focused	 on	 the	 task	 despite	 distractions.	 The	 second	 stage	 of
memory—short-term,	 recent,	 episodic,	 or	 declarative	 memory—involves
retaining	 and	 recalling	 information	 or	 events	 for	 minutes	 to	 hours.	 The	 medial
temporal	lobe	mediates	much	of	this	second	stage	of	memory.	The	familiar	test
of	the	ability	to	recall	three	items	after	5	minutes	assesses	episodic	or	short-term
memory.	The	term	episodic	memory	is	also	used	to	refer	to	the	system	involved
in	remembering	particular	episodes	or	experiences,	such	as	the	movie	seen	last
weekend;	 episodic	 memory	 involves	 specific	 personal	 experiences.	 In	 the	 third
stage,	 memories	 are	 consolidated	 and	 stored	 more	 permanently.	 The	 lateral
temporal	region	and	other	cortical	areas	subserve	this	storage	function.	The	fund
of	information	stored	in	remote,	long-term	memory	includes	basic	school	facts,
such	 as	 state	 capitals,	 past	 presidents,	 and	 important	 dates;	 current	 events;	 and
personal	information,	such	as	address,	phone	number,	and	the	names	of	relatives.
This	long-term	stage	of	memory	is	commonly	referred	to	as	semantic	memory,	a
confusing	 term	 at	 best.	 Semantic	 memory	 includes	 generalized	 knowledge	 and
factual	 information	 not	 related	 to	 memory	 of	 a	 specific	 thing	 or	 event,	 such	 as
what	a	movie	is.	Semantic	memory	is	distinct	from	personal	long-term	memory.
Digit	 span	 is	 a	 test	 of	 attention	 and	 immediate,	 working	 memory.	 Episodic
(recent,	short-term)	memory	is	tested	by	giving	the	patient	items	to	recall.	The
recall	items	may	be	simple	objects,	such	as	orange,	umbrella,	and	automobile,	or
more	complex,	such	as	“John	Brown,	42	Market	St.,	Chicago”	(part	of	Blessed
SOMC).	Apple,	table,	penny	is	a	favorite	three-item	list.	The	items	should	be	in
different	 categories.	 Maurice	 Victor	 preferred	 a	 simple	 “one”-item	 list,	 an
appointment:	 Dr.	 Victor,	 Saturday,	 8	 o’clock.	 After	 ensuring	 the	 patient	 has
registered	the	items,	proceed	with	other	testing.	After	approximately	5	minutes,
ask	 the	 patient	 to	 recall	 the	 items.	 Investigators	 have	 found	 considerable
variability	 when	 using	 such	 three-word	 lists;	 some	 normal	 subjects	 may	 recall
zero	 or	 one	 word.	 Better	 tests	 for	 the	 bedside	 evaluation	 of	 memory	 are

supraspan	 list	 learning	 tasks	 with	 delayed	 recall	 and	 recognition	 conditions.
Asking	the	patient	to	recall	that	morning’s	breakfast	is	another	test	of	short-term
memory.	Assessing	memory	is	frequently	difficult	in	patients	who	work	in	very
specialized	 fields	 and	 who	 have	 few	 outside	 interests.	 Patients	 with	 major
cognitive	 impairment	 may	 still	 recall	 some	 deeply	 ingrained,	 overlearned
memories,	for	example,	days	of	the	week,	months	of	the	year,	nursery	rhymes,
and	jingles.

Patients	with	severe	memory	deficits	may	not	only	fail	to	recall	the	items	but
also	fail	to	recall	being	asked	to	recall.	Some	patients	may	fail	to	remember	the
items,	but	they	can	improve	performance	with	hints	or	pick	the	items	from	a	list.
Patients	who	are	able	to	remember	items	with	cuing	or	by	picking	from	a	list	are
able	to	retain	the	information	but	not	retrieve	it.	When	cuing	or	picking	do	not
improve	 performance,	 the	 defect	 is	 in	 retention.	 Patients	 with	 early	 dementing
processes	may	have	only	a	failure	of	retrieval.	Another	memory	test	is	to	ask	the
patient	to	remember	the	Babcock	sentence	(“One	thing	a	nation	must	have	to	be
rich	 and	 great	 is	 a	 large,	 secure	 supply	 of	 wood”)	 after	 5	 minutes.	 Normal
patients	can	do	this	in	three	attempts.	Tests	of	nonverbal	memory	include	hiding
objects	 in	 the	 patient’s	 room	 as	 she	 watches	 and	 then	 having	 her	 remember
where	 the	 objects	 are	 hidden,	 or	 asking	 her	 to	 remember	 shapes,	 colors,	 or
figures.

In	 confabulation,	 a	 patient	 with	 memory	 loss,	 most	 classically	 Wernicke-
Korsakoff	syndrome,	“fills	in	the	gaps”	in	memory	by	saying	whatever	comes	to
mind,	 having	 no	 idea	 whether	 it	 is	 actually	 true	 or	 not.	 There	 is	 memory
impairment	 out	 of	 proportion	 to	 other	 cognitive	 functions.	 Unable	 to	 recall
things,	the	patient	makes	up	wild	tales	without	an	intent	to	deceive	and	without
any	awareness	whether	the	information	is	or	is	not	true.	The	confabulation	may
range	from	minor	deviations	from	actual	events	to	blatant	falsehoods.	Two	forms
are	recognized:	spontaneous	and	provoked.	The	provoked	type	typically	emerges
during	memory	testing.

CONSTRUCTIONAL	TASKS

Brain	 disease	 commonly	 causes	
impaired	 visuospatial	 abilities,	 and
constructional	 ability	 can	 be	 tested	 by	 drawing	 shapes,	 the	 clock	 drawing	 test
(CDT),	or	copying	the	Rey-Osterrieth	figure	(see	Chapter	10).	Drawing	a	cube
or	interlocking	pentagons	(part	of	the	MMSE)	are	commonly	used	constructional

tasks.	The	CDT	is	a	test	of	visuospatial	capability	and	mental	status.	Originally
developed	 as	 a	 test	 of	 constructional	 and	 visuospatial	 function,	 the	 CDT	 has
evolved	into	a	simple	and	quick	test	of	general	cognitive	abilities.	Given	a	circle,
the	 patient	 is	 asked	 to	 insert	 the	 numbers	 and	 draw	 the	 hands	 indicating	 a
specific	 time.	 Points	 are	 assessed	 for	 each	 element	 of	 the	 task.	 An	 abnormal
CDT	increases	the	probability	of	dementia.	Errors	on	the	CDT	develop	early	in
AD	and	worsen	progressively.	Studies	have	shown	a	sensitivity	of	36%	to	75%,
a	 specificity	 of	 72%	 to	 98%,	 and	 a	 positive	 likelihood	 ratio	 of	 5.3.	 Testing	 of
constructional	ability	is	discussed	more	fully	in	Chapter	10.

CALCULATIONS

Ability	 to	 count	 and	 calculate	 may	 be	 evaluated	 by	 asking	 the	 patient	 to	 count
forward	or	backward,	to	count	coins,	or	to	make	change.	Patients	may	be	asked
to	select	a	certain	amount	from	a	handful	of	change.	More	formal	testing	might
include	 having	 the	 patient	 perform	 simple	 arithmetic,	 either	 mentally	 or	 on
paper.	 The	 ability	 to	 calculate	 depends	 on	 native	 intelligence,	 innate	 number
sense	or	mathematical	ability,	and	educational	level.	Basic	calculations,	such	as
2	+	2,	are	often	rote,	overlearned	items	from	early	schooling;	these	test	remote
memory	more	than	calculating	ability.	The	average	normal	patient	can	perform
mental	calculations	that	involve	two-digit	operations	and	require	simple	carrying
and	 borrowing.	 A	 patient	 who	 succeeds	 with	 simple	 calculations	 should	 be
pressed	to	at	least	a	moderate	level	of	difficulty,	for	example,	12	+	3,	13	+	7,	17
+	11,	and	26	+	14.	Another	test	is	to	sequentially	double	a	number	until	failure.
Adding	or	subtracting	a	column	of	two-	or	three-digit	numbers	on	paper	further
requires	 the	 ability	 to	 correctly	 align	 and	 manipulate	 a	 column	 of	 numbers.	 It
gives	 insight	 not	 only	 into	 calculating	 skill	 but	 also	 into	 visuospatial	 ability,
which	 may	 be	 particularly	 impaired	 with	 nondominant	 parietal	 lesions.	 Simple
math	 problems	 may	 be	 presented;	 for	 example,	 if	 apples	 are	 a	 quarter	 apiece,
how	many	can	you	buy	for	a	dollar?	How	many	quarters	are	in	$1.50?	If	a	loaf
of	bread	costs	89	cents	and	you	paid	with	a	dollar,	what	change	would	you	get
back?	 A	 commonly	 used	 calculation	 task	 is	 subtracting	 serial	 7s	 from	 100
(failing	 that,	 serial	 3s).	 This	 function	 also	 requires	 attention	 and	 concentration.
Counting	to	20	is	more	of	a	remote	memory	test	and	counting	backward	from	20
more	of	an	attentional	task.	There	is	little	difference	in	calculating	ability	across
age	 groups	 and	 little	 impairment	 in	 early	 AD.	 However,	 advancing	 disease

dramatically	alters	calculation	ability.

Aphasic	 patients	 may	 have	 difficulty	 with	 calculations	 because	 they	 make
paraphasic	errors	involving	the	numbers.	Impaired	calculating	ability	may	occur
with	 posterior	 dominant	 hemisphere	 lesions,	 either	 as	 an	 isolated	 defect	 or	 as
part	 of	 Gerstmann’s	 syndrome	 (see	 Chapter	 10).	 These	 patients	 have	 a	 true
anarithmetria,	a	primary	disturbance	of	calculating	ability.

ABSTRACT	THINKING

The	ability	to	think	abstractly	is	typically	tested	by	asking	the	patient	to	describe
similarities	 and	 differences,	 to	 find	 analogies,	 and	 to	 interpret	 proverbs	 and
aphorisms.	The	patient	may	be	asked	how	an	apple	and	a	banana,	a	car	and	an
airplane,	 a	 watch	 and	 a	 ruler,	 or	 a	 poem	 and	 a	 statue	 are	 alike,	 or	 to	 tell	 the
difference	between	a	lie	and	a	mistake.	To	test	for	the	ability	to	find	analogies,
the	patient	might	be	asked:	“Table	is	to	leg	as	car	is	to	what?”	The	patient	may
be	unable	to	interpret	a	proverb	or	may	interpret	it	concretely	or	literally.	When
interpreting	“Don’t	cry	over	spilt	milk,”	the	patient	thinking	concretely	will	talk
about	 accidents,	 milk,	 spillage,	 cleanup,	 and	 other	 things	 that	 miss	 the	 point.
Some	commonly	used	proverbs	include	the	following:	a	rolling	stone	gathers	no
moss,	a	stitch	in	time	saves	nine,	and	people	who	live	in	glass	houses	shouldn’t
throw	 stones.	 The	 usefulness	 of	 proverb	 interpretation	 has	 been	 questioned.	 It
seems	 many	 examiners	 are	 not	 precisely	 sure	 themselves	 what	 some	 of	 the
proverbs	 mean.	 Only	 late	 in	 life	 did	 either	 of	 the	 authors	 learn	 what	 Thoreau
meant	by	“Some	circumstantial	evidence	is	very	strong,	as	when	you	find	a	trout
in	 the	 milk”	 (meaning	 the	 milk	 has	 been	 watered	 down).	 Bizarre,	 peculiar
proverb	interpretations	may	be	given	by	patients	with	psychiatric	disease,	or	by
normal	people	not	familiar	with	the	idiomatic	usage.	It	may	be	useful	to	throw	in
a	concatenated,	mixed,	and	confused	proverb	or	saying	such	as	“The	hand	that
rocks	 the	 cradle	 shouldn’t	 throw	 stones”	 to	 test	 both	 the	 patient’s	 abstraction
ability	and	sense	of	humor.	Impaired	abstraction	occurs	in	many	conditions	but
is	particularly	common	with	frontal	lobe	disorders.

INSIGHT	AND	JUDGMENT

Common	 insight	 and	 judgment	 questions—such	 as	 asking	 what	 the	 patient
would	 do	 if	 she	 found	 a	 sealed,	 addressed,	 stamped	 letter	 on	 the	 sidewalk,	 or

smelled	smoke	in	a	crowded	theater—may	be	less	useful	than	determining	if	the
patient	 has	 insight	 into	 her	 illness	 and	 the	 implications	 of	 any	 functional
impairment.	 Historical	 information	 from	 family	 members	 about	 the	 patient’s
actual	 judgment	 in	 real-life	 situations	 may	 be	 more	 enlightening	 than	 these
artificial	 constructs.	 Patients	 with	 no	 concern	 about	 their	 illness	 have	 impaired
impulsively	 or
judgment.	 Patients	 with	 poor	
inappropriately	during	the	examination.	Many	neurologic	conditions	may	impair
judgment,	 particularly	 processes	 that	 affect	 the	 orbitofrontal	 regions.	 Lack	 of
insight	 into	 the	 illness,	 to	 the	 point	 of	 denial	 of	 any	 disability,	 may	 occur	 with
nondominant	parietal	lesions.

judgment	 may	 behave	

FRONTAL	LOBE	(EXECUTIVE)	FUNCTION

Executive	function	refers	to	“supervisory”	cognitive	processes	that	involve	high-
level	 organization	 and	 execution	 of	 complex	 thoughts	 and	 behavior,	 including
such	 processes	 as	 planning,	 problem	 solving,	 multitasking,	 and	 monitoring	 of
actions.	 These	 functions	 primarily	 reflect	 frontal	 lobe	 function,	 although	 other
systems	 are	 involved.	 Concepts	 of	 the	 executive	 system	 have	 arisen	 largely	 by
observations	of	patients	such	as	Phineas	Gage,	who	display	disorganized	actions
and	 strategies	 for	 everyday	 tasks	 (dysexecutive	 syndrome),	 without	 deficits	 on
formal	tests	of	cognition.

Frontal	lobe	dysfunction	may	be	subtle.	The	usual	methods	of	bedside	testing,
including	 formal	 neuropsychological	 assessment,	 may	 fail	 to	 detect	 even
significant	frontal	lobe	dysfunction	(see	Box	7.2).	Comparison	with	the	patient’s
premorbid	personality	and	behavior	is	often	more	telling	than	assessment	based
on	population-derived	reference	information.	In	addition	to	the	standard	tests	of
abstract	 thinking	 and	 proverb	 interpretation,	 special	 techniques	 designed	 to
evaluate	frontal	lobe	function	may	be	useful.	Tests	helpful	for	evaluating	frontal
lobe	function	include	verbal	fluency	by	word	list	generation,	assessment	of	the
ability	 to	 alternate	 tasks	 or	 switch	 between	 tests,	 abstraction	 ability,	 motor
sequencing,	 and	 tests	 for	 perseveration,	 apathy,	 and	 impulsivity.	 The	 Frontal
Assessment	 Battery	 is	 a	 test	 battery	 that	 can	 be	 administered	 in	 a	 few	 minutes
that	covers	five	executive	tests	plus	the	grasp	reflex.

Some	 commonly	 used	 executive	 function	 measures	 include	 the	 Wisconsin
Card	 Sorting	 Test,	 verbal	 fluency	 by	 word	 list	 generation,	 and	 response
inhibition	tests.	Patients	with	frontal	lobe	dysfunction	who	do	not	have	anomia

when	 tested	 by	 other	 methods	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 generate	 word	 lists	 (see
Chapter	9).	Patients	may	be	asked	to	name	items	as	quickly	as	possible	from	a
particular	category,	such	as	animals	or	furniture	(semantic	or	category	fluency),
or	 think	 of	 as	 many	 words	 as	 possible	 beginning	 with	 a	 particular	 letter,	 for
example,	F,	A,	or	S	(letter	or	phonemic	fluency).	Semantic	category	fluency	has
been	 found	 to	 rely	 on	 lateral	 and	 inferior	 temporal	 lobe	 regions	 known	 to	 be
involved	 in	 object	 perception,	 recognition,	 imagery,	 and	 naming.	 In	 contrast,
first-letter	verbal	fluency	tests	the	ability	to	use	phonemic	and/or	graphemic	cues
to	guide	retrieval.	This	requires	greater	effort	and	a	more	active	strategic	search
than	 does	 semantic	 category	 fluency.	 Consistent	 with	 its	 prominent	 executive
demands,	 letter	 fluency	 has	 been	 found	 to	 correlate	 more	 with	 prefrontal	 lobe
functioning	 than	 semantic	 fluency.	 Category	 fluency	 (naming	 animals)	 was
found	to	be	a	very	useful	one-minute	MSE	and	identified	dementia	better	than
did	phonemic	fluency.	Normal	patients	should	name	a	minimum	of	12	items	in	a
category;	 some	 adjustment	 may	 be	 necessary	 for	 poorly	 educated	 and	 older
patients	(Chapter	9).	In	a	relatively	well-educated	study	group,	a	cutoff	score	of
15	on	the	category	fluency	test	had	a	sensitivity	of	0.87	and	a	specificity	of	0.96.
In	the	MoCA,	letter	fluency	of	≥11	is	considered	normal.

The	Wisconsin	Card	Sort	Test	is	used	by	neuropsychologists	to	determine	if
the	 patient	 can	 shift	 between	 tasks	 (shift	 sets).	 The	 formal	 test	 requires	 the
patient	to	discover	through	trial	and	error	the	expected	sorting	of	cards	by	color,
shape,	or	number	and	then	to	recognize	and	adapt	to	a	change	in	the	scheme.	A
bedside	 variation	 is	 to	 ask	 the	 patient	 to	 detect	 a	 pattern	 when	 the	 examiner
switches	a	coin	between	hands	behind	her	back—for	example,	twice	in	the	right
hand,	 once	 in	 the	 left—and	 then	 to	 change	 the	 pattern	 and	 see	 if	 the	 patient
detects	the	new	scheme.	Perseveration	is	the	abnormal,	inappropriate	repetition
of	words	or	actions.	Patients	with	frontal	lesions,	especially	those	involving	the
dominant	 dorsolateral	 prefrontal	 cortex,	 have	 difficulty	 abandoning	 the	 initial
pattern	of	responses	and	tend	to	perseverate.

In	 trail-making	 tests,	 the	 patient	 is	 required	 to	 connect	 in	 sequence	 either
letters	or	numbers	scattered	around	a	page	(Trails	A)	or	to	alternate	connecting
letters	 and	 numbers,	 for	 example,	 A-1-B-2-C-3	 (Trails	 B).	 In	 another	 test	 of
alternating	 ability,	 the	 patient	 writes	 a	 string	 of	 Ms	 and	 Ns,	 all	 connected.	 In
Luria’s	 fist-edge-palm	 test,	 the	 patient	 is	 asked	 to	 repetitively	 place	 the	 hand
down	in	a	series	of	motions:	fist,	edge	of	hand	palm,	over	and	over.	There	is	a
tendency	 to	 perseveration	 and	 difficulty	 accurately	 executing	 the	 sequences	 of
hand	positions,	particularly	with	frontal	lobe	lesions.	In	copying	tasks	involving

drawing	 simple	 figures	 with	 multiple	 loops,	 patients	 with	 perseveration	 may
insert	extra	loops.

A	 common	 manifestation	 of	 frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction	 is	 lack	 of	 response
inhibition.	Automatic	responses	are	a	type	of	defective	response	inhibition.	The
ability	 to	 inhibit	 automatic	 responses	 can	 be	 measured	 in	 several	 ways.	 The
Stroop	 color	 word	 interference	 test	 assesses	 the	 patient’s	 ability	 to	 inhibit
automatic	responses.	In	the	“little-big”	test,	the	words	little	and	big	are	printed
on	separate	cards	in	both	upper-	and	lowercase	letters.	The	patient	is	required	to
answer	 “big”	 aloud	 if	 the	 print	 is	 upper	 case,	 even	 in	 response	 to	 the	 word
“little,”	or	vice	versa.	A	variation	is	to	write	several	color	names	in	nonmatching
colors,	 for	 example,	 write	 the	 word	 “blue”	 with	 a	 red	 marker	 and	 then	 ask	 the
patient	to	read	the	cards	by	stating	the	color	of	the	print,	not	the	written	name	of
the	 color.	 Patients	 with	 frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction	 have	 trouble	 inhibiting	 the
tendency	to	read	the	color	name.	Another	response	inhibition	task	is	to	have	the
patient	respond	oppositely	to	the	examiner,	for	example,	asking	the	patient	to	tap
once	if	the	examiner	taps	twice	and	vice	versa,	or	telling	the	patient	to	point	to
her	chin	as	the	examiner	points	to	her	nose.

The	 Go/No-Go	 test	 is	 another	 test	 for	 detect	 defective	 response	 inhibition.
The	patient	is	asked	to	perform	an	action	in	response	to	a	stimulus	(Go)	and	do
nothing	in	response	to	a	different	stimulus	(No	Go).	If	Go	stimuli	exceed	No-Go
stimuli,	the	patient	with	frontal	lobe	disease	has	difficulty	inhibiting	the	response
on	the	No-Go	stimuli.	Then	the	rules	are	changed,	and	the	patient	is	challenged
to	 adapt.	 Any	 number	 of	 stimulus-responses	 paradigms	 are	 possible.	 The
antisaccade	task	is	another	measure	of	the	ability	to	inhibit	automatic	responses
(see	Chapter	14).

The	 applause	 sign	 is	 an	 inability	 to	 stop	 clapping	 after	 being	 asked	 to	 clap
three	 times	 and	 was	 initially	 touted	 as	 a	 way	 to	 distinguish	 progressive
supranuclear	 palsy	 (PSP)	 from	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 (PD)	 and	 frontotemporal
dementia	(FTD)	(Video	Link	8.1).	Later	studies	found	the	applause	sign	was	a
nonspecific	sign	of	frontal	lobe	dysfunction.	Lhermitte	first	described	utilization
behavior	 and	 imitation	 behavior	 in	 patients	 with	 frontal	 lobe	 damage.	 Patients
with	utilization	behavior	will	reach	out	and	use	objects	in	the	environment	in	an
automatic	 manner	 and	 are	 not	 able	 to	 inhibit	 this	 response.	 Similarly,	 patients
with	imitation	behavior	will	imitate	the	examiner’s	gestures,	even	if	specifically
told	to	refrain	from	doing	so.

OTHER	MENTAL	STATUS	TESTS

Other	 procedures	 used	 to	 evaluate	 cognitive	 function	 include	 assessment	 of
visuospatial	and	constructional	ability,	praxis,	language	disturbances,	recognition
(visual,	 tactile,	 and	 auditory),	 right-left	 orientation,	 and	 finger	 identification.
These	are	discussed	in	subsequent	chapters.

ABNORMAL	MENTAL	STATUS	EXAMINATION

The	 MSE	 may	 be	 abnormal	 for	 a	 number	 of	 reasons,	 including	 metabolic
disorders,	 drug	 intoxication	 or	 withdrawal,	 psychiatric	 conditions,	 neurologic
disorders,	 especially	 degenerative	 conditions,	 or	 following	 traumatic	 brain
injury.	Dementia	refers	to	the	loss	of	cognitive	 abilities	in	a	previously	normal
individual.	The	term	implies	a	progressive	disorder,	in	contrast	to	the	cognitive
impairment	 that	 may	 follow	 brain	 trauma	 or	 a	 hypoxic	 insult,	 although	 in
vascular	dementia,	the	onset	may	be	sudden	and	the	progression	stepwise.

Many	 disorders	 may	 cause	 dementia	 (see	 Chapter	 53).	 AD,	 dementia	 with
Lewy	bodies	(DLB,	diffuse	Lewy	body	disease)	and	vascular	dementia	account
for	 the	 majority	 of	 cases.	 The	 distribution	 of	 etiologies	 is	 somewhat	 age
dependent.	 Overall,	 AD	 accounts	 for	 about	 60%	 to	 80%,	 DLB	 for	 about	 10%,
cerebrovascular	 disease	 for	 about	 10%,	 “treatable”	 dementias	 (e.g.,	 normal
pressure	 hydrocephalus,	 drug	 effects,	 metabolic	 disorders)	 for	 about	 2%,	 FTD
for	 about	 1%,	 and	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob	 disease	 for	 less	 than	 1%.	 These	 diseases,
especially	AD	and	vascular	dementia,	may	coexist.	MCI	refers	to	patients	with
demonstrable	cognitive	abnormalities,	especially	difficulty	with	memory,	that	do
not	appreciably	interfere	with	daily	functioning.	The	current	construct	of	MCI	is
that	it	is	an	intermediate	stage	between	the	 cognitive	 changes	 of	aging	 and	 the
very	earliest	features	of	AD.

Dementia	 is	 sometimes	 divided	 into	 cortical	 and	 subcortical	 types,	 although
recent	 research	 questioned	 the	 clinical,	 neuropsychological,	 neuroimaging,	 and
neuroanatomical	basis	of	the	distinction.	AD	is	the	prototype	cortical	dementia;
aphasia,	apraxia,	and	agnosia	are	commonly	present.	Subcortical	dementia	lacks
these	 features	 and	 is	 characterized	 by	 slowness	 of	 mental	 processing,
forgetfulness,	impaired	cognition,	apathy,	and	depression;	vascular	dementia	and
the	intellectual	impairment	in	PD	are	the	most	common	examples.

ALZHEIMER’S	DISEASE

AD	 typically	 manifests	 as	 an	 insidiously	 progressive	 deterioration	 of	 higher
intellectual	 function,	 with	 memory	 loss	 and	 alterations	 in	 mood	 and	 behavior,
evolving	 over	 5	 to	 10	 years	 to	 a	 state	 of	 severe,	 diffuse	 cortical	 dysfunction.
Other	 cognitive	 deficits	 may	 appear	 with	 or	 after	 the	 development	 of	 memory
impairment.	 Language	 function	 and	 visuospatial	 skills	 tend	 to	 be	 affected
relatively	early,	whereas	deficits	in	executive	function	and	behavioral	symptoms
often	 manifest	 later	 in	 the	 disease	 course.	 These	 deficits	 appear	 and	 progress
insidiously.	 Clinical	 assessment	 and	 modern	 imaging	 allow	 for	 accurate
diagnosis	in	80%	to	90%	of	cases.

Although	diffuse	cognitive	changes	are	typical,	especially	in	the	mid	and	later
stages,	AD	causes	two	particularly	distinct	findings	on	MSE:	rapid	forgetting	on
tests	 of	 episodic	 memory	 and	 impaired	 category	 fluency	 compared	 with	 letter
fluency.	Difficulty	consolidating	new	memories	causes	rapid	forgetting.	Patients
may	have	relatively	intact	immediate	recall,	but	much	of	the	information	is	lost
after	 delays	 of	 a	 little	 as	 a	 few	 minutes.	 Decreased	 category	 fluency	 with
relatively	 preserved	 letter	 fluency	 is	 another	 prominent	 feature	 of	 AD;	 the
reverse	pattern	occurs	in	FTD	and	vascular	dementia.

DEMENTIA	WITH	LEWY	BODIES

DLB	 typically	 causes	 recurrent	 visual	 hallucinations,	 fluctuations	 in	 attention
and	 alertness,	 episodes	 of	 confusion,	 parkinsonian	 features,	 visuospatial
impairments,	 and	 a	 particular	 sensitivity	 to	 neuroleptic	 medications	 (Chapter
30).	The	pathology	resembles	that	of	PD	dementia,	and	DLB	is	classified	as	an
alpha-synucleinopathy.	 Symptoms	 characteristically	 fluctuate	 (“good	 days	 and
bad	 days”).	 In	 one	 study,	 daytime	 drowsiness	 and	 lethargy,	 naps	 of	 2	 or	 more
hours,	 staring	 into	space	 for	long	 periods,	and	episodes	of	 disorganized	 speech
occurred	in	63%	of	DLB	patients	compared	with	12%	of	AD	patients	and	0.5%
of	normal	elderly	persons.	Findings	on	MSE	are	similar	to	AD,	but	patients	with
DLB	have	relatively	greater	deficits	in	attention,	executive	function,	visuospatial
and	 constructional	 skills,	 psychomotor	 speed,	 and	 verbal	 fluency.	 Impaired
visual	 perception	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 the	 visual	 hallucinations	 as	 well	 as	 the
impaired	visuospatial	capability.	Cognitive	impairment	occurs	in	half	or	more	of
patients	 with	 advanced	 idiopathic	 PD.	 Hallucinations	 can	 also	 occur	 in	 PD,

particularly	 in	 relation	 to	 medications.	 The	 relationship	 between	 DLB	 and	 PD
with	dementia	remains	unsettled.

FRONTOTEMPORAL	DEMENTIA

FTD	 is	 a	 group	 of	 disorders	 with	 prominent	 involvement	 of	 the	 frontal	 and
temporal	lobes.	Onset	is	typically	in	the	late	50s	or	early	60s;	in	patients	under
age	65,	FTD	is	as	common	as	AD.	Two	subtypes	are	currently	recognized:	the
behavioral	 variant	 of	 FTD	 (FTDbv),	 and	 primary	 progressive	 aphasia	 (PPA).
Pick’s	disease	is	the	same	as	FTDbv.	The	term	FTD	is	variably	used	to	refer	to
FTDbv	 or	 the	 entire	 frontotemporal	 lobar	 degeneration	 (FTLD)	 complex.
Patients	 with	 PPA	 may	 have	 a	 nonfluent	 aphasia	 similar	 to	 Broca’s	 or	 a	 fluent
aphasia	termed	semantic	dementia.

FTDbv	is	characterized	by	deterioration	in	personal	and	social	conduct,	lack
of	insight,	hyperorality,	and	apathy	or	irritability	and	disinhibition.	Patients	with
FTDbv	 have	 more	 impairment	 of	 executive	 functioning	 compared	 to	 patients
with	AD.	 They	 perform	 worse	 on	 letter	 fluency	 compared	 to	 category	 fluency.
They	 are	 prone	 to	 repetition	 errors	 and	 tend	 to	 deviate	 from	 test	 instructions.
They	 perform	 relatively	 better	 on	 tests	 of	 spatial	 ability,	 episodic	 memory,	 and
semantic	 tasks.	 Semantic	 dementia,	 or	 the	 temporal	 variant	 of	 FTLD,	 causes
progressive	 difficulty	 with	 recalling	 the	 meaning	 of	 words.	 Verbal	 output	 is
fluent	 and	 grammatically	 correct,	 but	 with	 an	 empty	 quality	 because	 of	 severe
word-finding	 difficulty.	 On	 mental	 status	 testing,	 they	 demonstrate	 severe
naming	deficits	and	loss	of	word	knowledge,	but	visual	memory	and	visuospatial
abilities	 are	 relatively	 preserved.	 Category	 fluency	 is	 particularly	 impaired.
FTLD	 is	 classified	 into	a	 group	with	tau	 inclusions	 and	 a	 group	 with	ubiquitin
inclusions.	FTD	signs	can	be	seen	in	patients	with	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis
(ALS),	 implying	 clinical	 overlap	 between	 these	 disorders.	 Both	 FTD	 and	 ALS
are	heterogeneous	and	there	is	increasing	evidence	that	they	share	some	clinical,
neuropathologic,	and	genetic	features.

Video	Links

Video	Link	8.1.	The	applause	sign.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=Qn4VrJRiBOk

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alvarez	JA,	Emory	E.	Executive	function	and	the	frontal	lobes:	a	meta-analytic

review.	Neuropsychol	Rev	2006;16:17–42.

Anthony	JC,	LeResche	L,	Niaz	U,	et	al.	Limits	of	the	‘Mini-Mental	State’	as	a
screening	 test	 for	 dementia	 and	 delirium	 among	 hospital	 patients.	 Psychol
Med	1982;12:397–408.

Ballard	 C,	 Gauthier	 S,	 Corbett	 A,	 et	 al.	 Alzheimer’s	 disease.	 Lancet

2011;377(9770):1019–1031.

Blessed	G,	Black	SE,	Butler	T,	et	al.	The	diagnosis	of	dementia	in	the	elderly.	A
comparison	of	CAMCOG	(the	cognitive	section	of	CAMDEX),	the	AGECAT
program,	 DSM-III,	 the	 mini-mental	 state	 examination	 and	 some	 short	 rating
scales.	Br	J	Psychiatry	1991;159:193–198.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Canning	 SJ,	 Leach	 L,	 Stuss	 D,	 et	 al.	 Diagnostic	 utility	 of	 abbreviated	 fluency
in	 Alzheimer	 disease	 and	 vascular	 dementia.	 Neurology

measures	
2004;62:556–562.

Chauvire	 V,	 Even	 C,	 Thuile	 J,	 et	 al.	 Frontotemporal	 dementia:	 a	 review.

Encéphale	2007;33:933–940.

Cullen	 B,	 Fahy	 S,	 Cunningham	 CJ,	 et	 al.	 Screening	 for	 dementia	 in	 an	 Irish
community	sample	using	MMSE:	a	comparison	of	norm-adjusted	versus	fixed
cut-points.	Int	J	Geriatr	Psychiatry	2005;20:371–376.

Crum	RM,	Anthony	JC,	Sassett	SS,	et	al.	Population-based	norms	for	the	mini-
mental	state	examination	by	age	and	educational	level.	JAMA	1993;269:2386–
2391.

Cummings	 JL.	 The	 one-minute	 mental	 status	 examination.	 Neurology

2004;62:534–535.

Cummings	 JL,	 Benson	 DF.	 Subcortical	 dementia.	 Review	 of	 an	 emerging

concept.	Arch	Neurol	1984;41:874–879.

Daffner	 KR,	 Gale	 SA,	 Barrett	 AM,	 et	 al.	 Improving	 clinical	 cognitive	 testing:
report	 of	 the	 AAN	 Behavioral	 Neurology	 Section	 Workgroup.	 Neurology
2015;85:910–918.

Delbeuck	 X,	 Debachy	 B,	 Pasquier	 F,	 et	 al.	 Action	 and	 noun	 fluency	 testing	 to
distinguish	 between	 Alzheimer’s	 disease	 and	 dementia	 with	 Lewy	 bodies.	 J
Clin	Exp	Neuropsychol	2013;35:259–268.

Dubois	B,	Slachevsky	A,	Litvan	I,	et	al.	The	FAB:	a	frontal	assessment	battery	at

bedside.	Neurology	2000;55:1621–1626.

Dubois	B,	Slachevsky	A,	Pillon	B,	et	al.	“Applause	sign”	helps	to	discriminate

PSP	from	FTD	and	PD.	Neurology	2005;64:2132–2133.

Ferman	TJ,	Smith	GE,	Boeve	BF,	et	al.	DLB	fluctuations:	specific	features	that
reliably	 differentiate	 DLB	 from	 AD	 and	 normal	 aging.	 Neurology
2004;62:181–187.

Ferrari	R,	Kapogiannis	D,	Huey	ED,	et	al.	FTD	and	ALS:	a	tale	of	two	diseases.

Curr	Alzheimer	Res	2011;8(3):273–294.

Fillenbaum	GG,	Heyman	A,	Wilkinson	WE,	et	al.	Comparison	of	two	screening
tests	in	Alzheimer’s	disease.	The	correlation	and	reliability	of	the	mini-mental
state	 examination	 and	 the	 modified	 Blessed	 test.	 Arch	 Neurol	 1987;44:924–
927.

Fillenbaum	GG,	Landerman	LR,	Simonsick	EM.	Equivalence	of	two	screens	of
cognitive	functioning:	the	Short	Portable	Mental	Status	Questionnaire	and	the
Orientation-Memory-Concentration	 test.	 J	 Am	 Geriatr	 Soc	 1998;46:1512–
1518.

Hanson	 JC,	 Lippa	 CF.	 Lewy	 body	 dementia.	 Int	 Rev	 Neurobiol	 2009;84:215–

228.

Hodges	 JR.	 Frontotemporal	 dementia	 (Pick’s	 disease):	 clinical	 features	 and

assessment.	Neurology	2001;56(11	Suppl	4):S6–S10.

Holl	AK,	Ille	R,	Wilkinson	L,	et	al.	Impaired	ideomotor	limb	apraxia	in	cortical
and	 subcortical	 dementia:	 a	 comparison	 of	 Alzheimer’s	 and	 Huntington’s
disease.	Neurodegener	Dis	2011;8:208–215.

Jurado	MB,	Rosselli	M.	The	elusive	nature	of	executive	functions:	a	review	of

our	current	understanding.	Neuropsychol	Rev	2007;17:213–233.

Katzman	 R,	 Brown	T,	Fuld	 P,	 et	 al.	Validation	 of	a	short	 Orientation-Memory-
Concentration	Test	of	cognitive	impairment.	Am	J	Psychiatry	 1983;140:734–
739.

Kilada	S,	Gamaldo	A,	Grant	EA,	et	al.	Brief	screening	tests	for	the	diagnosis	of
dementia:	comparison	with	the	mini-mental	state	exam.	Alzheimer	Dis	Assoc
Disord	2005;19:8–16.

Kokmen	 E,	 Smith	 GE,	 Petersen	 RC,	 et	 al.	 The	 short	 test	 of	 mental	 status.
testing.	 Arch	 Neurol
standardized	 psychometric	

Correlations	 with	
1991;48:725–728.

Krueger	 CE,	 Kramer	 JH.	 Mental	 status	 examination.	 In:	 Miller	 BL,	 Boeve	 BF,
eds.	 The	 Behavioral	 Neurology	 of	 Dementia.	 New	 York:	 Cambridge
University	Press,	2011.

Lashley	T,	Rohrer	JD,	Mead	S,	et	al.	Review:	an	update	on	clinical,	genetic	and
pathological	aspects	of	frontotemporal	lobar	degenerations.	Neuropathol	Appl

Neurobiol	2015;41:858–881.

Laureno	 R.	 Foundations	 for	 Clinical	Neurology.	 New	York:	Oxford	University

Press,	2017.

McGee,	 S.	 Evidence	 Based	 Physical	 Diagnosis.	 3rd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:

Elsevier/Saunders,	2012.

Mesulam	MM.	Frontal	cortex	and	behavior.	Ann	Neurol	1986;19:320–325.
Nyhus	 E,	 Barcelo	 F.	 The	 Wisconsin	 Card	 Sorting	 Test	 and	 the	 cognitive
assessment	 of	 prefrontal	 executive	 functions:	 a	 critical	 update.	 Brain	 Cogn
2009;71:437–451.

Petersen	 RC.	 Clinical	 practice.	 Mild	 cognitive	 impairment.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med

2011;364:2227–2234.

Prasad	 K,	 Yadav	 R,	 Spillane	 J,	 eds.	 Bickerstaff’s	 Neurological	 Examination	 in

Clinical	Practice.	7th	ed.	New	Delhi:	Wiley	India,	2013.

Queally	 VR,	 Evans	 JJ,	 McMillan	 TM.	 Accuracy	 in	 scoring	 vignettes	 using	 the
mini	mental	state	examination	and	the	short	orientation	memory	concentration
test.	J	Geriatr	Psychiatry	Neurol	2010;23:160–164.

Reverberi	C,	Cherubini	P,	Baldinelli	S,	et	al.	Semantic	fluency:	cognitive	basis
and	 diagnostic	 performance	 in	 focal	 dementias	 and	 Alzheimer’s	 disease.
Cortex	2014;54:150–164.

Rossetti	 HC,	 Lacritz	 LH,	 Cullum	 CM,	 et	 al.	 Normative	 data	 for	 the	 Montreal
Cognitive	 Assessment	 (MoCA)	 in	 a	 population-based	 sample.	 Neurology
2011;77:1272–1275.

Shibasaki	H.	Hallett	 Mark.	 The	 Neurological	 Examination:	 Scientific	 Basis	 for

Clinical	Diagnosis.	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2016.

Strub	 RL,	 Black	 FW.	 The	 Mental	 Status	 Examination	 in	 Neurology.	 4th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	F.A.	Davis,	2000.

Swain	 DG,	 O’Brien	 AG,	 Nightingale	 PG.	 Cognitive	 assessment	 in	 elderly
patients	admitted	to	hospital:	the	relationship	between	the	Abbreviated	Mental
Test	and	the	Mini-Mental	State	Examination.	Clin	Rehabil	1999;13:503–508.
Tschanz	JT,	Welsh-Bohmer	KA,	Plassman	BL,	et	al.	Cache	County	Study	Group.
An	 adaptation	 of	 the	 modified	 mini-mental	 state	 examination:	 analysis	 of
demographic	 influences	 and	 normative	 data:	 the	 cache	 county	 study.
Neuropsychiatry	Neuropsychol	Behav	Neurol	2002;15:28–38.

Turner	 MA,	 Moran	 NF,	 Kopelman	 MD.	 Subcortical	 dementia.	 Br	 J	 Psychiatry

2002;180:148–151.

Umetsu	A,	Okuda	J,	Fujii	T,	et	al.	Brain	activation	during	the	fist-edge-palm	test:

a	functional	MRI	study.	Neuroimage	2002;17:385–392.

Vendrell	P,	Junque	C,	Pujol	J,	et	al.	The	role	of	prefrontal	regions	in	the	Stroop

task.	Neuropsychologia	1995;33:341–352.

Wade	DT,	Vergis	E.	The	Short	Orientation-Memory-Concentration	Test:	a	study

of	its	reliability	and	validity.	Clin	Rehabil	1999;13:164–170.

Watson	 RT,	 Valenstein	 E,	 Heilman	 KM.	 Thalamic	 neglect.	 Possible	 role	 of	 the
in	 behavior.	 Arch	 Neurol

thalamus	 and	 nucleus	

reticularis	

medial	
1981;38:501–506.

Weisman	D,	McKeith	I.	Dementia	with	Lewy	bodies.	Semin	Neurol	2007;27:42–

47.

CHAPTER	9

Disorders	of	Speech	and	Language

Phonation,	 strictly	 defined,	 is	 the	 production	 of	 vocal	 sounds	 without	 word
formation;	 it	 is	 entirely	 a	 function	 of	 the	 larynx.	 Howls	 of	 rage,	 the	 squeals	 of
little	girls,	and	singing	a	note	with	the	mouth	open	are	phonation.	A	vocalization
is	the	sound	made	by	the	vibration	of	the	vocal	folds,	modified	by	workings	of
the	vocal	tract.	Speech	consists	of	words,	which	are	articulated	vocal	sounds	that
symbolize	and	communicate	ideas.	Articulation	is	the	enunciation	of	words	and
phrases;	 it	 is	 a	 function	 of	 organs	 and	 muscles	 innervated	 by	 the	 brainstem.
Language	 is	 a	 mechanism	 for	 expressing	 thoughts	 and	 ideas	 as	 follows:	 by
speech	 (auditory	 symbols),	 by	 writing	 (graphic	 symbols),	 or	 by	 gestures	 and
pantomime	 (motor	 symbols).	 Language	 may	 be	 regarded	 as	 any	 means	 of
expressing	 or	 communicating	 feeling	 or	 thought	 using	 a	 system	 of	 symbols.
Grammar	 (or	 syntax)	 is	 the	 set	 of	 rules	 for	 organizing	 the	 symbols	 to	 enhance
their	meaning.

Language	 is	 a	 function	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 Linguistic	 communication
requires	 not	 only	 the	 motor	 acts	 necessary	 for	 execution;	 it	 also	 requires	 the
reception	and	interpretation	of	these	acts	when	they	are	carried	out	by	others—
along	 with	 the	 retention,	 recall,	 and	 visualization	 of	 the	 symbols.	 Speech	 is	 as
dependent	 upon	 the	 interpretation	 of	 the	 auditory	 and	 visual	 images—and	 the
association	of	these	images	with	the	motor	centers	that	control	expression—as	it
is	upon	the	motor	elements	of	expression.

In	 neurologic	 patients,	 the	 speech	 abnormalities	 most	 often	 encountered	 are
dysarthria	 and	 aphasia.	 The	 essential	 difference	 is	 that	 aphasia	 is	 a	 disorder	 of
language	and	dysarthria	is	a	disorder	of	the	motor	production	or	articulation	of
speech.	The	common	vernacular	phrase	“slurred	speech”	could	be	due	to	either.
Aphasia	 usually	 affects	 other	 language	 functions	 such	 as	 reading	 and	 writing.
Dysarthria	 is	 defective	 articulation	 of	 sounds	 or	 words	 of	 neurologic	 origin.	 In
dysarthria,	 language	 functions	 are	 normal	 and	 the	 patient	 speaks	 with	 proper

syntax,	 but	 pronunciation	 is	 faulty	 because	 of	 a	 breakdown	 in	 performing	 the
coordinated	 muscular	 movements	 necessary	 for	 speech	 production.	 A	 good
general	rule	is	that	no	matter	how	garbled	the	speech,	if	the	patient	is	speaking	in
correct	 sentences—using	 grammar	 and	 vocabulary	 commensurate	 with	 his
dialect	and	education—he	has	dysarthria	and	not	aphasia.	In	dysarthria,	there	are
often	 other	 accompanying	 bulbar	 abnormalities—such	 as	 dysphagia—and	 a
brainstem	 lesion	 is	 usually	 a	 prominent	 clinical	 consideration.	 Dysarthria	 is	 a
problem	 with	 articulation	 of	 speech;	 aphasia	 is	 a	 problem	 with	 language
function.	The	implications	of	these	two	conditions	are	quite	different.	Disturbed
language	function	is	always	due	to	brain	disease,	but	dysfunction	limited	to	the
speech	 mechanisms	 may	 occur	 with	 many	 conditions,	 neurologic	 and
nonneurologic.

Difficulty	 talking	 is	 a	 common	 neurologic	 symptom,	 and	 many	 conditions
could	 be	 responsible.	 The	 following	 sections	 discuss	 the	 anatomy,	 physiology,
clinical	examination,	and	disorders	of	articulation.	They	also	include	a	review	of
the	following:	the	anatomy	of	the	cerebral	language	centers,	the	examination	of
the	 aphasic	 patient,	 and	 the	 different	 types	 of	 aphasia.	 Other	 disturbances	 of
higher	 cortical	 function	 include	 apraxias,	 agnosias,	 and	 various	 disconnection
syndromes,	which	are	discussed	in	Chapter	10.

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY	OF
ARTICULATION

Sounds	 are	 produced	 by	 expired	 air	 passing	 through	 the	 vocal	 cords.	 Properly
articulated	speech	requires	coordination	between	the	respiratory	muscles	and	the
muscles	 of	 the	 larynx,	 pharynx,	 soft	 palate,	 tongue,	 and	 lips.	 All	 of	 these
components	 are	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 vocal	 (oral)	 tract.	 Respiratory	 movements
determine	 the	 strength	 and	 rhythm	 of	 the	 voice.	 Variations	 in	 pitch	 are
accomplished	by	alterations	in	the	tension	and	length	of	the	vocal	cords	and	the
rate	and	character	of	the	vibrations	transmitted	to	the	column	of	air	that	passes
between	them.	Modifications	in	sound	are	produced	by	changes	in	the	size	and
shape	 of	 the	 glottis,	 pharynx,	 and	 mouth	 and	 by	 changes	 in	 the	 position	 of	 the
tongue,	 soft	 palate,	 and	 lips.	 The	 oropharynx,	 nasopharynx,	 and	 mouth	 act	 as
resonating	chambers	and	further	influence	the	timbre	and	character	of	the	voice.
Speech	may	be	possible	in	the	absence	of	vocal	cords,	and	whispered	speech
may	be	possible	in	inspiration	as	well	as	expiration.	Esophageal	speech	is	used

by	patients	who	cannot	move	air	over	the	vocal	cords,	such	as	after	tracheostomy
or	laryngectomy.	The	patient	swallows	a	bolus	of	air	and	then	allows	it	to	escape
in	 a	 controlled	 fashion.	 The	 escaping	 air	 causes	 vibrations	 in	 the	 walls	 of	 the
esophagus	and	pharynx,	particularly	the	cricopharyngeal	sphincter,	producing	a
sound	that	can	be	articulated	by	the	mouth	and	lips	to	produce	speech.

Articulation	is	one	of	the	vital	bulbar	functions.	Several	cranial	nerves	(CNs)
are	involved	in	speech	production,	and	an	adequate	appraisal	of	speech	requires
evaluating	 the	 function	 of	 each.	 The	 trigeminal	 nerves	 control	 the	 muscles	 of
mastication	and	open	and	close	the	mouth.	The	facial	nerves	control	the	muscles
of	 facial	 expression,	 especially	 the	 branches	 to	 the	 orbicularis	 oris	 and	 other
smaller	 muscles	 about	 the	 mouth	 that	 control	 lip	 movement.	 The	 vagus	 nerves
and	glossopharyngeal	nerves	control	the	soft	palate,	pharynx,	and	larynx,	and	the
hypoglossal	 nerves	 control	 tongue	 movements.	 Other	 factors	 include	 the
following:	 the	 upper	 cervical	 nerves,	 which	 communicate	 with	 the	 lower	 CNs
and,	 in	 part,	 supply	 the	 infrahyoid	 and	 suprahyoid	 muscles;	 the	 cervical
sympathetic	nerves	that	contribute	to	the	pharyngeal	plexus;	and	the	phrenic	and
intercostal	nerves,	which	also	contribute	to	normal	speech.

TYPES	OF	SPEECH	SOUNDS

Voiced	sounds	are	produced	by	narrowing	the	glottis	so	that	the	vocal	cords	are
approximated.	 Voiceless	 sounds	 are	 made	 with	 the	 glottis	 open.	 Either	 type	 of
sound	may	be	modulated	by	adjusting	the	size	and	shape	of	the	vocal	cavities.
Vowels	are	largely	of	laryngeal	origin	but	are	modified	by	the	resonance	of	the
vocal	cavities.	Certain	vowel	sounds	such	as	i,	a,	and	y	are	modified	by	the	soft
palate.	 Consonants	 may	 be	 either	 voiced	 or	 voiceless;	 they	 are	 enunciated	 by
constriction	or	closure	at	one	or	more	points	along	the	vocal	tract.

Speech	 sounds	 may	 be	 placed	 in	 different	 categories	 related	 to	 the	 place	 of
articulation	 (e.g.,	 labiodental,	 interdental,	 alveolar,	 palatal,	 alveopalatal,	 velar,
and	uvular).	From	an	anatomic	and	neurologic	viewpoint,	it	is	more	important	to
recognize	how	various	sounds	are	produced.	Articulated	labials	(b,	p,	m,	and	w)
are	 formed	 principally	 by	 the	 lips.	 Modified	 labials	 (o	 and	 u,	 and	 to	 a	 lesser
extent	 i,	 e,	 and	 a)	 are	 altered	 by	 lip	 contraction.	 Labiodentals	 (f	 and	 v)	 are
formed	 by	 placing	 the	 teeth	 against	 the	 lower	 lip.	 Linguals	 are	 sounds	 formed
with	tongue	action.	T,	d,	l,	r,	and	n	are	tongue-point,	or	alveolar,	sounds,	formed
by	touching	the	tip	of	the	tongue	to	the	upper	alveolar	ridge.	S,	z,	sh,	zh,	ch,	and

j	are	dentals,	or	tongue-blade	sounds.	To	hear	distorted	linguals,	place	the	tip	of
your	 tongue	 against	 the	 back	 of	 your	 bottom	 teeth,	 hold	 it	 there	 and	 say	 “top
dog,”	 “go	 jump,”	 and	 “train.”	 To	 hear	 distorted	 labials,	 hold	 your	 upper	 lip
between	 the	 thumb	 and	 forefinger	 of	 one	 hand	 and	 your	 bottom	 lip	 similarly
with	the	other	and	say	“my	baby.”	Gutturals	(velars,	or	tongue-back	sounds,	such
as	 k,	 g,	 and	 ng)	 are	 articulated	 between	 the	 back	 of	 the	 tongue	 and	 the	 soft
palate.	 Palatals	 (German	 ch	 and	 g,	 and	 the	 French	 gn)	 are	 formed	 when	 the
dorsum	of	the	tongue	approximates	the	hard	palate.

EXAMINATION	OF	ARTICULATION

Examination	of	articulation	begins	with	noting	the	patient’s	spontaneous	speech
in	 normal	 conversation,	 usually	 during	 taking	 of	 the	 history.	 The	 accuracy	 of
pronunciation,	 rate	 of	 speech,	 resonance,	 and	 prosody	 (variations	 in	 pitch,
rhythm,	 and	 stress	 of	 pronunciation)	 are	 noted.	 Abnormalities	 of	 articulation
include	 tremulousness,	 stuttering,	 slurring,	 or	 sliding	 of	 letters	 or	 words,
scanning,	 explosiveness,	 and	 difficulties	 with	 specific	 sound	 formations.	 Some
difficult-to-enunciate	 phrases	 have	 been	 traditionally	 used.	 These	 require	 the
pronunciation	 of	 labials,	 linguals,	 and,	 to	 a	 lesser	 extent,	 velars.	 The	 nonsense
phrase	 “puhtuhkuh”	 or	 “pataka”	 tests	 all	 the	 three:	 labials	 (puh/pa),	 linguals
(tuh/ta),	and	velars	(kuh/ka).

Traditional	 phrases	 have	 been	 selected	 to	 test	 primarily	 the	 labials	 and
linguals,	such	letters	as	l,	r,	b,	p,	t,	and	d.	As	the	patient	repeats	these	phrases,
various	 aspects	 of	 the	 dysarthria	 may	 become	 more	 evident.	 These	 phrases	 are
time-honored,	 perhaps	 above	 their	 actual	 value,	 and	 are	 to	 a	 certain	 extent
colloquial.	Nonetheless,	they	are	often	useful.	Pronouncing	r’s	requires	a	facile
tongue,	 and	 many	 of	 the	 test	 phrases	 are	 loaded	 with	 this	 letter.	 The	 best	 test
words	 and	 phrases	 have	 the	 significant	 consonants	 and	 vowels	 placed	 in	 the
initial,	 middle,	 and	 final	 positions.	 Commonly	 used	 words	 and	 phrases	 include
third	 riding	 artillery	 brigade,	 Methodist	 Episcopal,	 West	 Register	 Street,	 liquid
electricity,	
truly	 rural,	 voluntary	 retribution,	 baby	 hippopotamus,	 and
irretrievable	ball.	Phrases	such	as	“my	baby	ate	a	cupcake	on	the	train”	contain
all	of	the	pertinent	elements.

Have	the	patient	repeat	a	syllable	such	as	“puh”	over	and	over	as	rapidly	as
possible.	Normally,	the	syllable	can	be	pronounced	accurately	at	a	rate	of	5	to	7
Hz.	Then	try	for	“tuh”	and	“kuh.”	Listen	for	abnormally	slow	or	rapid	repetition,

tremulousness.	 Speech
regularity	 and	 evenness,	 uniform	
pathologists	count	how	long	it	takes	for	the	patient	to	pronounce	a	syllable	such
as	“puh”	20	times	to	determine	the	diadochokinetic	syllable	rate.

loudness,	 or	

Weakness	 and	 fatigueability	 of	 articulation,	 such	 as	 might	 occur	 in
myasthenia	gravis	(MG),	may	be	brought	out	by	having	the	patient	count	to	100
at	about	one	number	per	second,	enunciating	each	number	clearly.	Listen	for	the
voice	 to	 become	 hoarse,	 hypernasal,	 slurred,	 or	 breathy.	 Disturbances	 of
laryngeal	 function	 and	 of	 speech	 rhythm	 may	 be	 elicited	 by	 having	 the	 patient
attempt	prolonged	phonation,	such	as	by	singing	and	holding	a	high	“a”	or	“e”	or
“ah”	sound.	Assess	loudness,	pitch,	quality	(hoarseness,	breathiness),	steadiness,
nasality,	 and	 duration.	 The	 voice	 may	 break,	 waver,	 or	 flutter	 excessively,
particularly	when	there	is	cerebellar	dysfunction.	Note	whether	the	pitch	of	the
voice	 is	 appropriate	 for	 the	 patient’s	 age	 and	 sex.	 Ability	 to	 hold	 a	 high	 note
indicates	the	vocal	cords	are	adducting	normally.

Normal	 coughing	 requires	 normal	 vocal	 cord	 movement.	 A	 normal	 cough
indicates	 that	 vocal	 cord	 innervation	 is	 intact.	 Dysphonia	 with	 a	 normal	 cough
suggests	laryngeal	disease	or	a	nonorganic	speech	disturbance.	The	glottal	coup
(glottic	click,	coup	de	glotte)	is	the	sharp	sound	at	the	beginning	of	a	cough.	The
intensity	 of	 the	 glottic	 click	 reflects	 the	 power	 of	 vocal	 cord	 adduction.	 The
glottic	click	may	also	be	elicited	by	asking	the	patient	to	say	“oh-oh”	or	to	make
a	sharp,	forceful	grunting	sound.	A	cough	without	a	glottal	coup	(bovine	cough)
suggests	vocal	cord	palsy.

Resonance	 is	 an	 important	 voice	 quality.	 Normal	 resonance	 depends	 on	 an
adequate	 seal	 between	 the	 oropharynx	 and	 nasopharynx	 (velopharyngeal
competence).	When	palatal	weakness	causes	an	inadequate	seal	on	pronouncing
sounds	that	require	high	oral	pressure,	the	voice	has	a	nasal	quality.	An	audible
nasal	emission	is	nasal	air	escape	that	causes	a	snorting	sound.	Hypernasality	is
more	 noticeable	 when	 the	 head	 is	 tipped	 forward;	 it	 is	 less	 evident	 when	 the
patient	lies	with	his	head	back	because	the	weakened	soft	palate	falls	back	by	its
own	weight	and	closes	off	the	nasopharynx.	To	check	for	nasal	air	leakage,	hold
a	smooth	glass	or	metal	surface,	such	as	one	lens	of	a	pair	of	spectacles,	under
the	patient’s	nostrils.	Pronouncing	sounds	with	a	nasal	component	(m,	n,	ng)	as
in	the	phrase	“ming,	ping,	ring,	sing,”	will	normally	produce	slight	condensation
and	fogging	of	the	surface.	Have	the	patient	say	a	phrase	with	no	sounds	having
a	nasal	component	(“we	see	three	geese”).	Clouding	of	the	surface	suggests	an
abnormal	 nasal	 component	 of	 the	 voice.	 Velopharyngeal	 incompetence	 is
common	in	patients	with	cleft	palate.

DISORDERS	OF	ARTICULATION

Lesions	 of	 the	 nervous	 system	 may	 cause	 various	 abnormalities	 of	 sound
production	and	word	formulation	(Table	9.1).	Laryngeal	disorders	may	alter	the
volume,	quality,	or	pitch	of	the	voice	(dysphonia).	Laryngitis	causes	dysphonia.
Aphonia	 is	 complete	 voice	 loss.	 A	 central	 or	 peripheral	 disturbance	 of	 the
innervation	 of	 the	 articulatory	 muscles	 may	 cause	 dysarthria.	 Lesions	 may
involve	 the	 peripheral	 nerves,	 brainstem	 nuclei,	 or	 the	 central	 corticobulbar,
extrapyramidal,	or	cerebellar	pathways.	Anarthria	is	a	total	inability	to	articulate
because	 of	 a	 defect	 in	 the	 control	 of	 the	 peripheral	 speech	 musculature.
Videostroboscopy	 has	 become	 a	 standard	 technique	 for	 evaluating	 articulatory
disturbances.

Lesions	 of	 the	 cerebral	 centers	 and	 connections	 that	 subserve	 language
function	 may	 cause	 aphasia,	 an	 abnormality	 of	 language,	 even	 though	 the
articulation	 mechanisms	 may	 be	 intact.	 Mutism	 is	 a	 total	 inability	 to	 speak;
usually	the	patient	appears	to	make	no	attempt	to	speak	or	make	sounds.	Mutism
is	 usually	 of	 psychogenic	 origin	 if	 present	 in	 an	 apparently	 otherwise	 normal
patient,	but	it	may	occur	with	lesions	of	the	cerebrum,	brainstem,	and	cerebellum
(especially	 in	 children).	 In	 akinetic	 mutism,	 the	 patient	 is	 mute	 and	 unmoving
(akinetic).	The	patient	appears	awake	but	is	mute,	immobile,	and	unresponsive.
Akinetic	mutism	most	often	occurs	with	damage	to	the	frontal	lobes.	Selective
(elective)	 mutism	 is	 a	 disorder	 of	 childhood	 characterized	 by	 a	 total	 lack	 of
speech	limited	to	 certain	situations—such	as	school—despite	normal	speech	in
other	settings.	The	present	discussion	is	limited	to	disorders	limited	to	the	motor
components	of	speech;	disorders	of	language	are	discussed	subsequently.

TABLE
9.1

Differential	Diagnosis	of	Abnormal	Speech	in	the
Absence	of	Obvious	Oral	Abnormality

Speech	abnormal
			Language	functions	(syntax,	naming,	comprehension,	etc.)	abnormal

→	aphasia

			Language	functions	normal
						Voice	volume,	pitch,	timbre	abnormal
									Dysphonia
												High-pitched,	strained,	choking	→	adductor	spasmodic

dysphonia

															Hoarse,	whispery,	mute
																		Cough	abnormal	→	vocal	cord	palsy
																		Cough	normal
																					Abductor	spasmodic	dysphonia
																					Local	laryngeal	disease
																					Nonorganic	dysphonia
						Voice	volume	and	pitch	normal
									Speech	rhythm,	prosody	abnormal
												Speech	slurred,	drunken	sounding	→	cerebellar	dysfunction	vs.

intoxication

												Speech	flat,	monotonous,	without	normal	inflection	or

emotionality	→	Extrapyramidal	dysfunction	vs.	right	frontal	lobe	lesion

									Speech	rhythm,	prosody	normal
															Speech	hypernasal
																		Palatal	weakness
												Abnormal	labials	(puh,	papa,	mama,	baby	hippopotamus)
																		Facial	weakness
															Abnormal	linguals	(tuh,	daddy,	darn	it)
																		Anterior	tongue	weakness
															Abnormal	velars	(kuh,	cupcake,	coke)
																		Palatal	or	posterior	tongue	weakness

Abnormalities	 of	 articulation	 may	 be	 caused	 by	 many	 different	 pathologic
conditions.	 Disturbances	 in	 the	 respiratory	 rhythm	 interfere	 with	 speech,	 and
respiratory	 muscle	 weakness	 causes	 a	 feeble	 voice	 with	 abnormalities	 in
regularity	and	rhythm.	Laryngeal	disease	may	cause	severe	speech	impairment,
but	whispered	speech	may	still	be	possible.	In	children,	articulation	disturbances
may	be	developmental	and	are	often	temporary.	Structural	abnormalities	of	the
vocal	 tract,	 such	 as	 congenital	 craniofacial	 defects	 (cleft	 palate,	 cleft	 lip),
ankyloglossia	(abnormal	shortness	of	the	frenulum	of	the	tongue;	“tongue-tie”),
adenoidal	 hypertrophy,	 vocal	 cord	 edema	 or	 nodules,	 nasal	 obstruction,	 or
perforated	 nasal	 septum	 may	 cause	 abnormalities	 in	 sound	 production.	 The
importance	 of	 the	 teeth	 in	 articulation	 is	 apparent	 in	 the	 speech	 of	 edentulous

patients.

the	

Neurologic	 disturbances	 of	 articulation	 may	 be	 caused	 by	 the	 following:
primary	 muscle	 diseases	 affecting	
larynx,	 and	 pharynx;
neuromuscular	 junction	 disorders;	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 disease	 involving	 either
the	 CN	 nuclei	 or	 the	 peripheral	 nerves	 that	 supply	 the	 muscles	 of	 articulation;
cerebellar	dysfunction;	basal	ganglia	disease;	or	disturbances	of	the	upper	motor
neuron	 control	 of	 vocalization.	 A	 commonly	 used	 classification	 separates
dysarthria	 into	 flaccid,	 spastic,	 ataxic,	 hypokinetic,	 hyperkinetic,	 and	 mixed
types.

tongue,	

Lesions	of	the	hypoglossal	nerve	or	nucleus—or	local	disorders	of	the	tongue
such	 as	 ankyloglossia—may	 cause	 impairment	 of	 all	 enunciation,	 but	 with
special	 difficulty	 in	 pronouncing	 lingual	 sounds.	 The	 speech	 is	 lisping	 in
character	 and	 is	 clumsy	 and	 indistinct.	 Paralysis	 of	 the	 laryngeal	 musculature
causes	 hoarseness,	 and	 the	 patient	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 speak	 above	 a	 whisper;
there	 is	 particular	 difficulty	 pronouncing	 vowels.	 Similar	 changes	 occur	 in
laryngitis	 and	 in	 tumors	 of	 the	 larynx.	 With	 unilateral	 laryngeal	 muscle
weakness,	such	as	in	recurrent	laryngeal	nerve	lesions,	the	voice	is	usually	low-
pitched	and	hoarse.	However,	occasionally	severe	unilateral	vocal	cord	weakness
may	be	present	without	much	effect	on	speech	because	the	normal	vocal	cord	is
able	 to	 adduct	 across	 the	 midline	 and	 approximate	 the	 abnormal	 cord.
Hoarseness	because	of	slight	vocal	cord	weakness	may	be	brought	out	by	having
the	 patient	 talk	 with	 his	 head	 turned	 to	 one	 side.	 With	 paralysis	 of	 the
cricothyroid,	 the	 voice	 is	 hoarse	 and	 deep	 and	 fatigues	 quickly.	 Diplophonia	 is
one	sound	being	produced	at	two	different	frequencies	because	of	differences	in
vibration	 when	 one	 vocal	 cord	 is	 weak	 and	 the	 other	 normal.	 In	 bilateral
abductor	paresis,	speech	is	moderately	affected,	but	in	bilateral	total	paralysis	it
is	lost.

Paralysis	 limited	 to	 the	 pharynx	 causes	 little	 detectable	 impairment	 of
articulation.	 Weakness	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 results	 in	 nasal	 speech	 (rhinolalia,	 Gr.
lalia	 “speech”),	 caused	 by	 inability	 to	 seal	 off	 the	 nasal	 from	 the	 oral	 cavity.
Voice	sounds	have	an	added	abnormal	resonance.	There	is	special	difficulty	with
the	velar	sounds,	but	labials	and	linguals	are	also	affected	because	much	of	the
air	 necessary	 for	 their	 production	 escapes	 through	 the	 nose.	 The	 speech
resembles	that	of	a	patient	with	a	cleft	palate.	Characteristically,	b	becomes	m,	d
becomes	 n,	 and	 k	 becomes	 ng.	 Amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 and	 MG	 are
common	causes	of	this	type	of	speech	difficulty.

Seventh	 nerve	 paralysis	 causes	 difficulty	 in	 pronouncing	 labials	 and

labiodentals.	 Dysarthria	 is	 noticeable	 only	 in	 peripheral	 facial	 palsy;	 the	 facial
weakness	in	the	central	type	of	facial	palsy	is	usually	too	mild	to	interfere	with
articulation.	 Bell’s	 palsy	 occasionally	 causes	 marked	 dysarthria	 because	 of
inability	 to	 close	 the	 mouth,	 purse	 the	 lips,	 and	 distend	 the	 cheeks.	 Similar
articulatory	 defects	 are	 found	 in	 myopathies	 involving	 the	 labial	 muscles	 (e.g.,
facioscapulohumeral	 or	 oculopharyngeal	 dystrophy),	 in	 cleft	 lip	 and	 with
wounds	of	the	lips.	There	is	little	impairment	of	articulation	in	trigeminal	nerve
lesions	unless	the	involvement	is	bilateral;	in	such	cases,	there	are	usually	other
characteristics	of	bulbar	speech.	Trismus	may	affect	speech	because	the	patient
is	unable	to	open	the	mouth	normally.

Lower	motor	neuron	disorders	causing	difficulty	in	articulation	may	occur	in
cranial	 neuropathies.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 ninth	 and	 eleventh	 nerves	 usually	 do	 not
affect	 articulation.	 A	 unilateral	 lesion	 of	 CN	 X	 causes	 hypernasality.	 Lesions
involving	the	vagus	bilaterally	distal	to	the	origin	of	the	superior	laryngeal	nerve
may	leave	the	vocal	cords	paralyzed	in	adduction,	resulting	in	a	weak	voice	with
stridor.	With	more	proximal	lesions,	there	is	no	stridor,	but	the	voice	and	cough
are	weak.

Neuromuscular	 disorders,	 particularly	 neuromuscular	 junction	 disorders,
often	interfere	with	speech.	In	MG,	prolonged	speaking,	such	as	counting,	may
cause	progressive	weakness	of	the	voice	with	a	decrease	in	volume	and	at	times
the	 development	 of	 a	 bulbar	 or	 nasal	 quality,	 which	 may	 even	 proceed	 to
anarthria.	As	the	voice	fatigues,	the	speech	of	a	patient	with	bulbar	myasthenia
may	be	reduced	to	an	incoherent	whisper.	Thomas	Willis,	who	provided	one	of
the	first	descriptions	of	MG	in	1672,	wrote	of	a	woman	who,	when	she	tried	to
talk	for	a	prolonged	period,	“temporarily	lost	her	power	of	speech	and	became
mute	as	a	fish.”	An	occasional	myasthenic	patient	must	hold	his	jaw	closed	with
his	hand	in	order	to	enunciate.

Motor	 neuron	 disease	 commonly	 causes	 dysarthria.	 The	 type	 varies	 from	 a
primarily	 flaccid	 dysarthria	 in	 bulbar	 palsy	 to	 a	 primarily	 spastic	 dysarthria	 in
primary	 lateral	 sclerosis;	 most	 patients	 have	 classical	 amyotrophic	 lateral
sclerosis,	 and	 the	 dysarthria	 is	 of	 mixed	 type	 with	 both	 flaccid	 and	 spastic
components;	 that	 is,	 there	 are	 both	 bulbar	 palsy	 and	 pseudobulbar	 palsy	 (see
below).	In	bulbar	palsy,	dysarthria	results	from	weakness	of	the	tongue,	pharynx,
larynx,	soft	palate,	and,	to	a	lesser	extent,	the	facial	muscles,	lips,	and	muscles	of
mastication.	Both	articulation	and	phonation	may	be	affected;	speech	is	slow	and
hesitant	with	failure	of	correct	enunciation,	and	all	sounds	and	syllables	may	be
indistinct.	 The	 patient	talks	as	though	his	mouth	were	full	of	mashed	potatoes.

Speech	 is	 thick	 and	 slurred,	 often	 with	 a	 nasal	 quality	 and	 a	 halting,	 drawling,
monotonous	 character.	 The	 tongue	 lies	 in	 the	 mouth,	 more	 or	 less	 immobile,
shriveled,	 and	 fasciculating;	 the	 palate	 rises	 very	 little.	 The	 dysarthria	 may
progress	 to	 a	 stage	 where	 there	 is	 phonation	 but	 no	 articulation.	 Speech	 is
reduced	 to	 unmodified,	 unintelligible	 laryngeal	 noises.	 Often	 at	 this	 stage,	 the
jaw	hangs	open	and	the	patient	drools.	The	condition	may	eventually	reach	the
stage	of	anarthria.	Dysphagia	is	typically	present	as	well.	For	a	video	of	flaccid
dysarthria,	see	Video	Link	9.1.

Supranuclear	 lesions	 involving	 the	 corticobulbar	 pathways	 may	 also	 cause
dysarthria.	Unilateral	cortical	lesions	do	not	usually	affect	speech	unless	they	are
in	 the	 dominant	 hemisphere	 and	 cause	 aphasia.	 Occasionally,	 some	 dysarthria
accompanies	aphasia.	Rarely,	lesions	in	the	cortical	motor	areas	for	articulation
may	cause	severe	dysarthria	without	aphasia.	Both	dysarthria	and	dysprosody,	a
defect	in	rhythm,	melody,	and	pitch,	have	been	described	with	localized	frontal
lobe	 lesions;	 these	 may	 be	 due	 to	 an	 apraxia	 of	 speech	 (AOS).	 In	 acute
hemiplegia,	there	may	be	transient	slurring	or	thickness	of	speech	depending	on
the	degree	of	face	and	tongue	weakness.

Bilateral	 supranuclear	 lesions	 involving	 the	 cortex,	 corona	 radiata,	 internal
capsule,	 cerebral	 peduncles,	 pons,	 or	 upper	 medulla	 may	 cause	 pseudobulbar
palsy	with	spastic	dysarthria.	The	muscles	that	govern	articulation	are	both	weak
and	 spastic.	 Phonation	 is	 typically	 strained-strangled,	 and	 articulation	 and
diadochokinesis	are	slow.	There	is	a	thick	bulbar	type	of	speech,	similar	to	that
in	progressive	bulbar	palsy,	but	more	explosive;	it	rarely	progresses	to	complete
anarthria.	The	tongue	is	protruded	and	moved	from	side	to	side	with	difficulty.
There	 may	 also	 be	 spasticity	 of	 the	 muscles	 of	 mastication;	 mouth	 opening	 is
restricted	and	speech	seems	to	come	from	the	back	of	the	mouth.	The	jaw	jerk,
gag	 reflex,	 and	 facial	 reflexes	 often	 become	 exaggerated	 and	 emotional
incontinence	 commonly	 occurs	 (pseudobulbar	 affect).	 For	 a	 video	 of	 spastic
dysarthria,	see	Video	Link	9.2.

The	Foix-Chavany-Marie	(bilateral	anterior	opercular)	syndrome	is	the	loss	of
voluntary	 bulbar	 movements,	 with	 preservation	 of	 involuntary	 movements	 and
reflexes,	 due	 to	 a	 lesion	 involving	 the	 frontal	 opercular	 regions	 bilaterally.
Unilateral	 lesions	 of	 the	 dominant	 frontal	 operculum	 may	 cause	 “cortical
dysarthria”	or	AOS	(see	below).

Lesions	of	the	basal	ganglia	may	affect	speech.	Athetotic	grimaces	of	the	face
and	 tongue	 may	 interfere	 with	 speech.	 Irregular	 spasmodic	 contractions	 of	 the
diaphragm	and	other	respiratory	muscles,	together	with	spasms	of	the	tongue	and

pharynx,	 may	 give	 the	 speech	 a	 curious	 jerky	 and	 groaning	 character.	 In
addition,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 pseudobulbar	 element	 with	 slurred,	 indistinct,	 spastic
speech.	When	chorea	is	present,	the	violent	movements	of	the	face,	tongue,	and
respiratory	 muscles	 may	 make	 the	 speech	 jerky,	 irregular,	 and	 hesitant.	 The
patient	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 maintain	 phonation,	 and	 occasionally,	 there	 is	 loss	 of
the	 ability	 to	 speak.	 Dysarthria	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 common	 neurologic
manifestations	of	Wilson’s	disease,	and	frequently	the	presenting	complaint.	It	is
typically	 mixed	 with	 spastic,	 ataxic,	 hypokinetic,	 and	 dystonic	 elements.	 The
type	of	dysarthria	often	corresponds	with	other	manifestations,	with	spasmodic
dysphonia	
those	 with
those	 with	 dystonic	 features,	 hypokinetic	
parkinsonism,	 and	 ataxic	 in	 those	 with	 tremor	 as	 the	 primary	 manifestation.
(Hallervorden-Spatz
Pantothenate	
syndrome)	may	cause	a	similar	mixed	spastic-extrapyramidal	dysarthria.

neurodegeneration	

kinase-associated	

in	

in	

Speech	 in	 parkinsonism	 is	 often	 mumbled,	 hesitant,	 rapid,	 and	 soft
(hypophonic).	Parkinsonian	patients	tend	to	be	soft,	fast,	mumbly	talkers.	There
may	 sometimes	 be	 bradylalia,	 with	 feeble,	 slow,	 slurred	 speech	 because	 of
muscular	 rigidity	 and	 immobility	 of	 the	 lips	 and	 tongue.	 There	 is	 dysprosody,
and	the	speech	lacks	inflections,	accents,	and	modulation.	The	patient	speaks	in
a	 monotone,	 and	 the	 words	 are	 slurred	 and	 run	 into	 one	 another.	 The	 voice
becomes	 increasingly	 weak	 as	 the	 patient	 talks,	 and	 he	 may	 become	 unable	 to
speak	 above	 a	 whisper;	 as	 the	 speech	 becomes	 more	 indistinct	 it	 may	 become
inaudible	 or	 practically	 disappear.	 Words	 may	 be	 chopped	 off.	 There	 may	 be
sudden	 blocks	 and	 hesitations,	 or	 speech	 may	 stop	 abruptly.	 There	 may	 be
pathologic	 repetition	 of	 syllables,	 words,	 or	 phrases	 (palilalia).	 Like	 the
parkinsonian	 gait,	 the	 speech	 may	 show	 festination,	 with	 a	 tendency	 to	 hurry
toward	the	end	of	sentences	or	long	words.

Voice	tremor	produces	rhythmic	alterations	in	loudness	and	pitch.	There	may
be	 associated	 tremor	 of	 the	 extremities	 or	 head,	 or	 other	 signs	 of	 neurologic
dysfunction.	Voice	tremor	may	further	complicate	the	other	speech	disturbances
of	parkinsonism.	Voice	tremor	occurs	commonly	in	essential	tremor,	a	frequently
familial	 syndrome	 that	 most	 often	 affects	 the	 hands.	 Fine	 voice	 tremors	 are
characteristic	 of	 essential	 tremor;	 coarse	 tremors	 are	 more	 commensurate	 with
cerebellar	 disease.	 Essential	 voice	 tremor	 is	 probably	 more	 common	 than
generally	 suspected,	 and	 many	 cases	 appear	
to	 go	 unrecognized	 or
misdiagnosed,	 most	 often	 as	 spasmodic	 dysphonia.	 Voice	 tremor	 is	 a	 common
manifestation	of	anxiety.	Lip	and	chin	tremors,	when	severe,	may	interfere	with
speech.	In	habit	spasms,	Tourette’s	syndrome,	and	obsessive-compulsive	states,

there	 may	 be	 articulatory	 tics	 causing	 grunts,	 groans,	 or	 barking	 sounds.	 In
Tourette’s	syndrome,	palilalia	may	also	occur.

Cerebellar	dysfunction	causes	a	defect	of	articulatory	coordination	(scanning
speech,	ataxic	dysarthria,	or	speech	asynergy).	Many	studies	have	attempted	to
localize	 speech	 functions	 in	 the	 cerebellum.	 The	 superior	 regions	 bilaterally
appear	to	mediate	speech	motor	control	and	the	right	cerebellar	hemisphere	has	a
putative	 role	 in	 speech	 planning	 and	 processing.	 Lesion	 mapping	 studies	 have
shown	 that	 dysarthria	 occurs	 with	 pathology	 affecting	 the	 upper	 paravermal
areas,	 or	 lobules	 V	 and	 VI.	 Subtypes	 of	 ataxic	 dysarthria	 are	 recognized,
common	to	all	is	an	impairment	of	articulation	and	prosody.

Ataxic	 dysarthria	 causes	 a	 lack	 of	 smooth	 coordination	 of	 the	 tongue,	 lips,
pharynx,	and	diaphragm.	Ataxic	speech	is	slow,	slurred,	irregular,	labored,	and
jerky.	 Words	 are	 pronounced	 with	 irregular	 force	 and	 speed,	 with	 involuntary
variations	 in	 loudness	 and	 pitch	 lending	 an	 explosive	 quality.	 There	 are
unintentional	pauses,	which	cause	words	and	syllables	to	be	erratically	broken.
Excessive	 separation	 of	 syllables	 and	 skipped	 sounds	 in	 words	 produce	 a
disconnected,	 disjointed,	 faltering,	 staccato	 articulation	 (scanning	 speech).	 The
speech	pattern	is	reminiscent	of	a	person	who	is	sobbing	or	breathing	hard	from
exertion.	The	unusual	spacing	of	sounds	with	perceptible	pauses	between	words
and	 irregular	 accenting	 of	 syllables	 may	 cause	 a	 jerky,	 singsong	 cadence	 that
resembles	 the	 reading	 of	 poetry.	 Ataxic	 speech	 is	 particularly	 characteristic	 of
multiple	sclerosis.	It	may	be	accompanied	by	grimaces	and	irregular	respirations.
Ataxia	of	the	voice	and	scanning	speech	may	be	more	apparent	when	the	patient
repeats	a	fairly	long	sentence.

the	 speech	

In	 multiple	 sclerosis,	

Specific	 speech	 abnormalities	 may	 occur	 in	 various	 neurologic	 conditions.
The	 disturbance	 varies	 in	 individual	 cases	 and	 depends	 upon	 the	 site	 of	 the
is
predominant	 pathologic	 change.	
characteristically	 ataxic;	 there	 are	 explosive	 and	 staccato	 elements,	 with
slowness,	 stumbling,	 halting,	 slurring,	 and	 a	 cerebellar	 type	 of	 speech	 ataxia.
Spastic-ataxic	and	mixed	dysarthrias	are	also	common.	In	Friedreich’s	ataxia,	the
ataxic,	 staccato,	 and	 explosive	 elements	 predominate.	 Speech	 is	 clumsy,	 often
scanning,	 and	 the	 pitch	 may	 suddenly	 change	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 sentence.	 In
alcohol	intoxication,	the	speech	is	slurred	and	indistinct.	There	is	difficulty	with
labials	and	linguals,	and	there	may	be	tremulousness	of	the	voice.	Conversation
is	 often	 characterized	 by	 a	 tendency	 to	 garrulousness.	 The	 patient	 may
repeatedly	 use	 words	 he	 can	 pronounce	 correctly,	 avoiding	 the	 use	 of	 other
words.	This	results	from	loss	of	cerebral	cortical	control	over	thought	and	word

formulation	and	speech,	rather	than	from	a	primary	articulatory	disturbance.	In
delirium	 tremens,	 the	 speech	 is	 tremulous	 and	 slurred.	 Other	 types	 of
intoxication	also	produce	speech	that	is	thick	and	slurred.	Rarely,	the	inability	to
relax	 muscles	 in	 myotonia	 causes	 slight	 speech	 impairment.	 Myxedema	 may
cause	a	low-pitched,	harsh,	husky,	slow,	and	monotonous	voice.	General	paresis
may	cause	a	tremulous,	slurring	type	of	dysarthria,	with	special	difficulties	with
the	 linguals	 and	 labials.	 Letters,	 syllables,	 and	 phrases	 are	 omitted	 or	 run
together.	 The	 speech	 is	 slovenly,	 with	 ataxia,	 stumbling,	 and	 alliteration,	 often
accompanied	by	tremors	of	the	lips,	tongue,	and	face.

Patients	 with	 some	 forms	 of	 aphasia,	 dysarthria,	 dysprosodia,	 and	 speech
apraxia	 may	 begin	 to	 sound	 as	 if	 they	 have	 developed	 an	 unusual	 accent.	 The
foreign	accent	syndrome	during	recovering	facial	diplegia	made	one	patient	from
Virginia	 sound	 for	 several	 months	 as	 if	 she	 were	 a	 Bavarian	 countess.	 The
foreign	accent	syndrome	has	been	reported	as	the	only	manifestation	of	a	cortical
lesion	and	as	the	presenting	manifestation	of	primary	progressive	aphasia	(PPA).
Spasmodic	 dysphonia	 is	 a	 focal	 dystonia	 characterized	 by	 a	 striking
abnormality	 of	 voice	 production.	 In	 adductor	 dysphonia,	 irregular	 involuntary
spasms	of	the	vocal	muscles	cause	erratic	adduction	of	the	cords.	As	the	patient
strains	 to	 speak	 through	 the	 narrowed	 vocal	 tract,	 his	 voice	 takes	 on	 a	 high-
pitched,	choked	quality	that	varies	markedly	during	the	course	of	a	sentence.	It	is
most	marked	in	stressed	 vowels.	The	dysphonia	may	lessen	or	disappear	when
the	 patient	 sighs	 or	 whispers.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 spasmodic	 dysphonia,	 see	 Video
Link	9.3.

The	much	rarer	abductor	spasmodic	dysphonia	causes	excessive	abduction	of
the	 involved	 cord,	 and	 the	 voice	 is	 hoarse	 and	 breathy.	 In	 both	 types,	 there	 is
often	 a	 dramatic	 improvement	 in	 the	 voice	 during	 shouting,	 whispering,	 or
singing.	The	difference	in	adductor	and	abductor	spasmodic	dysphonia	is	nicely
demonstrated	 in	 the	 audio/video	 posted	 by	 Reich	 and	 Meyer.	 Both	 types	 may
respond	 dramatically	 to	 the	 injection	 of	 botulinum	 toxin	 into	 the	 involved
muscle.

Secondary	 speech	 disturbances	 may	 also	 occur	 without	 abnormalities	 or
specific	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 articulatory	 apparatus,	 as	 seen	 in	 individuals	 with
hearing	 defects,	 delayed	 physical	 development,	 intellectual	 disability,	 and
psychogenic	disturbances.	Severe	hearing	loss,	especially	when	it	occurs	early	in
life	before	speech	patterns	are	ingrained,	can	result	in	abnormalities	of	speech.
The	 nature	 and	 severity	 of	 the	 speech	 abnormality	 depend	 largely	 upon	 the
degree	of	hearing	loss,	the	time	at	which	it	occurred,	and	the	individual’s	ability

to	 compensate.	 The	 speech	 disorder	 may	 range	 from	 a	 mild	 abnormality	 of
articulation	 to	 the	 indistinct	 and	 often	 unintelligible	 speech	 of	 deaf-mutism.	 A
child	 with	 slow	 physical	 development	 or	 psychological	 problems	 may	 retain
childish	speech	until	later	years.	Childish	speech	may	persist	in	mild	intellectual
disability.	With	moderate	disability,	speech	develops	late,	and	the	vocabulary	is
limited.	 It	 may	 be	 slow,	 labored,	 indistinct,	 and	 difficult	 to	 understand.	 With
severe	disability,	speech	is	babbling	and	grunting	in	character,	with	a	tendency
toward	 echolalia.	 In	 delayed	 puberty	 and	 in	 eunuchism,	 the	 male	 voice	 retains
juvenile	 or	 feminine	 characteristics,	 whereas	 in	 the	 virilized	 woman,	 it	 may	 be
low-pitched	and	coarse.

Stuttering	 refers	 to	 faulty,	 spasmodic,	 interrupted	 speech	 characterized	 by
involuntary	 hesitations	 in	 which	 the	 speaker	 is	 unable	 to	 produce	 the	 next
expected	 sound.	 The	 flow	 of	 speech	 is	 broken	 by	 pauses	 during	 which
articulation	 is	 entirely	 arrested.	 Stammering	 may	 happen	 to	 anyone	 in	 certain
circumstances,	 as	 with	 embarrassment.	 Stuttering	 implies	 a	 more	 severe
disturbance	 of	 speech,	 with	 faltering	 or	 interrupted	 speech	 characterized	 by
difficulty	 in	 enunciating	 syllables	 and	 joining	 them	 together.	 Interference	 with
communication	may	be	profound	and	the	social	consequences	severe.	Stuttering
speech	 is	 stumbling	 and	 hesitant	 in	 character,	 with	 habitual	 and	 spasmodic
repetitions	 of	 consonants	 or	 syllables,	 alternating	 with	 pauses.	 There	 may	 be
localized	 cramps,	 spasms,	 and	 tic-like	 contractions	 of	 the	 muscles	 essential	 to
articulation,	 which	 may	 be	 accompanied	 by	 grimaces,	 spasms	 and	 contractions
of	the	muscles	of	the	head	and	extremities,	and	spasm	and	incoordination	of	the
respiratory	 muscles.	 The	 individual	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 pronounce	 certain
consonants,	with	particular	difficulty	in	using	dentals	and	labials.	Often	the	first
syllable	 or	 consonant	 of	 a	 word	 is	 repeated	 many	 times.	 The	 individual	 may
remain	with	his	mouth	open	until	the	articulatory	spasm	relaxes,	then	the	words
explode	 out	 until	 the	 breath	 is	 gone.	 He	 then	 takes	 another	 breath,	 and	 the
process	 is	 repeated.	 Stuttering	 is	 markedly	 influenced	 by	 emotional	 excitement
and	by	the	presence	of	strangers.	In	spite	of	difficulty	in	speaking,	the	individual
may	 be	 able	 to	 sing	 without	 hesitation.	 There	 have	 been	 accomplished
professional	 singers	 who	 stuttered	 severely	 in	 ordinary	 speech.	 Britain’s	 King
George	VI	stuttered	severely,	as	memorably	depicted	in	the	motion	picture	The
King’s	 Speech.	 Many	 theories	 have	 been	 offered	 regarding	 the	 etiology	 of
stuttering.

In	 lalling	 (lallation,	 “baby	 talk”),	 the	 speech	 is	 childish,	 babbling,	 and
characterized	 by	 a	 lack	 of	 precision	 in	 pronouncing	 certain	 consonants,

especially	the	letters	r	and	l.	A	uvular	is	substituted	for	a	lingual-palatal	r,	so	that
“broken	reed”	is	pronounced	“bwoken	weed.”	The	diphthong	ow	or	other	sounds
may	be	substituted	for	the	l	sound,	or	sometimes	l	may	be	substituted	for	r.	T	and
d	 may	 be	 substituted	 for	 s,	 g,	 and	 the	 k	 sound.	 Lalling	 may	 occur	 because	 of
hearing	 defects,	 mental	 or	 physical	 retardation,	 or	 from	 psychogenic	 disorders.
In	lisping,	the	sibilants	are	imperfectly	pronounced,	and	th	is	substituted	for	s;	a
similar	defect	in	articulation	may	be	associated	with	partial	edentulism.	Lalling
and	lisping	are	usually	because	of	imperfect	action	of	the	articulatory	apparatus
(as	 in	 children),	 persistent	 faulty	 habits	 of	 articulation,	 imitation	 of	 faulty
patterns	of	articulation,	poor	speech	training,	habit,	or	affectation.

NONORGANIC	(FUNCTIONAL)	SPEECH
DISORDERS

Emotional	 and	 psychogenic	 factors	 influence	 articulation.	 Speech,	 but	 not
language,	 disorders	 may	 occur	 on	 a	 nonorganic	 basis.	 Nonorganic	 voice
disorders	 can	 take	 many	 different	 forms	 and	 can	 be	 caused	 by	 a	 variety	 of
factors.	 The	 most	 common	 functional	 voice	 disorders	 are	 dysphonia	 and
aphonia.	 Dysarthria,	 lalling,	 stuttering,	 mutism,	 or	 anarthria	 occurs	 rarely.
Psychogenic	foreign	accent	syndrome	has	been	reported.	There	may	be	infantile
language	wherein	the	objective	pronoun	is	used	as	the	subject	(e.g.,	“Me	want	to
go	home”).	Onset	is	often	abrupt,	perhaps	in	association	with	emotional	trauma;
there	 may	 be	 periods	 of	 remission,	 and	 the	 condition	 may	 suddenly	 disappear.
The	 speech	 defect	 may	 vary	 in	 type	 from	 time	 to	 time.	 It	 is	 often	 bizarre,	 and
does	not	correspond	to	any	organic	pattern.	The	patient	may	fail	to	articulate	and
speak	 only	 by	 whispering.	 Speech	 may	 be	 lost	 but	 the	 patient	 is	 able	 to	 sing,
whistle,	and	cough.	There	may	be	associated	dysphagia	and	globus	hystericus.

In	anxiety	and	agitation	the	speech	may	be	broken,	tremulous,	high-pitched,
uneven,	and	breathless.	Stuttering	and	stammering	are	common.	The	speech	may
be	 rapid	 and	 jumbled	 (tachyphemia	 or	 tachylalia),	 or	 there	 may	 be	 lalling	 or
mutism.	 In	 hysterical	 aphonia,	 there	 is	 profound	 speech	 difficulty	 but	 no
disturbance	of	coughing	or	respiration.	Manic	patients	may	have	a	rapid	flow	of
words	(pressured	speech),	often	with	an	abrupt	change	of	subject.	In	depression
speech	 may	 be	 slow,	 sometimes	 with	 mutism.	 True	 organic	 aphasia	 is
occasionally	confused	with	hysterical	or	simulated	mutism.	The	aphasic	patient,
no	 matter	 how	 speechless,	 at	 least	 occasionally	 tries	 to	 speak;	 in	 hysterical

mutism	there	may	be	the	appearance	of	great	effort	without	the	production	of	so
much	as	a	tone;	in	simulated	mutism,	the	patient	does	not	even	make	an	effort.
Mutism	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 catatonia.	 In	 schizophrenia	 there	 may	 be	 hesitancy
with	 blocking,	 or	 negativism	 with	 resulting	 mutism	 (alalia).	 Two	 common
nonorganic	 dysphonias	 seen	 in	 children	 and	 adolescents	 are	 the	 whispering
syndrome,	 seen	 primarily	 in	 girls,	 and	 mutational	 falsetto	 (hysterical	 high-
pitched	voice),	seen	primarily	in	boys.

Palilalia,	 echolalia,	 and	 perseveration	 are	 often	 manifestations	 of	 psychosis,
but	they	can	occur	with	organic	lesions,	especially	of	the	frontal	lobes.	Palilalia
is	the	repetition	of	one’s	own	speech.	Echolalia	is	the	meaningless	repetition	of
heard	words.	Perseveration	is	the	persistence	of	one	reply	or	one	idea	in	response
to	various	questions.	Neologisms	are	new	words,	usually	meaningless,	coined	by
the	 patient,	 and	 usually	 heard	 in	 psychotic	 states	 or	 in	 aphasic	 patients.
Idioglossia	 is	 imperfect	 articulation	 with	 utterance	 of	 meaningless	 sounds;	 the
individual	 may	 speak	 with	 a	 vocabulary	 all	 his	 own.	 Idioglossia	 may	 be
observed	 in	 patients	 with	 partial	 deafness,	 aphasia,	 and	 congenital	 word
deafness.	Alliterative	sentences,	repetition,	and	confusion	are	found	in	delirium
and	in	psychosis.	Dyslogia	refers	to	abnormal	speech	because	of	mental	disease,
and	it	is	most	often	used	to	refer	to	abnormal	speech	in	dementia.

APHASIA

When	focal	brain	disease	affects	primary	cortex,	the	resulting	deficit	reflects	the
area	 involved	 (e.g.,	 hemiparesis	 with	 conditions	 affecting	 the	 posterior	 frontal
lobe,	or	visual	field	defects	with	conditions	affecting	the	occipital	lobe).	When
disease	 affects	 association	 cortex	 or	 areas	 of	 the	 brain	 that	 subserve	 high-level
integrative	 function,	 a	 variety	 of	 abnormalities	 of	 higher	 cortical	 function	 may
result.	 Aphasia	 (dysphasia)	 refers	 to	 a	 disorder	 of	 language,	 including	 various
combinations	of	impairment	in	the	ability	to	spontaneously	produce,	understand,
and	 repeat	 speech,	 as	 well	 as	 defects	 in	 the	 ability	 to	 read	 and	 write.	 A	 deficit
affecting	 only	 speech	 is	 usually	 dysarthria,	 because	 of	 cerebellar	 disease	 or
weakness	or	spasticity	of	the	speech-producing	musculature.

In	 the	 late	 18th	 century,	 Russian	 clinicians	 began	 to	 report	 aphasia.	 Broca
(1861)	 noted	 loss	 of	 speech	 associated	 with	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 left	 inferior	 frontal
convolution,	 and	 Trousseau	 (1862)	 first	 used	 the	 term	 aphasia.	 Wernicke’s
seminal	ideas	laid	the	groundwork	for	many	of	the	current	concepts	of	aphasia.

In	 1874,	 he	 described	 loss	 of	 speech	 comprehension	 (word	 deafness)	 from	 a
lesion	 of	 the	 left	 superior	 temporal	 gyrus,	 and	 he	 later	 reported	 that	 a	 lesion
posterior	to	the	superior	temporal	gyrus,	in	the	region	of	the	angular	gyrus,	was
followed	by	inability	to	comprehend	written	words	(alexia,	or	word	blindness).
Wernicke	also	provided	the	first	description	of	what	is	now	known	as	conduction
aphasia.	 Lichtheim	 proposed	 a	 model	 of	 the	 cortical	 speech	 areas	 based	 on
Wernicke’s	 ideas	 (the	 Wernicke-Lichtheim	 model).	 This	 model	 was	 further
described	 and	 popularized	 by	 Benson,	 Geschwind,	 and	 others	 at	 the	 Boston
Aphasia	 Research	 Center	 to	 create	 what	 is	 now	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 Wernicke-
Geschwind	model,	or	the	Boston	classification.

Overall,	 functional	 neuroimaging	 has	 shown	 that	 the	 19th-century	 model	 of
language	 is	 remarkably	 insightful,	 confirming	 the	 importance	 of	 the	 left
posterior	inferior	frontal	(PIF)	and	posterior	superior	temporal	(PST)	cortices	as
predicted	 by	 Broca,	 Wernicke,	 and	 Lichtheim.	 However,	 the	 Wernicke-
Geschwind	model	has	a	number	of	limitations,	for	example,	it	does	not	account
for	 language	 disturbances	 caused	 by	 subcortical	 lesions	 other	 than	 conduction
aphasia;	 it	 does	 not	 account	 for	 the	 often	 significant	 recovery	 after	 stroke,
possibly	because	of	plasticity	with	speech	functions	taken	over	by	other	areas	of
the	cortex;	and	it	does	not	account	for	the	diverse	nature	 of	most	aphasias,	for
example,	comprehension	deficits	in	Broca’s	aphasia.

A	 simple	 definition	 of	 aphasia	 is	 a	 disorder	 of	 previously	 intact	 language
abilities	because	of	brain	damage.	A	more	comprehensive	definition	considers	it
a	defect	in	or	loss	of	the	power	of	expression	by	speech,	writing,	or	gestures	or	a
defect	in	or	loss	of	the	ability	to	comprehend	spoken	or	written	language	or	to
interpret	 gestures,	 because	 of	 brain	 damage.	 Aphasia	 implies	 that	 the	 language
disorder	is	not	due	to	paralysis	or	disability	of	the	organs	of	speech	or	of	muscles
governing	 other	 forms	 of	 expression.	 The	 term	 dysphasia	 is	 not	 helpful	 and	 is
easily	confused	with	dysphagia;	therefore,	it	has	fallen	into	disuse.

There	are	three	cortical	levels	involved	in	language	comprehension.	The	first
is	the	level	of	arrival,	a	function	of	the	primary	cortical	reception	areas;	at	this
level,	 language	 symbols	 are	 perceived,	 seen,	 or	 heard,	 without	 further
differentiation	of	the	impulses.	The	second	level	is	 that	of	knowing,	or	gnostic
function,	concerned	with	the	recognition	of	impulses,	formulation	of	engrams	for
recall	 of	 stimuli,	 and	 revisualization.	 The	 third	 level,	 the	 one	 of	 greatest
importance	 in	 aphasia,	 has	 to	 do	 with	 recognition	 of	 symbols	 in	 the	 form	 of
words,	or	the	higher	elaboration	and	association	of	learned	symbols	as	a	function
of	language.

There	 are	 also	 three	 levels	 of	 motor	 speech	 function.	 In	 aphasia,	 the	 most
elementary	of	these	is	least	frequently	affected,	and	the	most	complex	most	often
involved.	 Most	 primitive	 is	 the	 emotional	 level;	 the	 patient	 may	 respond	 to	 a
painful	 stimulus	 with	 an	 “ouch,”	 even	 though	 other	 language	 functions	 are
entirely	absent.	Emotional	language	may	be	preserved	when	all	other	language
functions	are	lost.	Next	is	the	automatic	level,	which	is	concerned	with	casual,
automatic	speech;	the	patient	may	be	able	to	answer	questions	with	words	such
as	 “yes”	 and	 “no,”	 and	 be	 able	 to	 count	 or	 recite	 the	 days	 of	 the	 week,	 even
though	 other	 elements	 of	 speech	 are	 severely	 impaired.	 The	 highest	 level	 is
propositional,	 volitional,	 symbolic,	 or	 intellectualized	 language,	 which	 is	 most
easily	 disrupted	 and	 most	 difficult	 to	 repair.	 Language	 requires	 the	 use	 of
symbols	(sounds,	marks,	gestures)	for	communication.	Propositional	language	is
the	 communication	 of	 thoughts,	 ideas,	 feelings,	 and	 judgments	 using	 words,
syntax,	 semantics,	 and	 rules	 of	 conversation.	 A	 normal	 individual	 is	 able	 to
understand	 complex	 sentences	 and	 make	 statements	 that	 require	 thought	 and
concentration.

ANATOMY	OF	THE	LANGUAGE	CENTERS

The	 classical	 language	 centers	 are	 located	 in	 the	 perisylvian	 areas	 of	 the
language-dominant	 hemisphere	 (Figure	 9.1).	 Although	
these	 anatomical
constructs	 are	 useful,	 current	 evidence	 is	 that	 language	 functions	 involve
widespread	neural	networks	in	many	parts	of	both	hemispheres.	This	may	help
explain	 the	 many	 clinical	 nuances	 found	 in	 language	 disorders.	 The	 language
areas	 form	 a	 C-shaped	 mass	 of	 tissue	 around	 the	 lips	 of	 the	 Sylvian	 fissure
extending	from	Broca’s	area	to	Wernicke’s	area.	The	central	sulcus	intersects	the
Sylvian	 fissure	 near	 its	 posterior	 ramus.	 The	 PIF	 language	 areas	 lie	 in	 front	 of
the	 central	 sulcus	 in	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 and	 are	 referred	 to	 as	 anterior	 or
prerolandic.	The	PST	areas	lie	posterior	to	the	central	sulcus	and	are	referred	to
as	 posterior	 or	 postrolandic.	 The	 anterior	 speech	 areas	 subserve	 the	 motor—or
expressive—aspects,	and	the	posterior	areas	subserve	the	sensory—or	perceptive
—aspects	of	language.	Broca’s	speech	area	lies	in	the	inferior	frontal	gyrus.	It	is
essentially	the	motor	association	cortex,	the	executive	area	for	language	function
that	 lies	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 primary	 motor	 areas	 for	 the	 lips,	 tongue,	 and	 face.
The	region	of	the	left	precentral	gyrus	of	the	insula,	a	cortical	area	beneath	the
frontal	 and	 temporal	 lobes,	 seems	 to	 be	 important	 in	 the	 motor	 planning	 of

speech.

FIGURE	9.1	 Centers	 important	 in	 language.	 A,	 angular	 gyrus;	 B,	 Broca’s	 area;	 EC,
Exner’s	 writing	 center;	 SP,	 superior	 parietal	 lobule,	 which	 with	 the	 PCG	 (postcentral
gyrus)	is	important	in	tactile	recognition;	T,	pars	triangularis;	W,	Wernicke’s	area.

Wernicke’s	speech	area	lies	in	the	superior	temporal	gyrus.	It	is	essentially	the
sensory	association	cortex	that	lies	just	posterior	to	the	primary	auditory	cortex.
The	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 (AF)	 is	 a	 deep	 white	 matter	 tract	 that	 arches	 from
Wernicke’s	area	around	the	posterior	end	of	the	Sylvian	fissure	and	through	the
subcortical	 white	 matter	 of	 the	 insula	 to	 Broca’s	 area.	 Other	 tracts	 in	 the
subcortical	white	matter	of	the	insula	provide	additional	connections	between	the
PIF	 and	 PST	 areas.	 The	 angular	 gyrus	 is	 part	 of	 the	 inferior	 parietal	 lobule;	 it
caps	the	posterior	ramus	of	the	Sylvian	fissure	and	lies	between	Wernicke’s	area
and	 the	 visual	 cortex.	 The	 angular	 gyrus	 is	 important	 for	 reading	 and	 similar
nonverbal	 language	 functions.	 The	 supramarginal	 gyrus	 also	 lies	 between	 the
visual	 cortex	 and	 the	 posterior	 perisylvian	 language	 areas	 and	 is	 involved	 with
visual	language	functions.	Exner’s	center	is	a	purported	cortical	area	concerned
with	 writing	 that	 lies	 in	 the	 middle	 frontal	 gyrus	 of	 the	 language-dominant
frontal	 lobe	 very	 near	 the	 frontal	 eye	 field,	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 primary	 motor
cortex	for	the	hand.	There	may	be	white	matter	tracts	connecting	Wernicke’s	and
Exner’s	areas	analogous	to	the	AF.

Although	 the	 cortical	 areas	 and	 connections	 described	 above	 are	 important
language	centers,	the	clinicopathologic	correlations	are	not	so	exact	as	to	permit
precise	localization	in	all	instances.	The	degree	of	deficit	seems	to	correlate	with

the	 size	 of	 the	 lesion	 as	 well	 as	 its	 location.	 Language	 functions	 are	 not	 as
discretely	 localized	 in	 the	 brain	 as	 are	 things	 such	 as	 vision	 and	 elemental
sensation,	 but	 they	 are	 more	 localized	 than	 such	 faculties	 as	 intelligence,
judgment,	and	creativity.	There	is	evidence	that	propositional	speech	depends	on
left	hemisphere	regions	remote	from	the	classic	perisylvian	language	areas.	The
2012	meta-analysis	of	more	than	100	functional	imaging	studies	done	by	Dewitt
and	 Rauschecker	 implicates	 a	 much	 broader	 portion	 of	 the	 superior	 temporal
gyrus	
than	 has	 been	 previously	 appreciated,
challenging	the	classical	scheme	that	word	recognition	occurs	in	the	PST	gyrus.

in	 speech	 comprehension	

The	 perisylvian	 language	 areas	 are	 perfused	 by	 the	 middle	 cerebral	 artery
(MCA);	the	anterior	language	areas	are	supplied	by	the	superior	division	and	the
posterior	 areas	 by	 the	 inferior	 division.	 Most	 cases	 of	 aphasia	 are	 due	 to
ischemia	in	the	MCA	distribution.	Aphasia	occurs	in	as	many	as	40%	of	stroke
patients	 but	 can	 also	 occur	 in	 other	 disorders,	 such	 as	 neoplasms,	 degenerative
disorders,	 and	 demyelinating	 disease.	 Aphasia	 due	 to	 a	 tumor	 is	 generally	 less
severe	than	aphasia	due	to	a	stroke	in	the	same	region.	Dysphagia	is	common	in
patients	 with	 nonfluent	 aphasia,	 and	 strokes	 causing	 aphasia	 have	 twice	 the
mortality	as	nonaphasic	strokes.

EXAMINATION	OF	THE	PATIENT	WITH	APHASIA

Initial	appraisal	of	language	function	takes	place	during	the	taking	of	the	history.
Obvious	deficits	require	exploration,	but	there	may	be	language	deficits	that	are
not	readily	apparent	during	history	taking.	For	example,	the	inability	to	repeat,
which	is	the	essential	characteristic	of	conduction	aphasia,	may	not	be	apparent
during	history	taking.	Some	degree	of	formal	assessment	is	usually	prudent.	In
evaluating	 aphasia,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 know	 about	 the	 patient’s	 handedness,
cultural	background,	languages	spoken,	vocabulary,	and	intellectual	capacity.	It
is	difficult	to	evaluate	language	status	in	a	person	who	has	altered	mental	status,
inattention,	 agitation,	 or	 severe	 depression.	 Patients	 with	 emotional	 problems
may	have	language	disturbances	on	a	nonorganic	basis.	Any	apparent	speech	or
language	difficulty	must	of	course	be	correlated	with	the	findings	on	other	parts
of	the	neurologic	examination.	The	evaluation	of	hearing	is	discussed	in	Chapter
17.	Aphasia	is	sometimes	mistaken	for	dementia	and	vice	versa.

About	 90%	 to	 95%	 of	 the	 population	 is	 right-handed.	 The	 left	 cerebral
hemisphere	is	dominant	for	language	in	99%	of	right-handers,	and	60%	to	70%

of	 left-handers.	 Of	 the	 remaining	 left-handers,	 about	 half	 are	 right-hemisphere
dominant	 and	 about	 half	 have	 mixed	 dominance.	 Shifted	 sinistrals	 (anomalous
dextrals)	are	naturally	left-handed	individuals	forced	by	parents	or	teachers	early
in	life	to	function	right-handed,	primarily	for	writing.	This	approach	to	dealing
with	 left-handedness	 has	 largely	 died	 out,	 but	 shifted	 sinistrals	 are	 still
encountered,	 primarily	 in	 the	 older	 population.	 One	 can	 therefore	 encounter
right-handed	patients	(dextrals)	who	are	left-hemisphere	dominant	for	language,
left-handed	 patients	 (sinistrals)	 who	 are	 still	 left-hemisphere	 dominant,	 “right-
handed”	patients	who	are	right-hemisphere	dominant	(anomalous	dextrals),	and
left-handed	 patients	 who	 are	 right-hemisphere	 dominant	 (true	 sinistrals).
Because	 clinical	 abnormalities	 of	 higher	 cortical	 function,	 especially	 language,
are	heavily	influenced	by	dominance,	determination	of	the	patient’s	handedness
and	dominance	status	is	paramount.	Only	about	2%	of	cases	of	aphasia	are	due
to	unilateral	right	hemisphere	lesions.

Cerebral	dominance	and	handedness	are	at	least	in	part	hereditary.	Failure	to
develop	 clear	 hemispheric	 dominance	 has	 been	 offered	 as	 an	 explanation	 for
such	things	as	dyslexia,	stuttering,	mirror	writing,	learning	disability,	and	general
clumsiness.	Many	patients	are	at	least	to	some	degree	ambidextrous,	and	it	may
be	 difficult,	 short	 of	 a	 Wada	 test,	 to	 be	 certain	 which	 hemisphere	 is	 language
dominant.	Various	“foolproof”	markers	of	true	handedness	have	been	proposed,
but	 all	 are	 suspect.	 In	 right-handed	 patients,	 aphasia	 will	 be	 due	 to	 a	 left
hemisphere	 lesion	 in	 99%	 of	 the	 cases;	 the	 other	 1%	 are	 crossed	 aphasics.	 In
left-handers,	 the	 situation	 is	 much	 more	 variable.	 In	 one	 series	 of	 left-handed
aphasics,	 60%	 had	 lesions	 of	 the	 left	 hemisphere.	 There	 may	 be	 a	 degree	 of
mixed	 dominance	 for	 language	 in	 non–right-handed	 individuals.	 Aphasia	 may
tend	to	be	less	severe	in	left-handers	and	recover	better;	just	a	family	history	of
left-handedness	in	a	right-handed	aphasic	may	predict	better	recovery.	Basso	has
challenged	the	concept	of	better	recovery	in	non–right-handed	patients.

Multilingual	aphasics	require	examination	in	all	of	their	languages.	Polyglots
may	 have	 several	 centers	 for	 speech	 in	 somewhat	 discrete	 but	 overlapping
cortical	areas.	Neurophysiologic	and	neuroimaging	studies	are	gradually	adding
to	 our	 knowledge	 of	 the	 regions	 of	 the	 brain	 involved	 in	 the	 various	 speech-
related	processes.	In	bilinguals,	the	cerebral	representation	of	some	functions	is
similar	for	both	languages,	but	the	areas	concerned	with	other	functions	may	be
different	 depending	 on	 when	 the	 languages	 were	 acquired.	 Which	 language
recovers	best	in	multilingual	aphasics	is	variable.	Pitres’	law	states	that	recovery
from	aphasia	will	be	best	for	the	language	most	used,	but	Ribot’s	rule	holds	that

recovery	will	be	best	for	the	native	language.	In	fact,	most	patients	show	parallel
recovery	in	both	languages.

There	 are	 six	 separate	 components	 of	 language	 function	 that	 are	 typically
tested	 in	 the	 clinical	 arena:	 spontaneous	 (conversational)	 speech,	 auditory
comprehension,	 naming,	 reading,	 writing,	 and	 the	 ability	 to	 repeat.	 It	 is	 often
useful	 to	 assess	 these	 components	 individually	 before	 trying	 to	 synthesize	 the
findings	into	a	diagnostic	entity.	There	are	several	instruments	available	for	more
detailed	 examination	 of	 the	 aphasic	 patient,	 such	 as	 the	 Boston	 Diagnostic
Aphasia	 Examination,	 Western	 Aphasia	 Battery,	 and	 others.	 The	 Western
Aphasia	 Battery	 produces	 a	 summary	 score	 reflecting	 overall	 severity	 (aphasia
quotient).	 For	 clinical	 purposes,	 it	 is	 not	 clear	 these	 add	 a	 great	 deal	 to	 the
bedside	examination.

SPONTANEOUS	SPEECH

In	 addition	 to	 high-level	 propositional	 speech,	 spontaneous	 utterances	 may
include	the	lower-level	functions	of	emotional	and	automatic	speech.	Emotional
speech	is	spontaneous	speech	prompted	by	a	high	emotional	charge.	It	is	present
in	 animals,	 especially	 higher	 primates,	 and	 in	 humans	 before	 they	 acquire
propositional	language.	Some	patients	with	aphasia,	primarily	nonfluent	aphasia,
even	 when	 severe,	 may	 swear	 and	 curse	 eloquently	 when	 angry,	 often	 to	 the
shock	 and	 surprise	 of	 friends	 and	 family.	 Automatic	 speech	 refers	 to	 the
recitation	 of	 simple	 overlearned	 items	 from	 early	 childhood	 or	 to	 a	 specific
retained	speech	fragment	that	an	aphasic	patient	is	still	capable	of	saying	even	in
the	 presence	 of	 severe	 nonfluency.	 Even	 when	 unable	 to	 produce	 propositional
speech,	 an	 aphasic	 patient	 may	 be	 able	 to	 automatically	 count,	 say	 the	 days	 of
the	 week	 or	 months	 of	 the	 year,	 repeat	 the	 alphabet,	 say	 his	 name,	 or	 recite
nursery	 rhymes.	 Some	 aphasic	 patients	 are	 able	 to	 sing	 simple	 overlearned
songs,	such	as	Happy	Birthday,	even	when	they	are	unable	to	speak.

A	 retained	 fragment	 that	 an	 aphasic	 patient	 repeats	 over	 and	 over	 has	 been
referred	 to	 as	 a	 monophasia	 (recurring	 utterance,	 verbal	 stereotypy,	 verbal
automatism,	 verbigeration).	 In	 monophasia,	 the	 individual’s	 vocabulary	 is
limited	to	a	single	word,	phrase,	or	sentence,	such	as	“do-do-do”	or	“Oh,	God.”
Verbal	automatisms	occur	most	often	in	global	aphasia.	The	recurrent	utterance
may	be	a	real	word	or	a	neologism.	Sometimes	the	monophasia	is	an	outrageous
expletive	 that	 bursts	 from	 an	 otherwise	 dignified	 and	 respectable	 patient	 under

socially	 awkward	 circumstances.	 Some	 verbal	 automatisms	 are	 unusual	 and
difficult	 to	 understand.	 One	 aphasic	 patient	 would	 say	 “Pontius	 Pilate”	 in
response	 to	 any	 and	 all	 questions.	 Other	 examples	 include	 “no	 pasta,”
“television,”	and	“gotta	go.”	Broca’s	original	aphasic	patient,	M.	Leborgne,	was
nicknamed	 “Tan”	 because	 that	 was	 the	 only	 word	 he	 could	 say.	 According	 to
Critchley,	Hughlings	Jackson	first	became	interested	in	aphasia	when	his	family
vacationed	in	a	house	where	the	aphasic	landlady	could	utter	only	the	neologistic
stereotypy	 “watty.”	 A	 patient	 may	 have	 several	 stereotypies	 in	 their	 repertoire,
and	 preservation	 of	 stereotypic	 social	 responses	 (“hello,”	 “fine”)	 may	 trick	 the
careless	 or	 rushed	 clinician	 into	 believing	 the	 patient	 is	 linguistically	 intact.
Speech	automatisms	can	also	occur	as	an	ictal	phenomenon.

A	paraphasia	is	a	speech	error	in	which	the	patient	substitutes	a	wrong	word
or	 sound	 for	 the	 intended	 word	 or	 sound.	 Paraphasic	 errors	 are	 common	 in
aphasic	 patients.	 In	 a	 phonemic	 (phonologic,	 literal)	 paraphasia,	 there	 is	 the
addition,	 deletion,	 or	 substitution	 of	 a	 phoneme;	 however,	 the	 word	 is
recognizable	 and	 may	 be	 clearly	 pronounced.	 Substitution	 of	 the	 wrong
phoneme	 would	 cause	 the	 patient	 to	 say	 “blotch”	 instead	 of	 watch,	 or
“thumbness”	 instead	 of	 numbness.	 Technically,	 a	 literal	 paraphasia	 is	 a	 single-
letter	substitution.	Phonemic	paraphasia	is	the	preferable	term	because	a	single-
letter	substitution	also	changes	the	phoneme,	and	the	brain	thinks	in	phonemes,
not	 letters.	 Illiterate	 patients	 commit	 phonemic	 paraphasias	 despite	 their
ignorance	of	letters.	In	a	semantic	(verbal)	paraphasia,	the	patient	substitutes	the
wrong	word.	A	semantic	paraphasia	would	cause	the	patient	to	say	“ring”	instead
of	watch.	Paraphasias	are	similar	to	the	malapropisms,	spoonerisms,	and	sniglets
everyone	 occasionally	 utters,	 but	 aphasic	 patients	 make	 them	 more	 often	 and
may	not	recognize	them	as	wrong.	A	neologism	is	a	novel	utterance,	a	nonword
made	 up	 on	 the	 spot.	 The	 patient	 might	 call	 a	 watch	 a	 woshap.	 Phonemic
paraphasias	are	more	typical	of	anterior,	and	semantic	paraphasias	more	typical
of	posterior,	perisylvian	lesions.

In	 evaluating	 propositional	 speech,	 note	 pronunciation,	 word	 and	 sentence
formation,	 fluency,	 cadence,	 rhythm,	 prosody,	 omission	 or	 transposition	 of
syllables	or	words,	misuse	of	words,	circumlocutions,	repetition,	perseveration,
paraphasias,	 jargon,	 and	 the	 use	 of	 neologisms.	 Aphasic	 patients	 may	 use
unusual	 synonyms	 or	 circumlocutions	 in	 order	 to	 avoid	 the	 use	 of	 a	 word	 that
cannot	 be	 recalled.	 There	 may	 be	 omissions	 of	 words;	 hesitations	 and
inappropriate	 pauses;	 perseveration;	 difficulty	 understanding	 the	 implication	 of
words;	verbal	automatisms;	agrammatism;	jargon;	or	gibberish.	When	the	patient

is	 having	 difficulty	 with	 fluency,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 evaluate	 propositional
spontaneous	 speech.	 Fluency	 refers	 to	 the	 volume	 of	 speech	 output.	 Normal
speech	is	100	to	115	words	per	minute.	Speech	output	is	often	as	low	as	10	to	15
words	 per	 minute,	 sometimes	 less,	 in	 patients	 with	 nonfluent	 aphasia.	 If	 the
maximum	 sentence	 length	 is	 fewer	 than	 seven	 words,	 then	 the	 patient	 is
nonfluent.	 Patients	 are	 usually	 aware	 of	 nonfluency	 and	 frustrated	 by	 it.	 Their
speech	may	tend	toward	the	laconic,	answering	questions	but	trying	to	speak	no
more	than	necessary.	Patience	and	open-ended	questions	are	the	best	approaches
in	 persuading	 the	 patient	 to	 converse.	 Patients	 unable	 to	 express	 themselves
through	 speech	 may	 use	 pantomime	 or	 gesture,	 shaking,	 or	 nodding	 the	 head,
shrugging	the	shoulders,	or	demonstrating	visible	emotional	reactions.	In	severe
aphasia,	the	patient	may	be	unable	to	utter	a	single	word.

COMPREHENSION

The	 patient’s	 responses	 to	 verbal	 requests	 and	 commands	 and	 to	 everyday
questions	and	comments	give	information	about	his	ability	to	understand	speech.
Comprehension	 may	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 follow	 verbal	 commands
(“show	me	your	teeth,”	“stick	out	your	tongue,”	“close	your	eyes,”	or	“point	to
the	ceiling”).	Comprehension	can	be	judged	to	be	reasonably	intact	if	the	patient
follows	 a	 complicated,	 multistep	 command.	 However,	 failure	 to	 follow	 a
command,	even	a	simple	one,	does	not	necessarily	prove	that	comprehension	is
impaired.	 A	 patient	 may	 not	 comply	 because	 of	 apraxia.	 Patients	 with	 a	 left
hemisphere	 lesion	 may	 even	 have	 apraxia	 for	 functions	 of	 their	 nonparetic	 left
hand.	 They	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 salute,	 wave	 goodbye,	 or	 perform	 other	 simple
functions	on	command	using	the	left	hand	because	of	involvement	of	fibers	that
transmit	 information	 from	 the	 language	 areas	 on	 the	 left	 to	 the	 motor	 areas	 on
the	 right	 (sympathetic	 apraxia).	 When	 the	 patient	 does	 not	 follow	 simple
commands,	establish	whether	he	can	say	or	shake	his	head	yes	and	no.	Then	ask
ridiculously	simple	questions,	such	as—“Are	you	from	the	planet	Jupiter?,”	“Did
you	 have	 nails	 for	 breakfast?,”	 “Are	 you	 riding	 in	 a	 taxicab?,”	 or	 “Are	 you	 a
man	 (or	a	woman)?”	 Include	obvious	“no”	 questions,	as	 some	aphasic	 patients
will	 agree	 with	 almost	 anything.	 The	 responses	 may	 be	 nonverbal.	 An	 elderly
woman	 who	 laughs	 when	 asked	 “Are	 you	 pregnant?”	 has	 understood	 the
question.	 More	 complex	 yes-no	 questions	 might	 include	 the	 following:	 “Is	 a
mother	older	than	her	daughter?,”	“Do	you	have	dinner	before	breakfast?,”	“Can

you	fly	in	a	car?,”	“Did	the	sun	come	up	this	morning?,”	or	“Do	you	have	feet
on	the	ends	of	your	legs?”	Because	the	chance	of	a	correct	response	is	50%,	it	is
important	to	ask	enough	questions	to	exclude	lucky	answers.

Impaired	 comprehension	 may	 result	 from	 difficulty	 understanding	 grammar
and	 syntax,	 words	 in	 relation	 to	 other	 words,	 difficulty	 with	 semantics	 or
understanding	 individual	 words.	 The	 patient	 may	 have	 more	 difficulty	 with
polysyllabic	 words	 and	 long	 sentences	 than	 with	 simple	 words	 and	 short
sentences.	Compound	sentences	and	double	or	complex	commands	may	be	used
to	 see	 if	 comprehension	 is	 more	 than	 superficial.	 The	 aphasia	 examination
begins	 to	 overlap	 with	 the	 mental	 status	 examination	 with	 commands	 such	 as
“place	 one	 coin	 on	 the	 table,	 give	 me	 the	 second,	 and	 keep	 the	 third	 in	 your
hand”	or	“here	is	a	piece	of	paper;	tear	it	in	four	parts	and	place	one	on	the	table,
give	 one	 to	 me,	 and	 keep	 two	 for	 yourself”	 (Marie’s	 paper	 test).	 Both
comprehension	 and	 retention	 are	 evaluated	 by	 telling	 a	 short	 story	 and	 then
asking	questions	about	it.	Patients	with	impaired	comprehension	have	particular
difficulty	 with	 passive	 constructions	 (e.g.,	 “The	 lion	 was	 killed	 by	 the	 tiger;
which	animal	is	dead?”	or	“The	boy	was	slapped	by	the	girl;	who	got	hit?”)	and
possessives	(e.g.,	“Is	my	wife’s	brother	a	man	or	a	woman?”).	Patients	who	are
unable	 to	comprehend	 spoken	or	 written	 language	 may	 understand	pantomime,
gestures,	and	symbols.	They	may	imitate	the	examiner	in	placing	a	finger	to	the
nose	 or	 sticking	 out	 the	 tongue.	 Imitation,	 however,	 is	 a	 more	 lower-level
function	than	comprehension.

Many	 aphasic	 patients	 have	 difficulty	 with	 right-left	 orientation,	 especially
with	 posterior	 lesions.	 Right-left	 confusion	 is	 part	 of	 Gerstmann’s	 syndrome.
Testing	 right-left	 orientation	 might	 include	 such	 commands	 as	 “show	 me	 your
right	 thumb”	 or	 “touch	 your	 right	 ear	 with	 your	 left	 thumb.”	 It	 is	 important	 to
determine	baseline	function	before	concluding	a	patient	has	right-left	confusion.

NAMING

Testing	naming	ability	is	an	important	part	of	the	aphasia	examination.	Naming
is	 a	 delicate	 function,	 and	 most	 aphasic	 patients	 have	 some	 difficulty	 with	 it.
However,	 naming	 defects	 are	 nonspecific.	 In	 anomic	 aphasia,	 an	 inability	 to
name	 is	 an	 isolated	 defect,	 but	 more	 often	 misnaming	 occurs	 as	 part	 of	 some
other	 aphasic,	 or	 even	 nonaphasic,	 syndrome.	 In	 confrontation	 naming,	 the
patient	is	asked	to	name	simple	objects	such	as	a	key,	pencil,	coin,	watch,	parts

of	the	body	(nose,	ear,	chin,	fingernail,	knuckle),	or	to	name	colors.	When	lost
for	the	name	of	an	object,	the	patient	may	describe	it	or	tell	its	use.	The	patient
may	 be	 able	 to	 name	 an	 object,	 such	 as	 a	 watch,	 but	 be	 unable	 to	 identify	 the
component	parts,	such	as	the	band	or	buckle.	Some	caution	is	necessary,	as	there
are	age,	cultural,	and	even	gender	influences	at	work.	For	whatever	reason,	many
normal	 women	are	 unable	 to	identify	 a	 watch	crystal.	Many	normal	men	 (with
intact	 color	 vision)	 are	 unable	 to	 name	 more	 than	 primary	 and	 very	 simple
secondary	 colors.	 Before	 including	 something	 as	 a	 naming	 test	 item,	 the
examiner	 should	 ensure	 that	 nonaphasic	 people	 of	 all	 ages	 and	 both	 sexes	 are
normally	able	to	identify	it.	Some	normal	patients	use	unusual	names	for	various
parts	 of	 the	 body,	 especially	 the	 fingers.	 Some	 of	 this	 is	 related	 to	 educational
level	and	region	of	origin.	Individuals	may	refer	to	the	index	finger	or	pointer	as
“the	 finger	 next	 to	 the	 thumb,”	 or	 call	 it	 the	 “dog	 finger,”	 “poison	 finger,”	 or
“statue	 of	 liberty	 finger.”	 These	 patients	 are	 not	 aphasic.	 Many	 normal
individuals	 cannot	 name	 the	 index,	 middle,	 and	 ring	 fingers.	 When	 unable	 to
retrieve	a	name,	an	aphasic	patient	may	be	able	to	select	the	correct	name	from	a
list.	Another	naming	test	is	to	have	the	patient	point	to	something	named	by	the
examiner	(e.g.,	the	telephone,	the	window).

A	 sensitive	 method	 of	 testing	 spontaneous	 naming	 ability	 is	 word	 list
generation.	The	patient	is	asked	to	name	as	many	items	as	possible	in	a	certain
category	 in	 1	 minute.	 Animals	 are	 a	 common	 category	 for	 testing	 spontaneous
naming.	The	patient	may	name	any	types	of	animals	(e.g.,	farm,	zoo),	but	groups
should	not	be	suggested	ahead	of	time	because	there	may	be	an	inability	to	shift
groups.	It	is	wise	to	check	more	than	one	item	category;	other	useful	categories
include	 tools,	 foods,	 countries,	 and	 modes	 of	 transportation.	 Spontaneous
naming	 ability	 also	 depends	 on	 age	 and	 educational	 level.	 Normal	 patients
should	 name	 a	 minimum	 of	 12	 items	 in	 a	 category;	 some	 adjustment	 may	 be
necessary	 for	 poorly	 educated	 and	 older	 patients.	 Another	 measure	 of
spontaneous	naming	is	to	ask	the	patient	to	list	all	of	the	words	he	can	think	of
that	 begin	 with	 a	 certain	 letter.	 The	 FAS	 test	 is	 popular.	 The	 patient	 thinks	 of
words	 beginning	 with	 one	 of	 these	 letters,	 excluding	 proper	 nouns	 or
morphologic	variants.	For	FAS,	a	person	of	average	education	should	produce	12
or	 more	 words	 per	 letter	 in	 1	 minute,	 or	 36	 words	 with	 all	 three	 letters	 in	 3
minutes.	Standardization	and	reference	values	for	testing	naming	are	imperfect.
Language	 competence	 depends	 on	 education,	 dialect,	 experience,	 and	 other
factors.	 Often	 the	 reference	 population	 does	 not	 include	 less	 well-educated
people	 nor	 every	 dialect.	 Poor	 word	 list	 generation	 may	 also	 occur	 with

dementia,	depression,	parkinsonism,	and	prefrontal	lesions.	Responsive	naming
is	also	useful,	and	it	uses	audition	rather	than	vision.	The	patient	may	be	asked
for	nouns	(e.g.,	“Where	do	teachers	work?”),	verbs	(e.g.,	“What	do	you	do	with
a	cup?”),	or	adjectives	(e.g.,	“How	does	sugar	taste?”).

REPETITION

The	ability	to	repeat	may	be	selectively	involved	or	paradoxically	preserved	in
certain	 aphasic	 syndromes.	 Most	 often	 the	 inability	 to	 repeat	 is	 proportional	 to
the	 defect	 in	 comprehension	 or	 fluency,	 and	 repetition	 is	 a	 good	 screening	 test
for	aphasia.	The	patient	is	asked	to	repeat	words	or	phrases	back	to	the	examiner.
A	 patient’s	 repetition	 span	 (i.e.,	 the	 number	 of	 words	 he	 can	 repeat)	 is	 usually
two	 more	 than	 his	 digit	 span.	 Simple	 repetition	 tasks	 might	 include	 counting,
avoiding	 numbers	 that	 might	 be	 repeated	 by	 automatic	 speech,	 or	 repeating
single	words.	More	complex	tasks	include	polysyllabic	words	(e.g.,	catastrophe),
phrases	 (e.g.,	 “If	 he	 were	 here,	 I	 would	 go	 away”),	 or	 tongue	 twisters	 (e.g.,
Popocatepetl	[po-pó-cah-té-petl],	a	volcano	in	Mexico).	The	stock	phrases	used
to	test	for	dysarthria	work	for	this	purpose	as	well.	A	popular	phrase	for	testing
repetition	 in	 aphasia	 is	 “no	 ifs,	 ands,	 or	 buts.”	 Omitting	 the	 s	 in	 each	 of	 these
words	may	not	be	an	error	in	some	dialects	of	English.	A	better	repetition	test	is
“they	 heard	 him	 speak	 on	 the	 radio	 last	 night”	 (modified	 from	 the	 Boston
diagnostic	 aphasia	 examination).	 Patients	 with	 impaired	 repetition	 may	 omit
words,	 change	 the	 word	 order,	 or	 commit	 paraphasic	 errors.	 Repetition	 is
preserved	in	anomic,	transcortical,	and	some	cases	of	subcortical	aphasia.

WRITING

The	 patient’s	 ability	 to	 use	 written	 language	 should	 also	 be	 assessed.
Accompanying	 impairment	 of	 fine	 motor	 control	 of	 the	 dominant	 hand	 often
hampers	the	ability	to	evaluate	writing.	Writing	may	be	disturbed	in	conjunction
with	abnormalities	of	spoken	language,	or	separately.	Patients	who	are	aphasic	in
speech	are	also	aphasic	in	writing,	but	writing	may	be	preserved	in	patients	with
dysarthria	 or	 verbal	 apraxia.	 In	 all	 aphasias,	 reading	 and	 writing	 are	 typically
worse	 than	 understanding	 and	 speaking,	 probably	 because	 they	 are	 secondarily
acquired	skills.	The	patient	may	be	asked	to	write	spontaneously	or	to	dictation.
A	 spontaneous	 writing	 sample	 might	 include	 a	 few	 words,	 a	 sentence,	 or	 a

paragraph.	 The	 writing	 sample	 usually	 reveals	 the	 same	 sorts	 of	 naming
difficulties	and	paraphasias	evident	in	the	patient’s	speech.	Patients	may	be	able
to	write	elementary,	overlearned	things	such	as	name,	address,	days	of	the	week,
and	months	of	the	year	but	be	unable	to	write	more	complex	material.	There	may
be	a	difference	in	the	patient’s	ability	to	print	and	to	write	in	cursive.	The	ability
to	write	to	dictation	is	analogous	to	the	ability	to	repeat	verbal	material.	Copying
written	material	also	assesses	the	ability	to	transfer	information	from	the	visual
system	to	the	language	areas.	Having	the	patient	copy	written	material	may	also
test	 the	 connections	 between	 the	 receptive	 language	 areas	 and	 Exner’s	 writing
center.	 However,	 copying	 does	 not	 require	 much	 processing;	 one	 can	 copy
material	 in	 another	 language	 despite	 not	 speaking	 the	 language,	 as	 long	 as	 the
alphabet	 is	 the	 same.	 An	 inability	 to	 copy	 may	 be	 due	 to	 apraxia.	 Naming	 can
also	be	tested	by	having	the	patient	write	down	the	names	of	things	in	a	manner
similar	to	that	for	speech.

Modern	 electronic	 communications	 have	 brought	 to	 light	 new	 aphasic
disturbances:	 difficulty	 writing	 mobile	 phone	 texts,	 an	 entity	 called	 dystextia,
and	difficulty	typing	on	a	computer,	dystypia.	These	have	been	reported	in	both
stroke	and	complex	migraine.	Aphasia	can	also	affect	sign	language.

READING

The	patient’s	 ability	 to	 comprehend	 written	 language	symbols	can	 be	tested	 by
having	 him	 read.	 Written	 language	 is	 perceived	 by	 the	 visual	 system	 and	 the
information	 conveyed	 to	 the	 perisylvian	 language	 centers.	 Dysfunction	 of	 the
language	centers	or	interruption	of	the	connections	with	the	visual	system	may
cause	an	inability	to	read	(alexia).	Reading	difficulty	because	of	acquired	alexia
is	 unrelated	 to	 the	 developmental	 (congenital)	 dyslexia	 seen	 most	 often	 in
school-age	 boys	 that	 may	 cause	 severe	 reading	 disability.	 Patients	 may	 have
to	 comprehend	 speech—the
alexia	 without	 any	 accompanying	
syndrome	 of	 pure	 word	 blindness.	 Alexia	 may	 occur	 with	 or	 without	 a
hemianopia.	 Alexia	 may	 occur	 with	 or	 without	 accompanying	 agraphia.	 Most
patients	 with	 alexia	 also	 have	 difficulty	 with	 writing	 (alexia	 with	 agraphia).
Some	 patients	 have	 alexia	 without	 agraphia	 (see	 Chapter	 10).	 Judging	 reading
ability	by	having	the	patient	follow	a	written	command	such	as	close	your	eyes
involves	 a	 praxis	 element	 and	 should	 be	 interpreted	 with	 caution.	 For	 patients
unable	to	read	aloud,	use	questions	that	can	be	answered	by	“yes”	or	“no,”	or	by

inability	

gestures.	It	is	also	important	to	determine	whether	the	patient	is	able	to	read	his
own	writing.

Reading	 aloud	is	 a	 different	 task	 from	 reading	comprehension.	Oral	reading
(visual	input-oral	output)	is	comparable	to	copying	(visual	input-manual	output),
repetition	(auditory	input-oral	output),	and	transcribing	dictation	(auditory	input-
manual	output)	and	may	be	preserved	despite	impaired	reading	comprehension.

CLASSIFICATION	OF	THE	APHASIAS

Classification	 of	 the	 aphasias	 is	 problematic.	 These	 disorders	 vary	 in	 severity,
even	with	a	lesion	in	the	same	location,	and	are	frequently	mixed	in	type.	There
have	 been	 many	 attempts	 at	 classification	 from	 anatomic,	 physiologic,	 and
psychological	 points	 of	 view.	 None	 is	 entirely	 satisfactory.	 A	 strictly	 anatomic
classification	does	not	apply	in	all	instances,	for	a	small	lesion	may	cause	severe
impairment	 of	 both	 fluency	 and	 comprehension,	 whereas	 an	 extensive	 lesion
sometimes	 causes	 an	 isolated	 defect.	 Lesions	 similar	 in	 size	 and	 location	 on
imaging	 studies	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 different	 aphasic	 syndromes	 even	 in
persons	 with	 identical	 cerebral	 dominance	 for	 speech.	 Lesions	 in	 different
locations	 and	 of	 variable	 size	 may	 produce	 similar	 aphasic	 syndromes.
Nevertheless,	 some	 general	 relationships	 exist	 between	 anatomic	 sites	 and	 the
type	of	aphasia.

One	 common	 classification	 divides	 aphasias	 into	 expressive	 and	 receptive
types.	 In	 expressive	 aphasia,	 the	 patient	 has	 difficulty	 with	 speech	 output	 and
struggles	to	talk	(nonfluent);	in	receptive	aphasia,	the	primary	difficulty	is	with
understanding	 language,	 whereas	 speech	 output	 is	 unaffected	 (fluent).	 A	 major
problem	with	the	expressive-receptive	classification	of	aphasia	is	that	all	aphasic
patients	 have	 difficulty	 expressing	
themselves.	 This	 causes	 difficulty,
particularly	 for	 trainees	 and	 nonneurologists.	 There	 is	 a	 tendency	 to	 classify
almost	 all	 aphasias	 as	 expressive,	 even	 when	 they	 are	 flagrantly	 receptive.	 It
requires	 some	 clinical	 experience	 to	 recognize	 that	 a	 patient	 may	 be	 having
difficulty	 expressing	 himself	 linguistically	 because	 of	 a	 defect	 in	 the	 reception
(comprehension)	of	spoken	language.	Other	simple	dichotomous	classifications
proposed	
fluent/nonfluent,	 motor/sensory,	 and	 anterior/posterior.
Although	 each	 of	 these	 is	 useful,	 none	 adequately	 describes	 most	 aphasic
patients,	 who	 have	 some	 evidence	 of	 both	 types.	 Pure	 forms	 of	 aphasia	 are
uncommon;	 most	 patients	 with	 sensory	 aphasia	 have	 some	 motor	 deficit,

include	

posterior	lesions	can	cause	nonfluency,	anterior	lesions	can	cause	comprehension
deficits,	 and	 aphasic	 disorders	 can	 occur	 with	 pathology	 that	 does	 not	 directly
affect	 the	 classical	 perisylvian	 language	 centers,	 such	 as	 subcortical	 and	 even
nondominant	 hemisphere	 lesions.	 In	 the	 mid-19th	 century,	 John	 Hughlings
Jackson	 expressed	 a	 preference	 for	 the	 fluent	 and	 nonfluent	 subtypes.	 Most
aphasia	experts	discourage	the	expressive-receptive	scheme.

The	 Wernicke-Geschwind	 model	 (Boston	 classification)	 recognizes	 eight
aphasia	syndromes:	Broca’s,	Wernicke’s,	conduction,	global,	transcortical	motor,
transcortical	 sensory,	 transcortical	 mixed	 (isolation	 of	 the	 speech	 area),	 and
anomic.	 It	 divides	 aphasias	 into	 fluent	 and	 nonfluent	 varieties	 (Tables	 9.2	 and
9.3).	If	speech	output	is	high	and	articulation	facile,	the	aphasia	is	referred	to	as
fluent;	 if	 speech	 output	 is	 sparse	 and	 effortful,	 the	 aphasia	 is	 classified	 as
nonfluent.	Nonfluency	occurs	when	a	lesion	involves	the	anterior	speech	areas	in
the	 region	 of	 Broca’s	 area	 in	 the	 frontal	 lobe.	 When	 these	 areas	 are	 relatively
spared,	 fluency	 is	 preserved.	 Broca’s	 is	 a	 type	 of	 nonfluent	 aphasia.	 Many
aphasic	 patients	 fail	 to	 fulfill	 the	 criteria	 for	 a	 specific	 subtype	 other	 than
fluent/nonfluent.

TABLE	9.2

The	Major	Aphasia	Syndromes

TABLE	9.3

Organization	of	Common	Aphasia	Syndromes

Nonfluent
			Good	comprehension
						Good	repetition

Transcortical	motor

	
	
						Poor	repetition
									Aphasic	writing
									Writing	intact
			Poor	comprehension
						Good	repetition
						Poor	repetition
Fluent
			Good	comprehension
						Good	repetition
						Poor	repetition
			Poor	comprehension
						Good	repetition
						Poor	repetition
									Poor	reading
									comprehension
									Intact	reading
									comprehension

Broca’s
Verbal	apraxia

Mixed	transcortical
Global

Anomic
Conduction

Transcortical	sensory

Wernicke’s

Pure	word	deafness

According	to	whether	spontaneous	speech	is	fluent	or	nonfluent	and	whether	auditory
comprehension	and	repetition	are	good	or	poor.

When	 the	 posterior	 speech	 areas	 in	 the	 region	 of	 Wernicke’s	 area	 in	 the
temporal	lobe	are	involved,	auditory	comprehension	is	impaired.	When	this	area
is	 spared,	 comprehension	 is	 relatively	 preserved.	 The	 most	 common	 fluent
aphasia	 is	 Wernicke’s.	 In	 global	 or	 total	 aphasia,	 there	 is	 both	 nonfluency	 and
impaired	 comprehension;	 the	 lesion	 may	 involve	 both	 anterior	 and	 posterior
speech	 areas.	 Difficulty	 arises	 because	 not	 all	 patients	 can	 be	 satisfactorily
placed	into	one	of	these	categories.	The	clinical	features	of	aphasia	evolve	over
time.	For	example,	global	aphasia	can	occur	with	a	purely	anterior	lesion,	but	it
usually	 evolves	 into	 a	 Broca’s	 aphasia.	 If	 seen	 acutely,	 about	 60%	 to	 80%	 of
aphasic	patients	fit	into	the	anterior-nonfluent/posterior-fluent	classification.

This	aphasia	classification	can	also	be	divided	into	central,	or	perisylvian,	and
paracentral,	 or	 extrasylvian,	 types.	 The	 central	 aphasias	 (Broca’s,	 Wernicke’s,
and	 conduction)	 have	 in	 common	 loss	 of	 repetition.	 The	 paracentral	 aphasias
(transcortical	 syndromes	 and	 anomic	 aphasia)	 have	 in	 common	 preserved

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
repetition.	 The	 central	 aphasias	 are	 due	 to	 lesions	 involving	 the	 perisylvian
cortical	 structures,	 and	 the	 paracentral	 aphasias	 by	 lesions	 surrounding	 the
perisylvian	 areas,	 for	 example,	 border	 zone	 (watershed)	 infarction	 (BZI).	 The
central	and	paracentral	aphasias	are	distinguished	by	testing	repetition.	Without
testing	 repetition,	 difficulty	 will	 arise	
in	 distinguishing	 Broca’s	 from
transcortical	 motor,	 Wernicke’s	 from	 transcortical	 sensory,	 anomic	 from
conduction,	and	global	from	isolation.

Critchley	 described	 the	 normal	 changes	 in	 linguistic	 ability	 that	 accompany
advancing	 age.	 Aphasia	 may	 be	 a	 feature	 of	 degenerative	 and	 other	 diffuse
neurologic	disorders.	Aphasia	is	common	in	Alzheimer’s	disease.	The	language
disorder	 in	 Alzheimer’s	 disease	 most	 resembles	 transcortical	 sensory	 aphasia,
and	 it	 grows	 progressively	 worse	 as	 the	 disease	 advances.	 The	 presence	 of
aphasia	has	been	suggested	as	a	diagnostic	criterion	for	the	disorder.	Prominent
aphasia	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 an	 earlier	 date	 of	 onset	 and	 more	 rapid
progression.	Patients	typically	 display	 a	paucity	 of	information	 content	in	their
spontaneous	 speech	 and	 anomia,	 particularly	 for	 spontaneous	 naming	 tasks.
When	 dementia	 complicates	 Parkinson’s	 disease,	 aphasia	 may	 also	 develop.	 In
addition,	 parkinsonian	 patients	 have	 superimposed	 motor	 speech	 abnormalities
related	to	the	extrapyramidal	dysfunction.

Aphasia	most	often	results	from	stroke	but	can	be	caused	by	any	pathologic
process	 involving	 the	 language	 areas.	 PPA	 is	 a	 condition	 in	 which	 patients
present	 with	 a	 progressive	 loss	 of	 specific	 language	 functions	 with	 relative
sparing	of	other	cognitive	domains,	eventually	resulting	in	severe	aphasia,	even
mutism,	 or	 evolving	 into	 dementia.	 Three	 variants	 of	 PPA	 are	 recognized:
semantic	 variant	 (semantic	 dementia),	 logopenic	 variant,	 and	 a	 nonfluent-
agrammatic	 variant.	 In	 contrast	 to	 the	 aphasia	 of	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 the
nonfluent	 variant	 of	 PPA	 tends	 to	 affect	 the	 anterior	 speech	 areas	 initially,
resulting	in	impaired	and	anomia	but	relative	preservation	of	comprehension.	In
the	early	stages,	nonverbal	cognitive	abilities	are	preserved.	Patients	who	present
with	 PPA	 may	 eventually	 develop	 evidence	 of	 other	 degenerative	 neurologic
disorders,	 most	 often	
lobar	 degeneration,	 occasionally
corticobasal	degeneration	or	progressive	supranuclear	palsy.

frontotemporal	

Broca’s	Aphasia	(Nonfluent,	Expressive,	Motor,
Anterior,	Prerolandic,	Executive)

Broca’s	 aphasia	 is	 a	 nonfluent	 type	 of	 aphasia	 due	 to	 a	 lesion	 involving	 the
anterior	 perisylvian	 speech	 areas	 in	 the	 PIF	 region	 (Figure	 9.2).	 Patients	 have
labored,	uninflected,	nonfluent	spontaneous	speech	with	a	decreased	amount	of
linguistic	output:	few	words,	short	sentences,	and	poor	grammar	(Video	9.1).	In
severe	 Broca’s	 aphasia,	 the	 speech	 consists	 of	 nouns	 and	 substantive	 verbs
produced	with	great	effort.	Patients	are	aware	of	and	frustrated	by	their	difficulty
speaking.	There	is	a	tendency	to	leave	out	nonessential	words	such	as	adjectives,
adverbs,	 and	 functor	 words	 (i.e.,	 articles,	 pronouns,	 conjunctions,	 and
prepositions	 that	 serve	 primarily	 to	 provide	 sentence	 structure	 rather	 than	 to
convey	 meaning).	 Such	 parsimonious,	 agrammatical	 language	 is	 sometimes
referred	to	as	telegraphic	speech.	It	has	been	likened	to	the	speech	of	someone
learning	a	new	language,	or	of	Tarzan.	The	patient	knows	what	he	wishes	to	say
but	 is	 unable	 to	 say	 it	 or	 to	 say	 it	 correctly.	 There	 is	 an	 inability	 to	 use	 proper
syntax,	 so	 that	 sentence	 structure	 is	 defective	 (paragrammatism).	 The	 resultant
misuse	 of	 words	 and	 defective	 syntax	 is	 termed	 agrammatism.	 The	 ability	 to
comprehend	 speech	 is	 relatively	 unimpaired.	 When	 challenged	 with	 difficult
material,	 some	 comprehension	 defects	 usually	 emerge.	 The	 comprehension
defect	 is	 greater	 for	 grammar	 than	 semantics.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 a	 patient	 with
Broca’s	aphasia,	see	Video	Link	9.4.

Video	9.1	A	patient	with	Broca’s	aphasia	due	to	a	middle	cerebral	artery	stroke.

00:00	/	00:00

FIGURE	9.2	The	extent	of	the	lesion	classically	causing	global	aphasia	is	indicated	by
the	dashed	outer	line;	the	lesion	causing	Broca’s	aphasia	by	the	light	red	area;	 and
the	lesion	causing	Wernicke’s	aphasia	by	the	dark	brown	area.

Because	of	the	severe	nonfluency,	patients	are	unable	to	repeat	what	they	hear
and	 unable	 to	 read	 aloud.	 The	 patient	 can	 identify	 objects	 but	 not	 name	 them.
Although	 the	 patient	 is	 nonfluent	 for	 propositional	 speech,	 there	 may	 be
preservation	of	emotional	and	automatic	speech,	and	the	patient	may	be	able	to
sing.	Occasionally,	speech	is	reduced	to	monophasia	or	recurrent	utterances.	The
patient	 is	 aphasic	 in	 writing	 as	 in	 speech,	 even	 when	 using	 the	 nonparetic
(usually	left)	hand.	Preservation	of	writing	suggests	verbal	apraxia.

In	mild	cases,	there	may	be	only	slight	errors	in	word	formation,	occasional
circumlocutions,	or	word-finding	difficulty,	often	brought	out	only	by	stressing
the	 patient	 by	 requesting	 specific	 information	 in	 a	 rapid-fire	 manner.	 Patients
with	Broca’s	aphasia	classically	have	a	contralateral	hemiparesis	or	faciobrachial
paresis	 but	 no	 visual	 field	 deficit.	 Dysarthria	 is	 sometimes	 present	 in	 aphasic
patients—either	 because	 of	 coincidental	 lesions	 affecting	 the	 articulatory
apparatus	 at	 a	 lower	 level	 or	 as	 the	 result	 of	 apraxia	 of	 the	 muscles	 of
articulation.	 There	 may	 be	 an	 accompanying	 buccofacial	 apraxia	 causing	 the
patient	 to	 have	 difficulty	 executing	 mouth	 and	 lip	 movements	 on	 command.
Sympathetic	apraxia	involving	the	nonparalyzed	hand	is	common.	Some	patients
with	Broca’s	aphasia	have	an	accompanying	alexia	(third	alexia	of	Dejerine).

Occasionally,	 lesions	 affect	 areas	 of	 the	 brain	 that	 control	 speech	 but	 not
language.	 The	 patient	 may	 have	 difficulty	 with	 speech,	 but	 comprehension	 is
perfect	and	writing	is	not	affected.	Emotional	and	automatic	speech	functions	are

preserved.	The	problem	is	essentially	an	isolated	apraxia	for	speech,	which	may
or	may	not	be	accompanied	by	other	evidence	of	buccofacial	apraxia.	The	lesion
in	these	cases	may	be	confined	to	Broca’s	area,	whereas	in	the	more	typical	case
of	Broca’s	aphasia,	the	lesion	is	usually	more	extensive.	This	condition	has	been
called	 apraxia	 of	 speech	 (AOS;	 verbal	 apraxia,	 cortical	 dysarthria,	 acquired
AOS,	 Broca’s	 area	 aphasia,	 mini-Broca,	 or	 baby-Broca).	 Lesions	 limited	 to
Broca’s	area	may	cause	the	Broca’s	area	infarction	syndrome	with	initial	mutism
rapidly	evolving	into	apractic	and	effortful	speech	without	a	persistent	language
impairment.

Patients	 with	 AOS	 appear	 to	 have	 forgotten	 how	 to	 make	 the	 sounds	 of
speech.	There	is	speech	sound	distortion	as	their	articulatory	muscles	grope	for
the	right	position.	There	is	defective	control	but	no	weakness	of	the	vocal	tract.
Prosody	may	be	impaired,	and	speech	may	have	a	stuttering	quality.	The	speech
pattern	 may	 change	 so	 that	 the	 patient	 sounds	 as	 though	 he	 has	 developed	 a
foreign	accent.	There	is	greater	difficulty	with	polysyllabic	words	and	complex
phrases	 than	 with	 simple	 words.	 The	 patient	 with	 AOS	 may	 be	 able	 to	 repeat
short,	 common	 words	 but	 will	 fail	 longer,	 polysyllabic	 words.	 Syllable
transposition	 is	 common	 (“pasghetti”).	 With	 puhtuhkuh,	 the	 patient	 may
interpose	 a	 syllable	 or	 perseverate	 on	 one	 syllable.	 The	 speech	 resembles	 the
hesitant	 nonfluency	 seen	 in	 Broca’s	 aphasia,	 but	 the	 patient	 speaks	 in	 correct
English	sentences,	using	proper	grammar	and	syntax.	Indeed,	some	of	the	speech
difficulty	in	Broca’s	aphasia	may	be	due	to	an	element	of	AOS.	Closely	related
to	AOS	is	the	syndrome	of	pure	word	mutism	(aphemia,	pure	motor	aphasia	of
Dejerine).	 The	 patient	 is	 totally	 unable	 to	 speak,	 but	 auditory	 comprehension,
reading,	 and	 writing	 are	 normal.	 The	 usual	 cause	 is	 a	 small	 lesion	 of	 the	 PIF
area.

Modern	 imaging	 and	 clinicopathologic	 studies	 have	 shown	 that	 lesions
restricted	to	Broca’s	area	more	likely	cause	predominantly	AOS	or	Broca’s	area
infarction	 syndrome	 rather	 than	 aphasia.	 The	 development	 of	 Broca’s	 aphasia
seems	 to	 require	 a	 large	 perisylvian	 lesion	 that	 involves	 Broca’s	 area	 and	 the
subjacent	white	matter,	as	was	present	in	his	original	patient.	With	large,	acute
lesions,	mutism	may	occur	initially.	Persistence	of	aphasia	after	stroke	is	usually
associated	with	larger	lesions.

Wernicke’s	Aphasia	(Fluent,	Receptive,	Sensory,
Posterior,	Postrolandic)

Wernicke’s	aphasia	is	due	to	a	lesion	in	the	PST	region	that	involves	the	auditory
association	cortex	and	the	angular	and	supramarginal	gyri	(Figure	9.2).	 Patients
are	 unable	 to	 understand	 speech	 (word	 deafness)	 or	 unable	 to	 read	 (word
blindness).	 They	 are	 relatively	 fluent,	 with	 a	 normal	 or	 even	 increased	 word
output	(logorrhea,	hyperlalia),	but	there	is	loss	of	the	ability	to	comprehend	the
significance	 of	 spoken	 words	 or	 recall	 their	 meaning.	 Speech	 production	 is
effortless;	phrase	and	sentence	length	and	prosody	are	normal.	Although	speech
is	abundant,	it	is	devoid	of	meaningful	content.	The	patient	can	still	hear	and	can
recognize	 voices	 but	 not	 the	 words	 they	 utter.	 Paraphasic	 errors	 are	 frequent,
resulting	 in	 incorrect	 or	 unintelligible	 words,	 unconventional	 and	 gibberish
sounds,	 and	 senseless	 combinations.	 The	 speech	 abounds	 in	 neologisms.	 There
may	be	circumlocution	and	an	excess	of	small	filler	words.	In	its	mildest	form,
there	 are	 mild	 paraphasias	 and	 minimal	 difficulty	 understanding	 grammatically
complex	material	(mini-Wernicke’s).

Speech	may	be	fluent,	but	the	patient	cannot	understand	his	own	speech;	he	is
not	 aware	 of,	 and	 does	 not	 correct,	 his	 errors	 in	 speaking.	 The	 frequent
paraphasias	 and	neologisms,	 combined	 with	 agrammatism,	 along	 with	 the	 high
word	 output,	 may	 lead	 to	 completely	 unintelligible	 gibberish,	 termed	 jargon
aphasia,	 or	 word	 salad.	 Hughlings	 Jackson	 described	 this	 type	 of	 aphasia	 as
“plentiful	 words	 wrongly	 used.”	 This	 is	 an	 example	 of	 speech	 from	 a	 patient
with	Wernicke’s,	“We	stayed	with	the	water	over	here	at	the	moment	and	talked
with	 the	 people	 with	 the	 them	 over	 there,	 they’re	 giivving	 for	 them	 at	 the
moment.”	Naming	and	repetition	deficits	arise	from	poor	comprehension.	There
is	 usually	 an	 accompanying	 proportional	 alexia.	 Rarely,	 there	 is	 dissociation
between	the	comprehension	defects	for	spoken	and	written	language.	Often	the
patient	lacks	awareness	of	the	deficit	and	may	actually	appear	euphoric.	Patients
with	 Wernicke’s	 aphasia	 often	 have	 a	 visual	 field	 deficit	 but	 no	 hemiparesis.
When	due	to	vascular	disease,	the	ischemia	is	usually	in	the	distribution	of	the
inferior	division	of	the	MCA.	With	large,	acute	lesions,	Wernicke’s	aphasia	may
evolve	 from	 a	 state	 of	 mutism.	 As	 with	 Broca’s	 aphasia,	 lesions	 causing
Wernicke’s	aphasia	usually	extend	beyond	the	superior	temporal	gyrus.	Patients
with	 acute	 Wernicke’s	 aphasia	 may	 become	 agitated	 because	 of	
their
comprehension	 difficulty.	 The	 agitated	 patient,	 speaking	 gibberish	 and	 with	 no
gross	neurologic	deficit,	is	frequently	thought	to	be	psychotic.	Psychotic	speech
is	 distinguished	 by	 bizarre	 content,	 few	 paraphasic	 errors,	 and	 minimal
comprehension	difficulties.	For	a	video	of	Wernicke’s	aphasia,	see	Video	Link
9.5.

Global	(Total,	Expressive-Receptive,	Complete)
Aphasia

In	 global	 aphasia,	 most	 commonly	 a	 large	 lesion	 has	 destroyed	 the	 entire
perisylvian	language	center,	or	separate	lesions	have	destroyed	both	the	PIF	and
PST	 regions	 (Figure	 9.2).	 Grossly	 nonfluent	 speech	 is	 combined	 with	 a	 severe
comprehension	deficit	and	inability	to	name	or	repeat.	Speech	is	often	reduced	to
expletives	or	monophasia.	Typically,	there	is	both	a	hemiplegia	and	a	field	cut.
Global	aphasia	is	usually	due	to	internal	carotid	or	proximal	MCA	occlusion.	In
some	 patients,	 comprehension	 improves,	 leaving	 a	 deficit	 resembling	 Broca’s
aphasia.

Conduction	(Associative,	Commissural,	Central,
Deep)	Aphasia

Conduction	 aphasia	 was	 described	 by	 Carl	 Wernicke,	 who	 called	
it
leitungsaphasie.	 It	 is	 due	 to	 a	 lesion	 that	 interrupts	 the	 conduction	 of	 impulses
between	 Wernicke’s	 and	 Broca’s	 areas.	 The	 characteristic	 deficit	 is	 poor
repetition	with	relative	preservation	of	other	language	functions.	Comprehension
is	 often	 impaired	 but	 not	 to	 the	 degree	 seen	 in	 Wernicke’s.	 The	 patient	 is
relatively	fluent,	but	the	speech	is	contaminated	by	paraphasic	errors	(primarily
literal,	 with	 incorrect	 phonemes);	 comprehension	 is	 unaffected,	 and	 naming	 is
variable.	 Repetition	 is	 worst	 for	 multisyllabic	 words	 and	 sentences,	 and	 it	 is
during	repetition	that	paraphasic	errors	are	most	apt	to	appear.	Patients	are	aware
of	 and	 try	 to	 correct	 the	 pronunciation	 errors.	 Patients	 have	 difficulty	 reading
aloud	 and	writing	to	 dictation.	 The	 remainder	of	 the	neurologic	 examination	 is
often	normal	or	shows	mild	hemiparesis.	The	lesion	most	often	lies	in	the	deep
white	matter	in	the	region	of	the	supramarginal	gyrus	and	involves	the	AF	and
other	 fiber	 tracts	 that	 run	 from	 the	 posterior	 to	 the	 anterior	 language	 areas
(Figure	9.3).	In	addition,	conduction	aphasia	can	occur	with	cortical	injury	and
no	 subcortical	 extension.	 The	 etiology	 is	 usually	 an	 embolic	 occlusion	 of	 a
terminal	 branch	 of	 the	 MCA.	 Because	 it	 disconnects	 the	 anterior	 from	 the
posterior	 perisylvian	 language	 areas,	 conduction	 aphasia	 represents	 one	 of	 the
disconnection	syndromes	(see	Chapter	10).

FIGURE	 9.3	 The	 lesion	 classically	 causing	 conduction	 aphasia	 is	 indicated	 by	 the
lightly	shaded	area;	the	lesion	causing	anomic	aphasia	by	lightly	shaded	area	at	right;
and	the	lesion	causing	the	angular	gyrus	syndrome	by	the	darkly	shaded	area.

Conduction	 aphasia	 may	 evolve	 from	 Wernicke’s	 aphasia.	 Although
conduction	 aphasia	 results	 primarily	 from	 lesions	 that	 disrupt	 communication
between	Wernicke’s	and	Broca’s	areas,	the	most	severe	and	persistent	repetition
disturbance	follows	damage	to	Wernicke’s	area	itself.

Anomic	(Amnesic,	Amnestic,	Nominal)	Aphasia

In	anomic	aphasia,	there	is	a	deficit	in	naming	ability	with	preservation	of	other
language	 functions.	The	 patients	are	 fluent,	 have	good	comprehension,	 and	 are
able	 to	 repeat.	 Speech	 may	 be	 relatively	 empty	 and	 circumlocutory	 because	 of
the	word-finding	deficit.	Anomic	aphasia	is	the	most	common	but	least	specific
type	 of	 aphasia.	 Anomia	 occurs	 with	 every	 type	 of	 aphasia.	 Patients	 with	 any
aphasia	 type,	 as	 it	 develops	 or	 recovers,	 may	 pass	 through	 a	 stage	 in	 which
anomia	 is	 the	 primary	 finding,	 and	 it	 may	 be	 the	 most	 persistent	 deficit.	 In
anomic	 aphasia,	 the	 patient	 usually	 is	 simply	 at	 a	 loss	 for	 a	 name;	 anomia
associated	 with	 other	 aphasia	 types	 often	 provokes	 a	 paraphasia.	 Only	 when
anomia	 occurs	 as	 an	 isolated	 deficit	 throughout	 the	 course	 of	 the	 illness	 is	 the
designation	anomic	aphasia	appropriate.	Dysnomia	is	sometimes	used	to	refer	to
mild	difficulty	with	naming.	Associated	neurologic	findings	vary	widely;	many
patients	have	none.	Anomic	aphasia	is	regarded	as	nonlocalizing	syndrome;	the
lesion	 cannot	 be	 readily	 localized	 to	 any	 particular	 cortical	 area.	 Patients	 may

have	naming	difficulty	as	a	manifestation	of	lesions	that	are	outside	the	language
areas	 or	 of	 generalized	 cerebral	 dysfunction.	 Anomic	 aphasia	 as	 the	 only
language	 disorder	 suggests	 a	 lower	 temporal	 lobe	 lesion	 (Figure	 9.3).	 When
anomic	aphasia	is	accompanied	by	all	four	elements	of	Gerstmann’s	syndrome,
the	lesion	virtually	always	lies	in	the	dominant	angular	gyrus	(Figure	9.3).

Transcortical	(Extrasylvian)	Aphasia

in	 spontaneous	 speech	 but	

The	 transcortical	 aphasias	 (TCAs)	 are	 syndromes	 in	 which	 the	 perisylvian
language	 area	 is	 preserved	 but	 disconnected	 from	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 brain	 (Figure
9.4).	 The	 usual	 etiology	 is	 a	 BZI.	 Because	 the	 PIF	 and	 PST	 areas	 and	 the
connecting	 AF	 are	 intact,	 the	 patients	 are	 aphasic	 but	 have	 a	 paradoxical
preservation	of	the	ability	to	repeat.	Repetition	can	be	so	well	preserved	that	the
patients	display	echolalia,	repeating	everything	they	hear.	When	the	condition	is
severe	and	the	entire	perisylvian	language	complex	is	separated	from	the	rest	of
the	 brain,	 the	 patients	 are	 not	 fluent	 in	 spontaneous	 speech	 and	 are	 unable	 to
comprehend.	 This	 syndrome	 has	 been	 termed	 isolation	 of	 the	 speech	 area,	 or
mixed	 TCA.	 When	 the	 lesion	 is	 primarily	 anterior,	 the	 syndrome	 resembles
Broca’s	 aphasia	 with	 nonfluency	
intact
comprehension.	 Repetition	 is	 better	 than	 spontaneous	 speech.	 This	 is	 the
syndrome	 of	 transcortical	 motor	 aphasia	 (anterior	 isolation	 syndrome).	 The
supplementary	 motor	 area	 and	 dorsolateral	 prefrontal	 cortex,	 which	 are
responsible	 for	 the	 planning	 and	 initiation	 of	 speech,	 are	 isolated	 from	 the	 PIF
region.	 In	 transcortical	 sensory	 aphasia	 (posterior	 isolation	 syndrome),	 there	 is
greater	involvement	of	the	posterior	language	areas.	The	PST	region	is	isolated
from	 the	 surrounding	 parietal,	 occipital,	 and	 temporal	 cortex	 that	 store	 word
associations.	 The	 patients	 are	 fluent	 but	 have	 difficulty	 with	 comprehension;
repetition	is	better	than	spontaneous	speech.	Associated	neurologic	findings	are
much	like	those	in	Broca’s	aphasia.	The	TCAs	are	more	common	than	is	often
appreciated.	There	are	reports	of	a	fairly	specific	pattern	of	aphasia	in	BZI,	with
patients	 having	 mixed	 TCA	 initially,	 then	 evolving	 to	 motor	 TCA	 or	 sensory
TCA	depending	on	the	individual	anatomy.	Exceptions	to	the	pattern	have	been
reported,	for	example,	transcortical	sensory	aphasia	due	to	a	frontal	lobe	lesion.
These	may	be	because	of	anomalous	location	of	language	centers	and	variability
in	the	anatomy	of	the	AF.

FIGURE	 9.4	 Areas	 typically	 involved	 in	 transcortical	 aphasias;	 these	 correspond	 to
the	 watershed	 zones	 between	 major	 arterial	 distributions.	 Br,	 Broca’s;	 Con,
conduction;	 MTC,	 mixed	 transcortical;	 TCM,	 transcortical	 motor;	 TCS,	 transcortical
sensory;	We,	Wernicke’s.	(From	Benson	DF,	Geschwind	N.	The	aphasias	and	related
disturbances.	 In:	 Joynt	 RJ,	 ed.	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 Philadelphia:	 J.B.	 Lippincott,
1990:1–34.)

Subcortical	Aphasia

Subcortical	 (extrasylvian)	 aphasia	 refers	 to	 language	 disorders	 that	 arise	 not
from	 damage	 to	 the	 perisylvian	 language	 areas,	 but	 from	 lesions—usually
vascular—involving	 the	 thalamus,	 caudate,	 putamen,	 periventricular	 white
matter,	 or	 internal	 capsule	 of	 the	 language-dominant	 hemisphere.	 Subcortical
aphasia	is	not	a	new	concept;	it	was	recognized	by	Lichtheim	in	the	19th	century.
The	speech	disorder	is	difficult	to	categorize	in	the	Wernicke-Geschwind	scheme
and	may	most	resemble	a	TCA.	Two	types	have	been	described:	an	anterior	and
a	posterior	syndrome.	The	anterior	syndrome	(caudate	or	striatocapsular	aphasia)
is	characterized	by	slow	dysarthric	speech	with	preserved	phrase	length,	that	is,
not	 telegraphic,	 preserved	 comprehension,	 and	 poor	 naming.	 In	 the	 posterior
syndrome	 (thalamic	 aphasia),	 there	 is	 fluent	 speech	 without	 dysarthria,	 poor
comprehension,	 and	 poor	 naming.	 In	 both	 forms,	 repetition	 is	 relatively
preserved,	 and	 the	 patients	 usually	 have	 an	 accompanying	 hemiplegia.	 The
anterior	 syndrome	 resembles	 a	 transcortical	 motor	 aphasia,	 and	 the	 posterior
transcortical	 sensory	 aphasia	 but
syndrome	
accompanied	 by	 a	 hemiplegia.	 It	 is	 the	 relative	 preservation	 of	 repetition	 that
indicates	 a	 link	 between	 the	 subcortical	 and	 transcortical	 syndromes.	 The

resembles	 Wernicke’s	 or	

anterior	 syndrome	 shows	 more	 clinical	 variability	 than	 the	 posterior.	 The
mechanism	by	which	subcortical	lesions	cause	aphasia	remains	conjectural,	but
it	may	involve	secondary	dysfunction	of	the	perisylvian	language	areas	because
of	 interruption	 of	 fibers	 that	 communicate	 between	 cortical	 and	 subcortical
structures.	Modern	imaging	has	shown	that	cortical	hypoperfusion	is	common	in
subcortical	 aphasia.	 In	 a	 single-photon	 emission	 computed	 tomography	 study,
left	 cerebral	 cortical	 hypoperfusion	 was	 observed	
in	 all	 patients	 with
striatocapsular	infarction.

NONDOMINANT	HEMISPHERE	LANGUAGE
DISTURBANCES

How	much	language	function	resides	in	the	nondominant	hemisphere	remains	a
matter	 of	 debate.	 Non–right-handers,	 particularly,	 are	 thought	 to	 have	 some
speech	 function	 in	 the	 nondominant	 hemisphere.	 Some	 of	 the	 recovery	 from
aphasia	 and	 the	 persistence	 of	 emotional	 and	 automatic	 speech	 suggest	 some
language	 function	 may	 be	 present	 in	 the	 minor	 hemisphere.	 Lesions	 of	 the
nondominant	hemisphere	cause	speech	disturbances	that	affect	the	nonlinguistic
elements	of	language.	There	is	loss	or	impairment	of	the	rhythm	and	emotional
elements	 of	 language.	 Prosody	 refers	 to	 the	 melodic	 aspects	 of	 speech—the
modulation	 of	 pitch,	 volume,	 intonation,	 and	 inflection	 that	 convey	 nuances	 of
meaning	 and	 emotional	 content.	 Hyperprosody	 is	 exaggeration,	 hypoprosody	 a
decrease,	 and	 aprosody	 an	 absence	 of	 the	 prosodic	 component	 of	 speech.
Dysprosody,	
typically	 hypoprosody	 or	 aprosody,	 may	 occur	 with	 right
hemisphere	 lesions.	 Patients	 lose	 the	 ability	 to	 convey	 emotion	 in	 speech	 or	 to
detect	the	emotion	expressed	by	others.	They	are	unable	to	say	the	same	neutral
phrase	(e.g.,	“I	am	going	to	the	store”)	in	an	angry	or	happy	way.	Dysprosodic
speech	 is	 flat	 and	 monotonous,	 without	 inflection	 or	 emotion.	 The	 speech	 in
parkinsonism	is	typically	hypoprosodic.	Patients	with	nondominant	lesions	may
also	 have	 difficulty	 in	 understanding	 figurative	 meanings	 and	 in	 distinguishing
the	 implicit	 and	 implied	 meaning	 of	 a	 phrase	 such	 as	 “Can	 you	 tell	 me	 the
time?”	 There	 is	 often	 difficulty	 processing	 nonliteral,	 context	 bound,	 complex
aspects	 of	 language,	 such	 as	 understanding	 figurative	 language,	 stories,	 and
jokes.

ALEXIA	AND	AGRAPHIA

A	 lesion	 of	 the	 primary	 visual	 cortex	 causes	 loss	 of	 visual	 perception.	 With	 a
lesion	 involving	 the	 visual	 association	 cortex,	 visual	 perception	 is	 intact,	 but
there	may	be	impairment	of	the	ability	to	recognize	and	interpret	visual	stimuli.
The	 region	 of	 the	 angular	 gyrus	 and	 the	 adjacent	 cortex	 in	 the	 dominant
hemisphere	 (Figure	 9.1)	 is	 important	 for	 the	 recognition	 and	 interpretation	 of
symbols	in	the	form	of	letters	and	words.	Connections	between	the	visual	cortex
and	 the	 dominant	 angular	 gyrus	 are	 vital	 for	 visual	 recognition	 of	 language
symbols.	 Geschwind	 said	 that	 the	 angular	 gyrus,	 “turns	 written	 language	 into
spoken	 language	 and	 vice	 versa.”	 Loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 read	 in	 the	 absence	 of
actual	 loss	 of	 vision	 is	 alexia	 (word	 blindness,	 visual	 receptive	 aphasia,	 visual
sensory	 aphasia).	 There	 are	 other	 disorders	 of	 visual	 recognition	 in	 addition	 to
alexia;	these	are	discussed	in	Chapter	10.

A	lesion	of	the	angular	or	supramarginal	gyrus,	or	its	connections	to	the	visual
cortex,	 causes	 alexia.	 There	 is	 loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 recognize,	 interpret,	 and
recall	the	meaning	of	visual	language	symbols.	Printed	words	have	no	meaning,
although	 the	 patient	 may	 talk	 without	 difficulty	 and	 understand	 what	 is	 said	 to
him.	 In	 verbal	 alexia,	 the	 patient	 can	 read	 individual	 letters	 but	 not	 words.	 In
some	patients,	the	recognition	of	letters	and	syllables	as	well	as	of	words	may	be
impaired;	in	some,	number	reading	may	be	less	affected	than	letter	identification
and	word	reading.	Reading	sometimes	improves	when	the	patient	traces	over	a
letter	 with	 his	 finger	 (kinesthetic	 facilitation),	 and	 occasionally	 a	 patient	 with
alexia	 can	 read	 by	 touch,	 recognizing	 embossed	 letters	 by	 feel	 even	 though	 he
cannot	 identify	 them	 visually.	 Syntactic	 alexia	 is	 the	 inability	 to	 comprehend
meaning	 that	 depends	 on	 syntax.	 The	 left	 supramarginal	 gyrus	 is	 particularly
important	for	comprehension	of	language	where	the	syntax	conveys	much	of	the
meaning.	 In	 hemialexia,	 the	 patient	 ignores	 half	 of	 the	 word.	 Types	 of	 alexia
commonly	 recognized	 include	 alexia	 with	 agraphia,	 alexia	 without	 agraphia,
frontal	alexia,	deep	alexia,	and	pure	alexia.	Patients	with	pure	alexia	may	suffer
from	a	specific	word	form–processing	deficit;	they	see	“wrods	with	trasnpsoed
letters.”	 Alexia	 with	 agraphia	 is	 classically	 associated	 with	 a	 dominant	 angular
gyrus	 lesion,	 and	 alexia	 without	 agraphia	 with	 an	 occipitotemporal	 lesion	 with
disconnection	between	the	visual	cortex	and	the	angular	gyrus.

Loss	of	the	ability	to	write	not	because	of	weakness,	incoordination,	or	other
neurologic	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 arm	 or	 hand	 is	 called	 agraphia.	 Milder
involvement	may	be	referred	to	as	dysgraphia.	There	are	three	types	of	agraphia:

aphasic,	 constructional	 (because	 of	 visuospatial	 compromise),	 and	 apractic.
Agraphia	 is	 seen	 in	 all	 types	 of	 aphasia	 except	 pure	 word	 blindness	 and	 pure
word	mutism.	Although	agraphia	typically	accompanies	aphasia,	it	may	occur	as
an	isolated	finding	(pure	agraphia)	and	as	part	of	other	syndromes	in	which	the
patient	 is	 not	 aphasic.	 Agraphia	 without	 alexia	 is	 a	 feature	 of	 Gerstmann’s
syndrome.	 A	 lesion	 involving	 the	 writing	 center	 or	 its	 connections	 may	 cause
agraphia.	In	aphasia,	writing	is	often	even	more	impaired	than	speech.	Patients
may	 lose	 the	 ability	 to	 write	 even	 though	 speech	 is	 retained.	 The	 defect	 is
essentially	an	apraxia	of	the	writing	hand.

Aphasic	agraphia	causes	spelling	and	grammatical	errors,	with	contraction	of
words,	omission	of	letters	or	syllables,	transposition	of	words,	or	mirror	writing.
Having	 the	 patient	 write	 spontaneously	 will	 usually	 bring	 out	 all	 the	 errors
present	 in	 speech	 as	 well	 as	 spelling	 and	 letter	 formation	 errors.	 In	 dissociated
agraphia,	 there	 may	 be	 difficulty	 in	 writing	 spontaneously	 or	 to	 dictation,	 with
retention	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 copy	 written	 or	 printed	 material.	 Patients	 with
constructional	apraxia	may	also	have	difficulty	writing.	Constructional	agraphia
interferes	 with	 the	 proper	 alignment	 and	 orientation	 of	 the	 text.	 Apractic
agraphia	 is	 due	 to	 inability	 to	 properly	 use	 the	 writing	 hand	 in	 the	 absence	 of
other	 deficits.	 The	 Japanese	 language	 has	 two	 separate	 but	 parallel	 writing
systems:	 kana	 (phonograms,	 syllabograms),	 which	 is	 similar	 to	 alphabet-based
languages;	 and	 kanji	 (morphograms,	 logograms,	 ideograms),	 which	 consists	 of
1,945	 symbols	 or	 characters.	 Patients	 may	 have	 alexia	 or	 agraphia	 to	 different
degrees	for	the	two	systems.

AMUSIA

Loss	 of	 musical	 ability,	 either	 production	 or	 comprehension,	 may	 occur	 in
patients	with	aphasia	or	agnosia,	or	acquired	amusia	may	develop	independently.
One	 classification	 of	 amusia	 includes	 vocal	 amusia,	 instrumental	 amnesia,
musical	 agraphia,	 musical	 amnesia,	 disorders	 of	 rhythm,	 and	 receptive	 amusia.
Melody	and	rhythm	may	be	affected	independently.	There	has	been	speculation
as	 to	 the	 site	 of	 the	 lesion	 producing	 amusia.	 The	 centers	 that	 control	 musical
ability	 are	 largely	 undefined	 compared	 to	 the	 centers	 that	 control	 verbal
language.	Evaluation	is	hindered	by	the	fact	that	the	patient	must	not	have	any
significant	other	type	of	aphasia,	and	must	have	had	premorbid	musical	ability.
The	 examiner	 must	 have	 some	 degree	 of	 appreciation	 of	 music	 to	 assess	 the

patient.	Wertheim	described	a	comprehensive	test	for	the	evaluation	of	amusia.
Different	 features	 of	 musical	 ability	 appear	 to	 be	 distributed	 between	 the	 two
hemispheres;	 thus,	 elements	 of	 amusia	 may	 develop	 from	 lesions	 of	 either.
Maurice	Ravel,	the	French	composer,	developed	amusia,	probably	because	of	a
degenerative	neurologic	disease	primarily	affecting	his	left	hemisphere.	His	final
compositions	 may	 demonstrate	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 disease	 on	 his	 creative
process.	 The	 mesmerizing	 Boléro,	 his	 most	 famous	 composition,	 features	 a
predominance	of	changes	in	pitch	and	rhythm	(more	right	hemisphere),	with	few
changes	in	melody	(more	left	hemisphere).

Video	Links

Video	Link	9.1.	Flaccid	dysarthria.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Flaccid_dysarthria
Video	Link	9.2.	Spastic	dysarthria.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Spastic_dysarthria
Video	Link	9.3.	Spasmodic	dysphonia.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Spasmodic_dysphonia
Video	Link	9.4.	Broca’s	aphasia.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Broca%27s_aphasia
Video	Link	9.5.	Wernicke’s	aphasia.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Wernicke%27s_aphasia

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Al	Hadidi	S,	Towfiq	B,	Bachuwa	G.	Dystextia	as	a	presentation	of	stroke.	BMJ

Case	Rep	2014;2014.	pii:	bcr2014206987.

Aladdin	Y,	Snyder	TJ,	Ahmed	SN.	Pearls	&	Oy-sters:	selective	postictal	aphasia:
cerebral	language	organization	in	bilingual	patients.	Neurology	 2008;71:e14–
e17.

Alexander	MP,	Naeser	MA,	Palumbo	CL.	Correlations	of	subcortical	CT	lesion

sites	and	aphasia	profiles.	Brain	1987;110(Pt	4):961–991.

Amaducci	 L,	 Grassi	 E,	 Boller	 F.	 Maurice	 Ravel	 and	 right-hemisphere	 musical
creativity:	 influence	 of	 disease	 on	 his	 last	 musical	 works?	 Eur	 J	 Neurol
2002;9:75–82.

Ardila	 A.	 A	 review	 of	 conduction	 aphasia.	 Curr	 Neurol	 Neurosci	 Rep

2010;10:499–503.

Ayotte	 J,	 Peretz	 I,	 Rousseau	 I,	 et	 al.	 Patterns	 of	 music	 agnosia	 associated	 with

middle	cerebral	artery	infarcts.	Brain	2000;123(Pt	9):1926–1938.

Bakar	 M,	 Kirshner	 HS,	 Wertz	 RT.	 Crossed	 aphasia.	 Functional	 brain	 imaging

with	PET	or	SPECT.	Arch	Neurol	1996;53:1026–1032.

Bang	 OY,	 Heo	 KG,	 Kwak	 Y,	 et	 al.	 Global	 aphasia	 without	 hemiparesis:	 lesion
analysis	and	its	mechanism	in	11	Korean	patients.	J	Neurol	Sci	2004;217:101–
106.

Barr	 A,	 Brandt	 J.	 Word-list	 generation	 deficits	 in	 dementia.	 J	 Clin	 Exp

Neuropsychol	1996;18:810–822.

Basso	A,	Farabola	M,	Grassi	MP,	et	al.	Aphasia	in	left-handers.	Comparison	of
aphasia	 profiles	 and	 language	 recovery	 in	 non-right-handed	 and	 matched
right-handed	patients.	Brain	Lang	1990;38:233–252.

Becker	 A,	 Hardmeier	 M,	 Steck	 AJ,	 et	 al.	 Primary	 lateral	 sclerosis	 presenting
with	isolated	progressive	pseudobulbar	syndrome.	Eur	J	Neurol	2007;14:e3.
Benson	DF.	 Aphasia,	 Alexia,	 and	 Agraphia.	 New	 York:	 Churchill	 Livingstone,

1980.

Bernal	 B,	 Ardila	 A.	 The	 role	 of	 the	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 in	 conduction	 aphasia.

Brain	2009;132(Pt	9):2309–2316.

Berthier	 ML,	 Lambon	 Ralph	 MA,	 Pujol	 J,	 et	 al.	 Arcuate	 fasciculus	 variability

and	repetition:	the	left	sometimes	can	be	right.	Cortex	2011;48:133–143.

Blank	SC,	Scott	SK,	Murphy	K,	et	al.	Speech	production:	Wernicke,	Broca	and

beyond.	Brain	2002;125:1829–1838.

Blanken	 G,	 Wallesch	 CW,	 Papagno	 C.	 Dissociations	 of	 language	 functions	 in
aphasics	with	speech	automatisms	(recurring	utterances).	Cortex	1990;26:41–
63.

Bonner	MF,	Ash	S,	Grossman	M.	The	new	classification	of	primary	progressive
aphasia	 into	 semantic,	 logopenic,	 or	 nonfluent/agrammatic	 variants.	 Curr
Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2010;10:484–490.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Buckingham	HW.	The	mechanisms	of	phonemic	paraphasia.	Clin	Linguist	Phon

1992;6:41–63.

Burns	 MS,	 Fahy	 J.	 Broca’s	 area:	 rethinking	 classical	 concepts	 from	 a

neuroscience	perspective.	Top	Stroke	Rehabil	2010;17:401–410.

Cauquil-Michon	 C,	 Flamand-Roze	 C,	 Denier	 C.	 Borderzone	 strokes	 and

transcortical	aphasia.	Curr	Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2011;11:570–577.

Choi	 JY,	 Lee	 KH,	 Na	 DL,	 et	 al.	 Subcortical	 aphasia	 after	 striatocapsular
infarction:	 quantitative	 analysis	 of	 brain	 perfusion	 SPECT	 using	 statistical
parametric	mapping	and	a	statistical	probabilistic	anatomic	map.	J	Nucl	Med
2007;48:194–200.

Confavreux	 C,	 Croisile	 B,	 Garassus	 P,	 et	 al.	 Progressive	 amusia	 and	 aprosody.

Arch	Neurol	1992;49:971–976.

Critchley	 M.	 And	 all	 the	 daughters	 of	 Musick	 shall	 be	 brought	 low:	 language

function	in	the	elderly.	Arch	Neurol	1984;41:1135–1139.

Croquelois	 A,	 Bogousslavsky	 J.	 Stroke	 aphasia:	 1,500	 consecutive	 cases.

Cerebrovasc	Dis	2011;31:392–399.

Damasio	AR.	Aphasia.	N	Engl	J	Med	1992;326:531–539.
Dewitt	I,	Rauschecker	JP.	Phoneme	and	word	recognition	in	the	auditory	ventral

stream.	Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	U	S	A	2012;109:E505–E514.

Dronkers	 NF.	 A	 new	 brain	 region	 for	 coordinating	 speech	 articulation.	 Nature

1996;384:159–161.

Dronkers	NF,	Plaisant	O,	Iba-Zizen	MT,	et	al.	Paul	Broca’s	historic	cases:	high
resolution	 MR	 imaging	 of	 the	 brains	 of	 Leborgne	 and	 Lelong.	 Brain
2007;130(Pt	5):1432–1441.

Duffy	JR.	Language	and	motor	speech.	In:	Weibers	DO,	Dale	AJD,	Kokmen	E,
Swanson	JW,	eds.	Mayo	Clinic	Examinations	in	Neurology.	7th	ed.	St.	Louis:
Mosby,	1998:53–85.

Dyukova	 GM,	 Glozman	 ZM,	 Titova	 EY,	 et	 al.	 Speech	 disorders	 in	 right-

hemisphere	stroke.	Neurosci	Behav	Physiol	2010;40:593–602.

Espay	AJ,	Aybek	S,	Carson	A,	et	al.	Current	concepts	in	diagnosis	and	treatment
of	functional	neurological	disorders.	JAMA	Neurol	2018;75(9):1132–1141.
Fabbro	F.	The	bilingual	brain:	bilingual	aphasia.	Brain	Lang	2001;79:201–210.
Flamand-Roze	 C,	 Cauquil-Michon	 C,	 Roze	 E,	 et	 al.	 Aphasia	 in	 border-zone
infarcts	 has	 a	 specific	 initial	 pattern	 and	 good	 long-term	 prognosis.	 Eur	 J
Neurol	2011;18:1397–1401.

Foundas	 AL,	 Bollich	 AM,	 Corey	 DM,	 et	 al.	 Anomalous	 anatomy	 of	 speech-
language	 areas	 in	 adults	 with	 persistent	 developmental	 stuttering.	 Neurology
2001;57:207–215.

Fridriksson	J,	Bonilha	L,	Rorden	C.	Severe	Broca’s	aphasia	without	Broca’s	area

damage.	Behav	Neurol	2007;18:237–238.

Geschwind	N.	Current	concepts:	aphasia.	N	Engl	J	Med	1971;284:654–656.
Glozman	 JM.	 A.R.	 Luria	 and	 the	 history	 of	 Russian	 neuropsychology.	 J	 Hist

Neurosci	2007;16:168–180.

Goodglass	H,	Kaplan	E,	Barresi	B,	et	al.	The	Assessment	of	Aphasia	and	Related

Disorders.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2001.

Grossman	M.	Primary	progressive	aphasia:	clinicopathological	correlations.	Nat

Rev	Neurol	2010;6:88–97.

Henderson	 VW.	 Jules	 Dejerine	 and	

the	

third	 alexia.	 Arch	 Neurol

1984;41(4):430–432.

Hillis	AE,	Barker	PB,	Wityk	RJ,	et	al.	Variability	in	subcortical	aphasia	is	due	to

variable	sites	of	cortical	hypoperfusion.	Brain	Lang	2004;89:524–530.

Hoffmann	 M,	 Chen	 R.	 The	 spectrum	 of	 aphasia	 subtypes	 and	 etiology	 in

subacute	stroke.	J	Stroke	Cerebrovasc	Dis	2013;22:1385–1392.

Jonkers	R,	Bastiaanse	R.	Action	naming	in	anomic	aphasic	speakers:	effects	of

instrumentality	and	name	relation.	Brain	Lang	2007;102:262–272.

Jordan	LC,	Hillis	AE.	Aphasia	and	right	hemisphere	syndromes	in	stroke.	Curr

Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2005;5:458–464.

Jordan	 LC,	 Hillis	 AE.	 Disorders	 of	 speech	 and	 language:	 aphasia,	 apraxia	 and

dysarthria.	Curr	Opin	Neurol	2006;19:580–585.

Joseph	PR.	Selective	mutism—the	child	who	doesn’t	speak	at	school.	Pediatrics

1999;104(2	Pt	1):308–309.

Kent	RD,	Kent	JF,	Duffy	JR,	et	al.	Ataxic	dysarthria.	J	 Speech	 Lang	 Hear	Res

2000;43:1275–1289.

Kertesz	 A,	 Poole	 E.	 The	 aphasia	 quotient:	 the	 taxonomic	 approach	 to
measurement	of	aphasic	disability.	1974.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2004;31:175–184.
Keulen	S,	Verhoeven	J,	De	Page	L,	et	al.	Psychogenic	foreign	accent	syndrome:

a	new	case.	Front	Hum	Neurosci	2016;10:143.

Kim	EJ,	Suh	MK,	Lee	BH,	et	al.	Transcortical	sensory	aphasia	following	a	left
frontal	 lobe	 infarction	 probably	 due	 to	 anomalously	 represented	 language
areas.	J	Clin	Neurosci	2009;16:1482–1485.

Kluin	KJ,	Foster	NL,	Berent	S,	et	al.	Perceptual	analysis	of	speech	disorders	in

progressive	supranuclear	palsy.	Neurology	1993;43(3	Pt	1):563–566.

Kluin	 KJ,	 Gilman	 S,	 Lohman	 M,	 et	 al.	 Characteristics	 of	 the	 dysarthria	 of

multiple	system	atrophy.	Arch	Neurol	1996;53:545–548.

Konstantopoulos	 K,	 Vikelis	 M,	 Seikel	 JA,	 et	 al.	 The	 existence	 of	 phonatory
instability	 in	 multiple	 sclerosis:	 an	 acoustic	 and	 electroglottographic	 study.
Neurol	Sci	2010;31:259–268.

Kreisler	 A,	 Godefroy	 O,	 Delmaire	 C,	 et	 al.	 The	 anatomy	 of	 aphasia	 revisited.

Neurology	2000;54:1117–1123.

Krishnan	G,	Rao	SN,	Rajashekar	B.	Apraxic	agraphia:	an	insight	into	the	writing
disturbances	of	posterior	aphasias.	Ann	Indian	Acad	Neurol	2009;12:120–123.
Kuljic-Obradovic	 DC.	 Subcortical	 aphasia:	 three	 different	 language	 disorder

syndromes?	Eur	J	Neurol	2003;10:445–448.

Kumral	E,	Ozdemirkiran	T,	Alper	Y.	Strokes	in	the	subinsular	territory:	clinical,

topographical,	and	etiological	patterns.	Neurology	2004;63:2429–2432.

Lazar	RM,	Marshall	RS,	Prell	GD,	et	al.	The	experience	of	Wernicke’s	aphasia.

Neurology	2000;55:1222–1224.

Li	EC,	Williams	SE.	Repetition	deficits	in	three	aphasic	syndromes.	J	Commun

Disord	1990;23:77–88.

Liotti	M,	Ramig	LO,	Vogel	D,	et	al.	Hypophonia	in	Parkinson’s	disease:	neural
correlates	of	voice	treatment	revealed	by	PET.	Neurology	2003;60:432–440.
Ludlow	 CL.	 Spasmodic	 dysphonia:	 a	 laryngeal	 control	 disorder	 specific	 to

speech.	J	Neurosci	2011;31:793–797.

Mark	 VW.	 Perisylvian	 aphasias.	 In:	 Roos	 RP,	 ed.	 MedLink	 Neurology.	 San
Diego:	 MedLink	 Corporation,	 2016.	 Available	 at:	 www.medlink.com.	 Last
updated:	August	13,	2016.

Martnez-Sanchez	 F.	 Speech	 and	 voice	 disorders	 in	 Parkinson’s	 disease.	 Rev

Neurol	2010;51:542–550.

Matas	M.	Psychogenic	voice	disorders:	literature	review	and	case	report.	Can	J

Psychiatry	1991;36:363–365.

Matsuo	K,	Kato	C,	Sumiyoshi	C,	et	al.	Discrimination	of	Exner’s	area	and	the
frontal	 eye	 field	 in	 humans—functional	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 during
language	and	saccade	tasks.	Neurosci	Lett	2003;340:13–16.

Mesulam	MM.	Primary	progressive	aphasia.	Ann	Neurol	2001;49:425–432.
Mohr	JP,	Pessin	MS,	Finkelstein	S,	et	al.	Broca	aphasia:	pathologic	and	clinical.

Neurology	1978;28:311–324.

Mulroy	E,	Murphy	S,	Lynch	T.	Alexia	without	agraphia.	Ir	Med	J	2011;104:124.
Murdoch	 BE.	 Acquired	 Speech	 and	 Language	 Disorders:	 A	 Neuroanatomical
and	 Functional	 Neurological	 Approach.	 2nd	 ed.	 Chichester,	 West	 Sussex;
Hoboken:	Wiley-Blackwell,	2010.

Ochfeld	 E,	 Newhart	 M,	 Molitoris	 J,	 et	 al.	 Ischemia	 in	 broca	 area	 is	 associated
with	 broca	 aphasia	 more	 reliably	 in	 acute	 than	 in	 chronic	 stroke.	 Stroke
2010;41:325–330.

Ogawa	K,	Yoshihashi	H,	Suzuki	Y,	et	al.	Clinical	study	of	the	responsible	lesion

for	dysarthria	in	the	cerebellum.	Intern	Med	2010;49:861–864.

Ohyama	 M,	 Senda	 M,	 Kitamura	 S,	 et	 al.	 Role	 of	 the	 nondominant	 hemisphere
and	 undamaged	 area	 during	 word	 repetition	 in	 poststroke	 aphasics.	 A	 PET
activation	study.	Stroke	1996;27:897–903.

Pearce	JM.	Selected	observations	on	amusia.	Eur	Neurol	2005;54:145–148.
Peters	 AS,	 Remi	 J,	 Vollmar	 C,	 et	 al.	 Dysprosody	 during	 epileptic	 seizures
lateralizes	to	the	nondominant	hemisphere.	Neurology	2011;77:1482–1486.
Pflugshaupt	T,	Suchan	J,	Mandler	MA,	et	al.	Do	patients	with	pure	alexia	suffer

from	 a	 specific	 word	 form	 processing	 deficit?	 Evidence	 from	 ‘wrods	 with
trasnpsoed	letetrs’.	Neuropsychologia	2011;49:1294–1301.

Pool	 KD,	 Freeman	 FJ,	 Finitzo	 T,	 et	 al.	 Heterogeneity	 in	 spasmodic	 dysphonia.

Neurologic	and	voice	findings.	Arch	Neurol	1991;48:305–309.

Price	CJ.	Functional-imaging	studies	of	the	19th	century	neurological	model	of

language.	Rev	Neurol	(Paris)	2001;157(8–9	Pt	1):833–836.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Ravi	 A,	 Rao	 VR,	 Klein	 JP.	 Dystextia:	 acute	 stroke	 in	 the	 modern	 age.	 JAMA

Neurol	2013;70:404–405.

Reich	 SG,	 Meyer	 T.	 Teaching	 video	 NeuroImage:	 spasmodic	 dysphonia:

adductor	and	abductor.	Neurology	2008;70:e78.

Rodriguez-Fornells	A,	Rotte	M,	Heinze	HJ,	et	al.	Brain	potential	and	functional
MRI	 evidence	 for	 how	 to	 handle	 two	 languages	 with	 one	 brain.	 Nature
2002;415:1026–1029.

Rohrer	 JD,	 Knight	 WD,	 Warren	 JE,	 et	 al.	 Word-finding	 difficulty:	 a	 clinical

analysis	of	the	progressive	aphasias.	Brain	2008;131(Pt	1):8–38.

Sakurai	Y,	Ichikawa	Y,	Mannen	T.	Pure	alexia	from	a	posterior	occipital	lesion.

Neurology	2001;56:778–781.

Sakurai	Y,	Asami	M,	Mannen	T.	Alexia	and	agraphia	with	lesions	of	the	angular
and	supramarginal	gyri:	evidence	for	the	disruption	of	sequential	processing.	J
Neurol	Sci	2010;288:25–33.

Schiff	 HB,	 Alexander	 MP,	 Naeser	 MA,	 et	 al.	 Aphemia.	 Clinical-anatomic

correlations.	Arch	Neurol	1983;40:720–727.

Selnes	OA,	Hillis	A.	Patient	Tan	revisited:	a	case	of	atypical	global	aphasia?	J

Hist	Neurosci	2000;9:233–237.

Sheldon	 CA,	 Malcolm	 GL,	 Barton	 JJ.	 Alexia	 with	 and	 without	 agraphia:	 an
assessment	of	two	classical	syndromes.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2008;35:616–624.
Shinoura	N,	Onodera	T,	Kurokawa	K,	et	al.	Damage	to	the	upper	portion	of	area
19	 and	 the	 deep	 white	 matter	 in	 the	 left	 inferior	 parietal	 lobe,	 including	 the
superior	 longitudinal	 fasciculus,	 results	 in	 alexia	 with	 agraphia.	 Eur	 Neurol
2010;64:224–229.

Shipley	 KG,	 McAfee	 JG.	 Assessment	 in	 Speech-Language	 Pathology.	 4th	 ed.

Clifton	Park:	Delmar	Cengage	Learning,	2009.

Sommer	M,	Koch	MA,	Paulus	W,	et	al.	Disconnection	of	speech-relevant	brain

areas	in	persistent	developmental	stuttering.	Lancet	2002;360:380–383.

Song	 X,	 Dornbos	 D	 III,	 Lai	 Z,	 et	 al.	 Diffusion	 tensor	 imaging	 and	 diffusion

tensor	 imaging-fibre	 tractography	 depict	 the	 mechanisms	 of	 Broca-like	 and
Wernicke-like	conduction	aphasia.	Neurol	Res	2011;33:529–535.

Spencer	 KA,	 Slocomb	 DL.	 The	 neural	 basis	 of	 ataxic	 dysarthria.	 Cerebellum

2007;6:58–65.

Starrfelt	 R,	 Behrmann	 M.	 Number	 reading	

in	 pure	 alexia—a	 review.

Neuropsychologia	2011;49:2283–2298.

Sugishita	M,	Otomo	K,	Kabe	S,	et	al.	A	critical	appraisal	of	neuropsychological
correlates	of	Japanese	ideogram	(kanji)	and	phonogram	(kana)	reading.	Brain
1992;115(Pt	5):1563–1585.

Sulica	L,	Louis	ED.	Clinical	characteristics	of	essential	voice	tremor:	a	study	of

34	cases.	Laryngoscope	2010;120:516–528.

Takayama	 Y,	 Sugishita	 M,	 Kido	 T,	 et	 al.	 A	 case	 of	 foreign	 accent	 syndrome
without	 aphasia	 caused	 by	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 left	 precentral	 gyrus.	 Neurology
1993;43:1361–1363.

Thomas	NWD,	Mestre	TA.	Impact	of	new	technologies	in	a	stroke	presentation:

a	case	of	dystextia	and	dystypia.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2017;44:458–460.

Timmann	 D,	 Konczak	 J,	 Ilg	 W,	 et	 al.	 Current	 advances	 in	 lesion-symptom

mapping	of	the	human	cerebellum.	Neuroscience	2009;162:836–851.

Tomik	 B,	 Guiloff	 RJ.	 Dysarthria	 in	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis:	 a	 review.

Amyotroph	Lateral	Scler	2010;11:4–15.

Tudor	 L,	 Sikiric	 P,	 Tudor	 KI,	 et	 al.	 Amusia	 and	 aphasia	 of	 Bolero’s	 creator–
influence	of	the	right	hemisphere	on	music.	Acta	Med	Croatica	2008;62:309–
316.

Urban	 PP,	 Hopf	 HC,	 Zorowka	 PG,	 et	 al.	 Dysarthria	 and	 lacunar	 stroke:

pathophysiologic	aspects.	Neurology	1996;47:1135–1141.

von	 Keyserlingk	 AG,	 Naujokat	 C,	 Niemann	 K,	 et	 al.	 Global	 aphasia-with	 and
linguistic	 and	 CT	 scan	 study.	 Eur	 Neurol

without	 hemiparesis.	 A	
1997;38:259–267.

Wise	RJ,	Greene	J,	Buchel	C,	et	al.	Brain	regions	involved	in	articulation.	Lancet

1999;353:1057–1061.

Yamada	K,	Nagakane	Y,	Mizuno	T,	et	al.	MR	tractography	depicting	damage	to
the	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 conduction	 aphasia.	 Neurology
2007;68:789.

Yang	 ZH,	 Zhao	 XQ,	 Wang	 CX,	 et	 al.	 Neuroanatomic	 correlation	 of	 the	 post-

stroke	aphasias	studied	with	imaging.	Neurol	Res	2008;30:356–360.

Zhang	Y,	Wang	Y,	Wang	C,	et	al.	Study	on	the	pathogenic	mechanism	of	Broca’s

and	Wernicke’s	aphasia.	Neurol	Res	2006;28:59–65.

Zhang	Y,	Wang	C,	Zhao	X,	et	al.	Diffusion	tensor	imaging	depicting	damage	to
the	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 in	 patients	 with	 conduction	 aphasia:	 a	 study	 of	 the
Wernicke-Geschwind	model.	Neurol	Res	2010;32:775–778.

SECTION	D	The	Cranial	Nerves

CHAPTER	10

Agnosia,	Apraxia,	and	Related
Disorders	of	Higher	Cortical
Function

Gnosia	 (Gr.	 gnosis,	 “knowledge”)	 refers	 to	 the	 higher	 synthesis	 of	 sensory
impulses,	with	the	resulting	perception,	appreciation,	and	recognition	of	stimuli.
Agnosia	refers	to	the	loss	or	impairment	of	the	ability	to	know	or	recognize	the
meaning	 or	 import	 of	 a	 sensory	 stimulus,	 even	 though	 it	 has	 been	 perceived.
Agnosia	 occurs	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 any	 impairment	 of	 cognition,	 attention,	 or
alertness.	 The	 patients	 are	 not	 aphasic	 and	 do	 not	 have	 word-finding	 or	 a
impairment.	 Hughlings	 Jackson	 saw	 agnosia	 as	 a
generalized	 naming	
nonlanguage	form	of	aphasia.	Agnosias	are	usually	specific	for	a	given	sensory
modality	and	can	occur	with	any	type	of	sensory	stimulus.	Agnosias	that	involve
the	 primary	 sensory	 modalities	 may	 represent	 disconnection	 syndromes	 that
disrupt	communication	between	a	specific	cortical	sensory	area	and	the	language
areas,	which	causes	a	restricted	anomia.	Agnosias	are	frequently	due	to	bilateral
or	diffuse	processes	 such	as	multiple	 stroke,	hypoxic	ischemic	encephalopathy,
and	degenerative	disorders.

inability	

Tactile	 agnosia	 refers	 to	 the	 inability	 to	 recognize	 stimuli	 by	 feel;	 visual
agnosia	is	the	inability	to	recognize	visually;	and	auditory	(acoustic)	agnosia	is
the	
to	 know	 or	 recognize	 by	 audition.	 Body-image	 agnosia
(autotopagnosia)	is	loss	or	impairment	of	the	ability	to	name	and	recognize	body
parts.	Finger	agnosia	is	a	type	of	autotopagnosia	involving	the	fingers.	Auditory
agnosia	is	the	loss	of	recognition	of	sounds.	A	patient	with	auditory	agnosia	may
not	be	able	to	distinguish	between	the	sound	of	a	baby	crying	and	the	noise	of
traffic.	 Phonagnosia	 is	 the	 loss	 of	 recognition	 of	 familiar	 voices.	 Amusia	 is	 a
form	of	auditory	agnosia	(Chapter	9).	Time	agnosia	refers	to	loss	of	time	sense

without	 disorientation	 in	 other	 spheres.	 Visuospatial	 agnosia	 is	 loss	 or
impairment	 in	 the	 ability	 to	 judge	 direction,	 distance,	 and	 motion	 and	 the
inability	 to	 understand	 three-dimensional	 spatial	 relationships.	 Because	 of	 the
impaired	spatial	judgment	and	visual	disorientation,	the	patient	cannot	find	her
way	in	familiar	surroundings.	Multimodal	agnosias	may	occur	with	dysfunction
of	the	association	areas	in	the	parietal	and	temporal	lobes	that	assimilate	sensory
information	from	more	than	one	domain.

Astereognosis	 (stereoanesthesia)	 is	 loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 recognize	 and
identify	an	object	by	touch	despite	intact	primary	sensory	modalities.	There	is	no
loss	of	perceptual	ability.	The	patient	can	feel	the	object,	sensing	its	dimensions,
texture,	and	other	relevant	information.	However,	she	is	unable	to	synthesize	this
information	 and	 correlate	 it	 with	 past	 experience	 and	 stored	 information	 about
similar	 objects	 in	 order	 to	 recognize	 and	 identify	 it.	 Stereognosis	 is	 tested	 by
asking	the	patient	to	identify,	with	eyes	closed,	common	objects	placed	into	the
hand	(e.g.,	coin,	key,	button,	safety	pin,	paper	clip).	The	most	convincing	deficit
is	when	the	patient	is	able	to	identify	with	the	other	hand	an	object	that	she	was
unable	to	identify	with	the	tested	hand.	When	primary	sensory	modalities	in	the
hand	 are	 impaired,	 as	 by	 radiculopathy	 or	 neuropathy,	 failure	 to	 identify	 an
object	 by	 touch	 is	 not	 astereognosis.	 Astereognosis	 usually	 indicates	 a	 lesion
involving	 the	 contralateral	 parietal	 lobe.	 Rarely,	 a	 lesion	 of	 either	 parietal	 lobe
can	 produce	 astereognosis	 bilaterally.	 It	 has	 also	 been	 reported	 to	 occur	 with
lesions	 involving	 the	 anterior	 corpus	 callosum	 and	 the	 thalamic	 radiations.	 If
there	is	hand	weakness,	the	examiner	may	hold	and	move	the	object	between	the
patient’s	fingers.	It	is	striking	to	see	a	patient	with	a	paralyzed	hand	from	a	pure
motor	capsular	stroke	demonstrate	exquisitely	intact	stereognosis	when	tested	in
this	 fashion.	 In	 tactile	 agnosia,	 the	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 identify	 the	 object	 with
either	hand	but	can	identify	it	visually.	Graphesthesia	is	a	similar	function.	It	is
tested	 by	 writing	 numbers	 on	 the	 patient’s	 palm	 or	 fingertips.	 The	 inability	 to
recognize	the	numbers	is	referred	to	as	agraphesthesia;	in	the	presence	of	intact
primary	 sensory	 modalities,	 it	 usually	 indicates	 a	 lesion	 involving	 the
contralateral	 parietal	 lobe.	 Cortical	 sensory	 functions	 and	 abnormalities	 are
discussed	further	in	Chapter	35.

Finger	 agnosia	 refers	 to	 the	 loss	 or	 impairment	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 recognize,
name,	or	select	individual	fingers	of	the	patient’s	own	hands	or	the	hands	of	the
examiner.	 The	 patient	 loses	 the	 ability	 to	 name	 individual	 fingers,	 point	 to
fingers	 named	 by	 the	 examiner,	 or	 move	 named	 fingers	 on	 request,	 in	 the
absence	 of	 any	 other	 naming	 deficit.	 Testing	 for	 finger	 agnosia	 may	 be

conveniently	 combined	 with	 assessment	 of	 right-left	 orientation.	 The	 simplest
test	of	right-left	orientation	is	to	ask	the	patient	to	raise	a	specific	hand.	A	more
challenging	 test	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 touch	 a	 body	 part	 on	 one	 side	 (e.g.,	 the
right	ear)	with	a	specific	digit	of	the	other	side	(e.g.,	the	left	thumb).	Even	more
strenuous	 is	 when	 the	 examiner	 faces	 the	 patient,	 crosses	 her	 forearms	 with
hands	 and	 fingers	 extended,	 and	 requests	 the	 patient	 to	 touch	 one	 of	 the
examiner’s	 fingers	 on	 a	 specific	 side	 (e.g.,	 the	 left	 index	 finger).	 A	 very
challenging	 test	 is	 to	 ask	 the	 patient	 to	 touch	 a	 specific	 finger	 as	 the	 examiner
faces	 away	 from	 the	 patient	 with	 forearms	 crossed	 behind	 the	 back.	 Using	 a
confusing	syntax,	the	examiner	might	say,	“with	your	left	hand,	touch	my	right
index	finger.”

Finger	 agnosia	 and	 right-left	 confusion,	 along	 with	 agraphia	 and	 acalculia,
make	 up	 Gerstmann’s	 syndrome.	 Finger	 agnosia	 alone	 is	 not	 highly	 localizing,
but	when	all	components	of	the	syndrome	are	present,	the	lesion	is	likely	to	lie	in
the	 dominant	 inferior	 parietal	 lobule,	 particularly	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 angular
gyrus	 and	 subjacent	 white	 matter.	 Current	 thinking	 is	 that	 pure	 Gerstmann’s
syndrome	 likely	 results	 from	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 subcortical	 parietal	 white	 matter
causing	 disconnection	 of	 separate	 but	 colocalized	 fiber	 tracts	 disrupting
intraparietal	cortical	networks,	rather	than	a	focal	cortical	lesion.

In	the	visual	agnosias,	there	is	loss	or	impairment	of	the	ability	to	recognize
things	visually,	despite	intact	vision	(psychic	blindness	or	mind	blindness).	Area
18	 and	 area	 19	 are	 particularly	 important	 for	 visual	 gnostic	 functions.	 Visual
agnosia	is	not	a	sensory	defect	but	a	problem	in	recognition.	There	is	impairment
in	the	higher	visual	association	processes	necessary	for	recognition	and	naming,
not	explicable	 by	 any	deficit	in	visual	perception	or	in	naming	ability.	Patients
can	 see	 but	 cannot	 make	 sense	 of	 the	 visual	 world.	 Teuber	 said	 visual	 agnosia
was	a	“percept	stripped	of	its	meaning.”	Oliver	Sacks	provided	an	entertaining
and	informative	description	of	the	clinical	picture	of	visual	agnosia	in	The	Man
Who	Mistook	His	Wife	for	a	Hat.

The	specifics	of	which	visual	functions	are	preserved	or	involved	vary	from
patient	 to	 patient.	 Lissauer	 divided	 the	 visual	 agnosias	 into	 apperceptive	 and
associative	 types.	 Apperceptive	 visual	 agnosia	 occurs	 when	 there	 is	 some
perceptual	defect	distorting	the	visual	image	so	that	the	object	is	unrecognizable.
It	 most	 often	 follows	 lesions	 involving	 the	 parietooccipital	 regions	 bilaterally
and	 may	 evolve	 during	 recovery	 from	 cortical	 blindness.	 In	 apperceptive
agnosia,	there	 is	lack	of	recognition	because	of	a	visual	perceptual	impairment
above	 the	 level	 of	 a	 basic	 visual	 function	 such	 as	 acuity,	 color	 perception,	 and

visual	 fields.	 There	 is	 impairment	 of	 the	 more	 complex	 perceptions	 that	 allow
for	the	synthesis	of	visual	elements.	The	patient	may	be	able	to	see	parts	but	not
the	whole.	She	may	not	be	able	to	distinguish	a	circle	from	a	square	or	match	an
object	with	its	picture.

Associative	visual	agnosia	refers	to	a	global	inability	to	identify	objects	in	the
absence	of	visual	impairment,	aphasia,	or	anomia.	It	is	a	defect	in	the	association
of	the	object	with	past	experience	and	memory.	Patients	can	readily	identify	the
same	 objects	 using	 other	 sensory	 modalities.	 Associative	 visual	 agnosia	 occurs
with	bilateral	occipitotemporal	junction	lesions,	often	involving	fusiform	gyri.	It
may	also	occur	when	the	visual	cortex	is	disconnected	from	the	language	centers
by	a	lesion	involving	the	splenium	of	the	corpus	callosum	and	the	left	occipital
lobe,	 similar	 to	 the	 lesion	 causing	 alexia	 without	 agraphia.	 Patients	 often	 have
related	 recognition	 deficits,	 such	 as	 color	 agnosia	 and	 prosopagnosia.	 The
apperceptive-associative	 scheme	 has	 been	 applied	 to	 other	 types	 of	 agnosia	 as
well.

Visual	object	agnosia	(optic	aphasia)	is	an	associative	visual	agnosia	causing
an	 inability	 to	 recognize	 things	 seen	 that	 is	 not	 because	 of	 visual	 impairment,
cognitive	deficit,	inattention,	aphasic	misnaming,	or	unfamiliarity.	The	patient	is
unable	 to	 identify	 familiar	 objects	 presented	 visually	 and	 cannot	 correctly
identify	a	seen	object	from	a	pick	list.	She	may	be	able	to	see	the	object,	even
describe	it,	but	have	no	idea	what	it	is	or	what	it	is	called.	But	she	recognizes	it
immediately	 if	 allowed	 to	 handle	 it	 or	 hear	 any	 sound	 it	 might	 make.	 Visual
object	 agnosia	 must	 be	 distinguished	 from	 anomia.	 The	 patient	 with	 anomia
cannot	 recognize	 the	 object	 when	 presented	 by	 another	 modality	 (e.g.,	 touch),
and	 she	 will	 have	 other	 defects	 in	 naming,	 such	 as	 impairment	 in	 spontaneous
naming	with	inability	to	generate	word	lists	(e.g.,	naming	animals).	The	anomic
patient	 may	 also	 be	 able	 to	 demonstrate	 what	 the	 object	 is	 by	 gesture	 (e.g.,
appropriately	 apply	 a	 comb	 to	 her	 hair),	 yet	 not	 be	 able	 to	 call	 it	 a	 comb.	 The
patient	with	agnosia	doesn’t	recognize	the	comb	as	a	comb	and	has	no	idea	what
to	do	with	it.	Visual	object	agnosia	is	often	accompanied	by	right	homonymous
hemianopia	and	alexia	without	agraphia.

Some	 occipital	 lobe	 lesions,	 particularly	 of	 the	 primary	 visual	 cortex,	 cause
color	 blindness	 (central	 achromatopsia).	 Lesions	 of	 the	 association	 areas	 may
cause	color	agnosia.	In	color	agnosia,	the	patient	cannot	name	or	identify	colors,
although	she	is	not	color	blind	and	can	discern	the	numbers	on	color	plates.	In
prosopagnosia	(face	or	facial	agnosia),	there	is	an	inability	to	recognize	familiar
faces.	 The	 patient	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 identify	 people,	 even	 close	 family

members,	by	looking	at	their	faces.	However,	she	may	immediately	identify	the
person	by	the	sound	of	the	voice.	The	patient	may	recognize	a	face	as	a	face	but
cannot	 associate	 it	 with	 a	 particular	 individual.	 She	 learns	 to	 identify	 people
using	other	cues.	In	extreme	examples,	the	patient	is	unable	to	recognize	herself
in	 a	 mirror	 or	 a	 photograph.	 Patients	 with	 prosopagnosia,	 and	 other	 visual
agnosias,	 usually	 have	 bilateral	 lesions	 of	 the	 occipitotemporal	 area	 involving
the	lingual,	fusiform,	and	 parahippocampal	gyri.	Prosopagnosia	can	occur	with
unilateral	 right	 posterior	 hemispheric	 lesions.	 Recent	 literature	 suggests	 that	 a
hereditary	form	may	affect	about	2.5%	of	the	population,	and	perhaps	up	to	10%
in	 a	 very	 mild	 form.	 A	 common	 complaint	 is	 the	 inability	 to	 keep	 track	 of
characters	 in	 movies.	 Transient	 prosopagnosia	 has	 been	 reported	 after	 focal
electrical	stimulation	of	the	right	inferior	occipital	gyrus.

Simultagnosia	is	the	ability	to	perceive	only	one	object	at	a	time	or	specific
details	but	not	a	picture	in	its	entirety.	The	patient	may	perceive	parts	but	not	the
whole	of	a	pattern.	They	may	be	able	to	read	letter-by-letter	but	not	recognize	an
entire	word.	Area	19	is	thought	to	be	important	in	revisualization,	and	lesions	in
this	region	cause	a	visual	agnosia	characterized	by	inability	to	revisualize,	or	a
loss	 of	 visual	 memory.	 An	 object	 may	 be	 identified	 when	 seen,	 but	 the	 patient
cannot	describe	it	afterward.	In	the	Charcot-Wilbrand	syndrome,	there	is	loss	of
revisualization;	the	patient	cannot	draw	or	construct	from	memory.	Patients	may
not	be	able	to	remember	the	color	of	common	things	(e.g.,	the	sky).

Apraxia	 (Gr.	 praxis	 “action”)	 is	 defined	 in	 several	 ways.	 Common	 to	 all
definitions	is	the	inability	to	carry	out	on	request	a	motor	act	in	the	absence	of
any	 weakness,	 sensory	 loss,	 or	 other	 deficit	 involving	 the	 affected	 part.	 The
patient	must	have	intact	comprehension	and	be	cooperative	and	attentive	to	the
task.	 One	 definition	 requires	 the	 task	 be	 high	 level,	 learned,	 familiar,	 and
purposeful,	such	as	saluting	or	using	an	implement.	But	the	term	is	also	used	to
refer	 to	 loss	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 execute	 some	 very	 elemental	 functions,	 such	 as
opening	or	closing	the	eyes	(eyelid	apraxia),	glancing	to	the	side	(ocular	motor
or	gaze	apraxia),	walking	(gait	apraxia),	or	a	behavior	as	basic	as	smacking	the
lips	 (buccofacial	 apraxia).	 Another	 definition	 of	 apraxia	 is	 the	 inability	 to
perform	 an	 act	 on	 command	 that	 the	 patient	 is	 able	 to	 perform	 spontaneously.
But	 the	 patient	 with	 gait	 apraxia	 cannot	 walk	 spontaneously	 any	 better	 than	 to
command.	 So,	 all	 the	 definitions	 and	 applications	 of	 the	 term	 suffer	 in	 one
respect	or	another.	There	are	many	varieties	of	apraxia.	The	ones	seen	most	often
are	 ideomotor,	 buccofacial,	 constructional,	 and	 dressing	 apraxia.	 Apraxia	 of
speech	is	discussed	in	Chapter	9.

The	 major	 limb	 apraxias	 are	 limb	 kinetic,	 ideomotor,	 and	 ideational.	 The
simplest	 form	 is	 limb	 kinetic	 apraxia.	 This	 category	 probably	 should	 not	 exist.
These	patients	have	difficulty	with	fine	motor	control.	They	typically	have	very
mild	lesions	involving	the	corticospinal	tract	that	are	not	severe	enough	to	cause
detectable	 weakness,	 but	 they	 are	 severe	 enough	 to	 impair	 coordination	 and
dexterity.	 Limb	 kinetic	 apraxia	 is	 due	 to	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 primary	 motor
pathways.	In	other	forms	of	apraxia,	the	primary	motor	and	sensory	functions	are
intact.	 Pryse-Phillips	 referred	 to	 limb	 kinetic	 apraxia	 as,	 “an	 entity	 of	 doubtful
validity,	the	clumsiness…	probably	being	due	to	paresis.”

In	 ideomotor	 apraxia,	 the	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 perform	 a	 complex	 command
(e.g.,	 salute,	 wave	 goodbye,	 comb	 hair,	 use	 scissors,	 flip	 a	 coin,	 show	 how	 to
hitchhike)	 with	 the	 involved	 extremity,	 sometimes	 with	 either	 extremity.	 The
patient	 may	 be	 unable	 to	 pantomime	 how	 to	 use	 common	 implements	 (e.g.,
hammer,	toothbrush,	comb)	or	how	to	kick	or	throw	a	ball.	She	may	substitute	a
hand	or	finger	for	the	imagined	object,	thus	using	a	body	part	as	the	tool	(e.g.,
raking	 her	 fingers	 through	 her	 hair	 instead	 of	 showing	 how	 to	 use	 a	 comb	 or
snapping	 her	 fingers	 together	 as	 the	 blades	 when	 asked	 to	 show	 how	 to	 use
scissors).	The	patient	may	be	unable	to	carry	out	the	act	on	command	but	be	able
to	imitate	it.	Rarely,	the	patient	may	be	unable	to	carry	out	an	act	on	command	or
imitation—such	 as	 showing	 how	 to	 use	 a	 comb—but	 be	 able	 to	 use	 the	 actual
object,	referred	to	as	dissociation	or	disconnection	apraxia.

In	ideomotor	apraxia,	there	may	be	a	disconnection	between	the	language	or
visual	 centers	 that	 understand	 the	 command	 and	 the	 motor	 areas	 tasked	 with
carrying	it	out.	Patients	may	have	apraxia	for	whole	body	movements.	They	are
unable	to,	on	command,	do	such	things	as	stand	up,	take	a	bow,	or	stand	like	a
boxer.	Lack	of	apraxia	for	whole	body	movements	in	the	presence	of	apraxia	for
limb	 movements	 has	 been	 attributed	 to	 sparing	 of	 the	 bundle	 of	 Turck,	 a	 tract
from	the	posterior	superior	temporal	area	to	the	pontine	nuclei	(temporopontine
tract).	 As	 many	 as	 40%	 of	 aphasic	 patients	 have	 ideomotor	 ataxia	 if	 correctly
tested,	 but	 it	 frequently	 goes	 undetected.	 Depending	 on	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the
lesion,	 ideomotor	 apraxia	 may	 affect	 only	 contralateral	 or	 all	 four	 limbs	 plus
midline	
functions.	 Some	 authorities	 distinguish	 between	 parietal	 and
disconnection	variants	of	ideomotor	apraxia.

Sympathetic	apraxia	is	the	inability	of	a	patient	to	perform	a	complex	motor
act	with	the	nonparetic	limb	in	the	presence	of	a	unilateral	dominant	hemisphere
lesion.	 For	 instance,	 a	 patient	 with	 a	 left	 hemisphere	 lesion	 causing	 Broca’s
aphasia	may	be	unable	to	show	how	to	wave	goodbye	using	the	left	hand.	This	is

because	the	fibers	connecting	the	language	areas	of	the	left	hemisphere	with	the
motor	 areas	 of	 the	 right	 hemisphere	 are	 disrupted.	 The	 patient	 understands	 the
request,	has	no	weakness	of	the	left	hand,	but	is	unable	to	execute	because	the
right	hemisphere	never	receives	the	command.

In	ideational	apraxia,	the	patient	is	able	to	carry	out	individual	components	of
a	complex	motor	act,	but	she	cannot	perform	the	entire	sequence	properly.	The
patient	 may	 perform	 each	 step	 correctly,	 but	 in	 attempting	 the	 sequence,	 she
omits	 steps	 or	 gets	 the	 steps	 out	 of	 order.	 There	 is	 an	 inability	 to	 correctly
sequence	 a	 series	 of	 acts	 leading	 to	 a	 goal.	 Ideational	 apraxia	 seems	 to	 be	 an
impairment	 in	 conceptualizing	 the	 overall	 goal	 of	 the	 activity	 sequence	 or	 an
inability	to	plan	the	series	of	steps.	For	instance,	in	showing	how	to	drive	a	car,
the	 patient	 might	 try	 to	 put	 the	 car	 in	 drive	 before	 starting	 the	 engine.	 When
asked	 to	 demonstrate	 how	 to	 mail	 a	 letter,	 the	 patient	 may	 seal	 the	 envelope
before	inserting	the	letter,	or	mail	the	letter	before	affixing	the	stamp.	Ideational
apraxia	may	occur	with	damage	to	the	left	posterior	temporoparietal	junction	or
in	 patients	 with	 generalized	 cognitive	 impairment.	 In	 daily	 life,	 patients	 with
ideational	apraxia	may	choose	the	wrong	tool	for	a	task,	for	example,	eat	soup
with	 fork,	 or	 perform	 tasks	 out	 of	 sequence,	 for	 example,	 brush	 teeth	 before
applying	 toothpaste.	 In	 one	 reported	 case,	 a	 woman	 trying	 to	 light	 a	 gas	 stove
first	struck	the	match,	then	blew	it	out,	then	lit	the	burner.	On	another	occasion,
she	 turned	 on	 the	 gas,	 filled	 the	 kettle,	 then	 struck	 the	 match,	 causing	 a	 minor
explosion.

In	 buccofacial	 (oral)	 apraxia,	 patients	 are	 unable	 to	 execute	 on	 request
complex	acts	involving	the	lips,	mouth,	and	face;	this	may	include	such	activities
as	whistling,	coughing,	pursing	the	lips,	sticking	out	the	tongue,	blowing	a	kiss,
pretending	to	blow	out	a	match,	or	sniffing	a	flower.	There	is	no	weakness	of	the
mouth,	lips,	or	face,	but	the	patients	are	unable	to	make	the	requested	movement.
The	 patient	 may	 spontaneously	 lick	 her	 lips	 or	 stick	 out	 her	 tongue,	 but	 she	 is
unable	to	do	so	on	command.	Apraxia	of	such	midline	functions	is	common	in
patients	 with	 lesions	 involving	 either	 hemisphere.	 Failure	 to	 execute	 such	 acts
should	 not	 necessarily	 be	 construed	 as	 evidence	 of	 impaired	 comprehension	 in
aphasic	patients.

Other	 common	 types	 of	 apraxia	 include	 dressing	 and	 constructional.
Constructional	 or	 dressing	 apraxia	 usually	 occurs	 with	 parietal	 lobe	 lesions,
occasionally	 with	 frontal	 lesions	 that	 interfere	 with	 the	 patient’s	 ability	 to
comprehend	spatial	relationships.	In	constructional	apraxia,	the	patient	is	unable
to	 copy	 geometric	 forms	 of	 any	 complexity	 because	 of	 impaired	 visuospatial

skills.	She	may	be	able	to	draw	a	square	but	not	a	three-dimensional	cube.	She
may	 be	 able	 to	 draw	 individual	 shapes,	 but	 she	 cannot	 synthesize	 them	 into	 a
more	 complex	 geometric	 figure	 (e.g.,	 a	 square	 with	 a	 triangle	 perched	 on	 its
upper-right	corner	and	a	circle	attached	to	the	lower-right	corner,	all	touching).
The	patient	may	also	be	asked	to	draw	actual	things,	such	as	a	three-dimensional
house	with	a	roof	and	chimney,	a	clock,	or	a	daisy.

Patients	with	hemineglect	 may	fail	to	put	petals	on	one	side	of	the	daisy.	A
test	for	both	praxis	and	cognition	is	to	have	the	patient	draw	a	clock	face,	insert
the	 numbers,	 and	 draw	 the	 hands	 at	 a	 specific	 time	 (e.g.,	 3:10,	 or	 “10	 minutes
past	3”).	Patients	with	hemineglect	may	fail	to	put	the	numbers	on	one	side	of
the	clock.	Patients	with	frontal	lobe	dysfunction	or	a	confusional	state	may	have
a	 disorganized	 and	 confused	 approach	 to	 the	 task,	 making	 multiple	 errors.	 A
patient	 with	 cognitive	 impairment	 may	 forget	 the	 proper	 arrangement	 of
numbers	or	how	to	indicate	a	specific	time.	Some	patients	cannot	interpret	3:10
and	will	put	one	hand	on	the	10	and	the	other	on	the	3,	indicating	2:50	or	10:15.
The	 clock	 drawing	 test	 is	 discussed	 further	 in	 Chapter	 8.	 The	 Rey-Osterrieth
figure	 is	 very	 complex	 and	 can	 bring	 out	 subtle	 constructional	 apraxia	 (Figure
10.1).	Constructional	tasks	are	particularly	useful	for	differentiating	psychiatric
from	neurologic	disease.	 Impaired	constructional	 ability	is	a	sensitive	indicator
of	 lesions	 involving	 various	 parts	 of	 the	 brain,	 but	 in	 patients	 with	 psychiatric
disease,	constructional	ability	is	preserved.

In	 dressing	 apraxia,	 the	 patient	 loses	 the	 ability	 to	 don	 clothing	 correctly.
Dressing	 requires	 bimanual	 cooperation	 to	 solve	 a	 complex	 spatial	 problem.
There	is	loss	of	the	ability	to	manipulate	the	clothing	in	space	and	to	understand
its	 three-dimensional	 relationships.	 Patients	 with	 hemineglect	 may	 fail	 to	 dress
one	side	of	the	body.	A	useful	test	for	dressing	apraxia	is	to	turn	one	sleeve	of
the	hospital	gown	or	robe	inside	out	and	then	ask	the	patient	to	put	it	on.	Patients
with	 dressing	 apraxia	 are	 often	 baffled.	 Dressing	 apraxia	 can	 be	 particularly
disabling,	as	the	patient	struggles	for	a	long	period	of	time	each	morning	simply
to	get	dressed.	Constructional	apraxia	would	be	very	disabling	for	a	patient	who
was	 an	 artist	 or	 craftsman.	 Dressing	 apraxia	 often	 occurs	 in	 conjunction	 with
constructional	apraxia.

DISCONNECTION	SYNDROMES

Disconnection	syndromes	are	disorders	in	which	the	fiber	tracts	that	interconnect

primary	 cortical	 areas	 are	 disrupted,	 with	 preservation	 of	 the	 cortical	 areas	 of
origin.	 Neurologic	 dysfunction	 occurs	 not	 because	 of	 destruction	 of	 cortex	 but
because	 of	 defects	 in	 intrahemispheric	 or	 interhemispheric	 communication.	 In
1874,	 Wernicke	 was	 the	 first	 to	 suggest	 that	 such	 a	 pathoanatomic	 mechanism
might	 exist	 when	 he	 described	 conduction	 aphasia	 in	 his	 MD	 thesis,	 written	 at
the	age	of	26.	Dejerine	added	alexia	without	agraphia	in	1892.	In	his	1965	paper,
Disconnection	syndromes	in	animals	and	man,	 which	 became	 the	 manifesto	 of
behavioral	 neurology,	 Geschwind	 expanded	 and	 popularized	 the	 concept,
describing	 several	 new	 examples.	 Other	 disconnection	 syndromes	 include
ideomotor	 apraxia,	 sympathetic	 apraxia,	 pure	 word	 deafness,	 and	
the
transcortical	 aphasias.	 The	 modality-specific	 agnosias	 may	 be	 disconnection
syndromes	 in	 which	 the	 primary	 sensory	 area	 for	 a	 given	 modality	 is
disconnected	 from	 the	 language	 and	 memory	 areas	 of	 the	 brain	 that	 are
responsible	 for	 recognition	 and	 naming.	 Disconnection	 syndromes	 may	 result
from	 any	 process	 that	 disrupts	 subcortical	 white	 matter,	 including	 infarction,
hemorrhage,	 neoplasm,	 and	 trauma.	 There	 have	 been	 reports	 of	 patients	 with
double	disconnection	syndromes.

In	alexia	without	agraphia,	a	left	occipital	lobe	lesion,	usually	an	infarction,
extends	anteriorly	to	involve	the	splenium	of	the	corpus	callosum	or	the	adjacent
white	matter.	Patients	usually	have	a	right	homonymous	hemianopia	because	of
the	 occipital	 lobe	 lesion.	 Although	 the	 right	 occipital	 lobe	 and	 left	 visual	 field
are	intact,	fibers	from	the	right	occipital	lobe	are	disconnected	from	the	language
centers	in	the	left	parietal	lobe	because	of	disruption	of	commissural	fibers	in	the
splenium.	 The	 patients	 are	 unable	 to	 read	 because	 the	 visual	 information	 from
the	right	occipital	lobe	cannot	be	transferred	to	the	region	of	the	opposite	angular
gyrus.	 They	 are	 typically	 better	 able	 to	 read	 letters	 than	 words,	 and	 individual
letters	 better	 than	 letter	 strings.	 Preservation	 of	 number	 reading	 may	 occur.
Because	 the	 angular	 gyrus	 is	 itself	 intact,	 patients	 are	 able	 to	 write	 without
difficulty	but	are	unable	to	read	what	they	may	have	just	written.	Rarely,	alexia
without	agraphia	occurs	without	an	accompanying	hemianopia.

FIGURE	10.1	The	Rey-Osterrieth	complex	figure	for	evaluating	constructional	ability.

In	 pure	 word	 deafness	 (auditory	 verbal	 agnosia),	 patients	 are	 unable	 to
understand	 speech,	 but	 other	 language	 modalities	 are	 unimpaired.	 Spontaneous
speech,	 reading,	 and	 writing	 are	 preserved	 in	 the	 face	 of	 a	 severe	 auditory
comprehension	 deficit.	 Hearing	 is	 intact,	 and	 nonlanguage	 auditory	 processing
(e.g.,	for	music)	is	undisturbed.	Responsible	pathology	is	typically	bitemporal	or
dominant	temporal,	causing	disconnection	of	Wernicke’s	area	from	the	primary
auditory	 cortex.	 In	 pure	 word	 blindness,	 the	 patient	 cannot	 read,	 but	 other
language	functions	are	intact.	The	lesion	disconnects	the	visual	cortex	from	the
language	centers.	There	is	conjecture	that	the	dysphagia	in	Wallenberg’s	lateral
medullary	syndrome	may	be	due	to	a	disconnection	between	premotor	neurons
related	to	swallowing	and	the	bulbar	nuclei	responsible	for	execution.

In	 callosal	 disconnection	 syndromes,	 there	 is	 evidence	 of	 interhemispheric
disconnection	 causing	 deficits	 in	 corpus	 callosum	 function	 that	 resemble	 those
seen	 in	 split-brain	 patients.	 Patients	 with	 anterior	 callosal	 lesions	 may	 have
unilateral	 tactile	 anomia,	 unilateral	 agraphia,	 unilateral	 apraxia,	 difficulty	 in
copying	 drawings,	 dyscalculia,	 abnormalities	 of	 somesthetic	 transfer,	 and	 the

alien	hand	phenomenon.	Posterior	callosal	lesions	may	cause	left	tactile	anomia,
left	visual	anomia,	and	agraphia	of	the	left	hand.	A	patient	with	infarction	of	the
total	 length	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum	 had	 unilateral	 verbal	 anosmia,	 hemialexia,
unilateral	 ideomotor	 apraxia,	 unilateral	 agraphia,	 unilateral	 tactile	 anomia,
unilateral	 constructional	 apraxia,	 lack	 of	 somesthetic	 transfer,	 and	 dissociative
phenomena.	 Callosal	 apraxia	 refers	 to	 impaired	 ability	 to	 pantomime	 to
command,	imitate,	or	use	actual	objects	with	the	left	hand,	with	spared	ability	to
perform	these	tasks	with	the	right	hand,	because	of	a	callosal	lesion.	Evidence	of
callosal	disconnection	has	been	reported	in	infarction,	hemorrhage,	Marchiafava-
Bignami	disease,	multiple	sclerosis,	and	Alzheimer’s	disease.

Attentional	Deficits

to	 describe	

In	 addition	 to	 the	 generalized	 defects	 in	 attention	 seen	 in	 patients	 with	 altered
mental	 status	 and	 other	 diffuse	 cerebral	 disturbances,	 there	 may	 be	 selective
defects	 of	 attention	 in	 patients	 with	 focal	 cerebral	 lesions.	 These	 are	 seen
primarily	in	right-handed	patients	with	right	(nondominant)	hemisphere	lesions,
especially	those	that	involve	the	inferior	parietal	lobule.	A	variety	of	terms	has
been	 used	
including	 extinction,	 neglect,
hemineglect,	hemi-inattention,	denial,	and	spatial	inattention.	Hemiattention	may
be	 modality	 specific.	 The	 mildest	 manifestation	 of	 a	 right	 parietal	 lesion	 is
extinction	of	the	contralateral	stimulus	with	double	simultaneous	stimulation	on
visual	 field	 or	 somatosensory	 testing.	 Although	 primary	 sensory	 modalities	 are
intact,	when	touched	simultaneously	on	both	sides,	the	patient	fails	to	appreciate
the	 stimulus	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 or	 fails	 to	 see	 the	 stimulus	 in	 the	 involved
visual	hemifield.

the	 phenomenon,	

Patients	 with	 multimodal	 hemineglect	 may	 extinguish	 all	

types	 of
contralesional	stimuli,	and	they	may	completely	ignore	the	left	side	of	space.	On
the	line	bisection	test,	they	fail	to	see	the	left	half	of	the	line	(Chapter	8).	They
bisect	 the	 right	 half,	 drawing	 their	 vertical	 tick	 about	 one-quarter	 of	 the	 way
down	the	line	from	the	right.	If	lines	are	drawn	all	over	the	page,	patients	may
fail	 to	 bisect	 any	 of	 the	 lines	 on	 the	 left.	 When	 presented	 with	 a	 complex
drawing,	such	as	the	cookie	theft	picture,	they	may	describe	what	is	taking	place
on	 the	 right	 side	 of	 the	 picture,	 but	 they	 may	 fail	 to	 notice	 the	 cookie	 theft
happening	 on	 the	 left.	 It	 appears	 that	 the	 right	 parietal	 lobe	 is	 dominant	 for
spatial	 attention;	 subtle	 ipsilateral	 deficits	 may	 also	 occur.	 In	 addition,	 the	 left
hemisphere	 plays	 a	 role	 in	 attention	 to	 contralateral	 stimuli	 only.	 With	 a	 right-

sided	 lesion,	 the	 left	 hemisphere	 still	 adequately	 attends	 to	 the	 right	 side	 of
space,	 and	 the	 deficit	 appears	 in	 contralateral	 hemispace	 left	 unguarded	 by	 the
right	 hemisphere.	 In	 motor	 neglect	 (hemiakinesia),	 all	 of	 the	 patient’s	 motor
activities	are	directed	to	one	side	of	space.

Babinski	introduced	the	cumbersome	term	anosognosia	to	refer	to	a	patient’s
lack	of	awareness	of	a	neurologic	deficit.	It	occurs	particularly	in	patients	with
nondominant	parietal	lesions.	It	has	been	estimated	at	seven	times	more	common
with	nondominant	than	dominant	lesions,	a	difference	not	wholly	explicable	by
associated	 aphasia	 with	 dominant	 lesions.	 It	 is	 not	 uncommon	 to	 see	 patients
with	a	right	parietal	infarction	on	imaging	studies	but	no	clinical	history	of	the
event,	 in	 part	 because	 of	 this	 lack	 of	 recognition	 of	 deficits	 involving	 the	 left
side	 of	 the	 body.	 Occasionally,	 a	 patient	 with	 severe	 left	 hemiplegia	 may	 deny
there	 is	 anything	 wrong	 with	 the	 involved	 limbs.	 Even	 when	 the	 examiner
dangles	 the	 patient’s	 paralyzed	 left	 hand	 before	 her	 face	 and	 asks	 if	 there	 is
anything	wrong	with	this	hand,	the	patient	may	deny	it.	The	most	severe	form	of
anosognosia	 is	 when	 the	 patient	 denies	 owning	 the	 hand	 (asomatognosia).
Occasionally,	 patients	 become	 belligerent	 in	 denying	 that	 the	 hand	 dangling
before	them	is	theirs.	They	commonly	say	the	hand	belongs	to	the	examiner.	One
patient	 stated	 it	 was,	 “Queen	 Elizabeth’s	 hand.”	 When	 asked	 where	 Queen
Elizabeth	 was,	 the	 patient	 replied,	 “behind	 the	 curtain.”	 Patients	 with
anosognosia	 may	 refuse	 to	 remain	 in	 the	 bed	 with	 this	 “other	 person.”	 One
patient	 thought	 her	 left	 arm	 was	 her	 grandbaby	 lying	 beside	 her.	 One	 patient,
convinced	her	 left	arm	was	not	her	own,	threw	it	over	the	side	rail	of	the	bed,
fracturing	the	humerus	(see	section	on	“Alien	Hand	Syndrome”).	In	misoplegia,
also	 seen	 with	 right	 hemisphere	 lesions,	 patients	 hate	 and	 may	 reject	 their
paralyzed	 limbs.	 A	 possibly	 related	 disorder,	 also	 attributed	 to	 a	 right	 parietal
lesion,	 is	 apotemnophilia,	 in	 which	 otherwise	 apparently	 rational	 individuals
seek	amputation	of	healthy	limbs.

loss	 and	

left	 hemisensory	

Patients	 with	 persistent	 anosognosia	 typically	 have	 large	 right	 hemisphere
left	 spatial	 neglect.
strokes	 causing	 severe	
Anosognosia	 for	 the	 hemiplegia	 may	 result	 from	 impaired	 proprioceptive
mechanisms	that	leave	the	patient	unaware	of	the	position	and	movement	of	the
affected	limbs.	Anosognosia	for	hemiplegia	has	also	been	reported	with	pontine
lesions.	Using	special	techniques	to	compensate	for	aphasia,	it	may	be	detected
more	 often	 in	 dominant	 hemisphere	 lesions	 than	 previously	 suspected.	 Patients
may	deny	or	neglect	other	neurologic	deficits	as	well,	particularly	loss	of	vision
due	to	bilateral	occipital	lobe	lesions	(cortical	blindness,	Anton’s	syndrome).

Alien	Hand	Syndrome

In	alien	hand	syndrome,	there	is	complex	but	involuntary	activity	in	one	hand;
the	hand	moves	as	if	it	had	a	mind	of	its	own.	There	is	debate	about	whether	the
activity	 need	 appear	 purposeful	 and	 goal	 directed.	 Alien	 hand	 syndrome	 is
usually	 due	 to	 interruption	 of	 the	 cortical	 connections	 that	 control	 smooth
bimanual	 operations.	 The	 hands	 no	 longer	 work	 as	 a	 team.	 The	 affected	 hand
begins	 to	 function	 autonomously	 and	 loses	 the	 ability	 to	 cooperate	 with	 its
fellow.	 The	 patient	 feels	 a	 loss	 of	 ownership	 of	 the	 extremity.	 There	 may	 be
outright	 intermanual	 conflict.	 The	 affected	 hand	 acts	 as	 if	 possessed	 by	 a
poltergeist.	 If	 the	 patient	 tries	 to	 eat	 with	 the	 good	 hand,	 the	 alien	 hand	 may
grasp	the	good	hand	and	force	it	away	from	the	mouth.	If	the	good	hand	tries	to
write,	the	alien	hand	may	snatch	the	pen.

There	 are	 at	 least	 two	 forms	 of	 alien	 hand	 syndrome.	 In	 the	 callosal	 form,
there	is	a	lesion	in	the	anterior	corpus	callosum.	Intermanual	conflict	is	typical	of
the	callosal	form,	and	it	nearly	always	affects	the	left	hand	(anarchic	hand).	In
the	frontal	form,	there	is	a	lesion	of	the	medial	frontal	lobe,	near	or	involving	the
supplementary	motor	area.	The	alien	hand	is	uncooperative	but	not	contentious.
It	may	display	reflex	grasping	and	other	autonomous	behavior,	but	there	is	little
or	 no	 intermanual	 conflict.	 Patients	 may	 complain	 of	 the	 hand’s	 behavior	 and
may	 criticize	 it	 or	 even	 slap	 the	 alien	 hand	 with	 the	 good	 hand.	 Other	 patients
regard	the	hand’s	behavior	as	amusing.

A	sensory	or	posterior	alien	hand	syndrome	has	also	been	described	following
parietal	 lobe	 lesions.	 There	 are	 typically	 parietal	 sensory	 deficits	 and
hemineglect	 involving	 the	 left	 side	 of	 the	 body,	 which	 resemble	 anosognosia.
The	left	arm	may	then	involuntarily	attack	the	right	side	of	the	body.	There	have
been	 reports	 of	 patients	 with	 a	 callosal	 lesion	 feeling	 as	 though	 they	 had	 a
second	left	hand.

Other	 neurologic	 examination	 abnormalities	 help	 indicate	 the	 alien	 hand
subtype.	Nonfluent	aphasia	and	a	prominent	grasp	reflex	suggest	the	frontal	lobe
variant.	Ideomotor	apraxia	of	the	nondominant	hand	suggests	the	callosal	form.
A	hemisensory	deficit	and	other	parietal	lobe	findings	suggest	the	sensory	alien
include	 stroke,	 corpus	 callosotomy,
hand	 variant.	 Potential	 etiologies	
hypoglycemic	 encephalopathy,	 diabetic	 hypermolar	 syndrome,	 Marchiafava-
Bignami	 disease,	 MS,	 migraine,	 and	 posterior	 reversible	 encephalopathy
syndrome.	 Alien	 hand	 syndrome	 occurs	 in	 degenerative	 cerebral	 disorders,
including	 corticobasal	 syndrome,	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 and	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob

disease.	The	incidence	of	alien	hand	in	corticobasal	syndrome	has	been	reported
as	 high	 as	 40%	 to	 50%,	 making	 corticobasal	 syndrome	 potentially	 the
commonest	etiology	for	alien	hand	syndrome.

The	 alien	 hand	 syndrome	 has	 appeared	 many	 times	 in	 pop	 culture.	 In	 Dr.
Strangelove,	 Peter	 Sellers	 constantly	 has	 to	 restrain	 his	 alien	 hand	 from	 giving
the	 Nazi	 party	 salute	 and	 alien	 hand	 syndrome	 has	 been	 referred	 to	 as	 Dr.
Strangelove	syndrome.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Absher	JR,	Benson	DF.	Disconnection	syndromes:	an	overview	of	Geschwind’s

contributions.	Neurology	1993;43:862–867.

Adair	 JC,	 Na	 DL,	 Schwartz	 RL,	 et	 al.	 Anosognosia	 for	 hemiplegia:	 test	 of	 the

personal	neglect	hypothesis.	Neurology	1995;45:2195–2199.
Alien	

Anonymous.	

hand	

syndrome.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alien_hand_syndrome

Ardila	 A.	 A	 proposed	 reinterpretation	 of	 Gerstmann’s	 syndrome.	 Arch	 Clin

Neuropsychol	2014;29:828–833.

Aydogdu	I,	Ertekin	C,	Tarlaci	S,	et	al.	Dysphagia	in	lateral	medullary	infarction
(Wallenberg’s	 syndrome):	 an	 acute	 disconnection	 syndrome	 in	 premotor
neurons	related	to	swallowing	activity?	Stroke	2001;32:2081–2087.

Brang	 D,	 McGeoch	 PD,	 Ramachandran	 VS.	 Apotemnophilia:	 a	 neurological

disorder.	Neuroreport	2008;19:1305–1306.

Buxbaum	LJ.	Ideomotor	apraxia:	a	call	to	action.	Neurocase	2001;7:445–458.
Catani	 M,	 Ffytche	 DH.	 The	 rises	 and	 falls	 of	 disconnection	 syndromes.	 Brain

2005;128(Pt	10):2224–2239.

Catani	 M,	 Mesulam	 M.	 The	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 and	 the	 disconnection	 theme	 in
language	and	aphasia:	history	and	current	state.	Cortex	2008a;44:953–961.

Catani	 M,	 Mesulam	 M.	 What	

is	 a	 disconnection	 syndrome?	 Cortex

2008b;44:911–913.

Chan	 JL,	 Liu	 AB.	 Anatomical	 correlates	 of	 alien	 hand	 syndromes.

Neuropsychiatry	Neuropsychol	Behav	Neurol	1999;12(3):149–155.

Cherrier	 MM,	 Mendez	 MF,	 Dave	 M,	 et	 al.	 Performance	 on	 the	 Rey-Osterrieth
in	 Alzheimer	 disease	 and	 vascular	 dementia.

complex	
Neuropsychiatry	Neuropsychol	Behav	Neurol	1999;	12:95–101.

figure	

test	

Cocchini	 G,	 Beschin	 N,	 Cameron	 A,	 et	 al.	 Anosognosia	 for	 motor	 impairment

following	left	brain	damage.	Neuropsychology	2009;	23:223–230.

Critchley	M.	Misoplegia,	or	hatred	of	hemiplegia.	Mt	Sinai	J	Med	1974;41:82–

87.

Degos	 JD,	 Gray	 F,	 Louarn	 F,	 et	 al.	 Posterior	 callosal	

infarction.

Clinicopathological	correlations.	Brain	1987;110:1155–1171.

Delrieu	 J,	 Payoux	 P,	 Toulza	 O,	 et	 al.	 Sensory	 alien	 hand	 syndrome	 in
corticobasal	 degeneration:	 a	 cerebral	 blood	 flow	 study.	 Mov	 Disord
2010;25:1288–1291.

Epelbaum	S,	Pinel	P,	Gaillard	R,	et	al.	Pure	alexia	as	a	disconnection	syndrome:
new	diffusion	imaging	evidence	for	an	old	concept.	Cortex	2008;44:962–974.
Estañol	 B,	 Baizabal-Carvallo	 JF,	 Sentíes-Madrid	 H.	 A	 case	 of	 tactile	 agnosia
with	 a	 lesion	 restricted	 to	 the	 post-central	 gyrus.	 Neurol	India	2008;56:471–
473.

Evyapan	 D,	 Kumral	 E.	 Pontine	 anosognosia	 for	 hemiplegia.	 Neurology

1999;53:647–649.

Fitzgerald	LK,	McKelvey	JR,	Szeligo	F.	Mechanisms	of	dressing	apraxia:	a	case

study.	Neuropsychiatry	Neuropsychol	Behav	Neurol	2002;15:148–155.

Gasquoine	 PG.	 Blissfully	 unaware:	 anosognosia	 and	 anosodiaphoria	 after

acquired	brain	injury.	Neuropsychol	Rehabil	2016;	26:261–285.

Geschwind	 N.	 Disconnection	 syndromes	 in	 animals	 and	 man,	 parts	 I	 and	 II.

Brain	1965;88:237–294,	585–644.
Geschwind	 N.	 The	 organization	 of	

1970;170:940–944.

language	 and	

the	 brain.	 Science

Geschwind	 N.	 The	 Apraxias:	 neural	 mechanisms	 of	 disorders	 of	 learned
movement:	 the	 anatomical	 organization	 of	 the	 language	 areas	 and	 motor
systems	of	the	human	brain	clarifies	apraxic	disorders	and	throws	new	light	on
cerebral	dominance.	Am	Sci	1975;63:188–195.

Geschwind	N,	Kaplan	E.	A	human	cerebral	deconnection	syndrome.	Neurology

1962;12:675–685.

Goldenberg	 G,	 Mullbacher	 W,	 Nowak	 A.	 Imagery	 without	 perception—a	 case
study	of	anosognosia	for	cortical	blindness.	Neuropsychologia	1995;33:1373–
1382.

Gruter	 T,	 Gruter	 M,	 Carbon	 CC.	 Neural	 and	 genetic	 foundations	 of	 face

recognition	and	prosopagnosia.	J	Neuropsychol	2008;2(Pt	1):79–97.

Hartmann	JA,	Wolz	WA,	Roeltgen	DP,	et	al.	Denial	of	visual	perception.	Brain

Cogn	1991;16:29–40.

Heilman	 KM.	 Apraxia.	 Continuum	 (Minneap	 Minn)	 2010;16(4	 Behavioral

Neurology):86–98.

Jonas	J,	Descoins	M,	Koessler	L,	et	al.	Focal	electrical	intracerebral	stimulation
of	 a	 face-sensitive	 area	 causes	 transient	 prosopagnosia.	 Neuroscience
2012;222:281–288.

Kararizou	E,	Lykomanos	D,	Kosma	A,	et	al.	Stereoanesthesia	or	astereognosia?

Neurol	Sci	2009;30:409–411.

Kim	 YD,	 Lee	 ES,	 Lee	 KS,	 et	 al.	 Callosal	 alien	 hand	 sign	 following	 a	 right

parietal	lobe	infarction.	J	Clin	Neurosci	2010;17:796–797.

Kirshner	 HS.	 Agnosias.	 In:	 Daroff	 RB,	 Jankovic	 J,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Bradley’s

Neurology	in	Clinical	Practice.	7th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Elsevier,	2016.

Kleinschmidt	 A,	 Rusconi	 E.	 Gerstmann	 meets	 Geschwind:	 a	 crossing	 (or
kissing)	 variant	 of	 a	 subcortical	 disconnection	 syndrome?	 Neuroscientist
2011;17:633–644.

Kloesel	B,	Czarnecki	K,	Muir	JJ,	et	al.	Sequelae	of	a	left-sided	parietal	stroke:

posterior	alien	hand	syndrome.	Neurocase	2010;	16:488–493.

Lausberg	H,	Gottert	R,	Munssinger	U,	et	al.	Callosal	disconnection	syndrome	in
a	 left-handed	 patient	 due	 to	 infarction	 of	 the	 total	 length	 of	 the	 corpus
callosum.	Neuropsychologia	1999;37:253–265.

Lavados	 M,	 Carrasco	 X,	 Pena	 M,	 et	 al.	 A	 new	 sign	 of	 callosal	 disconnection
syndrome:	agonistic	dyspraxia.	A	case	study.	Neurocase	2002;8:480–483.
Leiguarda	 R,	 Starkstein	 S,	 Berthier	 M.	 Anterior	 callosal	 hemorrhage:	 a	 partial

interhemispheric	disconnection	syndrome.	Brain	1989;112:1019–1037.

Levine	 DN,	 Calvanio	 R,	 Rinn	 WE.	 The	 pathogenesis	 of	 anosognosia	 for

hemiplegia.	Neurology	1991;41:1770–1781.

Luzzi	 S,	 Piccirilli	 M,	 Pesallaccia	 M,	 et	 al.	 Dissociation	 apraxia	 secondary	 to

right	premotor	stroke.	Neuropsychologia	2010;48:68–76.

Marangolo	P,	De	Renzi	E,	Di	Pace	E,	et	al.	Let	not	thy	left	hand	know	what	thy
right	hand	knoweth.	The	case	of	a	patient	with	an	infarct	involving	the	callosal
pathways.	Brain	1998;121:1459–1467.

Mark	 VW.	 Alien	 hand	 syndrome.	 In:	 Gilman	 S,	 ed.	 MedLink	 Neurology.	 San
Diego:	MedLink	Corporation.	Available	at	www.medlink.com.	Last	updated:
May	2,	2017.

Meador	 KJ,	 Loring	 DW,	 Feinberg	 TE,	 et	 al.	 Anosognosia	 and	 asomatognosia
during	intracarotid	amobarbital	inactivation.	Neurology	2000;55:816–820.
Mendez	MF,	Deutsch	MB.	Limb	apraxias	and	relates	disorders.	In:	Daroff	RB,
Jankovic	 J,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Bradley’s	 Neurology	 in	 Clinical	 Practice.	 7th	 ed.
Philadelphia:	Elsevier,	2016.

Motomura	 N,	 Yamadori	 A.	 A	 case	 of	 ideational	 apraxia	 with	 impairment	 of

object	use	and	preservation	of	object	pantomime.	Cortex	1994;30:167–170.
Mulroy	E,	Murphy	S,	Lynch	T.	Alexia	without	agraphia.	Ir	Med	J	2011;104:124.
Murdoch	 BE.	 Acquired	 Speech	 and	 Language	 Disorders:	 A	 Neuroanatomical
and	 Functional	 Neurological	 Approach.	 2nd	 ed.	 Chichester,	 West
Sussex/Hoboken:	Wiley-Blackwell,	2010.

Nocentini	 U,	 Borghese	 NA,	 Caltagirone	 C,	 et	 al.	 A	 callosal	 disconnection

syndrome	of	vascular	origin.	J	Neurosurg	Sci	1997;41:107–111.

Ochipa	C,	Rothi	LJ,	Heilman	KM.	Ideational	apraxia:	a	deficit	in	tool	selection

and	use.	Ann	Neurol	1989;25:190–193.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Rizzo	 M,	 Hurtig	 R.	 Looking	 but	 not	 seeing:	 attention,	 perception,	 and	 eye

movements	in	simultanagnosia.	Neurology	1987;37:1642–1648.

Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Rusconi	 E,	 Pinel	 P,	 Dehaene	 S,	 et	 al.	 The	 enigma	 of	 Gerstmann’s	 syndrome
revisited:	 a	 telling	 tale	 of	 the	 vicissitudes	 of	 neuropsychology.	 Brain
2010;133(Pt	2):320–332.

Sacks	 O.	 The	 man	 who	 mistook	 his	 wife	 for	 a	 hat.	 Br	 J	 Psychiatry

1995;166:130–131.

Schmahmann	 JD,	 Nitsch	 RM,	 Pandya	 DN.	 The	 mysterious	 relocation	 of	 the

bundle	of	Turck.	Brain	1992;115:1911–1924.

Schnider	 A,	Benson	F,	Rosner	LJ.	Callosal	disconnection	in	multiple	sclerosis.

Neurology	1993;43:1243–1245.

Takahashi	 N,	 Kawamura	 M,	 Shinotou	 H,	 et	 al.	 Pure	 word	 deafness	 due	 to	 left

hemisphere	damage.	Cortex	1992;28:295–303.

Thiebaut	 de	Schotten	M,	Dell’Acqua	F,	Ratiu	P,	et	al.	From	Phineas	Gage	and
Monsieur	 Leborgne	 to	 H.M.:	 revisiting	 disconnection	 syndromes.	 Cereb
Cortex	2015;25:4812–4827.

Vincent	 FM,	 Sadowsky	 CH,	 Saunders	 RL,	 et	 al.	 Alexia	 without	 agraphia,
hemianopia,	 or	 color-naming	 defect:	 a	 disconnection	 syndrome.	 Neurology
1977;27:689–691.

Zhang	Y,	Wang	C,	Zhao	X,	et	al.	Diffusion	tensor	imaging	depicting	damage	to
the	 arcuate	 fasciculus	 in	 patients	 with	 conduction	 aphasia:	 a	 study	 of	 the
Wernicke-Geschwind	model.	Neurol	Res	2010;32:775–778.

CHAPTER	11

An	Overview	of	Brainstem	and
Cranial	Nerve	Anatomy

Except	for	cranial	nerve	(CN)	I	(olfactory)	and	CN	II	(optic),	the	anatomy	of	the
CNs	 is	 inextricably	 linked	 to	 that	 of	 the	 brainstem.	 This	 chapter	 provides	 an
overview	 of	 the	 organization	 and	 general	 features	 of	 the	 brainstem.	 Detailed
discussion	about	each	of	the	CNs	follows	in	subsequent	chapters.	Gates	offered	a
mnemonic,	 the	 rule	 of	 4	 of	 the	 brainstem,	 to	 remember	 the	 basic	 anatomy	 and
the	vascular	syndromes	(Box	11.1).

EMBRYOLOGY	OF	THE	BRAINSTEM

A	brief	review	of	the	pertinent	embryology	helps	in	understanding	the	structure
and	 organization	 of	 the	 brainstem.	 A	 longitudinal	 groove,	 the	 sulcus	 limitans,
appears	in	the	 lateral	 wall	of	the	neural	tube	in	the	4th	week.	As	it	deepens,	it
divides	the	tube	into	a	dorsal	and	a	ventral	half	throughout	its	length.	Thickening
of	 the	 mantle	 layer	 dorsal	 to	 the	 sulcus	 limitans	 forms	 the	 alar	 plate,	 and	 a
thickening	 ventrally	 forms	 the	 basal	 plate	 (Figure	 11.1).	 Development	 of	 the
spinal	 cord	 is	 a	 simplified	 example	 of	 the	 ontogeny	 of	 the	 brainstem.	 The	 alar
plate	contains	sensory	neuroblasts	and	becomes	the	posterior	gray	horns	of	the
spinal	cord;	the	basal	plate	contains	motor	neuroblasts	and	becomes	the	anterior
gray	 horns	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 The	 sulcus	 limitans	 is	 not	 present	 in	 the	 adult
spinal	cord,	but	it	is	present	in	the	brainstem	where	it	continues	to	demarcate	the
zones	of	motor	and	sensory	neurons.

As	the	brainstem	develops,	the	expansion	of	the	cavity	of	the	fourth	ventricle
pushes	 the	 alar	 plate	 outward	 and	 downward.	 This	 causes	 the	 alar	 plate	 to
retroflex	 so	 that	 it	comes	to	lie	lateral	to,	rather	than	dorsal	to,	the	basal	plate.
The	two	plates	are	separated	by	the	sulcus	limitans	(Figure	11.2).	In	the	mature

brainstem,	the	motor	neurons	derived	from	the	basal	plate	lie	medially,	and	the
sensory	neurons	derived	from	the	alar	plate	lie	laterally.	The	neurons	form	cell
columns,	which	are	divided	by	anatomists	into	functional	categories.	The	formal
anatomical	classification	is	somewhat	arcane,	seldom	used	by	clinicians,	but	its
conceptual	 framework	 is	 useful.	 The	 cell	 columns	 are	 divided	 into	 motor
(efferent)	 and	 sensory	 (afferent)	 and	 into	 general	 and	 special,	 somatic	 and
visceral	cell	types.

Referring	 to	 Figure	 11.2	 and	 moving	 from	 medial	 to	 lateral,	 the	 first	 cell
column	 is	 general	 somatic	efferent	 (GSE),	which	contains	somatic	motor	cells.
The	 GSE	 cells	 innervate	 skeletal	 muscles,	 which	 are	 derived	 from	 myotomes.
For	 the	 head	 and	 neck,	 these	 are	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 and	 the	 tongue.	 The
next	 cell	 column	 laterally	 is	 general	 visceral	 efferent	 (GVE).	 This	 contains
visceral	 motor	 or	 autonomic	 (parasympathetic)	 neurons	 supplying	 smooth
muscles	and	glands	of	the	head	and	neck,	and	the	thoracic	and	abdominal	viscera
as	far	as	the	splenic	flexure	of	the	colon.	The	GVE	nuclei	are	the	cranial	portion
of	the	craniosacral	autonomic	system,	and	they	include	the	superior	and	inferior
salivatory	nuclei	and	the	dorsal	motor	nucleus	of	the	vagus.

BOX	11.1

The	Rule	of	4	of	the	Brainstem

In	 brief,	 the	 rule	 of	 4	 states	 that	 there	 are	 4	 midline	 or	 medial	 structures
beginning	with	M,	4	structures	to	the	side	beginning	with	S,	4	cranial	nerves
(CNs)	 in	 the	 medulla,	 4	 in	 the	 pons,	 and	 4	 above	 the	 pons.	 The	 4	 medial
structures	 are	 the	 motor	 pathway	 (corticospinal	 tract),	 medial	 lemniscus
(ML),	 medial	 longitudinal	 fasciculus	 (MLF),	 and	 motor	 nuclei	 and	 nerves.
The	 4	 lateral	 (side)	 structures	 are	 the	 spinocerebellar	 tracts,	 spinothalamic
tract,	sensory	nucleus	of	CN	V,	and	sympathetics.	The	4	CNs	in	the	medulla
are	 IX,	 X,	 XI,	 and	 XII;	 the	 4	 in	 the	 pons	 are	 V,	 VI,	 VII,	 and	 VIII;	 and	 the
remainder	
at
http://www.boutlis.com/files/UnderstandingTheBrainstem.pdf	for	details.

above	

Gates	

pons.	

See	

the	

are	

P	

FIGURE	 11.1	 The	 sulcus	 limitans	 divides	 the	 neural	 tube	 into	 the	 dorsal	 alar	 plate,
which	contains	sensory	neuroblasts,	and	the	ventral	basal	plate,	which	contains	motor
neuroblasts.	In	the	brainstem,	the	sulcus	limitans	separates	the	motor	nuclei	from	the
sensory	nuclei.

FIGURE	11.2	The	cell	columns	of	the	brainstem	with	motor	nuclei	medial	and	sensory

nuclei	 lateral.	 GSA,	 general	 somatic	 afferent;	 GSE,	 general	 somatic	 efferent;	 GVA,
general	 visceral	 afferent;	 GVE,	 general	 visceral	 efferent;	 SSA,	 special	 somatic
afferent;	SVA,	special	visceral	afferent;	SVE,	special	visceral	efferent.

Lateral	 to	 the	 GVE	 column	 is	 the	 special	 visceral	 efferent	 (SVE)	 column.
Nuclei-innervating	 muscles	 of	 branchial	 (pharyngeal)	 arch	 origin	 were
designated	 visceral	 because	 the	 gills	 in	 fish	 are	 derived	 from	 the	 embryonic
branchial	 arches	 (Gr.	 branchia	 “gills”).	 Gills	 are	 viscera,	 primordial	 lungs,	 so
branchial	 arch–derived	 muscles	 in	 humans	 were	 considered	 visceral,	 and
branchiomeric	neurons	were	designated	as	SVE.	In	the	course	of	ontogeny	and
phylogeny,	the	branchiomotor	cell	column	drifted	ventrally	from	a	location	just
under	the	ventricular	floor	to	a	position	in	the	tegmentum.	The	motor	nuclei	of
CNs	V	and	VII	and	the	nucleus	ambiguus	lie	about	midway	between	the	somatic
motor	 nuclear	 column	 and	 the	 point	 of	 exit	 of	 their	 respective	 nerves.	 The
nucleus	 ambiguus	 is	 obscured	 by	 the	 fibers	 of	 the	 reticular	 formation	 (RF),
making	it	inconspicuous	and	difficult	to	identify.	Because	of	the	displacement	of
their	 nuclear	 columns,	 branchiomotor	 axons	 have	 a	 tendency	 to	 form	 internal
loops,	for	example,	the	encirclement	of	the	CN	VI	nucleus	(GSE)	by	the	axons
leaving	 the	 CN	 VII	 nucleus	 (SVE).	 Somatic	 motor	 fibers	 exit	 the	 brainstem
anteriorly;	branchiomotor	fibers	exit	laterally.

The	 sulcus	 limitans	 separates	 the	 most	 lateral	 motor	 cell	 column	 from	 the
most	medial	sensory	cell	column.	Most	medial	are	the	general	visceral	afferent
—or	 visceral	 sensory—cell	 columns,	 which	 receive	 sensory	 input	 from	 the
viscera.	The	special	visceral	afferent—or	special	sensory—cell	column	receives
fibers	 subserving	
taste.	 The	 general	 somatic	 afferent	 column	 receives
exteroceptive	 input	 (i.e.,	 touch,	 pressure,	 pain,	 temperature,	 vibration,	 and
proprioception)	from	the	head	and	neck.	The	most	lateral	sensory	column	is	for
special	somatic	afferent	functions	subserving	the	special	sensations	(i.e.,	hearing
and	vestibular	function).

External	Anatomy

Selected	 major	 features	 of	 the	 external	 anatomy	 of	 the	 brainstem	 are	 shown	 in
Figures	11.3	and	11.4.	On	the	ventral	surface,	the	rostral	limit	of	the	brainstem	is
demarcated	 by	 the	 optic	 tracts	 as	 they	 sweep	 around	 to	 reach	 the	 lateral
geniculate	 bodies.	 Descending	 from	 beneath	 the	 optic	 tracts	 are	 the	 massive
cerebral	 peduncles.	 The	 space	 between	 the	 peduncles	 is	 the	 interpeduncular

fossa.	 At	 the	 upper	 margin	 of	 the	 interpeduncular	 fossa	 are	 the	 mammillary
bodies.	 In	 its	 depths	 is	 the	 posterior	 perforated	 substance	 where	 paramedian
perforating	 vessels	 from	 the	 basilar	 artery	 penetrate	 the	 upper	 brainstem	 and
thalamus.	CN	III	(oculomotor)	emerges	from	the	fossa	and	runs	forward	between
the	superior	cerebellar	and	posterior	cerebral	arteries.

FIGURE	 11.3	 The	 base	 of	 the	 brain	 showing	 the	 sites	 of	 emergence	 of	 the	 cranial
nerves.

FIGURE	11.4	Dorsal	view	of	the	brainstem	and	rhomboid	fossa.

At	 the	 caudal	 limit	 of	 the	 interpeduncular	 fossa	 is	 the	 junction	 between	 the
midbrain	 and	 pons.	 The	 bulge	 of	 the	 anterior	 pons,	 due	 primarily	 to	 the
underlying	 fibers	 of	 the	 middle	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 (MCP)	 (brachium	 pontis),
bridges	 the	 space	 between	 the	 two	 cerebellar	 hemispheres	 and	 spans	 the	 gap
between	 the	 midbrain	 and	 medulla	 (L.	 pons	 “bridge”).	 The	 root	 of	 CN	 V
(trigeminal)	is	attached	laterally	at	the	level	of	the	midpons.	The	furrow	of	the
basilar	artery,	the	basilar	sulcus,	grooves	the	pons	from	below	to	above.	At	the
pontomedullary	 junction,	 from	 medial	 to	 lateral,	 CNs	 VI	 (abducens),	 VII
(facial),	and	 VIII	 (acoustic)	exit.	The	nervus	intermedius	lies	just	lateral	to	the
main	root	of	the	facial	nerve.	The	vestibular	division	of	CN	VIII	lies	medial	and
slightly	rostral	to	the	cochlear	division.

The	 medulla	 is	 24	 to	 30	 mm	 in	 length,	 and	 it	 extends	 from	 the
pontomedullary	junction	and	the	striae	medullares	above	to	the	lowermost	roots
of	the	hypoglossal	nerve	and	the	lowest	plane	of	the	pyramidal	decussation—just
rostral	to	the	emergence	of	the	highest	rootlets	of	C1	at	the	level	of	the	foramen
magnum.	Running	down	the	anterior	aspect	of	the	medulla	are	the	twin	columns
of	 the	 medullary	 pyramids,	 which	 contain	 the	 corticospinal	 tracts.	 Interlacing
bundles	 of	 crossing	 fibers	 at	 the	 caudalmost	 extent	 of	 the	 medulla	 mark	 the
decussation	 of	 the	 pyramids.	 Caudal	 to	 the	 decussation	 is	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 Just

lateral	 to	 the	 pyramids	 in	 the	 upper	 medulla	 is	 the	 oval	 bulge	 of	 the	 olive,
beneath	 which	 lies	 the	 inferior	 olivary	 nucleus.	 The	 CN	 XII	 (hypoglossal)
filaments	 exit	 in	 the	 gutter	 between	 the	 pyramid	 and	 the	 olive.	 CNs	 IX
(glossopharyngeal),	X	(vagus),	and	the	cranial	root	of	XI	(accessory)	exit	in	the
retro-olivary	sulcus,	in	sequence	from	rostral	to	caudal.

Figure	11.4	shows	the	brainstem	with	the	cerebellum	removed	and	the	fourth
ventricle	 opened.	 The	 most	 rostral	 extent	 of	 the	 brainstem	 is	 marked	 by	 its
junction	 with	 the	 pulvinar	 of	 the	 thalamus.	 The	 prominent	 mounds	 of	 the
superior	 and	 inferior	 colliculi	 form	 the	 quadrigeminal	 plate.	 The	 pineal	 body
extends	 caudally	 between	 the	 superior	 colliculi.	 The	 superior	 colliculus	 is
connected	 to	 the	 lateral	 geniculate	 body	 by	 the	 brachium	 of	 the	 superior
colliculus,	 and	 the	 inferior	 colliculus	 to	 the	 medial	 geniculate	 by	 its	 brachium.
Just	caudal	to	the	inferior	colliculus	CN	IV	(trochlear)	exits.

The	fourth	ventricular	floor	is	rhomboid	or	diamond	shaped	and	is	called	the
rhomboid	fossa.	The	superior	cerebellar	peduncle	(SCP)	forms	the	upper,	lateral
walls	of	the	fourth	ventricular	cavity,	and	the	inferior	cerebellar	peduncle	(ICP)
forms	 the	 walls	 elsewhere.	 At	 the	 lateral	 recesses	 of	 the	 ventricle,	 near	 the
foramina	of	Luschka,	the	vestibular	and	cochlear	nerves	enter.	In	the	ventricular
floor,	there	are	longitudinal	fissures	or	sulci	separating	ridges	and	protuberances.
The	medial	longitudinal	fissure	 lies	 in	the	midline	and	separates	the	two	sides.
The	 paired	 grooves	 of	 the	 sulcus	 limitans,	 separating	 basal	 plate	 (motor)
structures	from	alar	plate	(sensory)	structures,	lie	laterally.

The	striae	medullares	of	the	fourth	ventricle	(stria	medullares	medullares)	is	a
band	 of	 myelinated	 fibers	 running	 across	 the	 ventricular	 floor.	 The	 fibers	 arise
from	the	external	arcuate	nucleus,	which	lies	anterior	to	the	medullary	pyramids,
and	are	bound	for	the	ICP.	Paired	midline	humps	in	the	ventricular	floor	rostral
to	the	stria	medullares	are	the	facial	colliculi,	beneath	which	are	the	nuclei	of	CN
VI	 and	 the	 internal	 genu	 of	 CN	 VII.	 Along	 the	 same	 meridians	 caudal	 to	 the
striae	 are	 the	 hypoglossal	 trigones,	 beneath	 which	 lie	 the	 nuclei	 of	 CN	 XII.
Lateral	to	the	hypoglossal	trigones	are	the	vagal	trigones	(ala	cinerea),	beneath
which	 are	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nuclei	 of	 the	 vagus	 nerves.	 The	 area	 postrema
(chemoreceptor	 trigger	 zone)	 is	 a	 narrow	 strip	 along	 the	 caudal	 aspect	 of	 the
vagal	 trigone.	 Far	 laterally,	 near	 the	 entry	 zones	 of	 CN	 VIII,	 are	 the	 vestibular
areas.	At	the	caudal	tip	of	the	fourth	ventricle	is	the	obex,	the	point	at	which	the
fourth	 ventricle	 communicates	 with	 the	 central	 canal	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 The
shape	 of	 the	 rhomboid	 fossa	 at	 the	 caudal	 end	 of	 the	 ventricle	 resembles	 a
writing	 pen;	 it	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 calamus	 scriptorius.	 On	 the	 dorsal	 surface

caudal	 to	 the	 ventricle	 are	 the	 gracile	 tubercles	 in	 the	 midline	 and	 the	 cuneate
tubercles	 just	 laterally;	 these	 merge	 into	 the	 gracile	 and	 cuneate	 fasciculi
inferiorly.	Lateral	to	the	gracile	and	cuneate	tubercles	are	the	ICPs.

Brainstem	Organization

The	brainstem,	throughout	its	length,	is	composed	of	three	parts:	tectum	(roof),
tegmentum	 (midportion),	 and	 base	 (Figure	 11.5).	 In	 the	 midbrain,	 the	 tectum
consists	 of	 the	 quadrigeminal	 plate.	 In	 the	 pons	 and	 medulla,	 the	 tectum
devolves	into	nonfunctional	tissue	forming	the	roof	plate	of	the	fourth	ventricle,
the	anterior	(superior)	medullary	velum	in	the	pons,	and	the	posterior	(inferior)
medullary	 velum	 in	 the	 medulla.	 The	 contents	 of	 the	 tegmentum	 are	 variable
from	 level	 to	 level	 and	 include	 the	 CN	 motor	 and	 sensory	 nuclei.	 Running
throughout	 the	 length	 of	 the	 tegmentum	 is	 the	 RF.	 The	 reticular	 activating
system	 is	 part	 of	 this	 loose	 network	 and	 is	 responsible	 for	 controlling	 arousal.
Coursing	 through	 the	 tegmentum	 are	 the	 long	 ascending	 and	 descending	 tracts
(e.g.,	ML,	spinothalamic	 tract,	rubrospinal	tract,	and	others).	The	base	consists
of	descending	corticospinal	and	corticobulbar	fibers	in	different	configurations.

Reticular	Formation

The	core	of	the	brainstem	is	the	RF,	a	loose	network	of	cells	and	fibers	that	has
extensive	 interconnections	 with	 other	 brainstem	 structures	 as	 well	 as	 complex,
polysynaptic	 projections	 rostrally	 and	 caudally.	 The	 RF	 terminates	 as	 the
intralaminar	nuclei	of	the	thalamus.	There	are	three	cell	populations	in	the	RF:
the	 raphe	 nuclei,	 the	 medial	 reticular	 nucleus,	 and	 the	 lateral	 reticular	 nucleus.
The	raphe	nuclei	are	a	detached	series	of	individual	nuclear	groups	that	lie	in	the
midline	(Gr.	raphe	“seam”)	from	the	rostral	midbrain	to	the	caudal	medulla.	All
the	 raphe	 nuclei	 send	 serotonergic	 projections	 widely	 throughout	 the	 nervous
system.	 As	 a	 generalization,	 the	 midbrain	 raphe	 nuclei	 project	 to	 the
hemispheres,	those	in	the	pons	to	the	brainstem	and	cerebellum,	and	those	in	the
medulla	to	the	spinal	cord.

FIGURE	 11.5	 Three	 levels	 of	 the	 brainstem	 showing	 what	 constitutes	 the	 tectum,
tegmentum,	 and	 base	 at	 each	 level.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon	 RM.
Practical	 Primer	 of	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 Philadelphia:	 Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,
2002,	with	permission.)

The	lateral	reticular	nucleus	contains	small	neurons	and	is	primarily	afferent;
it	 receives	 collateral	 projections	 from	 ascending	 and	 descending	 long	 tracts.
These	 parvocellular	 neurons	 are	 essentially	 a	 continuation	 of	 the	 system	 of
interneurons	in	the	spinal	cord.	The	lateral	reticular	nucleus	projects	primarily	to
the	medial	reticular	nucleus.	The	cells	of	the	medial	reticular	nucleus	are	larger,
and	these	magnocellular	neurons	send	projections	up	and	down	the	neuraxis.	An
the	 medullary
expansion	 of	
gigantocellular	nucleus,	and	in	the	pons	the	pontine	gigantocellular	nucleus.	The
medial	 reticular	 nucleus	 gives	 rise	 to	 two	 major	 descending	 tracts.	 The	 medial
reticulospinal	 (bulbospinal)	 tract	 arises	 from	 the	 medullary	 nucleus	 and	 the
lateral	reticulospinal	(pontospinal)	tract	from	the	pontine	nucleus.

the	 upper	 medulla	 forms	

the	 nucleus	

in	

Brainstem	Nuclei

The	 major	 brainstem	 nuclei	 are	 depicted	 in	 Figure	 11.6.	 Some	 exist	 as	 focal
collections,	 others	 as	 cell	 columns	 that	 range	 longitudinally	 over	 an	 extensive
span.	The	location,	composition,	and	function	of	these	nuclei	are	summarized	in
Tables	11.1	and	11.2.

FIGURE	 11.6	 Gross	 representational	 brainstem	 view	 on	 the	 left	 demonstrates	 the
relationships	of	the	external	structures.	On	the	right,	the	expanded	diagrammatic	view
shows	the	location	of	the	various	cell	columns	that	lie	interiorly,	motor	nuclei	medially,
and	sensory	nuclei	laterally,	separated	by	the	sulcus	limitans.

TABLE	11.1

The	Motor	Nuclei	of	the	Brainstem

Long	Tracts

The	 long	 tracts	 are	 fiber	 systems	 that	 run	 through	 the	 brainstem	 over	 several
segments.	 Some	 are	 ascending	 sensory	 pathways	 coming	 from	 the	 spinal	 cord,
such	as	the	ML	and	spinothalamic	tracts.	Others	are	descending	pathways	going
to	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 such	 as	 the	 corticospinal	 tract.	 Some	 fiber	 tracts	 are	 more
complex,	carrying	both	ascending	and	descending	fibers,	such	as	the	MLF.	The
major	long	tracts	of	the	brainstem	are	summarized	in	Table	11.3	and	illustrated
in	Figure	11.7.

Cross-Sectional	Anatomy

The	 internal	 details	 of	 the	 brainstem	 are	 best	 appreciated	 as	 a	 series	 of	 cross
sections	 at	 different	 levels	 (Figure	11.8).	 The	 following	 paragraphs	 review	 the
cross-sectional	anatomy	at	the	level	of	the	superior	colliculus,	inferior	colliculus,
midpons,	and	midmedulla.

TABLE	11.2

The	Sensory	Nuclei	of	the	Brainstem

TABLE
11.3

The	Major	Ascending	and	Descending	Long	Tracts	of
the	Brainstem

Midbrain

The	 midbrain	 is	 composed	 of	 tectum,	 tegmentum,	 and	 base.	 The	 tectum	 is	 the
quadrigeminal	 plate	 and	 the	 base	 the	 crus	 cerebri.	 There	 are	 two	 segmental
levels	with	different	characteristics.

Superior	Colliculus	Level
A	cross	section	at	the	level	of	the	superior	colliculi	is	shown	in	Figure	11.8.	The
functions	of	the	superior	colliculi	are	closely	related	to	those	of	the	pretectum.	In
addition,	 they	 subserve	 visual	 reflexes,	 tracking,	 and	 orienting	 behavior.	 The
medial	geniculate	bodies	are	located	just	lateral	to	the	colliculi.	They	are	part	of
the	 thalamus	 and	 are	 important	 relay	 nuclei	 in	 the	 auditory	 system.	 In	 the
tegmentum	at	this	level,	the	most	prominent	structure	is	the	red	nucleus,	which
gives	 rise	 to	 a	 major	 descending	 motor	 pathway,	 the	 rubrospinal	 tract	 (Figure
11.7).	After	decussating,	the	rubrospinal	tract	descends	in	the	brainstem	and	then

in	the	lateral	funiculus	of	the	spinal	cord,	lying	just	beside	the	pyramidal	tract;	it
functions	to	facilitate	flexor	tone.

The	 third	 nerve	 nuclei	 lie	 in	 the	 midline	 anterior	 to	 the	 aqueduct;	 they	 send
axons	 that	 stream	 through	 and	 around	 the	 red	 nucleus	 to	 exit	 anteriorly	 in	 the
interpeduncular	 fossa.	 The	 extraocular	 motor	 nuclei	 (CNs	 III,	 IV,	 and	 VI)	 are
GSE	fibers.	At	this	level,	the	long	ascending	sensory	tracts	lie	far	laterally.	The
ML,	so	named	because	it	was	in	the	midline	in	the	medulla,	has	by	now	 in	its
ascent	drifted	laterally,	and	been	joined	by	ascending	fibers	of	the	anterolateral
tract.	 The	 MLF	 courses
(spinothalamic)	 system	 and	
posteriorly	 in	 the	 midline,	 bound	 for	 the	 medial	 rectus	 subnucleus	 of	 the
oculomotor	complex.	Lying	in	the	area	adjacent	to	the	aqueduct	is	the	SCP,	the
major	 efferent	 pathway	 from	 the	 cerebellum.	 The	 gray	 matter	 immediately
surrounding	 the	 aqueduct	 is	 one	 of	 the	 characteristic	 sites	 for	 lesions	 in
Wernicke’s	encephalopathy.

trigeminothalamic	

FIGURE	 11.7	 Some	 of	 the	 major	 long	 tracts	 that	 ascend	 and	 descend	 through	 the
brainstem.

FIGURE	 11.8	 The	 midbrain	 at	 the	 superior	 collicular	 level,	 showing	 the	 oculomotor
nucleus,	 the	 red	 nucleus,	 and	 the	 fibers	 of	 the	 third	 nerve	 as	 they	 exit	 through	 the
interpeduncular	 fossa.	 (Modified	 from	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &
Wilkins,	1992,	with	permission.)

Anteriorly,	at	this	level,	the	base	of	the	midbrain	is	composed	of	the	cerebral
peduncle,	 which	 consists	 of	 the	 substantia	 nigra	 and	 crus	 cerebri.	 The	 crus
cerebri	 is	 a	 direct	 continuation	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 and	 conveys	 mostly
descending	 corticospinal	 and	 corticobulbar	 fibers.	 It	 can	 be	 approximately
divided	into	fifths.	The	lateral	fifth	contains	the	parietotemperopontine	tract;	the
corticospinal	 and	 corticobulbar	 tracts	 occupy	 the	 middle	 three-fifths;	 and	 the
medial	 fifth	 consists	 of	 the	 frontopontine	 tract.	 The	 middle	 three-fifths	 is
somatotopically	organized.	The	homunculus	lies	in	Trendelenburg	position	with
the	 head	 medial	 (corticobulbar	 fibers)	 and	 the	 feet	 above	 and	 lateral
(corticospinal	fibers).	In	the	space	between	the	peduncles—the	interpeduncular
fossa—the	third	nerve	emerges.

Inferior	Colliculus	Level
The	 inferior	 colliculus	 is	 a	 relay	 station	 in	 the	 auditory	 pathway;	 it	 receives
fibers	from	the	lateral	lemniscus	and	sends	fibers	to	the	medial	geniculate	body
through	 the	 brachium	 of	 the	 inferior	 colliculus.	 The	 medial	 geniculate	 body	 in
turn	sends	fibers	to	the	auditory	cortex.	In	the	tegmentum	at	this	level,	the	most
prominent	morphologic	feature	is	the	decussation	of	the	SCP	(Figure	11.9).	The
major	component	of	the	SCP	is	the	dentatothalamic	(dentatorubrothalamic)	tract,
which	 is	 crossing	 in	 the	 midline,	 coming	 from	 the	 cerebellum,	 primarily	 the
dentate	 nucleus,	 en	 route	 to	 the	 contralateral	 ventral	 lateral	 nucleus	 of	 the

thalamus,	with	collaterals	to	the	red	nucleus.	The	decussating	fibers	of	the	SCP
surround	the	caudal	red	nucleus,	completely	obscuring	it.

The	fourth	nerve	nuclei	lie	posteriorly	just	beneath	the	aqueduct.	The	fourth
nerve	takes	a	highly	aberrant	course	out	of	the	brainstem,	curving	posteriorly	to
decussate	 in	 the	 tectum	 and	 exit	 through	 the	 dorsal	 surface.	 The	 fourth	 is	 the
only	 CN	 to	 cross	 and	 the	 only	 one	 to	 exit	 dorsally.	 The	 remainder	 of	 the
tegmentum	and	base	are	essentially	the	same	as	at	the	superior	collicular	level.

Pons

At	 the	 level	 of	 the	 pons,	 the	 tectum	 consists	 of	 the	 nonfunctional	 anterior
medullary	velum.	The	base	is	rounded	and	protuberant	(the	“belly”	of	the	pons)
and	consists	of	descending	corticospinal	and	corticobulbar	fibers	admixed	with
crossing	pontocerebellar	fibers	entering	the	MCP	(Figure	11.10).	The	tegmentum
of	 the	 pons	 contains	 numerous	 important	 structures.	 The	 major	 long	 tracts
include	 the	 medial	 and	 lateral	 lemnisci,	 the	 spinothalamic	 tracts,	 and	 the	 MLF.
Near	the	midline	in	the	gray	matter	lies	the	nucleus	of	CN	VI,	encircled	by	the
fibers	 of	 CN	 VII.	 Just	 within	 or	 adjacent	 to	 the	 CN	 VI	 nucleus	 in	 the	 pontine
paramedian	 RF	 lies	 the	 pontine	 lateral	 gaze	 center.	 Fibers	 of	 CN	 VI	 exit
anteriorly,	 in	 the	 same	 manner	 as	 fibers	 of	 CN	 III	 exit	 the	 midbrain	 into	 the
interpeduncular	 fossa.	 After	 looping	 around	 the	 CN	 VI	 nucleus,	 CN	 VII	 fibers
exit	the	pons	laterally,	cross	the	cerebellopontine	angle	(CPA)	in	company	with
CN	VIII,	and	disappear	into	the	internal	auditory	meatus.

The	 trigeminal	 ganglion	 lies	 just	 beside	 the	 pons	 in	 a	 depression	 in	 the
petrous	 ridge,	 called	 Meckel’s	 cave.	 A	 large	 sensory	 and	 a	 smaller	 motor	 root
join	the	ganglion	to	the	pons.	The	motor	fibers	are	derived	from	the	trigeminal
motor	nucleus	in	the	lateral	pontine	tegmentum	and	are	destined	for	the	nerve’s
mandibular	division.	Afferent	fibers	conveying	light	touch	and	pressure	enter	the
principal	sensory	nucleus,	which	lies	beside	the	trigeminal	motor	nucleus,	there
to	synapse	and	give	rise	to	second	order	neurons	that	cross	the	midline	en	route
to	the	ventral	posterior	medial	(VPM)	thalamic	nucleus.	Fibers	conveying	pain
and	 temperature	 enter	 the	 spinal	 tract	 of	 the	 trigeminal,	 where	 they	 descend	 to
various	 levels,	 depending	 on	 their	 somatotopic	 origin,	 and	 synapse	 in	 the
adjacent	nucleus	of	the	spinal	tract.	The	axons	of	second	order	neurons	cross	the
midline,	aggregate	as	the	trigeminothalamic	tract,	and	ascend	to	VPM	running	in
proximity	to	the	ML	and	spinothalamic	tracts.

FIGURE	11.9	The	midbrain	at	the	inferior	collicular	level,	showing	the	decussation	of
the	superior	cerebellar	peduncle,	the	medial	longitudinal	fasciculus,	and	the	fibers	of
the	
from	 Fix	 JD.
tectum.	 (Modified	
Neuroanatomy.	Baltimore:	Williams	&	Wilkins,	1992,	with	permission.)

fourth	 nerve	 as	

they	 exit	

through	

the	

FIGURE	 11.10	 The	 midpons,	 showing	 the	 cavity	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle,	 trigeminal
nucleus,	 medial	 longitudinal	 fasciculus,	 transverse	 pontine	 fibers,	 and	 cerebellar
peduncles.	 (Modified	 from	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,
1992,	with	permission.)

At	 the	 junction	 of	 pons	 and	 medulla,	 CN	 VIII	 enters	 far	 laterally	 after
crossing	the	CPA.	The	cochlear	component	consists	of	fibers	from	the	organ	of
Corti	 and	 the	 spiral	 ganglion	 of	 the	 cochlea,	 which	 synapse	 in	 the	 cochlear
nuclei.	 From	 the	 cochlear	 nuclei	 a	 complex,	 crossed	 and	 uncrossed,	 ascending
pathway	 with	 multiple	 nuclear	 relays	 arises.	 Most	 auditory	 fibers	 eventually
ascend	 in	 the	 lateral	 lemniscus	 en	 route	 to	 the	 inferior	 colliculus,	 then	 to	 the
medial	 geniculate,	 and	 on	 to	 the	 auditory	 cortex	 in	 the	 temporal	 lobe.	 The

vestibular	 component	 consists	 of	 fibers	 from	 the	 vestibular	 ganglion,	 which
synapse	in	one	of	the	four	vestibular	nuclei.	Fibers	from	these	nuclei	ascend	and
descend	the	brainstem	and	spinal	cord	as	vestibulospinal	tracts	and	as	part	of	the
MLF.

Medulla

In	the	medulla,	the	tectum	consists	of	the	posterior	medullary	velum.	The	velum
is	 continuous	 inferiorly	 with	 the	 tela	 choroidea,	 to	 which	 the	 choroid	 plexus	 is
attached,	 which	 makes	 up	 the	 caudal	 part	 of	 the	 ventricular	 roof.	 The	 base
consists	 of	 the	 medullary	 pyramids,	 which	 are	 made	 up	 of	 fibers	 of	 the
corticospinal	tract	(Figure	11.11).	About	90%	of	the	corticospinal	tract	crosses	to
the	 other	 side	 at	 this	 level,	 forming	 the	 decussation	 of	 the	 pyramids,	 and
continues	 as	 the	 lateral	 corticospinal	 tract.	 The	 remainder	 of	 the	 corticospinal
fibers	descend	ipsilaterally	in	the	anterior	corticospinal	tract	and	then	decussate
at	the	local	spinal	level.	At	the	level	of	the	decussation,	the	arm	fibers	lie	medial
and	 rostral	 to	 the	 leg	 fibers;	 the	 arm	 fibers	 decussate	 first	 and	 then	 assume	 a
position	 medially	 in	 the	 lateral	 corticospinal	 tract	 in	 the	 spinal	 cord	 (Figure
11.12).	 Because	 of	 the	 complexity	 of	 the	 decussation,	 unusual	 clinical	 deficits
can	occur	with	lesions	in	this	region.

FIGURE	 11.11	 The	 medulla	 at	 midolivary	 level,	 showing	 the	 pyramids,	 olives,
hypoglossal	 and	 ambiguus	 nuclei,	 medial	 lemniscus,	 medial	 longitudinal	 fasciculus,
and	 spinal	 tract	 of	 the	 trigeminal.	 (Modified	 from	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 Baltimore:
Williams	&	Wilkins,	1992,	with	permission.)

The	tegmentum	of	the	medulla	is	conveniently	divided	into	medial	and	lateral
portions,	 especially	 because	 of	 differences	 in	 their	 blood	 supply.	 The	 medial
medulla	contains	the	ML	in	a	vertical	midline	position	(homunculus	erect)	with
the	 MLF	 capping	 it	 posteriorly.	 The	 hypoglossal	 nerve	 nucleus	 lies	 in	 the
midline	 and	 projects	 axons	 that	 exit	 anteriorly	 in	 the	 groove	 between	 the
pyramid	 and	 the	 olive.	 The	 olive	 is	 a	 prominent,	 wrinkled	 structure	 lying	 just
posterior	 to	 the	 pyramids.	 Neurons	 in	 the	 olive	 project	 axons	 that	 cross	 the
midline	 to	 enter	 the	 contralateral	 ICP.	 The	 ICP	 is	 a	 prominent	 structure	 arising
from	 the	 lateral	 aspect	 of	 the	 medulla;	 it	 receives	 fibers	 from	 the	 ascending
spinocerebellar	tracts	as	well	as	from	the	olive.

