FIGURE	11.12	At	the	decussation	of	the	pyramids	in	the	lower	medulla,	the	arm	fibers
lie	 medial	 to	 the	 leg	 fibers.	 Arm	 fibers	 decussate	 first	 and	 come	 to	 lie	 in	 the	 medial
portion	 of	 the	 lateral	 corticospinal	 tract	 in	 the	 upper	 cervical	 spinal	 cord.	 Leg	 fibers
decussate	 more	 caudally	 and	 come	 to	 lie	 in	 the	 lateral	 portion	 of	 the	 lateral
corticospinal	 tract.	 The	 syndrome	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 decussation	 (cruciate	 or	 crossed
paralysis)	 is	 spastic	 weakness	 of	 one	 arm	 and	 the	 contralateral	 leg	 because	 of	 a
lesion	at	the	decussation.

The	lateral	medulla	contains	the	spinal	tract	and	nucleus	of	CN	V;	nearby	run
ascending	 spinothalamic	 (anterolateral	 system)	 fibers.	 The	 nucleus	 ambiguus,
because	of	its	branchial	arch	origin,	lies	deep	in	the	tegmentum	anterolaterally,
in	a	position	analogous	to	that	of	the	CN	VII	nucleus	in	the	pons.	It	extends	from
the	level	of	entry	of	CN	VIII	at	the	upper	border	of	the	medulla	to	the	level	of
the	 decussation	 of	 the	 ML	 or	 even	 to	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 corticospinal
decussation.	From	the	nucleus	ambiguus,	motor	fibers	exit	laterally	to	enter	both
the	ninth	and	tenth	nerves.	The	dorsal	motor	nucleus	of	the	vagus,	the	autonomic
component	 of	 CN	 X,	 sends	 fibers	 laterally	 to	 join	 the	 exiting	 ambiguus	 fibers.
The	 solitary	 tract	 lies	 lateral	 to	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus	 of	 the	 vagus,	 and	 it
receives	entering	taste	fibers	from	CNs	VII	and	IX.	Descending	in	the	reticular
core	are	sympathetic	fibers	destined	for	the	intermediolateral	gray	column	of	the
thoracic	and	lumbar	cord.

OVERVIEW	OF	CRANIAL	NERVES	III–XII

This	section	provides	a	brief	overview	of	the	CNs	that	arise	or	terminate	in	the
brainstem.	The	nerves	are	covered	in	more	detail	in	succeeding	chapters.

Oculomotor	(CN	III)

CN	III	arises	from	the	oculomotor	complex	in	the	midbrain	and	conveys	motor
fibers	to	extraocular	muscles,	plus	parasympathetic	fibers	to	the	pupil	and	ciliary
body.	 It	 exits	 the	 midbrain	 in	 the	 interpeduncular	 fossa,	 travels	 between	 the
posterior	cerebral	and	superior	cerebellar	artery,	and	runs	alongside	the	posterior
communicating	 artery.	 The	 nerve	 travels	 through	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 where	 it
has	 important	 relationships	 with	 the	 carotid	 artery,	 ascending	 pericarotid
sympathetics,	 and	 CNs	 IV,	 V,	 and	 VI.	 After	 exiting	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 and
passing	through	the	superior	orbital	fissure,	the	third	nerve	innervates	the	medial
rectus,	inferior	oblique	and	superior	and	inferior	recti,	and	the	levator	palpebrae.

Long	ciliary	nerves	swerve	off	to	the	ciliary	ganglion,	from	which	short	ciliary
nerves	arise	to	innervate	the	iris	and	ciliary	body.

Trochlear	(CN	IV)

CN	IV	arises	from	the	trochlear	nucleus	at	the	level	of	the	inferior	colliculus	and
travels	backward	and	around	to	decussate	and	exit	through	the	tectum.	The	nerve
winds	 around	 the	 brainstem,	 then	 runs	 forward,	 passes	 through	 the	 cavernous
sinus	in	proximity	to	CN	III,	traverses	the	superior	orbital	fissure,	and	enters	the
orbit	to	supply	the	superior	oblique.

Trigeminal	(CN	V)

Motor	fibers	of	CN	V	arise	from	the	motor	nucleus	in	the	midpons,	exit	laterally,
pass	 through	 the	 gasserian	 ganglion,	 and	 travel	 with	 the	 mandibular	 sensory
branch	 to	 exit	 the	 skull	 through	 the	 foramen	 ovale.	 Trigeminal	 motor	 fibers
innervate	the	masseter,	temporalis,	and	pterygoids.

Sensory	 trigeminal	 fibers	 arise	 from	 the	 ophthalmic,	 maxillary,	 and
mandibular	 divisions	 supplying	 the	 face.	 Ophthalmic	 division	 fibers	 enter	 the
skull	 via	 the	 superior	 orbital	 fissure,	 and	 maxillary	 fibers	 enter	 through	 the
foramen	 rotundum;	 both	 pass	 through	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 before	 joining	 the
ganglion.	The	mandibular	fibers	enter	through	the	foramen	ovale.	Sensory	fibers
terminate	in	the	principal	sensory	nucleus	in	the	pons	and	in	the	nucleus	of	the
spinal	tract,	which	extends	from	the	pons	to	the	upper	cervical	spinal	cord.

Abducens	(CN	VI)

The	 cells	 of	 origin	 of	 the	 CN	 VI	 lie	 in	 the	 pons	 near	 the	 pontine	 lateral	 gaze
center.	Axons	pass	forward	through	the	substance	of	the	pons,	weaving	among
descending	 corticospinal	 fibers,	 and	 exit	 anteriorly.	 CN	 VI	 ascends	 the	 clivus,
traverses	the	cavernous	sinus	in	company	with	the	CNs	III,	IV,	and	V,	and	then
passes	 through	 the	 superior	 orbital	 fissure	 and	 enters	 the	 orbit	 to	 innervate	 the
lateral	rectus.

Facial	(CN	VII)

Axons	of	CN	VII	arise	from	the	facial	nucleus	in	the	pontine	tegmentum,	travel
backward,	up	and	around	the	nucleus	of	CN	VI,	and	then	cross	the	pons	to	exit
laterally.	 In	 the	 company	 of	 CN	 VIII,	 CN	 VII	 crosses	 the	 CPA,	 enters	 the
internal	auditory	meatus,	and	travels	along	the	internal	auditory	canal.	It	curves
down	 and	 away	 from	 CN	 VIII	 at	 the	 external	 genu	 in	 the	 vicinity	 of	 the
geniculate	ganglion.	After	traversing	the	remainder	of	the	petrous	bone,	CN	VII
exits	through	the	stylomastoid	foramen,	turns	forward,	passes	under	the	parotid
gland,	 and	 ramifies	 into	 upper	 and	 lower	 divisions	 to	 supply	 the	 muscles	 of
facial	 expression.	 Running	 in	 company	 with	 the	 facial	 nerve	 is	 the	 nervus
intermedius;	its	primary	component	is	the	chorda	tympani,	which	provides	taste
sensation	to	the	anterior	two-thirds	of	the	tongue.

Vestibulocochlear	(CN	VIII)

Auditory	stimuli	activate	hair	cells	in	the	organ	of	Corti.	Nerve	fibers	supplying
the	hair	cells	are	the	peripheral	processes	of	the	bipolar	neurons	that	make	up	the
spiral	ganglion	lying	in	the	center	of	the	cochlea.	The	central	processes	of	these
neurons	 form	 the	 auditory	 nerve,	 which	 follows	 a	 direct	 course	 through	 the
internal	 auditory	 canal	 and	 across	 the	 CPA,	 enters	 the	 brainstem	 at	 the
pontomedullary	junction,	and	synapses	in	the	cochlear	nuclei.

The	 vestibular	 nerve	 arises	 from	 the	 vestibular	 (Scarpa’s)	 ganglion.	 The
peripheral	 processes	 of	 its	 bipolar	 neurons	 receive	 impulses	 from	 the	 utricle,
saccule,	 and	 three	 semicircular	 canals;	 the	 central	 processes	 convey	 these
impulses	through	the	vestibular	portion	of	CN	VIII.

Glossopharyngeal	(CN	IX)

The	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 sends	 axons	 via	 CN	 IX	 to	 innervate	 the	 pharyngeal
plexus.	The	functions	of	CNs	IX	and	X	are	virtually	inseparable	in	this	regard.
The	only	muscle	innervated	solely	by	CN	IX	is	the	stylopharyngeus.	In	company
with	CNs	X	and	XI,	the	nerve	exits	the	skull	through	the	jugular	foramen.	CN	IX
also	 conveys	 taste	 fibers	 from	 the	 posterior	 third	 of	 the	 tongue	 and	 supplies
parasympathetics	to	the	parotid	gland.

Vagus	(CN	X)

CN	X	carries	motor	fibers	from	the	nucleus	ambiguus	to	the	palate,	pharynx,	and

larynx.	 In	 addition,	 a	 heavy	 input	 arises	 from	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus	 of	 the
vagus,	which	conveys	parasympathetic	fibers	to	innervate	viscera	of	the	thorax
and	abdomen.	The	vagus	also	carries	visceral	afferents	and	taste	fibers.

Accessory	(CN	XI)

The	accessory	nerve	has	two	parts.	The	spinal	portion	arises	from	lower	motor
neurons	in	the	upper	cervical	cord.	Because	of	its	branchial	arch	origin,	it	exits
laterally,	 runs	 upward	 to	 enter	 the	 skull	 through	 the	 foramen	 magnum,	 and
ascends	
the
sternomastoid	and	trapezius	muscles.	The	cranial	portion	of	CN	XI	arises	from
the	 nucleus	 ambiguus,	 exits	 laterally,	 joins	 the	 spinal	 root	 briefly,	 and	 then
quickly	turns	off	to	join	IX	and	X.	Its	functions	are	not	separable	from	those	of
the	vagus.

jugular	 foramen.	 These	 fibers	 ultimately	

innervate	

the	

to	

Hypoglossal	(CN	XII)

CN	XII	arises	from	motor	neurons	in	the	hypoglossal	nucleus,	exits	the	medulla
anteriorly	 in	 the	 groove	 between	 the	 pyramid	 and	 the	 olive,	 leaves	 the	 skull
through	the	hypoglossal	foramen,	and	runs	forward	to	innervate	the	tongue.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Carpenter	 MB.	 Core	 Text	 of	 Neuroanatomy.	 4th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &

Wilkins,	1991:115–223.

Dickman	CA,	Hadley	MN,	Pappas	CTE,	et	al.	Cruciate	paralysis:	a	clinical	and
radiographic	 analysis	 of	 injuries	 to	 the	 cervicomedullary	 junction.	 J
Neurosurg	1990;73:850–858.

FitzGerald	 MJT,	 Folan-Curran	 J.	 Clinical	 Neuroanatomy	 and	 Related

Neuroscience.	4th	ed.	Edinburgh:	W.	B.	Saunders,	2002.

Gates	P.	The	rule	of	4	of	the	brainstem:	a	simplified	method	for	understanding
brainstem	anatomy	and	brainstem	vascular	syndromes	for	the	non-neurologist.
Intern	Med	J	2005;35:263–266.

Gilman	 S,	 Winans	 S.	 Manter	 and	 Gatz’s	 Essentials	 of	 Clinical	 Neuroanatomy
and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	F.	A.	Davis	Publishers,	2003:77–
118.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Parent	 A.	 Carpenter’s	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 9th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &

Wilkins,	1996.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

CHAPTER	12

The	Olfactory	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	first-order	neurons	of	the	olfactory	system	are	bipolar	sensory	cells	that	lie
in	 the	 olfactory	 epithelium,	 which	 occupies	 a	 small	 area	 on	 the	 superior	 nasal
concha,	upper	nasal	septum,	and	roof	of	the	nose.	Their	peripheral	ramifications
are	 ciliated	 processes	 that	 penetrate	 the	 mucous	 membrane	 of	 the	 upper	 nasal
cavity.	Tiny	knobs	on	the	cilia	are	the	sites	of	chemosensory	signal	transduction.
Odorant	binding	to	receptors	causes	ion	fluxes,	excitation,	and	the	activation	of
messenger	 systems.	 Specific	 odorants	 stimulate	 specific	 receptor	 cells,	 and
specific	cells	respond	to	particular	odorants.

Most	nasally	inspired	air	fails	to	reach	the	olfactory	epithelium	because	of	its
location	 in	the	nasal	 attic.	 Sniffing	creates	a	better	airflow	pattern	for	reaching
the	 olfactory	 endings.	 The	 central	 processes	 of	 the	 olfactory	 neurons	 are
unmyelinated	 axons	 that	 form	 approximately	 20	 branches	 on	 each	 side.	 These
are	the	olfactory	nerves.	They	penetrate	the	cribriform	plate	of	the	ethmoid	bone,
acquire	a	sheath	of	meninges,	and	synapse	in	the	olfactory	bulbs	(Figure	12.1).
Basal	 cells	 in	 the	 olfactory	 epithelium	 can	 regenerate,	 an	 unusual	 neuronal
property.	 Olfactory	 receptor	 cells	 are	 continuously	 replaced	 by	 newly	 formed
cells.	The	olfactory	apparatus	is	sensitive	to	processes	such	as	chemotherapy	that
affect	 rapidly	 replicating	 cell	 systems.	 Receptor	 regeneration	 with	 recovery	 of
olfactory	function	can	occur	after	some	insults.

Within	the	olfactory	bulbs,	axons	of	incoming	fibers	synapse	on	dendrites	of
mitral	and	tufted	cells	in	the	olfactory	glomeruli.	The	mitral	and	tufted	cells	are
the	 output	 cells	 of	 the	 olfactory	 bulb.	 The	 axons	 of	 the	 second-order	 neurons,
mainly	the	mitral	cells,	course	posteriorly	through	the	olfactory	tracts,	which	lie
in	 the	 olfactory	 grooves,	 or	 sulci,	 beneath	 the	 frontal	 lobes	 in	 the	 floor	 of	 the
anterior	cranial	fossa.

The	olfactory	bulbs	and	tracts	are	sometimes	mistakenly	called	the	olfactory
nerves.	 The	 olfactory	 nerves	 are	 the	 unmyelinated	 filaments,	 wrapped	 by	 a
special	 type	 of	 glia	 called	 olfactory	 ensheathing	 glia,	 that	 pass	 through	 the
cribriform	plate.	The	olfactory	tracts	are	mainly	formed	by	axons	myelinated	by
oligodendrocytes	 and	 are	 thus	 part	 of	 the	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS).	 The
bulbs	 and	 tracts	 are	 part	 of	 the	 rhinencephalon.	 The	 proximity	 of	 the	 olfactory
tracts	 to	 the	 inferior	 surface	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobes	 is	 an	 important	 anatomic
relationship	(see	Figure	11.3).

Olfactory	information	is	processed	in	primitive	areas	of	the	brain.	Olfaction	is
the	 only	 sensation	 not	 directly	 processed	 in	 the	 thalamus.	 The	 olfactory	 tracts
divide	 into	 medial	 and	 lateral	 olfactory	 striae	 that	 run	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the
anterior	 perforated	 substance.	 The	 triangular	 area	 thus	 formed	 is	 called	 the
olfactory	 trigone.	 Some	 olfactory	 stria	 fibers	 decussate	 in	 the	 anterior
commissure	 to	 join	 the	 fibers	 from	 the	 opposite	 side;	 some	 go	 to	 the	 olfactory
trigone	 and	 tuberculum	 olfactorium	 within	 the	 anterior	 perforated	 substance.
Fibers	 of	 the	 medial	 olfactory	 stria	 terminate	 on	 the	 medial	 surface	 of	 the
cerebral	hemisphere	in	the	parolfactory	area,	subcallosal	gyrus,	and	inferior	part
of	 the	 cingulate	 gyrus.	 The	 lateral	 olfactory	 stria	 courses	 obliquely	 along	 the
anterior	 perforated	 space	 and	 beneath	 the	 temporal	 lobe	 to	 terminate	 in	 the
uncus,	 anterior	 hippocampal	 gyrus,	 piriform	 cortex,	 entorhinal	 cortex,	 and
amygdaloid	nucleus	(Figures	12.2	and	 12.3).	 Structures	 collectively	 referred	 to
as	 the	 primary	 olfactory	 cortex	 include	 the	 anterior	 olfactory	 nucleus,	 the
piriform	 cortex,	
the
the	 anterior	 cortical	 nucleus	 of	
periamygdaloid	complex,	and	the	rostral	entorhinal	cortex.

the	 amygdala,	

The	 parahippocampal	 gyrus	 sends	 impulses	 to	 the	 hippocampus.	 The
hippocampi	 and	 amygdaloid	 nuclei	 on	 the	 two	 sides	 are	 intimately	 related
through	 the	 anterior	 commissure.	 These	 nuclei	 send	 projection	 fibers	 to	 the
anterior	hypothalamic	nuclei,	mammillary	bodies,	tuber	cinereum,	and	habenular
nucleus.	 These	 in	 turn	 project	 to	 the	 anterior	 nuclear	 group	 of	 the	 thalamus,
interpeduncular	nucleus,	dorsal	tegmental	nucleus,	striatum,	cingulate	gyrus,	and
mesencephalic	 reticular	 formation.	 Functional	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 has
shown	 that	 chemosensory	 signals	 cause	 activation	 of	 cortical	 areas	 not
previously	 known	 to	 have	 olfactory	 functions.	 Communications	 with	 the
superior	 and	 inferior	 salivatory	 nuclei	 are	 important	 in	 reflex	 salivation.
Pheromones	 are	 also	 detected	 by	 neurons	 in	 the	 vomeronasal	 organ.	 These
project	via	the	olfactory	tract	to	the	accessory	olfactory	bulb,	then	to	the	piriform
cortex	and	amygdala.

FIGURE	12.1	The	distribution	of	the	olfactory	nerves	within	the	nose.

Olfaction	is	a	phylogenetically	ancient	sensation.	In	lower	mammals	in	whom
olfaction	is	extremely	important,	the	olfactory	cortex	constitutes	a	large	part	of
the	 cerebral	 hemispheres.	 The	 connections	 between	 the	 olfactory	 system,
hypothalamus,	 certain	 brainstem	 nuclei,	 and	 autonomic	 centers	 are	 pertinent	 to
the	understanding	of	many	visceral	functions.

The	 olfactory	 nerve	 is	 a	 sensory	 nerve	 with	 but	 one	 function—smell.	 The
ability	to	perceive	and	identify	various	odors	differs	from	person	to	person.	Only
volatile	 substances	 soluble	 in	 lipids	 or	 water	 are	 perceived	 as	 odors.	 In	 true
anosmia,	there	is	loss	of	ability	to	perceive	or	recognize	not	only	scents	but	also
flavors,	 for	 much	 of	 what	 is	 interpreted	 as	 taste	 involves	 smell.	 Flavor	 is	 a
synthesis	of	sensations	derived	from	the	olfactory	nerves,	taste	buds,	and	other
sensory	end	organs.	A	patient	with	olfactory	impairment	may	complain	of	loss	of
taste	 rather	 than	 of	 smell.	 Patients	 with	 unilateral	 anosmia	 may	 be	 unaware	 of
any	impairment.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION 

Impairments  because  of anosmia  are  not trivial.  The  problem is  not merely that 
patients  with  disturbances  of  smell  sensation  miss  out  on  some  of  life's 
pleasures;  they  may  also  miss  olfactory  danger  signals,  such  as  spoiled  food, 
smoke,  and  leaking  gas.  As  with  hearing,  olfactory  deficits  are  sometimes 
divided  into  (a)  conductive  deficits,  because  of  processes  interfering  with  the 
ability of odorants to  contact the  olfactory epithelium,  such as  nasal  polyps;  and 
(b)  sensorineural or neurogenic  deficits,  because of dysfunction  of the  receptors 
or their central connections. 

Stria  medullaris thalam i--------- , 

1- - - - Nucleus med ialis dorsa lis 

of thalamus 

Forn i";_, 

Ant.  nuc lear  group 

of  tha lamus ',, 

' ' ' 

', 

Cingu late 

gyrus ---

Mammilothalamic 

tract·-

Olfactory 
bulb 

Olfactory _ 
neuron 

,, 
.,, 
reop  ic  area 

Lat.  olfactory  stri 

,, ,, 

/ 

,sal  tegmental  nuc leus 

Dorsal  longitudinal  fasc. 

, /  

Facial  nucleus 

Nuc leus  ambiguus 

., 
Hippocampal  gyr  s  ,/ 

/ 

.,/ 
, 
Amygdaloid  nucleus  , /  

, 

, , 
Hippocampus 

---.,..., __ , 

./' 

I 

, , , 
I , 
I , 
I , 
r , 

I 
I 

I 
I 

, 
Fornix 

lnterpeduncular nucleus 

FIGURE 12.2 The olfactory pathway and its central connections. 

Important  historical  points  to  address  in  a  patient  with  a  smell  or  taste 
disturbance  include  past  head  injury;  smoking;  recent  upper  respiratory  tract 
infection (URI);  systemic illness;  nutrition;  and exposure to  toxins,  medications, 
or  illicit  drugs.  Feldman  contends  that  changes  in  the  flavor  of  coffee  may  be 
particularly  informative.  Unilateral  loss  of  smell  is  more  significant  than 

bilateral,	which	may	be	caused	by	many	conditions,	primarily	conductive	(Table
12.1).

Before	evaluating	smell,	ensure	that	the	nasal	passages	are	open.	Most	cases
of	 impaired	 smell	 are	 due	 to	 intranasal	 obstructions.	 Acute	 or	 chronic	 rhinitis
and	chronic	sinusitis	may	seriously	interfere	with	olfaction.

Smell	is	tested	using	nonirritating	stimuli.	Avoid	substances	such	as	ammonia
that	may	stimulate	the	trigeminal	nerve	instead	of	the	olfactory	nerve,	causing	a
response	 that	 can	 be	 confused	 with	 olfaction.	 The	 nasal	 passages	 are	 richly
innervated	by	free	nerve	endings	from	the	trigeminal	system,	which	respond	to
many	substances.	Some	patients	with	impaired	taste	and	smell	enjoy	spicy	food
because	of	its	stimulation	of	the	trigeminal	system.

Examine	each	nostril	separately	while	occluding	the	other.	With	the	patient’s
eyes	closed	and	one	nostril	occluded,	bring	the	test	substance	near	the	open	one.
Ask	the	patient	to	sniff	and	indicate	whether	she	smells	something	and,	if	so,	to
identify	it.	Repeat	for	the	other	nostril	and	compare	the	two	sides.	The	side	that
might	 be	 abnormal	 should	 be	 examined	 first.	 Many	 substances	 can	 be	 used	 to
test	smell	(e.g.,	wintergreen,	cloves,	coffee,	and	cinnamon).	At	the	bedside	or	in
the	 clinic,	 one	 can	 use	 mouthwash,	 toothpaste,	 alcohol,	 soap,	 and	 similar
substances.	 Commercial	 scratch-and-sniff	 strips	 are	 available.	 Commercially
the	 University	 of
taste	
available	 quantitative	 smell	 and	
the	 Connecticut
test	
identification	
smell	
Pennsylvania	
chemosensory	 test.	 The	 UPSIT	 requires	 no	 trained	 personnel	 and	 may	 be	 self-
administered.	Its	forced-choice	design	helps	identify	malingering.

tests	
(UPSIT)	 and	

include	

FIGURE	 12.3	 The	 olfactory	 pathways.	 APS,	 anterior	 perforated	 substance;	 LOS,
lateral	olfactory	stria;	MOS,	Medial	olfactory	stria.

The	 perception	 of	 odor	 is	 more	 important	 than	 accurate	 identification.
Perceiving	 the	 presence	 of	 an	 odor	 indicates	 continuity	 of	 the	 olfactory
pathways;	 identification	 of	 the	 odor	 indicates	 intact	 cortical	 function	 as	 well.
Because	there	is	bilateral	innervation,	a	lesion	central	to	the	decussation	of	the
olfactory	 pathways	 never	 causes	 loss	 of	 smell,	 and	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 olfactory
cortex	 does	 not	 produce	 anosmia.	 The	 appreciation	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 smell,
even	without	recognition,	excludes	anosmia.

DISORDERS	OF	OLFACTORY	FUNCTION

Some	definitions	regarding	disorders	of	smell	are	reviewed	in	Table	12.2.	 Loss
of	smell	may	occur	in	a	variety	of	conditions	(Table	12.1).	Common	causes	of
impaired	 smell	 are	 URI,	 trauma,	 nasal	 and	 sinus	 disease,	 and	 normal	 aging.
Persistent	 olfactory	 loss	 following	 a	 URI	 is	 the	 most	 common	 etiology,
accounting	for	15%	to	25%	of	cases.

TABLE	12.1

Some	Causes	of	Persistent	Loss	of	Smell

Olfactory	groove	meningioma

Smoking

Frontal	lobe	tumor,	especially	glioma
Sellar/parasellar	tumor
Neuro-olfactory	tumor

(esthesioneuroblastoma)

Korsakoff’s	syndrome
Vitamin	deficiency	(B6,	B12,	A)
Zinc	or	copper	deficiency
Craniocerebral	trauma,	including	surgery
Alzheimer’s	disease
Parkinson’s	disease
Multiple	sclerosis
Congenital	anosmia
Arhinencephaly
Olfactory	dysgenesis
Kallmann’s	syndrome	(hereditary
hypogonadism	with	anosmia)

Familial	dysautonomia
Refsum’s	syndrome
Psychiatric	conditions	(depression,

conversion	disorder,	schizophrenia)

Chronic	sinus	disease

Chronic	rhinitis
Deviated	nasal	septum
Nasal	polyps
Intranasal	tumors	(e.g.,

epidermoid	carcinoma)

Postviral
General	anesthesia
Dental	trauma
Chemical	burns	of	the
olfactory	epithelium

Normal	aging
Pregnancy
Meningitis
Chemotherapeutic	agents
Cadmium	toxicity
Antihistamines
Propylthiouracil
Antibiotics
Levodopa
Cocaine
Amphetamines
Radiation	therapy

TABLE
12.2

Terms	and	Definitions	Related	to	Olfactory
Abnormalities

Anosmia

No	sense	of	smell

Hyposmia

A	decrease	in	the	sense	of	smell

Hyperosmia

An	overly	acute	sense	of	smell

Dysosmia

Impairment	or	defect	in	the	sense	of	smell

Parosmia

Perversion	or	distortion	of	smell

Phantosmia

Perception	of	an	odor	that	is	not	real

Presbyosmia

Decrease	in	the	sense	of	smell	because	of	aging

Cacosmia

Inappropriately	disagreeable	odors

Coprosmia

Cacosmia	with	a	fecal	scent

Olfactory	agnosia

Inability	to	identify	or	interpret	detected	odors

Age	 is	 the	 strongest	 correlate	 of	 olfactory	 decline,	 and	 decreased	 smell
function	occurs	in	the	otherwise	healthy	elderly.	Such	decline	often	goes	noticed
and	 unreported.	 In	 those	 under	 the	 age	 of	 65,	 about	 2%	 of	 the	 population	 has
impaired	olfaction;	the	prevalence	rises	to	about	50%	between	65	and	80	and	to
nearly	 75%	 in	 those	 over	 80.	 This	 impaired	 olfaction	 may	 be	 related	 to
ossification	 of	 the	 foramina	 in	 the	 cribriform	 plate,	 early	 neurodegenerative
disease	 (see	 below),	 and	 degradation	 of	 receptor	 function	 related	 to	 repeated
viral	infections	and	other	insults	over	the	span	of	time.

Chronic	intranasal	cocaine	use	may	cause	anosmia.	Toxins	such	as	cadmium,
chromium,	 or	 toluene	 may	 cause	 anosmia,	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 other
neurologic	 abnormalities.	 Exposure,	 especially	 when	 chronic,	 to	 herbicides,
pesticides,	 and	 solvents	 may	 lead	 to	 impaired	 smell.	 Disturbances	 of	 taste	 and
smell	may	result	from	deficiency	of	vitamin	B12,	B6,	or	A	and	from	the	effects	of
some	drugs.	Decreased	sense	of	smell	has	been	often	attributed	to	abnormalities
in	zinc	metabolism.

Craniocerebral	 trauma	 may	 cause	 damage	 to	 the	 olfactory	 nerves	 at	 the

cribriform	plate	because	of	coup	or	contrecoup	forces.	The	incidence	of	trauma-
related	 olfactory	 dysfunction	 in	 the	 general	 population	 is	 4%	 to	 15%.	 The
likelihood	 of	 smell	 impairment	 after	 head	 trauma	 is	 directly	 related	 to	 the
severity.	 The	 incidence	 of	 anosmia	 may	 be	 as	 high	 as	 80%	 in	 patients	 with
cerebrospinal	fluid	(CSF)	rhinorrhea.	Head	trauma	accounted	for	about	20%	of
all	chemosensory	disorders	in	one	referral	center.

Neurologic	causes	of	impaired	smell	are	rare	but	important.	Lesions	involving
the	 orbital	 surface	 of	 the	 brain	 may	 cause	 unilateral	 anosmia.	 Meningiomas	 of
the	 sphenoidal	 ridge	 or	 olfactory	 groove	 and	 gliomas	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 may
damage	 the	 olfactory	 bulbs	 or	 tracts.	 A	 typical	 clinical	 picture	 with	 sphenoidal
ridge	 meningioma	 consists	 of	 unilateral	 optic	 atrophy	 or	 papilledema	 and
exophthalmos,	and	ipsilateral	anosmia.	In	meningiomas	of	the	olfactory	groove
or	cribriform	plate	area,	unilateral	anosmia	occurs	early,	progressing	to	bilateral
anosmia,	often	accompanied	by	optic	neuropathy.	Anosmia	may	also	occur	with
other	 frontal	 lobe	 tumors,	 with	 parasellar	 and	 pituitary	 lesions	 and	 with	 other
mass	lesions,	such	as	giant	anterior	cerebral	aneurysm.

The	Foster	Kennedy	syndrome	consists	of	anosmia	accompanied	by	unilateral
ipsilateral	 optic	 atrophy	 and	 contralateral	 papilledema,	 classically	 because	 of	 a
large	 tumor	 involving	 the	 orbitofrontal	 region,	 such	 as	 an	 olfactory	 groove
meningioma.	 It	 was	 first	 described	 by	 Sir	 William	 Gowers;	 later	 and	 more
thoroughly	 by	 R.	 Foster	 Kennedy.	 The	 anosmia	 and	 optic	 atrophy	 are	 due	 to
direct	 compression;	 the	 contralateral	 papilledema	 occurs	 late	 when	 intracranial
pressure	increases.	The	atrophic	optic	disk	cannot	swell	and	the	unusual	picture
of	 optic	 atrophy	 in	 one	 eye	 and	 papilledema	 in	 the	 fellow	 eye	 develops.	 This
ophthalmologic	 picture,	 without	 the	 anosmia,	 is	 more	 often	 due	 to	 anterior
ischemic	 optic	 neuropathy,	 arteritic	 or	 nonarteritic,	 involving	 first	 one	 eye,
leading	 to	 atrophy,	 then	 the	 other,	 leading	 to	 disk	 edema	 (the	 pseudo–Foster
Kennedy	 syndrome).	 A	 mass	 causing	 asymmetric	 compression	 of	 both	 optic
nerves	may	cause	a	similar	picture.

Anosmia	 may	 accompany	 some	 degenerative	 dementias,	 especially
Alzheimer’s	 disease	 (AD).	 Dopamine	 is	 one	 of	 the	 neurotransmitters	 in	 the
olfactory	 bulbs	 and	 Lewy	 bodies	 appear	 in	 the	 olfactory	 bulb	 early	 in
Parkinson’s	 disease	 (PD).	 Olfactory	 dysfunction	 has	 been	 recognized	 as	 a
common	finding	in	patients	with	PD	and	may	help	distinguish	PD	from	atypical
Parkinson	 syndromes.	 Deficits	 may	 involve	 odor	 detection,	 identification,	 and
discrimination.	In	AD	and	PD,	the	deficit	is	present	in	85%	to	90%	of	patients
even	 in	 the	 early	 stages	 of	 the	 disease.	 The	 sensitivity	 of	 olfactory	 testing	 in

detecting	PD	has	been	estimated	as	high	as	0.91.	In	fact,	Hawkes	suggested	that
impaired	smell	identification	is	so	common	in	PD	that	its	absence	should	prompt
reconsideration	of	the	diagnosis.	The	prevalence	of	anosmia	may	be	even	higher
in	Lewy	body	dementia	than	in	AD.	Anosmia	and	visual	hallucinations	are	both
strong	 independent	 predictors	 of	 Lewy	 body	 pathology.	 Impaired	 smell	 may
occur	in	other	neurologic	disorders	(Box	12.1).

BOX	12.1

Other	Neurologic	Causes	of	Impaired	Smell

Impaired	smell	has	been	found	to	occur	in	many	other	neurologic	conditions,
including	 Huntington’s	 disease,	 Korsakoff’s	 syndrome,	 hydrocephalus,
disease	 of	 the	 anterior	 cerebral	 artery	 near	 its	 origin,	 basilar	 meningitis,
frontal	 lobe	 abscess,	 Refsum’s	 disease,	 Wilson’s	 disease,	 corticobasal
degeneration,	 spinocerebellar	 ataxias,	 narcolepsy,	 MS,	 pure	 autonomic
failure,	 and	 following	 temporal	 lobectomy.	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob	 disease	 may
cause	 anosmia,	 and	 prion	 protein	 immunoreactivity	 has	 been	 detected	 by
olfactory	 biopsy	 to	 confirm	 the	 diagnosis.	 Kallmann’s	 syndrome	 is	 a
hereditary	 disorder	
that	 causes	 hypogonadism,	 anosmia,	 and	 mirror
movements	 associated	 with	 developmental	 anomalies	 of	 the	 corticospinal
tracts.

Anosmia	 sometimes	 occurs	 in	 conversion	 disorder;	 taste	 is	 usually	 not
affected.	 In	 hysterical	 anosmia,	 irritating	 substances,	 such	 as	 ammonia,	 that
stimulate	the	trigeminal	endings	are	detected	no	better	than	subtle	aromas.

Disorders	 of	 smell	 other	 than	 hyposmia	 or	 anosmia	 occasionally	 occur.
Hyperosmia	 is	 usually	 functional,	 but	 it	 can	 occur	 with	 certain	 types	 of
substance	 abuse	 and	 in	 migraine.	 Parosmia	 and	 cacosmia	 are	 often	 due	 to
psychiatric	 disease	 but	 occasionally	 follow	 head	 trauma	 and	 may	 accompany
conductive	dysosmia.	Olfactory	hallucinations	are	most	often	due	to	psychosis,
but	 they	 can	 result	 from	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 central	 olfactory	 system,	 usually
neoplastic	 or	 vascular,	 or	 as	 a	 manifestation	 of	 seizure.	 So-called	 uncinate	 fits
are	 complex	 partial	 or	 temporal	 lobe	 seizures	 preceded	 by	 an	 olfactory	 or
gustatory	aura,	usually	disagreeable,	and	often	accompanied,	as	the	patient	loses
awareness,	 by	 smacking	 of	 the	 lips	 or	 chewing	 movements.	 Such	 attacks	 are
typically	 because	 of	 a	 seizure	 focus	 involving	 medial	 temporal	 lobe	 structures.

There	is	never	objective	loss	of	smell	interictally.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anholt	RRH.	Molecular	physiology	of	olfaction.	Am	J	Physiol	1989;257:1043.
Boesveldt	 S,	 Postma	 EM,	 Boak	 D,	 et	 al.	 Anosmia-A	 clinical	 review.	 Chem

Senses	2017;42:513–523.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Deems	DA,	Doty	RL,	Settle	RG,	et	al.	Smell	and	taste	disorders:	a	study	of	750
patients	 from	 the	 University	 of	 Pennsylvania	 Smell	 and	 Taste	 Center.	 Arch
Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	1991;117:519–528.

Demarquay	G,	Ryvlin	P,	Royet	JP.	Olfaction	and	neurological	diseases:	a	review

of	the	literature.	Rev	Neurol	(Paris)	2007;163:155–167.

Devanand	DP,	Lee	S,	Manly	J,	et	al.	Olfactory	deficits	predict	cognitive	decline
and	 Alzheimer	 dementia	 in	 an	 urban	 community.	 Neurology	 2015;84:182–
189.

Doty	RL.	The	olfactory	system	and	its	disorders.	Semin	Neurol	2009;29:74–81.
Doty	 RL.	 Olfactory	 dysfunction	 in	 neurodegenerative	 diseases:	 is	 there	 a

common	pathological	substrate?	Lancet	Neurol	2017;16:478–488.

Doty	 RL,	 Shaman	 P,	 Dann	 M.	 Development	 of	 the	 University	 of	 Pennsylvania
Smell	 Identification	 Test:	 a	 standardized	 microencapsulated	 test	 of	 olfactory
function.	Physiol	Behav	1984;32:489–502.

Doty	 RL,	 Golbe	 LI,	 McKeown	 DA,	 et	 al.	 Olfactory	 testing	 differentiates
between	 progressive	 supranuclear	 palsy	 and	 idiopathic	 Parkinson’s	 disease.
Neurology	1993;43:962.

Feldman	JI,	Wright	HN,	Leopold	DA.	The	initial	evaluation	of	dysosmia.	Am	J

Otolaryngol	1986;7:431.

Fullard	ME,	Morley	JF,	Duda	JE.	Olfactory	dysfunction	as	an	early	biomarker	in

Parkinson’s	disease.	Neurosci	Bull	2017;33:515–525.

Garcia-Gonzalez	 D,	 Murcia-Belmonte	 V,	 Clemente	 D,	 et	 al.	 Olfactory	 system

and	demyelination.	Anat	Rec	2013;296:1424–1434.

Hawkes	 C.	 Olfaction	 in	 neurodegenerative	 disorder.	 Mov	Disord	2003;18:364–

372.

Hussey	 HH.	 Taste	 and	 smell	 deviations:	

importance	 of	 zinc.	 JAMA

1974;226:1669.

Lafaille-Magnan	 ME,	 Poirier	 J,	 Etienne	 P,	 et	 al.	 Odor	 identification	 as	 a
biomarker	of	preclinical	AD	in	older	adults	at	risk.	Neurology	2017;89:327–
335.

Levy	 M,	 Henkin	 RI,	 Hutter	 A,	 et	 al.	 Functional	 MRI	 of	 human	 olfaction.	 J

Comput	Assist	Tomogr	1997;21:849–856.

Lucassen	 EB,	 Turel	 A,	 Knehans	 A,	 et	 al.	 Olfactory	 dysfunction	 in	 multiple
sclerosis:	a	scoping	review	of	the	literature.	Mult	Scler	Relat	Disord	2016;6:1–
9.

Manconi	 M,	 Paolino	 E,	 Casetta	 I,	 et	 al.	 Anosmia	 in	 a	 giant	 anterior

communicating	artery	aneurysm.	Arch	Neurol	2001;58:1474–1475.

Marine	N,	Boriana	A.	Olfactory	markers	of	depression	and	Alzheimer’s	disease.

Neurosci	Biobehav	Rev	2014;45:262–270.

Mesholam	 RI,	 Moberg	 PJ,	 Mahr	 RN,	 et	 al.	 Olfaction	 in	 neurodegenerative
disease:	 a	 meta-analysis	 of	 olfactory	 functioning	 in	 Alzheimer’s	 and
Parkinson’s	diseases.	Arch	Neurol	1998;55:84–90.

Olichney	JM,	Murphy	C,	Hofstetter	CR,	et	al.	Anosmia	is	very	common	in	the
Lewy	 body	 variant	 of	 Alzheimer’s	 disease.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry
2005;76:1342–1347.

Pardini	 M,	 Huey	 ED,	 Cavanagh	 AL,	 et	 al.	 Olfactory	 function	 in	 corticobasal

syndrome	and	frontotemporal	dementia.	Arch	Neurol	2009;66:92–96.

Roberts	RO,	Christianson	TJ,	Kremers	WK,	et	al.	Association	between	olfactory
dysfunction	 and	 amnestic	 mild	 cognitive	 impairment	 and	 Alzheimer	 disease
dementia.	JAMA	Neurol	2016;73:93–101.

Ross	GW,	Petrovitch	H,	Abbott	RD,	et	al.	Association	of	olfactory	dysfunction

with	risk	for	future	Parkinson’s	disease.	Ann	Neurol	2008;63:167–173.

Ruggiero	GF,	Wick	JY.	Olfaction:	new	understandings,	diagnostic	applications,

Consult	Pharm	2016;31:624–632.

Scangas	 GA,	 Bleier	 BS.	 Anosmia:	 differential	 diagnosis,	 evaluation,	 and

management.	Am	J	Rhinol	Allergy	2017;31:3–7.

Schiffman	 SS.	 Taste	 and	 smell	 losses	 in	 normal	 aging	 and	 disease.	 JAMA

1997;278:1357–1362.

Schon	 F.	 Involvement	 of	 smell	 and	 taste	 in	 giant	 cell	 arteritis.	 J	 Neurol

Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1988;51:1594.

Shibasaki	 H,	 Hallett	 M.	 The	 Neurological	 Examination:	 Scientific	 Basis	 for

Clinical	Diagnosis.	Oxford;	New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2016.

Silveira-Moriyama	L,	Mathias	C,	Mason	L,	et	al.	Hyposmia	in	pure	autonomic

failure.	Neurology	2009;72:1677–1681.

Stiasny-Kolster	K,	Doerr	Y,	Moller	JC,	et	al.	Combination	of	‘idiopathic’	REM
sleep	 behaviour	 disorder	 and	 olfactory	 dysfunction	 as	 possible	 indicator	 for
alpha-synucleinopathy	demonstrated	by	dopamine	transporter	FP-CIT-SPECT.
Brain	2005;128(Pt	1):126–137.

Stiasny-Kolster	K,	Clever	SC,	Moller	JC,	et	al.	Olfactory	dysfunction	in	patients
with	 narcolepsy	 with	 and	 without	 REM	 sleep	 behaviour	 disorder.	 Brain
2007;130(Pt	2):442–449.

Tabaton	M,	Monaco	S,	Cordone	MP,	et	al.	Prion	deposition	in	olfactory	biopsy

of	sporadic	Creutzfeldt-Jakob	disease.	Ann	Neurol	2004;55:294–296.

Vale	 TC,	 Pedroso	 JL,	 Rivero	 RLM,	 et	 al.	 Lack	 of	 decussation	 of	 pyramids	 in
Kallmann	 syndrome	 presenting	 with	 mirror	 movements.	 J	 Neurol	 Sci
2017;372:220–222.

Velayudhan	L.	Smell	identification	function	and	Alzheimer’s	disease:	a	selective

review.	Curr	Opin	Psychiatry	2015;28:173–179.

Zanusso	G,	Ferrari	S,	Cardone	F,	et	al.	Detection	of	pathologic	prion	protein	in
the	olfactory	epithelium	in	sporadic	Creutzfeldt-Jakob	disease.	N	Engl	J	Med
2003;348:711–719.

Zatorre	 RJ,	 Jones-Gotman	 M,	 Evans	 AC,	 et	 al.	 Functional	 localization	 and

lateralization	of	human	olfactory	cortex.	Nature	1992;360:339–340.

CHAPTER	13

The	Optic	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	optic	nerve	is	a	central	nervous	system	(CNS)	fiber	pathway	connecting	the
retina	 and	 the	 brain.	 The	 peripheral	 receptors,	 retinal	 rods	 and	 cones,	 are
stimulated	 by	 light	 rays	 that	 pass	 through	 the	 cornea,	 lens,	 and	 vitreous.	 They
send	impulses	to	the	inner	nuclear	or	bipolar	layer;	cells	there	send	axons	to	the
ganglion	cell	layer	(Figure	13.1).	There	are	nearly	1.2	million	ganglion	cells	and
their	axons	that	make	up	the	optic	nerve.	The	photoreceptor	layer	is	the	deepest
layer	of	the	retina;	it	lies	adjacent	to	the	choroid,	and	light	must	pass	through	the
more	superficial	layers	to	reach	it.	The	rods,	more	numerous	than	the	cones,	are
scattered	 diffusely	 throughout	 the	 retina	 but	 are	 absent	 in	 the	 macula.	 They
respond	to	low-intensity	stimulation	and	mediate	night	vision,	peripheral	vision,
and	perception	of	movement.	They	cannot	perceive	color.	Cones	are	also	present
throughout	 the	 retina	 but	 are	 concentrated	 in	 the	 macula	 lutea.	 The	 macula
consists	 entirely	 of	 cones;	 it	 is	 the	 point	 of	 central	 fixation	 and	 the	 site	 of
greatest	visual	acuity	and	color	perception.	The	macular	cones	have	a	2:1	ratio
with	 ganglion	 cells,	 the	 highest	 in	 the	 eye.	 The	 macula	 (L.	 “spot”)	 is	 a	 small
shallow	depression	in	the	retina	that	lies	temporal	to	the	disk	(Figure	13.2).	It	has
a	 slightly	 different	 color	 than	 the	 surrounding	 retina	 that	 can	 be	 seen	 with	 the
ophthalmoscope.	 The	 fovea	 (L.	 “pit”)	 centralis	 is	 a	 tiny	 depression	 that	 lies	 in
the	center	of	the	macula.	The	foveola	is	an	even	tinier	depression	in	the	center	of
the	fovea.	It	is	the	point	of	most	acute	vision	because	the	overlying	retinal	layers
are	 pushed	 aside	 and	 light	 falls	 directly	 on	 the	 receptors;	 the	 foveola	 is	 the
optical	center	of	the	eye.	The	macula	is	responsible	for	the	central	15	degrees	of
vision	 and	 the	 discrimination	 of	 colors	 and	 fine	 visual	 details;	 its	 cones	 are
stimulated	 by	 light	 of	 relatively	 high	 intensity	 and	 colors.	 The	 optic	 disk,	 or
papilla,	 is	 the	 ophthalmoscopically	 visible	 tip	 of	 the	 intraocular	 portion	 of	 the

optic	nerve.	The	nerve	head	is	a	1.5	×	1.8	mm	vertical	ellipse,	and	it	appears	as	a
pink	 to	 yellowish-white	 disk.	 The	 disk	 normally	 inserts	 into	 the	 retina
perpendicularly.	 When	 the	 angle	 is	 less	 than	 90	 degrees,	 a	 rim	 or	 crescent	 of
choroid	 or	 sclera	 appears	 on	 the	 temporal	 side	 and	 the	 nasal	 side	 may	 appear
elevated	 (tilted	 disk).	 It	 contains	 no	 receptor	 cells,	 does	 not	 respond	 to	 visual
stimuli,	 and	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	 physiologic	 blind	 spot.	 The	 macula,	 not	 the
disk,	forms	the	center	of	the	retina,	and	the	macular	fixation	point	is	the	center	of
the	clinical	visual	field	(VF).

The	 retinal	 ganglion	 cell	 axons	 form	 the	 retinal	 nerve	 fiber	 layer	 (NFL)	 as
they	stream	toward	the	disk	to	exit	through	the	lamina	cribrosa	(L.	“sieve”),	the
collagenous	 support	 of	 the	 optic	 disk.	 Loss	 of	 axons	 and	 other	 abnormalities
involving	the	NFL	can	sometimes	be	appreciated	ophthalmoscopically.	Using	the
red-free	 light	 of	 the	 ophthalmoscope	 helps	 visualize	 the	 NFL.	 Myelin	 in	 the
optic	 nerve	 is	 CNS	 myelin,	 formed	 by	 oligodendroglia.	 The	 axons	 are
unmyelinated	in	the	retina	and	on	the	papillary	surface	but	become	myelinated	at
the	posterior	end	of	the	optic	nerve	head	as	they	pass	through	one	of	200	to	300
holes	in	the	lamina	cribrosa.	In	about	1%	of	individuals,	myelin	extends	into	the
peripapillary	retinal	NFL	(myelinated	nerve	fibers).	Optic	nerve	axons	primarily
carry	 visual	 impulses,	 but	 they	 also	 transmit	 the	 impulses	 that	 mediate
accommodation	 and	 reflex	 responses	 to	 light	 and	 other	 stimuli.	 Optic	 nerve
signals	are	coded	spatially	because	of	the	location	of	cells	in	the	retina,	and	they
are	 also	 coded	 temporally	 because	 the	 frequency	 and	 pattern	 of	 firing	 relays
information.

Macular	vision	is	a	critical	function,	and	the	projection	of	the	macula	to	the
optic	nerve	is	massive.	There	are	approximately	1.2	million	fibers	in	each	optic
nerve;	 about	 90%	 arise	 from	 the	 macula.	 Because	 of	 this	 preponderance	 of
macular	 fibers,	 early	 signs	 of	 optic	 nerve	 disease	 reflect	 macular	 function:
impaired	color	vision,	impaired	acuity,	and	central	scotoma.	A	dense	collection
of	axons,	the	papillomacular	bundle	(PMB),	travels	from	the	nasal	hemimacula
to	enter	the	temporal	aspect	of	the	disk	(Figure	13.3).	Fibers	from	the	temporal
hemiretina	 and	 hemimacula	 arch	 around	 the	 macula	 and	 enter	 the	 disk	 as	 the
superior	and	inferior	retinal	arcades.	Lesions	involving	these	arcades	may	create
arcuate	 VF	 defects	 that	 have	 an	 arching	 shape.	 The	 horizontal	 temporal	 raphe
demarcates	 superiorly	 from	 inferiorly	 sweeping	 axons	 traveling	 from	 the
temporal	hemimacula	to	the	disk.	All	of	the	axons	from	the	macula	gather	into
the	PMB	as	it	enters	the	optic	nerve.	The	fibers	of	the	PMB	are	very	vulnerable
to	toxins,	ischemia,	and	pressure.

FIGURE	13.1	 The	 layers	 of	 the	 retina	 and	 their	 relationship	 to	 the	 optic	 nerve.	 The
inner	limiting	membrane	is	the	most	superficial	structure;	light	must	pass	through	the
other	 layers	 to	 reach	 the	 rod	 and	 cone	 layer.	 (Modified	 from	 Ramon	 y	 Cajal	 S.
Histologie	 du	 Système	 Nerveux	 de	 l’Homme	 et	 Des	 Vertebres,	 vol	 2.	 Paris:	 A.
Maloine,	1909,	1911.)

The	organization	of	the	visual	afferent	system	is	not	random.	Tight	retinotopic
correlation	prevails	throughout	the	system;	each	point	on	the	retina	has	a	specific
representation	 in	 the	 optic	 nerve,	 the	 chiasm,	 the	 tract,	 the	 radiations,	 and	 the
cortex.	The	PMB,	which	forms	the	bulk	of	optic	nerve	axons,	runs	as	a	discrete
bundle	 inside	 the	 optic	 nerve.	 The	 VF	 maintains	 its	 basic	 shape	 and	 structure
throughout	 the	 system,	 although	 its	 orientation	 within	 the	 visual	 pathways
changes	 (Figure	 13.4).	 Fibers	 from	 the	 temporal	 hemiretina	 are	 located	 in	 the
temporal	 half	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve,	 whereas	 fibers	 from	 the	 nasal	 hemiretina	 are
located	 medially.	 Upper	 retinal	 fibers	 are	 located	 superiorly	 and	 lower	 retinal
fibers	inferiorly	in	the	optic	nerve;	this	relationship	is	retained	except	in	the	optic
tract	and	lateral	geniculate	body	(LGB).

FIGURE	13.2	Structure	of	the	eyeball.

The	 optic	 nerve	 extends	 from	 the	 retina	 to	 the	 optic	 chiasm;	 it	 is
approximately	 5	 cm	 long.	 It	 is	 conventionally	 divided	 into	 four	 portions:
intraocular	(1	mm;	the	disk),	intraorbital	(about	25	mm),	intracanalicular	(about
9	mm),	and	intracranial	(12	to	16	mm).	The	nerve	is	organized	into	400	to	600
fascicles	 separated	 by	 connective	 tissue	 septa.	 The	 intraorbital	 portion	 is
surrounded	by	fat	(Figure	13.5).

The	intracranial	dura	is	continuous	with	the	investments	of	the	optic	nerve;	at
the	 posterior	 globe,	 the	 dura	 fuses	 with	 Tenon’s	 capsule,	 and	 at	 the	 optic
foramen,	 it	 is	 adherent	 to	 the	 periosteum.	 The	 pia	 and	 arachnoid	 also	 continue
from	the	brain	and	envelop	the	optic	nerve.	They	fuse	with	the	sclera	where	the
nerve	 terminates.	 The	 intracranial	 meninges	 extend	 forward	 along	 the	 optic
nerves	 for	 a	 variable	 distance,	 forming	 the	 vaginal	 sheaths	 (Figure	 13.2).
Through	 these	 sheaths,	 the	 intracranial	 subarachnoid	 space	 continues	 along	 the
nerves	 and	 may	 transmit	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure,	 causing	 papilledema.
Variations	in	vaginal	sheath	anatomy	may	explain	the	occasional	asymmetry	of
papilledema.	 Decompression	 of	 the	 optic	 nerves	 by	 opening	 the	 sheaths	 is
sometimes	 done	 to	 treat	 papilledema	 that	 threatens	 vision.	 The	 intervaginal
space	 lies	 between	 the	 dura	 and	 the	 pia,	 divided	 by	 the	 arachnoid	 into	 a	 small
subdural	 and	 a	 larger	 subarachnoid	 space.	 The	 ophthalmic	 artery,	 the	 ciliary
ganglion	 and	 nerves,	 and	 the	 nerves	 to	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 lie	 close	 to	 the

optic	nerve	in	the	orbital	apex.	The	intraorbital	optic	nerve	is	sinuous,	with	about
8	mm	of	redundant	length	to	accommodate	eye	movement.	This	excess	of	length
allows	about	9	mm	of	proptosis	before	the	nerve	begins	to	tether.

FIGURE	13.3	 The	 optic	 disk	 and	 associated	 structures.	 Axons	 destined	 to	 form	 the
bulk	of	the	fibers	in	the	optic	nerve	arise	from	the	macula,	those	from	the	nasal	side
form	 the	 papillomacular	 bundle,	 and	 those	 from	 the	 temporal	 hemimacula	 enter	 the
disk	as	superior	and	inferior	arcades.	Spontaneous	venous	pulsations	are	best	seen
by	looking	at	the	tip	of	the	column	of	one	of	the	large	veins	on	the	disk	surface.

FIGURE	 13.4	 The	 grouping	 of	 visual	 fibers	 from	 the	 retinal	 quadrants	 and	 macular
area	in	the	optic	nerve,	optic	tract,	lateral	geniculate	body	(LGB),	and	occipital	cortex.

FIGURE	13.5	Optic	nerve	exposed	from	above	with	fat	and	the	roof	and	lateral	wall
removed.	The	intraocular	segment	(a)	is	within	the	globe.	The	intraorbital	segment	(b)
runs	through	the	orbit	to	the	entrance	of	the	optic	canal	depicted	by	the	left-most	blue
dot.	 The	 short	 intracanalicular	 segment	 (c)	 courses	 between	 the	 two	blue	dots.	 The
intracranial	 segment	 (d)	 continues	 to	 its	 junction	 with	 the	 optic	 chiasm	 (blue	 bar).
(Courtesy	Dr.	John	B.	Selhorst.)

In	 the	 peripheral	 portion	 of	 the	 nerve,	 near	 the	 eye,	 the	 PMB	 is	 positioned
laterally	and	slightly	inferiorly;	this	separates	the	temporal	fibers	into	dorsal	and
ventral	 quadrants.	 These	 in	 turn	 crowd	 and	 somewhat	 displace	 the	 nasal
quadrants	(Figure	13.4).	 As	 the	 nerve	 approaches	 the	 chiasm,	 the	 PMB	 moves
toward	its	center.

The	intracanalicular	portion	of	the	optic	nerve	begins	as	it	traverses	the	optic
foramen	at	the	orbital	apex.	The	orbital	opening	of	the	canal	is	a	vertical	ellipse;
the	intracranial	end	is	 a	horizontal	 ellipse.	The	intracanalicular	portion	is	fixed
tightly	 inside	 the	 optic	 canal	 with	 little	 room	 to	 move;	 intracanalicular	 lesions
can	compress	the	optic	nerve	while	they	are	still	small	and	difficult	to	visualize
on	 imaging	 studies	 (the	 “impossible	 meningioma”).	 The	 ophthalmic	 artery	 and

some	filaments	of	the	sympathetic	carotid	plexus	accompany	the	nerve	through
the	canal.

After	traversing	the	orbit	and	optic	canal,	the	two	optic	nerves	exit	from	the
optic	canals	and	rise	at	an	angle	of	about	45	degrees	to	unite	at	the	optic	chiasm,
so	 named	 because	 of	 its	 resemblance	 to	 the	 Greek	 letter	 chi	 (χ)	 (Figure	 13.6).
The	 orbital	 surface	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobes	 lies	 just	 above	 the	 intracranial	 optic
nerves.	 The	 chiasm	 typically	 lies	 about	 10	 mm	 above	 the	 pituitary	 gland,
separated	 by	 the	 suprasellar	 cistern.	 Fibers	 from	 the	 temporal	 retina	 continue
directly	 back	 to	 enter	 the	 ipsilateral	 optic	 tract.	 Fibers	 from	 the	 nasal	 retina
decussate	to	enter	the	opposite	optic	tract.

FIGURE	13.6	 The	 macular	 fibers	 decussate	 as	 a	 separate	 compact	 bundle,	 inferior
retinal	 (superior	 visual	 field	 [VF])	 fibers	 cross	 inferiorly,	 and	 superior	 retinal	 (inferior
VF)	 fibers	 cross	 superiorly.	 Masses	 impinging	 from	 below	 (e.g.,	 pituitary	 adenoma)
tend	 to	 cause	 early	 defects	 in	 the	 superior	 temporal	 fields;	 masses	 impinging	 from
above	 (e.g.,	 craniopharyngioma)	 tend	 to	 cause	 early	 defects	 in	 the	 inferior	 temporal
fields.

In	80%	of	the	population,	the	chiasm	rests	directly	above	the	sella.	In	10%,
the	 chiasm	 sits	 forward	 over	 the	 tuberculum	 sellae	 with	 short	 optic	 nerves	 and
long	optic	tracts	(prefixed);	in	the	other	10%,	the	chiasm	sits	posteriorly	over	the

dorsum	 sellae	 with	 long	 optic	 nerves	 and	 short	 optic	 tracts	 (postfixed)	 (Figure
13.7).	The	position	of	the	chiasm	in	relation	to	the	sella	and	the	neoplasia-prone
pituitary	gland	influences	the	clinical	presentation	of	masses	in	the	region.

The	basic	scheme	of	the	chiasm	with	temporal	hemiretinal	fibers	continuing
ipsilaterally	 and	 nasal	 hemiretinal	 fibers	 decussating	 is	 straightforward	 (Figure
13.8).	 But	 there	 are	 intricacies	 in	 the	 chiasmal	 crossing.	 In	 the	 process	 of
decussating,	 fibers	 from	 the	 inferior	 nasal	 quadrant	 loop	 forward	 into	 the
opposite	 optic	 nerve	 for	 a	 short	 distance	 before	 turning	 back	 again,	 forming
Wilbrand’s	knee	(Figure	13.9,	see	junctional	scotoma	in	“Scotomas”	section).	In
addition,	 some	 of	 the	 upper	 nasal	 fibers	 loop	 back	 briefly	 into	 the	 ipsilateral
optic	 tract	 before	 decussation.	 In	 the	 chiasm,	 the	 fibers	 from	 the	 upper	 retinal
quadrants	lie	superior	and	those	from	the	lower	quadrants	inferior	(Figure	13.6).
Inferior	 nasal	 fibers	 decussate	 anteriorly	 and	 inferiorly	 in	 the	 chiasm,	 whereas
superior	 nasal	 fibers	 cross	 posteriorly	 and	 superiorly,	 accounting	 for	 the
difference	in	the	pattern	of	evolution	of	the	field	defect	in	infrachiasmatic	versus
suprachiasmatic	lesions	(Figure	13.9).	Macular	fibers	more	or	less	decussate	as	a
group,	forming	a	miniature	chiasm	within	the	chiasm,	primarily	in	the	posterior
superior	portion.

FIGURE	13.7	The	normal	position	of	the	chiasm	is	shown	in	the	top	drawing.	When
the	 chiasm	 is	 prefixed,	 the	 optic	 nerves	 are	 short,	 the	 chiasm	 sits	 forward	 over	 the
sella,	and	the	optic	tracts	are	long.	When	the	chiasm	is	postfixed,	the	optic	nerves	are
long,	the	chiasm	sits	posteriorly	over	the	sella,	and	the	optic	tracts	are	short.

The	 cavernous	 sinuses	 and	 carotid	 siphons	 lie	 just	 lateral	 to	 the	 chiasm	 on
either	side.	The	anterior	cerebral	and	anterior	communicating	arteries	are	in	front
and	above,	and	the	third	ventricle	and	hypothalamus	are	behind	and	above.	The
sella	 turcica	 and	 sphenoid	 sinus	 lie	 below.	 The	 circle	 of	 Willis	 lies	 above,
sending	numerous	small	perforators	to	supply	the	chiasm.	The	ophthalmic	artery
runs	 alongside	 the	 optic	 nerve	 within	 the	 same	 dural	 sheath	 through	 the	 canal
and	orbit.	About	8	to	12	mm	posterior	to	the	globe,	the	artery	enters	the	nerve
and	runs	along	its	center	to	the	optic	disk,	where	it	becomes	the	central	retinal
artery,	 which	 pierces	 the	 nerve	 and	 runs	 forward	 onto	 the	 disk.	 The	 central
retinal	artery	divides	at	the	disk	head	into	superior	and	inferior	branches,	which
supply	the	retina.	Other	terminal	branches	of	the	ophthalmic,	the	short	posterior
ciliary	 arteries	 and	 choroidal	 vessels,	 form	 an	 arterial	 network,	 the	 circle	 of
Zinn-Haller,	 which	 supplies	 the	 disk;	 the	 central	 retinal	 artery	 makes	 only	 a

minimal	contribution	to	the	vascular	supply	of	the	optic	disk.

Posterior	 to	 the	 optic	 chiasm,	 the	 uncrossed	 fibers	 from	 the	 ipsilateral
temporal	 hemiretina	 and	 the	 crossed	 fibers	 from	 the	 contralateral	 nasal
hemiretina	form	the	optic	tract.	About	55%	of	the	axons	of	the	optic	tract	arise
from	the	contralateral	nasal	retina	and	45%	from	the	ipsilateral	temporal	retina,
which	 roughly	 corresponds	 to	 the	 ratio	 of	 the	 area	 of	 the	 temporal	 field	 to	 the
nasal	 field.	 The	 tracts	 contain	 approximately	 80%	 visual	 afferents	 and	 20%
pupillary	 afferents.	 The	 tracts	 extend	 from	 the	 chiasm	 to	 the	 LGB,	 where	 the
majority	of	fibers	terminate.	Retinotopic	organization	is	maintained	in	the	optic
tract,	 but	 the	 orientation	 changes.	 There	 is	 a	 gradual	 inward	 rotation,	 so	 fibers
from	the	upper	retina	assume	a	medial	position,	whereas	those	from	the	inferior
retina	 lie	 lateral.	 Fibers	 of	 the	 PMB	 gradually	 assume	 a	 dorsal	 and	 lateral
position,	wedged	between	the	upper	and	lower	retinal	fibers	(Figure	13.4).	The
retinotopic	organization	in	optic	tracts	is	not	as	precise	as	elsewhere,	which	may
contribute	to	the	 incongruity	of	VF	defects	that	are	characteristic	of	optic	tract
lesions.

FIGURE	13.8	The	course	of	the	visual	fibers	from	the	retina	to	the	occipital	cortex.	A
to	G	show	the	sites	of	various	lesions	that	may	affect	the	fields	of	vision.

FIGURE	 13.9	 A	 mass	 impinging	 on	 the	 optic	 nerve	 at	 its	 junction	 with	 the	 chiasm,
producing	a	junctional	scotoma.

Afferent	fibers	from	the	pupil	leave	the	tract	just	anterior	to	the	geniculate	to
enter	 the	 pretectal	 area	 of	 the	 midbrain	 (Figure	 13.10).	 The	 visual	 afferents
synapse	 in	 the	 geniculate	 on	 second-order	 neurons,	 which	 give	 rise	 to	 the
geniculocalcarine	pathway	(optic	radiations).

There	 are	 six	 neuronal	 layers	 in	 the	 LGB,	 separated	 by	 myelinated	 nerve
fibers.	 Uncrossed	 fibers	 from	 the	 ipsilateral	 temporal	 hemiretina	 synapse	 in
layers	2,	3,	and	5;	those	from	the	contralateral	nasal	hemiretina	synapse	in	layers
1,	 4,	 and	 6.	 Upper	 retinal	 fibers	 remain	 medial	 and	 lower	 ones	 lateral	 (Figure
13.4).	Macular	fibers	occupy	an	intermediate	position	in	the	dorsal,	middle,	and
somewhat	 caudal	 portion.	 The	 LGB	 has	 large	 magnocellular	 and	 small
parvocellular	neurons.	Some	of	the	visual	fibers	pass	over	or	through	the	LGB	to
terminate	in	the	pulvinar	of	the	thalamus,	but	the	significance	of	this	connection
has	 yet	 to	 be	 determined	 for	 vision	 or	 visual	 reflexes.	 The	 magnocellular
projections	 seem	 to	 process	 movement	 and	 depth,	 whereas	 the	 parvocellular
projections	mediate	shape,	pattern,	and	color.

The	 axons	 of	 LGB	 neurons	 pass	 posteriorly	 to	 form	 the	 geniculocalcarine
tract,	 or	 optic	 radiations,	 and	 terminate	 in	 the	 calcarine	 cortex	 of	 the	 occipital
lobe	 (Figure	 13.11).	 Leaving	 the	 LGB,	 the	 optic	 radiations	 pass	 through	 the
retrolenticular	portion	 of	the	 internal	capsule	and	then	fan	out.	Retinotopically,
upper	retinal	fibers	resume	an	upper,	and	lower	retinal	fibers	a	lower,	position	in
the	 radiations,	 with	 fibers	 subserving	 central	 vision	 intermediate	 between	 the
two	other	bundles.	Inferior	retinal	fibers	arch	anteriorly	into	the	temporal	lobe,
sweeping	 forward	 and	 laterally	 above	 the	 inferior	 horn	 of	 the	 ventricle	 to	 run
within	5	to	7	cm	of	the	temporal	tip,	then	laterally,	down,	and	backward	around
the	inferior	horn.	This	creates	a	great	arching	shape	referred	to	as	Meyer’s	loop

(loop	of	Meyer	and	Archambault).	The	inferior	retinal	fibers	then	course	through
the	 temporal	 and	 occipital	 lobes.	 Peripheral	 retinal	 fibers	 loop	 further	 forward
than	macular	fibers.	Fibers	from	the	superior	retina	run	directly	back	in	the	deep
parietal	lobe	in	the	external	sagittal	stratum,	lateral	to	the	posterior	horn	of	the
lateral	ventricle.	The	inferior,	or	ventral,	radiations	may	mediate	recognition	of
visual	 objects,	 whereas	 the	 dorsal	 pathway	 processes	 spatial	 information	 and
recognition	of	movement.

FIGURE	13.10	Pupillary	afferent	fibers	from	the	right	eye	are	crossed	and	uncrossed
and	run	in	both	optic	tracts.	They	leave	the	tract	before	the	LGB	and	send	projections
to	 the	 pretectal	 region	 bilaterally.	 The	 Edinger-Westphal	 nucleus	 sends	 pupillomotor
fibers	through	the	third	cranial	nerve	to	the	ciliary	ganglion,	and	postganglionic	fibers
innervate	 the	 pupil	 sphincter.	 Because	 of	 the	 bilaterality	 of	 the	 pathways,	 a	 light
stimulus	in	the	right	eye	causes	pupillary	constriction	in	both	eyes.

FIGURE	13.11	The	course	of	the	geniculocalcarine	fibers.	A.	Medial	view.	B.	Inferior
view.

Approaching	the	occipital	lobe,	fibers	from	the	upper	and	lower	retina	again
converge.	 The	 primary	 visual	 cortex	 (calcarine	 area	 or	 striate	 cortex)	 lies	 in
Brodmann’s	 area	 17	 on	 the	 medial	 surface	 of	 the	 occipital	 lobe.	 Lower	 retinal
fibers	 terminate	 on	 the	 lower	 lip	 of	 the	 calcarine	 fissure	 (lingual	 gyrus)	 and
upper	 retinal	 fibers	 on	 the	 upper	 lip	 of	 the	 calcarine	 fissure	 (cuneus).	 Macular
fibers	 are	 first	 lateral	 and	 then	 form	 the	 intermediate	 portion	 of	 the
geniculocalcarine	pathway,	continuing	to	the	posterior	pole	of	the	occipital	lobe.
The	 divergence	 and	 convergence	 of	 fibers	 throughout	 the	 visual	 pathway
influences	the	shape	and	congruity	of	VF	defects,	which	have	localizing	value.

Fibers	 that	 carry	 visual	 impulses	 from	 the	 peripheral	 portions	 of	 the	 retina
terminate	on	the	anterior	third	or	half	of	the	visual	cortex	of	the	occipital	lobe	in
concentric	 zones;	 macular	 fibers	 terminate	 in	 the	 posterior	 portion	 (Figure
13.12).	The	most	peripheral	parts	of	the	retina	are	represented	most	anteriorly	in
the	 calcarine	 cortex;	 the	 closer	 a	 retinal	 point	 lies	 to	 the	 macula,	 the	 more
posterior	its	calcarine	representation.	This	culminates	in	the	representation	of	the
macula	at	the	occipital	pole.	The	nasal	hemiretina	representation	extends	farther
forward	than	the	temporal	(the	temporal	field	is	more	extensive	than	the	nasal),
creating	 a	 portion	 of	 retina	 for	 which	 no	 homology	 exits	 in	 the	 opposite	 eye.
This	 unpaired	 nasal	 retina	 is	 represented	 in	 the	 most	 anterior	 portion	 of	 the
calcarine	 cortex,	 near	 the	 area	 of	 the	 tentorium,	 just	 outside	 the	 binocular	 VF,
which	 creates	 an	 isolated	 temporal	 crescent	 in	 each	 VF.	 Sparing	 or	 selective
involvement	 of	 this	 monocular	 temporal	 crescent	 has	 localizing	 value.	 The
macula	 has	 a	 wider	 cortical	 distribution	 in	 the	 striate	 cortex	 than	 in	 the
peripheral	retina.	It	is	represented	in	a	wedge-shaped	area	with	its	apex	anterior.
The	central	10	to	15	degrees	of	the	VF	occupy	50%	to	60%	of	the	visual	cortex.
To	summarize	the	retinotopic	organization	of	the	visual	system,	upper	retinal
fibers	 remain	 upper	 and	 lower	 fibers	 lower	 throughout	 except	 in	 the	 tract	 and
LGB	 where	 upper	 becomes	 medial	 and	
lateral.	 The
corresponding	VF	abnormalities	can	be	deduced.

lower	 becomes	

The	 striate	 cortex	 is	 the	 sensory	 visual	 cortex.	 It	 receives	 afferents	 via	 the
myelinated	stripe	or	line	of	Gennari,	because	of	the	abundant	myelinated	fibers
in	 the	 fourth	 layer	 of	 the	 calcarine	 cortex,	 which	 gives	 this	 area	 its	 distinctive
appearance	 and	 name.	 Its	 physiology	 is	 complex.	 Neurons	 are	 arranged	 in
parallel,	vertically	oriented,	ocular	dominance	columns	and	complex	units	called
hypercolumns.	One	hypercolumn	can	process	information	from	a	focal	region	of
the	VF.	There	may	be	interhemispheric	connections	through	the	corpus	callosum
to	synchronize	information	generated	from	the	two	sides.	Surrounding	the	striate

cortex	are	the	visual	association	areas.	Area	18,	the	parastriate	or	parareceptive
cortex,	receives	and	interprets	impulses	from	area	17.	Area	19,	the	peristriate	or
perireceptive	 cortex,	 has	 connections	 with	 areas	 17	 and	 18	 and	 with	 other
portions	 of	 the	 cortex.	 It	 functions	 in	 more	 complex	 visual	 recognition,
perception,	 revisualization,	 visual	 association,	 size	 and	 shape	 discrimination,
color	vision,	and	spatial	orientation.

FIGURE	13.12	Fibers	from	the	macula	synapse	in	the	geniculate	and	then	project	to
the	 occipital	 tip.	 The	 most	 peripherally	 located	 retinal	 ganglion	 cells	 synapse	 in	 the
geniculate	 and	 then	 loop	 far	 forward	 in	 Meyer’s	 loop	 before	 terminating	 in	 the	 most
anterior	portion	of	the	calcarine	cortex.	The	most	anterior	and	medial	portions	of	the
cortex	 receive	 projections	 from	 the	 monocular	 temporal	 crescent,	 which	 represents
the	nasal	portion	of	the	retina	that	extends	far	forward	and	is	the	most	peripheral	part
of	the	retina.

The	anterior	choroidal	artery	from	the	internal	carotid	and	thalamoperforators
from	the	posterior	cerebral	supply	the	optic	tract.	The	geniculate	is	perfused	by
the	 anterior	 choroidal	 and	 thalamogeniculate	 branches	 from	 the	 posterior
cerebral.	Perhaps	because	of	this	redundant	blood	supply,	vascular	disease	only
rarely	 affects	 the	 optic	 tract	 or	 lateral	 geniculate.	 Meyer’s	 loop	 receives	 blood
supply	primarily	from	the	inferior	division	of	the	middle	cerebral	artery,	whereas
the	 optic	 radiations	 in	 the	 parietal	 lobe	 are	 perfused	 via	 the	 superior	 division.
The	 occipital	 lobe	 is	 supplied	 primarily	 by	 the	 posterior	 cerebral	 artery.
Collaterals	 from	 the	 anterior	 and	 middle	 cerebral	 may	 provide	 additional
perfusion	 to	 the	 macular	 areas	 at	 the	 occipital	 tip.	 The	 parietal	 smooth	 pursuit
optomotor	center	and	its	projections	are	supplied	by	the	middle	cerebral.

Optic	Reflexes

Fibers	subserving	the	pupillary	light	reflex	and	other	optic	reflexes	pass	through
the	pregeniculate	pathways	in	the	same	fashion	as	fibers	subserving	vision.	They
leave	the	optic	tract	just	before	it	reaches	the	LGB.	Pupillary	light	reflex	fibers
travel	 to	 the	 pretectal	 nuclei,	 just	 rostral	 to	 the	 superior	 colliculus;	 from	 the
pretectum,	axons	are	sent	to	synapse	on	the	Edinger-Westphal	nuclei.	Some	light
reflex	fibers	project	to	the	ipsilateral	pretectal	nucleus	to	mediate	the	direct	light
reflex;	 others	 decussate	 through	 the	 posterior	 commissure	 to	 mediate	 the
consensual	light	reflex	(Figures	13.8	and	13.10).	Parasympathetic	fibers	from	the
Edinger-Westphal	 nuclei	 are	 carried	 by	 the	 oculomotor	 nerve	 to	 the	 pupillary
sphincter.

Fibers	 controlling	 somatic	 visual	 reflexes,	 such	 as	 turning	 of	 the	 head	 and
eyes	 toward	 a	 visual	 stimulus,	 synapse	 in	 the	 superior	 colliculus.	 From	 there
tectospinal	 tract	 fibers	 descend	 to	 more	 caudal	 brainstem	 nuclei	 to	 execute	 the
reflex	response.	The	internal	corticotectal	tract	is	made	up	of	fibers	that	run	from
areas	 18	 and	 19	 of	 the	 occipital	 cortex	 to	 the	 superior	 colliculus	 to	 subserve
reflex	 reactions	 through	 connections	 with	 the	 eye	 muscle	 nuclei	 and	 other
structures.	Fibers	that	carry	impulses	having	to	do	with	visual-palpebral	reflexes
(such	as	blinking	in	response	to	light)	go	to	the	facial	nuclei.

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION	AND	DISORDERS	OF
FUNCTION

Optic	nerve	function	is	tested	by	examining	the	various	modalities	of	vision:	the
visual	 acuity,	 the	 VFs,	 and	 special	 components	 of	 vision,	 such	 as	 color	 vision
and	 day	 and	 night	 vision.	 The	 optic	 nerve	 is	 the	 one	 cranial	 nerve	 that	 can	 be
visualized	directly,	and	no	neurologic,	or	indeed	general,	physical	examination	is
complete	without	an	ophthalmoscopic	inspection	of	the	optic	disk	and	the	retina.
Before	 performing	 the	 optic	 nerve	 examination,	 look	 for	 local	 ocular
abnormalities	such	as	conjunctival	irritation,	corneal	scarring	or	opacity,	foreign
bodies,	photophobia,	or	an	ocular	prosthesis.	The	presence	of	a	unilateral	arcus
senilis	 with	 ipsilateral	 carotid	 disease	 has	 been	 reported.	 In	 Wilson’s	 disease
(hepatolenticular	degeneration),	a	yellowish-orange	brown	coloration	1	to	3	mm
wide	 (Kayser-Fleischer	 ring)	 may	 be	 seen	 around	 the	 rim	 of	 the	 cornea,	 more
easily	in	light-eyed	individuals	(Chapter	30).	It	is	due	to	copper	deposition	in	the

posterior	 stroma	 and	 in	 Descemet’s	 membrane	 and	 best	 seen	 with	 a	 slit	 lamp.
Cataracts	 may	 be	 present	 in	 patients	 with	 myotonic	 dystrophy,	 certain	 rare
hereditary	 conditions	 with	 disturbed	 lipid	 or	 amino	 acid	 metabolism,	 and	 in
many	 other	 conditions.	 Lisch	 nodules	 are	 pigmented	 iris	 hamartomas	 that	 are
highly	 suggestive	 of	 NF1	 (Figure	 13.13).	 Proptosis,	 chemosis,	 and	 tortuous
(“corkscrew”)	 blood	 vessels	 in	 the	 conjunctiva	 occur	 with	 carotid	 cavernous
fistula	 (Chapter	 21).	 Other	 causes	 of	 unilateral	 proptosis	 include	 thyroid	 eye
disease,	 meningocele,	 encephalocele,	 and	 histiocytosis	 X.	 Other	 potentially
relevant	findings	might	include	jaundice,	evidence	of	iritis,	dysmorphic	changes
(e.g.,	 epicanthal	 folds),	 xanthelasma	 due	 to	 hypercholesterolemia,	 corneal
clouding	 from	 mucopolysaccharidosis,	 keratoconjunctivitis	 sicca	 due	
to
Sjögren’s	syndrome	or	other	collagen	vascular	diseases,	ocular	complications	of
upper	 facial	 paralysis,	 depositions	 of	 amyloid	 in	 the	 conjunctiva,	 pigmented
pingueculae	 due	 to	 Gaucher’s	 disease,	 tortuous	 conjunctival	 vessels	 in	 ataxia
telangiectasia,	 scleritis	 in	 Wegener’s	 granulomatosis,	 lens	 dislocation	 in
Marfan’s	
syndrome,	 and
nonsyphilitic	 interstitial	 keratitis	 in	 Cogan’s	 syndrome.	 Hypertelorism	 can	 be
seen	 in	 a	 number	 of	 neurologic	 conditions.	 Blue	 sclera	 can	 occur	 in	 Ehlers-
Danlos	 syndrome,	 osteogenesis	 imperfecta,	 and	 occasionally	 in	 Marfan’s
syndrome.	 Basal	 skull	 fractures	 often	 cause	 bilateral	 periorbital	 ecchymosis
(raccoon	eyes).

syndrome,	 homocystinuria	 or	 Ehlers-Danlos	

FIGURE	 13.13	 Lisch	 nodules	 are	 elevated,	 pale	 brown	 lesions	 that	 vary	 in
appearance	depending	on	the	underlying	color	of	the	iris.	The	prevalence	in	patients
with	NF1	increases	from	birth	to	about	50%	of	5-year-olds,	75%	of	15-year-olds,	and
95%	 to	 100%	 of	 adults	 over	 the	 age	 of	 30.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Gerstenblith	 AT,
Rabinowitz	MP.	The	 Wills	 Eye	 Manual:	 Office	 and	 Emergency	 Room	 Diagnosis	 and
Treatment	 of	 Eye	 Disease.	 6th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott
Williams	&	Wilkins,	2012,	with	permission.)

Visual	Acuity

Ideally,	 the	 eyes	 are	 examined	 individually.	 When	 testing	 acuity	 and	 color
vision,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 occlude	 the	 eye	 not	 being	 tested.	 Visual	 acuity	 is	 a
measure	 of	 the	 eye’s	 ability	 to	 resolve	 details;	 it	 depends	 on	 several	 functions.
The	intensity	threshold	reflects	the	sensitivity	of	the	retina	to	light;	the	minimum
visibility	 is	 the	 smallest	 area	 that	 can	 be	 perceived,	 and	 the	 minimum
separability	 is	 the	 ability	 to	 recognize	 the	 separateness	 of	 two	 close	 points	 or
lines.	 Visual	 acuity	 charts,	 such	 as	 the	 Snellen	 chart	 for	 distance	 and	 the	 near
card	for	near,	consist	of	letters,	numbers,	or	figures	that	get	progressively	smaller
and	 can	 be	 read	 at	 distances	 from	 10	 to	 200	 ft	 by	 normal	 individuals	 (Figure
13.14).	Snellen	charts	have	certain	limitations,	the	most	critical	is	the	nonlinear
variation	in	the	sizes	of	the	letters	from	line	to	line,	and	the	Early	Treatment	in

Diabetic	Retinopathy	Study	(ETDRS)	charts	have	become	increasingly	popular.

The	difference	between	near	and	distance	vision	and	between	vision	with	and
without	 correction	 are	 points	 of	 primarily	 ophthalmologic	 interest.	 For
neurologic	purposes,	only	the	patient’s	best-corrected	visual	acuity	is	pertinent.
Near	acuity	is	not	as	accurate	as	distant,	especially	if	the	card	is	not	held	at	the
required	 14	 in.	 Refractive	 errors,	 media	 opacities,	 and	 similar	 optometric
problems	 are	 irrelevant.	 Acuity	 is	 always	 measured	 using	 the	 patient’s
accustomed	 correction.	 Ophthalmologists	 and	 neuro-ophthalmologists	 often
employ	 more	 detailed	 methods	 (e.g.,	 full	 refraction)	 to	 clarify	 the	 refractive
component	of	a	patient’s	visual	impairment.	In	infants	and	children,	acuity	can
be	 estimated	 by	 blink	 to	 threat	 or	 bright	 light,	 following	 movements,	 and	 the
pupillary	reactions.	At	the	age	of	4	months,	acuity	may	be	20/400;	it	gradually
increases,	reaching	normal	levels	at	about	age	5.

FIGURE	13.14	Snellen	test	chart.

For	 distance	 vision	 measurement	 in	 the	 United	 States,	 a	 Snellen	 chart	 or
similar	 is	 placed	 20	 ft	 from	 the	 patient;	 at	 that	 distance,	 there	 is	 relaxation	 of
accommodation,	 and	 the	 light	 rays	 are	 nearly	 parallel.	 The	 eyes	 are	 tested
separately,	and	by	convention,	the	right	eye	is	tested	first.	In	countries	using	the
metric	 system,	 the	 distance	 is	 usually	 given	 as	 6	 m.	 The	 ability	 to	 resolve	 test
characters	(optotypes)	approximately	1-in	high	at	20	ft	is	normal	(20/20	or	6/6)
visual	 acuity.	 These	 characters	 subtend	 5	 minutes	 of	 visual	 arc	 at	 the	 eye;	 the
components	of	the	characters	(e.g.,	the	crossbar	on	the	A)	subtend	1	minute	of
arc.	The	acuity	is	the	line	where	more	than	half	of	the	characters	are	accurately
read.	If	the	patient	can	read	the	20/30	line	and	two	characters	on	the	20/25	line,
the	notation	is	20/30	+	2.	Two	mistakes	or	two	extra	letters	are	allowed	per	line.
By	 conventional	 notation,	 the	 distance	 from	 the	 test	 chart,	 20	 or	 6,	 is	 the
numerator,	and	the	distance	at	which	the	smallest	type	read	by	the	patient	should
be	seen	by	a	person	with	normal	acuity	is	the	denominator.	An	acuity	of	20/40
(6/12)	means	the	individual	must	move	in	to	20	ft	to	read	letters	a	normal	person
can	read	at	40	ft.	This	does	not	mean	the	patient’s	acuity	is	one-half	of	normal.
In	 fact,	 an	 individual	 with	 a	 distance	 acuity	 of	 20/40	 has	 only	 a	 16.4%	 loss	 of
vision.

Because	 few	 neurology	 clinics,	 offices,	 or	 hospital	 rooms	 have	 20-ft	 eye
lanes,	 testing	 is	 commonly	 done	 at	 a	 closer	 distance.	 Neurologists	 frequently
assess	 vision	 with	 a	 near	 card.	 Though	 examination	 of	 distance	 vision	 is
preferable,	the	requisite	devices	are	generally	not	at	hand.	There	are	pocket	cards
designed	for	testing	at	6	ft,	a	convenient	distance	that	usually	eliminates	the	need
for	 presbyopic	 correction.	 Near	 vision	 is	 tested	 with	 a	 near	 card,	 such	 as	 the
Rosenbaum	 pocket	 vision	 screening	 card,	 held	 at	 the	 near	 point	 (14	 in	 or	 35.5
cm).	Jaeger	reading	cards	are	still	used	occasionally	(Box	13.1).	Good	lighting	is
essential.	A	penlight	shone	directly	on	the	line	being	read	is	useful	for	bedside
testing.

BOX	13.1

Jaeger	Notation

Jaeger’s	test	types	are	ordinary	printer’s	types,	graded	from	fine	(Jaeger	0)	to
coarse,	 also	 used	 for	 near	 testing.	 The	 physical	 optics	 of	 the	 Jaeger	 system

are	 crude.	 The	 numbers	 refer	 to	 the	 boxes	 in	 the	 Austrian	 print	 shop	 from
which	Jaeger	selected	the	type	in	1854.	Jaeger	0	corresponds	approximately
to	an	acuity	of	20/20.	As	a	rough	approximation	of	near	vision,	the	examiner
may	 use	 different	 sizes	 of	 ordinary	 print.	 Newspaper	 want-ad	 text	 is
approximately	J-0,	regular	newsprint	J-6,	and	newspaper	headlines	J-17.

If	 the	 patient	 cannot	 read	 the	 20/200	 line	 at	 20	 ft,	 the	 distance	 may	 be
shortened	 and	 the	 fraction	 adjusted.	 Ability	 to	 read	 the	 line	 at	 5	 ft	 is	 vision	 of
5/200,	 equivalent	 to	 20/800.	 Vision	 worse	 than	 the	 measurable	 20/800	 is
described	as	count	fingers	(CFs),	hand	motion	(HM),	light	perception	(LP),	or	no
light	perception	(NLP).	The	average	finger	is	approximately	the	same	size	as	the
20/200	character,	so	ability	to	count	fingers	at	5	ft	is	equivalent	to	an	acuity	of
20/800.

When	 a	 patient	 has	 impaired	 vision,	 an	 attempt	 should	 be	 made	 to	 exclude
refractive	error	by	any	available	means.	If	the	patient	has	corrective	lenses,	they
should	be	worn.	In	the	absence	of	correction,	improvement	of	vision	by	looking
through	a	pinhole	suggests	impairment	related	to	a	refractive	error.	Commercial
multi-pinhole	devices	are	available.	A	substitute	can	be	made	by	making	three	or
four	holes	with	a	pin	in	a	3	×	5	card	in	a	circle	about	the	size	of	a	quarter.	The
multiple	pinholes	help	the	patient	locate	one.	The	patient	should	then	attempt	to
read	further	down	the	acuity	card	through	the	pinhole.	The	pinhole	permits	only
central	 light	 rays	 to	 enter	 the	 eye.	 These	 are	 less	 likely	 to	 be	 disrupted	 by
refractive	 errors	 such	 as	 presbyopia	 and	 astigmatism.	 If	 a	 pinhole	 was	 used,
make	 some	 notation,	 such	 as	 20/20	 (ph).	 If	 the	 visual	 impairment	 is	 due	 to	 a
neurologic	process,	such	as	optic	neuritis	(ON),	vision	will	not	improve	with	a
pinhole.	 Under	 some	 circumstances,	 such	 as	 with	 opacities	 in	 the	 media	 (e.g.,
cataract),	vision	may	get	worse	with	pinhole.

Other	ocular	causes	of	reduced	visual	acuity	include	a	macular	lesion,	media
opacity	 such	 as	 cataract	 or	 vitreous	 hemorrhage,	 and	 corneal	 opacities	 or
irregularities.	 Neurologic	 processes	 that	 affect	 the	 optic	 nerve	 or	 chiasm	 may
cause	impaired	acuity.	Retrochiasmal	lesions	affect	visual	acuity	only	if	they	are
bilateral.	Suspected	functional	visual	loss	because	of	hysteria	or	malingering	is
best	 evaluated	 by	 an	 ophthalmologist,	 who	 has	 the	 proper	 tools	 to	 answer	 the
question.	 Clever	 and	 determined	 patients	 with	 functional	 visual	 loss	 present	 a
major	challenge.	There	may	be	certain	clues	(Box	13.2).

The	term	amblyopia	refers	to	impaired	vision	because	of	an	organic	process

in	 the	 absence	 of	 a	 demonstrable	 lesion.	 The	 mechanism	 is	 poorly	 understood.
Suppression	 amblyopia	 is	 the	 visual	 impairment	 in	 one	 eye	 because	 of
preferential	 use	 of	 the	 opposite	 eye	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 congenital	 strabismus.
Suppression	 amblyopia	 is	 also	 referred	 to	 as	 amblyopia	 ex	 anopsia	 (amblyopia
from	disuse).	Many	other	varieties	of	amblyopia	have	been	described,	including
alcoholic,	 toxic,	 traumatic,	 and	 uremic	 amblyopia.	 Amaurosis	 means	 blindness
of	any	type,	but	in	general	usage,	it	means	blindness	without	primary	eye	disease
or	loss	of	vision	secondary	to	disease	of	the	optic	nerve	or	brain.

Color	Vision;	Day	and	Night	Vision

Color	blindness	(achromatopsia)	is	an	X-linked	condition	present	in	about	3%	to
4%	of	males.	The	most	common	hereditary	dyschromatopsia	is	an	X-linked	red-
green	 defect.	 Disturbances	 of	 color	 vision	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 neurologic
conditions.	Loss	of	color	vision	may	precede	other	visual	deficits.	Color	deficits
may	 be	 partial	 or	 total.	 Color	 plates	 or	 pseudoisochromatic	 plates	 (Ishihara,
Hardy-Ritter-Rand	 [HRR],	 or	 similar)	 formally	 and	 quantitatively	 assess	 color
vision.	 Pseudoisochromatic	 plates	 were	 originally	 designed	 to	 screen	 for
congenital	 dyschromatopsias.	 The	 HRR	 plates,	 which	 contain	 blue	 and	 purple
figures	that	screen	for	tritan	defects,	may	be	more	helpful	in	detecting	acquired
dyschromatopsia	because	of	some	optic	neuropathies.	Having	the	patient	identify
the	 colors	 in	 a	 fabric,	 such	 as	 a	 tie	 or	 a	 dress,	 can	 provide	 a	 crude	 estimate	 of
color	vision.

Acquired	 dyschromatopsia	 may	 result	 from	 macular,	 retinal,	 optic	 nerve,
chiasmal,	 or	 retrochiasmal	 lesions.	 Monocular	 loss	 of	 acuity,	 deficits	 in	 color
vision,	 and	 an	 afferent	 pupillary	 defect	 (APD)	 are	 highly	 characteristic	 of	 an
ipsilateral	 optic	 neuropathy.	 Acquired	 optic	 nerve	 diseases	 usually	 cause	 a
red/green	 color	 deficiency,	 but	 there	 are	 several	 exceptions,	 such	 as	 glaucoma
and	 dominant	 optic	 atrophy.	 Impaired	 color	 vision	 with	 only	 mildly	 reduced
acuity	 is	 suggestive	 of	 optic	 neuropathy;	 color	 deficits	 associated	 with	 more
severe	acuity	loss	suggest	maculopathy.

Fading	 or	 bleaching	 of	 colors	 is	 a	 real	 but	 uncommon	 complaint	 in	 optic
nerve	 disease.	 Red	 perception	 is	 usually	 lost	 first.	 Desaturation	 to	 red,	 or	 red
washout,	describes	a	graying	down	or	loss	of	intensity	of	red.	The	bright	red	cap
on	a	bottle	of	mydriatic	drops	is	a	common	test	object.	The	patient	compares	the
brightness	 or	 redness	 in	 right	 versus	 left	 hemifields,	 temporal	 versus	 nasal
hemifields,	 or	 central	 versus	 peripheral	 fields.	 No	 right/left	 or	 temporal/nasal

desaturation	 to	 red	 occurs	 normally.	 Red	 does	 normally	 look	 brighter	 in	 the
center	of	the	VF	than	off	center;	reversal	of	this	pattern	suggests	impairment	of
central	vision.	The	normal	red	appears	washed	out,	or	changes	to	pink	to	orange
to	 yellow	 to	 colorless	 as	 color	 perception	 is	 lost.	 Because	 optic	 neuropathies
affect	macular	fibers,	patients	lose	the	ability	to	read	pseudoisochromatic	plates.
The	flight	of	colors	phenomenon	is	the	series	of	color	perceptions	that	follows
shining	a	bright	light	into	the	eye.	With	impaired	color	vision,	the	flight	of	colors
may	be	reduced	or	absent.	Patients	may	also	compare	the	brightness	or	intensity
of	an	examining	light	in	one	eye	versus	the	other.	A	diminution	of	brightness	on
one	 side	 suggests	 optic	 nerve	 dysfunction;	 it	 is	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 a
subjective	 APD,	 relative	 APD,	 or	 Marcus-Gunn	 pupil.	 Its	 significance	 is	 the
same	as	for	red	desaturation.	The	APD	is	discussed	in	more	detail	in	Chapter	14.

BOX	13.2

Nonorganic	(Functional)	Visual	Loss

A	 truly	 blind	 person	 can	 sign	 his	 name	 without	 difficulty.	 A	 functionally
blind	patient	often	cannot.	A	truly	blind	person	asked	to	look	at	his	hand	will
look	 wherever	 proprioception	 tells	 him	 his	 hand	 should	 be;	 a	 functionally
blind	 person	 may	 gaze	 in	 any	 direction	 and	 perhaps	 never	 where	 the	 hand
actually	 is	 (Schmidt-Rimpler	 test).	 A	 truly	 blind	 person	 can	 touch	 his
forefingers	together	without	difficulty;	a	functionally	blind	person	may	make
half-hearted	 inaccurate	 thrusts.	 The	 presence	 of	 normal	 visual,	 menace,
fixation,	 and	 emergency	 light	 reflexes	 (see	 Chapter	 16)	 excludes	 organic
blindness.	A	functionally	blind	person	ignorant	of	the	laws	of	reflection	may
have	much	improved	vision	reading	the	image	of	an	acuity	chart	held	to	his
chest	in	a	mirror	10	ft	away	compared	to	reading	the	actual	chart	at	20	ft;	the
acuity	 in	 fact	 should	 be	 the	 same.	 Some	 patients	 with	 functional	 blindness
can	suppress	optokinetic	nystagmus	(OKN)	responses	and	the	visual	evoked
response	 (VER).	 An	 excellent	 test	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 look	 into	 a	 large
mirror	that	can	be	held	and	moved.	Tilting	and	moving	the	mirror	will	elicit
OKN	responses	because	the	entire	visual	environment	is	moving.	The	patient
cannot	suppress	or	“blur	out”	by	willfully	failing	to	fixate	on	a	single	target,
as	he	may	be	able	to	do	with	OKN	or	VER.

Day	 blindness	 (hemeralopia)	 is	 a	 condition	 in	 which	 vision	 is	 better	 in	 dim

lighting	than	in	bright.	It	occurs	in	various	conditions	causing	a	central	scotoma,
in	 early	 cataracts;	 it	 is	 a	 rare	 side	 effect	 of	 trimethadione.	 Night	 blindness
(nyctalopia)	is	much	poorer	vision	in	feeble	illumination	than	occurs	normally.	It
is	common	in	retinitis	pigmentosa	and	can	occur	in	chronic	alcoholism,	Leber’s
hereditary	 optic	 neuropathy	 (LHON),	 and	 xerophthalmia	 due	 to	 vitamin	 A
deficiency.

The	Visual	Fields

The	VF	examination	is	a	very	important	and,	unfortunately,	often	omitted	part	of
the	neurologic	examination.	The	VF	is	the	limit	of	peripheral	vision,	the	area	in
which	 an	 object	 can	 be	 seen	 while	 the	 eye	 remains	 fixed.	 Macular	 vision	 is
sharp.	Peripheral	images	are	not	as	distinct,	and	objects	are	more	visible	if	they
are	moving.	The	normal	VF	extends	to	90	to	100	degrees	temporally,	about	60
degrees	nasally,	50	to	60	degrees	superiorly,	and	60	to	75	degrees	inferiorly.	The
field	 is	 wider	 in	 the	 inferior	 and	 temporal	 quadrants	 than	 in	 the	 superior	 and
nasal	 quadrants	 (Figure	 13.15).	 There	 are	 individual	 variations	 in	 the	 field	 of
vision,	 dependent	 to	 some	 extent	 on	 the	 facial	 configuration,	 the	 shape	 of	 the
orbit,	the	position	of	the	eye	in	the	orbit,	the	width	of	the	palpebral	fissure,	and
the	amount	of	brow	projection	or	the	size	of	the	nose.	However,	these	changes
are	 seldom	 clinically	 relevant.	 With	 binocular	 vision,	 the	 VFs	 of	 the	 two	 eyes
overlap	 except	 for	 the	 unpaired	 temporal	 crescent	 extending	 from	 60	 to	 90
degrees	 on	 the	 horizontal	 meridian,	 which	 is	 seen	 by	 one	 eye	 only.	 The
monocular	 temporal	 crescent	 exists	 because	 of	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the	 retina.	 The
nasal	retina	extends	farther	forward,	more	peripherally,	than	the	temporal.	This	is
the	true	reason	that	the	temporal	VF	is	more	expansive,	not	because	the	nose	is
blocking	the	nasal	field.

FIGURE	13.15	The	normal	VFs.

VF	 examination	 results	 are	 most	 accurate	 in	 an	 individual	 who	 is	 alert	 and
cooperative	 and	 will	 maintain	 fixation.	 Wandering	 of	 the	 eye	 impairs	 the
evaluation.	 Crude	 assessment	 is	 possible	 even	 in	 uncooperative	 patients	 if	 the
target	 is	 interesting	 enough	 (e.g.,	 food	 or	 paper	 money).	 Fatigue	 and	 weakness
may	lengthen	the	latency	between	perception	of	the	test	object	and	the	response
to	it,	giving	a	false	impression	of	VF	deficit.	Close	cooperation,	good	fixation,
and	 adequate	 illumination	 are	 essential	 for	 mapping	 of	 the	 blind	 spot	 and
delineation	of	scotomas.

Clinicians	 use	 several	 different	 methods	 for	 VF	 evaluation.	 The	 time	 and
energy	 expended	 on	 bedside	 confrontation	 testing	 depends	 on	 the	 patient’s
history	 and	 on	 the	 facilities	 available	 for	 formal	 field	 testing	 with	 tangent
(Bjerrum)	 screen	 (central	 30	 degrees)	 or	 perimetry	 (entire	 field).	 Even
sophisticated	 confrontation	 testing	 cannot	 approach	 the	 accuracy	 of	 formal
fields.

The	confrontation	VF	exam	can	be	tailored	to	the	circumstances	and	done	as
superficially	 or	 as	 thoroughly	 as	 the	 situation	 requires.	 Sophisticated	 bedside
techniques	can	explore	the	VFs	in	detail	if	circumstances	warrant.	If	the	patient
has	 no	 specific	 visual	 complaint,	 and	 if	 other	 aspects	 of	 the	 history	 and
examination	 do	 not	 suggest	 a	 field	 defect	 is	 likely,	 then	 a	 screening	 exam	 is
appropriate.	 This	 can	 be	 accomplished	 rapidly	 and	 with	 great	 sensitivity	 using
small	amplitude	finger	movements	in	the	far	periphery	of	the	VF.	Recall	that	the
VFs	extend	temporally	to	90+	degrees.	Extending	elbows	and	index	fingers,	the
examiner	should	position	the	fingers	nearly	directly	lateral	to	the	lateral	canthus

at	 a	 distance	 of	 about	 24	 in.	 Superficially,	 this	 appears	 to	 be	 a	 binocular
examination,	but,	properly	placed,	the	finger	targets	are	actually	in	the	unpaired
monocular	temporal	crescent	part	of	the	VF.	With	the	targets	positioned,	make	a
small	amplitude	flexion	movement	with	the	tip	of	one	index	finger,	perhaps	2	cm
in	amplitude.	Have	the	patient	“point	to	the	finger	that	moves.”	This	language	is
more	efficient	than	attempting	a	right-left	verbal	description	where	the	patient’s
and	examiner’s	rights	and	lefts	are	reversed.	Stimuli	should	be	delivered	in	each
upper	quadrant	individually,	then	both	together,	and	then	similarly	for	the	lower
quadrants.	Including	bilateral	simultaneous	stimuli	is	necessary	to	detect	subtle
defects,	which	may	be	manifested	only	by	extinction	of	one	stimulus	on	double
simultaneous	 stimulation.	 This	 technique	 of	 small	 finger	 movements	 in	 the	 far
periphery	 in	 both	 upper	 and	 lower	 quadrants	 is	 an	 excellent	 screen;	 when
properly	 done,	 even	 binocularly,	 this	 technique	 misses	 few	 VF	 defects.	 Large
amplitude	 finger	 wiggles	 near	 the	 center	 are	 insensitive.	 Always	 bear	 in	 mind
that	 primary	 ophthalmologic	 disorders	 such	 as	 glaucoma,	 diabetic	 retinopathy,
and	retinal	detachment	can	also	alter	the	VFs.

With	 any	 hint	 of	 abnormality,	 or	 if	 the	 patient	 has	 or	 could	 be	 expected	 to
have	a	visual	problem,	higher-level	testing	is	in	order.	Examining	monocularly,
techniques	 include	 having	 the	 patient	 assess	 the	 brightness	 and	 clarity	 of	 the
examiner’s	hands	as	they	are	held	in	the	right	and	left	hemifields,	in	both	upper
and	lower	quadrants,	or	having	the	patient	count	fingers	fleetingly	presented	in
various	parts	of	the	field.	Because	of	the	over-representation	of	central	vision	in
the	 CNS,	 assessing	 each	 quadrant	 within	 the	 central	 10	 to	 20	 degrees	 is
important.

More	 exacting	 techniques	 compare	 the	 patient’s	 field	 dimensions	 with	 the
examiner’s,	using	various	targets—still	or	moving	fingers,	the	head	of	a	cotton
swab,	colored	pinheads,	or	similar	objects.	Impairment	of	color	perception	also
occurs	with	lesions	of	the	posterior	visual	pathways.	Loss	of	VF	to	testing	with	a
red	 object	 may	 be	 apparent	 even	 when	 the	 fields	 are	 intact	 to	 a	 white	 object.
Positioning	the	patient	and	examiner	at	the	same	eye	level,	and	gazing	eyeball	to
eyeball	 over	 an	 18-	 to	 24-in	 span,	 targets	 introduced	 midway	 between	 and
brought	 into	 the	 VF	 along	 various	 meridians	 should	 appear	 to	 both	 people
simultaneously	 in	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 field	 except	 temporally,	 where	 the	 examiner
must	simply	develop	a	feel	for	the	extent	of	a	normal	field	(Figure	13.16).	Even
in	 expert	 hands,	 confrontation	 fields	 are	 relatively	 gross	 and	 more	 precision
required	perimetry.

For	obtunded,	uncooperative,	or	aphasic	patients,	paper	money	(the	larger	the

denomination	 the	 better)	 makes	 a	 compelling	 target.	 Even	 if	 the	 examiner	 has
only	a	$1	bill,	suggest	to	the	patient	that	it	might	be	$100.	The	patient	who	can
see	 will	 glance	 at	 or	 reach	 for	 the	 object.	 Children	 may	 respond	 to	 keys	 (no
jingling),	candy,	or	other	visually	interesting	objects.	Infants	may	turn	the	head
and	eyes	toward	a	diffuse	light	within	a	few	days	after	birth.	Moving	a	penlight
into	the	VF	and	noting	when	the	patient	blinks	is	sometimes	useful.	Checking	for
blink	 to	 threat—the	 menace	 reflex—provides	 a	 crude	 last	 resort	 method.	 The
examiner’s	hand	or	fingers	are	brought	in	rapidly	from	the	side,	as	if	to	strike	the
patient	or	poke	him	in	the	eye.	The	patient	may	wince,	drawback,	or	blink.	The
threatening	 movement	 should	 be	 deliberate	 enough	 to	 avoid	 stimulating	 the
cornea	with	an	induced	air	current.

FIGURE	13.16	Confrontation	method	of	testing	the	VFs.

Testing	 central	 fields	 can	 include	 having	 the	 patient	 gaze	 at	 the	 examiner’s
face	and	report	any	defects,	such	as	a	missing	or	blurred	nose.	Having	the	patient
survey	a	grid	work	(Amsler	grid,	graph	paper,	or	a	quickly	sketched	homemade
version)	while	fixing	on	a	central	point	is	a	sensitive	method	to	detect	scotomas
(Figure	13.17).	 Probing	 the	 central	 field	 with	 a	 small	 white	 or	 red	 object	 may
detect	moderate	or	large	scotomas.	With	a	cooperative	patient,	one	can	estimate
the	size	of	the	blind	spot.	Amsler	grid	testing	is	helpful	in	detecting	central	and
paracentral	scotomas.	Small	deficits	suggest	macular	disease	and	may	be	missed
on	perimetry.

Pandit	 et	 al.	 compared	 the	 sensitivity	 of	 seven	 confrontation	 VF	 examining
methods	 in	 patients	 whose	 formal	 fields	 showed	 small	 or	 shallow	 defects.	 The
most	sensitive	method	was	examining	the	central	VF	with	a	5-mm	red	target;	the
next	 most	 sensitive	 was	 comparing	 red	 color	 intensity.	 These	 together	 had	 a
sensitivity	 of	 76%.	 Description	 of	 the	 examiner’s	 face	 and	 quadrant	 finger
counting	 were	 the	 least	 sensitive.	 All	 of	 the	 confrontation	 methods	 had	 high
specificity.	In	a	similar	study,	Kerr	et	al.	compared	seven	common	confrontation
VF	 tests	 to	 Humphrey	 VF	 in	 301	 eyes	 in	 patients	 recruited	 from	 a	 neuro-
ophthalmology	clinic,	and	therefore	at	high	risk	for	having	a	VF	defect.	Anterior
visual	pathway	lesions	accounted	for	78%	of	the	defects,	and	of	these,	glaucoma
was	 the	underlying	 cause	in	81%;	how	 applicable	 the	 findings	 are	to	a	general
neurologic	 practice	 is	 debatable.	 Most	 confrontation	 tests	 were	 relatively
insensitive.	 All	 tests	 were	 more	 sensitive	 for	 posterior	 than	 anterior	 lesions.
Although	 very	 commonly	 done,	 finger	 counting	 had	 a	 sensitivity	 of	 only	 35%,
but	 a	 specificity	 of	 100%.	 The	 most	 sensitive	 single	 test	 was	 red	 comparison.
Testing	 with	 a	 kinetic	 red	 target	 had	 the	 highest	 combined	 sensitivity	 and
specificity	of	any	individual	test.	The	combination	of	kinetic	testing	with	a	red
target	 combined	 with	 static	 finger	 wiggle	 was	 the	 best	 combination,	 with	 a
sensitivity	 of	 78%	 while	 retaining	 a	 specificity	 of	 90%.	 The	 combination	 was
significantly	better	than	any	single	test.	Description	of	the	examiner’s	face	and
finger	 counting,	 while	 simple	 tests,	 had	 low	 sensitivity	 and	 negative	 predictive
values;	 it	 was	 recommended	 these	 tests	 not	 be	 used	 in	 isolation	 to	 exclude	 VF
loss.

By	convention,	VFs	are	depicted	as	seen	by	the	patient	(i.e.,	right	eye	drawn
on	the	right).	This	convention	is	backward	from	most	things	in	clinical	medicine,
and	 violations	 of	 the	 rule	 occur	 sufficiently	 often	 that	 labeling	 notations	 are
the	 clinical
prudent.	 When	 confrontation	 fields	 are	 not	 adequate	 for	
circumstances,	 formal	 fields	 are	 done.	 These	 might	 include	 tangent	 screen
examination,	kinetic	perimetry,	or	computerized	automated	static	perimetry	(Box
13.3).

FIGURE	13.17	 The	 Amsler	 grid	 for	 testing	 the	 central	 VFs.	 (1)	 Test	 vision	 with	 one
eye	at	a	time,	and	use	normal	glasses	for	reading.	(2)	Hold	chart	at	normal	reading
distance.	(3)	Stare	at	central	dot	and	look	for	distortion	or	blind	spots	in	the	grid.

Visual	Field	Abnormalities

For	 neurologic	 purposes,	 VF	 abnormalities	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 scotomas,
hemianopias,	altitudinal	defects,	and	concentric	constriction	or	contraction	of	the
fields.	 Figure	13.19	 depicts	 some	 examples	 of	 different	 types	 of	 field	 defects.
Because	 of	 the	 anatomy	 and	 organization	 of	 the	 visual	 system,	 neurologic
disorders	tend	to	produce	straight-edged	defects	that	respect	either	the	horizontal
or	vertical	meridian	or	have	a	characteristic	shape	because	of	the	arrangement	of
the	NFL.	Respect	of	the	horizontal	meridian	may	occur	because	of	the	horizontal
temporal	 raphe	 and	 the	 arching	 sweep	 of	 NFL	 axons	 above	 and	 below	 the

macula.	This	pattern	is	characteristic	of	optic	nerve,	optic	disk,	and	NFL	lesions.
The	vascular	supply	of	the	retina	consists	of	superior	and	inferior	branches	of	the
central	 retinal	 artery,	 which	 supply	 the	 upper	 and	 lower	 retina,	 respectively.
Vascular	disease	characteristically	causes	altitudinal	field	defects	that	are	sharply
demarcated	horizontally.	The	calcarine	cortex	is	organized	into	a	superior	and	an
inferior	bank,	and	lesions	involving	only	one	bank	may	produce	VF	defects	that
respect	the	horizontal	meridian.	The	vertical	meridian	is	respected	because	of	the
division	 into	 nasal	 and	 temporal	 hemiretinas	 that	 occurs	 at	 the	 chiasmal
decussation	and	is	maintained	through	the	retrochiasmal	visual	pathways.

BOX	13.3

Formal	Visual	Field	Testing

Perimetry	 is	 the	 measurement	 of	 the	 visual	 field	 (VF)	 on	 a	 curved	 surface.
Campimetry	 is	 the	 measurement	 of	 the	 VF	 on	 a	 flat	 surface.	 The	 tangent
screen	is	the	standard	method	for	performing	campimetry.	For	tangent	screen
examination,	 a	 black	 screen,	 blackboard,	 or	 other	 flat	 surface	 is	 used	 to
examine	the	central	30	degrees	of	vision.	The	central	fields	can	be	evaluated
more	 accurately	 with	 the	 tangent	 screen,	 the	 peripheral	 fields	 more
accurately	 with	 perimetry.	 The	 patient	 is	 seated	 1	 to	 2	 m	 from	 the	 tangent
screen;	 objects	 of	 various	 sizes	 and	 colors	 are	 brought	 into	 view	 using	 a
black	wand	that	blends	into	the	background.	Testing	is	now	often	done	with	a
laser	 pointer.	 The	 test	 object	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 of	 visual	 interest	 against	 the
black	 background.	 As	 with	 perimetry,	 the	 notation	 numerator	 is	 the	 test
object	size	and	the	denominator	the	distance	from	the	screen,	often	followed
by	a	letter	to	indicate	the	target	color.	A	field	notation	of	2/1,000	r	indicates
the	field	was	done	with	a	2-mm	red	test	object,	and	the	patient	was	seated	1
m	 away	 from	 the	 screen.	 The	 tangent	 screen	 is	 especially	 valuable	 for
measuring	 the	 size	 of	 the	 physiologic	 blind	 spot	 and	 for	 demonstrating
central	defects.	Defects	may	be	easier	to	detect	when	the	VF	is	done	at	2	m,
because	 the	 dimensions	 of	 the	 field	 and	 the	 dimensions	 of	 the	 defect	 are
doubled.	The	Amsler	grid	is	another	sensitive	method	for	testing	the	central
10	degrees	of	the	VF	(Figure	13.17).

A	perimeter	is	useful	for	testing	the	peripheral	VFs,	which	cannot	be	done
by	 tangent	 screen.	 Many	 different	 types	 of	 perimeters	 and	 perimetric
techniques	have	been	described.	Perimetry	may	be	kinetic	or	static.	Kinetic

perimetry	 entails	 moving	 a	 test	 object	 along	 various	 meridians	 and	 noting
when	 it	 is	 detected.	 For	 standard	 kinetic	 perimetry	 (e.g.,	 Goldmann),	 the
patient	gazes	at	a	fixation	point	and	various	test	objects	are	brought	into	the
field	of	vision	through	multiple	meridians	in	a	hemispheric	dome.	White	and
colored	test	objects	varying	in	size	from	1	to	5	mm	are	used.	The	points	at
which	a	target	of	given	size	and	color	is	first	seen	are	recorded,	and	a	line	is
drawn	joining	these	points	to	outline	the	VF.	The	line	representing	the	limits
of	 the	 field	 for	 a	 given	 size	 and	 color	 test	 object	 is	 called	 an	 isopter.	 The
smaller	the	test	object,	the	smaller	the	VF.	Mapping	isopters	for	test	objects
of	varying	sizes	and	colors	creates	an	image	resembling	a	topographic	map.
Perimetric	 readings	 are	 expressed	 in	 fractions;	 the	 numerator	 indicates	 the
target	 size	 and	 the	 denominator	 the	 distance	 away	 from	 the	 patient	 in
millimeters.	If	the	size	of	a	VF	defect	is	the	same	with	all	test	objects,	it	is
said	to	have	steep,	or	abrupt,	margins.	If	the	defect	is	larger	with	smaller	test
objects,	its	margins	are	said	to	be	gradual,	or	sloping,	in	character.

Limits	of	the	VF	vary	according	to	the	size,	color,	and	brightness	of	the
test	 object,	 the	 intensity	 of	 illumination,	 the	 state	 of	 adaptation	 of	 the	 eye,
and	the	cooperation	of	the	patient.	The	VF	for	a	colored	test	object	is	smaller
than	 the	 VF	 for	 a	 white	 object	 of	 the	 same	 size.	 The	 size	 of	 the	 VF	 is
different	 for	 different	 colors.	 Changes	 in	 color	 fields	 precede	 gross	 field
to	 color	 may	 help
changes	 (color	 desaturation).	 Altered	 responses	
differentiate	between	retinal	lesions	and	neurologic	conditions.	Formal	fields
provide	 permanent	 objective	 documentation	 of	 the	 VFs.	 They	 may	 be
repeated	periodically	to	look	for	progression	or	improvement.

The	 Goldmann	 perimeter	 uses	 a	 kinetic	 paradigm.	 Modern	 quantitative
automated	 perimetry	 uses	 static	 perimeters,	 and	 automated	 perimetry	 has
largely	 replaced	 manual	 perimetry.	 Static	 perimetry	 measures	 the	 threshold
for	perception	of	various	targets	at	various	locations	in	the	VF	with	the	aid	of
a	computer	and	statistical	analysis.	The	Humphrey	Visual	Field	Analyzer	is
in	 widespread	 use	 in	 the	 United	 States.	 Statistical	 analysis	 of	 the	 VF	 data
allows	 determination	 of	 the	 probability	 that	 a	 VF	 is	 normal.	 Automated
perimetry	 is	 very	 sensitive	 for	 detecting	 VF	 defects.	 However,	 normal
patients	may	appear	to	have	an	abnormal	VF	because	of	the	large	number	of
erroneous	 responses	
testing.	 The
instruments	 include	 reliability	 indices	 determined	 by	 the	 false-positive	 and
false-negative	responses	(Figure	13.18).

that	 can	 occur	 during	 automated	

FIGURE	 13.18	 Top.	 VF	 performed	 on	 a	 Goldmann	 perimeter	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 a
chiasmal	 lesion.	 Bottom.	 Humphrey	 perimeter	 field	 in	 the	 same	 patient.	 (Reprinted
from	Beck	RW,	Bergstrom	TJ,	Lichter	PR.	A	clinical	comparison	of	visual	field	testing
with	 a	 new	 automated	 perimeter,	 the	 Humphrey	 Field	 Analyzer,	 and	 the	 Goldmann
perimeter.	Ophthalmology	1985;92[1]:77–82.	Copyright	©	1985	American	Academy	of
Ophthalmology,	Inc.	With	permission.)

Scotomas
A	 scotoma	 (Gr.	 “darkness”)	 is	 an	 area	 of	 impaired	 vision	 in	 the	 field,	 with
normal	surrounding	vision.	With	an	absolute	scotoma,	there	is	no	visual	function
within	the	scotoma	to	testing	with	all	sizes	and	colors	of	objects.	With	a	relative
scotoma,	visual	function	is	depressed	but	not	absent;	smaller	objects	and	colored
objects	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 detect	 the	 abnormality.	 A	 positive	 scotoma	 causes
blackness	or	a	sense	of	blockage	of	vision,	as	though	an	object	were	interposed;
it	 suggests	 disease	 of	 the	 retina,	 especially	 the	 macula	 or	 choroid.	 Positive
scotomas	are	often	due	to	exudate	or	hemorrhage	involving	the	retina	or	opacity
in	the	media.	A	negative	scotoma	is	an	absence	of	vision,	a	blank	spot	as	if	part
of	the	field	had	been	erased;	it	suggests	optic	nerve	disease	but	can	occur	with
lesions	 more	 posteriorly.	 With	 a	 negative	 scotoma,	 the	 defect	 may	 not	 be
perceived	until	a	VF	examination	is	done.

A	scotoma	can	often	be	demonstrated	on	confrontation	VF	testing	using	small
objects	and	carefully	exploring	the	central	fields,	but	they	are	best	demonstrated
by	the	use	of	the	tangent	screen.	The	physiologic	blind	spot	(Mariotte’s	spot)	is	a
scotoma	corresponding	to	the	optic	nerve	head,	which	contains	no	rods	or	cones
and	is	blind	to	all	visual	impressions.	The	physiologic	blind	spot	is	situated	15
degrees	lateral	to	and	just	below	the	center	of	fixation	because	the	disk	lies	nasal
to	the	macula	and	the	blind	spot	is	projected	into	the	temporal	field.	Elliptical	in
shape,	 it	 averages	 7	 to	 7½	 degrees	 vertically	 and	 5	 to	 5½	 degrees	 horizontally
and	extends	2	degrees	above	and	5	degrees	below	the	horizontal	meridian.	On	a
tangent	screen	with	the	patient	1	m	away	using	a	1-mm	white	object,	the	average
measurements	for	the	blind	spot	are	from	9	to	12	cm	horizontally	and	15	to	18
cm	vertically.	The	blind	spot	is	enlarged	in	papilledema	and	ON.

Scotomas	 are	 described	 by	 their	 location	 or	 their	 shape.	 A	 central	 scotoma
involves	 the	 fixation	 point	 and	 is	 seen	 in	 macular	 or	 optic	 nerve	 disease.	 It	 is
typical	 for	 ON	 but	 can	 occur	 in	 vascular	 and	 compressive	 lesions	 (Figure
13.19A).	A	paracentral	scotoma	involves	the	areas	adjacent	to	the	fixation	point,
and	it	has	the	same	implications	as	for	a	central	scotoma.	A	cecocentral	scotoma
extends	from	the	blind	spot	to	fixation.	It	is	usually	accompanied	by	loss	of	all
central	 vision	 with	 preservation	 of	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 peripheral	 vision,	 and	 it
strongly	 suggests	 optic	 nerve	 disease	 (Figures	 13.19B	 and	 13.20).	 Central,
paracentral,	 and	 cecocentral	 scotomas	 are	 all	 suggestive	 of	 a	 process	 involving
the	PMB.	Any	scotoma	involving	the	blind	spot	implies	optic	neuropathy.

An	arcuate	scotoma	is	a	crescent	defect	arching	out	of	the	blind	spot,	usually
because	 of	 optic	 neuropathy	 with	 the	 brunt	 of	 damage	 falling	 on	 the	 fibers
forming	the	superior	and	inferior	NFL	arcades.	A	nasal	step	defect	is	a	scotoma
that	involves	the	nasal	part	of	the	VF	away	from	fixation,	usually	respecting	the
horizontal	 meridian,	 which	 is	 due	 to	 optic	 neuropathy	 and	 often	 progresses	 to
become	a	broad	arcuate	scotoma.	Nasal	step	defects	are	common,	especially	in
optic	 neuropathy	 because	 of	 glaucoma.	 A	 junctional	 scotoma	 is	 an	 optic	 nerve
defect	 in	 one	 eye	 (central,	 paracentral,	 or	 cecocentral	 scotoma)	 and	 a	 superior
temporal	 defect	 in	 the	 opposite	 eye	 (syndrome	 of	 Traquair).	 This	 is	 due	 to	 a
lesion	(usually	a	mass)	that	involves	one	optic	nerve	close	to	the	chiasm,	which
damages	the	inferior	nasal	fibers	from	the	opposite	eye	(Wilbrand’s	knee)	as	they
loop	forward	into	the	proximal	optic	nerve	on	the	side	of	the	lesion	(Figures	13.9
and	13.19C).	The	temporal	VF	defect	in	the	contralateral	eye	may	be	subtle	and
easily	 missed.	 The	 anatomic	 evidence	 supporting	 the	 existence	 of	 Wilbrand’s
knee	 has	 been	 questioned,	 but	 clinical	 cases	 continue	 to	 suggest	 it	 exists.	 No

junctional	scotoma	could	be	detected	in	three	patients	whose	optic	nerves	were
surgically	divided	at	the	optic	nerve-chiasm	junction.

Although	scotomas	most	often	result	from	disease	of	the	retina	or	optic	nerve,
they	 may	 also	 be	 caused	 by	 cerebral	 lesions.	 Occipital	 pole	 lesions	 primarily
affecting	 the	 macular	 area	 can	 produce	 contralateral	 homonymous	 hemianopic
scotomas	(Figure	13.19D).	Because	the	bulk	of	fibers	in	the	chiasm	come	from
the	macula,	early	compression	may	preferentially	affect	central	vision	producing
bitemporal	 heteronymous	 paracentral	 scotomas	
(Figure	 13.19E);	 with
progression	 of	 the	 lesion,	 a	 full	 blown	 bitemporal	 hemianopia	 will	 appear
(Figure	 13.19G).	 Optic	 nerve	 lesions	 such	 as	 glioma	 and	 drusen	 (hyaline
excrescences	 that	 may	 be	 buried	 in	 or	 on	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 nerve)	 may	 cause
scotomas,	 contraction	 of	 the	 VFs,	 or	 sector	 defects.	 Enlargement	 of	 the
physiologic	blind	spot	is	referred	to	as	a	peripapillary	scotoma.

Other	types	of	scotomas	occur	from	primary	ocular	disease,	such	as	retinitis,
chorioretinitis,	 and	 glaucoma,	 which	 are	 not	 related	 directly	 to	 disease	 of	 the
nervous	system	(Box	13.4).

Subjective	scotomas	cannot	be	delineated	in	the	field	examination.	Subjective
scotomas	include	the	scintillating	scotomas,	or	teichopsias,	of	migraine,	and	the
annoying	 but	 harmless	 vitreous	 floaters	
individuals
experience.

that	 many	 normal	

impaired	 vision	

Hemianopia
Hemianopia	is	impaired	vision	in	half	the	VF	of	each	eye;	hemianopic	defects	do
not	 cross	 the	 vertical	 meridian.	 Hemianopias	 may	 be	 homonymous	 or
heteronymous.	 A	 homonymous	 hemianopia	 causes	
in
corresponding	 halves	 of	 each	 eye	 (e.g.,	 a	 right	 homonymous	 hemianopia	 is	 a
defect	 in	 the	 right	 half	 of	 each	 eye).	 Homonymous	 hemianopias	 are	 caused	 by
lesions	 posterior	 to	 the	 optic	 chiasm,	 with	 interruption	 of	 the	 fibers	 from	 the
temporal	half	of	the	ipsilateral	retina	and	the	nasal	half	of	the	contralateral	retina.
Vision	 is	 lost	 in	 the	 ipsilateral	 nasal	 field	 and	 the	 contralateral	 temporal	 field
(Figure	 13.21).	 A	 heteronymous	 hemianopia	 is	 impaired	 vision	 in	 opposite
halves	of	each	eye	(e.g.,	the	right	half	in	one	eye	and	the	left	half	in	the	other).
Unilateral	homonymous	hemianopias,	even	those	with	macular	splitting,	do	not
affect	 visual	 acuity.	 Patients	 can	 read	 normally	 with	 the	 preserved	 half	 of	 the
macula,	but	those	with	left-sided	hemianopias	may	have	trouble	finding	the	line
to	be	read.	Occasionally,	patients	with	homonymous	hemianopia	will	read	only
half	of	the	line	on	the	acuity	chart.

A	homonymous	hemianopia	may	be	complete	or	incomplete.	If	incomplete,	it
may	 be	 congruous	 or	 incongruous.	 A	 congruous	 hemianopia	 shows	 similar-
shaped	defects	in	each	eye	(Figure	13.19H).	The	closer	the	optic	radiations	get	to
the	occipital	lobe,	the	closer	lie	corresponding	visual	fibers	from	the	two	eyes.
The	more	congruous	the	field	defect,	the	more	posterior	the	lesion	is	likely	to	be.
An	incongruous	hemianopia	is	differently	shaped	defects	in	the	two	eyes	(Figure
13.19I).	The	more	incongruous	the	defect,	the	more	anterior	the	lesion.	The	most
incongruous	 hemianopias	 occur	 with	 optic	 tract	 and	 lateral	 geniculate	 lesions.
With	a	complete	hemianopia,	congruity	cannot	be	assessed;	the	only	localization
possible	 is	 to	 identify	 the	 lesion	 as	 contralateral	 and	 retrochiasmal.	 A	 superior
quadrantanopia	 implies	 a	 lesion	 in	 the	 temporal	 lobe	 affecting	 Meyer’s	 loop
(inferior	 retinal	 fibers):	 “pie	 in	 the	 sky”	 (Figure	 13.19J).	 Such	 a	 defect	 may
occur	 after	 temporal	 lobe	 epilepsy	surgery	 because	 of	damage	to	the	 anteriorly
looping	fibers.	An	inferior	quadrantanopia	(“pie	on	the	floor”)	implies	a	parietal
lobe	lesion	affecting	superior	retinal	fibers	(Figure	 13.19K).	 A	 macular-sparing
hemianopia	is	one	that	spares	the	area	immediately	around	fixation;	it	implies	an
occipital	 lobe	 lesion	 (Figure	 13.19L).	 The	 explanation	 for	 macular	 sparing
remains	 unclear.	 There	 has	 been	 conjecture	 about	 dual	 representation	 of	 the
macula	 in	 each	 occipital	 pole,	 but	 this	 has	 never	 been	 confirmed	 anatomically.
More	 likely	 it	 is	 collateral	 blood	 supply	 from	 the	 anterior	 or	 middle	 cerebral
artery,	which	protects	the	macular	region	from	ischemia.	Or	it	could	simply	be
that	the	extensive	cortical	representation	of	the	macula	both	at	the	occipital	pole
and	anteriorly	in	the	depths	of	the	calcarine	fissure	makes	it	difficult	for	a	single
lesion	to	affect	all	macular	function.	A	small	amount	of	macular	sparing	may	be
due	to	fixation	shifts	during	testing.

FIGURE	13.19	Types	of	VF	defects.	A.	Central	scotoma.	B.	Cecocentral	scotoma.	C.
Junctional	scotoma.	D.	Homonymous	scotomas.	E.	Heteronymous	scotomas.	F.	Right
homonymous	 hemianopia.	 G.	 Bitemporal	 hemianopia.	 H.	 Congruous	
right
homonymous	 hemianopia.	 I.	 Incongruous	 right	 homonymous	 hemianopia.	 J.	 Right
superior	 quadrantanopia	 (“pie	 in	 the	 sky”).	 K.	 Right	 inferior	 quadrantanopia.	 L.
Macular-sparing	right	homonymous	hemianopia.

FIGURE	13.20	Bilateral	cecocentral	scotomas	in	a	patient	with	bilateral	optic	neuritis.

BOX	13.4

Other	Types	of	Scotomas

Glaucoma	 may	 cause	 arcuate,	 cuneate,	 comma-shaped,	 or	 other	 partially
ring-shaped	scotomas.	A	Seidel	scotoma	arises	from	the	blind	spot	and	has	a
thin	 and	 well-demarcated	 arcuate	 tail,	 the	 shape	 resembling	 a	 comma.	 A
Bjerrum	scotoma	is	shaped	like	a	bow,	extending	from	the	blind	spot	to	near
fixation.	Both	are	common	in	glaucoma.	Peripheral	scotomas	may	be	present
anywhere	in	the	field	of	vision.	In	annular,	or	ring,	scotomas,	there	is	a	loss
of	vision	in	a	doughnut	shape	with	relative	sparing	of	fixation	and	of	the	far
periphery.	These	types	of	scotomas	are	typically	due	to	retinitis	pigmentosa,
a	condition	primarily	affecting	the	rods	that	are	concentrated	in	the	midzone
of	the	retina.	Ring	scotomas	also	occur	in	optic	neuropathy,	macular	lesions,
and	 myopia.	 Many
cancer-associated	
ophthalmologic	 conditions	 produce	 a	 global	 depression	 of	 retinal	 function
and	 concentric	 constriction	 of	 the	 VF,	 rather	 than	 a	 discrete	 defect.

retinopathy,	

choroiditis,	

Ophthalmoscopic	 examination	 generally	 reveals	
conditions.

the	 nature	 of	 such

FIGURE	 13.21	 Macular-splitting	 right	 homonymous	 hemianopia	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 a
neoplasm	of	the	left	occipital	lobe.

Incomplete	 homonymous	 VF	 defects	 are	 common.	 These	 include	 partial	 or
irregular	 defects	 in	 one	 or	 both	 of	 the	 hemifields,	 relative	 rather	 than	 absolute
loss	of	vision,	an	inability	to	localize	the	visual	stimulus,	and	hemianopia	only
for	 objects	 of	 a	 certain	 color	 (hemiachromatopsia).	 Extinction	 (visual
inattention)	 is	 hemianopic	 suppression	 of	 the	 visual	 stimulus	 in	 the	 involved
hemifield	when	bilateral	simultaneous	stimuli	are	delivered.	Visual	extinction	is
most	characteristic	of	lesions	involving	the	nondominant	parietooccipital	region.
Riddoch’s	 phenomenon	 is	 a	 dissociation	 between	 the	 perception	 of	 static	 and
kinetic	 stimuli.	 The	 patient	 may	 not	 perceive	 a	 stationary	 object	 but	 detect	 it
instantly	when	it	moves.

Heteronymous	 hemianopias	 are	 usually	 bitemporal;	 only	 rarely	 are	 they
binasal.	A	bitemporal	hemianopia	is	usually	due	to	chiasmatic	disease,	such	as	a
pituitary	tumor	growing	up	out	of	the	sella	turcica	and	pressing	on	the	underside
of	 the	 chiasm	 (Figure	 13.18).	 Bitemporal	 field	 defects	 can	 usually	 be	 detected
earliest	by	demonstrating	bitemporal	desaturation	to	red.	Because	of	the	anterior
inferior	 position	 of	 decussating	 inferior	 nasal	 fibers,	 lesions	 impinging	 from
below	 produce	 upper	 temporal	 field	 defects,	 which	 evolve	 into	 a	 bitemporal
hemianopia	(Figure	13.6).	Lesions	encroaching	from	above	tend	to	cause	inferior

temporal	 defects	 initially.	 The	 defect	 will	 be	 first	 and	 worst	 in	 the	 upper
quadrants	 with	 infrachiasmatic	 masses	 (e.g.,	 pituitary	 adenoma),	 and	 it	 will	 be
first	 and	 worst	 in	 the	 lower	 quadrants	 with	 suprachiasmatic	 masses	 (e.g.,
craniopharyngioma).	 Patients	 with	 postfixed	 chiasms	 and	 pituitary	 tumors	 may
present	with	optic	nerve	defects,	and	those	with	prefixed	chiasms	may	have	optic
tract	defects.

The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 bitemporal	 hemianopia	 is	 a	 pituitary	 adenoma;
occasionally,	 it	 results	 from	 other	 parasellar	 or	 suprasellar	 lesions	 such	 as
meningioma	 and	 craniopharyngioma,	 as	 well	 as	 glioma	 of	 the	 optic	 chiasm,
aneurysms,	 trauma,	 and	 hydrocephalus.	 Other	 VF	 defects	 that	 may	 simulate
bitemporal	hemianopia	include	tilted	optic	disks,	bilateral	cecocentral	scotomas,
and	 bilaterally	 enlarged	 blind	 spots.	 Binasal	 hemianopias	 may	 occur	 from
disease	 impinging	 on	 the	 lateral	 aspect	 of	 the	 chiasm	 bilaterally	 (e.g.,	 bilateral
intracavernous	carotid	aneurysms),	but	they	are	more	likely	to	be	due	to	bilateral
optic	neuropathy.

An	 altitudinal	 VF	 defect	 is	 one	 involving	 the	 upper	 or	 lower	 half	 of	 vision,
usually	 in	 one	 eye,	 and	 usually	 due	 to	 retinal	 vascular	 disease	 (central	 retinal
artery	 or	 branch	 occlusion	 or	 anterior	 ischemic	 optic	 neuropathy	 [AION]).	 A
partial	altitudinal	defect	may	approximate	a	quadrantanopia.	Altitudinal	defects
do	not	cross	the	horizontal	meridian.

Constriction	of	the	VFs	is	characterized	by	a	narrowing	of	the	range	of	vision,
which	may	affect	one	or	all	parts	of	the	periphery.	Constriction	may	be	regular	or
irregular,	 concentric	 or	 eccentric,	 temporal	 or	 nasal,	 and	 upper	 or	 lower.
Symmetric	 concentric	 contraction	 is	 most	 frequent	 and	 is	 characterized	 by	 a
more	or	less	even,	progressive	reduction	in	field	diameter	through	all	meridians.
Such	constriction	is	referred	to	as	funnel	vision,	as	opposed	to	tunnel	vision	(see
below).	 Concentric	 constriction	 of	 the	 VFs	 may	 occur	 with	 optic	 atrophy,
especially	 secondary	 to	 papilledema	 or	 late	 glaucoma,	 or	 with	 retinal	 disease,
especially	retinitis	pigmentosa.	Narrowing	of	the	fields	because	of	fatigue,	poor
attention,	 or	 inadequate	 illumination	 must	 be	 excluded,	 as	 must	 spurious
contraction	 because	 of	 decreased	 visual	 acuity	 or	 delayed	 reaction	 time.	 Slight
constriction	 of	 the	 VF	 may	 occur	 when	 there	 is	 a	 significant	 refractive	 error.
Diffuse	 depression	 is	 the	 static	 perimeter	 equivalent	 of	 constriction	 on	 kinetic
perimetry.

Concentric	 constriction	 of	 the	 fields	 is	 sometimes	 seen	 in	 hysteria.	 A
suspicious	finding	 is	 when	 the	 fields	fail	 to	 enlarge	 as	 expected	 with	 testing	at
increasing	 distance	 (tubular	 or	 tunnel	 fields).	 Normally,	 the	 field	 of	 vision

widens	 progressively	 as	 the	 test	 objects	 are	 held	 farther	 away	 from	 the	 eye.
However,	 in	 nonorganicity,	 this	 normal	 widening	 is	 not	 seen,	 and	 the	 entire
width	of	the	field	is	as	great	at	1	ft	from	the	eye	as	it	is	at	2,	5,	10,	or	15	ft.	The
normal	VF	is	a	funnel;	the	nonorganic	VF	is	a	tunnel.	The	tubular	field	can	be
demonstrated	either	by	testing	the	extent	of	the	VF	at	varying	distances	from	the
patient,	or	it	can	be	shown	by	using	test	objects	of	different	sizes	at	a	constant
distance.	 Spiral	 contraction	 is	 a	 progressive	 narrowing	 of	 the	 VF	 during	 the
process	 of	 testing.	 It	 may	 be	 a	 sign	 of	 nonorganicity,	 but	 it	 is	 probably	 more
suggestive	of	fatigue.	A	similar	pattern	field	is	the	star-shaped	VF,	where	there	is
an	 irregularity	 of	 outline.	 This	 may	 be	 seen	 in	 nonorganicity,	 fatigue,	 or	 poor
attention.

The	Ophthalmoscopic	Examination

The	physician	using	a	direct	ophthalmoscope	is	like	a	one-eyed	Eskimo	peering
into	a	dark	igloo	from	the	entryway	with	a	flashlight.	Only	a	narrow	sector	of	the
posterior	 pole	 is	 visible,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 stereopsis.	 Pupil	 dilation	 significantly
increases	the	field	of	view.	Indirect	ophthalmoscopy,	used	by	ophthalmologists,
can	stereoscopically	view	almost	the	entire	vista	of	the	fundus.	PanOptic	direct
ophthalmoscopes	 (Welch-Allyn)	 give	 the	 advantage	 of	 a	 broader	 view	 but	 still
reveal	 only	 the	 posterior	 pole.	 See	 Box	 13.5	 for	 a	 brief	 discussion	 of	 the
techniques	 of	 direct	 ophthalmoscopy.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 become	 facile	 by
practicing	direct	ophthalmoscopy	on	all	patients,	as	the	examination	is	inevitably
most	technically	difficult	in	situations	where	fundus	examination	is	most	critical.

BOX	13.5

Direct	Ophthalmoscopy

The	standard	direct	ophthalmoscope	has	dials	that	adjust	the	light	apertures
and	 filters	 and	 allow	 the	 examiner	 to	 focus.	 The	 small	 aperture	 is	 for
examining	 an	 undilated	 pupil,	 the	 large	 aperture	 for	 examining	 a	 dilated
pupil.	 Using	 the	 small	 aperture	 may	 help	 minimize	 reflections	 from	 the
cornea.	The	red-free	filter	is	useful	for	examining	blood	vessels,	looking	for
hemorrhages,	and	examining	the	nerve	fiber	layer	(NFL).	The	red	reflex	can
be	 assessed	 from	 a	 distance	 of	 12	 to	 15	 in.	 Opacities	 in	 the	 media	 (e.g.,
cataract)	appear	as	black	dots	against	the	red	background.	The	ocular	fundus

is	the	only	place	in	the	body	where	blood	vessels	can	be	visualized	directly.
Changes	 in	 the	 retinal	 vasculature	 in	 conditions	 such	 as	 diabetes	 and
hypertension	 mirror	 the	 status	 of	 the	 systemic	 circulation.	 The	 fundus	 may
also	reveal	important	findings	in	systemic	diseases	such	as	endocarditis	and
AIDS.

In	the	neurologic	examination,	the	areas	of	primary	concern	are	the	disk,
the	 macula,	 and	 the	 arteries.	 The	 disk	 is	 normally	 round	 or	 a	 vertically
oriented	slight	oval.	The	nasal	margin	is	normally	slightly	blurred	compared
to	 the	 temporal.	 The	 disk	 consists	 of	 a	 peripheral	 neuroretinal	 rim	 and	 a
central	cup.	The	neuroretinal	rim	consists	of	axons	streaming	from	the	retina
to	 enter	 the	 optic	 nerve.	 The	 physiologic	 cup	 is	 a	 slight	 depression	 in	 the
center	 of	 the	 disk	 that	 is	 less	 pinkish	 than	 the	 rim	 and	 shows	 a	 faint
latticework	 because	 of	 the	 underlying	 lamina	 cribrosa.	 The	 rim	 is	 elevated
slightly	 above	 the	 cup.	 The	 cup	 normally	 occupies	 about	 a	 third	 of	 the
temporal	aspect	of	the	disk.	To	locate	the	disk,	a	helpful	technique	is	to	find	a
retinal	 blood	 vessel,	 focus	 on	 it,	 and	 then	 follow	 it	 to	 the	 disk.	 In	 severe
myopia,	 the	 disk	 may	 appear	 larger	 and	 paler	 than	 normal.	 In	 the	 aphakic
eye,	the	disk	looks	small	and	far	away.

The	 myelinated	 axons	 making	 up	 its	 substance	 render	 the	 normal	 optic
disk	yellowish-white.	It	is	paler	temporally	where	the	papillomacular	bundle
(PMB)	 enters.	 The	 normal	 disk	 lies	 flat	 and	 well	 demarcated	 against	 the
surrounding	 retina,	 with	 arteries	 and	 veins	 crossing	 the	 margins	 and
capillaries	 staining	 the	 surface	 a	 faint	 pink.	 The	 size	 of	 the	 scleral	 opening
varies	 from	 individual	 to	 individual.	 When	 the	 opening	 is	 small,	 the	 disk
consists	 entirely	 of	 neuroretinal	 tissue,	 and	 the	 cup	 is	 inconspicuous	 or
nonexistent.	 Such	 a	 small	 cupless	 disk	 is	 more	 vulnerable	 to	 anterior
ischemic	 optic	 neuropathy	 and	 is	 termed	 a	 disk	 at	 risk.	 The	 normal	 cup-to-
disk	ratio	is	about	0.1	to	0.5.	In	patients	with	glaucoma,	the	cup-to-disk	ratio
is	increased	and	the	cup	is	more	prominent	and	often	nasally	displaced.

The	central	retinal	artery	enters	the	eye	through	the	physiologic	cup	and
divides	 into	 superior	 and	 inferior	 branches,	 which	 in	 turn	 divide	 into	 nasal
and	 temporal	 branches,	 yielding	 four	 prominent	 arterial	 trunks	 emanating
from	 the	 disk.	 Beyond	 the	 second	 branch,	 the	 retinal	 vessels	 are	 arterioles,
visible	because	of	the	14×	magnification	provided	by	the	patient’s	lens	and
cornea.	 Cilioretinal	 arteries	 are	 present	 in	 many	 normal	 individuals.	 These
vessels	 arise	 from	 posterior	 ciliary	 arteries,	 enter	 the	 eye	 along	 the	 disk
margin,	and	perfuse	the	peripapillary	retina.	They	may	become	prominent	as

shunt	 vessels	 when	 there	 is	 optic	 nerve	 compression.	 Varying	 amounts	 of
pigmentation	 are	 present	 in	 the	 retina	 near	 the	 temporal	 border	 of	 the	 disk,
especially	in	dark-skinned	persons.	At	times	a	pigment	ring	may	completely
surround	the	disk.	White	scleral	and	dark	choroidal	rings	may	sometimes	be
seen.

The	macula	is	a	dark	area	that	lies	about	two	disk	diameters	temporal	to
and	slightly	below	the	disk.	The	macula	appears	darker	than	the	surrounding
retina	 because	 the	 depression	 of	 the	 macula	 and	 fovea	 means	 the	 retina	 is
thinner	 in	 that	 area,	 allowing	 more	 of	 the	 deeply	 colored	 choroid	 to	 show
through.	The	area	of	the	macula	is	devoid	of	large	blood	vessels.	The	fovea
centralis	 appears	 as	 a	 pinpoint	 of	 light	 reflected	 from	 the	 center	 of	 the
macula.	 The	 macula	 may	 be	 seen	 more	 easily	 with	 a	 red-free	 filter.	 It	 is
sometimes	easier	to	visualize	the	macula	if	the	patient	looks	directly	into	the
light.

The	 routine	 fundus	 examination	 in	 neurologic	 patients	 is	 generally	 done
through	 the	 undilated	 pupil.	 The	 fundus	 examination	 is	 more	 challenging
when	the	patient	has	a	small	pupil,	myopia,	or	opacities	in	the	media	such	as
cataract.	One	or	more	of	these	are	commonly	present	in	older	individuals.	In
some	circumstances,	the	benefits	of	an	adequate	fundus	exam	outweigh	the
minimal	 risk	 of	 precipitating	 an	 attack	 of	 acute	 narrow	 angle	 glaucoma	 by
using	mydriatic	drops.	A	crude	estimate	of	the	narrowness	of	the	iridocorneal
angle	 can	 be	 made	 by	 shining	 a	 light	 from	 the	 temporal	 side	 to	 see	 if	 a
shadow	is	cast	on	the	nasal	side	of	the	iris	and	sclera.	The	risk	of	an	attack	of
acute	narrow-angle	glaucoma	because	of	the	use	of	mydriatic	drops	has	been
estimated	 at	 0.1%.	 Mydriatic	 drops	 are	 best	 avoided	 in	 situations	 where
assessment	of	pupillary	function	is	critical,	such	as	patients	with	head	injury
or	other	causes	of	depressed	consciousness.	Their	use	in	such	situations	must
be	obtrusively	documented,	even	to	the	point	of	writing	“eye	drops	in”	on	the
patient’s	forehead.

LOCALIZATION	AND	DISORDERS	OF	VISUAL
FUNCTION

Disorders	 of	 the	 afferent	 visual	 system	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 prechiasmal,
chiasmal,	and	retrochiasmal.	Disease	in	each	of	these	locations	has	characteristic

features	 that	 usually	 permit	 its	 localization.	 The	 etiologic	 processes	 affecting
these	 different	 segments	 of	 the	 afferent	 visual	 system	 are	 quite	 different.	 As	 a
generalization,	prechiasmal	lesions	cause	monocular	visual	loss;	impaired	color
perception;	 a	 central,	 paracentral,	 or	 cecocentral	 VF	 defect;	 and	 an	 APD.	 The
disk	 may	 or	 may	 not	 appear	 abnormal	 depending	 on	 the	 exact	 location	 of	 the
lesion.	Chiasmal	lesions	cause	heteronymous	VF	defects,	most	often	bitemporal
hemianopia,	with	preservation	of	visual	acuity	and	color	perception	and	a	normal
appearing	 optic	 disk.	 Retrochiasmal	 lesions	 cause	 a	 contralateral	 homonymous
hemianopia	and	have	no	effect	on	acuity	or	disk	appearance.	There	is	usually	no
effect	 on	 color	 vision,	 but	 some	 central	 lesions	 may	 cause	 achromatopsia.	 A
summary	 of	 the	 features	 of	 disease	 involving	 the	 macula,	 optic	 nerve,	 chiasm,
optic	 tract,	 LGB,	 optic	 radiations,	 and	 calcarine	 cortex	 can	 be	 found	 in	 Table
13.1.

TABLE
13.1

Clinical	Characteristics	of	Acute	Lesions	Involving
Different	Parts	of	the	Afferent	Visual	Pathway

Prechiasmal	Lesions

Prechiasmal	disorders	affect	the	optic	nerve.	Disorders	can	be	divided	into	those
that	 affect	 the	disk	 (papillopathy)	 and	 those	 that	 affect	 the	 retrobulbar	segment
between	the	globe	and	the	chiasm.	The	macula	gives	rise	to	the	majority	of	the
fibers	 in	 the	 optic	 nerve,	 and	 disease	 of	 the	 macula	 itself	 can	 cause	 a	 clinical
picture	 that	 is	 at	 times	 difficult	 to	 distinguish	 from	 optic	 neuropathy.	 Common
causes	 of	 maculopathy	 include	 age-related	 macular	 degeneration	 and	 central
serous	 retinopathy	 (Table	 13.1).	 Macular	 disease	 causes	 marked	 impairment	 of
central	 acuity	 and	 impaired	 color	 vision.	 There	 may	 be	 a	 central	 scotoma.	 A
distinct	 central	 scotoma	 with	 normal	 field	 between	 the	 central	 defect	 and	 the
blind	 spot	 is	 more	 common	 in	 macular	 than	 in	 optic	 nerve	 disease.	 Macular
disease	 often	 causes	 metamorphopsia,	 a	 distortion	 of	 visual	 images.	 When
severe,	 maculopathy	 can	 cause	 an	 APD.	 Prolongation	 of	 the	 time	 to	 recover
vision	after	direct,	intense	light	stimulation	(photostress	test)	can	sometimes	help
to	distinguish	macular	from	optic	nerve	disease	(Box	13.6).	Other	retinal	lesions
severe	 enough	 to	 cause	 monocular	 VF	 defects	 are	 almost	 all	 visible
ophthalmoscopically.

in	 hypertension,	 papilledema,	 and	

A	macular	star	is	a	radial	pattern	of	exudates	in	the	perimacular	retina.	They
in	 other	 conditions.
are	 common	
Neuroretinitis	 refers	 to	 the	 association	 of	 ON	 with	 a	 macular	 star	 and	 is
commonly	of	viral	origin.	Chorioretinitis	is	inflammation	involving	choroid	and
retina,	 which	 is	 most	 often	 due	 to	 infections	 such	 as	 tuberculosis,	 syphilis,
toxoplasmosis,	 cytomegalovirus,	 and	 HIV.	 Chorioretinitis	 often	 leaves	 whitish
scars	 surrounded	 by	 clumps	 of	 pigment.	 Cytomegalovirus	 chorioretinitis	 is
common	in	AIDS.

BOX	13.6

The	Photostress	Test

In	 macular	 disease,	 the	 photoreceptors	 require	 longer	 to	 recover	 from
bleaching	 of	 the	 retinal	 pigments	 after	 exposure	 to	 a	 bright	 light.	 The
photostress	test	is	done	by	determining	a	baseline	visual	acuity,	then	shining
a	 bright	 light	 (e.g.,	 a	 fresh	 penlight)	 into	 the	 eye	 for	 10	 seconds,	 and	 then
determining	 the	 time	 required	 for	 the	 visual	 acuity	 to	 return	 to	 baseline.
Reliable	 reference	 values	 are	 not	 available;	 the	 test	 is	 mainly	 useful	 with
unilateral	 disease	 when	 the	 unaffected	 eye	 can	 be	 used	 for	 comparison.	 In
optic	nerve	disease,	the	photostress	test	is	normal.	Recovery	times	may	reach

several	minutes	in	macular	disorders	such	as	macular	edema,	central	serous
retinopathy,	and	macular	degeneration.

Monocular	 altitudinal	 defects	 are	characteristic	of	 disease	 in	the	 distribution
of	the	central	retinal	artery.	Central	vision	may	be	spared	because	the	macula	is
often	perfused	by	the	cilioretinal	arteries.	AION	(see	below)	is	another	cause	of
an	altitudinal	defect.	Bilateral	altitudinal	defects	may	occur	with	bilateral	lesions
in	certain	parts	of	the	visual	pathway,	for	example,	bilateral	occipital	infarction
or	 a	 large	 prechiasmal	 lesion	 compressing	 both	 optic	 nerves.	 A	 checkerboard
pattern	is	a	superior	altitudinal	defect	in	one	eye	and	an	inferior	altitudinal	defect
in	the	other	eye.

Disorders	of	the	Optic	Disk
The	color	and	appearance	of	the	disk	may	change	in	a	variety	of	circumstances.
The	 disk	 may	 change	 color—to	 abnormally	 pale	 in	 optic	 atrophy	 or	 to
abnormally	red	with	disk	edema.	The	margins	may	become	obscured	because	of
disk	 edema	 or	 the	 presence	 of	 anomalies.	 Edema	 of	 the	 disk	 is	 nonspecific.	 It
may	 reflect	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure,	 or	 it	 may	 occur	 because	 of	 optic
nerve	 inflammation,	 ischemia,	 or	 other	 local	 processes.	 By	 convention,	 disk
swelling	because	of	increased	intracranial	pressure	is	referred	to	as	papilledema;
under	 all	 other	 circumstances,	 the	 noncommittal	 terms	 disk	 edema	 or	 disk
swelling	 are	 preferred.	 Visual	 function	 provides	 a	 critical	 clue	 to	 the	 nature	 of
disk	 abnormalities.	 Patients	 with	 acute	 papilledema	 and	 those	 with	 disk
anomalies	have	normal	visual	acuity,	VFs,	and	color	perception.	Impairment	of
these	 functions	 is	 the	 rule	 in	 patients	 suffering	 from	 optic	 neuropathies	 of	 any
etiology.	The	first	step	in	evaluating	a	questionably	abnormal	disk	is	therefore	a
careful	assessment	of	vision.

Papilledema
Increased	intracranial	pressure	exerts	pressure	on	the	optic	nerves,	which	impairs
axoplasmic	 flow	 and	 produces	 axonal	 edema	 and	 an	 increased	 volume	 of
axoplasm	 at	 the	 disk.	 The	 swollen	 axons	 impair	 venous	 return	 from	 the	 retina,
engorging	 first	 the	 capillaries	 on	 the	 disk	 surface,	 then	 the	 retinal	 veins,	 and
ultimately	 causing	 splinter-	 and	 flame-shaped	 hemorrhages	 as	 well	 as	 cotton
wool	 exudates	 in	 the	 retinal	 NFL.	 Further	 axonal	 swelling	 eventually	 leads	 to
elevation	 of	 the	 disk	 above	 the	 retinal	 surface.	 Transient	 visual	 obscurations,

momentary	graying	out	or	blacking	out	of	vision,	often	precipitated	by	postural
changes,	 are	 classical	 symptoms	 of	 papilledema,	 especially	 in	 pseudotumor
cerebri	(idiopathic	intracranial	hypertension	[IIH]).	Obscurations	may	be	due	to
microvascular	compromise	at	the	nerve	head.

The	 four	 stages	 of	 papilledema	 are	 early,	 fully	 developed,	 chronic,	 and
atrophic.	 Fully	 developed	 papilledema	 is	 obvious,	 with	 elevation	 of	 the	 disk
surface,	 humping	 of	 vessels	 crossing	 the	 disk	 margin,	 obliteration	 of	 disk
margins,	 peripapillary	 hemorrhages,	 cotton	 wool	 exudates,	 engorged	 and
tortuous	 retinal	 veins,	 and	 marked	 disk	 hyperemia.	 The	 recognition	 of	 early
papilledema	 is	 much	 more	 problematic	 (Figure	 13.22).	 Occasionally,	 the	 only
way	 to	 resolve	 the	 question	 of	 early	 papilledema	 is	 by	 serial	 observation.	 The
earliest	 change	 is	 loss	 of	 previously	 observed	 spontaneous	 venous	 pulsations
(SVPs).	Venous	pulsations	are	best	seen	where	the	large	veins	dive	into	the	disk
centrally.	The	movement	is	a	back-and-forth	rhythmic	oscillation	of	the	tip	of	the
blood	 column,	 which	 resembles	 a	 slowly	 darting	 snake’s	 tongue.	 Side-to-side
expansion	 of	 a	 vein	 is	 much	 more	 difficult	 to	 see.	 The	 presence	 of	 SVPs
indicates	 an	 intracranial	 pressure	 less	 than	 approximately	 200	 mm	 H2O.
However,	 because	 they	 are	 absent	 in	 10%	 to	 20%	 of	 normals,	 only	 the
disappearance	of	previously	observed	SVPs	is	clearly	pathologic.

As	 papilledema	 develops,	 increased	 venous	 back	 pressure	 dilates	 the
capillaries	 on	 the	 disk	 surface,	 transforming	 its	 normal	 yellowish-pink	 color	 to
fiery	 red.	 Blurring	 of	 the	 superior	 and	 inferior	 margins	 evolves	 soon	 after.
However,	because	these	margins	are	normally	the	least	distinct	areas	of	the	disk,
blurry	 margins	 alone	 are	 not	 enough	 to	 diagnose	 papilledema.	 There	 is	 no
alteration	of	the	physiologic	cup	with	early	papilledema.	With	further	evolution,
the	 patient	 with	 early	 papilledema	 will	 develop	 diffuse	 disk	 edema,	 cup
obscuration,	 hemorrhages,	 exudates,	 and	 venous	 engorgement.	 Frank	 disk
elevation	 then	 ensues	 as	 the	 fundus	 ripens	 into	 fully	 developed	 papilledema
(Figure	 13.23).	 In	 chronic	 papilledema,	 hemorrhages	 and	 exudates	 resolve	 and
leave	a	markedly	swollen	“champagne	cork”	disk	bulging	up	from	the	plane	of
the	retina.	If	unrelieved,	impaired	axoplasmic	flow	eventually	leads	to	death	of
axons	 and	 visual	 impairment,	 which	 evolves	 into	 the	 stage	 of	 atrophic
papilledema,	 or	 secondary	 optic	 atrophy.	 Papilledema	 ordinarily	 develops	 over
days	 to	 weeks.	 With	 acutely	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 because	 of
subarachnoid	 or	 intracranial	 hemorrhage,	 it	 may	 develop	 within	 hours.
Measuring	diopters	of	disk	elevation	ophthalmoscopically	has	little	utility.

FIGURE	13.22	Early	papilledema.

The	changes	in	the	optic	nerve	head	in	papilledema	are	both	mechanical	and
vascular	in	nature.	The	mechanical	signs	of	disk	edema	include	blurring	of	the
disk	 margins,	 filling	 in	 of	 the	 physiologic	 cup,	 protrusion	 of	 the	 nerve	 head,
edema	 of	 the	 NFL	 and	 retinal	 or	 choroidal	 folds,	 or	 both.	 The	 vascular	 signs
include	 venous	 congestion,	 hyperemia	 of	 the	 nerve	 head,	 papillary	 and
peripapillary	hemorrhages,	NFL	infarcts	(cotton-wool	spots),	and	hard	exudates
of	the	optic	disk.

Acute	papilledema	causes	no	impairment	of	visual	acuity	or	color	vision.	The
typical	patient	has	no	symptoms	related	to	its	presence	except	for	obscurations.
The	blind	spot	may	be	enlarged,	but	VF	testing	is	otherwise	normal.	In	patients
who	 develop	 optic	 atrophy	 following	 papilledema,	 the	 visual	 morbidity	 can	 be
severe	and	may	include	blindness.

FIGURE	13.23	Severe	papilledema.

With	 current	 technology,	 imaging	 has	 usually	 detected	 intracranial	 mass
lesions	 before	 the	 development	 of	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure.	 As	 a	 result,
IIH	is	the	most	common	cause	of	papilledema	in	the	developed	world.	IIH	can
occur	 without	 papilledema,	 or	 with	 asymmetric	 papilledema,	 rarely	 with
unilateral	 papilledema.	 The	 typical	 patient	 with	 IIH	 is	 an	 obese,	 young	 female
with	 headaches,	 no	 focal	 findings	 on	 neurologic	 examination,	 normal	 imaging
except	 for	 small	 ventricles,	 and	 normal	 CSF	 except	 for	 elevated	 opening
pressure.	Without	adequate	treatment,	visual	loss	is	a	common	sequel.

Other	Causes	of	Disk	Edema
Changes	 ophthalmoscopically	 indistinguishable	 from	 papilledema	 occur	 when
conditions	 primarily	 affecting	 the	 optic	 nerve	 papilla	 cause	 disk	 edema.
Papilledema	is	usually	bilateral;	other	causes	of	disk	edema	are	often	unilateral
(Table	 13.2).	 Optic	 neuropathies	 generally	 cause	 marked	 visual	 impairment,
including	loss	of	acuity,	central	or	cecocentral	scotoma,	loss	of	color	perception,
and	 an	 APD.	 Disease	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve	 head	 is	 usually	 due	 to	 demyelination,
ischemia,	 inflammation,	 or	 compression.	 ON	 and	 AION	 are	 two	 common
conditions	 that	 cause	 impaired	 vision	 and	 disk	 edema.	 Both	 are	 usually
unilateral.	 Compressive	 lesions	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve	 in	 the	 orbit	 may	 cause	 disk

edema,	 but	 intracanalicular	 and	 intracranial	 compression	 usually	 does	 not.	 ON
with	 disk	 edema	 is	 sometimes	 called	 papillitis.	 Papillitis	 may	 occur	 as	 an
isolated	 abnormality,	 as	 a	 manifestation	 of	 multiple	 sclerosis	 (MS),	 or	 as	 a
complication	 of	 some	 systemic	 illness.	 Demyelinating	 optic	 neuropathies
causing	papillopathy	are	common	as	a	feature	of	MS,	but	they	also	can	occur	as
an	 independent	 disease	 process	 or	 complicate	 other	 disorders	 such	 as	 acute
disseminated	 encephalomyelitis	 and	 neuromyelitis	 optica	 (NMO),	 which
includes	Devic’s	disease.	There	are	many	other	causes	of	optic	neuropathy;	some
of	the	more	common	conditions	are	listed	in	Table	13.3.

TABLE	13.2

Some	Causes	of	Unilateral	Disk	Edema

Optic	neuritis

Anterior	ischemic	optic	neuropathy

Compression	of	the	optic	nerve	in	the	orbit

Central	retinal	vein	occlusion

Optic	nerve	infiltration

Diabetic	papillopathy

Syphilis

Leber’s	hereditary	optic	neuropathy	(LHON)

TABLE	13.3

Some	Causes	of	Optic	Neuropathy

Optic	neuritis

Ischemic	optic	neuropathy

Optic	nerve	compression

Papillophlebitis

Optic	nerve	infiltration	(carcinomatous,	lymphomatous)

Sarcoidosis

Diabetic	papillopathy

Tobacco-alcohol	amblyopia

Nutritional	deficiency,	especially	vitamin	B12

Drugs

Toxins

Hereditary	optic	neuropathy	(Leber,	Kjer)

Glaucoma

Optic	Neuritis
Inflammation	 or	 demyelination	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve	 can	 occur	 in	 a	 variety	 of
conditions,	 including	 MS,	 postviral	 syndromes,	 sarcoidosis,	 collagen	 vascular
disease,	 neurosyphilis,	 and	 others.	 Many	 cases	 are	 idiopathic.	 The	 majority	 of
patients	are	women	in	the	20	to	50	age	range.	ON	occurs	sometime	during	the
course	of	MS	in	70%	of	patients	and	is	the	presenting	feature	in	25%.	Some	50%
to	70%	of	patients	presenting	with	ON	eventually	develop	other	evidence	of	MS.
Factors	 that	 increase	 the	 likelihood	 of	 underlying	 MS	 in	 patients	 with	 ON
include	 the	 presence	 of	 Uhthoff’s	 phenomenon	 (increased	 symptoms	 with
elevation	 of	 body	 temperature	 or	 after	 exercise),	 HLA-DR2	 positivity,	 and	 a
recurrent	 episode.	 Decreased	 acuity,	 impaired	 color	 perception,	 central	 or
cecocentral	 scotoma,	 disk	 edema,	 and	 an	 APD	 are	 the	 typical	 findings.	 For	 a
video	 of	 an	 APD,	 see	 Video	 Link	 13.1	 (from	 Kathleen	 B.	 Digre,	 MD	 at	 the
University	of	Utah	Neuro-Ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library:	NOVEL).
Color	vision	loss	usually	parallels	acuity	loss,	but	in	ON,	the	loss	of	color	vision
may	 be	 more	 severe	 than	 expected	 for	 the	 loss	 of	 acuity.	 Visual	 loss	 in	 ON
occurs	 suddenly	 and	 tends	 to	 progress	 over	 1	 to	 2	 weeks,	 with	 substantial
recovery	 over	 2	 to	 12	 weeks.	 Severe	 visual	 loss	 acutely	 does	 not	 necessarily
portend	 poor	 recovery.	 Eye	 pain	 is	 present	 in	 90%	 of	 patients,	 and	 many	 have
lights	 (photopsias,
positive	 visual	 phenomena	 with	 colors	 or	 flashing	
phosphenes).	 The	 eye	 pain	 is	 usually	 mild	 but	 can	 become	 severe	 and	 more
debilitating	 than	 the	 visual	 loss.	 The	 pain	 may	 precede	 or	 begin	 concomitantly

with	 the	 visual	 loss	 and	 is	 usually	 worsened	 with	 eye	 movement,	 particularly
upgaze.	 The	 absence	 of	 pain	 suggests	 a	 noninflammatory	 type	 of	 optic
neuropathy.	 In	 about	 65%	 of	 cases	 of	 ON,	 the	 disk	 appears	 normal;	 in	 the
remainder,	there	is	mild	disk	edema	and	occasional	NFL	hemorrhages.	Pain	can
occur	 whether	 or	 not	 there	 is	 disk	 edema.	 Optic	 atrophy	 ensues	 over	 the	 next
several	weeks	in	50%	of	patients.	Improvement	to	normal	or	near	normal	acuity
occurs	in	90%	of	patients.	ON	may	rarely	involve	the	chiasm	(chiasmal	neuritis).
In	 NMO,	 there	 are	 lesions	 of	 the	 optic	 nerves	 and	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 It	 is	 a
distinct	entity	from	MS,	but	separating	the	two	clinically	may	be	difficult.	The
spinal	cord	lesion	extends	over	three	or	more	vertebral	segments	(longitudinally
extensive	 transverse	 myelitis	 [LETM]).	 The	 spinal	 cord	 syndrome	 is	 usually
sudden	and	severe	and	may	be	permanent.	In	one	series	of	60	patients,	ON	was
the	initial	feature	in	53.3%.

NMO	 is	 increasingly	 being	 seen	 as	 a	 spectrum	 of	 neurologic	 conditions
defined	 by	 serologic	 tests.	 The	 term	 NMO	 spectrum	 disorder	 (NMOSD)
emphasizes	 that	 patients	 with	 ON	 or	 LETM	 alone	 are	 often	 antibody	 positive
and	 that	 some	 patients	 have	 brain	 lesions.	 The	 brain	 MRI	 abnormalities	 differ
from	 those	 typical	 of	 MS.	 Autoantibodies	 against	 aquaporin-4	 and	 myelin-
oligodendrocyte	glycoprotein	have	been	identified	so	far.

Anterior	Ischemic	Optic	Neuropathy
AION	 is	 the	 most	 common	 syndrome	 of	 optic	 nerve	 ischemia,	 and	 the	 most
common	 optic	 neuropathy	 in	 adults	 over	 50	 after	 glaucoma.	 In	 AION,
microangiopathy	 produces	 occlusion	 of	 the	 short	 posterior	 ciliary	 arteries	 and
infarction	 of	 all	 or	 part	 of	 the	 disk.	 Visual	 loss	 is	 sudden,	 painless,
nonprogressive,	 and	 generally	 does	 not	 improve.	 Decreased	 acuity,	 impaired
color	 perception,	 an	 altitudinal	 field	 defect,	 usually	 inferior,	 and	 pallid	 disk
edema	are	the	typical	findings	acutely;	evolving	subsequently	into	optic	atrophy.
In	the	acute	phase,	a	pale	disk	with	hemorrhage	will	virtually	always	be	due	to
AION.	 Other	 useful	 findings	 suggesting	 AION	 are	 altitudinal	 swelling	 and
arterial	attenuation.

AION	is	due	to	disease	involving	the	posterior	ciliary	arteries,	not	the	central
retinal	 artery,	 and	 is	divided	 into	 two	forms:	 arteritic	 and	 nonarteritic.	 Arteritic
AION	 most	 commonly	 complicates	 giant	 cell	 arteritis	 (GCA),	 accounting	 for
about	10%	to	15%	of	patients.	Usually,	these	patients	are	over	65	and	have	more
severe	visual	loss	than	patients	with	nonarteritic	AION.	A	history	of	headache,
jaw	 claudication,	 and	 scalp	 tenderness	 is	 very	 suspicious.	 Evidence	 of

polymyalgia	rheumatica,	such	as	malaise,	weight	loss,	myalgias,	and	an	elevated
ESR,	increases	the	likelihood	that	AION	is	due	to	GCA.	In	a	meta-analysis	of	21
studies,	 jaw	 claudication	 and	 diplopia	 were	 the	 only	 historical	 features	 that
substantially	 increased	 the	 likelihood	 of	 GCA.	 Predictive	 physical	 findings
included	 temporal	 artery	 beading,	 prominence,	 and	 tenderness;	 the	 absence	 of
any	 temporal	 artery	 abnormality	 was	 the	 only	 clinical	 factor	 that	 modestly
reduced	 the	 likelihood	 of	 disease.	 There	 is	 evidence	 that	 varicella-zoster	 virus
infection	may	trigger	the	inflammatory	cascade	that	characterizes	GCA.

Premonitory	amaurosis	fugax	is	more	common	in	the	arteritic	form.	They	do
not	have	a	small	disk	in	the	fellow	eye	(disk	at	risk,	see	below).	Involvement	of
the	 opposite	 eye	 occurs	 in	 approximately	 15%	 of	 patients	 within	 5	 years.
Although	no	treatment	affects	the	outcome	in	the	involved	eye,	recognition	and
management	of	underlying	vasculitis	may	prevent	a	future	attack	in	the	opposite
eye.

Nonarteritic	 AION	 is	 most	 often	 caused	 by	 a	 microvasculopathy	 related	 to
hypertension,	 diabetes,	 tobacco	 use,	 arteriosclerosis,	 or	 atherosclerosis.	 Some
cases	 are	 due	 to	 impaired	 microvascular	 perfusion	 related	 to	 systemic
hypotension	or	increased	intraocular	pressure.	There	is	a	syndrome	of	posterior
ischemic	optic	neuropathy,	lacking	disk	edema,	but	it	is	rare	and	much	less	well
defined	than	the	anterior	ischemic	syndromes.	It	may	be	difficult	to	distinguish
ON	from	ischemic	optic	neuropathy.	In	contrast	to	ON,	the	visual	loss	in	AION
is	usually	permanent,	although	one-third	of	patients	may	improve	somewhat.

Other	Optic	Neuropathies
Numerous	other	conditions	may	affect	the	optic	nerve	head,	causing	visual	loss
and	 disk	 abnormalities	 (e.g.,	 glaucoma;	 LHON	 and	 other	 hereditary	 optic
atrophies;	 toxins	 and	 drugs;	 primary	 and	 metastatic	 tumors;	 malnutrition	 and
deficiency	 states;	 neurodegenerative	 disorders;	 leukodystrophies;	 sarcoid;	 optic
perineuritis;	and	congenital	anomalies).	Dysthyroid	optic	neuropathy	occurs	as	a
late	complication	of	thyroid	orbitopathy	when	enlarged	ocular	muscles	compress
the	 nerve	 at	the	 orbital	 apex.	 See	Table	 13.3.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 distinguish	 ON
from	 compressive	 lesions	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve.	 One	 characteristic	 feature	 of
compressive	 optic	 neuropathy	 is	that	 the	 condition	 continues	to	 progress,	 often
insidiously.	 Large,	 abnormal-appearing	 veins	 on	 the	 disk	 surface	 because	 of
collateral	 venous	 drainage	 between	 the	 retinal	 and	 ciliary	 venous	 systems
(optociliary	 shunt	 vessels)	 may	 provide	 a	 telltale	 clue	 to	 a	 compressive	 lesion
(Figure	 13.24).	 The	 triad	 of	 progressive	 visual	 loss,	 optic	 atrophy,	 and

optociliary	shunt	vessels	is	highly	suggestive.

FIGURE	13.24	Pale,	elevated	optic	disk	with	optociliary	shunt	vessels	in	a	blind	eye;
the	 typical	 findings	 of	 an	 optic	 nerve	 meningioma.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Savino	 PJ,
Danesh-Meyer	HV;	Wills	Eye	Hospital	[Philadelphia,	PA].	Neuro-Ophthalmology.	2nd
ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,	 2012,	 with
permission.)

Pseudopapilledema
Some	conditions	affecting	the	nerve	head	cause	striking	disk	changes	of	little	or
import.	 This	 circumstance	 arises	 frequently	 when	 routine
no	 clinical	
ophthalmoscopy	 unexpectedly	 reveals	 an	 abnormal-appearing	 disk	 in	 a	 patient
with	 migraine	 or	 some	 seemingly	 benign	 neurologic	 complaint.	 Such	 patients
generally	 have	 normal	 vision	 and	 no	 visual	 complaints.	 Common	 causes	 of
pseudopapilledema	include	optic	nerve	drusen	and	myelinated	nerve	fibers.

Optic	nerve	drusen,	or	hyaloid	bodies,	are	acellular,	calcified	hyaline	deposits
within	 the	 optic	 nerve	 that	 may	 elevate	 and	 distort	 the	 disk	 (Figure	 13.25).
Drusen	 occur	 in	 about	 2%	 of	 the	 population	 and	 are	 bilateral	 in	 70%	 of	 cases.
They	are	familial,	inherited	as	an	irregular	dominant	with	incomplete	penetrance,
and	occur	almost	exclusively	in	Caucasians.	On	the	disk	surface,	drusen	have	a
highly	 refractile,	 rock-candy	 appearance.	 But	 when	 buried	 beneath	 the	 surface,

drusen	may	produce	only	disk	elevation	and	blurred	margins,	causing	confusion
with	papilledema.	Optic	nerve	drusen	are	not	to	be	confused	with	retinal	drusen,
which	are	an	age-related	abnormality	consisting	of	yellowish-white,	round	spots
of	 variable	 size	 concentrated	 at	 the	 posterior	 pole.	 Myelinated	 nerve	 fibers
occasionally	extend	beyond	the	disk	margin	into	the	retina,	which	causes	a	very
striking	 disk	 picture	 but	 signifies	 nothing	 (Figure	 13.26).	 Other	 causes	 of
pseudopapilledema	
the	 primitive	 hyaloid	 artery
(Bergmeister’s	papilla),	tilted	disks	(Figure	13.27),	and	extreme	hyperopia.

remnants	 of	

include	

FIGURE	13.25	Drusen	of	the	optic	nerve	head	simulating	papilledema.

FIGURE	13.26	Myelinated	nerve	fibers.

FIGURE	13.27	The	congenital	tilted	optic	disk	is	apparent	as	the	oval	of	nerve	tissue
superiorly.	 There	 is	 no	 apparent	 optic	 cup.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Chern	 KC,	 Saidel	 MA.

Ophthalmology	 Review	 Manual.	 2nd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer
Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2012,	with	permission.)

Distinguishing	pseudopapilledema	from	acquired	disk	edema	can	be	difficult.
Features	 that	 may	 be	 helpful	 include	 the	 following:	 in	 papilledema,	 the	 disk	 is
usually	hyperemic;	the	disk	margin	blurriness	is	at	the	superior	and	inferior	poles
early	in	the	process;	blood	vessels	look	normal	except	for	fullness	of	the	veins;
SVPs	 are	 absent;	 and	 the	 NFL	 is	 dull	 with	 the	 retinal	 blood	 vessels	 obscured
because	of	retinal	edema.	In	pseudopapilledema,	the	disk	color	remains	normal;
blurriness	of	the	disk	margin	may	be	irregular,	and	the	disk	may	have	a	lumpy
appearance;	 SVPs	 are	 usually	 present;	 the	 blood	 vessels	 on	 the	 disk	 frequently
look	anomalous;	and	the	NFL	is	clear.	Hemorrhages	are	common	in	papilledema
in	 doubt,	 consult	 an
and	 extremely	
ophthalmologist.

in	 pseudopapilledema.	

rare	

If	

Optic	Atrophy
In	optic	atrophy,	the	disk	is	paler	than	normal	and	more	sharply	demarcated	from
the	 surrounding	 retina,	 sometimes	 having	 a	 punched-out	 appearance	 (Figure
13.28).	 The	 disk	 margins	 stand	 out	 distinctly;	 the	 physiologic	 cup	 may	 be
abnormally	prominent	and	extend	to	the	margin	of	the	disk.	Loss	of	myelinated
axons	and	their	supporting	capillaries	with	replacement	by	gliotic	scar	produce
the	lack	of	color,	which	may	vary	from	a	dirty	gray	to	a	blue-white	color	to	stark
white.	 Loss	 of	 axons	 causes	 involution	 of	 the	 capillary	 bed	 of	 the	 disk	 and
allows	 the	 sclera	 to	 show	 through,	 contributing	 to	 the	 pallor.	 Dark	 choroidal
pigment	deposits	may	be	present	about	the	margin	of	the	disk.	The	depth	of	color
of	the	choroid	will	influence	the	perception	of	the	degree	of	contrast	between	the
disk	and	 retina.	 An	 atrophic	 disk	 may	appear	perceptibly	 smaller.	 Pallor	 of	 the
temporal	 portion	 of	 the	 disk—a	 classical	finding	 in	 MS—may	 precede	 definite
atrophy,	 but	 normal	 physiologic	 temporal	 pallor	 makes	 this	 finding	 often
equivocal.

FIGURE	13.28	Primary	optic	atrophy.

Optic	atrophy	may	follow	some	other	condition	(ON,	AION,	or	papilledema)
and	is	then	referred	to	as	secondary	or	consecutive	optic	atrophy.	Primary	optic
atrophy,	 appearing	 de	 novo,	 occurs	 as	a	heredofamilial	 condition	 (e.g.,	 LHON)
or	after	toxic,	metabolic,	nutritional,	compressive,	or	glaucomatous	insult	to	the
nerve.	 Some	 causes	 of	 optic	 atrophy	 are	 listed	 in	 Table	 13.4.	 The	 term
cavernous,	 or	 pseudoglaucomatous,	 optic	 atrophy	 is	 used	 if	 there	 is	 marked
recession	of	the	disk.	Glaucoma	is	a	common	cause	of	optic	atrophy;	it	produces
both	 an	 increase	 in	 the	 depth	 of	 the	 physiologic	 cup	 and	 atrophy	 of	 the	 nerve
(Figure	 13.29).	 LHON	 is	 an	 uncommon	 mitochondriopathy	 that	 affects	 only
males;	it	may	cause	the	appearance	of	disk	edema	acutely	but	evolves	into	optic
atrophy.	It	typically	affects	young	men	and	causes	sudden	unilateral	visual	loss
with	 involvement	 of	 the	 fellow	 eye	 within	 days	 to	 months.	 Characteristic
peripapillary	telangiectasias	are	frequently	present,	even	in	the	uninvolved	eye.
Bow-tie	or	band	optic	atrophy	refers	to	pallor	of	the	disk	that	may	develop	in	an
eye	with	temporal	VF	loss	following	a	lesion	of	the	optic	chiasm	or	tract	(Box
13.7,	Figure	13.30).

TABLE	13.4

Some	Causes	of	Optic	Atrophy

Optic	neuritis

Glaucoma

Trauma

Chronic	papilledema

Ischemic	optic	neuropathy

LHON

Drugs

Toxins

Optic	nerve	compression

Deficiency	states

Central	nervous	system	syphilis

FIGURE	13.29	Glaucomatous	optic	atrophy.	(Courtesy	Richard	A.	Lewis.)

BOX	13.7

Bow-Tie	(Band)	Optic	Atrophy

The	macula	lies	temporal	to	the	disk,	and	fibers	from	the	nasal	hemimacula
enter	 the	 temporal	 aspect	 of	 the	 disk.	 These	 papillomacular	 fibers	 are
responsible	for	the	normal	pallor	of	the	temporal	aspect	of	the	disk,	and	the
pallor	is	accentuated	with	NFL	axon	loss.	There	is	also	atrophy	of	the	nasal
hemiretinal	NFL.	Fibers	from	the	peripheral	nasal	hemiretina	enter	the	nasal
aspect	 of	 the	 disk,	 and	 axon	 loss	 causes	 nasal	 disk	 pallor.	 With	 axon	 loss
involving	 both	 nasal	 hemimacula	 and	 nasal	 hemiretina,	 the	 result	 is	 a
transverse	band	of	atrophy	across	the	disk.	The	appearance	is	reminiscent	of
a	white	bow	tie.

FIGURE	13.30	 “Band”	 or	 “bow-tie”	 atrophy	 of	 the	 right	 optic	 disk	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 a
temporal	hemianopia	caused	by	a	pituitary	adenoma.	Note	horizontal	band	of	atrophy
across	the	right	disk,	with	preservation	of	the	superior	and	inferior	portions	of	the	disk.
(Reprinted	 from	 Miller	 NR,	 Biousse	 V,	 Newman	 NJ,	 et	 al.	 Walsh	 and	 Hoyt’s	 Clinical
Neuro-Ophthalmology:	 The	 Essentials.	 2nd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer
Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2008,	with	permission.)

A	patient	may	have	disk	edema	in	one	eye	and	optic	atrophy	in	the	other	eye.
Foster	 Kennedy	 syndrome	 is	 due	 to	 an	 olfactory	 groove	 meningioma,	 causing
anosmia	 (see	 Chapter	 12),	 with	 optic	 atrophy	 because	 of	 direct	 compression
ipsilateral	 to	 the	 neoplasm,	 and	 late	 contralateral	 papilledema	 because	 of
increased	intracranial	pressure.	Optic	atrophy	in	one	eye	with	disk	edema	in	the
other	eye	is	now	much	more	commonly	seen	with	AION	or	ON	(pseudo–Foster
Kennedy	syndrome),	when	the	disease	strikes	the	opposite	eye	weeks	to	months
after	an	initial	episode	renders	the	originally	affected	disk	atrophic.

Retrobulbar	Optic	Neuropathy
The	retrobulbar	portion	of	the	nerve	may	be	affected	by	most	of	the	diseases	that

affect	 the	 optic	 disk.	 The	 clinical	 picture	 is	 similar	 except	 that	 there	 is	 no	 disk
edema	 acutely,	 but	 optic	 atrophy	 may	 follow	 later.	 When	 ON	 strikes	 the
retrobulbar	portion	of	the	nerve,	marked	visual	impairment	occurs,	but	the	disk
appearance	 remains	 normal,	 because	 the	 pathology	 is	 posterior	 to	 the	 papilla.
Optic	 papillopathy	 thus	 causes	 impaired	 vision	 and	 an	 abnormal	 disk;
retrobulbar	 optic	 neuropathy	 causes	 impaired	 vision	 and	 a	 normal	 disk;	 and
papilledema	causes	an	abnormal	disk	but	does	not	affect	vision	acutely.	An	old
saw	describes	these	differences	aptly:	when	the	patient	sees	(has	normal	vision)
and	 the	 doctor	 sees	 (observes	 disk	 abnormalities),	 it	 is	 papilledema;	 when	 the
patient	 doesn’t	 see	 (has	 impaired	 vision)	 and	 the	 doctor	 sees	 (observes	 disk
abnormalities),	it	is	papillitis;	when	the	patient	doesn’t	see	(has	impaired	vision)
and	 the	 doctor	 doesn’t	 see	 (observes	 no	 disk	 abnormality),	 it	 is	 retrobulbar
neuritis.

A	 major	 difference	 between	 retrobulbar	 neuropathy	 and	 papillopathy	 is	 the
increased	incidence	of	compression	as	an	etiology	in	the	former.	Mass	lesions	of
many	 types,	 particularly	 neoplasms,	 can	 affect	 the	 retrobulbar	 optic	 nerve.
Common	 causes	 include	 meningiomas	 of	 the	 optic	 nerve	 sheath	 or	 sphenoid
wing,	 pituitary	 tumors,	 and	 distal	 carotid	 aneurysms.	 The	 possibility	 of
compression	always	figures	prominently	in	the	differential	diagnosis	of	patients
with	 optic	 neuropathy.	 Insidious	 visual	 loss	 producing	 decreased	 acuity;
impaired	color	perception;	and	central,	cecocentral,	or	arcuate	scotoma	is	typical.
Compressive	neuropathies	may	evolve	more	acutely	in	patients	with	metastatic
lesions,	particularly	lymphoma.	The	optic	neuropathy	in	low-pressure	glaucoma
may	simulate	the	picture	of	compression.

Distal	(Prechiasmal)	Optic	Neuropathy

Disorders	that	affect	 the	 distal	portion	 of	 the	 optic	nerve	 near	 its	 junction	 with
the	 chiasm	 are	 similar	 to	 other	 retrobulbar	 optic	 neuropathies	 except	 that
involvement	 of	 the	 Wilbrand’s	 knee	 fibers	 may	 produce	 a	 junctional	 scotoma,
which	 is	 highly	 localizing	 when	 present	 (Figure	 13.19C).	 For	 this	 reason,	 it	 is
important	 to	 pay	 particular	 attention	 to	 the	 temporal	 field	 of	 the	 opposite	 eye
when	 examining	 a	 patient	 with	 optic	 neuropathy.	 The	 most	 common	 cause	 is
pituitary	tumor.

Chiasmal	Lesions

Pituitary	 tumors,	 craniopharyngiomas,	 meningiomas,	 gliomas,	 and	 carotid
aneurysms	are	the	lesions	that	commonly	involve	the	chiasm.	Uncommon	causes
include	 demyelination,	 ischemia,	 radionecrosis,	 and	 a	 host	 of	 other	 conditions.
Because	 the	 chiasm	 lies	 about	 a	 centimeter	 above	 the	 diaphragma	 sella,	 visual
system	involvement	indicates	suprasellar	extension;	chiasmatic	mass	effect	is	a
late,	not	an	early,	manifestation	of	a	pituitary	tumor	(Figure	13.6).	 Involvement
of	 macular	 fibers	 may	 produce	 bitemporal	 scotomas.	 Chiasmal	 lesions	 rarely
produce	 textbook	 bitemporal	 hemianopias.	 There	 is	 often	 a	 combination	 of
chiasm	and	optic	nerve	or	optic	tract	defects	depending	on	whether	the	chiasm	is
prefixed,	postfixed,	or	in	normal	position	and	the	particular	attributes	of	the	mass
and	 its	 force	 vectors	 (Figure	 13.7).	 Generally,	 the	 defects	 are	 binocular	 and
usually	 heteronymous.	 The	 deficit	may	develop	 so	slowly	 as	to	 pass	 unnoticed
by	the	patient.	Acuity,	color	vision,	and	pupillary	function	are	not	affected	unless
there	is	optic	nerve	involvement.	Although	binasal	hemianopias	can	occur	from
chiasmal	 disease,	 optic	 neuropathy,	 glaucoma,	 and	 congenital	 anomalies	 are
more	common	causes.

Retrochiasmal	Lesions

Retrochiasmal	 lesions	 produce	 contralateral	 homonymous	 VF	 defects	 that
respect	 the	 vertical	 meridian.	 Except	 for	 optic	 tract	 lesions,	 they	 do	 not	 cause
any	 deficit	 of	 visual	 acuity,	 color	 perception,	 pupillary	 reactions,	 or	 disk
appearance.

Optic	 tract	 and	 LGB	 lesions	 occur	 rarely,	 perhaps	 because	 of	 generous
collateral	 blood	 supply;	 they	 are	 characterized	 by	 incongruous	 homonymous
hemianopias	that	split	the	macula.	Optic	tract	lesions	may	be	accompanied	by	a
mild	 APD	 in	 the	 contralateral	 eye	 because	 of	 a	 greater	 percentage	 of	 crossed
pupillomotor	 fibers	 (see	 Chapter	 14).	 Tract	 lesions	 may	 also	 result	 in	 bow-tie
pattern	 disk	 pallor	 in	 the	 contralateral	 eye	 (Box	 13.7)	 and	 more	 generalized
pallor	 in	 the	 ipsilateral	 eye.	 Visual	 acuity	 remains	 normal.	 Etiologies	 of	 optic
tract	 lesions	 include	 masses	 (e.g.,	 meningioma,	 glioma,	 craniopharyngioma),
aneurysms,	 AVMs,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 and	 trauma.	 Rarely,	 an	 APD	 can	 be
seen	 with	 lesions	 elsewhere	 in	 the	 retrochiasmal	 pathways	 and	 even	 in	 the
midbrain.	Behr’s	pupil	refers	to	a	slightly	dilated	pupil	because	of	an	optic	tract
lesion,	usually	associated	with	a	contralateral	hemiparesis.

LGB	 lesions	are	 rare	 and	usually	 because	of	 vascular	disease.	 They	cause	 a
incongruous,

contralateral	 homonymous	 hemianopia	

is	 somewhat	

that	

occasionally	 with	 a	 wedge-shaped	 or	 hour-glass	 pattern	 along	 the	 horizontal
meridian	 pointing	 to	 fixation	 (sectoranopia	 or	 keyhole	 defect)	 and	 splits	 the
macula.	The	unusual	pattern	is	due	to	the	organization	of	the	LGB	and	to	its	dual
blood	 supply.	 Etiologies	 of	 an	 LGB	 lesion	 include	 ischemia,	 neoplasm,	 AVM,
demyelinating	disease,	and	trauma.

In	 geniculocalcarine	 pathway	 (optic	 radiation)	 lesions,	 temporal	 lobe
pathology	
typically	 produces	 contralateral	 superior	 quadrantanopias,	 or
homonymous	 hemianopia,	 worse	 in	 the	 upper	 quadrants;	 and	 parietal	 lobe
processes	 contralateral	 inferior	 quadrantanopias,	 or	 homonymous	 hemianopia,
worse	in	the	lower	quadrants	(Figure	13.19).	The	more	posterior	the	lesion,	the
more	congruous	the	defect.	Parietal	lesions	are	associated	with	asymmetric	OKN
responses.	 Parietal	 lobe	 lesions	 may	 be	 accompanied	 by	 other	 evidence	 of
parietal	lobe	dysfunction,	such	as	cortical	sensory	loss,	aphasia,	apraxia,	agnosia,
anosognosia,	and	hemispatial	neglect	(Chapters	9,	10,	and	35).

In	the	occipital	lobe,	the	upper	retinal	fibers	(lower	VF)	synapse	on	the	upper
bank,	 and	 the	 lower	 retinal	 fibers	 synapse	 on	 the	 lower	 bank	 of	 the	 calcarine
cortex,	which	is	separated	by	the	calcarine	fissure	(Figure	 13.12).	The	 macular
representation	is	massive,	taking	up	the	occipital	pole	and	about	40%	to	50%	of
the	 contiguous	 cortex.	 Occipital	 lobe	 lesions	 cause	 contralateral	 homonymous
hemianopias	 that	 are	 highly	 congruous,	 tend	 to	 spare	 the	 macula,	 and	 do	 not
affect	 OKN	 responses.	 Macular	 sparing	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 due	 in	 part	 to	 middle
cerebral	 artery	 collaterals	 that	 help	 to	 preserve	 macular	 function	 despite	 a
posterior	cerebral	artery	territory	infarct.	Conversely,	the	occipital	pole	is	an	area
of	border	zone	perfusion	between	the	middle	and	posterior	cerebral	arteries,	and
hypotensive	 watershed	
infarctions	 may	 cause	 contralateral	 homonymous
paracentral	scotomas	because	of	ischemia	limited	to	the	macular	cortex	(Figure
13.19D).	 Bilateral	 occipital	 lobe	 lesions	 causing	 bilateral	 hemianopias	 may
cause	 decreased	 visual	 acuity.	 Bilateral	 occipital	 infarcts	 with	 macular	 sparing
may	leave	only	constricted	tunnels	of	central	vision,	as	though	looking	through
pipes.	 Although	 acuity	 may	 be	 normal,	 the	 functional	 visual	 impairment	 is
extreme	 because	 of	 the	 constricted	 peripheral	 vision,	 analogous	 to	 end-stage
retinitis	 pigmentosa.	 Occipital	 lobe	 lesions	 may	 spare	 the	 monocular	 temporal
crescent	 if	 the	 damage	 does	 not	 involve	 the	 anterior	 part	 of	 the	 cortex.
Conversely,	 small	 far	 anteriorly	 placed	 lesions	 may	 involve	 only	 the	 temporal
crescent	in	the	contralateral	eye	(half	[quarter	might	be	more	appropriate]	moon
or	temporal	crescent	syndrome).	Preservation	of	the	temporal	crescent	results	in
strikingly	 incongruous	 fields.	 Preservation	 of	 the	 temporal	 crescent	 has	 been

called	an	“endangered”	finding	because	it	requires	the	now	seldom	used	kinetic
(Goldmann)	 perimetry;	 the	 currently	 used	 static	 perimetric	 techniques	 that
concentrate	 on	 the	 central	 30	 degrees	 of	 the	 VF	 tend	 to	 miss	 this	 phenomenon
(Figure	13.31).

Bilateral	 occipital	 lesions	 may	 also	 cause	 some	 dramatic	 defects	 of	 cortical
function	 in	 addition	 to	 the	 visual	 loss.	 Anton’s	 syndrome	 is	 cortical	 blindness
because	of	bilateral	homonymous	hemianopias,	with	extreme	visual	impairment
in	 which	 the	 patient	 is	 unaware	 of,	 and	 denies	 the	 existence	 of,	 the	 deficit.
Anton’s	syndrome	and	related	disorders	are	discussed	in	Chapter	10.

Most	 occipital	 lesions	 are	 vascular.	 Many	 anterior	 temporal	 lobe	 lesions	 are
neoplastic.	Parietal	lesions	may	be	either.	The	greater	likelihood	of	tumor	in	the
parietal	 lobe	 gives	 rise	 to	 Cogan’s	 rule	 regarding	 OKNs	 (see	 Chapter	 14).
Trauma,	 vascular	 malformations,	 abscesses,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 metastases,
and	other	pathologic	processes	can	occur	in	any	location.

FIGURE	13.31	 Loss	 of	 the	 temporal	 crescent	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 an	 infarct	 in	 the	 right
anterior	occipital	lobe.	Kinetic	perimetry	demonstrates	a	full	peripheral	field	in	the	right
eye	(right),	but	there	is	loss	of	the	far	temporal	field	(the	temporal	crescent)	in	the	left
eye	(left).	(Reprinted	from	Miller	NR,	Biousse	V,	Newman	NJ,	et	al.	Walsh	and	Hoyt’s
Clinical	Neuro-Ophthalmology:	The	Essentials.	3rd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,
2016,	with	permission.)

Other	Abnormalities	of	the	Ocular	Fundus

Other	 abnormalities	 of	 the	 fundus	 are	 also	 important	 to	 detect	 in	 neurologic
patients.	 The	 fundus	 may	 reveal	 evidence	 of	 hypertensive	 retinopathy	 in	 the
patient	 with	 stroke,	 especially	 in	 the	 lacunar	 syndromes.	 In	 the	 patient	 with
hypertensive	 encephalopathy,	 there	 may	 be	 spasm	 of	 retinal	 arterioles.	 Retinal
emboli	may	be	seen	in	the	patient	with	possible	cerebrovascular	disease.	In	the
patient	 with	 acute	 severe	 headache,	 the	 finding	 of	 subhyaloid	 (preretinal)
hemorrhage	is	pathognomonic	for	subarachnoid	hemorrhage	(Figure	13.32).	The

presence	of	a	cherry	red	spot	indicates	a	condition	such	as	gangliosidosis,	lipid
storage	disease	or	mucopolysaccharidosis	in	the	younger	patient	(e.g.,	Tay-Sachs
disease),	or	a	central	retinal	artery	occlusion	in	the	older	patient	(Figure	13.33).
In	 storage	 diseases,	 the	 cherry	 red	 spot	 is	 seen	 because	 of	 the	 accumulation	 of
abnormal	 material	 within	 the	 cell	 layers	 of	 the	 retina.	 Because	 of	 the	 relative
transparency	 of	 the	 macula,	 the	 underlying	 choroid	 is	 visible.	 In	 central	 retinal
artery	 occlusion,	 the	 preservation	 of	 blood	 supply	 to	 the	 macula	 from	 the
choroidal	 circulation	 makes	 it	 stand	 out	 against	 the	 retina	 made	 pale	 by
ischemia.	 Pigmentary	 retinopathy	 is	 seen	 in	 such	 conditions	 as	 Kearns-Sayre
syndrome	and	other	mitochondriopathies.

FIGURE	 13.32	 Subhyaloid	 hemorrhage	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 subarachnoid	 hemorrhage
(Terson’s	 syndrome).	 The	 hemorrhage	 occurs	 between	 the	 posterior	 layer	 of	 the
vitreous	and	the	retina,	is	globular,	and	often	forms	a	meniscus.

FIGURE	13.33	Cherry	red	spot	in	a	patient	with	a	lipid	storage	retinopathy.

Video	Links

Video	Link	13.1.	Afferent	pupillary	defect.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?id=180307&q=sort_type_t-
%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+afferent+pupillary+defect&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t-
%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anonymous.	 The	 clinical	 profile	 of	 optic	 neuritis.	 Experience	 of	 the	 Optic
Neuritis	 Treatment	 Trial.	 Optic	 Neuritis	 Study	 Group.	 Arch	 Ophthalmol
1991;109:1673–1678.

Bell	 RA,	 Thompson	 HS.	 Relative	 afferent	 pupillary	 defect	 in	 optic	 tract

hemianopias.	Am	J	Ophthalmol	1978;85:538–540.

Benton	 S,	 Levy	 I,	 Swash	 M.	 Vision	 in	 the	 temporal	 crescent	 in	 occipital

infarction.	Brain	1980;103:83–97.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Brody	 J,	 Hellmann	 MA,	 Marignier	 R,	 et	 al.	 Neuromyelitis	 optica	 spectrum
disorder:	 disease	 course	 and	 long-term	 visual	 outcome.	 J	 Neuroophthalmol
2016;36:356–362.

Burde	 RM.	 Optic	 disk	 risk	 factors	 for	 nonarteritic	 anterior	 ischemic	 optic

neuropathy.	Am	J	Ophthalmol	1993;116:759–764.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Chavis	 PS,	 al-Hazmi	 A,	 Clunie	 D,	 et	 al.	 Temporal	 crescent	 syndrome	 with

magnetic	resonance	correlation.	J	Neuroophthalmol	1997;17:151–155.

Chen	CJ,	Scheufele	M,	Sheth	M,	et	al.	Isolated	relative	afferent	pupillary	defect
secondary	to	contralateral	midbrain	compression.	Arch	Neurol	2004;61:1451–
1453.

Clearkin	 LG,	 Watts	 MT.	 Ocular	 involvement	 in	 giant	 cell	 arteritis.	 Br	 J	 Hosp

Med	1990;43:373–376.

Downer	JJ,	Leite	MI,	Carter	R,	et	al.	Diagnosis	of	neuromyelitis	optica	(NMO)

spectrum	disorders:	is	MRI	obsolete?	Neuroradiology	2012;54:279–285.

Egan	RA,	Lessell	S.	A	contribution	to	the	natural	history	of	optic	nerve	sheath

meningiomas.	Arch	Ophthalmol	2002;120:1505–1508.

Feldman	M,	Todman	L,	Bender	MB.	‘Flight	of	colours’	in	lesions	of	the	visual

system.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1974;37:1265–1272.

Frisen	L,	Hoyt	WF.	Insidious	atrophy	of	retinal	nerve	fibers	in	multiple	sclerosis.
Funduscopic	 identification	 in	 patients	 with	 and	 without	 visual	 complaints.
Arch	Ophthalmol	1974;92:91–97.

Fujino	 T,	 Kigazawa	 KI,	 Yamada	 R.	 Homonymous	 hemianopia:	 a	 retrospective

study	of	140	cases.	Neuroophthalmology	1986;6:17–21.

Gilden	 D,	 White	 T,	 Khmeleva	 N,	 et	 al.	 Prevalence	 and	 distribution	 of	 VZV	 in
temporal	arteries	of	patients	with	giant	cell	arteritis.	Neurology	2015;84:1948–
1955.

Giuseppe	G.	The	spectrum	of	the	visual	field	defects	in	the	tilted	disc	syndrome:

clinical	study	and	review.	Neuroophthalmology	1986;10:239–246.

Glaser	 JS,	 Savino	 PJ,	 Sumers	 KD,	 et	 al.	 The	 photostress	 recovery	 test	 in	 the
clinical	assessment	of	visual	function.	Am	J	Ophthalmol	1977;83:255–260.
Hackelbusch	R,	Nover	A,	Scherer	U.	Bitemporal	visual	field	defects	in	the	tilted

disk	syndrome.	Neuroophthalmology	1986;6:125–127.

Hayreh	SS.	Anterior	ischemic	optic	neuropathy.	Arch	Neurol	1981;38:675–678.
Horton	 JC,	 Hoyt	 WF.	 The	 representation	 of	 the	 visual	 field	 in	 human	 striate

cortex.	 A	
1991;109:816–824.

revision	 of	

the	 classic	 Holmes	 map.	 Arch	 Ophthalmol

Hoyt	 WF,	 Schlicke	 B,	 Eckelhoff	 RJ.	 Fundoscopic	 appearance	 of	 a	 nerve-fibre-

bundle	defect.	Br	J	Ophthalmol	1972;56:577–583.

Ichhpujani	 P,	 Rome	 JE,	 Jindal	 A,	 et	 al.	 Comparative	 study	 of	 3	 techniques	 to

detect	a	relative	afferent	pupillary	defect.	J	Glaucoma	2011;20:535–539.

Karanjia	 N,	 Jacobson	 DM.	 Compression	 of	 the	 prechiasmatic	 optic	 nerve

produces	a	junctional	scotoma.	Am	J	Ophthalmol	1999;128:256–258.

Katz	J,	Tielsch	JM,	Quigley	HA,	et	al.	Automated	perimetry	detects	visual	field
loss	before	manual	Goldmann	perimetry.	Ophthalmology	1995;102:21–26.
Keane	JR.	Patterns	of	hysterical	hemianopia.	Neurology	1998;51:1230–1231.
Keltner	 JL,	 Johnson	 CA.	 Automated	 and	 manual	 perimetry—a	 six-year
overview.	 Special	 emphasis	 on	 neuro-ophthalmic	 problems.	 Ophthalmology
1984;91:68–85.

Kerr	NM,	Chew	SS,	Eady	EK,	et	al.	Diagnostic	accuracy	of	confrontation	visual

field	tests.	Neurology	2010;74:1184–1190.

Kim	 HJ,	 Paul	 F,	 Lana-Peixoto	 MA,	 et	 al.	 MRI	 characteristics	 of	 neuromyelitis
optica	 spectrum	 disorder:	 an	 international	 update.	 Neurology	 2015;84:1165–
1173.

Lakhanpal	 A,	 Selhorst	 JB.	 Bilateral	 altitudinal	 visual	 fields.	 Ann	 Ophthalmol

1990;22:112–117.

Landau	 K,	 Wichmann	 W,	 Valavanis	 A.	 The	 missing	 temporal	 crescent.	 Am	 J

Ophthalmol	1995;119:345–349.

Lee	 JH,	 Tobias	 S,	 Kwon	 JT,	 et	 al.	 Wilbrand’s	 knee:	 does	 it	 exist?	 Surg	 Neurol

2006;66:11–17.

Lee	 MS,	 Balcer	 LJ,	 Volpe	 NJ,	 et	 al.	 Laser	 pointer	 visual	 field	 screening.	 J

Neuroophthalmol	2003;23:260–263.

Liu	 GT,	 Volpe	 NJ,	 Galetta	 S.	 Neuro-Ophthalmology:	 Diagnosis	 and

Management.	2nd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Saunders	Elsevier,	2010.

Lepore	FE.	The	origin	of	pain	in	optic	neuritis.	Determinants	of	pain	in	101	eyes

with	optic	neuritis.	Arch	Neurol	1991;48:748–749.

Lepore	 FE.	 The	 preserved	 temporal	 crescent:	 the	 clinical	 implications	 of	 an

“endangered”	finding.	Neurology	2001;57:1918–1921.

Lessell	S.	Optic	neuropathies.	N	Engl	J	Med	1978;299:533–536.
Levin	BE.	The	clinical	significance	of	spontaneous	pulsations	of	the	retinal	vein.

Arch	Neurol	1978;35:37–40.

Masuyama	Y,	Kodama	Y,	Matsuura	Y,	et	al.	Clinical	studies	on	the	occurrence

and	the	pathogenesis	of	optociliary	veins.	J	Clin	Neuroophthalmol	1990;10:1–
8.

Miller	 NR,	 Biousse	 V,	 Newman	 NJ,	 et	 al.	 Walsh	 and	 Hoyt’s	 Clinical	 Neuro-
Ophthalmology:	The	Essentials.	2nd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&
Wilkins,	2008.

Muci-Mendoza	R,	Arevalo	JF,	Ramella	M,	et	al.	Optociliary	veins	in	optic	nerve
findings.

Indocyanine	 green	 videoangiography	

sheath	 meningioma.	
Ophthalmology	1999;106:311–318.

Nakashima	 I,	 Fukazawa	 T,	 Ota	 K,	 et	 al.	 Two	 subtypes	 of	 optic-spinal	 form	 of
multiple	 sclerosis	 in	 Japan:	 clinical	 and	 laboratory	 features.	 J	 Neurol
2007;254:488–492.

Neville	 RG,	 Greenblatt	 SH,	 Kollartis	 CR.	 Foster	 Kennedy	 syndrome	 and	 an
optociliary	vein	in	a	patient	with	a	falx	meningioma.	J	Clin	Neuroophthalmol
1984;4:97–101.

Newman	 NJ.	 Neuro-ophthalmology:	 the	 afferent	 visual	 system.	 Curr	 Opin

Neurol	1993;6:738–746.

Newman	 NJ.	 Leber’s	 hereditary	 optic	 neuropathy.	 New	 genetic	 considerations.

Arch	Neurol	1993;50:540–548.
Newman	 SA,	 Miller	 NR.	 Optic	

tract	 syndrome.	 Neuro-ophthalmologic

considerations.	Arch	Ophthalmol	1983;101:1241–1250.

Newman	 NJ,	 Lessell	 S,	 Winterkorn	 JM.	 Optic	 chiasmal	 neuritis.	 Neurology

1991;41:1203–1210.

Osaguona	VB.	Differential	diagnoses	of	the	pale/white/atrophic	disc.	Community

Eye	Health	2016;29:71–74.

Pandit	 RJ,	 Gales	 K,	 Griffiths	 PG.	 Effectiveness	 of	 testing	 visual	 fields	 by

confrontation.	Lancet	2001;358:1339–1340.

Papais-Alvarenga	 RM,	 Carellos	 SC,	 Alvarenga	 MP,	 et	 al.	 Clinical	 course	 of
optic	neuritis	in	patients	with	relapsing	neuromyelitis	optica.	Arch	Ophthalmol
2008;126:12–16.

Rizzo	 JF	 III,	 Lessell	 S.	 Optic	 neuritis	 and	 ischemic	 optic	 neuropathy.

Overlapping	clinical	profiles.	Arch	Ophthalmol	1991;109:1668–1672.

Rosenberg	MA,	Savino	PJ,	Glaser	JS.	A	clinical	analysis	of	pseudopapilledema.
error,	 ophthalmoscopic

I.	 Population,	
characteristics,	and	coincident	disease.	Arch	Ophthalmol	1979;97:65–70.

refractive	

laterality,	

acuity,	

Sadun	 AA,	 Currie	 JN,	 Lessell	 S.	 Transient	 visual	 obscurations	 with	 elevated

optic	discs.	Ann	Neurol	1984;16:489–494.

Salinas-Garcia	 RF,	 Smith	 JL.	 Binasal	 hemianopia.	 Surg	 Neurol	 1978;10:187–

194.

Sato	DK,	Lana-Peixoto	MA,	Fujihara	K,	et	al.	Clinical	spectrum	and	treatment
of	neuromyelitis	optica	spectrum	disorders:	evolution	and	current	status.	Brain
Pathol	2013;23:647–660.

Savino	PJ,	Glaser	JS,	Rosenberg	MA.	A	clinical	analysis	of	pseudopapilledema.

II.	Visual	field	defects.	Arch	Ophthalmol	1979;97:71–75.

Savino	 PJ,	 Paris	 M,	 Schatz	 NJ,	 et	 al.	 Optic	 tract	 syndrome.	 A	 review	 of	 21

patients.	Arch	Ophthalmol	1978;96:656–663.

Selhorst	JB,	Chen	Y.	The	optic	nerve.	Semin	Neurol	2009;29:29–35.
Shamir	 RR,	 Friedman	 Y,	 Joskowicz	 L,	 et	 al.	 Comparison	 of	 Snellen	 and	 Early
Treatment	Diabetic	Retinopathy	Study	charts	using	a	computer	simulation.	Int
J	Ophthalmol	2016;9:119–123.

Smetana	 GW,	 Shmerling	 RH.	 Does	 this	 patient	 have	 temporal	 arteritis?	 JAMA

2002;287:92–101.

Susac	 JO,	 Smith	 JL,	 Walsh	 FB.	 The	 impossible	 meningioma.	 Arch	 Neurol

1977;34:36–38.

Thompson	 HS,	 Corbett	 JJ,	 Cox	 TA.	 How	 to	 measure	 the	 relative	 afferent

pupillary	defect.	Surv	Ophthalmol	1981;26:39–42.

Trobe	JD,	Acosta	PC,	Krischer	JP,	et	al.	Confrontation	visual	field	techniques	in
the	detection	of	anterior	visual	pathway	lesions.	Ann	Neurol	1981;10:28–34.
Vongphanit	 J,	 Mitchell	 P,	 Wang	 JJ.	 Population	 prevalence	 of	 tilted	 optic	 disks
and	 the	 relationship	 of	 this	 sign	 to	 refractive	 error.	 Am	 J	 Ophthalmol
2002;133:679–685.

Warner	JE,	Lessell	S,	Rizzo	JF	III,	et	al.	Does	optic	disc	appearance	distinguish
from	 optic	 neuritis?	 Arch	 Ophthalmol

ischemic	 optic	 neuropathy	
1997;115:1408–1410.

Watnick	RL,	Trobe	JD.	Bilateral	optic	nerve	compression	as	a	mechanism	for	the

Foster	Kennedy	syndrome.	Ophthalmology	1989;96:1793–1798.

Wilhelm	 H,	 Peters	 T,	 Ludtke	 H,	 et	 al.	 The	 prevalence	 of	 relative	 afferent
pupillary	defects	in	normal	subjects.	J	Neuroophthalmol	2007;27:263–267.
Wingerchuk	 DM,	 Lennon	 VA,	 Pittock	 SJ,	 et	 al.	 Revised	 diagnostic	 criteria	 for

neuromyelitis	optica.	Neurology	2006;66:1485–1489.

Whiting	AS,	Johnson	LN.	Papilledema:	clinical	clues	and	differential	diagnosis.

Am	Fam	Physician	1992;45:1125–1134.

Yan	 Y,	 Li	 Y,	 Fu	 Y,	 et	 al.	 Autoantibody	 to	 MOG	 suggests	 two	 distinct	 clinical

subtypes	of	NMOSD.	Sci	China	Life	Sci	2016;59:1270–1281.

Zhang	X,	Kedar	S,	Lynn	MJ,	et	al.	Homonymous	hemianopias:	clinical-anatomic

correlations	in	904	cases.	Neurology	2006;66:906–910.

CHAPTER	14

The	Ocular	Motor	Nerves

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

By	convention,	the	phrase	ocular	motor	nerves	refers	to	cranial	nerves	(CNs)	III,
IV,	 and	 VI,	 and	 the	 term	 oculomotor	 nerve	 refers	 specifically	 to	 CN	 III.	 The
orbits	and	the	globes	lie	in	the	skull	divergently,	making	the	anatomic	axes	of	the
eyes	diverge	slightly	from	the	visual	axes,	which	lie	straight	ahead	for	distance
vision	and	convergently	for	near	vision.	In	sleep	and	coma,	the	eyes	rest	in	the
divergent	 position	 of	 anatomic	 neutrality.	 In	 wakefulness,	 cerebral	 cortical
activity	 influencing	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 lines	 the	 eyes	 up	 for	 efficient,
binocular	vision.	Phorias	and	tropias	are	manifestations	of	the	latent	or	manifest
tendency,	 respectively,	 of	 the	 eyes	 to	 drift	 away	 from	 the	 visual	 axis	 (see	 Box
14.4).

The	 four	 rectus	 muscles	 arise	 from	 a	 common	 structure	 in	 the	 orbital	 apex,
the	annulus	of	Zinn.	The	annulus	is	a	thickening	of	the	periosteum	that	forms	a
circular	 tendon,	 its	 center	 pierced	 by	 the	 optic	 nerve,	 central	 retinal	 artery	 and
CNs	III	and	VI,	and	the	recti	arising	from	its	body.	The	rectus	muscles	insert	on
the	sclera	5	to	7	mm	posterior	to	the	limbus.

The	 nervous	 system	 attempts	 to	 maintain	 visual	 fusion	 of	 images	 by
controlling	 precisely	 the	 movements	 of	 the	 two	 eyes.	 The	 extraocular	 muscles
work	in	 pairs	that	 are	yoked	 together	and	work	in	concert	to	perform	a	certain
action.	The	superior	and	inferior	recti	lie	in	the	orbit,	and	insert	into	the	globe,
along	the	anatomic	axis,	exerting	their	maximally	efficient	pull	when	the	eye	is
slightly	abducted	(Figure	14.1).	The	superior	and	inferior	obliques	insert	into	the
globe	at	an	angle	of	about	30	degrees	from	medial	to	lateral;	they	exert	maximal
pull	 with	 the	 eye	 slightly	 adducted.	 The	 obliques	 insert	 posteriorly	 into	 the
globe:	 the	 superior	 oblique	 pulls	 the	 back	 of	 the	 eye	 up,	 producing	 downgaze;
the	 inferior	 oblique	 pulls	 the	 back	 of	 the	 eye	 down,	 producing	 upgaze.	 The

superior	oblique	therefore	works	as	a	depressor	of	the	adducted	eye,	the	inferior
oblique	as	an	elevator;	they	move	the	globe	in	the	direction	opposite	their	names
(Figure	14.2).

To	 achieve	 conjugate	 downgaze	 to	 one	 side,	 the	 superior	 oblique	 of	 the
adducting	eye	is	yoked	to	the	inferior	rectus	of	the	abducting	eye	(Figure	14.3).
In	 fact,	 even	 in	 adduction,	 most	 of	 ocular	 elevation	 and	 depression	 is
accomplished	 by	 the	 superior	 and	 inferior	 rectus,	 and	 the	 major	 action	 of	 both
obliques	 is	 torsional	 (cyclotorsional,	 rotational).	 The	 primary	 action—some
contend	the	only	action—of	the	superior	oblique	is	to	intort	(incyclotort)	and	of
the	 inferior	 oblique	 to	 extort	 (excyclotort).	 Because	 of	 its	 angle	 of	 insertion
along	the	anatomic	axis,	when	the	eye	is	in	primary	gaze,	the	inferior	rectus	acts
not	 only	 to	 depress	 the	 eye	 but	 also	 to	 extort	 it.	 The	 yoked	 superior	 oblique,
through	its	intorsion	action,	counteracts	the	extorsion	effect	of	the	inferior	rectus
so	 that	 downgaze	 is	 smooth	 and	 linear.	 Likewise,	 the	 superior	 rectus	 and	 the
inferior	oblique.

Because	of	the	anatomical	arrangement	of	the	obliques	and	vertically	acting
recti,	examination	of	extraocular	movement	should	include	gaze	to	the	right	and
left	 plus	 upgaze	 and	 downgaze	 in	 eccentric	 position	 to	 both	 sides:	 the	 six
cardinal	 directions	 of	 gaze	 (Figure	 14.3).	 The	 levator	 palpebrae	 superioris
supplies	the	striated	muscles	of	the	eyelid	and	elevates	the	lid.

THE	OCULOMOTOR	NERVE

The	 oculomotor,	 or	 third	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN	 III),	 arises	 from	 the	 oculomotor
nuclear	 complex	 in	 the	 midbrain	 and	 conveys	 motor	 fibers	 to	 extraocular
muscles,	plus	parasympathetic	fibers	to	the	pupil	and	ciliary	body.	These	nuclear
centers	 are	 situated	 in	 the	 periaqueductal	 gray	 matter	 just	 anterior	 to	 the
aqueduct	of	Sylvius,	at	the	level	of	the	superior	colliculi	(anterior	quadrigeminal
bodies).	 The	 median	 longitudinal	 fasciculus	 (MLF)	 abuts	 the	 nucleus	 laterally
and	 ventrally	 (Figure	 14.4).	 Each	 oculomotor	 nucleus	 consists	 of	 multiple
adjacent	 subnuclei	 that	 innervate	 specific	 ocular	 muscles.	 The	 neurons	 are
somatic	motor	(general	somatic	efferent).	The	paired	lateral	nuclei	are	the	largest
and	are	situated	anterior	and	lateral	to	the	others;	their	medial	portions	are	fused
into	 an	 unpaired	 mass.	 CN	 III	 has	 a	 superior	 and	 an	 inferior	 division.	 The
superior	 division	 supplies	 the	 levator	 palpebrae	 superioris	 and	 superior	 rectus
muscles.	The	inferior	division	supplies	the	medial	and	inferior	recti,	the	inferior

oblique,	 and	the	pupil.	The	lateral	subnucleus	innervates	the	 ipsilateral	inferior
oblique	and	medial	and	inferior	recti;	its	axons	make	up	the	inferior	division	of
CN	 III.	 The	 superior	 rectus	 muscle	 is	 innervated	 by	 the	 contralateral	 medial
subnucleus.	Because	of	its	crossed	innervation,	a	major	clue	to	the	presence	of	a
nuclear	third	nerve	palsy	is	superior	rectus	weakness	in	the	opposite	eye.

FIGURE	14.1	The	extraocular	muscles	and	the	third	nerve	in	the	orbit.

lesions	

function;	 destructive	

A	 single	 midline	 structure,	 the	 central	 caudal	 nucleus,	 supplies	 the	 levator
palpebrae	muscles	on	both	sides.	The	periaqueductal	gray	matter	is	also	involved
there	 may	 cause	 ptosis.	 A
with	 eyelid	
supraoculomotor	 area	 in	 the	 ventral	 periaqueductal	 gray	 matter	 controlling
levator	function	has	been	proposed.	The	Edinger-Westphal	(EW)	nuclei	are	part
of	 the	 craniosacral,	 or	 parasympathetic,	 division	 of	 the	 autonomic	 nervous
system.	The	EW	subnucleus	is	a	single	structure	that	provides	parasympathetic
innervation	 to	 both	 sides.	 It	 is	 spread	 throughout	 the	 length	 of	 the	 oculomotor
complex	with	a	paired	rostral	portion	and	an	unpaired	medial	and	caudal	portion.
Preganglionic	fibers	from	the	EW	nuclei	go	to	the	ciliary	ganglion	(Figure	13.9).
Postganglionic	 fibers	 derived	 from	 cells	 in	 the	 rostral	 part	 of	 the	 subnucleus
supply	 the	 pupillary	 sphincter;	 those	 derived	 from	 the	 anteromedial	 nucleus
supply	 the	 ciliary	 muscle	 and	 function	 in	 accommodation.	 Fibers	 from	 the

medial,	EW,	and	central	caudal	subnuclei	form	the	superior	division	of	CN	III.
ref	no:

FIGURE	14.2	Actions	of	the	extraocular	muscles	on	the	left	eye.	Arrows	denote	the
main	directions	of	action	for	each	muscle,	resulting	from	a	combination	of	movements
of	the	globe	in	the	three	dimensions.

FIGURE	 14.3	 The	 yoke	 muscles	 control	 extraocular	 movement	 in	 the	 six	 cardinal
directions	of	gaze.

the	 substantia	 nigra.	 The	 nerve	 exits	 from	

Fibers	 from	 the	 ipsilateral	 lateral	 subnucleus,	 from	 the	 contralateral	 medial
subnucleus	 (superior	 rectus),	 and	 from	 both	 central	 caudal	 (levator	 palpebrae)
and	 EW	 (parasympathetics)	 nuclei	 join	 to	 form	 the	 filaments	 of	 CN	 III,	 which
course	 anteriorly	 through	 the	 mesencephalon,	 traversing	 the	 medial	 portion	 of
the	 red	 nucleus	 and	
the
interpeduncular	fossa	on	the	anterior	surface	of	the	midbrain	just	above	the	pons
(Figure	11.3).	It	travels	anteriorly	and	passes	between	the	superior	cerebellar	and
posterior	cerebral	arteries	(Figure	14.5).	It	runs	forward	parallel	to	the	posterior
communicating	 artery.	 Third	 nerve	 palsy	 is	 a	 classic	 and	 important	 sign	 of
posterior	communicating	aneurysm.	In	its	course	toward	the	cavernous	sinus,	it
lies	 on	 the	 free	 edge	 of	 the	 tentorium	 cerebelli,	 medial	 to	 the	 temporal	 lobe.
Here,	 it	 is	 at	 risk	 of	 compression	 because	 of	 uncal	 herniation.	 Through	 the
nerve’s	subarachnoid	 course,	the	parasympathetic	 fibers	lie	 superficially	on	the
dorsomedial	 surface.	 The	 location	 of	 these	 fibers	 influences	 whether	 a	 third
nerve	palsy	will	or	will	not	involve	the	pupil,	an	important	differential	diagnostic

point.	CN	III	penetrates	the	dura	just	lateral	and	anterior	to	the	posterior	clinoid
processes	and	enters	the	cavernous	sinus,	where	it	lies	in	the	upper	aspect,	close
to	 the	 lateral	 wall	 (Figure	 14.6).	 In	 the	 cavernous	 sinus,	 CN	 III	 has	 important
relationships	 with	 the	 carotid	 artery,	 ascending	 pericarotid	 sympathetics,	 and
CNs	IV,	V,	and	VI.	CN	III	separates	into	its	superior	and	inferior	divisions	in	the
anterior	 cavernous	 sinus,	 then	 enters	 the	 orbit	 through	 the	 superior	 orbital
fissure,	 and	 passes	 through	 the	 annulus	 of	 Zinn.	 It	 sends	 a	 short	 root	 to	 the
ciliary	ganglion,	from	which	postganglionic	fibers	go	as	the	short	ciliary	nerves
to	 supply	 the	 ciliary	 muscle	 and	 the	 sphincter	 pupillae	 (Figure	 14.1).	 The
sphincter	 pupillae	 causes	 constriction	 of	 the	 pupil.	 Contraction	 of	 the	 ciliary
muscle	causes	relaxation	of	the	ciliary	zonule,	decreasing	the	tension	on	the	lens
capsule	and	allowing	it	to	become	more	convex	to	accommodate	for	near	vision.
Pupillary	constriction,	convergence,	and	accommodation	are	all	part	of	the	near
reflex.

FIGURE	 14.4	 Section	 through	 the	 mesencephalon	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 superior
colliculus	and	oculomotor	nucleus.

FIGURE	14.5	Anatomy	of	the	oculomotor	nerve	in	relation	to	the	major	arteries	at	the
base	 of	 the	 brain.	 An	 aneurysm	 arising	 from	 the	 posterior	 communicating	 artery	 is
compressing	and	distorting	the	nerve.

FIGURE	14.6	Oblique	section	through	the	cavernous	sinus.

THE	TROCHLEAR	NERVE

The	trochlear,	or	fourth	cranial	nerve	(CN	IV),	is	the	smallest	CN.	It	arises	from
the	trochlear	nucleus	located	just	anterior	to	the	aqueduct	in	the	gray	matter	of
the	 lower	 mesencephalon	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 inferior	 colliculus,	 immediately
above	 the	 pons	 (Figure	 14.7)	 and	 caudal	 to	 the	 lateral	 nucleus	 of	 CN	 III	 but
separated	by	a	short	distance.	The	nucleus	contains	somatic	motor	neurons.	The
nerve	filaments	curve	posteriorly	around	the	aqueduct,	decussate	in	the	anterior
medullary	velum,	and	exit	through	the	tectum.	It	is	the	only	CN	to	exit	from	the
brainstem	posteriorly,	and	because	of	this	extra	distance,	CN	IV	has	the	longest
intracranial	course	of	any	of	the	CNs.	The	nerve	circles	the	brainstem,	then	turns

and	runs	forward,	passing	between	the	posterior	cerebral	and	superior	cerebellar
arteries,	and	then	courses	along	the	tentorium.	It	penetrates	the	dura	just	behind
and	 lateral	 to	 the	 posterior	 clinoid	 processes	 and	 enters	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 in
proximity	to	CN	III.	In	the	sinus,	it	is	located	superolaterally,	below	CN	III	but
above	 the	 trigeminal	 branches.	 Leaving	 the	 cavernous	 sinus,	 it	 traverses	 the
superior	 orbital	 fissure,	 enters	 the	 orbit,	 and	 crosses	 over	 CN	 III	 to	 supply	 the
superior	oblique.	It	does	not	pass	through	the	annulus	of	Zinn.

CN	 IV	 terminates	 on	 the	 superior	 oblique	 muscle	 on	 the	 side	 opposite	 the
nucleus	 of	 origin.	 In	 a	 nuclear	 lesion	 of	 the	 fourth	 nerve,	 the	 contralateral
superior	 oblique	 muscle	 is	 weakened;	 in	 an	 extramedullary	 lesion	 along	 the
course	of	the	nerve,	the	ipsilateral	muscle	is	involved.

THE	ABDUCENS	NERVE

The	nucleus	of	the	abducens,	or	sixth	cranial	nerve	(CN	VI),	lies	in	the	mid	to
lower	pons,	in	the	gray	matter	of	the	dorsal	pontine	tegmentum	in	the	floor	of	the
fourth	ventricle,	encircled	by	the	looping	fibers	of	the	facial	nerve	(Figure	14.8).
The	nucleus	is	made	up	of	somatic	motor	neurons.	The	nerve	exits	anteriorly	at
the	 pontomedullary	 junction,	 crosses	 the	 internal	 auditory	 artery,	 and	 then
ascends	the	clivus	in	the	prepontine	cistern.	It	passes	near	the	gasserian	ganglion,
makes	a	sharp	turn	over	the	petrous	apex,	pierces	the	dura	at	the	dorsum	sellae,
and	 traverses	 the	 Dorello’s	 canal	 between	 the	 posterior	 clinoid	 process	 and	 the
petrous	apex.	The	petroclinoid	ligament	forms	the	roof	of	the	canal.	The	nerve
enters	the	cavernous	sinus	in	company	with	CNs	III	and	IV,	where	it	lies	below
and	medial	to	CN	III	and	just	lateral	to	the	internal	carotid	artery.	CN	VI	is	the
only	 nerve	 that	 lies	 free	 in	 the	 lumen	 of	 the	 sinus;	 the	 others	 are	 in	 the	 wall
(Figure	 14.6).	 It	 enters	 the	 orbit	 through	 the	 superior	 orbital	 fissure	 and	 the
annulus	of	Zinn	to	innervate	the	lateral	rectus.

FIGURE	14.7	Section	through	the	mesencephalon	at	the	border	of	the	pons,	showing
the	trochlear	nerve.

FIGURE	 14.8	 Section	 through	 the	 pons	 showing	 fibers	 of	 the	 abducens	 and	 facial
nerves.

SUPRANUCLEAR	CONTROL	OF	GAZE

The	supranuclear	mechanisms	that	control	gaze	are	designed	to	ensure	that	the
fovea	 maintains	 fixation	 on	 the	 object	 of	 interest	 despite	 movements	 of	 the
object,	the	eyes,	or	the	head.	A	saccade	(Fr.	“jerk”)	is	a	quick,	small-amplitude
eye	movement	used	to	acquire	a	target.	Smooth	pursuit	mechanisms	use	slower
eye	movements	to	track	a	target	once	acquired.	Saccades	are	designed	to	rapidly
shift	gaze	to	the	target;	pursuit	movements	are	designed	to	maintain	foveation	of
a	 moving	 target.	 The	 CN	 VI	 nucleus	 is	 the	 final	 common	 pathway	 controlling
horizontal	eye	movements.	The	vertical	gaze	centers	lie	in	the	midbrain.	There
are	 six	 currently	 recognized	 eye	 movement	 control	 systems:	 saccadic,	 smooth
pursuit,	vergence,	fixation,	optokinetic,	and	vestibuloocular	reflex	(VOR).

Four	interconnected	cortical	areas	are	involved	in	the	generation	of	saccades:
the	frontal	eye	field	(FEF),	which	lies	anterior	to	the	motor	strip	in	the	premotor

cortex	in	the	second	frontal	gyrus;	the	supplementary	eye	field,	which	lies	in	the
supplementary	motor	area;	the	dorsolateral	prefrontal	cortex,	which	lies	anterior
to	the	FEF	in	the	second	frontal	gyrus;	and	the	posterior	eye	field,	which	lies	in
the	parietal	lobe.

FIGURE	 14.9	 Diagram	 of	 the	 major	 supranuclear	 gaze	 pathways.	 The	 saccadic
pathway	arises	in	the	frontal	lobe	and	descends	to	the	contralateral	pons.	The	pursuit

pathway	 arises	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 parietotemporal-occipital	 junction	 (PTOJ)	 and
descends	 to	 the	 ipsilateral	 pons.	 Vertical	 dashed	 line	 represents	 the	 midline.	 III,
nucleus	 of	 CN	 III;	 VI,	 nucleus	 of	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN)	 VI;	 DLPN,	 dorsolateral	 pontine
nuclei;	 MLF,	 medial	 longitudinal	 fasciculus;	 NPH,	 nucleus	 prepositus	 hypoglossi;
PPRF,	pontine	paramedian	reticular	formation;	VN,	vestibular	nuclei.

The	 FEF	 controls	 horizontal	 conjugate	 saccades	 to	 the	 opposite	 side.	 Fibers
descend	 and	 decussate	 en	 route	 to	 the	 pontine	 paramedian	 reticular	 formation
(PPRF)	 (Figure	 14.9).	 Other	 fibers	 descend	 to	 the	 superior	 colliculus	 and	 are
then	 relayed	 to	 the	 contralateral	 PPRF.	 The	 FEF	 to	 the	 superior	 colliculus
pathway	and	the	posterior	eye	fields	are	likely	involved	in	reflex	saccades.	The
PPRF	 (horizontal	 gaze	 center,	 lateral	 gaze	 center,	 pontine	 gaze	 center)	 is	 a
premotor	area	that	consists	of	cells	lying	ventrolateral	to	the	MLF	from	the	level
of	the	abducens	nucleus	extending	rostrally	to	near	the	trochlear	nucleus.	Signals
from	the	PPRF	activate	both	motor	neurons	and	interneurons	in	the	adjacent	CN
VI	 nucleus.	 The	 CN	 VI	 motor	 neurons	 activate	 the	 ipsilateral	 lateral	 rectus,
whereas	 the	 interneurons	 simultaneously	 send	 impulses	 up	 the	 MLF,	 which
decussates	just	rostral	to	the	PPRF	and	runs	to	the	medial	rectus	subnucleus	of
the	 contralateral	 oculomotor	 nuclear	 complex	 in	 the	 midbrain	 to	 activate	 the
medial	rectus.	 The	 ipsilateral	lateral	rectus	and	contralateral	 medial	rectus	then
contract	 synchronously	 to	 produce	 conjugate	 horizontal	 gaze.	 A	 left	 FEF-
initiated	 command	 to	 look	 right	 is	 thus	 transmitted	 down	 to	 the	 right	 PPRF,
which	 simultaneously	 influences	 the	 right	 sixth	 nerve	 to	 contract	 the	 lateral
rectus	 and	 the	 left	 third	 nerve	 to	 contract	 the	 yoked	 medial	 rectus—both
contract,	according	to	Hering’s	law,	exactly	the	same	amount.

The	 PPRF	 contains	 burst	 and	 pause	 neurons.	 The	 burst	 neurons	 fire	 a	 high-
frequency	pulse	of	discharges	to	initiate	an	ipsilateral	saccade.	The	burst	neurons
determine	 saccadic	 velocity.	 The	 pause	 neurons	 lie	 in	 the	 nucleus	 raphe
interpositus.	 Their	 tonic	 discharges	 prevent	 the	 burst	 cells	 from	 initiating
extraneous	saccades,	and	the	tonic	firing	pauses	just	before	and	during	saccades.
Smooth	 pursuit	 signals	 to	 the	 PPRF	 come	 from	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei	 and	 the
nucleus	 prepositus	 hypoglossi,	 which	 lies	 in	 the	 perihypoglossal	 nuclear
complex.	 Step	 cells	 in	 the	 perihypoglossal	 nuclei	 control	 the	 impulses	 that
maintain	 the	 eyes	 in	 an	 eccentric	 position	 following	 a	 saccade.	 To	 acquire	 and
maintain	an	eccentric	stationary	target,	the	CN	VI	motor	neurons	would	have	a
pulse	of	activity	generated	by	the	burst	cells	to	create	the	saccade,	followed	by	a
step-up	 of	 firing	 generated	 by	 the	 step	 cells	 to	 maintain	 the	 new	 position.	 All
movements	 would	 be	 conjugate	 and	 synchronous	 because	 of	 coordination	 with

the	fellow	eye	by	the	MLF.

The	 dorsolateral	 prefrontal	 cortical	 area	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 mechanisms
responsible	 for	 inhibiting	 unwanted	 saccades.	 Antisaccades	 are	 voluntary
saccades	 away	 from	 a	 target.	 Patients	 with	 frontal	 lobe	 disease,	 progressive
supranuclear	 palsy	 (PSP),	 Parkinson’s	 disease,	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 and
schizophrenia,	when	asked	to	look	away	from	a	visual	stimulus,	may	be	unable
to	 inhibit	 a	 saccade	 toward	 the	 target	 (prosaccade)	 and	 are	 therefore	 unable	 to
make	 an	 antisaccade	 or	 make	 it	 only	 after	 a	 prosaccade.	 Another	 system
involved	in	saccades	works	through	the	basal	ganglia.	Collaterals	from	the	FEF
go	to	the	head	of	the	caudate	and	putamen,	which	send	fibers	to	the	ipsilateral
substantia	nigra.	Neurons	in	the	pars	reticulata	project	to	the	superior	colliculus,
which	then	projects	to	the	PPRF.	Disturbances	in	this	system	may	explain	some
of	the	abnormalities	of	ocular	motor	control	that	occur	in	basal	ganglia	disorders,
particularly	Parkinson’s	disease.

The	FEF	to	the	contralateral	PPRF	system	controls	saccadic	eye	movements.
The	 smooth	 pursuit	 system	 originates	 ipsilaterally	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the
parietotemporal-occipital	junction	(PTOJ)	and	functions	to	maintain	foveation	of
a	 moving	 target.	 The	 visual	 cortex	 sends	 information	 about	 the	 target	 to	 the
extrastriate	cortex	at	the	PTOJ.	From	there,	fibers	descend	in	the	internal	sagittal
stratum	 adjacent	 to	 the	 atrium	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle	 down	 to	 the	 ipsilateral
dorsolateral	pontine	nuclei.	The	system	then	double	decussates.	The	dorsolateral
pontine	 nuclei	 project	 to	 the	 contralateral	 cerebellum.	 Signals	 from	 the
cerebellum	 then	 activate	 the	 medial	 vestibular	 nucleus	 and	 the	 nucleus
propositus	hypoglossi,	which	in	turn	project	to	the	contralateral	PPRF.	The	PPRF
then	coordinates	conjugate	horizontal	pursuit	movements.	The	PTOJ	also	sends
corticocortical	fibers	to	the	ipsilateral	frontal	lobe.	Smooth	pursuit	to	the	right	is
controlled	by	the	right	occipital	region.	Quick	refixation	saccades	back	to	the	left
are	 mediated	 by	 the	 right	 FEF,	 so	 the	 process	 of	 following	 a	 series	 of	 moving
objects	 (as	 in	 optokinetic	 nystagmus	 [OKN],	 or	 railroad	 nystagmus)	 is	 all
accomplished	in	the	same	cerebral	hemisphere.

The	vergence	system	controls	the	degree	of	convergence	or	divergence	of	the
eyes,	maintaining	macular	fixation	no	matter	what	the	distance	to	the	target.	The
vestibular	 system	 has	 a	 large	 input	 into	 the	 oculomotor	 system	 in	 order	 to
maintain	proper	eye	orientation	in	relation	to	head	and	body	position.	The	VOR
produces	 conjugate	 eye	 movements	 of	 equal	 magnitude	 but	 in	 the	 opposite
direction	 to	 compensate	 for	 head	 movements	 in	 order	 to	 maintain	 foveation
during	motion	of	the	head.	The	VOR	is	discussed	in	more	detail	in	Chapter	17.

The	 pathways	 controlling	 upgaze	 and	 downgaze	 course	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the
rostral	 midbrain,	 pretectum,	 and	 posterior	 commissure.	 The	 vertical	 gaze
equivalent	 of	 the	 PPRF	 is	 the	 rostral	 interstitial	 nucleus	 of	 the	 MLF	 (riMLF),
which	lies	in	the	midbrain	near	the	red	nucleus.	The	lateral	portion	of	the	riMLF
is	 concerned	 with	 upgaze,	 the	 medial	 portion	 with	 downgaze.	 The	 riMLF	 send
impulses	 to	 the	 nuclei	 of	 CNs	 III	 and	 IV.	 Connections	 via	 the	 posterior
commissure	coordinate	the	activity	on	the	two	sides.	The	interstitial	nucleus	of
Cajal	(INC)	lies	caudal	to	the	riMLF.	Its	neurons	connect	to	the	riMLF	and	are
involved	in	vertical	pursuit	and	gaze	holding.	Upgaze	and	downgaze	pathways
occupy	different	positions,	 and	abnormalities	may	affect	one	without	the	other.
The	 upgaze	 centers	 lie	 more	 dorsally.	 Lesions	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 posterior
commissure	may	disturb	vertical	gaze,	especially	upgaze	(Parinaud’s	syndrome).
The	downgaze	centers	lie	more	ventrally,	and	lesions	there	may	primarily	affect
downgaze.

Bhidayasiri	 et	 al.	 developed	 a	 hypothetical	 scheme	 to	 account	 for	 clinical
disorders	 of	 vertical	 gaze	 based	 on	 recent	 insights	 gained	 from	 experimental
studies.	 Vertical	 saccades	 are	 generated	 by	 burst	 neurons	 in	 the	 riMLF,	 with
unilateral	innervation	of	depressor	muscles	but	bilateral	innervation	of	elevator
muscles.	 The	 riMLF	 is	 also	 a	 torsional	 saccade	 generator.	 Torsional	 deviation
during	an	attempted	vertical	saccade,	together	with	a	vertical	gaze	palsy,	occurs
with	lesions	involving	the	riMLF.	The	INC	acts	similar	to	the	step	neurons	in	the
PPRF,	 holding	 the	 eye	 in	 the	 new	 position	 after	 a	 vertical	 saccade.	 The	 INC
projects	 to	 ocular	 motoneurons	 via	 the	 posterior	 commissure.	 Bilateral	 INC	 or
posterior	commissure	lesions	cause	defects	of	vertical	gaze.

Reflex	upgaze	occurs	with	forceful	eyelid	closure	(Bell’s	phenomenon),	and
in	 some	 conditions,	 reflex	 upgaze	 may	 be	 preserved	 when	 upgaze	 is	 otherwise
paralyzed.	 Levator	 palpebrae	 and	 superior	 rectus	 muscle	 tone	 are	 normally
matched.	 In	 extreme	 downgaze,	 both	 are	 maximally	 inhibited,	 but	 in	 reflex
upgaze,	the	normal	parallel	innervation	becomes	reversed.

THE	MEDIAL	LONGITUDINAL	FASCICULUS

The	 oculomotor,	 trochlear,	 and	 abducens	 nuclei	 make	 up	 one	 more	 or	 less
continuous	cell	column.	They	are	united	for	coordinated	and	conjugate	action	by
the	MLF,	an	extensive	and	prominent	fiber	tract	that	runs	in	the	midline	in	the
dorsal	tegmentum	of	the	brainstem.	The	MLF	extends	from	the	midbrain	down

to	the	upper	thoracic	spinal	cord.	It	has	many	connections.	Its	primary	function
is	 to	 coordinate	 lateral	 gaze	 by	 connecting	 the	 sixth	 nerve	 nucleus	 on	 one	 side
with	the	third	and	fourth	nerve	nuclei	on	the	opposite	side	in	order	to	allow	the
two	eyes	to	move	synchronously.	Signals	from	the	PPRF	activate	interneurons	in
the	 adjacent	 sixth	 nerve	 nucleus,	 which	 send	 axons	 up	 the	 MLF.	 The	 MLF
crosses	 in	 the	 pons,	 soon	 after	 beginning	 its	 ascent	 to	 the	 contralateral	 third
nerve	 complex.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 MLF	 disrupt	 communication	 between	 the	 two
nuclei,	 causing	 internuclear	 ophthalmoplegia	 (INO).	 The	 MLF	 also	 has
extensive	 connections	 with	 CNs	 V,	 VII,	 VIII,	 XI,	 and	 XII,	 and	 with	 the	 motor
nuclei	 of	 the	 upper	 cervical	 nerves.	 Nuclear	 groups	 in	 the	 rostral	 midbrain	 are
involved	 in	 MLF	 function,	 including	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 posterior	 commissure
(nucleus	of	Darkshevich),	INC	(the	nucleus	of	the	MLF),	and	the	riMLF.	These
connections	coordinate	movement	of	the	two	eyes,	as	well	as	head	and	eye,	and
even	 body	 movements.	 The	 MLF	 mediates	 reflex	 head	 and	 eye	 movements	 in
response	to	various	stimuli	and	is	important	in	auditory-ocular,	vestibular-ocular,
and	righting	reflexes.

SYMPATHETIC	INNERVATION

The	 sympathetic	 pathway	 to	 the	 eye	 begins	 in	 the	 hypothalamus.	 Fibers	 of	 the
first-order	neuron	descend	through	the	brainstem	and	upper	cervical	spinal	cord.
The	second-order	neuron	lies	in	the	intermediolateral	gray	column	at	C8-T2	of
the	upper	thoracic	spinal	cord	(ciliospinal	center	of	Budge).	Axons	exit	through
the	 anterior	 roots	 and	 transverse	 the	 gray	 rami	 communicantes,	 and	 then	 arch
over	the	apex	of	the	lung	and	beneath	the	subclavian	artery	to	enter	the	cervical
sympathetic	chain,	where	they	ascend	to	synapse	on	the	third-order	neuron	in	the
superior	cervical	ganglion	at	the	level	of	the	carotid	bifurcation.

Postganglionic	fibers	of	the	third-order	neuron	lie	on	the	wall	of	the	common
carotid	 artery,	 forming	 the	 pericarotid	 sympathetic	 plexus.	 Sympathetic	 fibers
innervating	 facial	 structures	 follow	 the	 external	 carotid	 at	 the	 bifurcation.
Sympathetic	 fibers	 destined	 for	 the	 eye	 follow	 the	 internal	 carotid	 artery.	 A
lesion	 proximal	 to	 the	 carotid	 bifurcation	 causes	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 (ptosis,
miosis,	 and	 anhidrosis),	 and	 a	 lesion	 distal	 to	 the	 bifurcation	 causes
oculosympathetic	 paresis	 (Horner’s	 syndrome	 minus	 facial	 anhidrosis).	 The
effects	 on	 the	 eye	 of	 oculosympathetic	 paresis	 and	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 are	 the
same,	and	the	terms	are	often	used	interchangeably;	subsequent	discussion	refers

to	 Horner’s	 syndrome.	 The	 pericarotid	 sympathetic	 plexus	 continues	 along	 the
internal	 carotid	 artery	 in	 its	 course	 through	 the	 cavernous	 sinus.	 Sympathetic
fibers	migrate	to	CN	VI	for	a	short	distance,	then	join	the	nasociliary	branch	of
CN	V1,	and	enter	the	orbit	through	the	superior	orbital	fissure.	They	continue	as
long	ciliary	nerves	to	the	pupillodilator	muscle	(Figure	14.10).

Sympathetically	 innervated	 smooth	 muscle	 is	 present	 in	 both	 the	 upper	 and
lower	 lids	 to	 serve	 as	 accessory	 retractors.	 The	 upper	 lid	 muscle	 is	 better
organized	and	identified,	and	it	is	referred	to	as	the	accessory	levator	palpebrae
superioris,	superior	tarsal	muscle,	or	Müller’s	muscle.	The	inferior	tarsal	muscle
in	the	lower	lid	is	less	distinct.

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION	AND	DISORDERS	OF
FUNCTION	OF	THE	OCULAR	MOTOR	NERVES
AND	THE	CERVICAL	SYMPATHETIC	SYSTEM

Examination	of	the	eyes	begins	with	inspection—looking	for	any	obvious	ocular
malalignment,	 abnormal	 lid	 position,	 or	 abnormalities	 of	 the	 position	 of	 the
globe	within	the	orbit.	Abnormalities	of	the	external	eye	may	occasionally	be	of
diagnostic	significance	in	neurologic	patients	(see	Chapter	13).

EXOPHTHALMOS	AND	ENOPHTHALMOS

The	 globe	 may	 be	 abnormally	 positioned	 within	 the	 orbit	 so	 that	 it	 protrudes
(exophthalmos,	proptosis)	or	recedes	(enophthalmos).	Subtle	proptosis	can	often
be	better	appreciated	by	looking	down	at	both	eyes	from	above	the	vertex	of	the
head	 or	 by	 comparing	 side	 views.	 Exophthalmos	 is	 usually	 bilateral	 and	 most
commonly	 due	 to	 thyroid	 eye	 disease	 (TED,	 Graves’	 ophthalmopathy,	 Graves’
orbitopathy).	 Other	 conditions	 associated	 with	 neurologic	 complications	 and
exophthalmos	 include	 the	 craniosynostosis	 syndromes	 and	 Hand-Schüller-
Christian	 disease.	 Although	 TED	 can	 occasionally	 cause	 unilateral
exophthalmos,	 the	 likelihood	 of	 other	 conditions	 increases	 in	 this	 situation.
Orbital	 pseudotumor	 is	 an	 idiopathic	 inflammatory	 condition	 that	 affects	 the
tissues	 of	 the	 orbit.	 It	 is	 common,	 and	 second	 only	 to	 TED	 as	 a	 cause	 of
unilateral	 proptosis.	 Some	 of	 the	 neurologically	 significant	 causes	 of	 unilateral
proptosis	 include	 orbital	 mass	 lesion,	 carotid	 cavernous	 fistula	 (Figure	 14.11),

cavernous	 sinus	 thrombosis,	 sphenoid	 wing	 meningioma,	 meningocele,	 and
mucormycosis.

FIGURE	 14.10	 The	 cervical	 portion	 of	 the	 sympathetic	 division	 of	 the	 autonomic
nervous	system.

Other	 causes	 of	 exophthalmos	 include	 orbital	 neoplasm	 and	 vascular
malformation	 of	 the	 orbit.	 Intraorbital	 varicosities	 may	 cause	 intermittent,
positional	 exophthalmos	 because	 of	 decreased	 venous	 return	 in	 certain	 head
postures.	Pulsatile	proptosis	may	occur	with	an	orbital	vascular	malformation	or
when	there	is	a	defect	in	the	orbital	roof	that	transmits	cerebral	pulsations,	which

can	 occur	 in	 neurofibromatosis.	 Diplopia	 can	 occur	 in	 conditions	 where	 the
movement	 of	 the	 eyeball	 is	 restricted.	 Pseudoproptosis	 is	 the	 appearance	 of
proptosis	in	the	absence	of	any	orbital	disease;	it	may	occur	with	lid	retraction	or
high	myopia.

FIGURE	14.11	Proptosis	and	chemosis	in	a	direct,	high-flow,	right	carotid	cavernous
fistula	 following	 trauma.	 (Courtesy	 N.	 Schatz.	 Reprinted	 from	 Gold	 DH,	 MD,	 and
Weingeist	 TA,	 MD,	 PhD.	 Color	 Atlas	 of	 the	 Eye	 in	 Systemic	 Disease.	 Baltimore:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2001,	with	permission.)

Few	 conditions	 of	 neurologic	

interest	 cause	 enophthalmos.	 Horner’s
syndrome	causes	apparent	enophthalmos	because	the	upper	lid	is	ptotic	and	the
lower	 lid	 elevated	 because	 of	 hypotonicity	 of	 the	 accessory	 eyelid	 retractors.
This	may	cause	the	eye	to	appear	sunken	in	the	orbit,	but	it	is	an	optical	illusion
and	the	actual	globe	position	is	normal.

THE	EYELIDS

Patients	may	couch	the	complaint	of	ptosis	(blepharoptosis)	in	ways	other	than
droopy	eyelid	(e.g.,	eye	has	shrunk).	Fluctuating	ptosis	may	suggest	myasthenia
gravis	 (MG),	 although	 many	 varieties	 of	 ptosis,	 as	 in	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 may
get	worse	when	the	patient	is	fatigued.	Ptosis	may	have	been	present	for	a	very
long	time	before	coming	to	the	patient’s	attention.	Looking	at	old	photographs	is
often	 helpful.	 The	 eyes	 on	 a	 driver’s	 license	 photo	 can	 be	 seen	 quite	 well	 by

using	the	ophthalmoscope	on	magnification.

The	 position	 of	 the	 eyelids	 is	 important	 and	 can	 reveal	 significant
information.	 Note	 the	 position	 of	 the	 eyelids	 and	 the	 width	 of	 the	 palpebral
fissures	bilaterally.	The	width	of	the	palpebral	fissures	should	be	equal	on	both
sides,	 although	 a	 slight	 difference	 occurs	 in	 many	 normal	 individuals.	 Any
asymmetry	of	lid	position	should	be	noted,	such	as	ptosis	or	lid	retraction.	Note
the	 amount	 of	 iris	 or	 pupil	 covered	 by	 the	 lid.	 Patients	 may	 compensate	 for
ptosis	 by	 contracting	 the	 frontalis	 muscle.	 If	 the	 examiner	 fixes	 the	 frontalis
muscle	with	her	finger,	the	patient	may	be	unable	to	raise	the	eyelid.	Ptosis	may
cause	an	artefactual	superior	altitudinal	visual	field	defect	that	disappears	when
the	eyelid	is	raised.

The	 normal	 upper	 eyelid	 in	 primary	 position	 crosses	 the	 iris	 between	 the
limbus	(junction	of	the	iris	and	sclera)	and	the	pupil,	usually	1	to	2	mm	below
the	limbus;	the	lower	lid	touches	or	crosses	slightly	above	the	limbus.	Normally,
there	is	no	sclera	showing	above	the	iris.	The	palpebral	fissures	are	normally	9	to
12	mm	from	upper	to	lower	lid	margin	at	the	midpoint.	Measurement	can	also	be
made	 from	 the	 lid	 margin	 to	 the	 corneal	 light	 reflex.	 The	 upper	 lid	 margin	 is
normally	3	to	4	mm	above	the	light	reflex.	Levator	function	can	be	assessed	by
measuring	the	upper	lid	excursion	from	full	downgaze	to	full	upgaze	just	to	the
point	where	the	frontalis	begins	to	contract.	This	excursion	is	typically	10	to	12
mm.	Upper	lid	excursion	of	4	mm	or	less	indicates	poor	levator	function;	8	mm
or	more	indicates	good	function.

With	 ptosis,	 the	 lid	 droops	 down	 and	 may	 cross	 at	 the	 upper	 margin	 of	 the
pupil	 or	 cover	 the	 pupil	 partially	 or	 totally.	 With	 complete	 ptosis,	 the	 eyelid	 is
down	 and	 the	 eye	 appears	 closed	 (Figure	 14.12).	 Patients	 with	 ptosis	 often
display	telltale	wrinkling	of	the	ipsilateral	forehead	as	they	attempt	to	hold	the
eye	open	using	the	frontalis	muscle.	Ptosis	may	be	unilateral	or	bilateral,	partial
or	 complete,	 and	 occurs	 in	 many	 neurologic	 conditions	 (Figure	 14.13).	 With
eyelid	retraction,	the	upper	lid	pulls	back	and	frequently	exposes	a	thin	crescent
of	sclera	between	the	upper	limbus	and	the	lower	lid	margin.	Lid	retraction	is	a
classic	sign	of	thyroid	disease	but	occurs	in	neurologic	disorders	as	well.

The	 width	 of	 the	 palpebral	 fissures	 is	 normally	 equal	 on	 the	 two	 sides.
Sometimes,	 inequality	 results	 from	 subtle	 lid	 retraction	 or	 a	 widened	 palpebral
fissure	 on	 one	 side,	 not	 to	 be	 confused	 with	 ptosis	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 When	 in
doubt,	measure	the	width	of	the	palpebral	fissures	with	a	ruler,	in	both	primary
position	and	in	upgaze.	In	addition	to	observing	the	lid	position	at	rest,	notice	the
relationships	 of	 the	 lid	 to	 the	 globe	 during	 eye	 movement.	 CN	 VII,	 via

contraction	of	the	orbicularis	oculi,	closes	the	eye.	Facial	weakness	never	causes
ptosis.	In	fact,	the	palpebral	fissure	on	the	weak	side	is	often	wider	than	normal,
and	 unilateral	 widening	 of	one	palpebral	fissure	may	 be	 an	early	 sign	of	facial
palsy.

FIGURE	14.12	Paralysis	of	the	left	oculomotor	nerve	in	a	patient	with	an	aneurysm	of
the	left	internal	carotid	artery.	A.	Only	ptosis	can	be	seen.	B.	On	elevating	the	eyelid,
it	is	seen	that	the	pupil	is	dilated	and	the	eyeball	is	deviated	laterally.

Total	 unilateral	 ptosis	 only	 occurs	 with	 complete	 third	 nerve	 palsy.	 Mild	 to
moderate	 unilateral	 ptosis	 occurs	 as	 part	 of	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 or	 with	 partial
third	nerve	palsy.	Ptosis	may	rarely	be	the	only	manifestation	of	an	oculomotor
nerve	 palsy.	 Mild	 to	 moderate	 bilateral	 ptosis	 occurs	 in	 some	 neuromuscular
disorders,	 such	 as	 MG,	 muscular	 dystrophy,	 or	 ocular	 myopathy.	 The	 ptosis	 in
MG	is	frequently	asymmetric	and	may	be	unilateral,	though	it	will	tend	to	shift
from	side	to	side	(Figure	14.14).	It	characteristically	fluctuates	from	moment	to
moment	 and	 is	 worsened	 by	 prolonged	 upgaze	 (fatigable	 ptosis).	 Cogan’s	 lid
twitch	sign,	characteristic	of	myasthenia,	consists	of	a	brief	overshoot	twitch	of
lid	 retraction	 following	 sudden	 return	 of	 the	 eyes	 to	 primary	 position	 after	 a
period	 of	 downgaze	 (see	 Video	 Link	 14.1).	 In	 a	 series	 of	 117	 patients,	 the

specificity	of	the	lid	twitch	sign	was	99%,	the	sensitivity	was	75%,	and	the	false-
positive	rate	was	1%.	A	similar	upward	twitch	may	occur	on	glancing	quickly	to
the	side	from	primary	position	(eyelid	hopping).	When	the	ptosis	is	asymmetric,
the	 driving	 discharges	 attempting	 to	 keep	 the	 more	 ptotic	 eyelid	 open	 are	 also
transmitted,	per	Hering’s	law,	to	the	less	ptotic	eyelid.	Manually	raising	the	more
ptotic	 lid	 causes	 relaxation,	 and	 the	 eye	 with	 less	 ptosis,	 sometimes	 even	 no
ptosis,	 may	 suddenly	 crash	 (curtain	 sign,	 seesaw	 ptosis,	 enhanced	 ptosis,	 see
Video	Link	14.2).	Because	of	 the	law	 of	equal	 innervation,	 compensation	 for
mild	 ptosis	 on	 one	 side	 may	 cause	 the	 involved	 eye	 to	 appear	 normal	 and	 the
other	 eye	 to	 have	 lid	 retraction.	 Ptosis	 in	 MG	 may	 respond	 dramatically	 to
edrophonium	 (Figure	 14.15,	 also	 see	 Bilateral	 Ptosis	 from	 Dr.	 Shirley	 Wray,
Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library	[NOVEL],	University	of	Utah,
Video	Link	14.3).

FIGURE	14.13	 Characteristics	 of	 different	 causes	 of	 abnormal	 lid	 position.	 A.	 Right
third	CN	palsy	with	complete	ptosis.	B.	Left	Horner’s	syndrome	with	drooping	of	upper
lid	 and	 slight	 elevation	 of	 lower	 lid.	 C.	 Bilateral,	 asymmetric	 ptosis	 in	 myasthenia
gravis	 (MG).	 D.	 Right	 lid	 retraction	 in	 thyroid	 eye	 disease.	 E.	 Bilateral	 lid	 retraction
with	a	lesion	in	the	region	of	the	posterior	commissure	(Collier’s	sign).

FIGURE	14.14	Bilateral	ptosis	in	a	patient	with	MG.

FIGURE	14.15	Results	of	a	Tensilon	(edrophonium	chloride)	test	in	a	34-year-old	man
with	recent	onset	of	ptosis	and	diplopia.	A.	The	patient	has	bilateral	ptosis,	left	more
than	right.	Note	also	bilateral	inferior	scleral	show	from	laxity	of	the	lower	eyelids.	B.
The	patient	can	adduct	the	right	eye	only	to	the	midline	when	attempting	to	look	to	the
left	 (pseudointernuclear	 ophthalmoplegia).	 C.	 One	 minute	 after	 intravenous	 injection
of	2	mg	of	Tensilon,	the	patient’s	ptosis	has	markedly	improved	and	the	inferior	scleral
show	has	resolved.	D.	At	the	same	time,	the	patient’s	right	eye	adduction	has	become
full.	(Reprinted	from	Miller	NR,	Subramanian	PS,	Patel	VR.	Walsh	and	Hoyt’s	Clinical
Neuro-ophthalmology:	 The	 Essentials.	 3rd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer,	 2016,
with	permission).

Cerebral	 ptosis	 is	 due	 to	 supranuclear	 lesions.	 Unilateral	 cerebral	 ptosis
occurs	 with	 lesions,	 usually	 ischemic,	 of	 the	 opposite	 hemisphere,	 and	 is	 more
common	with	right	hemisphere	lesions.	Bilateral	supranuclear	ptosis	may	occur
with	 unilateral	 or	 bilateral	 hemispheric	 lesions.	 Ptosis	 has	 been	 reported	 in	 as
many	as	37.5%	of	patients	with	hemispheric	strokes.	Because	of	the	anatomy	of
the	central	caudal	nucleus,	bilateral	ptosis	can	occur	as	the	only	ocular	motility
abnormality	with	some	midbrain	lesions.

Senile	or	involutional	ptosis	is	very	common.	Asymmetric	lids	and	redundant
lid	 tissue	 are	 more	 the	 rule	 than	 the	 exception	 in	 the	 elderly.	 The	 levator
aponeurosis	 attaches	 the	 levator	 muscle	 to	 the	 tarsal	 plate,	 which	 forms	 the
eyelid.	The	lid	crease,	or	upper	lid	fold,	is	the	skin	fold	at	the	upper	part	of	the
lid	 at	 the	 site	 of	 levator	 insertion.	 Aging	 may	 cause	 levator	 dehiscence-
disinsertion	(LDD)—with	stretching,	thinning,	or	detachment	of	the	aponeurosis.
Normally,	 with	 the	 eyelids	 gently	 closed,	 the	 upper	 lid	 margin	 lies	 5	 to	 7	 mm
below	the	lid	crease.	An	increase	in	this	distance	suggests	LDD	(Figures	14.16

and	14.17).	The	lid	excursion	is	normal,	usually	9	mm	or	more.	Trauma	to	the
eyelid,	 as	 from	 contact	 lenses,	 may	 cause	 LDD	 in	 younger	 patients.
Blepharochalasis	(dermatochalasis)	refers	to	age-related	lax,	baggy	skin	around
the	 eyelids;	 it	 can	 also	 simulate	 ptosis	 but	 levator	 function	 is	 normal.	 Other
nonneurologic	 conditions	 that	 may	 be	 confused	 with	 ptosis	 include	 blepharitis,
lid	edema,	lid	infiltration,	and	eyelid	tumor.	Patients	with	neurofibromatosis	may
have	 diffuse	 neurofibroma	 in	 the	 eyelid,	 causing	 a	 characteristic	 S-shaped	 lid.
Chronic	 use	 of	 steroid	 eye	 drops	 can	 cause	 ptosis	 that	 has	 been	 attributed	 to	 a
focal	steroid	myopathy.

FIGURE	14.16	Levator	dehiscence	disinsertion	on	the	left.	The	distance	between	the
upper	lid	margin	and	the	upper	lid	crease	is	increased	compared	to	the	normal	right
side.

FIGURE	14.17	Bilateral	ptosis	from	dehiscence	of	the	levator	aponeurosis.	Note	the
high,	very	defined	upper	eyelid	crease.	Levator	function	was	18	mm.	(Reprinted	from
Penne	 RB.	 Oculoplastics.	 2nd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott
Williams	&	Wilkins	Health,	2012,	with	permission.)

Congenital	ptosis	is	common;	because	of	levator	fibrosis,	it	may	be	associated
with	lid	lag	in	downgaze	that	is	unusual	in	acquired	ptosis.	Jaw	winking	(Marcus
Gunn	phenomenon,	for	R.	Marcus	Gunn,	Scottish	ophthalmologist)	occurs	when
there	is	congenital	ptosis	with	abnormal	communication	between	CN	V	and	the
levator	 palpebrae.	 The	 ptotic	 lid	 opens	 with	 jaw	 movement	 (see	 Chapter	 15).
Synkinesia	 between	 CN	 V	 and	 the	 levator	 more	 rarely	 causes	 ptosis	 on	 mouth
opening	(inverse	Marcus	Gunn	phenomenon).	Marin	Amat	syndrome	is	a	facial
nerve	aberrant	innervation	syndrome	with	levator	inhibition	with	mouth	opening
(see	Chapter	16).	Orbicularis	oculi	contraction	causing	eye	closure	on	smiling	is
another	 common	 synkinesia.	 Eyelid	 myotonia	 may	 cause	 transient	 difficulty
opening	 the	 eyes	 after	 a	 forceful	 contraction	 or	 transient	 lid	 retraction	 after
looking	up.	Ptosis	in	Lambert-Eaton	syndrome	may	temporarily	improve	after	a
brief	 period	 of	 upgaze.	 Blepharospasm	 is	 a	 focal	 dystonia	 causing	 involuntary
eye	closure;	levator	function	is	normal.	In	apraxia	of	lid	opening,	the	patient	has
difficulty	 in	 voluntarily	 initiating	 lid	 elevation	 although	 there	 is	 no	 levator
impairment	or	blepharospasm.	A	fine	tremor	of	the	lid	(Rosenbach’s	sign)	may
occur	in	hyperthyroidism.

Pseudoptosis	 is	 the	 appearance	 of	 ptosis	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 levator
abnormality.	 A	 narrow	 palpebral	 fissure	 can	 occur	 because	 of	 mechanical

limitation	of	levator	excursion	or	enophthalmos.	In	vertical	strabismus	with	the
hypertropic	eye	fixing,	the	lid	of	the	hypotropic	eye	may	seem	to	be	ptotic,	but	is
not.	 In	 Duane’s	 syndrome	 (Box	 14.9),	 the	 palpebral	 fissure	 narrows	 on	 ocular
adduction	because	of	globe	retraction	causing	dynamic	enophthalmos	(see	Type	I
Duane’s	 syndrome	 from	 Dr.	 Kathleen	 B.	 Digre,	 John	 A.	 Moran	 Eye	 Center,
Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library	[NOVEL],	University	of	Utah,
Video	Link	14.4).	 The	 eyelids	 may	 also	 be	 intrinsically	 abnormal	 because	 of
inflammation,	trauma,	or	other	factors,	and	these	lid	disorders	may	be	mistaken
for	ptosis.	Nonorganic	ptosis	is	rare;	it	can	occur	because	of	voluntary	unilateral
blepharospasm.	A	telltale	clue	is	that	there	is	contraction	of	the	orbicularis	oculi
or	 relaxation	 of	 the	 eyebrow	 elevators	 causing	 brow	 ptosis	 in	 addition	 to	 the
appearance	of	lid	ptosis.

Lid	Retraction

Lid	 position	 is	 abnormal	 if	 there	 is	 a	 rim	 of	 sclera	 showing	 above	 the	 limbus,
indicating	 either	 lid	 retraction	 or	 lid	 lag.	 TED	 is	 a	 common	 cause	 of	 lid
abnormalities,	 including	 lid	 retraction	 in	 primary	 gaze	 (Dalrymple’s	 sign),
infrequent	 blinking	 (Stellwag’s	 sign),	 and	 lid	 lag	 in	 downgaze	 (von	 Graefe’s
sign).	 Lid	 retraction	 in	 primary	 gaze	 also	 occurs	 with	 lesions	 involving	 the
posterior	 commissure	 (Collier’s	 sign,	 posterior	 fossa	 stare;	 see	 discussion	 of
Parinaud’s	 syndrome).	 Lid	 retraction	 with	 posterior	 commissure	 lesions	 is
bilateral	 but	 may	 be	 asymmetric.	 With	 Collier’s	 sign,	 the	 levators	 relax
appropriately	 and	 the	 lids	 usually	 descend	 normally	 on	 downgaze	 without
lagging	 behind	 as	 they	 do	 in	 TED.	 In	 addition,	 the	 lid	 retraction	 may	 worsen
with	 attempted	 upgaze	 (Figure	 14.18).	 Circumscribed	 midbrain	 lesions	 may
cause	eyelid	retraction	with	minimal	impairment	of	vertical	gaze.

In	Parkinson’s	disease,	there	is	infrequent	blinking	and	there	may	be	some	lid
retraction.	 Topical	 instillation	 of	 sympathomimetic	 agents	 may	 cause	 lid
retraction.	Very	 weak	sympathomimetics	(e.g.,	tetrahydrozoline)	may	 cause	 the
lid	 with	 denervation	 supersensitivity,	 as	 in	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 to	 elevate.
Apraclonidine	 may	 also	 improve	 the	 ptosis	 (see	 below).	 In	 vertical	 strabismus,
the	 lid	 of	 the	 hypertropic	 eye	 may	 appear	 to	 be	 retracted	 when	 the	 hypotropic
eye	 is	 fixing.	 Aberrant	 regeneration	 of	 CN	 III	 may	 cause	 lid	 retraction	 on
adduction	 (the	 opposite	 of	 Duane’s	 syndrome)	 or	 on	 downgaze.	 Lid	 retraction
may	 also	 be	 mechanical,	 because	 of	 trauma	 or	 surgery.	 The	 plus	 minus	 lid
syndrome	 is	 ptosis	 on	 one	 side	 and	 lid	 retraction	 on	 the	 other	 because	 of	 a

unilateral	 lesion	 of	 the	 third	 nerve	 nucleus	 extending	 rostrally	 to	 involve	 the
region	 of	 the	 posterior	 commissure.	 Lid	 retraction	 may	 be	 confused	 with
ipsilateral	proptosis	or	contralateral	ptosis.

FIGURE	14.18	Paresis	of	upward	gaze	and	lid	retraction	in	a	patient	with	a	neoplasm
of	the	posterior	third	ventricle.

The	Pupils

The	 function	 of	 the	 pupil	 is	 to	 control	 the	 amount	 of	 light	 entering	 the	 eye,
ensuring	optimal	vision	for	the	lighting	conditions.	The	pupils	should	be	equal	in
size,	 round,	 regular,	 centered	 in	 the	 iris,	 and	 should	 exhibit	 specific	 reflex
responses.	 Large,	 small,	 and	 abnormally	 reactive	 pupils	 are	 discussed	 in	 this

section.	Normal	pupils	may	display	constant,	small	amplitude	fluctuations	in	size
under	 constant	 illumination	 (hippus,	 pupillary	 play).	 Hippus	 is	 of	 no	 clinical
significance,	even	when	pronounced,	but	can	cause	confusion	in	the	evaluation
of	 an	 afferent	 pupillary	 defect	 (APD)	 (see	 discussion	 of	 afferent	 pupillary
defect).

Pupil	 examination	 should	 first	 assess	 pupillary	 size	 and	 equality.	 If	 they	 are
unequal,	 determine	 whether	 the	 difference	 is	 greater	 in	 light	 or	 darkness.
Compare	the	pupillary	reactions	to	light	and	to	near.	Assess	whether	the	pupils
constrict	and	redilate	with	the	same	velocity.	Finally,	determine	whether	an	APD
is	present.

Size

Pupillary	 size	 depends	 primarily	 on	 the	 balance	 between	 sympathetic	 and
parasympathetic	 innervation	 and	 the	 level	 of	 ambient	 illumination.	 The	 most
important	 determinants	 are	the	 level	 of	illumination	and	the	 point	at	which	the
eyes	 are	 focused.	 Accurate	 measurements	 are	 important.	 Measurements	 should
be	 made	 with	 a	 pupil	 gauge	 or	 a	 millimeter	 ruler;	 estimates	 are	 surprisingly
inaccurate.	Special	cameras	can	measure	the	pupil	to	within	0.1	mm.	The	size	of
the	pupils	should	be	determined	at	distance	in	ambient	and	dim	light	and	at	near.
The	normal	pupil	is	2	to	6	mm	in	diameter.	In	ordinary	ambient	light,	the	pupils
are	usually	 3	 to	4	mm	 in	 diameter.	 The	pupils	are	 small	 and	 poorly	reactive	at
birth	 and	 in	 early	 infancy,	 becoming	 normal	 size	 around	 ages	 7	 to	 8.	 They	 are
normally	 larger	 in	 adolescents	 and	 young	 adults,	 about	 4	 mm	 in	 diameter	 and
perfectly	 round.	 In	 middle	 age,	 they	 are	 typically	 3.5	 mm	 in	 diameter	 and
regular,	and	in	old	age	3	mm	or	less	and	often	slightly	irregular.

Pupils	 less	 than	 2	 mm	 in	 diameter	 are	 miotic.	 Common	 causes	 of	 acquired
miosis	
include	 old	 age,	 hyperopia,	 alcohol	 abuse,	 and	 drug	 effects.
Neurologically	 significant	 causes	 of	 miosis	 include	 neurosyphilis,	 diabetes,
levodopa	therapy,	and	Horner’s	syndrome.	Acute,	severe	brainstem	lesions,	such
as	 pontine	 hematoma,	 may	 cause	 bilaterally	 tiny,	 “pinpoint”	 pupils	 that	 still
react.	Primary	ophthalmologic	conditions	commonly	cause	miosis	when	there	is
external	eye	disease.	Spastic	or	irritative	miosis	is	due	to	spasm	of	the	pupillary
sphincter,	often	in	association	with	corneal	or	intraocular	foreign	bodies	or	eye
trauma.	 Other	 ophthalmologic	 disorders	 causing	 miosis	 include	 iridocyclitis,
miotic	 drops,	 spasm	 of	 the	 near	 reflex,	 chronic	 anterior	 segment	 ischemia,	 and
an	old	Adie’s	pupil.	Synechia	are	adhesions	that	may	develop	in	the	eye,	usually

after	 inflammation	 such	 as	 iritis.	 The	 scarring	 may	 bind	 the	 pupil	 down	 to	 the
cornea	 (anterior	 synechia)	 or	 lens	 (posterior	 synechia)	 and	 cause	 miosis	 and
pupillary	irregularity.	Paralytic	miosis	is	due	to	paralysis	of	the	pupillary	dilator
muscle	(oculosympathetic	paresis).

Pupils	more	than	6	mm	in	diameter	are	dilated.	Common	causes	of	bilateral
mydriasis	 include	 anxiety,	 fear,	 pain,	 myopia,	 and	 drug	 effects—especially
anticholinergics.	Large	pupils	were	once	considered	a	sign	of	youth	and	beauty,
and	 the	 anticholinergic	 belladonna	 (Ital.	 “fair	 lady”)	 alkaloids	 were	 named	 for
their	 ability	 to	 produce	 this	 effect.	 Persons	 with	 light	 irises	 have	 larger	 pupils
than	those	with	dark	irises.	Only	severe,	bilateral	lesions	of	the	retina	or	anterior
visual	 pathways,	 enough	 to	 cause	 near	 blindness,	 will	 affect	 the	 resting	 pupil
size.	Neurologically	significant	bilateral	mydriasis	occurs	in	midbrain	lesions,	in
comatose	patients	following	cardiac	arrest,	in	cerebral	anoxia,	and	as	a	terminal
condition.

Shape

The	normal	pupil	is	round,	with	a	smooth,	regular	outline.	Gross	abnormalities
in	 shape	 are	 usually	 the	 result	 of	 ocular	 disease	 such	 as	 iritis	 or	 eye	 surgery.
Synechia,	a	congenital	coloboma	(a	gap	in	the	iris),	prior	trauma,	or	iridectomy
may	all	cause	pupil	irregularity.	A	slight	change	in	shape,	however,	such	as	an
oval	 pupil,	 slight	 irregularity	 in	 outline,	 serration	 of	 the	 border,	 or	 slight
notching,	may	be	significant	in	the	diagnosis	of	neurologic	disease.

Equality

The	pupils	are	generally	of	equal	size.	A	difference	of	0.25	mm	in	pupil	size	is
noticeable,	 and	 a	 difference	 of	 2	 mm	 is	 considered	 significant.	 Physiologic
anisocoria	(aniso,	“unequal”;	cor,	“pupil”),	mild	degrees	of	inequality	with	less
than	1	mm	of	difference	between	the	two	sides,	occurs	in	15%	to	20%	of	normal
individuals.	With	such	physiologic	anisocoria,	the	degree	of	inequality	remains
about	the	same	in	light	and	dark,	and	the	pupils	react	normally	to	all	stimuli	and
to	 instilled	 drugs	 (Figures	 14.19	 and	 14.20).	 Slightly	 greater	 asymmetry	 in	 the
dark	 sometimes	 occurs	 with	 physiologic	 anisocoria.	 Unequal	 pupils	 may	 be
caused	by	primary	eye	disorders,	such	as	iritis.	Unilateral	mydriasis	is	never	due
to	 isolated,	 unilateral	 visual	 loss.	 The	 reactivity	 of	 the	 normal	 eye	 and	 the
consensual	light	reflex	will	ensure	that	pupil	size	remains	equal.	Anisocoria	may

result	 from	 damage	 to	 the	 iris	 sphincter	 or	 pupillodilator	 muscles	 or	 to	 their
nerve	supply.	Unilateral	mydriasis	can	occur	with	local	ocular	trauma	(traumatic
iridoplegia).

Position

The	 pupil	 is	 normally	 situated	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 iris.	 An	 eccentric	 pupil
(corectopia)	usually	signifies	local	eye	disease,	but	it	can	occur	with	neurologic
disease,	especially	disorders	of	the	midbrain.

FIGURE	14.19	Behavior	of	unequal	pupils	in	light	and	dark	conditions.

FIGURE	14.20	Flow	diagram	for	the	evaluation	of	anisocoria.

The	Pupillary	Reflexes

The	 principal	 pupillary	 reflex	 responses	 assessed	 on	 examination	 are	 the	 light
response	and	the	near	response	(“accommodation”).	The	normal	pupil	constricts
promptly	 in	 response	 to	 light.	 Pupillary	 constriction	 also	 occurs	 as	 part	 of	 the
near	response,	along	with	convergence	and	rounding	up	of	the	lens	for	efficient
near	vision.	Normally,	the	light	and	near	responses	are	of	the	same	magnitude.

The	Light	Reflex

The	pupillary	light	reaction	is	mediated	by	the	macula,	optic	nerve,	chiasm,	and
optic	tract.	Before	reaching	the	lateral	geniculate	body,	pupil	afferents	leave	the
optic	 tract	 to	 synapse	 in	 the	 pretectum.	 In	 addition	 to	 the	 decussation	 of	 nasal
hemiretinal	 pupillary	 afferents,	 extensive	 crossing	 occurs	 through	 the	 posterior
ipsilaterally	 and
commissure	 with	 pupillary	 afferents	 synapsing	 both	
contralaterally.	Because	of	the	decussation	in	the	chiasm	and	the	decussation	in
the	 posterior	 commissure,	 pupillary	 fibers	 are	 extensively	 commingled	 and	 the
reflex	 is	 bilateral,	 both	 direct	 and	 consensual	 (crossed)	 (Figure	 13.9).	 Fibers
project	 from	 the	 pretectum	 to	 the	 EW	 subnucleus	 of	 the	 oculomotor	 nuclear
complex	 in	 the	 midbrain.	 Parasympathetic	 pupillary	 efferents	 from	 the	 EW
subnucleus	 enter	 the	 third	 nerve	 and	 travel	 through	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 and
along	 the	 inferior	 branch	 of	 III	 in	 the	 orbit	 to	 innervate	 the	 pupilloconstrictor
muscle	 of	 the	 iris.	 The	 pupillomotor	 fibers	 travel	 to	 the	 ciliary	 ganglion,	 then
through	the	short	posterior	ciliary	nerves	between	the	sclera	and	the	choroid	to
the	 pupillary	 sphincter.	 The	 sphincter	
the
pupillodilator	muscle	is	radially	arranged.	Balancing	parasympathetic	input	from
the	 EW	 subnucleus	 is	 sympathetic	 input	 ascending	 from	 the	 superior	 cervical
ganglion.

is	 concentrically	 arranged;	

The	light	reflex	should	be	tested	in	each	eye	individually.	The	examining	light
should	be	shone	into	the	eye	obliquely	with	the	patient	fixing	at	distance	to	avoid
eliciting	a	confounding	near	response.	A	common	error	in	pupil	examination	is
to	have	the	patient	fixing	at	near,	as	by	instructing	her	to	look	at	the	examiner’s
nose.	 This	 technique	 provides	 both	 a	 light	 stimulus	 and	 a	 near	 stimulus
simultaneously,	 and	 the	 pupils	 may	 well	 constrict	 to	 the	 near	 target	 of	 the
examiner’s	nose	even	when	the	reaction	to	light	is	impaired	or	absent.	Using	this
technique,	 the	 examiner	 would	 invariably	 miss	 light-near	 dissociation.	 Always
have	 the	 patient	 fix	 at	 a	 distance	 when	 checking	 the	 pupillary	 light	 reaction.
Having	the	patient	look	up	while	directing	the	light	forward	to	move	the	corneal
light	reflex	away	from	the	axis	of	the	pupil	may	help	to	visualize	the	pupils	in
very	dark	irides.	Another	technique	is	to	use	ambient	light	by	covering	the	eyes,
then	 withdrawing	 the	 cover	 alternately,	 and	 looking	 for	 pupil	 constriction.	 The
normal	 pupillary	 light	 reflex	 is	 brisk	 constriction	 followed	 by	 slight	 dilatation
back	 to	 an	 intermediate	 state	 (pupillary	 escape).	 Escape	 may	 occur	 because	 of
adaptation	of	the	visual	system	to	the	level	of	illumination.	The	responses	may
be	noted	as	prompt,	sluggish,	or	absent,	graded	from	0	to	4+,	or	measured	and

recorded	 numerically	 (e.g.,	 4	 mm	 →	 2	 mm).	 In	 comatose	 patients,	 it	 is	 often
important,	 but	 difficult,	 to	 see	 if	 the	 pupillary	 light	 reaction	 is	 preserved,
especially	if	there	is	a	question	of	brain	death.	A	useful	technique	is	to	use	the
ophthalmoscope:	 focus	 on	 the	 pupil	 with	 high	 positive	 magnification,	 dim	 the
ophthalmoscope,	 and	 then	 rapidly	 reilluminate.	 Even	 a	 small	 residual	 reaction
may	be	seen.	Obliquely	illuminating	the	pupil	by	holding	a	dim	light	source	to
the	side	may	help	evaluate	the	consensual	light	reflex.

The	Accommodation	Reflex

The	accommodation	reflex	(near	response,	near	reflex)	is	elicited	by	having	the
patient	 relax	 accommodation	 by	 gazing	 into	 the	 distance,	 then	 shifting	 gaze	 to
some	near	object.	The	best	near	object	is	the	patient’s	own	finger	or	thumb.	The
response	consists	of	thickening	of	the	lens	(accommodation),	convergence	of	the
eyes,	and	miosis.	The	primary	stimulus	for	accommodation	is	blurring.	Without
the	near	response,	attempting	to	focus	on	a	close	object	would	result	in	blurred
vision	 or	 frank	 diplopia.	 With	 special	 techniques,	 each	 component	 of	 the
response	 can	 be	 tested	 separately.	 Routine	 bedside	 testing	 elicits	 all	 three
components.	 Accommodation	 occurs	 because	 contraction	 of	 the	 ciliary	 muscle
relaxes	the	zonular	fibers,	permitting	the	lens	to	become	more	convex	because	of
its	inherent	elasticity.	Accommodation	is	measured	in	diopters	(Box	14.1).

The	 convergence	 movement	 of	 the	 near	 reflex	 is	 mediated	 by	 the	 vergence
subcomponent	of	the	supranuclear	ocular	motor	control	system.	It	consists	of	a
long	 latency,	 slow	 dysconjugate	 eye	 movement	 to	 foveate	 the	 near	 object	 by
contracting	 both	 medial	 rectus	 muscles.	 Convergence	 spasm	 causes	 excessive
convergence	 for	 the	 distance	 of	 the	 object,	 and	 the	 patient	 cannot	 focus	 at
distance.	 Convergence	 insufficiency	 causes	 inadequate	 convergence,	 and	 the
patient	cannot	focus	at	near.

BOX	14.1

Myopia	and	Hyperopia

The	 near	 point	 of	 accommodation	 (NPA)	 is	 the	 closest	 point	 at	 which	 an
object	can	be	seen	clearly.	The	NPA	lengthens	distressingly	with	advancing
presbyopia.	The	far	point	of	accommodation	(FPA)	is	the	distance	at	which	a
distant	 image	 is	 focused	 on	 the	 retina	 with	 no	 accommodative	 effort.	 An

the	

fovea.	

focused	 on	

emmetrope	(person	with	a	perfectly	normal	eye)	has	an	FPA	of	infinity,	and
distant	 objects	 are	 properly	
In	 hyperopia
(farsightedness,	 hypermetropia),	 the	 eyeball	 is	 too	 short,	 the	 FPA	 is	 behind
the	 eye,	 accommodation	 can	 bring	 far	 objects	 into	 focus	 but	 may	 fail	 with
near	 objects,	 and	 the	 correction	 is	 with	 positive	 lenses	 to	 add	 refractive
power.	 In	 myopia	 (nearsightedness),	 the	 eyeball	 is	 too	 long	 or	 refractive
power	 is	 excessive,	 the	 FPA	 falls	 in	 front	 of	 the	 fovea,	 relaxation	 of
accommodation	can	bring	near	objects	into	focus	but	fails	for	distant	objects,
and	 the	 correction	 is	 with	 negative	 lenses	 to	 reduce	 refractive	 power.	 To
quickly	tell	if	a	patient	who	uses	correction	has	hyperopia	or	myopia,	use	the
patient’s	 glasses	 to	 look	 at	 some	 object	 about	 an	 arm’s	 length	 away.
Hyperopic	glasses	magnify,	myopic	lenses	minify.

The	pupils	constrict	at	near	to	increase	the	depth	of	focus.	The	pathways	are
less	certain	than	for	the	pupillary	light	reflex,	but	they	involve	the	visual	cortex
with	 impulses	 probably	 descending	 through	 the	 corticotectal	 tract	 to	 near
response	 cells	 in	 the	 pretectum.	 The	 midbrain	 mechanisms	 for	 pupillary
constriction	 to	 near	 are	 separate	 from	 those	 for	 the	 light	 reflex;	 one	 response
may	be	abnormal,	whereas	the	other	is	preserved.

Other	Pupillary	Reflexes

The	ciliospinal	reflex	consists	of	dilation	of	the	pupil	on	painful	stimulation	of
the	skin	of	the	ipsilateral	neck.	Local	cutaneous	stimulation	(e.g.,	scratching	the
neck)	 activates	 sympathetics	 through	 connections	 with	 the	 ciliospinal	 center	 at
C8-T2	 that	 cause	 the	 ipsilateral	 pupil	 to	 dilate.	 An	 intact	 ciliospinal	 reflex	 is
evidence	 of	 brainstem	 integrity	 when	 evaluating	 a	 comatose	 patient.	 The
response	 is	 minimal	 and	 may	 be	 difficult	 to	 see	 even	 when	 normal.	 The
oculosensory	or	oculopupillary	reflex	is	pupil	constriction	in	response	to	painful
stimulation	of	the	eye	or	its	adnexa.	The	pupils	normally	constrict	on	attempted
lid	 closure.	 Pupil	 dilation	 may	 occur	
loud	 noise
(cochleopupillary	 reflex)	 or	 labyrinthine	stimulation	 (vestibulopupillary	 reflex).
The	 pupils	 may	 dilate	 in	 response	 to	 fear,	 anxiety,	 mental	 concentration,	 and
sexual	arousal	because	of	sympathetic	activity.

in	 response	

to	 a	

Effects	of	Drugs	on	the	Pupil

excessively	 because	 of	 denervation	

Many	 systemically	 acting	 as	 well	 as	 locally	 acting	 drugs	 may	 influence	 pupil
size	 and	 reactivity.	 An	 abnormal	 pupil	 may	 fail	 to	 respond	 appropriately	 or
respond	
supersensitivity.	 Pupil
pharmacology	 is	 complex.	 In	 brief,	 sympathomimetics	 and	 anticholinergics
cause	 pupillary	 dilation,	 and	 parasympathomimetics	 or	 sympathetic	 blockers
the
cause	 pupillary	 constriction.	 Agents	
include	
and	
anticholinergics	
the
sympathomimetics	
phenylephrine,
hydroxyamphetamine,	 and	 cocaine.	 Agents	 that	 cause	 miosis	 include	 the
cholinomimetics	 pilocarpine,	 methacholine,	 muscarine,	 and	 opiates,	 and	 the
cholinesterase	inhibitors	physostigmine	and	neostigmine.	Ergot	derivatives	block
postganglionic	 adrenergic	 nerves	 and	 can	 cause	 pupil	 constriction.	 Pupillary
pharmacology	 can	 be	 applied	 in	 the	 neurologic	 examination,	 primarily	 in	 the
evaluation	of	Horner’s	syndrome	and	Adie’s	pupil	(see	Table	14.1).

that	 cause	 mydriasis	

norepinephrine,	

homatropine,	

scopolamine	

epinephrine,	

atropine,	

and	

TABLE
14.1

Summary	of	Pharmacologic	Pupillary	Testing	for
Horner’s	Syndrome

DISORDERS	OF	THE	PUPIL

Pupils	can	be	abnormal	for	numerous	reasons.	Common	problems	include	pupils
that	 are	 too	 large	 or	 too	 small,	 unilaterally	 or	 bilaterally,	 or	 pupils	 that	 fail	 to
demonstrate	normal	reflex	responses.

Large	Pupils

The	two	 conditions	 most	 commonly	 causing	 a	 unilaterally	 large	 pupil	 are	 third
CN	 palsy	 and	 Adie’s	 pupil.	 In	 CN	 III	 palsy,	 the	 large	 pupil	 has	 impaired
reactions	to	light	and	to	near;	abnormalities	of	extraocular	movement	and	eyelid
position	 generally	 betray	 the	 origin	 of	 the	 abnormal	 pupil.	 With	 total	 CN	 III
palsy,	there	is	complete	ptosis;	lifting	the	eyelid	reveals	the	eye	resting	in	a	down

and	out	position	 (Figure	14.12).	 Although	 CN	 III	 palsies	 often	 affect	 the	 pupil
more	than	other	functions,	some	ptosis	and	ophthalmoparesis	is	usually	present.
Because	 the	 pupillary	 parasympathetics	 occupy	 a	 position	 on	 the	 dorsomedial
periphery	 of	 the	 nerve	 as	 it	 exits	 the	 brainstem,	 compressive	 lesions	 such	 as
aneurysms	generally	affect	the	pupil	prominently.	Ischemic	lesions	tend	to	affect
the	 interior	 of	 the	 nerve	 and	 spare	 the	 pupil,	 as	 in	 diabetic	 third	 nerve	 palsies,
because	the	periphery	of	the	nerve	has	a	better	vascular	supply.	This	rule	is	not
absolute:	 pupil-sparing	 third	 nerve	 palsies	 have	 been	 reported	 with	 aneurysms
(in	up	to	10%	of	cases),	as	have	diabetic	palsies	involving	the	pupil.	In	Keane’s
series	of	1,400	patients,	53%	of	diabetic	CN	III	palsies	involved	the	pupil,	but
only	 2%	 of	 aneurysms	 spared	 the	 pupil.	 In	 diabetics,	 pupil	 abnormalities	 were
often	 bilateral,	 suggesting	 autonomic	 neuropathy.	 However,	 only	 rarely	 does	 a
complete	aneurysmal	third	nerve	palsy	spare	the	pupil.	When	the	pupil	is	spared,
some	other	functions	are	usually	spared	as	well.	Barton	summarized	the	correct
“pupil	 rule”	 as	 follows:	 complete	 pupil	 sparing	 with	 otherwise	 complete	 and
isolated	 palsy	 of	 CN	 III	 is	 never	 due	 to	 an	 aneurysm.	 The	 pupil	 is	 usually
involved	 early	 and	 prominently	 with	 third	 nerve	 compression	 because	 of	 uncal
herniation	(Hutchinson’s	pupil).

When	the	ocular	sympathetics	are	involved	along	with	CN	III,	the	pupil	may
be	 midposition	 because	 the	 sympathetic	 denervation	 prevents	 the	 pupil	 from
dilating	 fully.	 This	 occurs	 most	 often	 in	 cavernous	 sinus	 lesions	 when	 there	 is
compression	of	both	CN	III	and	the	pericarotid	sympathetics,	leaving	the	pupil
midsize	 but	 unreactive.	 This	 should	 not	 be	 mistaken	 for	 pupil	 sparing.	 CN	 III
palsies	are	sometimes	complicated	by	aberrant	reinnervation.	This	misdirection
syndrome	may	cause	abnormal	pupil	constriction	in	relation	to	eye	movements
that	may	mimic	pupil	sparing.

The	patient	presenting	with	Adie’s	pupil	(tonic	pupil,	Holmes-Adie	pupil)	is
typically	a	young	woman	who	suddenly	notes	a	unilaterally	enlarged	pupil,	with
no	other	symptoms.	The	pupillary	reaction	to	light	may	appear	absent,	although
prolonged	 illumination	 may	 provoke	 a	 slow	 constriction.	 The	 reaction	 to	 near,
although	 slow,	 is	 better	 preserved.	 Once	 constricted,	 the	 tonic	 pupil	 redilates
very	slowly	when	illumination	is	removed	or	the	patient	looks	back	at	distance,
often	 causing	 a	 transient	 reversal	 of	 the	 anisocoria.	 The	 pathology	 in	 Adie’s
pupil	lies	in	the	ciliary	ganglion	or	short	ciliary	nerves,	or	both;	its	precise	nature
remains	 unknown.	 The	 parasympathetic	 denervation	 eventually	 leads	 to
denervation	 supersensitivity;	 the	 pupil	 may	 then	 constrict	 to	 solutions	 of
pilocarpine	 or	 methacholine	 that	 are	 too	 dilute	 to	 affect	 a	 normal	 eye.	 About

20%	 of	 patients	 develop	 a	 tonic	 pupil	 in	 the	other	 eye.	 Adie’s	syndrome	 is	 the
association	 of	 the	 pupil	 abnormality	 with	 depressed	 or	 absent	 deep	 tendon
reflexes,	particularly	in	the	lower	extremities.	With	the	passage	of	time,	the	pupil
may	 become	 smaller.	 An	 old	 Adie’s	 pupil	 can	 be	 a	 cause	 of	 unilateral	 miosis.
The	light	reaction	never	recovers.

The	term	“tectal	pupils”	refers	to	the	large	pupils	with	light-near	dissociation
sometimes	 seen	 when	 lesions	 affect	 the	 upper	 midbrain.	 Such	 pupils	 may
accompany	 the	 impaired	 upgaze	 and	 convergence/retraction	 nystagmus	 of
Parinaud’s	 syndrome.	 The	 variably	 dilated,	 fixed	 pupils	 reflecting	 midbrain
dysfunction	 in	 a	 comatose	 patient	 carry	 a	 bleak	 prognosis.	 Glutethimide
intoxication,	 infamous	 for	 causing	 fixed	 pupils	 in	 drug-induced	 coma,	 has
fortunately	 become	 rare.	 Acute	 angle	 closure	 glaucoma	 can	 cause	 severe
frontotemporal	 headache	 and	 a	 dilated,	 poorly	 reactive	 pupil.	 A	 cloudy	 cornea
may	provide	the	clue	that	the	patient	does	not	harbor	an	aneurysm	and	needs	to
quickly	 see	 an	 ophthalmologist	 rather	 than	 a	 neurologist	 or	 a	 neurosurgeon.
Deliberately	 or	 accidentally	 instilled	 mydriatics	 will	 produce	 a	 dilated,	 fixed
pupil.	 Such	 pharmacologic	 blockade	 can	 be	 distinguished	 by	 the	 failure	 to
respond	 to	 full	 strength	 pilocarpine,	 which	 promptly	 constricts	 a	 large	 pupil	 of
any	other	etiology.

Small	Pupils

The	 pupils	 in	 the	 elderly	 are	 normally	 smaller.	 Many	 older	 patients	 use
pilocarpine	eye	drops	to	manage	chronic	open	angle	glaucoma.	Many	systemic
drugs,	 such	 as	 opiates,	 may	 symmetrically	 shrink	 the	 pupils.	 Important
neurologic	 conditions	 causing	 an	 abnormally	 small	 pupil	 include	 Horner’s
syndrome	and	neurosyphilis.

HORNER’S	SYNDROME

In	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 sympathetic	 dysfunction	 produces	 ptosis,	 miosis,	 and
anhidrosis.	 Lack	 of	 sympathetic	 input	 to	 the	 accessory	 lid	 retractors	 results	 in
ptosis	and	apparent	enophthalmos.	The	ptosis	of	the	upper	lid	due	to	denervation
of	Müller’s	muscle	is	only	1	to	3	mm,	never	as	severe	as	with	a	complete	CN	III
palsy,	although	it	may	simulate	partial	third	nerve	palsy.	The	ptosis	can	be	subtle
and	is	often	missed.	The	lower	lid	is	frequently	elevated	1	to	2	mm	because	of

loss	 of	 the	 action	 of	 the	 lower	 lid	 accessory	 retractor	 that	 holds	 the	 lid	 down
(inverse	ptosis).	The	resulting	narrowing	of	the	palpebral	fissure	causes	apparent
enophthalmos.	 Because	 the	 fibers	 mediating	 facial	 sweating	 travel	 up	 the
external	 carotid,	 lesions	 distal	 to	 the	 carotid	 bifurcation	 produce	 no	 facial
anhidrosis	except	for	perhaps	a	small	area	of	medial	forehead	that	is	innervated
by	sympathetic	fibers	traveling	with	the	internal	carotid.

The	small	pupil	dilates	poorly	in	the	dark.	Pupillary	asymmetry	greater	in	the
dark	 than	 in	 the	 light	 generally	 means	 Horner’s	 syndrome.	 Recall	 that
physiologic	anisocoria	produces	about	the	same	degree	of	pupillary	asymmetry
in	the	light	and	dark.	In	contrast,	third	nerve	palsy	and	Adie’s	pupil	cause	greater
asymmetry	 in	 the	 light	 because	 of	 the	 involved	 pupil’s	 inability	 to	 constrict.
Examining	the	eyes	under	light	and	dark	conditions	can	help	greatly	in	sorting
out	 asymmetric	 pupils	 (Figures	 14.19	 and	 14.20).	 Should	 the	 examiner	 err	 by
having	the	patient	fixate	at	near	during	testing,	the	pupillary	constriction	in	the
good	eye	may	lessen	the	asymmetry	and	cause	the	abnormal	pupil	to	be	missed.
The	pupil	 in	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 not	 only	 dilates	 less	 fully	 but	 also	 dilates	 less
rapidly.	In	the	first	few	seconds	after	dimming	the	lights,	the	slowness	of	dilation
of	 the	 affected	 pupil	 may	 cause	 the	 anisocoria	 to	 be	 even	 more	 pronounced
(dilation	lag).	There	is	more	anisocoria	at	4	to	5	seconds	after	lights	out	than	at
10	to	12	seconds.

The	 causes	 of	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 are	 legion	 and	 include	 the	 following:
brainstem	 lesions	 (especially	 of	 the	 lateral	 medulla),	 cluster	 headache,	 internal
carotid	 artery	 thrombosis	 or	 dissection,	 cavernous	 sinus	 disease,	 apical	 lung
tumors,	 neck	 trauma,	 and	 other	 conditions	 (Figure	 14.21).	 Horner’s	 syndrome
may	 be	 an	 isolated	 manifestation	 of	 syringomyelia.	 The	 tiny	 and	 minimally
reactive	 pupils	 seen	 commonly	 in	 pontine	 hemorrhage	 may	 represent	 acute,
severe,	 bilateral	 oculosympathetic	 paresis.	 The	 rare	 condition	 of	 reverse
Horner’s	 syndrome	 (Pourfour	 du	 Petit	 syndrome)	 is	 unilateral	 mydriasis,
sometimes	 with	 facial	 flushing	 and	 hyperhidrosis,	 because	 of	 transient
sympathetic	overactivity	in	the	early	stages	of	a	lesion	involving	the	sympathetic
pathways	to	one	eye.	In	Harlequin	syndrome,	there	is	unilateral	facial	anhidrosis
with	contralateral	flushing	and	sweating,	induced	by	exercise,	heat,	and	emotion.
The	 condition	 is	 usually	 idiopathic	 but	 can	 occur	 as	 a	 manifestation	 of	 serious
underlying	disorders	including	brainstem	infarction	and	carotid	artery	dissection.
There	are	no	eye	findings.

Pharmacologic	 testing	 is	 occasionally	 done	 to	 help	 determine	 whether	 a
miotic	 pupil	 is	 due	 to	 Horner’s	 syndrome.	 In	 about	 half	 the	 patients	 with

Horner’s	syndrome,	the	etiology	is	apparent	from	other	signs	and	the	history.	In
the	other	half,	clinical	localization	is	uncertain;	pharmacologic	testing	may	help
determine	the	level	of	the	lesion	and	guide	further	investigations.	Interruption	of
the	 sympathetic	 pathways	 between	 the	 hypothalamus	 and	 the	 spinal	 cord	 (e.g.,
Wallenberg	syndrome)	causes	a	first-order	Horner’s	syndrome.	The	second-order
neuron	lies	in	the	ciliospinal	center	at	C8-T2.	A	lesion	involving	this	portion	of
the	pathway	(e.g.,	syringomyelia,	C8	root	lesion)	causes	a	second-order	Horner’s
syndrome.	 The	 third-order	 neuron	 lies	 in	 the	 superior	 sympathetic	 ganglion;	 a
lesion	 at	 or	 distal	 to	 here	 (e.g.,	 carotid	 artery	 dissection)	 causes	 a	 third-order
Horner’s	syndrome.	With	a	third-order	Horner’s,	the	final	neuron	in	the	pathway
dies	and	its	peripheral	processes	atrophy	and	disappear.	With	first-	and	second-
order	Horner’s	syndrome,	the	third-order	neuron	is	disconnected	but	intact,	and
its	terminal	connections	sound	and	viable.

FIGURE	14.21	 A	 patient	 with	 a	 right	 Horner’s	 syndrome.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell
WW.	Clinical	Signs	in	Neurology:	A	Compendium.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2016,
with	permission.)

Cocaine	 drops	 instilled	 into	 the	 eye	 can	 confirm	 the	 presence	 of	 Horner’s
syndrome,	but	cannot	localize	the	lesion;	hydroxyamphetamine	can	distinguish	a
third	order	from	other	types	of	Horner’s	syndrome.	Cocaine	blocks	the	reuptake
of	norepinephrine	from	the	nerve	terminals,	increasing	its	effect.	With	Horner’s
syndrome	 of	 any	 type,	 there	 is	 less	 norepinephrine	 being	 released,	 less

the	 pupil	 will	 dilate	

accumulates	 at	 the	 pupillodilator,	 and	 cocaine	 will	 fail	 to	 dilate	 the	 affected
pupil.	 Hydroxyamphetamine	 drops	 cause	 release	 of	 norepinephrine,	 but	 only
from	 intact	 nerve	 endings.	 If	 the	 third-order	 neuron	 is	 intact,	 as	 with	 first-	 or
to
second-order	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	
hydroxyamphetamine.	 In	 a	 third-order	 Horner’s	 syndrome,	 there	 are	 no
surviving	nerve	endings	in	the	eye	to	release	norepinephrine	and	the	pupil	will
fail	 to	 dilate.	 Table	 14.1	 summarizes	 pupil	 pharmacologic	 testing	 for	 Horner’s
syndrome.	Apraclonidine,	a	new	selective	α2	agonist	used	to	reduce	intraocular
pressure,	 may	 also	 be	 used	 to	 demonstrate	 denervation	 hypersensitivity	 and	 is
much	 more	 readily	 available	 than	 cocaine.	 It	 may	 also	 reverse	 the	 ptosis.
Denervation	hypersensitivity	may	occur	as	soon	as	36	hours	after	development
of	the	Horner’s	syndrome.

in	 response	

Other	 findings	 in	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 include	 loss	 of	 the	 ciliospinal	 reflex,
ocular	hypotony,	and	increased	amplitude	of	accommodation	and	vasodilation	in
the	affected	distribution.	Congenital	Horner’s	syndrome	may	cause	sympathetic
heterochromia	iridis	and	other	trophic	changes	of	the	head	and	face.

Thompson	 et	 al.	 described	 a	 group	 of	 patients	 with	 unilateral	 ptosis	 and
miosis	 of	 unrelated	 origin	 simulating	 oculosympathetic	 paresis,	 which	 they
called	 pseudo-Horner’s	 syndrome.	 The	 majority	 of	 patients	 had	 simple,
physiologic	 anisocoria	 accompanied	 by	 incidental	 ptosis	 because	 of	 LDD	 or
blepharochalasis.

Argyll	Robertson	Pupil

(AR	 pupil;	

Argyll	 Robertson	 pupils	
for	 Argyll	 Robertson,	 Scottish
ophthalmologist)	are	small	(1	to	2	mm),	irregular	in	outline,	and	have	light-near
dissociation.	 They	 react	 poorly	 or	 not	 at	 all	 to	 light,	 but	 very	 well	 to	 near.
Anterior	 visual	 pathway	 function	 must	 be	 normal.	 Argyll	 Robertson	 pupils	 are
generally	bilateral	and	asymmetric,	but	may	be	symmetric	and	rarely	unilateral.
Argyll	 Robertson	 pupils	 are	 the	 classic	 eye	 finding	 of	 neurosyphilis	 and	 when
present	 they	 mandate	 appropriate	 serologic	 testing.	 The	 lesion	 lies	 in	 the
periaqueductal	 region,	 pretectal	 area,	 and	 rostral	 midbrain	 dorsal	 to	 the	 EW
nuclei.	 Other	 conditions	 may	 cause	 an	 AR-like	 pupil.	 With	 the	 declining
incidence	 of	 neurosyphilis,	 AR-like	 pupils	 with	 light-near	 dissociation	 are
increasingly	 likely	 to	 be	 of	 some	 other	 etiology.	 Other	 causes	 of	 light-near
dissociation	are	discussed	in	the	following	section.

Pupils	with	Abnormal	Reactions

Disruption	of	the	afferent	or	efferent	limbs	of	the	pupillary	reflex	arcs,	or	disease
of	the	brainstem	pupil	control	centers,	may	alter	pupil	reactivity	to	light	or	near,
as	may	local	disease	of	the	iris	sphincter	(e.g.,	old	trauma).	Disease	of	the	retina
does	not	affect	pupil	reactivity	unless	there	is	involvement	of	the	macula	severe
enough	 to	 cause	 near	 blindness.	 Cataracts	 and	 other	 diseases	 of	 the	 anterior
segment	do	not	impair	light	transmission	enough	to	influence	the	pupil.	Because
of	 the	 extensive	 side-to-side	 crossing	 of	 pupillary	 control	 axons	 through	 the
posterior	 commissure,	 light	 constricts	 not	 only	 the	 pupil	 stimulated	 (the	 direct
response)	but	also	its	fellow	(the	consensual	response).	The	eye	with	a	severed
optic	 nerve	 will	 show	 no	 direct	 response,	 but	 will	 have	 a	 normal	 consensual
response	to	a	light	stimulus	in	the	other	eye,	as	well	as	constriction	to	attempted
convergence	 (amaurotic	 pupil).	 Lesser	 degrees	 of	 optic	 nerve	 dysfunction	 can
often	be	detected	by	checking	for	an	APD	(see	below).	The	pupil	frozen	because
of	third	nerve	palsy	will	have	no	near	response	and	no	direct	or	consensual	light
response,	 but	 the	 other	 eye	 will	 exhibit	 an	 intact	 consensual	 response	 on
stimulation	of	the	abnormal	side	(Table	14.2).

Light-Near	Dissociation

The	pupillary	reaction	to	light	is	normally	equal	to	or	greater	than	the	reaction	to
near.	 Light-near	 dissociation	 refers	 to	 a	 disparity	 between	 the	 light	 and	 near
reactions.	The	most	common	form	is	a	poor	light	response	but	good	constriction
with	 the	 near	 response;	 it	 is	 relatively	 common,	 and	 there	 are	 a	 number	 of
causes.	The	converse,	better	reaction	to	light	than	to	near,	is	rare	and	most	often
because	 of	 lack	 of	 patient	 effort	 in	 attending	 to	 the	 near	 target.	 In	 the	 routine
case,	 if	 the	 pupillary	 light	 reaction	 is	 normal,	 there	 is	 little	 to	 be	 gained	 by
examining	the	near	reaction.

TABLE	14.2

Direct	and	Consensual	Light	Reaction

The	fibers	mediating	the	pupillary	light	reflex	enter	the	dorsal	brainstem,	but
the	 near	 response	 fibers	 ascend	 to	 the	 EW	 nucleus	 from	 the	 ventral	 aspect.
Disorders	that	affect	the	dorsal	rostral	brainstem	may	affect	the	light	reaction	but
leave	the	near	reaction	intact.	This	anatomical	arrangement	likely	explains	many
instances	of	the	phenomenon	of	light-near	dissociation	of	the	pupils.	Pressure	on
the	 pupillary	 fibers	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 pretectum	 and	 posterior	 commissure
(e.g.,	from	pinealoma)	impairs	the	light	reaction.	However,	fibers	mediating	the
near	 response,	 the	 EW	 nucleus,	 and	 the	 efferent	 pupil	 fibers	 are	 spared,	 which
leaves	 the	 near	 response	 intact.	 Causes	 of	 light-near	 dissociation	 include
neurosyphilis,	 other	 lesions	 involving	 the	 dorsal	 rostral	 midbrain,	 diabetic
autonomic	 neuropathy	 (tabes	 diabetica),	 Lyme	 disease,	 chronic	 alcoholism,
chiasmal	 lesions	 (tabes	 pituitaria),	 myotonic	 muscular	 dystrophy,	 amyloidosis,
Adie’s	 pupil,	 aberrant	 regeneration	 of	 CN	 III,	 sarcoidosis,	 multiple	 sclerosis
(MS),	and	severe	retinal	or	optic	nerve	disease.

Afferent	Pupillary	Defect

When	testing	the	 light	 reflex,	 the	amplitude	 of	the	 initial	pupillary	 constriction
and	 subsequent	 slight	 escape	 depend	 greatly	 on	 the	 specific	 circumstances	 of
illumination.	 Therefore,	 the	 status	 of	 the	 light	 reflex	 must	 be	 judged	 by
comparing	the	two	eyes.	The	importance	of	the	pupil	light	reflex	as	an	indicator
of	 optic	 nerve	 function	 has	 been	 recognized	 since	 antiquity;	 Hippocrates	 and
Galen	understood	the	basic	concept.	With	mild	to	moderate	optic	nerve	disease,
it	is	difficult	to	detect	any	change	in	pupil	reactivity	to	direct	light	stimulation.
As	 provocatively	 pointed	 out	 by	 Landau,	 Marcus	 Gunn	 (in	 1902)	 described
pathologic	 pupillary	 escape,	 what	 he	 termed	 secondary	 dilatation	 under
continued	 exposure	 (for	 10	 to	 20	 seconds),	 or	 the	 adapting	 pupillary	 response,
due	 to	 optic	 nerve	 disease.	 In	 1959,	 Levitan	 described	 looking	 for	 the	 Marcus

Gunn	 pupillary	 sign	 by	 swinging	 a	 light	 back	 and	 forth	 between	 the	 two	 eyes
(swinging	flashlight	test,	alternating	light	test).	He	thought	that	moving	the	light
back	and	forth	amplified	the	asymmetry	of	the	pupillary	escape.	There	seems	to
be	general	agreement	that	the	swinging	flashlight	test	is	a	very	useful	technique
that	can	quickly	and	accurately	compare	the	initial	constriction	and	subsequent
escape	 of	 the	 two	 pupils.	 It	 is	 a	 key	 clinical	 technique	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of
suspected	optic	neuropathy,	and	it	can	often	detect	a	side-to-side	difference	even
when	 the	 lesion	 is	 mild	 and	 there	 is	no	 detectable	 difference	 in	 the	direct	 light
reflex	when	testing	each	eye	individually	(Figure	14.22).

There	are	two	techniques	for	the	swinging	flashlight	test.	In	the	first,	the	light
is	held	about	1	in	from	the	eye	along	and	just	below	the	visual	axis;	the	light	is
rapidly	alternated,	pausing	for	about	one	full	second	on	each	side.	The	examiner
attends	only	to	the	stimulated	eye,	comparing	the	amplitude	and	velocity	of	the
initial	 constriction	 in	 the	 two	 eyes.	 The	 reaction	 is	 relatively	 weaker	 when	 the
bad	eye	is	illuminated.	In	the	other	technique,	the	light	is	allowed	to	linger	a	bit
longer.	With	stimulation	of	the	good	eye,	both	pupils	constrict	smartly	because
of	the	direct	reflex	in	the	stimulated	eye	and	the	consensual	reflex	in	the	opposite
eye.	 After	 3	 to	 5	 seconds	 to	 allow	 the	 pupil	 to	 stabilize,	 the	 light	 is	 quickly
swung	 to	 the	 bad	 eye.	 With	 an	 optic	 nerve	 lesion,	 the	 brain	 detects	 a	 relative
diminution	in	light	intensity	and	the	pupil	may	dilate	a	bit	in	response.	The	pupil
in	 the	 other	 eye	 dilates	 as	 well	 because	 the	 consensual	 reflex	 constricting	 the
pupil	in	the	good	eye	is	less	active	than	its	direct	reflex,	but	this	is	not	observed.
On	moving	the	light	back	to	the	good	eye,	the	more	active	direct	response	causes
the	pupil	to	constrict.	On	moving	back	to	the	bad	eye,	the	pupil	dilates	because
the	direct	light	reflex	is	weaker	than	the	consensual	reflex	that	had	been	holding
it	down.	As	the	light	passes	back	and	forth,	the	pupil	of	the	good	eye	constricts
to	 direct	 light	 stimulation	 and	 the	 pupil	 of	 the	 bad	 eye	 dilates	 to	 direct	 light
stimulation.	It	may	require	several	swings	to	find	the	optimum	speed	to	bring	out
the	dynamic	anisocoria.	Over	several	cycles,	it	may	be	striking	to	see	one	pupil
consistently	 dilate	 to	 the	 same	 light	 stimulus	 that	 causes	 the	 other	 to	 constrict.
The	 weaker	 direct	 response	 or	 the	 paradoxical	 dilation	 of	 the	 light-stimulated
pupil	 is	 termed	 an	 APD,	 or	 Marcus	 Gunn	 pupil.	 It	 is	 an	 extremely	 useful	 and
important	 neurologic	 sign.	 Some	 modify	 the	 term	 with	 “relative”	 (RAPD)	 to
emphasize	that	the	finding	depends	on	the	difference	between	the	two	eyes—the
state	of	the	afferent	system	and	activity	of	the	light	reflex	in	one	eye	relative	to
the	 other	 eye.	 The	 shorter	 form,	 APD,	 is	 currently	 in	 more	 widespread	 use.
Active	 hippus	 may	 cause	 difficulty	 in	 interpretation.	 Hippus	 is	 random;	 a	 true

APD	will	be	consistent	over	multiple	trials.	Pay	attention	to	the	first	movement
of	the	pupil;	if	it	is	consistently	a	dilation	movement,	the	patient	has	an	APD	and
not	hippus.

FIGURE	14.22	Relative	afferent	pupillary	defect.	Vision	on	the	right	20/20;	vision	on
the	left	20/200	because	of	optic	neuropathy.	A.	The	pupils	in	dim	light	are	equal.	B.
Light	directed	into	the	left	eye	results	in	a	partial	and	sluggish	contraction	in	each	eye.
C.	Light	directed	into	the	right	eye	results	in	a	brisk	and	normal	reaction	in	each	eye.
D.	 The	 light	 quickly	 redirected	 into	 the	 left	 eye	 results	 in	 a	 dilatation	 of	 both	 pupils.
Swinging	the	light	back	and	forth	will	bring	out	the	dynamic	anisocoria.	(From	Tasman
W,	 Jaeger	 E.	 The	 Wills	 Eye	 Hospital	 Atlas	 of	 Clinical	 Ophthalmology.	 2nd	 ed.
Baltimore:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2001,	with	permission.)

The	magnitude	of	an	APD	is	often	graded.	In	one	scheme,	a	1+	APD	refers	to
initial	constriction	followed	by	escape,	2+	indicates	no	initial	constriction,	then
dilation,	 3+	 indicates	 immediate	 redilation,	 and	 4+	 means	 an	 amaurotic	 pupil.
More	 precise	 grading	 is	 done	 with	 neutral	 density	 filters.	 Asking	the	 patient	 to
compare	 the	 light	 intensity	 in	 the	 two	 eyes	 provides	 a	 subjective	 estimate	 of
APD	severity.

The	 presence	 of	 an	 APD	 depends	 on	 asymmetry	 in	 the	 afferent	 signal.	 A
bilateral	APD	cannot	occur,	although	a	severe	bilateral	afferent	defect	may	cause
light-near	 dissociation	 or	 abnormal	 pupillary	 escape.	 An	 APD	 can	 occur	 with
bilateral	optic	neuropathy	only	if	there	is	significant	asymmetry	of	involvement.
An	 APD	 can	 also	 occur	 with	 asymmetric	 chiasmal	 disorders	 or	 an	 optic	 tract
lesion.	A	pretectal	lesion	can	cause	a	contralateral	APD	without	visual	field	loss.
Media	opacities	will	not	cause	an	APD.	In	fact,	mature	cataract	may	so	scatter
the	incoming	light	as	to	actually	increase	the	light	reflex	and	cause	a	minor	APD
in	the	opposite	eye.	Only	severe	retinal	or	macular	disease	will	cause	an	APD,
and	 then	 it	 will	 be	 slight.	 Maculopathy	 with	 20/200	 vision	 might	 cause	 a	 1+
APD,	whereas	optic	neuropathy	with	20/30	vision	would	cause	a	3+	to	4+	APD.
For	 a	 demonstration	 of	 the	 swinging	 flashlight	 test	 and	 a	 demonstration	 of	 an
APD,	see	RAPD	Present	by	Dr.	Kathleen	B.	Digre,	John	A.	Moran	Eye	Center,
Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library	[NOVEL],	University	of	Utah,
available	at	Video	Link	14.5.

BOX	14.2

Unusual	Pupillary	Abnormalities

Paradoxical	 pupils	 constrict	 in	 darkness.	 The	 phenomenon	 is	 seen	 in
congenital	 retinal	 and	 optic	 nerve	 disorders;	 the	 mechanism	 is	 unknown.
Springing	pupil	(benign,	episodic	pupillary	dilation;	mydriasis	á	bascule)	is
intermittent,	 sometimes	 alternating,	 dilation	 of	 one	 pupil	 lasting	 minutes	 to
hours	 seen	 in	 young,	 healthy	 women,	 often	 followed	 by	 headache.	 Tadpole
pupil	 is	 a	 benign	 condition	 in	 which	 a	 pupil	 intermittently	 and	 briefly
becomes	 comma	 shaped	 because	 of	 spasm	 involving	 one	 sector	 of	 the
pupillodilator;	it	may	be	a	forme	fruste	of	springing	pupil.	Periodic	unilateral
mydriasis	 has	 been	 reported	 in	 migraine	 and	 as	 an	 ictal	 phenomenon.
Scalloped	pupils	occur	in	familial	amyloidosis.	Oval	pupils	usually	portend

major	intracranial	pathology	and	may	be	a	transient	phase	in	evolving	injury
to	 the	 third	 nerve	 nuclear	 complex.	 Corectopia	 iridis	 (ectopia	 pupillae,
Wilson’s	 sign)	 is	 spontaneous,	 cyclic	 displacement	 of	 the	 pupil	 from	 the
center	of	the	iris;	it	is	usually	seen	in	severe	midbrain	disease.

Unusual	Disorders	of	the	Pupil

Some	 rare	 pupillary	 disorders	 include	 paradoxical	 pupils,	 springing	 pupil,
tadpole	pupil,	oval	pupils,	and	corectopia	(Box	14.2).

OCULAR	MOTILITY

The	eyes	move	in	the	service	of	vision,	bringing	objects	of	regard	into	the	field
of	 vision	 and	 following	 them	 if	 they	 move.	 Eye	 movements	 are	 divided	 into
ductions	 (movements	 of	 one	 eye),	 versions	 (binocular	 conjugate	 movements),
and	 vergences	 (binocular	 dysconjugate	 movements).	 Vertical	 movements	 are
sometimes	 divided	 into	 supraductions/versions	 and	 infraductions/versions.	 The
different	 eye	 movement	 control	 systems	 (e.g.,	 saccade,	 pursuit,	 vergence)
normally	function	harmoniously	to	secure	and	maintain	vision.	The	globe	rotates
around	 one	 or	 more	 of	 three	 primary	 axes	 that	 intersect	 at	 right	 angles	 at	 the
center	 of	 rotation,	 15.4	 mm	 behind	 the	 cornea.	 Movement	 takes	 place
perpendicular	to	the	axis	of	rotation.	Abduction	and	adduction	are	rotation	in	the
horizontal	plane	about	the	vertical	axis	going	from	superior	to	inferior.	Elevation
and	depression	are	up	and	down	movements	around	the	horizontal	axis	that	runs
from	 medial	 to	 lateral	 across	 the	 eye.	 The	 third	 axis	 runs	 from	 anterior	 to
posterior;	 rotation	 about	
torsion.	 Intorsion
(incyclotorsion)	 is	 movement	 of	 the	 upper	 pole	 of	 the	 eye	 toward	 the	 nose;
extorsion	(excyclotorsion)	is	movement	away	from	the	nose.

is	 referred	

this	 axis	

to	 as	

The	eyes	are	said	to	be	in	primary	position	when	gaze	is	straight	ahead	and
the	visual	axes	of	the	two	eyes	are	parallel.	Because	the	orbits	diverge,	primary
position	 must	 be	 obtained	 by	 precisely	 adjusted	 contractions	 of	 the	 extraocular
muscles,	 which	 are	 controlled	 by	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 It	 is	 a	 delicate	 system.
When	 regarding	 an	 object,	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 move	 the	 eyes	 so	 that	 the
visual	 axes	 meet	 at	 the	 proper	 point	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 object’s	 image	 falls	 on
corresponding	 points	 on	 each	 macula.	 The	 point	 where	 the	 visual	 axes	 meet	 is
called	the	fixation	point.	Normal	eye	movements	are	usually	conjugate	in	order

to	 maintain	 binocular	 vision	 and	 stereopsis.	 The	 MLF	 coordinates	 the
contractions	of	the	yoked	muscles	and	the	relaxation	of	their	antagonists	so	that
the	two	eyes	move	together.

During	 a	 monocular	 duction	 movement,	 the	 agonist	 contracts	 and	 the
antagonist	relaxes.	When	the	medial	rectus	in	one	eye	contracts,	the	lateral	rectus
in	the	same	eye	must	relax.	Sherrington’s	law	describes	the	balance	between	the
contraction	 of	 the	 agonist	 and	 the	 inhibition	 of	 the	 antagonist.	 In	 certain
conditions	 (e.g.,	 Duane’s	 syndrome,	 Parinaud’s	 syndrome),	 there	 is	 failure	 of
antagonist	 inhibition	 resulting	 in	 co-contraction	 of	 muscles.	 Co-contraction
causes	the	globe	to	retract	into	the	orbit	rather	than	moving	in	a	normal	manner.

During	binocular	version	movements,	the	extraocular	muscles	work	as	yoked
pairs	 (e.g.,	 the	 lateral	 rectus	 in	 one	 eye	 contracts	 with	 the	 medial	 rectus	 in	 the
other	eye)	(Figure	14.3).	The	yoke	muscles	are	paired	agonists	for	the	binocular
movement,	and	in	each	eye,	their	respective	antagonists,	per	Sherrington’s	law,
must	 be	 reciprocally	 inhibited.	 Hering’s	 law,	 or	 the	 law	 of	 equal	 innervation,
states	that	the	same	amount	of	innervation	goes	to	an	extraocular	muscle	and	to
its	 yoked	 fellow.	 The	 amount	 of	 innervation	 to	 the	 yoked	 pair	 is	 always
determined	 by	 the	 fixating	 eye.	 Hering’s	 law	 is	 important	 in	 understanding	 the
topic	of	primary	and	secondary	deviations.

Patients	with	diplopia	become	symptomatic	because	of	visual	confusion.	The
confusion	 results	 because	 of	 discordant	 retinal	 images—one	 real,	 one	 not.
Diplopia	 is	 usually	 preceded	 by	 blurring	 of	 vision.	 Even	 when	 ocular
malalignment	 is	 obvious,	 it	 is	 common	 for	 patients	 to	 have	 nonspecific
complaints,	such	as	blurry	vision	or	dizziness,	rather	than	complaining	of	frank
“double	vision.”	Historical	details	are	often	helpful	in	deciphering	the	cause	of
diplopia.	The	first	step	should	be	to	determine	whether	the	diplopia	is	binocular
or	 monocular.	 Surprisingly,	 few	 patients	 have	 been	 observant	 enough	 to	 cover
one	eye	and	thus	answer	this	question.	With	binocular	diplopia,	covering	one	eye
eliminates	 the	 visual	 confusion.	 Monocular	 diplopia	 persists	 when	 using	 the
affected	 eye	 alone.	 Monocular	 diplopia	 is	 often	 considered	 a	 nonorganic
symptom,	 but	 there	 are	 many	 organic	 causes,	 primarily	 ophthalmologic
conditions	 such	 as	 cataract,	 corneal	 astigmatism,	 lens	 subluxation,	 retinal
detachment,	and	macular	disease.	Rare	patients	with	cortical	lesions	will	develop
polyopia,	 seeing	 multiple	 afterimages	 with	 either	 eye,	 which	 can	 be	 confused
with	monocular	diplopia.

Observant	patients	may	be	able	to	state	whether	the	diplopia	is	horizontal	or
vertical,	worse	at	near	or	distance,	or	worse	in	a	particular	direction	of	gaze;	all

are	pertinent	observations.	Horizontal	diplopia	usually	results	from	dysfunction
of	 the	 medial	 or	 lateral	 rectus	 muscles.	 Vertical	 diplopia	 tends	 to	 result	 from
disorders	of	the	oblique	muscles,	less	often	of	the	vertically	acting	recti.	Patients
with	sixth	nerve	palsy	have	difficulty	diverging	the	eyes	and	tend	to	have	more
diplopia	at	distance.	The	lateral	recti	are	not	active	when	the	eyes	are	converging
for	near	vision,	and	patients	have	less	diplopia	at	near	(reading)	as	compared	to
distance	 (driving).	 Conversely,	 patients	 with	 medial	 rectus	 weakness	 have
difficulty	converging	with	more	diplopia	at	near	and	less	at	distance.	Diplopia	is
worse	with	gaze	in	the	direction	of	the	involved	muscle.	The	patient	with	either	a
right	sixth	nerve	palsy	or	a	left	third	nerve	palsy	will	have	more	diplopia	on	right
gaze.	 Patients	 with	 fourth	 nerve	 palsy	 often	 describe	 an	 obliquity	 or	 tilt	 to	 the
image.	A	patient	with	diplopia	may	keep	one	eye	closed	or	may	tilt	or	turn	the
head	 to	 minimize	 the	 visual	 confusion	 (ocular	 torticollis).	 An	 ocular	 cause	 of
abnormal	 head	 position	 is	 common	 in	 children;	 the	 most	 common	 causes	 are
congenital	 nystagmus,	 superior	 oblique	 paresis,	 dissociated	 vertical	 deviation,
Brown’s	syndrome	(see	below),	and	refractive	errors.

The	 diplopia	 of	 MG	 varies	 greatly	 with	 time	 of	 day	 and	 fatigue.	 Transient
diplopia	 may	 occur	 with	 vertebrobasilar	 insufficiency.	 Persistent	 diplopia	 of
sudden	onset	suggests	a	vascular	event,	with	ischemia	involving	either	a	specific
CN,	as	in	diabetic	third	nerve	palsy,	or	the	brainstem.	Ischemic	CN	palsy	tends
to	 resolve	 in	 2	 to	 3	 months.	 Progressive	 diplopia	 raises	 the	 possibility	 of	 a
compressive	 lesion	 involving	 a	 CN.	 Trauma	 to	 the	 head	 or	 orbit	 frequently
causes	 diplopia.	 Patients	 with	 a	 history	 of	 congenital	 strabismus	 may	 develop
diplopia	 later	 in	 life	 because	 of	 decompensation	 of	 the	 squint	 and	 failure	 of
fusion.	 A	 history	 of	 squint,	 “lazy	 eye,”	 wearing	 glasses,	 patching	 one	 eye,	 or
visits	to	the	eye	doctor	as	a	child	may	all	be	relevant	in	the	adult	patient.

Associated	 symptoms	 may	 be	 important.	 Diplopia	 accompanied	 by	 ptosis
may	occur	with	third	nerve	palsy,	as	well	as	with	MG	and	other	neuromuscular
disorders.	 Pain	 in	 the	 head	 or	 eye	 in	 association	 with	 diplopia	 suggests	 such
conditions	 as	 diabetic	 third	 nerve	 palsy,	 posterior	 communicating	 aneurysm,
ophthalmoplegic	 migraine,	 Tolosa-Hunt	 syndrome	 (painful	 ophthalmoplegia),
and	giant	cell	arteritis.

EXAMINATION	OF	EYE	MOVEMENTS

Assessment	of	ocular	movements	should	include	an	assessment	of	visual	acuity.

When	acuity	is	impaired,	the	patient	may	not	be	able	to	adequately	fixate.	This
influences	the	results	of	various	maneuvers	used	to	assess	motility,	particularly
the	cover	test.	Note	the	position	of	the	patient’s	head.	Many	patients	with	ocular
malalignment	will	hold	their	head	in	an	unusual	position.	Usually,	there	is	a	turn
or	 tilt	 that	 minimizes	 the	 diplopia.	 Occasional	 patients	 will	 use	 a	 different
strategy	and	hold	the	head	in	a	position	that	maximizes	diplopia	in	order	to	make
the	 false	 image	 fainter	 and	 more	 easily	 ignored.	 Patients	 with	 congenital
nystagmus	typically	turn	the	head	to	maintain	the	eyes	in	a	null	zone	where	the
nystagmus	 is	 least.	 Note	 the	 lid	 position.	 Lid	 asymmetry	 may	 accompany
vertical	strabismus;	the	appearance	depends	on	which	eye	is	fixing.

Assuming	 reasonable	 visual	 acuity	 and	 normal	 head	 position,	 the	 motility
examination	begins	with	an	assessment	of	fixation.	A	normal	patient	can	fixate
steadily	 on	 an	 object	 of	 regard,	 whether	 near	 or	 distant.	 Inability	 to	 maintain
normal	 steady	 fixation	 may	 occur	 because	 of	 square	 wave	 jerks,	 macro	 square
wave	 jerks,	 macrosaccadic	 oscillations,	 and	 other	 disorders.	 These	 conditions
cause	fixation	instability,	or	saccadic	intrusions,	transient	deviations	away	from
fixation	 with	 a	 quick	 return.	 Saccadic	 intrusion	 may	 be	 more	 apparent	 when
viewing	 the	 fundus.	 Saccadic	 intrusions	 may	 be	 mistaken	 for	 nystagmus.
Although	 saccadic	 intrusions	 can	 occur	 in	 normals,	 especially	 the	 elderly,	 they
are	usually	a	sign	of	brainstem	or	cerebellar	disease.	The	patient	with	nystagmus
greater	than	first	degree	will	also	not	have	normal	steady	fixation.

In	 routine	 cases	 where	 there	 are	 no	 eye	 complaints	 and	 the	 likelihood	 of
abnormality	 is	 low,	 the	 ocular	 motility	 examination	 is	 usually	 limited	 to
assessing	 versional	 pursuit	 movements	 in	 the	 six	 cardinal	 positions	 of	 gaze,
including	full	lateral	gauge	to	each	side,	as	well	as	upgaze	and	downgaze	when
looking	to	either	side	(Figures	14.2	and	14.3).	The	target	should	slowly	trace	a
large	letter	“H”	for	the	patient	to	follow.	Some	add	primary	gaze	plus	upgaze	and
downgaze	in	the	center	to	make	nine	cardinal	positions.	Eye	movements	should
remain	 smooth	 and	 conjugate	 throughout.	 The	 six	 cardinal	 positions	 are
designed	 to	 search	 for	 dysfunction	 of	 individual	 muscles	 or	 nerves,	 as	 well	 as
supranuclear	 abnormalities	 of	 horizontal	 gaze.	 Assessment	 of	 upgaze	 and
downgaze	
the	 supranuclear	 vertical	 gaze
mechanisms.

in	 primary	 position	 assesses	

Pursuit	versions	are	done	by	asking	the	patient	to	follow	a	target	held	about
0.5	to	1.0	m	away,	such	as	an	examining	light,	a	pointer,	a	pen,	or	the	examiner’s
finger.	 A	 linear	 target	 should	 be	 held	 perpendicular	 to	 the	 direction	 of	 gaze,
vertical	 for	 testing	 horizontal	 gaze,	 and	 horizontal	 for	 vertical	 gaze.	 Use	 of	 an

examining	 light	 adds	 the	 ability	 to	 assess	 the	 corneal	 reflection,	 which	 gives
objective	 evidence	 of	 ocular	 malalignment.	 The	 light	 reflection	 should	 be	 just
medial	 to	 the	 center	 of	 the	 pupil	 and	 at	 corresponding	 points	 in	 each	 eye.	 The
patient	 should	 indicate	 if	 she	 sees	 more	 than	 one	 target	 at	 any	 point.	 Pursuit
movements	are	normally	smooth.	In	certain	disease	states	with	abnormal	pursuit,
the	tracking	movements	become	disrupted	by	superimposed	saccades,	creating	a
ratchety	or	jerky	movement	termed	saccadic	pursuit	(cogwheel	eye	movements).
The	 finding	 is	 nonspecific	 and	 can	 occur	 bilaterally	 with	 fatigue,	 inattention,
decreased	 consciousness,	 basal	 ganglia	 disorders,	 diffuse	 hemispheric	 disease,
drug	 effects,	 or	 if	 the	 target	 velocity	 is	 too	 fast.	 Abnormal	 pursuit	 in	 one
direction	may	indicate	an	ipsilateral	deep	occipitoparietal	lobe	lesion	involving
the	pursuit	pathways.

Normally,	 the	 eyes	 can	 move	 through	 a	 range	 of	 about	 45	 degrees	 to	 either
side	 of	 primary	 position.	 In	 absolute	 terms,	 for	 the	 normal	 adult	 eye,	 the
excursions	are	about	10	mm	for	adduction,	abduction,	and	elevation,	and	about	7
mm	for	depression.	The	last	10	degrees	of	abduction	is	difficult	to	maintain	and
holding	 there	 may	 result	 in	 end-point	 nystagmus,	 a	 normal	 physiologic
phenomenon.	 Patients	 can	 normally	 “bury	 the	 limbus”	 with	 both	 eyes	 in	 full
lateral	gaze	in	each	direction,	somewhat	better	on	adduction	than	abduction.	In
full	 lateral	 gaze,	 the	 temporal	 limbus	 abuts	 the	 lateral	 canthus;	 in	 full	 medial
gaze,	 about	 the	 inner	 third	 of	 the	 nasal	 limbus	 is	 buried.	 A	 small	 rim	 of	 sclera
showing	on	extreme	abduction	is	not	abnormal.	Normally,	the	amount	of	scleral
show	 on	 abduction	 is	 symmetric	 in	 the	 two	 eyes.	 Greater	 scleral	 show	 on	 full
abduction	 in	 one	 eye	 than	 the	 other	 may	 be	 a	 subtle	 sign	 of	 abduction
impairment.	 Assessment	 of	 upgaze	 and	 downgaze	 is	 occasionally	 difficult.
Normal	 aging	 causes	 impairment	 of	 upgaze,	 which	 varies	 from	 individual	 to
individual.	 The	 best	 control	 for	 assessing	 normality	 of	 upgaze	 is	 usually	 the
patient’s	spouse.

The	vergence	system	comes	into	play	when	an	object	moves	toward	or	away
from	the	observer.	Dysconjugate	eye	movements,	convergence	or	divergence,	are
required.	 Testing	 convergence	 is	 not	 always	 necessary.	 However,	 the	 central
mechanisms	subserving	adduction	of	the	eyes	for	convergence	are	different	from
the	 mechanisms	 for	 adduction	 during	 conjugate	 gaze.	 Testing	 convergence	 is
helpful	 in	 some	 circumstances,	 such	 as	 when	 the	 pupillary	 light	 reflex	 is	 not
crisply	normal	(in	order	to	look	for	light-near	dissociation	of	the	pupils),	or	when
there	is	anything	to	suggest	an	INO.

The	 saccadic	 system	 can	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 rapidly	 refixate

between	two	targets.	The	patient	is	instructed	to	switch	gaze	between	one	target,
such	 as	 the	 examiner’s	 nose,	 and	 an	 eccentric	 target,	 such	 as	 the	 examiner’s
finger	 held	 to	 one	 side.	 The	 examiner	 assesses	 the	 velocity,	 magnitude,	 and
accuracy	 of	 the	 saccades	 and	 compares	 adduction	 and	 abduction	 saccades	 in
each	 eye	 and	 saccades	 in	 the	 two	 eyes.	 Saccadic	 velocity	 may	 be	 decreased
globally	in	some	conditions,	such	as	MG,	or	selectively,	such	as	slow	adduction
saccades	in	the	involved	eye	in	a	unilateral	INO.	Saccades	may	be	hypometric,
falling	 short	 of	 target	 and	 requiring	 additional,	 smaller	 saccades	 to	 attain
fixation,	or	hypermetric,	overshooting	the	target	and	requiring	saccades	back	in
the	opposite	direction.	In	some	conditions,	reflex	eye	movements	may	be	present
when	 other	 movements	 are	 impaired.	 VOR	 movements	 can	 be	 examined	 by
having	the	patient	fix	on	a	target,	then	passively	moving	the	head	from	side	to
side,	or	up	and	down.

EVALUATION	OF	OCULAR	MALALIGNMENT

Testing	 for	 diplopia	 and	 ocular	 malalignment	 may	 be	 subjective	 or	 objective.
The	subjective	tests	depend	on	the	patient’s	observation	of	images,	the	objective
tests	on	the	examiner’s	observation	of	eye	movements	during	certain	maneuvers.
Common	 subjective	 bedside	 evaluations	 include	 the	 red	 lens	 and	 Maddox	 rod
tests;	 common	 bedside	 objective	 tests	 are	 the	 corneal	 light	 reflex	 tests	 and	 the
cover	tests	(cover-uncover	and	alternate	cover).	The	objective	tests	only	require
the	 patient	 to	 fixate;	 they	 do	 not	 require	 any	 subjective	 responses	 or
interpretation	of	the	color	or	separation	of	images.

Subjective	Tests

Subjective	 tests	 for	 diplopia	 depend	 on	 the	 patient’s	 description	 of	 the	 images
seen.	These	are	most	helpful	soon	after	the	onset	of	an	oculomotor	disturbance.
With	 the	 passage	 of	 time,	 there	 is	 compensation	 and	 precise	 delineation	 of	 the
faulty	 nerve	 or	 muscle	 becomes	 more	 difficult.	 Testing	 should	 be	 done	 at	 a
distance	of	1	m	to	avoid	any	potentially	confusing	convergence.	It	may	be	useful
to	have	the	patient	hold	up	both	index	fingers	and	demonstrate	the	separation	of
images	in	each	position	of	gaze.

When	 a	 patient	 has	 diplopia	 because	 of	 extraocular	 muscle	 weakness,	 she
sees	two	images.	The	real	image	falls	on	the	macula	of	the	normal	eye.	The	false

image	 falls	 on	 the	 retina	 beside	 the	 macula	 of	 the	 paretic	 eye.	 The	 brain	 is
accustomed	to	images	falling	off	the	macula	coming	from	peripheral	vision,	so	it
projects	the	false	image	peripherally.	The	farther	away	from	the	macula	that	the
image	falls,	the	farther	peripherally	the	misinterpretation	of	its	origin.	As	the	eye
moves	in	the	direction	of	the	paretic	muscle,	the	separation	of	images	increases,
and	the	false	image	appears	to	be	more	and	more	peripheral.	The	false	image	is
also	 usually	 fainter	 than	 the	 true	 image	 because	 extramacular	 vision	 is	 not	 as
acute.	The	clarity,	however,	depends	on	the	visual	acuity	in	the	two	eyes.

Consider	a	patient	with	right	lateral	rectus	weakness	gazing	to	the	right.	The
left	eye	accurately	tracks	the	target;	the	right	eye	does	not	pass	midline.	The	true
image	falls	on	the	left	macula.	The	false	image	falls	on	the	nasal	hemiretina	of
the	 right	 eye.	 The	 brain	 interprets	 the	 light	 ray	 falling	 on	 the	 right	 nasal
hemiretina	 as	 coming	 from	 the	 right	 side	 of	 space.	 The	 farther	 onto	 the	 right
nasal	hemiretina	the	light	ray	falls,	the	farther	to	the	right	side	the	brain	thinks	it
came	 from.	 These	 considerations	 lead	 to	 three	 “diplopia	 rules”	 to	 identify	 the
false	object:	(a)	the	separation	of	images	is	greatest	in	the	direction	of	action	of
the	 weak	 muscle,	 (b)	 the	 false	 image	 is	 the	 more	 peripheral,	 and	 (c)	 the	 false
image	comes	from	the	paretic	eye.

The	false	image	may	be	identified	in	different	ways.	The	simplest	is	to	move
the	patient’s	eyes	into	the	position	with	the	greatest	separation	of	images.	Then
cover	 one	 eye.	 If	 the	 more	 peripheral	 image	 disappears,	 the	 covered	 eye	 is	 the
paretic	 eye.	 Consider	 a	 patient	 with	 maximal	 diplopia	 in	 right	 horizontal	 gaze.
The	 candidate	 faulty	 muscles	 are	 the	 right	 lateral	 rectus	 and	 the	 left	 medial
rectus.	 If	 the	 examiner	 then	 covers	 the	 patient’s	 left	 eye	 and	 the	 image	 on	 the
patient’s	 left	 disappears,	 the	 diagnosis	 is	 right	 lateral	 rectus	 weakness.	 This	 is
because	the	image	that	disappeared	was	less	peripheral;	therefore,	the	true	image
and	the	false	image	must	have	been	arising	from	the	right	eye.

The	red	lens	(red	glass)	and	Maddox	rod	tests	are	attempts	to	be	more	precise.
They	may	be	especially	useful	when	the	diplopia	is	mild	and	the	weak	muscle	or
muscles	 not	 apparent	 from	 examination	 of	 ocular	 versions	 (Box	 14.3).	 The
theory	 of	 the	 red	 lens	 test	 is	 sound,	 but	 often	 the	 results	 of	 testing	 in	 clinical
practice	 are	 less	 than	 clear.	 One	 reason	 is	 that	 the	 red	 lens	 breaks	 fusion	 just
enough	to	bring	out	unrelated	phorias,	which	muddy	the	findings.	The	results	of
the	red	lens	test	may	be	drawn	to	aid	interpretation.	There	should	be	a	notation
as	to	whether	the	diplopia	fields	are	drawn	as	seen	by	the	patient	or	as	seen	by
the	examiner	(Figure	14.23).

BOX	14.3

Red	Lens	and	Maddox	Rod	Testing

The	red	lens	is	a	simple	translucent	red	glass	that	is	placed,	by	convention,
over	 the	 patient’s	 right	 eye.	 When	 an	 examining	 light	 is	 shone	 into	 an
orthophoric	patient’s	eyes,	the	patient	sees	a	single	pink	light	in	all	positions
of	 gaze.	 A	 Maddox	 rod	 is	 an	 array	 of	 cylinders	 in	 a	 plastic	 housing	 that
creates	a	line,	which	may	be	vertical	or	horizontal	depending	upon	how	it	is
held.	 The	 vertical	 line	 is	 used	 for	 evaluating	 horizontal	 diplopia,	 the
horizontal	line	for	vertical	diplopia.	The	Maddox	rod	is	placed	over	the	right
eye.	If	the	instrument	is	held	so	as	to	create	a	vertical	line,	the	orthophoric
patient	 sees	 a	 white	 light	 bisected	 by	 a	 red	 vertical	 line	 in	 all	 directions	 of
gaze.	The	red	line	indicates	which	image	is	coming	from	the	patient’s	right
eye.

Consider	again	the	patient	with	maximal	diplopia	in	right	horizontal	gaze,
with	the	red	lens	over	the	right	eye.	The	patient	sees	a	pink	light	in	primary
and	left	gaze,	but	a	red	light	and	a	white	light	in	right	lateral	gaze.	If	the	red
light	is	more	peripheral,	the	patient	has	right	lateral	rectus	weakness,	because
the	more	peripheral	image	is	coming	from	the	right	eye.	If	the	white	light	is
more	peripheral,	the	patient	has	left	medial	rectus	weakness.

Diplopia	 may	 be	 divided	 into	 crossed	 (heteronymous)	 and	 uncrossed
(homonymous).	If	the	false	image	is	on	the	same	side	as	the	eye	that	sees	it,
there	is	homonymous	diplopia;	if	the	image	is	on	the	opposite	side,	there	is
heteronymous	diplopia.	With	the	red-lens	test,	if	the	false	image	comes	from
the	ipsilateral	eye	(e.g.,	red	image	to	the	right	on	right	gaze),	the	diplopia	is
uncrossed	(a	line	could	be	drawn	directly	from	the	false	image	to	the	paretic
eye).	If	the	false	image	comes	from	the	contralateral	eye	(e.g.,	white	image
to	 the	 right	 on	 right	 gaze),	 a	 line	 from	 the	 false	 image	 to	 the	 paretic	 eye
would	cross	a	line	drawn	from	the	true	image	to	the	nonparetic	eye	and	the
diplopia	 is	 said	 to	 be	 crossed.	 For	 the	 patient	 with	 maximal	 separation	 of
images	on	right	horizontal	gaze,	uncrossed	diplopia	would	imply	right	lateral
weakness	 and	 crossed	 diplopia	 left	 medial	 rectus	 weakness.	 Of	 course,
apparent	 weakness	 of	 any	 particular	 extraocular	 muscle	 could	 be	 simulated
by	 any	 process	 that	 prevents	 relaxation	 of	 the	 antagonist—such	 as	 fibrosis,
contracture,	infiltrations,	entrapment,	or	co-contraction.

Objective	Tests

The	 corneal	 light	 reflex	 test	 (Hirschberg’s	 test)	 depends	 on	 observing	 the
reflection	 of	 an	 examining	 light	 on	 the	 cornea	 and	 estimating	 the	 amount	 of
ocular	deviation	depending	on	the	amount	of	displacement	of	the	reflection	from
the	 center	 of	 the	 pupil.	 The	 test	 can	 only	 be	 done	 at	 near	 because	 distant
reflections	 are	 too	 dim,	 so	 the	 confounding	 effects	 of	 the	 near	 reflex	 must	 be
reckoned	 with.	 Each	 millimeter	 of	 light	 displacement	 from	 the	 center	 indicates
18	degrees	of	eye	deviation.

Cover	Tests

An	elementary	review	of	strabismus	is	useful	to	help	understand	the	cover	tests
(Box	 14.4).	 The	 cover	 tests	 are	 predicated	 on	 forcing	 one	 eye	 or	 the	 other	 to
fixate	 by	 occluding	 its	 fellow,	 and	 determining	 the	 drift	 of	 the	 nonfixing	 eye
while	it	is	under	cover.	Varieties	of	cover	testing	include	the	cover-uncover	test
and	 the	 alternate	 cover	 test.	 The	 cover-uncover	 test	 is	 used	 primarily	 by
ophthalmologists	to	evaluate	patients	with	congenital	strabismus	where	there	is
an	obvious	squint.	When	neurologic	patients	have	an	obvious	malalignment,	its
nature	 is	 usually	 apparent.	 The	 alternate	 cover	 test	 is	 used	 to	 evaluate	 more
subtle	deviations.

FIGURE	14.23	Red	lens	diplopia	fields,	drawn	as	seen	by	the	examiner.	The	red	lens
is	placed	over	the	right	eye,	and	the	eyes	move	through	the	six	cardinal	positions	of
gaze	 with	 the	 patient	 looking	 at	 an	 examining	 light.	 White	 circles	 depict	 images
coming	 from	 the	 left	 eye	 (white	 light);	 dark	 circles,	 images	 from	 the	 right	 eye	 (red
light);	and	intermediate	circles,	images	from	both	eyes	(pink	light).

BOX	14.4

Strabismus

Strabismus,	or	squint,	means	nonconcordance	of	the	visual	axes.	Strabismus
may	be	paralytic	or	nonparalytic.	Ordinary	strabismus,	or	congenital	squint,
occurs	 when	 the	 cerebral	 cortical	 mechanisms	 designed	 to	 maintain
binocular	vision	fail	for	some	reason,	but	the	eyes	are	otherwise	normal.	This
variety	 of	 strabismus	 is	 very	 common	in	 children.	 Congenital	strabismus	 is
nonparalytic.	 In	 acquired	 strabismus,	 one	 or	 more	 eye	 muscles	 fail	 to
function	 normally.	 Acquired	 strabismus	 is	 often	 paralytic	 (e.g.,	 from	 third
nerve	palsy).	There	is	an	ocular	malalignment,	which	is	worse	in	the	field	of
action	of	the	affected	muscle	or	muscles.

Perfect	 eyes	 are	 orthophoric	 (Gr.	 orthos	 “straight”)	 in	 all	 fields	 of	 gaze;
the	 visual	 axes	 are	 precisely	 parallel	 during	 all	 versional	 eye	 movements,
even	without	a	stimulus	to	fusion.	Any	deviation	from	perfection	is	termed
heterophoria	 or	 heterotropia,	 usually	 shortened	 to	 phoria	 and	 tropia,
respectively.	In	heterotropia,	the	malalignment	is	evident	at	rest.	Esotropia	is
a	manifest	medial	deviation	(convergent	or	internal	strabismus;	“cross	eye”);
exotropia	 is	 a	 manifest	 lateral	 deviation	 (divergent	 or	 external	 strabismus;
“wall	 eye”).	 Hypertropia	 is	 elevation,	 and	 hypotropia	 is	 depression.
Heterophoria	 is	 a	 latent	 tendency	 for	 deviation,	 which	 only	 becomes
apparent	when	the	stimulus	to	fusion	fails	under	certain	circumstances,	such
as	 fatigue	 or	 when	 binocular	 fusion	 is	 deliberately	 broken,	 as	 by	 covering
one	eye.	Congenital	exophoria	is	very	common.	Exophoria	may	occur	with
myopia,	esophoria	with	hyperopia.	When	an	eye	with	exophoria	is	not	fixing,
it	tends	to	drift	back	to	its	anatomical	position	of	slight	abduction.

A	 phoria	 is	 a	 latent	 deviation	 held	 in	 check	 by	 fusion.	 Breaking	 fusion	 by
covering	 one	 eye	 causes	 the	 covered	 eye	 to	 deviate	 nasally	 (esophoria)	 or
temporally	 (exophoria).	 If	 the	 cover	 is	 switched	 to	 the	 other	 eye	 (alternate
cover),	the	just	uncovered	eye	is	forced	to	move	into	position	to	take	up	fixation.
If	an	adduction	movement	occurs,	it	means	the	eye	had	been	deviated	outward
under	 cover	 (exophoria).	 An	 abduction	 movement	 means	 the	 eye	 had	 been
deviated	inward	(esophoria).	The	magnitude	of	the	deviation	can	be	quantitated
by	 placing	 base-in	 or	 base-out	 prisms	 of	 increasing	 diopter	 strength	 before	 the
involved	eye	until	the	refixation	movements	no	longer	occur.

COMITANCE

A	 phoria	 or	 tropia	 may	 be	 comitant	 (concomitant)	 or	 incomitant	 (noncomitant,
nonconcomitant).	 Comitance	 describes	 the	 consistency	 of	 the	 deviation	 in
various	fields	of	gaze	(Box	14.5).	In	neurologic	patients,	strabismus	is	typically
paralytic	and	incomitant.	Primary	and	secondary	deviations	are	related	to	which
eye	is	abnormal	and	which	eye	is	fixing.	In	paralytic	strabismus,	the	secondary
deviation	is	greater	than	the	primary	deviation.

OPTOKINETIC	(OPTICOKINETIC,	OPTOMOTOR)
NYSTAGMUS

OKN	is	a	normal,	physiologic	phenomenon	sometimes	affected	by	disease.	OKN
is	conjugate	nystagmus	induced	by	a	succession	of	moving	visual	stimuli.	OKN
occurs	whenever	the	eyes	must	follow	a	series	of	rapidly	passing	objects,	such	as
telephone	poles	zipping	by	a	car	or	train	window.	Clinical	testing	entails	moving
a	striped	target,	a	rotating	drum,	or	a	cloth	tape	bearing	stripes	or	squares	in	front
of	 the	 patient	 and	 requesting	 that	 she	 “count”	 the	 stripes	 or	 squares.	 Several
OKN	 applications	 are	 available	 for	 smartphones	 and	 similar	 devices.	 Although
OKN	is	more	complex,	it	can	be	viewed	for	clinical	purposes	as	testing	pursuit
ipsilateral	 to	 the	 direction	 of	 target	 movement,	 and	 contralateral	 saccades.	 The
ipsilateral	PTOJ	mediates	pursuit	of	the	acquired	stripe	via	connections	that	run
in	 the	 internal	 sagittal	 stratum,	 deep	 in	 the	 parietal	 lobe	 medial	 to	 the
geniculocalcarine	 radiations	 and	 adjacent	 to	 the	 atrium	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle.
When	ready	to	break	off,	it	communicates	with	the	ipsilateral	frontal	lobe,	which
then	generates	a	saccadic	movement	in	the	opposite	direction	to	acquire	the	next
target.	 In	 normal,	 alert	 individuals,	 an	 OKN	 stimulus	 induces	 brisk	 nystagmus
with	 the	 fast	 phase	 in	 the	 direction	 opposite	 tape	 movement.	 The	 response	 is
intensified	if	the	subject	looks	in	the	direction	of	the	quick	phase.	Responses	in
one	 direction	 are	 compared	 with	 responses	 in	 the	 other	 direction.	 A	 vertically
moving	stimulus	can	evaluate	upgaze	and	downgaze.	For	an	example	of	normal
and	of	blunted	OKN	responses,	see	Video	Link	14.6.

BOX	14.5

Comitance	and	Primary	and	Secondary	Deviation

A	comitant	strabismus	shows	the	same	degree	of	deviation	in	all	directions	of
gaze.	 Congenital,	 nonparalytic	 strabismus	 is	 typically	 comitant.	 Paralytic
strabismus,	 likely	 to	 be	 seen	 in	 neurologic	 patients,	 is	 characterized	 by
incomitance;	 the	 ocular	 malalignment	 as	 revealed	 by	 cover	 testing	 varies
with	 the	 direction	 of	 gaze	 and	 is	 greatest	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 action	 of	 the
paretic	 muscle.	 A	 patient	 with	 right	 lateral	 rectus	 weakness	 will	 have	 no
abnormality	on	alternate	cover	testing	while	looking	to	the	left,	because	the
right	 lateral	 rectus	 has	 no	 role	 to	 play	 in	 left	 gaze.	 In	 primary	 gaze,	 the
affected	eye	might	drift	into	esophoria	under	cover	and	changing	the	cover	to
the	normal	eye	would	reveal	an	abduction	refixation	movement	of	the	right
eye.	In	right	lateral	gaze,	the	right	lateral	rectus	insufficiency	would	become
more	 obvious.	 The	 right	 eye	 would	 drift	 even	 more	 to	 the	 left	 under	 cover
than	it	did	in	primary	gaze,	and	uncovering	would	reveal	a	larger	abduction
refixation	saccade.	The	eye	deviation	thus	varies	with	the	direction	of	gaze,
none	 in	 left	 gaze,	 mild	 in	 primary	 gaze,	 and	 moderate	 in	 right	 gaze.	 This
variability	is	incomitance	and	is	the	hallmark	of	paralytic	strabismus.

In	 paralytic	 strabismus,	 the	 affected	 eye	 will	 be	 deviated	 away	 from	 the
field	 of	 action	 of	 the	 involved	 muscle.	 With	 a	 right	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN)	 VI
palsy,	 the	 right	 eye	 will	 be	 slightly	 adducted.	 With	 equal	 vision	 in	 the	 two
eyes,	the	noninvolved	left	eye	will	fixate	so	that	in	primary	gaze	the	left	eye
is	fixing	and	the	right	eye	is	deviated	toward	the	nose.	This	deviation	of	the
right	 eye	 is	 the	 primary	 deviation.	 If	 the	 target	 is	 moved	 into	 the	 field	 of
action	of	the	paretic	muscle,	to	the	right,	and	the	left	eye	is	covered	so	that
the	right	eye	is	forced	to	fixate,	the	left	medial	rectus	(the	yoke	muscle	of	the
right	 lateral	 rectus)	 will	 receive	 equal	 and	 simultaneous	 innervation	 per
Hering’s	law.	Because	the	right	lateral	rectus	is	trying	mightily	to	contract	in
an	 attempt	 to	 fixate,	 the	 left	 medial	 rectus	 is	 simultaneously	 contracting
mightily	 and,	 under	 cover,	 the	 left	 eye	 is	 markedly	 adducting	 into	 right
lateral	gaze.	Removal	of	the	cover	reveals	deviation	of	the	left	eye,	which	is
termed	 the	 secondary	 deviation.	 In	 summary,	 the	 primary	 deviation	 is	 the
deviation	of	the	bad	eye	with	the	good	eye	fixing;	the	secondary	deviation	is
the	deviation	of	the	good	eye	with	the	bad	eye	fixing.

Patients	 with	 hemianopsias	 because	 of	 occipital	 lobe	 disease	 have	 a	 normal
OKN	 response,	 despite	 their	 inability	 to	 see	 into	 the	 hemifield	 from	 which	 the
tape	 originates.	 Because	 of	 interruption	 of	 the	 OKN	 pathways,	 patients	 with

hemianopsias	because	of	disease	of	the	optic	radiations	in	the	deep	parietal	lobe
have	 abnormally	 blunted	 or	 absent	 OKN	 responses.	 The	 patient	 is	 unable	 to
pursue	 normally	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 and	 is	 unable	 to	 generate
contraversive	 saccades	 into	 the	 blind	 hemifield.	 The	 significance	 of	 OKN
asymmetry	lies	in	the	vascular	anatomy	and	the	differing	pathologies	that	affect
the	parietal	and	occipital	lobes.	Tumors	are	rare	in	the	occipital	lobe	and	much
more	common	in	the	parietal	lobe.	Furthermore,	the	OKN	pathways	in	the	deep
parietal	 lobe	 are	 outside	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 posterior	 cerebral	 artery.
Therefore,	 a	 patient	 with	 a	 hemianopsia	 and	 normal	 OKN	 responses	 is	 more
likely	 to	 have	 an	 occipital	 lesion,	 and	 more	 likely	 to	 have	 had	 a	 stroke.	 With
asymmetric	 OKNs,	 the	 lesion	 is	 more	 likely	 to	 reside	 in	 the	 parietal	 lobe,	 and
more	 likely	 to	 be	 nonvascular,	 that	 is,	 a	 tumor	 (Cogan’s	 rule).	 An	 asymmetric
OKN	response	has	a	positive	LR	of	5.7	for	detecting	parietal	lobe	disease.

The	 primary	 clinical	 utility	 of	 OKN	 testing	 is	 investigation	 of	 patients	 with
parietooccipital	 lesions,	 but	 the	 OKN	 tape	 has	 other	 uses.	 It	 may	 be	 used	 to
crudely	check	visual	acuity,	especially	in	infants.	OKN	responses	can	be	elicited
beginning	at	4	to	6	months	of	age.	OKN	may	also	be	useful	for	estimating	visual
function	in	patients	with	depressed	consciousness.	It	may	provide	a	clue	to	the
presence	 of	 psychogenic	 visual	 loss.	 OKN	 testing	 can	 demonstrate	 the	 slowed
adducting	saccades	of	a	subtle	INO,	and	sometimes	accentuate	the	nystagmus	in
the	 abducting	 eye.	 OKN-forced	 upward	 saccades	 may	 induce	 convergence
retraction	nystagmus	in	patients	with	Parinaud’s	syndrome.	OKN	abnormalities
may	be	seen	early	in	PSP.

DISORDERED	OCULAR	MOTILITY

Abnormal	eye	movements	can	occur	for	many	reasons.	Disorders	can	be	broadly
divided	 into	 peripheral	 (infranuclear	 and	 nuclear)	 and	 central	 (internuclear	 and
supranuclear).	Peripheral	disorders	involve	the	extraocular	muscles	(e.g.,	MG	or
ocular	 myopathy)	 or	 the	 CNs	 (e.g.,	 fourth	 nerve	 compression).	 Peripheral
disorders	include	things	that	affect	the	CN	nuclei,	fascicles,	or	peripheral	trunks.
Although	 the	 nuclei	 and	 fascicles	 are	 “central,”	 the	 clinical	 characteristics	 of
conditions	 involving	 these	 structures	 is	 much	 more	 akin	 to	 other	 infranuclear
conditions	than	to	supranuclear	disorders.	Central	disorders	can	be	divided	into
supranuclear,	 involving	 the	 optomotor	 control	 centers;	 and	 internuclear,
involving	 the	 pathways	 connecting	 and	 coordinating	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 ocular

motor	 nuclei,	 primarily	 the	 MLF.	 There	 are	 many	 primary	 ophthalmologic
conditions	 that	 can	 cause	 abnormal	 eye	 movements	 that	 can	 be	 confused	 with
neurologic	disorders	(Table	14.3).

PERIPHERAL	DISORDERS	OF	OCULAR
MOTILITY

Disturbances	 of	 ocular	 motility	 may	 result	 from	 processes	 involving	 the	 orbit
causing	 mechanical	 limitation	 of	 eye	 movement,	 or	 from	 ocular	 myopathies,
neuromuscular	transmission	disorders,	or	a	palsy	of	an	individual	ocular	motor
nerve.

Orbital	Disease

Masses	within	the	orbit	may	mechanically	inhibit	movement	of	the	globe,	often
causing	 telltale	 proptosis	 as	 well.	 Following	 trauma	 to	 the	 orbit,	 individual
extraocular	 muscles	 may	 become	 caught	 in	 fracture	 fragments,	 such	 as
entrapment	 of	 the	 inferior	 rectus	 by	 an	 orbital	 blowout	 fracture	 producing	 a
mechanical	limitation	of	upgaze	and	vertical	diplopia.	Other	examples	of	orbital
disease	causing	ocular	dysmotility	include	orbital	pseudotumor,	lymphoma,	and
rhabdomyosarcoma.	 Mechanically	 limited	 eye	 excursions	 exist	 for	 passive	 as
well	 as	 active	 movements.	 Forced	 ductions	 involve	 pushing	 or	 pulling	 on	 the
anesthetized	globe	in	order	to	passively	move	it	through	the	impaired	range.	An
eye	 affected	 by	 ocular	 muscle	 weakness,	 MG,	 or	 an	 ocular	 motor	 nerve	 palsy
moves	 freely	 and	 easily	 through	 a	 full	 range.	 An	 eye	 affected	 by	 restrictive
myopathy	 or	 an	 entrapped	 muscle	 cannot	 be	 moved	 passively	 any	 better	 than
actively.	Brown’s	tendon	sheath	syndrome	is	limitation	of	the	free	movement	of
the	superior	oblique	tendon	through	the	trochlea;	it	is	most	often	congenital.	The
restriction	of	movement	is	analogous	to	trigger	finger	and	causes	an	impairment
of	upgaze	in	adduction	simulating	inferior	oblique	palsy	(Video	Link	14.7).

TABLE
14.3

Disorders	That	May	Cause	Diplopia	Mimicking	Cranial
Nerve	Palsies

Disorder

Condition
Mimicked

Distinguishing	Feature

Duane’s	syndrome Cranial
nerve
(CN)	VI
palsy

Globe	retraction	and	narrowing	of
palpebral	fissure	on	adduction

Brown’s	tendon

Inferior

Click	on	eye	elevation

sheath
syndrome

oblique
palsy

Myasthenia	gravis Any

Fluctuating	findings

Thyroid	eye
disease

Convergence
spasm

Medial	rectus
restriction

Inferior	rectus
restriction

Superior	rectus
restriction

Any

Exophthalmos,	lid	abnormalities,

chemosis,	history	of	thyroid	disease,
abnormal	forced	ductions

CN	VI

palsy

CN	VI

palsy

Elevator
palsy

CN	IV

palsy

Pupil	constricts	on	lateral	gaze

Abnormal	forced	ductions

Abnormal	forced	ductions

Abnormal	forced	ductions

Möbius’	syndrome CN	VI

Congenital,	often	bilateral

palsy

CN	VI

palsy

Divergence

insufficiency	or
paralysis

Full	ductions,	can’t	diverge

Orbital

Any

Proptosis,	abnormal	forced	ductions

pseudotumor

Decompensation
of	congenital
squint

Any

Deviation	is	comitant

Muscle	Disease

Primary	ocular	muscle	disease	may	cause	impaired	motility	because	of	weakness
or	 because	 of	 restriction	 of	 movement.	 A	 number	 of	 myopathies	 and	 muscular
dystrophies	 may	 affect	 eye	 muscles.	 Muscle	 disorders	 may	 be	 divided	 into
myopathies	 and	 restrictive	 orbitopathies.	 The	 most	 common	 restrictive
orbitopathy	is	TED,	which	is	an	autoimmune	disorder	that	causes	deposition	of
mucopolysaccharide	 and	 lymphocytic	 infiltration	 in	 eye	 muscles,	 making	 them
bulky,	stiff,	and	unable	to	relax	during	contraction	of	the	antagonist.	This	sort	of
restrictive	 myopathy	 is	 easily	 confused	 with	 weakness	 of	 the	 antagonist	 (e.g.,
restrictive	 myopathy	 of	 the	 medial	 rectus	 simulating	 weakness	 of	 the	 lateral
rectus).	 Extraocular	 muscles	 affected	 by	 TED	 also	 do	 not	 contract	 normally.
Forced	ductions	are	often	done	to	clarify	matters.	The	inferior	rectus	is	the	most
commonly	involved	muscle	in	TED,	producing	impaired	upgaze	on	the	affected
side.	 The	 possibility	 of	 TED	 must	 be	 constantly	 borne	 in	 mind	 when	 dealing
with	ocular	motility	disturbances.

Ocular	 myopathies	 cause	 weakness	 of	 the	 extraocular	 muscles,	 usually
accompanied	 by	 ptosis	 and	 weakness	 of	 eye	 closure	 because	 of	 myopathic
involvement	 of	 the	 facial	 muscles.	 Weakness	 of	 eye	 closure	 is	 strongly
suggestive	 of	 ocular	 myopathy	 or	 neuromuscular	 transmission	 disorder	 as	 the
cause	of	eye	muscle	weakness.	Few	other	conditions	affect	both	eye	muscles	and
facial	 muscles.	 The	 common	 conditions	 causing	 ocular	 myopathy	 are	 chronic
progressive	 external	 ophthalmoplegia	 (CPEO)	 and	 oculopharyngeal	 muscular
dystrophy	(Box	14.6).

Neuromuscular	Transmission	Disorders

MG,	the	most	common	neuromuscular	transmission	disorder,	frequently	involves
the	extraocular	muscles,	affecting	any	muscle	or	combination	of	muscles.	Ocular
involvement	occurs	early	in	50%	to	70%	of	patients,	and	it	eventually	develops
in	 90%.	 Patients	 typically	 present	 with	 ptosis	 or	 diplopia,	 or	 both.	 In	 some
patients,	the	disease	remains	limited	to	the	eyes	(pure	ocular	myasthenia).	Most
patients	present	with	ocular	involvement	and	then	later	develop	generalized	MG,
as	the	disease	affects	bulbar	and	limb	muscles.	Even	in	patients	with	generalized
MG,	the	ocular	component	usually	remains	a	prominent	feature.	The	hallmark	of

MG	is	fatigable	weakness.	The	weakness	gets	worse	with	repetitive	contraction
of	the	muscle.	The	ptosis	in	MG	is	“fatigable”;	it	gets	progressively	worse	with
prolonged	 upgaze.	 The	 eyelid	 signs	 of	 MG	 are	 discussed	 above.	 Patients	 may
develop	 diplopia	 with	 sustained	 eccentric	 gaze	 even	 when	 not	 present	 initially.
Fluctuating	ptosis	and	diplopia	and	worsening	symptoms	toward	the	end	of	the
day	 are	 characteristic.	 The	 ptosis	 and	 ophthalmoparesis	 of	 MG	 are	 usually
asymmetric	 and	 may	 vary	 from	 minute	 to	 minute.	 During	 the	 course	 of	 a
neurologic	examination,	the	ptosis	may	switch	sides	and	the	diplopia	may	vary.
These	 features	 along	 with	 accompanying	 weakness	 of	 eye	 closure	 are	 virtually
diagnostic.	 The	 earliest	 manifestation	 of	 ocular	 MG	 is	 slowing	 of	 saccadic
movement	on	rapid	refixation.

BOX	14.6

Ocular	Myopathies

Chronic	 progressive	 external	 ophthalmoplegia	 (CPEO)	 is	 a	 syndrome	 that
has	numerous	etiologies,	but	it	is	most	often	due	to	mitochondrial	myopathy.
It	causes	inexorably	progressive	ptosis	and	symmetric	eye	muscle	weakness,
eventually	 leaving	 the	 patient	 with	 marked	 ptosis	 and	 eyes	 that	 are
essentially	 immobile.	 Patients	 do	 not	 typically	 have	 diplopia.	 Examination
shows	loss	of	both	voluntary	and	reflex	eye	movements;	Bell’s	phenomenon
is	 absent.	 Muscle	 biopsy	 usually	 shows	 ragged	 red	 fibers.	 Kearns-Sayre
syndrome	is	a	type	of	CPEO	that	is	associated	with	pigmentary	retinopathy,
cardiac	abnormalities,	particularly	conduction	block	with	an	increased	risk	of
sudden	death,	hearing	loss,	ataxia,	mental	retardation,	endocrine	dysfunction,
short	stature,	and	increased	cerebrospinal	fluid	(CSF)	protein;	all	with	onset
before	age	20.

Most	 of	 the	 classical	 muscular	 dystrophies	 do	 not	 involve	 the	 eye
is	 oculopharyngeal	 dystrophy,	 which	 causes
muscles.	 An	 exception	
prominent,	 progressive	 bilateral	 ptosis	 and	 dysphagia	 that	 usually	 begin	 in
the	 fifth	 or	 sixth	 decade.	 The	 signature	 of	 the	 disease	 is	 ocular	 myopathy
accompanied	by	pharyngeal	weakness.	Congenital	myopathies	usually	spare
the	eye	muscles.	An	exception	is	myotubular	myopathy,	where	there	may	be
early	 and	 prominent	 involvement.	 Myotonic	 dystrophy	 causes	 prominent
ptosis.	 It	 can	 affect	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 causing	 slowed	 saccades,	 but
major	involvement	is	not	a	typical	feature	of	the	disease.	Eyelid	myotonia	is

common	 but	 can	 occur	 with	 most	 of	 the	 myotonic	 disorders,	 and	 it	 is	 not
specific	 for	 myotonic	 dystrophy.	 Rarely,	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 may	 be
affected	by	inflammatory	myositis.

BOX	14.7

Myasthenia	Gravis

Having	 the	 patient	 rest	 with	 eyes	 closed	 for	 30	 minutes	 may	 produce
temporary	 improvement	 of	 the	 ophthalmoparesis	 (sleep	 test).	 Applying	 a
cold	pack	to	the	eye	may	relieve,	and	a	hot	pack	exacerbate,	both	the	ptosis
and	ophthalmoparesis.	A	convenient	way	to	warm	the	eye	is	with	an	electric
hair	 dryer	 on	 low	 setting.	 Warming	 just	 one	 eye	 can	 produce	 dramatic
asymmetries.	 The	 edrophonium	 (Tensilon)	 or	 neostigmine	 (Prostigmin)	 test
can	 be	 very	 helpful	 when	 there	 is	 a	 muscle	 with	 clear-cut	 weakness	 to
evaluate	before	and	after	the	injection.	Myasthenia	gravis	(MG)	may	induce
central	adaptive	effects	to	compensate	for	the	extraocular	muscle	weakness.
Because	of	fatigue	during	a	saccade,	the	central	nervous	system	may	begin	to
generate	an	increased	signal	for	a	saccadic	movement	in	order	for	the	eye	to
find	 the	 target.	 Administration	 of	 edrophonium	 may	 cause	 the	 weakness	 to
temporarily	 resolve,	 but	 the	 central	 adaption	 effect	 persists	 and	 saccades
suddenly	become	hypermetric,	overshooting	the	target.	The	development	of
hypermetric	 saccades	 or	 macrosaccadic	 oscillations	 after	 edrophonium	 is
highly	 suggestive,	 some	 say	 diagnostic,	 of	 MG.	 Other	 useful	 tests	 include
assay	for	 antiacetylcholine	receptor	 antibodies,	repetitive	 nerve	stimulation,
and	single-fiber	electromyography.

MG	can	cause	weakness	of	any	muscle	or	combination	of	muscles.	It	is	rare
but	 not	 unheard	 of	 to	 have	 ophthalmoparesis	 without	 ptosis.	 MG	 can	 cause
weakness	 of	 any	 isolated	 muscle	 and	 should	 be	 considered	 in	 the	 differential
diagnosis	 whenever	 ophthalmoparesis	 does	 not	 fit	 any	 particular	 pattern.	 MG
can	 also	 produce	 ophthalmoparesis	 that	 simulates	 other	 conditions.	 Selective
involvement	 of	 one	 medial	 rectus	 may	 produce	 a	 “myasthenic	 pseudo-INO,”
complete	 with	 nystagmus	 of	 the	 abducting	 eye	 (Figure	 14.15,	 also	 see	 Video
Link	 14.8).	 Involvement	 of	 one	 lateral	 rectus	 can	 simulate	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy.
MG	 can	 mimic	 gaze	 palsy	 or	 the	 pattern	 of	 any	 individual	 nerve.	 It	 should	 be

considered	 in	 the	 differential	 diagnosis	 of	 virtually	 any	 patient	 with	 external
ophthalmoplegia,	 but	 involvement	 of	 the	 pupil	 excludes	 MG.	 Ability	 to
manipulate	the	myasthenic	eye	signs	helps	greatly	in	diagnosis	(Box	14.7).

Except	for	mild	ptosis,	Lambert-Eaton	syndrome	does	not	usually	involve	the
eyes.	Botulism	can	cause	severe	ophthalmoparesis,	often	but	not	invariably	with
pupillary	 involvement.	 Other	 unusual	 neuromuscular	 disorders,	 such	 as	 marine
toxins	
produce
ophthalmoparesis.

congenital	 myasthenic	

syndromes,	

also	

and	

can	

INDIVIDUAL	NERVE	PALSIES

The	 same	 basic	 processes	 cause	 third,	 fourth,	 and	 sixth	 nerve	 palsies,	 but	 with
different	frequencies.	As	many	as	25%	of	cases	are	idiopathic,	and	of	these,	50%
recover	spontaneously.	Some	processes	may	affect	more	than	one	ocular	motor
nerve.	Trauma	is	the	most	common	cause	of	fourth	nerve	palsy	and	the	second
most	 common	 cause	 of	 third	 and	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy.	 Microangiopathic	 vascular
disease	 because	 of	 diabetes	 or	 hypertension	 is	 the	 most	 common	 etiology	 of
nontraumatic	third	and	sixth	nerve	palsies.	Aneurysms	are	an	important	etiology
of	 third	 nerve	 disease.	 Increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 may	 cause	 third	 nerve
palsies	because	of	uncal	herniation	and	sixth	nerve	palsies	as	a	nonspecific	and
nonlocalizing	 effect.	 Neoplasms	 may	 affect	 any	 of	 these	 nerves.	 A	 third	 nerve
palsy	developing	after	trivial	head	trauma	suggests	the	possibility	of	subclinical
stretch	 because	 of	 an	 underlying	 mass.	 Basilar	 meningitis,	 migraine,	 viral
infection,	 immunizations,	 cavernous	 sinus	 disease,	 sarcoid,	 vasculitis,	 and
Guillain-Barré	 syndrome	 are	 occasional	 etiologies;	 the	 list	 of	 rare	 etiologies	 is
long.

The	Oculomotor	Nerve

CN	III	palsy	produces	varying	degrees	and	combinations	of	extraocular	muscle
weakness,	 ptosis,	 and	 pupil	 involvement.	 Internal	 ophthalmoplegia	 means
involvement	 limited	 to	 the	 pupillary	 sphincter	 and	 ciliary	 muscle;	 external
ophthalmoplegia	means	involvement	of	only	the	extraocular	muscles;	complete
ophthalmoplegia	is	both.	The	most	common	identifiable	etiologies	are	ischemia,
aneurysm,	 tumor,	 and	 trauma;	 some	 20%	 remain	 unexplained.	 Differentiating
benign	ischemic	palsies	from	those	due	to	aneurysms	is	a	challenge,	especially

because	 both	 can	 present	 with	 painful	 diplopia;	 delay	 in	 diagnosis	 increases
mortality.	 Third	 nerve	 dysfunction	 is	 frequently	 an	 ominous	 sign,	 especially	 in
the	setting	of	any	alteration	of	consciousness.	Uncal	herniation	from	mass	effect
of	 any	 sort	 may	 result	 in	 compression	 as	 the	 temporal	 tip	 crowds	 through	 the
tentorial	 hiatus	 and	 traps	 CN	 III	 against	 the	 sharp	 edge	 of	 the	 tentorium.
Posterior	 communicating	 or	 distal	 internal	 carotid	 aneurysms	 commonly	 cause
third	 nerve	 palsy	 (Figure	14.5).	 With	 third	 nerve	 palsy,	 processes	 affecting	 the
nucleus	 or	 fascicles	 within	 the	 brainstem	 generally	 produce	 accompanying
neighborhood	 signs	 permitting	 localization	 (e.g.,	 Weber’s	 or	 Benedikt’s
syndrome).	In	its	long	course	along	the	base	of	the	brain,	CN	III	may	be	affected
in	 isolation.	 In	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 or	 orbit,	 accompanying	 deficits	 related	 to
involvement	of	other	structures	usually	permit	localization.

Complete	 paralysis	 of	 the	 third	 nerve	 causes	 severe	 ptosis	 of	 the	 upper	 lid;
impairment	of	medial,	upward,	and	downward	gaze;	and	loss	of	accommodation,
with	 a	 dilated	 pupil	 that	 does	 not	 react	 to	 light,	 directly	 or	 consensually,	 or	 to
near	(Figure	14.12).	There	may	be	no	complaint	of	diplopia	if	the	lid	completely
covers	the	eye.	When	there	is	diplopia,	the	images	are	often	oblique	because	of
the	 combination	 of	 weak	 muscles.	 The	 eye	 rests	 in	 a	 down	 and	 out	 position
because	of	preservation	of	the	lateral	rectus	and	superior	oblique	functions.

In	a	large	series,	third	nerve	palsies	were	complete	in	only	33%.	Incomplete
CN	 III	 lesions,	 causing	 paresis	 rather	 than	 paralysis	 and	 affecting	 certain
functions	 more	 than	 others,	 are	 more	 common	 than	 complete	 ones.	 Ischemic
lesions	 usually	 spare	 pupillary	 function.	 Lesions	 involving	 the	 midbrain	 or	 the
course	 of	 the	 nerve	 after	 it	 has	 split	 into	 its	 superior	 and	 inferior	 divisions	 are
more	 likely	 to	 involve	 only	 certain	 functions	 (see	 “Large	 Pupils,”	 below).
Lesions	between	the	interpeduncular	fossa	and	the	point	of	division	tend	to	cause
paralysis	of	all	functions,	but	divisional	palsy	may	occur	from	a	lesion	anywhere
along	the	course	of	the	nerve.	Very	rarely,	the	only	manifestation	of	a	third	nerve
palsy	may	be	an	abnormal	pupil.	Depending	on	the	etiology,	a	CN	III	palsy	may
show	 fluctuations,	 even	 over	 a	 short	 period	 of	 time,	 especially	 when	 there	 is
nerve	 compression.	 A	 third	 nerve	 palsy	 because	 of	 uncal	 herniation	 may
promptly	resolve	if	the	herniation	can	be	reversed.

In	 addition	 to	 pupil	 sparing,	 the	 most	 helpful	 clinical	 feature	 distinguishing
ischemic	 from	 mechanical,	 compressive	 lesions	 is	 aberrant	 reinnervation
(misdirection	syndrome,	oculomotor	synkinesis).	Aberrant	reinnervation	is	very
common	after	facial	 nerve	 lesions	 (see	 Chapter	 16),	 and	 a	 similar	process	 may
involve	CN	III	(Box	14.8).	Conditions	that	mechanically	disrupt	the	nerve	may

result	 in	 regenerating	 sprouts	 growing	 into	 the	 wrong	 tubes	 and	 eventually
innervating	some	structure	other	than	the	one	originally	intended.	For	instance,
fibers	 that	 originally	 innervated	 the	 medial	 rectus	 may	 reinnervate	 the	 levator
palpebrae.	 The	 common	 causes	 are	 aneurysm	 and	 head	 trauma,	 less	 common
causes	 are	 tumor	 and	 neurosyphilis;	 the	 condition	 can	 occur	 congenitally.	 The
misdirection	syndrome	typically	emerges	about	3	months	after	the	inciting	event.
Aberrant	 reinnervation	 does	 not	 occur	 after	 ischemic	 or	 idiopathic	 third	 nerve
palsy.	 For	 a	 dramatic	example	 of	 bilateral	 third	 nerve	 synkinesias	because	 of	 a
midbrain	injury,	see	Video	Link	14.9	 (From	 Taieb	et	 al).	 The	 lid	changes	 are
the	reverse	of	those	seen	in	Duane	syndrome	(see	Box	14.9).

Localization	of	Oculomotor	Nerve	Lesions

CN	 III	 palsy	 can	 occur	 because	 of	 lesions	 anywhere	 along	 its	 course	 from	 the
oculomotor	 nucleus	 in	 the	 midbrain	 to	 the	 orbit.	 Common	 causes	 are	 trauma,
tumor,	 diabetes,	 aneurysm,	 surgery,	 and	 stroke.	 Midbrain	 lesions	 are	 discussed
further	in	Chapter	21;	they	are	usually	accompanied	by	neighborhood	signs	that
permit	 localization.	 Processes	 involving	 the	 third	 nerve	 nucleus	 may	 cause
characteristic	 patterns	 of	 weakness	 not	 seen	 with	 lesions	 at	 other	 locations.
Because	of	the	contralateral	innervation	of	the	superior	rectus,	a	nuclear	lesion
may	 cause	 weakness	 of	 the	 contralateral	 superior	 rectus.	 Involvement	 of	 the
caudal	central	subnucleus	may	cause	bilateral	ptosis	with	an	otherwise	unilateral
CN	 III	 palsy,	 or	 isolated	 bilateral	 ptosis.	 Conversely,	 patients	 with	 midbrain
disease	may	have	a	lid-sparing	third	nerve	palsy	if	the	central	caudal	nucleus	is
not	 involved.	 Incomplete	 lesions	 involving	 the	 third	 nerve	 fascicles	 in	 the
midbrain	 may	 cause	 partial	 CN	 III	 palsies.	 The	 pattern	 of	 involvement	 may
mimic	 divisional	 palsy	 and	 suggest	 disease	 in	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 or	 orbit
(pseudodivisional	palsy).

BOX	14.8

Aberrant	Regeneration	of	CN	III

The	 third	 nerve	 misdirection	 syndrome	 has	 certain	 characteristic	 features.
The	 dual	 innervation	 of	 muscles	 causes	 a	 failure	 of	 normal	 reciprocal
relaxation	 of	 the	 antagonist,	 violating	 Sherrington’s	 law	 and	 causing	 co-
contraction	 and	 retraction	 of	 the	 globe	 on	 certain	 movements.	 The	 clinical

picture	 is	 stereotyped	 but	 may	 vary	 in	 degree.	 Attempted	 upgaze	 causes
adduction	and	retraction	because	of	misdirection	of	superior	rectus	fibers	to
the	 medial	and	 inferior	 recti	with	 co-contraction.	 The	 upper	 lid	 may	 retract
on	 downgaze	 (pseudo-Graefe	 sign)	 because	 of	 inferior	 rectus	 fibers
aberrantly	 innervating	 the	 levator.	 The	 lid	 retracts	 on	 adduction	 because	 of
synkinesis	between	the	medial	rectus	and	the	levator.	The	lid	may	droop	on
abduction	 because	 the	 reciprocal	 inhibition	 of	 the	 medial	 rectus	 causes	 the
levator	to	relax.

Misdirection	 may	 also	 involve	 the	 pupil.	 The	 pupillary	 light	 reaction
typically	remains	poor	to	absent,	but	the	pupil	constricts	on	ocular	adduction
with	either	convergence	or	horizontal	gaze.	The	constriction	on	convergence
with	 an	 impaired	 light	 reaction	 mimics	 light-near	 dissociation	 (pseudo-
Argyll	Robertson	pupil).	The	ciliary	muscle	is	about	30	times	larger	than	the
iris	 sphincter;	 most	 of	 the	 neurons	 in	 the	 ciliary	 ganglion	 are	 devoted	 to
accommodation	 rather	 than	 pupillary	 function.	 The	 great	 preponderance	 of
ciliary	muscle	over	pupillary	sphincter	axons	make	it	likely	that	misdirection
will	 result	 in	 accommodation	 fibers	 aberrantly	 innervating	 the	 pupil,	 which
causes	pupil	constriction	with	any	attempt	to	focus.

Processes	 involving	 the	 subarachnoid	 course	 of	 the	 nerve	 usually	 produce
isolated	 unilateral	 CN	 III	 palsy	 with	 few	 associated	 findings	 to	 assist	 in
localization.	Incomplete	involvement	mimicking	divisional	palsy	can	occur.	The
most	 pressing	 diagnostic	 consideration	 in	 an	 isolated	 third	 nerve	 palsy	 is
posterior	 communicating	 artery	 or	 basilar	 artery	 aneurysm.	 Aneurysmal	 third
nerve	palsies	are	typically	acute,	painful,	and	involve	the	pupil.

Ischemic	third	nerve	palsies	most	often	occur	because	of	microvasculopathy
related	to	diabetes	and	hypertension.	Patients	with	ischemic	palsies	are	typically
older	than	those	with	aneurysms.	Microvascular	third	nerve	palsies	are	of	sudden
onset,	painful,	may	spare	the	pupil,	begin	to	resolve	by	about	2	months,	and	do
not	result	in	aberrant	regeneration.

BOX	14.9

Duane’s	Syndrome

There	 are	 three	 recognized	 subtypes	 of	 Duane’s	 syndrome;	 type	 I	 accounts
for	 about	 80%	 of	 cases.	 The	 core	 feature	 of	 type	 I	 Duane’s	 syndrome	 is	 a

limitation	 of	 abduction	 with	 otherwise	 normal	 eye	 movements.	 It	 is	 caused
by	 aplasia	 or	 hypoplasia	 of	 the	 sixth	 nerve	 nucleus,	 as	 occurs	 in	 Möbius’
syndrome,	 but	 accompanied	 by	 anomalous	 innervation	 of	 the	 lateral	 rectus
by	CN	III.	The	patient	is	unable	to	abduct	the	eye,	and	adduction	induces	co-
contraction	of	the	lateral	rectus,	causing	retraction	of	the	globe	into	the	orbit.
Dynamic	enophthalmos	caused	by	co-contraction	makes	the	palpebral	fissure
narrow	 on	 adduction	 (pseudoptosis).	 Aberrant	 reinnervation	 of	 the	 third
nerve	causes	the	palpebral	fissure	to	widen	on	adduction;	Duane’s	syndrome
causes	it	to	narrow.

FIGURE	14.24	CT	brain	scan	showed	a	left	subdural	hematoma	with	1.5	cm	midline
shift	(panel	7/24).	After	emergency	platelet	transfusion,	the	subdural	hematoma	was
evacuated.	 Brain	 CT	 the	 next	 day	 showed	 resolution	 of	 the	 shift	 (panel	 7/25).	 Brain
MRI	 a	 week	 later	 showed	 a	 cerebral	 peduncle	 lesion	 in	 the	 T2-weighted	 sequence
(panel	7/31).	There	was	no	history	of	head	trauma.

Traumatic	CN	III	palsy	usually	occurs	only	with	major	head	injuries,	severe
enough	 to	 cause	 loss	 of	 consciousness	 or	 skull	 fracture.	 Increased	 intracranial
pressure	 with	 uncal	 herniation	 most	 often	 compresses	 the	 ipsilateral	 nerve;	 the
earliest	 sign	 is	 usually	 an	 abnormal	 pupil.	 Compression	 of	 the	 contralateral
cerebral	peduncle	causing	a	false	localizing	hemiparesis	ipsilateral	to	the	lesion
is	 not	 uncommon	 (Kernohan’s	 notch	 syndrome,	 Figure	 14.24).	 CN	 III	 can	 be
affected	 bilaterally	 with	 lesions	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 rostral	 midbrain,	 such	 as
central	 transtentorial	 herniation	 with	 Duret	 hemorrhages,	 ischemic	 top	 of	 the
basilar	syndrome,	and	basilar	tip	aneurysm.

Cavernous	sinus	disease	usually	affects	other	structures	in	addition	to	CN	III,
but	 mononeuropathy	 can	 occur.	 It	 is	 important	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 a	 complete
third	nerve	palsy	to	be	sure	that	CN	IV	is	intact	by	having	the	patient	attempt	to

look	down	and	medially;	look	for	a	slight	intorsion	movement	(best	appreciated
by	observing	the	conjunctival	blood	vessels).	For	an	example	of	a	pupil-sparing
ischemic	CN	III	palsy	with	preserved	CN	IV	function,	see	3rd	nerve	palsy	with
preserved	 4th	 nerve	 function	 from	 Dr.	 Daniel	 R.	 Gold,	 Neuro-ophthalmology
Virtual	 Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,	 available	 at	 Video
Link	14.10.	If	the	third	nerve	palsy	is	accompanied	by	involvement	of	CN	IV,
the	likelihood	of	cavernous	sinus	disease	is	high.	Cavernous	sinus	syndromes	are
discussed	 in	 Chapter	 21.	 Lesions	 in	 the	 anterior	 cavernous	 sinus	 or	 orbit	 may
selectively	 involve	 one	 of	 the	 divisions.	 A	 superior	 division	 third	 nerve	 palsy
causes	 ptosis	 and	 impairment	 of	 upgaze.	 An	 inferior	 division	 palsy	 causes
medial	 and	 inferior	 rectus	 weakness	 and	 pupillary	 dysfunction	 but	 with	 no
accompanying	 ptosis	 or	 superior	 rectus	 weakness.	 Lesions	 involving	 CN	 III	 in
the	apex	of	the	orbit	often	involve	CN	II	as	well	and	may	cause	proptosis.

Other	causes	of	isolated	third	nerve	palsy	include	nerve	sheath	tumors,	Lyme
disease,	 sarcoidosis,	 dolichoectatic	 basilar	 arteries,	 ophthalmoplegic	 migraine,
dural	arteriovenous	malformations,	postinfectious	syndromes,	sphenoid	sinusitis
or	 mucocele,	 nasopharyngeal	 carcinoma,	 herpes	 zoster,	 and	 meningeal
inflammation	or	infiltration.

The	Trochlear	Nerve

CN	IV	is	slender	and	has	a	long	intracranial	course;	these	two	factors	increase	its
vulnerability	 to	 injury.	 The	 most	 common	 etiology	 of	 acquired	 CN	 IV	 palsy	 is
head	 trauma.	 Nontraumatic	 cases	 are	 usually	 microvascular,	 idiopathic,	 or
congenital.	A	patient	with	a	congenital	fourth	nerve	palsy	may	decompensate	as
an	adult	and	present	as	an	apparently	new	onset	condition.	Other	causes	of	fourth
nerve	 palsy	 include	 meningioma,	 cavernous	 sinus	 syndrome,	 herpes	 zoster,
Lyme	disease,	ophthalmoplegic	migraine,	sarcoidosis,	Guillain-Barré	syndrome,
meningeal	disease,	and	Tolosa-Hunt	syndrome.

Patients	 with	 fourth	 nerve	 palsies	 may	 not	 complain	 of	 diplopia,	 but	 rather
blurry	 vision	 or	 some	 vague	 problem	 when	 looking	 down—as	 when	 reading	 a
book	 or	 descending	 stairs.	 The	 diplopia	 is	 vertical	 or	 diagonal	 and	 maximal	 in
downgaze.	Patients	may	tilt	the	head	to	the	opposite	side	to	eliminate	diplopia,
tucking	 the	chin	so	 the	 affected	eye	 may	 ride	 up	 and	into	 extorsion,	 out	 of	the
field	 of	 action	 of	 the	 weak	 superior	 oblique.	 Some	 fourth	 nerve	 palsies,
particularly	 in	 children,	 present	 with	 head	 tilt	 rather	 than	 diplopia.	 On
examination,	 there	 is	 extorsion	 and	 impairment	 of	 depression	 of	 the	 adducted

eye	(Figure	14.25).	The	involved	eye	has	incomitant	hypertropia	or	hyperphoria;
with	 the	 patient	 looking	 down	 and	 in,	 alternate	 cover	 testing	 shows	 corrective
downward	 refixations	 indicating	 upward	 drift	 of	 the	 affected	 eye	 under	 cover.
The	 Bielschowsky	 head	 tilt	 test	 consists	 of	 tilting	 the	 head	 to	 each	 side,
localizing	 the	 fourth	 nerve	 palsy	 by	 the	 changes	 in	 diplopia	 that	 result.	 If
diplopia	improves	with	head	tilt	to	the	left	and	worsens	with	tilt	to	the	right,	the
patient	has	a	right	fourth	nerve	palsy.	Forcing	the	involved	eye	to	intort	worsens
the	 diplopia.	 For	 an	 excellent	 discussion	 of	 the	 bedside	 evaluation	 of	 vertical
diplopia,	 see	 Prasad	 and	 Volpe.	 For	 a	 demonstration	 of	 the	 head	 tilt	 test	 in	 a
patient	 with	 a	 CN	 IV	 palsy,	 see	 Fourth	 Nerve	 Palsy	 from	 Dr.	 Shirley	 Wray,
Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library	[NOVEL],	University	of	Utah,
available	at	Video	Link	14.11.

FIGURE	 14.25	 Right	 fourth	 nerve	 palsy.	 The	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 depress	 the
adducted	eye	on	attempted	downgaze.

Except	that	a	nuclear	lesion	causes	the	fourth	nerve	palsy	on	the	contralateral
side,	 lesions	 at	 the	 nuclear	 and	 fascicular	 level	 in	 the	 midbrain	 cause	 the	 same
clinical	 appearance	 as	 lesions	 involving	 the	 nerve	 proper	 in	 the	 subarachnoid
space,	 cavernous	 sinus,	 or	 orbit.	 CNs	 III	 and	 IV	 can	 be	 involved	 together	 in
processes	affecting	either	the	midbrain	or	cavernous	sinus.

Superior	 oblique	 myokymia	 (microtremor)	 is	 a	 spasmodic,	 intermittent
contraction	 of	 the	 superior	 oblique	 muscle	 that	 may	 cause	 transient	 vertical
diplopia	or	monocular	oscillopsia.	The	etiology	is	unknown	but	likely	related	to
other	 conditions	 that	 cause	 focal	 myokymia.	 In	 rare	 instances,	 patients	 may	 go
on	to	develop	weakness	of	the	superior	oblique.

The	Abducens	Nerve

Sixth	nerve	palsies	are	common,	and	many	resolve	with	no	explanation.	With	a
complete	CN	VI	palsy,	the	eye	cannot	be	abducted	and	often	rests	in	a	position
of	 adduction	 (Figure	 14.26).	 Patients	 present	 with	 horizontal	 diplopia	 worse	 at
distance.	 There	 may	 be	 esotropia	 in	 primary	 position.	 Examination	 shows
paralytic	 (noncomitant)	 strabismus,	 worse	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 action	 of	 the
involved	muscle.	Incomplete	palsies	are	common,	and	mild	weakness	may	show
only	esophoria	on	alternate	cover	testing	when	the	patient	looks	toward	the	side
of	 the	 involved	 muscle.	 Neoplasms,	 trauma,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 and
microvascular	neuropathy	are	the	most	common	etiologies.	Many	cases	remain
unexplained.

Neighborhood	signs	usually	permit	localization	when	the	nerve	is	involved	in
the	 brainstem,	 cavernous	 sinus,	 or	 orbit.	 Pontine	 syndromes	 are	 discussed	 in
Chapter	 21.	 Brainstem	 lesions	 do	 not	 necessarily	 produce	 other	 signs	 and	 can
cause	an	apparently	isolated	sixth	nerve	palsy.	The	CN	VI	nucleus	contains	both
lateral	 rectus	 motor	 neurons	 and	 interneurons	 that	 project	 up	 the	 MLF,	 so	 a
lesion	involving	the	nucleus	causes	an	ipsilateral	gaze	palsy	rather	than	a	sixth
nerve	palsy.

in	

Sixth	 nerve	 palsies	 occur	 with	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure,	 after	 head
injury,	 with	 structural	 disease	
the	 middle	 or	 posterior	 fossa,	 with
nasopharyngeal	tumors,	and	for	numerous	other	reasons.	CN	VI	palsies	are	the
most	common	and	classic	of	all	false	localizing	signs:	they	are	nonspecific	and
bear	no	necessary	anatomical	relationship	to	the	CNS	pathology	producing	them.
Elevated	 intracranial	 pressure	 often	 produces	 CN	 VI	 dysfunction	 because	 of
stretching	of	the	nerve	over	the	petrous	tip	as	the	increased	pressure	forces	the
brainstem	 attachments	 inferiorly.	 Sixth	 nerve	 palsy	 is	 common	 in	 pseudotumor
cerebri,	 see	 Bilateral	 6th	 nerve	 palsies	 due	
intracranial
hypertension	from	Dr.	Daniel	R.	Gold,	Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education
Library	[NOVEL],	University	of	Utah,	available	at	Video	Link	14.12.

idiopathic	

to	

Gradenigo’s	 syndrome	 is	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy,	 facial	 pain,	 and	 V1	 sensory	 loss
because	 of	 lesions	 at	 the	 petrous	 apex	 (usually	 neoplastic,	 traumatic,	 or
inflammatory).	Any	process	in	the	cavernous	sinus	can	involve	CN	VI,	usually
along	 with	 other	 structures.	 Iatrogenic	 CN	 VI	 palsy	 may	 occur	 after	 lumbar
puncture,	 myelography,	 and	 certain	 neurosurgical	 procedures.	 Other	 etiologies
for	 CN	 VI	 palsy	 include	 Möbius’	 syndrome,	 herpes	 zoster,	 ophthalmoplegic
migraine,	 viral	 infection,	 and	 postviral	 syndromes.	 Bilateral	 sixth	 nerve	 palsies
are	not	uncommon.	They	may	occur	because	of	tumors	along	the	clivus,	where
the	two	nerves	lie	close	together,	with	meningeal	processes	such	as	subarachnoid

hemorrhage	and	meningitis	and	with	increased	intracranial	pressure.

FIGURE	 14.26	 Paralysis	 of	 the	 right	 abducens	 nerve	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 a	 posterior
fossa	neoplasm.	A.	Patient	looking	to	left.	B.	Patient	attempting	to	look	in	the	direction
of	action	of	the	paralyzed	muscle.

Other	Causes	of	Abduction	Impairment

Not	all	abduction	failure	is	due	to	CN	VI	palsy.	Some	of	the	other	causes	include
entrapment	 of	 the	 medial	 rectus	 by	 a	 medial	 orbital	 fracture,	 TED,	 MG,
convergence	 spasm,	 divergence	
insufficiency,	 Duane’s	 syndrome,	 orbital
pseudotumor,	and	Möbius	syndrome	(Table	14.3).

Duane’s	retraction	syndrome	is	a	common	cause	of	congenital	strabismus	that
can	 mimic	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy	 (Box	 14.9).	 Divergence	 insufficiency	 and
divergence	 paralysis	 are	 conditions	 in	 which	 there	 is	 impaired	 abduction	 with
esotropia	 when	 looking	 at	 distance,	 but	 full	 abduction	 on	 testing	 ductions.
Patients	have	horizontal,	comitant,	uncrossed	diplopia	at	far	with	no	abnormality
at	near.	Divergence	insufficiency	may	develop	as	an	isolated,	benign,	often	self-
limited	abnormality	in	an	otherwise	healthy	individual,	or	in	patients	who	have
other	neurologic	findings	and	underlying	disease	of	the	kind	that	more	typically

causes	sixth	nerve	palsy.

Convergence	spasm	causes	esotropia	on	lateral	gaze	that	can	mimic	a	CN	VI
palsy.	 The	 disorder	 is	 usually	 functional	 and	 caused	 by	 voluntary	 convergence
interrupting	 normal	 lateral	 gaze.	 As	 the	 patient	 looks	 laterally,	 the	 sudden
convergence	halts	the	abducting	eye	in	midflight	and	simulates	weakness	of	the
is	 betrayed	 by	 pupillary	 constriction
lateral	
accompanying	the	eye	movement	that	indicates	the	patient	is	converging.	There
is	a	report	of	convergence	spasm	as	an	isolated	finding	in	a	patient	with	midbrain
compression.

rectus.	 The	 mechanism	

CENTRAL	DISORDERS	OF	OCULAR	MOTILITY

Central	 disorders	 can	 be	 divided	
internuclear.
Supranuclear	disorders	include	those	that	affect	the	supranuclear	gaze	centers	in
the	 hemispheres	 and	 brainstem,	 as	 well	 as	 other	 areas	 that	 influence	 eye
movements,	 such	 as	 the	 basal	 ganglia	 and	 cerebellum.	 Internuclear	 disorders
affect	the	connections	between	the	ocular	motor	nerve	nuclei	in	the	brainstem.

into	 supranuclear	 and	

Internuclear	Ophthalmoplegia

Lesions	 of	 the	 MLF	 cause	 an	 INO	 (Figure	 14.27).	 The	 contralateral	 medial
rectus	receives	no	signal	to	contract	when	the	PPRF	and	sixth	nerve	nucleus	act
to	 initiate	 lateral	 gaze.	 As	 a	 result,	 gaze	 to	 one	 side	 results	 in	 abduction	 of	 the
ipsilateral	 eye,	 but	 no	 adduction	 of	 its	 fellow.	 Typically,	 the	 abducting	 eye	 has
nystagmus	as	well,	sustained	or	only	a	few	beats	(Video	Link	14.13).	 Failure
of	 the	 medial	 rectus	 to	 adduct	 is	 an	 isolated	 abnormality	 in	 the	 affected	 eye;
normality	of	the	lid	and	pupil	distinguish	an	INO	from	a	third	nerve	palsy.	Some
patients	 have	 total	 adduction	 failure,	 and	 some	 may	 have	 exotropia	 in	 primary
gaze.	Patients	with	bilateral	INO	and	exotropia	have	been	said	to	have	the	wall-
eyed	 bilateral	 INO	 (WEBINO)	 syndrome.	 An	 INO	 is	 commonly	 accompanied
by	vertical	nystagmus,	most	commonly	gaze-evoked	upbeat.

The	 earliest	 detectable	 sign	 of	 an	 INO	 is	 often	 slowness	 of	 adducting
saccades	compared	to	abducting	saccades,	demonstrated	by	rapid	refixations	or
OKNs.	By	convention,	the	INO	is	labeled	by	the	side	of	the	adduction	failure;	a
right	 INO	 produces	 adduction	 failure	 of	 the	 right	 eye.	 Many	 brainstem	 lesions
can	 cause	 an	 INO,	 but	 the	 common	 conditions	 are	 MS	 and	 brainstem	 stroke.

INOs	 due	 to	 MS	 are	 usually	 bilateral	 and	 seen	 in	 young	 patients;	 those	 due	 to
brainstem	vascular	disease	are	more	often	unilateral	and	seen	in	older	patients.
Conditions	such	as	MG,	Wernicke’s	encephalopathy,	TED,	or	partial	third	nerve
palsy	can	cause	a	“pseudo-INO.”	Wernicke’s	encephalopathy	can	occur	without
mental	status	changes.

Despite	 impaired	 adduction	 on	 horizontal	 gaze,	 some	 patients	 with	 INO	 are
still	 able	 to	 converge.	 INOs	 have	 been	 divided	 into	 those	 with	 and	 without
preservation	 of	 convergence.	 The	convergence	centers	 are	 in	 the	 midbrain,	 and
when	adduction	on	convergence	is	impaired,	the	INO	may	be	classified	as	rostral
(anterior).	When	convergence	is	preserved,	the	INO	may	be	classified	as	caudal
(posterior).	However,	many	normal	individuals	have	impaired	convergence,	and
the	localizing	value	of	convergence	ability	has	not	been	borne	out.

Gaze	Palsies	and	Gaze	Deviations

The	FEFs	move	the	eyes	into	contralateral	conjugate	horizontal	gaze.	The	eyes
normally	remain	straight	ahead	because	of	a	balance	of	input	from	the	FEFs	in
each	 hemisphere.	 Seizure	 activity	 in	 one	 frontal	 lobe	 drives	 the	 eyes
contralaterally.	In	an	adversive	seizure,	the	eyes	and	then	the	head	deviate	to	one
side,	 after	 which	 the	 seizure	 may	 generalize.	 Sustained	 eye	 deviation	 can	 be	 a
manifestation	 (rarely	 the	 only	 manifestation)	 of	 seizure	 activity,	 even	 of	 status
epilepticus.	With	destructive	frontal	lobe	lesions,	most	often	ischemic	stroke,	the
patient	 is	 unable	 to	 move	 the	 eyes	 contralaterally—a	 gaze	 palsy,	 or,	 if	 less
severe,	a	gaze	paresis.	The	intact,	normal	hemisphere	maintains	its	tonic	input,
the	imbalance	causing	the	eyes	to	move	contralaterally,	toward	the	diseased	side
—a	 gaze	 deviation.	 Patients	 may	 have	 gaze	 palsy	 without	 gaze	 deviation.	 The
presence	of	gaze	deviation	usually	means	gaze	palsy	to	the	opposite	side,	but	it
may	occasionally	signal	seizure	activity.

FIGURE	14.27	Sagittal	MRI	demonstrating	a	focus	of	high	FLAIR	signal	change	in	the
medial	longitudinal	fasciculus	within	the	posterior	pons	(white	arrows)	in	a	patient	with
internuclear	ophthalmoplegia,	acutely	(A)	and	with	resolution	(B).	(Reproduced	from
Auce	 P,	 Rajakulendran	 S,	 Nesbitt	 A,	 et	 al.	 Neurological	 picture.	 Internuclear
ophthalmoplegia	 following	 African	 tick	 bite	 fever.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry
2011;82[6]:681,	with	permission	from	BMJ	Publishing	Group	Ltd.)

Similar	 considerations	 apply	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 pons.	 The	 PPRF	 governs
ipsilateral,	conjugate	horizontal	gaze.	The	PPRF	draws	the	eyes	ipsilaterally,	in
contrast	to	the	FEFs,	which	force	the	eyes	contralaterally.	Destructive	lesions	of
the	 PPRF	 impair	 the	 ability	 to	 gaze	 ipsilaterally,	 resulting	 in	 a	 gaze	 deviation
toward	 the	 intact	 side	 as	 the	 normal	 PPRF	 pulls	 the	 eyes	 over	 (see	 Unilateral
Horizontal	 Gaze	 Palsy	 from	 Dr.	 Shirley	 Wray,	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 Virtual
Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,	 available	 at	 Video	 Link
14.14).	The	PPRF	is	the	final	common	pathway	for	horizontal	gaze,	and	pontine
gaze	 palsies	 that	 involve	 the	 PPRF	 affect	 all	 functions,	 voluntary	 and	 reflex.
Even	 ice	 water	 calorics	 will	 not	 move	 the	 eyes.	 Large,	 bilateral	 lesions	 may
cause	bilateral	gaze	palsy,	and	the	only	preserved	eye	movements	are	vertical.

When	 faced	 with	 a	 patient	 whose	 eyes	 rest	 eccentrically	 to	 one	 side,	 the
possibilities	 are	 (a)	 frontal	 lobe	 seizure	 activity,	 (b)	 frontal	 lobe	 destructive
lesion,	and	(c)	pontine	destructive	lesion.	Patients	with	destructive	frontal	lesions
gaze	away	from	the	side	of	the	hemiparesis;	patients	with	pontine	strokes	gaze
toward	 the	 hemiparesis.	 Frontal	 lobe	 gaze	 deviations	 are	 generally	 large
amplitude,	pronounced,	and	clinically	obvious,	whereas	pontine	gaze	deviations
tend	to	be	subtle	and	easily	missed.	Frontal	gaze	deviations	tend	to	resolve	in	a
few	 days,	 pontine	 deviations	 persist	 much	 longer,	 sometimes	 permanently.
Epileptogenic	gaze	deviations	are	usually	betrayed	by	a	component	of	jerky	eye

movement	and	subtle	twitches	elsewhere.

One-and-a-Half	Syndrome

The	MLF	fibers	arising	from	the	CN	VI	nucleus	decussate	just	after	their	origin
and	run	in	close	proximity	to	the	PPRF	and	sixth	nerve	nucleus	on	the	opposite
side.	A	medial	pontine	lesion	can	affect	both	the	PPRF	on	one	side	and	the	MLF
crossing	from	the	contralateral	side.	Because	of	the	ipsilateral	lesion,	the	patient
has	a	gaze	palsy	to	the	same	side.	Because	of	the	MLF	lesion,	the	patient	has	an
INO	 on	 the	 same	 side.	 A	 lesion	 of	 the	 right	 pons	 can	 then	 cause	 a	 right	 gaze
palsy	with	a	superimposed	right	INO,	which	results	in	complete	horizontal	gaze
palsy	to	the	right	and	inability	to	adduct	the	right	eye	on	left	gaze	(“half	a	gaze
palsy”	to	the	left).	The	only	eye	movement	possible	is	abduction	of	the	left	eye,
see	 One	 and	 Half	 Syndrome	 from	 Dr.	 Robert	 Daroff,	 Neuro-ophthalmology
Virtual	 Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,	 Video	 Link	 14.15.
Fisher	named	this	constellation	of	findings	the	“one-and-a-half	syndrome.”	The
most	common	causes	are	infarction	and	demyelinating	disease.	Paralytic	pontine
exotropia	 refers	 to	 such	 patients	 in	 the	 acute	 phase	 who	 have	 exotropia	 in
primary	position	because	of	the	preserved	abduction	in	the	contralateral	eye.

Vertical	Gaze	Abnormalities
Two	common	disorders	affecting	vertical	gaze	are	Parinaud’s	syndrome	and	PSP.

Parinaud’s	Syndrome

The	 core	 feature	 of	 Parinaud’s	 syndrome	 (for	 Henri	 Parinaud,	 French
neurologist,	 considered	 the	 father	 of	 neuro-ophthalmology)	 is	 impaired	 upgaze
(Figure	14.18).	Patients	are	unable	to	look	up,	and	when	they	attempt	it,	the	eyes
may	spasmodically	converge	and	retract	backward	into	the	orbits	(convergence-
retraction	 nystagmus).	 The	 convergence-retraction	 movements	 readily	 appear
during	 forced	 upward	 saccades	 in	 response	 to	 a	 down-moving	 OKN	 tape.	 The
retraction	 movement	 is	 best	 seen	 from	 the	 side.	 Parinaud’s	 syndrome	 usually
results	 from	 a	 mass	 lesion	 involving	 the	 region	 of	 the	 posterior	 third	 ventricle
and	upper	dorsal	midbrain,	such	as	a	pinealoma;	it	is	also	known	as	the	sylvian
aqueduct,	 dorsal	 midbrain	 or	 pretectal	 syndrome,	 or	 the	 syndrome	 of	 the
posterior	 commissure.	 Other	 frequent	 signs	 include	 eyelid	 retraction	 (Collier’s

sign)	 and	 abnormal	 pupils.	 The	 pupils	 in	 Parinaud’s	 syndrome	 have	 a	 poor,
rarely	absent,	light	response,	and	much	better	near	response	(tectal	pupils).	The
pupils	 tend	 to	 be	 large,	 partly	 because	 young	 people	 have	 larger	 pupils	 and
lesions	 in	 this	 region	 tend	 to	 occur	 in	 younger	 patients.	 Sometimes,	 upgaze
paresis	is	severe	enough	 that	 the	 eyes	 are	 forced	 into	 sustained	 downgaze	 with
retracted	 eyelids—the	 “setting	 sun	 sign,”	 seen	 in	 children	 with	 obstructive
hydrocephalus	 ballooning	 the	 posterior	 third	 ventricle	 and	 rostral	 aqueduct.
Leading	causes	of	the	pretectal	syndrome	in	Keane’s	series	were	hydrocephalus,
stroke,	and	tumor.	For	a	video	showing	all	the	features	of	Parinaud’s	syndrome,
see	Video	Link	14.16.

Progressive	Supranuclear	Palsy

In	 PSP,	 degenerative	 changes	 in	 the	 rostral	 brainstem	 and	 thalamus	 result	 in
impairment	 first	 of	 downgaze,	 then	 of	 upgaze,	 and	 eventually	 in	 global	 gaze
paresis.	Reflex	eye	movements	are	preserved	until	late	in	the	disease.	The	gaze
abnormalities	 are	 accompanied	 by	 parkinsonian	 signs	 and	 a	 pronounced
tendency	 to	 extensor	 axial	 rigidity.	 Patients	 may	 have	 particular	 difficulty	 with
the	antisaccade	task.

Other	Disorders	of	Vertical	Gaze

Skew	deviation	is	a	small,	vertical	misalignment	of	the	eyes	that	usually	results
from	a	prenuclear	lesion	involving	the	brainstem	or	cerebellum.	The	deviation	is
usually	 comitant,	 remaining	 about	 the	 same	 in	 all	 directions	 of	 gaze,	 and	 the
lesion	is	usually	on	the	side	of	the	hypotropic	eye.	Skew	deviation	is	sometimes
associated	with	an	INO,	with	the	lesion	on	the	side	of	the	hypertropic	eye.	The
ocular	tilt	reaction	(OTR)	consists	of	skew	deviation	with	torsion	of	the	eyes	and
a	head	tilt;	the	head	and	the	upper	poles	of	both	eyes	tilt	toward	the	hypotropic
eye	(Figure	14.28).	It	occurs	primarily	with	peripheral	vestibular	disease,	but	can
be	seen	in	lateral	medullary	infarction.	The	OTR	can	simulate	fourth	nerve	palsy
because	both	cause	an	unusual	head	tilt.	The	pathway	responsible	for	the	OTR
crosses	 the	 midline	 just	 above	 the	 sixth	 nerve	 nucleus	 and	 ascends	 in	 the
contralateral	MLF;	lesions	in	the	lower	pons	cause	an	ipsilateral	OTR;	and	more
rostral	lesions	cause	a	contralateral	OTR.	Cerebellar	lesions	may	cause	either	an
ipsilateral	 or	 contralateral	 OTR	 depending	 on	 the	 structures	 involved.	 Isolated
downgaze	palsy	is	rare,	but	it	can	occur	with	small	strategically	placed	lesions	in

the	 rostral	 midbrain.	 Double	 elevator	 palsy	 is	 a	 monocular	 paresis	 of	 elevation
involving	 both	 the	 superior	 rectus	 and	 inferior	 oblique;	 it	 may	 occur	 with
pretectal	lesions.	A	vertical	one-and-a-half-syndrome	has	been	described.

FIGURE	14.28	The	ocular	tilt	reaction	refers	to	the	head	tilt,	ocular	torsion,	and	skew
deviation	that	are	ascribed	to	asymmetry	in	the	otolithic	pathway	from	the	utricle.	The
head	 tilt	 and	 ocular	 torsion	 occur	 toward	 the	 hypotropic	 eye.	 (Reprinted	 with
permission	from	Huh	YE,	Kim	JS.	Bedside	evaluation	of	dizzy	patients.	J	Clin	Neurol
2013;9[4]:203–213.	Copyright	©	2013	Korean	Neurological	Association.)

Nystagmus	and	Other	Ocular	Oscillations

Nystagmus	 is	 a	 rhythmic,	 biphasic,	 involuntary	 movement	 of	 the	 eyes.	 When
faced	with	a	patient	with	nystagmus	or	similar-appearing	movements,	the	usual
clinical	exercises	include	the	following	two	steps:	(a)	deciding	if	the	nystagmus
indicates	neurologic	pathology	and	(b)	if	so,	whether	the	pathology	is	central	or
peripheral.	 There	 are	 normal,	 physiologic	 forms	 of	 nystagmus.	 A	 few	 beats	 of
nystagmus	at	the	extremes	of	lateral	gaze	occur	commonly	in	normals	and	have
no	 pathologic	 significance.	 A	 whole	 host	 of	 conditions	 can	 cause	 nystagmus,
including	 ocular	 disease,	 drug	 effects,	 peripheral	 vestibular	 disease,	 and	 CNS
disease.	Nystagmus	may	also	be	congenital.	Schemes	have	classified	nystagmus
in	 many	 different	 ways.	 This	 discussion	 focuses	 on	 the	 types	 of	 nystagmus
commonly	encountered	in	neurologic	practice	and	on	the	differentiation	between
nystagmus	that	likely	signifies	neurologic	disease	(neuropathologic)	and	the	kind
that	does	not	(nonneuropathologic).

include	

rapid/slow,	

characterizations	

Nystagmus	 is	 classified	 in	 multiple	 ways:	 pendular	 (both	 phases	 of	 equal
amplitude	 and	 velocity)	 versus	 jerk	 (a	 fast	 phase	 and	 a	 slow	 phase);	 central
induced	 versus	 spontaneous;	 and	 physiologic	 versus
versus	 peripheral;	
pathologic.	 Further	
coarse/fine,
manifest/latent,	 sensory/motor,	 and	 horizontal/vertical.	 Pendular	 nystagmus	 is
classified	by	its	plane	of	movement,	usually	horizontal.	Pendular	nystagmus	only
rarely	 signifies	 neurologic	 disease,	 and	 this	 discussion	 is	 focused	 primarily	 on
jerk	 nystagmus.	Jerk	 nystagmus	 is	 classified	 by	the	 direction	 of	 the	 fast	 phase.
Alexander’s	law	states	that	jerk	nystagmus	increases	with	gaze	in	the	direction
of	 the	 fast	 phase.	 First-degree	 nystagmus	 is	 present	 only	 with	 eccentric	 gaze
(e.g.,	 right-beating	 nystagmus	 on	 right	 gaze).	 Second-degree	 nystagmus	 is
present	in	primary	gaze	and	increases	in	intensity	with	gaze	in	the	direction	of
the	 fast	 component	 (e.g.,	 right-beating	 nystagmus	 in	 primary	 gaze	 increasing
with	 gaze	 to	 the	 right).	 With	 third-degree	 nystagmus,	 the	 fast	 component
continues	 to	 beat	 even	 with	 gaze	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 slow	 component	 (e.g.,
right-beating	 nystagmus	 persisting	 even	 with	 gaze	 to	 the	 left).	 Dissociated
nystagmus	is	different	in	the	two	eyes	(e.g.,	the	nystagmus	in	the	abducting	eye
in	INO).

Nonneuropathologic	Nystagmus
Nystagmus	 that	 does	 not	 signify	 neurologic	 disease	 may	 be	 physiologic,	 or
because	of	ocular	disease	(e.g.,	poor	vision),	or	other	conditions.

Physiologic	Nystagmus

Types	of	physiologic	nystagmus	include	end	point,	OKN,	and	induced	vestibular.
Although	 these	 types	 of	 nystagmus	 are	 normal,	 they	 may	 be	 altered	 when
disease	is	present	in	such	a	way	as	to	assist	in	localization.

End-point	nystagmus	is	fine,	variably	sustained	nystagmus	at	the	extremes	of
lateral	 gaze,	 especially	 with	 gaze	 eccentric	 enough	 to	 eliminate	 fixation	 by	 the
adducting	eye.	In	some	normals,	physiologic	end-point	nystagmus	appears	with
as	 little	 as	 30	 degrees	 of	 deviation	 from	 primary	 position,	 often	 with	 greater
amplitude	in	the	abducting	eye.	End-point	nystagmus	is	typically	low	amplitude
and	irregular.	Symmetry	on	right	and	left	gaze,	abolition	by	moving	the	eyes	a
few	 degrees	 toward	 primary	 position,	 and	 the	 absence	 of	 other	 neurologic
abnormalities	 generally	 serve	
to	 distinguish	 end-point	 from	 pathologic
nystagmus.	End-point	nystagmus	is	the	most	common	form	of	nystagmus	seen	in
routine	clinical	practice.

Although	 OKN	 is	 a	 normal	 response,	 its	 characteristics	 may	 be	 altered	 in
disease.	Changes	in	OKN	occur	primarily	with	deep	parietal	lobe	lesions.	OKN
abnormalities	are	discussed	above	(see	section	on	OKN).

Vestibular	 nystagmus	 can	 be	 induced	 by	 rotation	 (e.g.,	 Barany	 chair)	 or	 by
irrigation	of	the	ear	with	hot	or	cold	water.	This	complex	subject	is	discussed	in
more	detail	in	Chapter	17.

Other	Forms	of	Nonneuropathologic	Nystagmus
These	 types	 of	 nystagmus	 are	 not	 physiologic,	 but	 they	 do	 not	 result	 from
neurologic	disease.

Voluntary	Nystagmus

Some	normal	individuals	have	the	ability	to	saccade	very	rapidly	back	and	forth
horizontally,	 producing	 a	 high	 frequency,	 low	 amplitude,	 pendular	 eye
movement	that	is	startling	but	of	no	consequence	(see	Voluntary	Nystagmus	from
Dr.	 Robert	 Daroff,	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 Virtual	 Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],
University	of	Utah,	available	at	Video	Link	14.17).	Voluntary	nystagmus	may
alarm	 the	 physician	 who	 has	 not	 previously	 seen	 these	 impressive	 oscillations.
The	movements	cannot	be	sustained	for	long,	generally	less	than	30	seconds.

Drug-Induced	Nystagmus
Alcohol,	 sedative	 hypnotics,	 anticonvulsants,	 and	 other	 drugs	 commonly
produce	 nystagmus.	 Such	 drug-induced	 nystagmus	 is	 typically	 symmetric	 and
gaze	 evoked	 horizontally	 and	 vertically,	 especially	 in	 upgaze,	 only	 rarely	 in
downgaze.	 Nystagmus	 more	 prominent	
the	 commonly	 seen,	 few
unsustained	end-point	jerks	will	usually	prove	to	be	a	drug	effect.

than	

Congenital	Nystagmus

A	patient	with	a	clear	history	of	nystagmus	present	because	infancy	presents	no
neurologic	diagnostic	problem.	However,	occasionally,	patients	with	congenital
nystagmus	 are	 unaware	 of	 its	 presence;	 when	 they	 present	 later	 in	 life	 with
neurologic	complaints,	sorting	out	the	significance	of	the	nystagmus	may	prove
difficult.	 In	 distinguishing	 congenital	 from	 other	 types	 of	 nystagmus,	 the
following	 features	 are	 helpful.	 Congenital	 nystagmus	 is	 most	 often	 horizontal
jerk	 and	 remains	 horizontal	 even	 in	 upgaze	 and	 downgaze	 (i.e.,	 it	 is	 not	 gaze
evoked).	This	pattern	is	unusual	in	other	forms	of	nystagmus.	Patients	often	have
a	 null	 point	 of	 least	 nystagmus	 intensity	 and	 best	 vision	 in	 slightly	 eccentric
gaze.	They	may	adopt	a	head	turn	or	tilt	to	maintain	gaze	in	this	null	zone.	The
nystagmus	 typically	 damps	 with	 convergence.	 The	 patient	 with	 congenital
nystagmus	characteristically	holds	reading	material	extremely	close	and	regards
it	 with	 a	 peculiar	 head	 tilt	 and	 may	 still	 have	 mediocre	 vision.	 For	 video,	 see
Congenital	 Nystagmus	 from	 Dr.	 Shirley	 Wray,	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 Virtual
Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,	 available	 at	 Video	 Link
14.18.	 A	 virtually	 pathognomonic	 feature	 of	 congenital	 nystagmus	
is
“inversion”	 of	 OKNs.	 Moving	 an	 OKN	 tape	 so	 as	 to	 cause	 an	 expected
summation	 with	 the	 fast	 phase	 of	 the	 congenital	 nystagmus	 produces	 instead	 a
diminution	 or	 a	 paradoxical	 reversal	 of	 nystagmus	 direction.	 Patients	 with
congenital	 nystagmus	 are	 not	 immune	 to	 acquired	 visual	 system	 abnormalities.
Eye	 movement	 recordings	 help	 differentiate	 it	 from	 other	 nystagmus	 types.
Confirmation	that	it	is	long-standing	supports	the	diagnosis.

A	form	of	congenital	nystagmus,	latent	nystagmus	occurs	only	when	one	eye
is	 covered.	 This	 may	 happen	 when	 the	 examiner	 blocks	 the	 patient’s	 vision
during	 ophthalmoscopic	 examination,	 causing	 jerk	 nystagmus	 with	 the	 fast
component	toward	the	uncovered	eye.	The	nystagmus	disappears	with	binocular
fixation.	Latent	nystagmus	may	exist	in	isolation	or	as	a	manifestation	of	typical

congenital	nystagmus.

Ocular	Disease

Patients	with	very	poor	vision	may	develop	continuous	pendular	nystagmus,	and
nystagmus	 can	 occur	 in	 otherwise	 normal	 individuals	 who	 work	 in	 perpetually
dark	 environments.	 Visual-loss–induced	 nystagmus	 usually	 damps	 with
convergence.	Pendular	nystagmus	can	develop	monocularly	in	an	eye	with	visual
loss.	 Spasmus	 nutans	 is	 a	 disorder	 usually	 seen	 in	 infants	 between	 6	 and	 12
months	 of	 age,	 but	 onset	 can	 be	 later.	 The	 classic	 triad	 is	 nystagmus,	 head
nodding,	 and	 torticollis,	 but	 not	 all	 patients	 have	 all	 three.	 Head	 nodding	 and
nystagmus	are	the	most	common	manifestations,	with	head	turn	in	a	third.	The
nystagmus	is	low	amplitude,	high	frequency,	and	dysconjugate.	The	nystagmus
may	 be	 monocular.	 The	 etiology	 is	 uncertain,	 possibly	 related	 to	 sensory
deprivation,	but	the	condition	is	benign	and	disappears	before	age	4.

Neuropathologic	Nystagmus
Nystagmus	 is	 a	 frequent	 manifestation	 of	 disease	 of	 the	 nervous	 system.
Common	 types	 include	 vestibular,	 positional,	 gaze	 evoked,	 and	 gaze	 paretic
nystagmus.	Table	14.4	summarizes	important	but	less	often	encountered	types	of
nystagmus	 and	 related	 movements.	 Vestibular	 and	 positional	 nystagmus	 are
discussed	in	Chapter	 17.	 There	 are	 many	 online	sources	 for	 videos	 of	 different
types	 of	 nystagmus,	 especially	 the	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 Virtual	 Education
Library	 at	 the	 University	 of	 Utah	 (https://novel.utah.edu)	 and	 the	 Canadian
Neuro-Ophthalmology	Group	(http://www.neuroophthalmology.ca).

Symmetric,	 equal	 activity	 of	 the	 vestibular	 systems	 on	 each	 side	 normally
maintains	 the	 eyes	 in	 straight-ahead,	 primary	 position.	 Vestibular	 imbalance
causes	 the	 eyes	 to	 deviate	 toward	 the	 less	 active	 side	 as	 the	 normal	 side
overcomes	 the	 weakened	 tonic	 activity	 from	 the	 hypoactive	 side.	 In	 an	 alert
patient,	 the	 FEFs	 generate	 a	 saccade	 to	 bring	 the	 eyes	 back	 toward	 primary
position,	creating	the	fast	phase	of	vestibular	nystagmus.	When	the	cortex	does
not	generate	a	correcting	saccade,	as	in	coma,	only	the	tonic	deviation	develops;
the	eyes	deviate	toward	the	ice-water–irrigated	ear.

TABLE	14.4 Nystagmus	and	Other	Abnormal	Ocular	Movements

Degenerative	 changes	 in	 the	 otoliths	 frequently	 produce	 the	 syndrome	 of
positional	vertigo	and	nystagmus.	Nystagmus	occurs	after	a	latency	of	up	to	30
seconds,	beats	with	the	fast	phase	toward	the	down	ear,	quickly	fatigues	despite
holding	 the	 position,	 and	 adapts	 with	 repeated	 attempts	 to	 elicit	 it.	 Positional
nystagmus	 is	 a	 very	 common	 condition.	 Although	 generally	 peripheral,	 it	 may
occur	 with	 central	 disease	 (tumor,	 stroke,	 MS,	 degenerative	 disease).	 See
Chapter	17	for	further	discussion.

Any	 nystagmus	 not	 present	 in	 primary	 gaze	 but	 appearing	 with	 gaze	 in	 any
direction	with	the	fast	phase	in	the	direction	of	gaze	is	referred	to	as	gaze-evoked
nystagmus.	 Normal	 physiologic	 end-point	 nystagmus	 is	 gaze	 evoked,	 but	 only
present	horizontally	and	at	extremes	of	gaze.	Abnormal	gaze-evoked	nystagmus
occurs	short	of	extreme	gaze	and	is	more	sustained	than	end	point.	Drug-induced

nystagmus	is	gaze	evoked,	usually	horizontally	and	in	upgaze.	Nystagmus	with
the	 same	 appearance	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 drug	 effects	 is	 nonspecific	 but	 usually
indicates	 disease	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 or	 cerebellar	 connections.	 Gaze	 paretic
nystagmus	is	a	form	of	gaze-evoked	nystagmus	seen	in	patients	with	incomplete
gaze	 palsies.	 Rather	 than	 having	 an	 absolute	 inability	 to	 gaze	 in	 a	 particular
direction,	 the	 patient	 achieves	 full	 lateral	 gaze	 transiently	 but	 is	 not	 able	 to
maintain	it.	The	eyes	drift	back	toward	neutral	and	then	spasmodically	jerk	back
in	the	desired	gaze	direction.

Other	Disorders	of	Ocular	Motility
Other	types	of	abnormal	eye	movements	include	ocular	bobbing,	ocular	flutter,
and	opsoclonus	(Table	14.4).	Ocular	flutter	and	opsoclonus	are	types	of	saccadic
intrusions,	spontaneous	saccades	away	from	fixation;	they	may	be	confused	with
nystagmus.	Patients	with	ocular	motor	apraxia	are	unable	to	generate	saccades	to
look	 horizontally	 and	 develop	 compensatory	 blinking	 or	 head-thrusting
movements	 to	 shift	 gaze.	 The	 blinks	 or	 head	 movements	 help	 to	 trigger	 a
saccade.	 Ataxia	 telangiectasia	 may	 cause	 similar	 gaze	 difficulties.	 Parkinson’s
disease	 can	 produce	 a	 variety	 of	 ocular	 motility	 disturbances,	 including
hypometric	 saccades,	 impaired	 smooth	 pursuit,	 square	 wave	 jerks,	 and	 lid
retraction.	 Oculogyric	 crisis	 refers	 to	 attacks	 of	 involuntary	 conjugate	 upward
deviation	 of	 the	 eyes,	 which	 may	 be	 transient	 or	 last	 for	 hours.	 Occasionally,
there	is	also	some	deviation	to	one	side,	or	the	eyes	may	be	turned	downward.
Classically	 associated	 with	 postencephalitic	 parkinsonism,	 these	 episodes	 are
now	 seen	 as	 a	 dystonic	 reaction	 from	 phenothiazines	 and	 related	 drugs.
Oculogyric	crises	from	neuroleptic	drugs	may	also	occur	as	a	tardive	syndrome.
In	absence	seizures,	there	may	be	brief	spasms	of	upward	gaze.	Ocular	dysmetria
is	an	over-	or	undershooting	of	the	eyes	on	rapid	refixation	of	gaze	toward	either
side	 or	 on	 returning	 to	 the	 primary	 position	 that	 requires	 corrective	 saccades;
there	 may	 also	 be	 overshooting	 in	 following	 movements	 when	 the	 object	 of
regard	is	suddenly	stopped.

Video	Links

Video	Link	14.1.	Cogan’s	lid	twitch	sign	and	eyelid	hopping.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Cogan%27s_lid_twitch_and_eyelid_hopping

Video	Link	14.2.	Curtain	sign	in	myasthenia	gravis.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Curtain_sign_(enhanced_ptosis)

Video	Link	14.3.	Positive	edrophonium	test	in	myasthenia	gravis.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=188589&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+edrophonium&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.4.	Duane’s	syndrome.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?

id=180331

Video	Link	14.5.	Demonstration	of	APD	by	swinging	flashlight	test.
https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=180307&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+relative+afferent+pupillary+defect&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.6.	Optokinetic	nystagmus.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Optokinetic_nystagmus

Video	Link	14.7.	Brown’s	tendon	sheath	syndrome.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lBdEZU7Vkrs&NR=1

Video	Link	14.8.	Myasthenic	pseudo-INO.

http://www.neuroophthalmology.ca/case-of-the-month/eye-
movements/intermittent-diplopia-and-trouble-sucking-on-a-straw

Video	Link	14.9.	Bilateral	third	nerve	synkinesias.

http://archneur.jamanetwork.com/multimediaPlayer.aspx?
mediaid=2522009

Video	Link	14.10.	Pupil-sparing	ischemic	CN	III	palsy	with	preserved	CN	IV
function.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=187726&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+third+nerve&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.11.	Head	tilt	test	in	CN	IV	palsy.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=188602&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+fourth+nerve+palsy&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.12.	Bilateral	6th	nerve	palsies	due	to	idiopathic	intracranial

hypertension.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=1256233&q=creator_t%3A%22gold%22+AND+curriculum_t%3A%22sixthnervepalsy%22&fd=title_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t&sort=facet_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_novel

Video	Link	14.13.	Internuclear	ophthalmoplegia.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Internuclear_ophthalmoplegia

Video	Link	14.14.	Unilateral	horizontal	gaze	palsy.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=188642&page=2&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+horizontal+gaze+palsy&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.15.	One-and-a-half	syndrome.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=188473&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+one+and+a+half+syndrome&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.16.	Parinaud’s	syndrome.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=u7D1-zj98l8

Video	Link	14.17.	Voluntary	nystagmus.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?

id=188469&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+%22voluntary+nystagmus%22&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	14.18.	Congenital	nystagmus.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?

id=188527&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+%22congenital+nystagmus%22&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Algahtani	 H,	 Shirah	 B,	 Algahtani	 R,	 et	 al.	 Idiopathic	 harlequin	 syndrome
manifesting	 during	 exercise:	 a	 case	 report	 and	 review	 of	 the	 literature.	 Case
Rep	Med	2017;	Epub	Feb	21.

Auce	 P,	 Rajakulendran	 S,	 Nesbitt	 A,	 et	 al.	 Neurological	 picture.	 Internuclear
ophthalmoplegia	 following	 African	 tick	 bite	 fever.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg
Psychiatry	2011;82:681.

Averbuch-Heller	L.	Neurology	of	the	eyelids.	Curr	Opin	Ophthalmol	1997;8:27–

34.

Averbuch-Heller	 L,	 Leigh	 RJ,	 Mermelstein	 V,	 et	 al.	 Ptosis	 in	 patients	 with

hemispheric	strokes.	Neurology	2002;58:620–624.

Barr	 D,	 Kupersmith	 MJ,	 Turbin	 R,	 et	 al.	 Isolated	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy:	 an
uncommon	presenting	sign	of	multiple	sclerosis.	J	Neurol	2000;247:701–704.
Barton	JJS.	Neuro-ophthalmology	III:	eye	movements.	In:	Joynt	RJ,	Griggs	RC,
eds.	Baker’s	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,
2002.

Bhidayasiri	 R,	 Plant	 GT,	 Leigh	 RJ.	 A	 hypothetical	 scheme	 for	 the	 brainstem

control	of	vertical	gaze.	Neurology	2000;54:1985–1993.

Biousse	V,	Newman	NJ.	Third	nerve	palsies.	Semin	Neurol	2000;	20:55–74.
Boricean	

ID,	 Ba˘rar	 A.	 Understanding	 ocular	

torticollis	

in	 children.

Oftalmologia	2011;55:10–26.

Brazis	 PW.	 Localization	 of	 lesions	 of	 the	 oculomotor	 nerve:	 recent	 concepts.

Mayo	Clin	Proc	1991;66:1029–1035.

Brazis	 PW.	 Isolated	 palsies	 of	 cranial	 nerves	 III,	 IV,	 and	 VI.	 Semin	 Neurol

2009;29:14–28.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Breen	LA,	Hopf	HC,	Farris	BK,	et	al.	Pupil-sparing	oculomotor	nerve	palsy	due

to	midbrain	infarction.	Arch	Neurol	1991;48:105–106.

Bruce	 BB,	 Biousse	 V,	 Newman	 NJ.	 Third	 nerve	 palsies.	 Semin	 Neurol

2007;27:257–268.

Burde	 RM,	 Landau	 WM.	 Shooting	 backward	 with	 Marcus	 Gunn:	 a	 circular

exercise	in	paralogic.	Neurology	1993;43:2444–2447.

Buttner	 U,	 Kremmyda	 O.	 Smooth	 pursuit	 eye	 movements	 and	 optokinetic

nystagmus.	Dev	Ophthalmol	2007;40:76–89.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Choi	 KD,	 Lee	 HS,	 Bae	 JW,	 et	 al.	 Teaching	 Video	 NeuroImages:	 positional

exophthalmos	in	orbital	varices.	Neurology	2009;73:e8.
Cox	TA.	Pupillary	escape.	Neurology	1992;42:1271–1273.
Crippa	 SV,	 Borruat	 FX,	 Kawasaki	 A.	 Pupillary	 dilation	 lag	 is	 intermittently
present	in	patients	with	a	stable	oculosympathetic	defect	(Horner	syndrome).
Am	J	Ophthalmol	2007;143:712–715.

Dacso	 CC,	 Bortz	 DL.	 Significance	 of	 the	 Argyll	 Robertson	 pupil	 in	 clinical

medicine.	Am	J	Med	1989;86:199–202.

David	 NJ.	 Optokinetic	 nystagmus.	 A	 clinical	 review.	 J	 Clin	 Neuroophthalmol

1989;9:258–266.

Donahue	 SP,	 Lavin	 PJ,	 Hamed	 LM.	 Tonic	 ocular	 tilt	 reaction	 simulating	 a
superior	 oblique	 palsy:	 diagnostic	 confusion	 with	 the	 3-step	 test.	 Arch
Ophthalmol	1999;117:347–352.

Dresner	 SC,	 Kennerdell	 JS.	 Dysthyroid	 orbitopathy.	 Neurology	 1985;35:1628–

1634.

Eggenberger	ER,	Kaufman	DI.	Ocular	motility	review	1996.	J	Neuroophthalmol

1998;18:211–226.

Espinosa	 PS.	 Teaching	 NeuroImage:	 one-and-a-half	 syndrome.	 Neurology

2008;70:e20.

Fisher	CM.	Oval	pupils.	Arch	Neurol	1980;37:502–503.
Frohman	TC,	Galetta	S,	Fox	R,	et	al.	Pearls	and	Oysters:	the	medial	longitudinal

fasciculus	in	ocular	motor	physiology.	Neurology	2008;70:e57–e67.

Galetta	 SL,	 Gray	 LG,	 Raps	 EC,	 et	 al.	 Pretectal	 eyelid	 retraction	 and	 lag.	 Ann

Neurol	1993;33:554–557.

Galetta	 SL,	 Raps	 EC,	 Liu	 GT,	 et	 al.	 Eyelid	 lag	 without	 eyelid	 retraction	 in

pretectal	disease.	J	Neuroophthalmol	1996;16:96–98.

Gaymard	 B,	 Lafitte	 C,	 Gelot	 A,	 et	 al.	 Plus-minus	 lid	 syndrome.	 J	 Neurol

Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1992;55:846–848.

Hamilton	 SR.	 Neuro-ophthalmology	 of	 eye-movement	 disorders.	 Curr	 Opin

Ophthalmol	1999;10:405–410.

Keane	 JR.	 Bilateral	 sixth	 nerve	 palsy.	 Analysis	 of	 125	 cases.	 Arch	 Neurol

1976;33:681–683.

Keane	 JR.	 Third	 nerve	 palsy:	 analysis	 of	 1400	 personally-examined	 inpatients.

Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2010;37:662–670.

Keane	JR,	Zaias	B,	Itabashi	HH.	Levator-sparing	oculomotor	nerve	palsy	caused

by	a	solitary	midbrain	metastasis.	Arch	Neurol	1984;41:210–212.

Kerrison	 JB,	 Biousse	 V,	 Newman	 NJ.	 Isolated	 Horner’s	 syndrome	 and

syringomyelia.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2000;69:131–132.

Kline	LB,	Bajandas	FJ.	Neuro-ophthalmology	Review	Manual.	Thorofare:	Slack,

Inc.,	2000.

Koller	HP,	Olitsky	SE,	O’Hara	M,	et	al.	Diagnosis	and	treatment	of	fourth	nerve

palsy.	J	Pediatr	Ophthalmol	Strabismus	2016;53:70–74.

Kremmyda	 O,	 Rettinger	 N,	 Strupp	 M,	 et	 al.	 Teaching	 video	 neuroimages:
unilateral	 RIMLF	 lesion:	 pathologic	 eye	 movement	 torsion	 indicates	 lesion
side	and	site.	Neurology	2009;	73(18):e92–e93.

Landau	WM.	Clinical	neuromythology.	I.	The	Marcus	Gunn	phenomenon:	loose

canon	of	neuro-ophthalmology.	Neurology	1988;38:1141–1142.

Leigh	 RJ.	 Clinical	 features	 and	 pathogenesis	 of	 acquired	 forms	 of	 nystagmus.

Baillieres	Clin	Neurol	1992;1:393–416.

Leigh	 RJ,	 Zee	 DS.	 The	 Neurology	 of	 Eye	 Movements.	 New	 York:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2006.

Levitan	 P.	 Pupillary	 escape	 in	 disease	 of	 the	 retina	 or	 optic	 nerve.	 Arch

Ophthalmol	1959;62:768–779.

Liu	 GT,	 Volpe	 NJ,	 Galetta	 S.	 Neuro-ophthalmology:	 Diagnosis	 and

Management.	2nd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Saunders	Elsevier,	2010.

MacDonald	 RJ,	 Stanich	 PP,	 Monrad	 PA,	 et	 al.	 Teaching	 Video	 NeuroImages:
Wernicke	 encephalopathy	 without	 mental	 status	 changes.	 Neurology
2009;73:e97.

Martin	TJ,	Corbett	JJ.	Neuro-ophthalmology.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	2000.
Martin	TJ,	Corbett	JJ,	Babikian	PV,	et	al.	Bilateral	ptosis	due	to	mesencephalic
lesions	 with	 relative	 preservation	 of	 ocular	 motility.	 J	 Neuroophthalmol
1996;16:258–263.

McGee	 S.	 Evidence	 Based	 Physical	 Diagnosis.	 3rd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:

Elsevier/Saunders,	2012.

McMillan	 HJ,	 Keene	 DL,	 Jacob	 P,	 et	 al.	 Ophthalmoplegic	 migraine:
inflammatory	 neuropathy	 with	 secondary	 migraine?	 Can	 J	 Neurol	 Sci
2007;34:349–355.

Miller	NR.	The	ocular	motor	nerves.	Curr	Opin	Neurol	1996;	9:21–25.

Miller	 NR,	 Subramanian	 PS,	 Patel	 VR.	 Walsh	 and	 Hoyt’s	 Clinical	 Neuro-
ophthalmology:	The	Essentials.	3rd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2016.
Mollan	SP,	Edwards	JH,	Price	A,	et	al.	Aetiology	and	outcomes	of	adult	superior

oblique	palsies:	a	modern	series.	Eye	(Lond)	2009;23:640–644.

Mughal	 M,	 Longmuir	 R.	 Current	 pharmacologic	 testing	 for	 Horner	 syndrome.

Curr	Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2009;9(5):384–389.

Olsen	 T,	 Jakobsen	 J.	 Abnormal	 pupillary	 function	 in	 third	 nerve	 regeneration
(the	 pseudo-Argyll	 Robertson	 pupil).	 A	 case	 report.	 Acta	 Ophthalmol
(Copenh)	1984;62:163–167.

Peters	GB	III,	Bakri	SJ,	Krohel	GB.	Cause	and	prognosis	of	nontraumatic	sixth

nerve	palsies	in	young	adults.	Ophthalmology	2002;109:1925–1928.

Prasad	S,	Volpe	NJ.	Clinical	reasoning:	36-year-old	man	with	vertical	diplopia.

Neurology	2009;72:e93–e99.

Romano	 LM,	 Besocke	 AG.	 Teaching	 video	 neuroimages:	 recurrent	 oculomotor
neuropathy	 with	 isolated	 ptosis	 vs	 ophthalmoplegic	 migraine.	 Neurology
2009;72(9):e44.

Rucker	JC.	 An	update	on	 acquired	 nystagmus.	 Semin	 Ophthalmol	 2008;23:91–

97.

Sadun	AA,	Thompson	HS,	Corbett	JJ,	et	al.	Swinging	flashlight	test.	Neurology

1989;39:154–156.

Saeki	N,	Yamaura	A,	Sunami	K.	Bilateral	ptosis	with	pupil	sparing	because	of	a
discrete	midbrain	lesion:	magnetic	resonance	imaging	evidence	of	topographic
arrangement	 within	 the	 oculomotor	 nerve.	 J	 Neuroophthalmol	 2000;20:130–
134.

Sakamoto	 Y,	 Kimura	 K,	 Iguchi	 Y,	 et	 al.	 A	 small	 pontine	 infarct	 on	 DWI	 as	 a
lesion	 responsible	 for	 wall-eyed	 bilateral	 internuclear	 ophthalmoplegia
syndrome.	Neurol	Sci	2012;33:121–123.

Selhorst	 JB,	 Hoyt	 WF,	 Feinsod	 M,	 et	 al.	 Midbrain	 corectopia.	 Arch	 Neurol

1976;33:193–195.

Shin	 RK,	 Cheek	 AG.	 Teaching	 neuroimages:	 positive	 apraclonidine	 test	 in

Horner	syndrome.	Neurology	2011;76:e100.

Shinoda	 K,	 Matsushita	 T,	 Furuta	 K,	 et	 al.	 Wall-eyed	 bilateral	 internuclear
ophthalmoplegia	(WEBINO)	syndrome	in	a	patient	with	neuromyelitis	optica
spectrum	 disorder	 and	 anti-aquaporin-4	 antibody.	 Mult	 Scler	 2011;17:885–
887.

Singman	 EL,	 Matta	 NS,	 Silbert	 DI.	 Use	 of	 the	 Cogan	 lid	 twitch	 to	 identify

myasthenia	gravis.	J	Neuroophthalmol	2011;31:239–240.

Stahl	JS,	Leigh	RJ.	Nystagmus.	Curr	Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2001;1:471–477.
Taieb	 G,	 Renard	 D,	 Jeanjean	 L,	 et	 al.	 Unusual	 third	 nerve	 synkinesis	 due	 to

midbrain	injury.	Arch	Neurol	2011;68:948–949.

Thompson	 HS,	 Corbett	 JJ,	 Cox	 TA.	 How	 to	 measure	 the	 relative	 afferent

pupillary	defect.	Surv	Ophthalmol	1981;26:39–42.

Thompson	 BM,	 Corbett	 JJ,	 Kline	 LB,	 et	 al.	 Pseudo-Horner’s	 syndrome.	 Arch

Neurol	2003;39:108–111.

Thurtell	 MJ.	 Diagnostic	 approach	 to	 abnormal	 spontaneous	 eye	 movements.
Continuum	(Minneap	Minn)	2014;20(4	Neuro-ophthalmology):993–1007.
Thurtell	MJ,	Leigh	RJ.	Nystagmus	and	saccadic	intrusions.	Handb	 Clin	 Neurol

2011;102:333–378.

Thurtell	MJ,	Weber	KP,	Halmagyi	GM.	Teaching	video	NeuroImage:	acquired	or

congenital	gaze-evoked	nystagmus?	Neurology	2008;70:e96.

Weber	 KP,	 Thurtell	 MJ,	 Halmagyi	 GM.	 Teaching	 neuroImage:	 convergence
spasm	 associated	 with	 midbrain	 compression	 by	 cerebral	 aneurysm.
Neurology	2008;70:e49–e50.

Yotharak	P,	Aui-Aree	N.	Correlation	between	clinical	grading	and	quantification
by	 neutral	 density	 filter	 of	 relative	 afferent	 pupillary	 defect	 (RAPD).	 J	 Med
Assoc	Thai	2012;95(Suppl	4):S92–S95.

Zak	 R,	 Slamovits	 T,	 Burde	 R.	 Oculomotor	 brainstem	 anatomy:	 nuclei	 to

fascicles.	J	Neurooncol	1994;18:241–248.

CHAPTER	15

The	Trigeminal	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	trigeminal,	or	fifth	cranial,	nerve	(CN	V)	is	the	largest	and	one	of	the	most
complex	 CNs.	 It	 has	 a	 large	 sensory	 part	 (portio	 major;	 170,000	 fibers)	 and	 a
much	 smaller	 motor	 part	 (portio	 minor;	 7,700	 fibers).	 The	 sensory	 component
has	 three	 divisions:	 the	 first	 or	 ophthalmic	 division	 (CN	 V1),	 the	 second	 or
maxillary	division	(CN	V2),	and	the	third	or	mandibular	division	(CN	V3).	The
motor	 and	 principal	 sensory	 nuclei	 are	 located	 in	 the	 mid-pons	 (Figure	 15.1).
The	spinal	tract	and	nucleus,	which	subserve	pain	and	temperature,	extend	from
the	 pons	 down	 into	 the	 upper	 cervical	 spinal	 cord.	 The	 mesencephalic	 root
receives	 proprioceptive	 fibers.	 Trigeminal	 nuclear	 structures	 thus	 extend	 from
the	rostral	midbrain	to	the	rostral	spinal	cord.	The	sensory	portion	innervates	the
face,	teeth,	oral	and	nasal	cavities,	the	scalp	back	to	the	vertex,	the	intracranial
dura,	and	 the	cerebral	 vasculature,	and	provides	proprioceptive	information	for
muscles	of	mastication.	The	motor	portion	innervates	the	muscles	of	mastication.
CN	V	has	extensive	connections	with	other	CNs.	There	is	a	small	input	to	both
the	 mossy	 and	 climbing	 fiber	 systems	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 (trigeminocerebellar
fibers).	 Functional	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 (MRI)	 using	 specific	 sensory
stimuli	or	motor	tasks	has	been	used	to	localize	the	brainstem	nuclei.

The	Motor	Portion

Upper	motor	neuron	control	of	trigeminal	motor	functions	arises	primarily	from
the	lower	third	of	the	contralateral	motor	cortex,	although	each	trigeminal	motor
nucleus	receives	projections	from	both	cerebral	hemispheres.	Fibers	descend	in
the	corticobulbar	tract	to	the	pons,	where	they	decussate	(Figure	15.2).	There	is
extrapyramidal	 innervation	 from	 the	 premotor	 cortex	 and	 basal	 ganglia.	 The

muscles	supplied	by	the	trigeminal	are	derived	from	the	first	branchial	arch,	and
the	system	is	special	visceral	efferent	(SVE)	or	branchial	motor.	The	fibers	exit
laterally,	 typical	 for	 SVE	 fibers,	 but	 do	 not	 form	 an	 internal	 loop	 as	 other
branchial	motor	fibers	do.

The	 motor	 root	 exits	 the	 lateral	 pons	 anteromedial	 to	 the	 sensory	 root.	 It
passes	 beneath	 the	 gasserian	 ganglion,	 leaves	 the	 skull	 through	 the	 foramen
ovale,	and	then	joins	the	mandibular	sensory	division	briefly	before	separating	to
supply	the	muscles	of	mastication	and	associated	muscles.

The	 principal	 function	 of	 the	 motor	 root	 is	 to	 innervate	 the	 muscles	 of
mastication:	 masseter,	 temporalis,	 and	 medial	 and	 lateral	 pterygoids.	 The
masseter	muscles	close	the	jaw	and	protrude	it	slightly;	the	masseter	may	be	the
most	 powerful	 muscle	 in	 the	 body.	 The	 temporalis	 muscles	 close	 the	 jaw	 and
retract	it	slightly.	The	medial	pterygoids	acting	synchronously	close	the	jaw	and
protrude	 it.	 The	 lateral	 pterygoids	 acting	 synchronously	 open	 the	 jaw	 and
protrude	it.	The	medial	and	lateral	pterygoids	originate	from	the	skull	base	and
extend	laterally	to	insert	on	the	inner	aspect	of	the	mandible.	When	they	contract
on	 one	 side,	 they	 pull	 the	 mandible	 contralaterally.	 When	 there	 is	 unilateral
pterygoid	weakness,	the	jaw	deviates	toward	the	side	of	the	weak	muscles.

Mastication	 is	 a	 complex	 opening,	 closing,	 forward,	 backward,	 and	 lateral
movement	 of	 the	 jaw.	 The	 motor	 root	 of	 CN	 V	 is	 responsible	 for	 all	 of	 these
intricate	 motions.	 CN	 V	 also	 supplies	 the	 mylohyoid,	 anterior	 belly	 of	 the
digastric,	tensor	veli	palatini,	and	tensor	tympani	muscles.	The	mylohyoid	pulls
the	hyoid	bone	upward	and	forward,	raising	the	floor	of	the	mouth	and	pressing
the	base	of	the	tongue	against	the	palate.	The	anterior	belly	of	the	digastric	raises
and	advances	the	hyoid	bone	if	the	jaw	is	fixed.	The	tensor	veli	palatini	tenses
the	 soft	 palate	 and	 helps	 prevent	 food	 from	 escaping	 from	 the	 oro-	 to	 the
nasopharynx;	 it	 also	 dilates	 the	 eustachian	 tube.	 The	 tensor	 tympani,	 through
interaction	with	CN	VIII,	tenses	the	tympanic	membrane	and	helps	dampen	its
excursions	in	response	to	sound	intensity.

FIGURE	15.1	Section	through	the	pons	at	the	level	of	the	trigeminal	nuclei.

The	Sensory	Portion

The	trigeminal,	or	gasserian	(for	J.	L.	Gasser),	ganglion,	the	largest	ganglion	in
the	peripheral	nervous	system,	lies	just	beside	the	pons	in	a	shallow	depression
in	 the	 petrous	 apex	 called	 Meckel’s	 cave.	 The	 ganglion	 is	 crescent	 shaped,
convex	anterolaterally,	and	is	also	known	as	the	semilunar	ganglion.	It	lies	just
lateral	to	the	internal	carotid	artery	and	the	posterior	part	of	the	cavernous	sinus.
The	ganglion	is	analogous	to	a	dorsal	root	ganglion;	it	contains	unipolar	sensory
neurons,	whose	central	processes	enter	the	lateral	pons	through	the	large	sensory
root	 that	 passes	 beneath	 the	 tentorium	 to	 connect	 the	 concave	 side	 of	 the
ganglion	 to	 the	 brainstem.	 The	 sensory	 root	 can	 be	 compressed	 by	 vascular
loops,	 causing	 trigeminal	 neuralgia	 (TN).	 The	 peripheral	 processes	 subserve
sensation	 to	 the	 face	 and	 head.	 There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 sensory	 neurons	 in	 the
gasserian	 ganglion.	 One	 mediates	 fine	 discriminative	 touch;	 the	 other	 mediates
primarily	pain	and	temperature.

Afferent	fibers	conveying	light	touch	and	pressure	enter	the	principal	sensory
nucleus,	 which	 lies	 in	 the	 tegmentum	 just	 lateral	 and	 posterior	 to	 the	 motor
nucleus;	 most	 fibers	 synapse	 there	 and	 give	 rise	 to	 second-order	 neurons	 that

cross	 the	 midline	 and	 ascend	 in	 the	 ventral	 trigeminothalamic	 tract	 en	 route	 to
the	ventral	posterior	medial	(VPM)	thalamic	nucleus	(Figure	15.2).	Some	fibers
ascend	ipsilaterally	in	the	small	dorsal	trigeminothalamic	tract	to	VPM.	The	two
sets	 of	 trigeminothalamic	 fibers,	 both	 of	 which	 run	 near	 the	 medial	 lemniscus,
are	sometimes	referred	to	as	the	trigeminal	lemniscus.

Fibers	subserving	pain	and	temperature	take	a	much	more	circuitous	route	to
the	thalamus.	The	spinal	tract,	or	the	descending	root,	of	the	trigeminal	extends
from	 the	 principal	 sensory	 nucleus	 down	 through	 the	 lower	 pons	 and	 medulla,
into	the	spinal	cord	as	far	as	C3,	or	even	C4	(Figure	15.2).	There	the	spinal	tract
becomes	continuous	with	Lissauer’s	tract.	The	nucleus	of	the	spinal	tract	is	a	cell
column	 that	 lies	 just	 medial	 to	 the	 fiber	 tract	 throughout	 its	 course.	 In	 the
cervical	 cord,	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 spinal	 tract	 becomes	 continuous	 with	 the
substantia	 gelatinosa	 of	 the	 posterior	 horn.	 Fibers	 conveying	 pain	 and
temperature	enter	the	spinal	tract	of	the	trigeminal	and	descend	to	various	levels
depending	on	their	somatotopic	origin,	then	synapse	in	the	adjacent	 nucleus	of
the	spinal	tract.	The	axons	of	second-order	neurons	cross	the	midline,	aggregate
in	the	ventral	trigeminothalamic	tract,	and	ascend	to	VPM	alongside	the	medial
lemniscus	 and	 spinothalamic	 tracts.	 Fibers	 arising	 from	 the	 pars	 caudalis	 send
collaterals	to	the	intralaminar	and	 posterior	thalamic	nuclei.	From	VPM,	fibers
project	 through	 the	 thalamic	 radiations	 to	 the	 sensory	 cortex	 in	 the	 postcentral
gyrus,	 where	 facial	 sensation	 occupies	 the	 lower	 third.	 Some	 projections	 from
VPM	 terminate	 in	 the	 precentral	 gyrus.	 Fibers	 from	 the	 intralaminar	 nuclei
project	 well	 outside	 the	 primary	 sensory	 cortex.	 Sensory	 fibers	 from	 CNs	 VII,
IX,	and	X	provide	sensation	to	the	region	of	the	external	ear	canal;	these	fibers
join	the	trigeminal	system	centrally.

FIGURE	15.2	The	trigeminal	nerve	and	its	connections.

The	 somatotopic	 organization	 of	 the	 nucleus	 and	 spinal	 tract	 is	 complex.
There	 are	 three	 subnuclei,	 from	 above	 to	 below—the	 nuclei	 (or	 pars)	 oralis,
interpolaris,	and	caudalis.	The	pars	oralis	extends	from	mid-pons	to	the	level	of
the	inferior	olive,	the	pars	interpolaris	from	the	inferior	olive	to	the	obex,	and	the
pars	caudalis	from	there	to	the	upper	cervical	cord.	At	one	time,	it	was	thought
that	 different	 divisions	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 descended	 to	 different	 levels	 in	 the
spinal	 tract.	 This	 concept	 was	 based	 in	 part	 on	 the	 alterations	 in	 corneal

sensation	 after	 surgical	 tractomy	 of	 the	 cervical	 cord,	 which	 is	 done	 to	 treat
chronic	 pain.	 Current	 thinking	 is	 that	 all	 three	 divisions	 are	 represented	 at	 all
levels	of	the	nucleus,	although	V1	may	not	project	as	far	caudally	as	V2	and	V3.
Somatotopically,	 V1	 is	 represented	 most	 anteriorly,	 and	 V2	 and	 V3	 more
posteriorly	 (resembling	 a	 small	 inverted	 face	 with	 the	 forehead	 anterior	 on	 a
typical	cross	section).

Dejerine,	 using	 clinical	 and	 pathologic	 material,	 demonstrated	 an	 “onion
skin”	 somatotopic	 organization	 (Figure	 15.3).	 The	 face	 is	 represented	 as
concentric	rings	from	the	perioral	region	to	the	preauricular	region.	Fibers	from
the	foreface	(upper	lip,	mouth,	and	tip	of	the	nose)	synapse	most	rostrally	in	the
nucleus	 of	 the	 spinal	 tract;	 those	 from	 the	 hindface	 synapse	 more	 caudally,
adjacent	to	the	sensory	input	from	C2	and	C3.	Because	of	this	organization,	there
is	 occasionally	 sparing,	 less	 frequently	 selective	 involvement	 of	 the	 perioral
region	 compared	 to	 the	 posterior	 face	 (balaclava	 helmet	 distribution).	 The
onionskin	 distribution	 is	 important	 in	 understanding	 the	 patterns	 of	 facial
sensory	 loss	 that	 may	 occur	 with	 intrinsic	 brainstem	 and	 cervical	 spinal	 cord
lesions,	 especially	 syringomyelia	 and	 syringobulbia.	 Chang	 reported	 a	 clinical
demonstration	of	the	onionskin	organization	in	a	case	of	central	cord	syndrome
where	 facial	 dysesthesias	 retreated	 from	 the	 center	 toward	 the	 periphery.
Onionskin	sensory	loss	was	apparently	common	in	neurosyphilis.

The	third	sensory	component,	the	mesencephalic	root	of	the	trigeminal	nerve,
runs	 with	 the	 motor	 root	 and	 then	 extends	 posteriorly	 and	 cephalad	 from	 the
level	 of	 the	 motor	 nucleus	 into	 the	 mesencephalon.	 It	 carries	 proprioceptive
impulses	from	the	muscles	supplied	by	the	trigeminal	nerve	and	probably	for	the
extraocular	 muscles	 and	 the	 muscles	 of	 facial	 expression	 as	 well.	 Neurons
subserving	 proprioception	 are	 unipolar	 neurons,	 but	 they	 reside	 inside	 the
brainstem	in	the	mesencephalic	nucleus	of	CN	V,	making	it	in	essence	an	ectopic
dorsal	 root	 ganglion	 within	 the	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS).	 Proprioceptive
fibers	 pass	 through	 the	 gasserian	 ganglion	 without	 synapsing	 and	 terminate	 in
the	 mesencephalic	 nucleus.	 The	 mesencephalic	 nucleus	 mediates	 the	 jaw	 jerk
reflex.	Projections	join	the	trigeminothalamic	tracts	and	ascend	to	VPM.

FIGURE	 15.3	 Cutaneous	 distribution	 of	
distribution.	B.	Segmental	distribution.

the	

trigeminal	 nerve.	 A.	 Peripheral

The	Trigeminal	Divisions

The	 three	 divisions	 of	 CN	 V	 arise	 from	 the	 trigeminal	 ganglion.	 Each	 division
has	 a	 meningeal	 branch.	 Disregarding	 these,	 the	 ophthalmic	 division	 has	 three
major	 terminal	 branches;	 the	 other	 two	 divisions	 have	 four	 each.	 The	 terminal
branches	 of	 V1	 are	 the	 frontal,	 lacrimal,	 and	 nasociliary	 nerves.	 The	 terminal
branches	 of	 the	 maxillary	 division	 are	 the	 infraorbital,	 zygomatic,	 superior
alveolar,	and	pterygopalatine.	The	terminal	branches	of	the	mandibular	division
are	 the	 buccal,	 lingual,	 inferior	 alveolar,	 and	 auriculotemporal.	 The	 cutaneous
distribution	of	the	divisions	is	summarized	in	Table	15.1.

From	 the	 gasserian	 ganglion,	 V1—the	 smallest	 of	 the	 three	 divisions—runs
forward	and	enters	the	cavernous	sinus;	it	lies	laterally	in	the	wall	of	the	sinus
between	the	folds	of	dura	(Figure	14.6).	A	branch	is	given	off	to	the	meninges	of
the	 tentorium	 cerebelli	 just	 after	 leaving	 the	 ganglion.	 CN	 V1	 runs	 forward
through	 the	 superior	 orbital	 fissure	 and	 divides	 into	 its	 terminal	 branches.	 The
sensory	innervation	of	V1	is	shown	in	Figure	15.3.	Note	that	V1	supplies	most	of
the	nose.	Sensory	loss	along	the	nose	because	of	a	lesion	of	the	distal	branches
of	V2	 is	 shown	 in	 Figure	15.5.	 The	 sensory	 fibers	 to	 the	 eye	 pass	 through	 the
ciliary	ganglion	without	synapsing	and	continue	as	the	short	ciliary	nerves;	these
convey	sensation	from	the	globe	and	carry	postganglionic	sympathetic	fibers	to
the	 pupilloconstrictor	 muscle.	 The	 long	 ciliary	 nerves	 carry	 sensation	 from	 the

ciliary	 body	 and	 cornea,	 as	 well	 as	 sympathetic	 fibers	 to	 the	 pupillodilator
muscle.	 Proprioceptive	 fibers	 from	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 travel	 initially	 with
their	respective	CNs	but	join	V1	and	proceed	to	the	mesencephalic	nucleus.

through	

then	 exits	

the	 foramen	 rotundum.	 It	 crosses	

The	maxillary	branch	gives	off	the	middle,	or	recurrent,	meningeal	nerve	to
the	 dura	 of	 the	 middle	 fossa,	 passes	 through	 the	 lateral	 wall	 of	 the	 cavernous
the
sinus,	 and	
pterygopalatine	(sphenopalatine)	fossa,	where	the	sensory	branches	to	the	palate
are	 given	 off,	 after	 which	 the	 nerve	 splits	 into	 the	 zygomatic	 and	 posterior
superior	 alveolar	 branches.	 The	 palatine	 nerves	 traverse	 the	 sphenopalatine
ganglion	 without	 synapsing	 to	 innervate	 the	 hard	 and	 soft	 palate.	 The	 nerve
enters	the	orbit	via	the	inferior	orbital	fissure	and	transits	the	infraorbital	canal.
The	 middle	 and	 anterior	 alveolar	 branches	 arise	 in	 the	 infraorbital	 canal.	 The
anterior	alveolar	branch	exits	through	the	infraorbital	foramen	and	becomes	the
infraorbital	 nerve.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 infraorbital	 nerve	 cause	 the	 numb	 cheek
syndrome	(see	below).

The	 mandibular	 division,	 the	 largest	 of	 the	 branches,	 gives	 off	 a	 small
meningeal	branch,	and	then	exits	through	the	foramen	ovale.	It	runs	for	a	short
distance	 with	 the	 motor	 root,	 forming	 a	 large	 trunk.	 This	 trunk	 gives	 off	 the
nervous	 spinosus	 and	 the	 branch	 to	 the	 medial	 pterygoid	 muscle.	 The	 nervous
spinosus	 is	 a	 recurrent	 twig	 that	 re-enters	 the	 skull	 through	 the	 foramen
spinosum	 and	 runs	 alongside	 the	 middle	 meningeal	 artery	 to	 innervate	 the
meninges	of	the	anterior	and	middle	fossa.	The	trunk	then	divides	into	a	small,
anterior,	chiefly	motor	branch	and	a	large,	posterior,	chiefly	sensory	branch.	The
sensory	 filaments	 of	 the	 anterior	 branch	 form	 the	 buccal	 nerve.	 The	 posterior
branch	 divides	 into	 three	 large	 terminal	 nerves.	 Two,	 the	 lingual	 and
auriculotemporal,	are	purely	sensory.	The	third,	the	inferior	alveolar,	also	carries
motor	 fibers	 to	 the	 mylohyoid	 and	 anterior	 belly	 of	 the	 digastric.	 The	 lingual
nerve	carries	somatic	sensation	from	the	anterior	two-thirds	of	the	tongue.	Taste
sensation	 from	 the	 same	 region	 is	 carried	 by	 the	 chorda	 tympani	 and	 CN	 VII.
After	 the	 origin	 of	 the	 lingual	 nerve,	 the	 nerve	 enters	 the	 mandibular	 foramen,
traverses	the	mandibular	canal,	and	emerges	through	the	mental	foramen	as	the
mental	 nerve	 to	 supply	 sensation	 to	 the	 chin.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 mental	 nerve
produce	the	numb	chin	syndrome	(see	below).

TABLE
15.1

The	Divisions	of	the	Trigeminal	Nerve,	the	Foramina
Through	Which	They	Pass,	Their	Terminal	Branches,	and
Fields	of	Cutaneous	Innervation

Some	 specifics	 about	 the	 trigeminal	 sensory	 innervation	 are	 clinically
noteworthy.	 The	 innervation	 of	 the	 cornea	 is	 generally	 said	 to	 be	 CN	 V1,
although	 there	 is	 some	 evidence	 that	 the	 upper	 cornea	 may	 be	 CN	 V1	 and	 the
lower	 cornea	 CN	 V2,	 at	 least	 in	 some	 patients.	 CN	 V1	 innervates	 most	 of	 the
nose,	 including	 the	 nasal	 septum.	 CN	 V1	 territory	 extends	 back	 to	 the	 scalp
vertex;	it	does	not	stop	at	the	hairline.	Figure	15.4	demonstrates	the	territory	of
the	 ophthalmic	 division	 outlined	 by	 post-zoster	 scarring.	 CN	 V2	 innervates	 the
inferior	 lateral	 aspect	 of	 the	 nose	 and	 the	 cheek.	 The	 cutaneous	 distribution	 of
CN	 V2	 is	 nearly	 identical	 to	 the	 infraorbital	 nerve	 (Figure	 15.5).	 Changes	 in
sensation	involving	the	upper	teeth	and	gums	can	be	helpful	in	distinguishing	a
CN	V2	lesion	from	an	infraorbital	nerve	lesion	in	patients	with	the	numb	cheek
syndrome.	 The	 major	 terminal	 branch	 of	 CN	 V3	 is	 the	 mental	 nerve,	 which
provides	sensation	to	the	chin	and	lower	lip.	The	distribution	of	CN	V3	does	not
extend	to	the	jaw	line;	there	is	a	large	“notch”	at	the	angle	of	the	jaw	innervated
by	the	greater	auricular	nerve	(C2-C3).	This	notch	of	C2-C3	innervation	can	be
surprisingly	large	(Figure	15.6).

FIGURE	 15.4	 A	 remote	 case	 of	 ophthalmic	 division	 zoster	 has	 left	 severe
postinflammatory	scarring,	which	outlines	the	cranial	nerve	(CN)	V1	distribution.	Note
the	scarring	extends	back	to	the	interaural	line	and	involves	much	of	the	nose.

FIGURE	15.5	Patient	with	infraorbital	neuropathy	from	carcinomatous	infiltration.	Note
that	 the	 maxillary	 division	 innervates	 only	 the	 side	 of	 the	 nose	 distally.	 This	 patient
had	 numbness	 of	 only	 the	 anterior	 teeth	 and	 gums,	 which	 proved	 the	 lesion	 was	 at
the	 infraorbital	 foramen	 and	 not	 intracranial.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW.	 The
numb	cheek	syndrome:	a	sign	of	infraorbital	neuropathy.	Neurology	1986;36[3]:421–
423,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	 15.6	 The	 distribution	 of	 sensory	 loss	 following	 complete	 section	 of	 the
trigeminal	 root.	 Note	 the	 large	 area	 at	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 jaw	 that	 is	 innervated	 by	 C2
through	 the	 greater	 auricular	 nerve,	 and	 the	 inclusion	 of	 the	 tragus	 of	 the	 ear	 in	 the
trigeminal	distribution.

CN	 V	 supplies	 filaments	 to	 four	 ganglia	 in	 the	 head:	 the	 ciliary,

sphenopalatine,	otic,	and	submaxillary	(Box	15.1).

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION

Examination	of	the	Motor	Functions

Assessment	 of	 trigeminal	 motor	 function	 is	 accomplished	 by	 examining	 the

muscles	of	mastication.	Bulk	and	power	of	the	masseters	and	pterygoids	can	be
gauged	by	palpating	these	muscles	as	the	patient	clinches	the	jaw.	An	effective
technique	is	to	place	the	examining	fingers	along	the	anterior,	not	lateral,	border
of	 the	 masseters	 bilaterally.	 When	 the	 jaw	 is	 clenched,	 the	 fingers	 will	 move
forward;	 this	 movement	 should	 be	 symmetric	 on	 the	 two	 sides.	 Unilateral
trigeminal	motor	weakness	causes	deviation	of	the	jaw	toward	the	weak	side	on
opening,	because	of	the	unopposed	action	of	the	contralateral	lateral	pterygoid.
The	tongue	also	deviates	toward	the	side	of	the	weakness	with	CN	XII	lesions.
So,	 both	 the	 tongue	 and	 the	 jaw	 deviate	 toward	 the	 weakness.	 Whether	 this	 is
toward	 or	 away	 from	 the	 lesion	 depends	 on	 the	 specifics	 of	 the	 lesion.	 Figure
15.7	shows	a	patient	with	both	tongue	and	jaw	deviation.	For	a	video	of	a	patient
with	jaw	deviation,	see	Video	Link	15.1.

BOX	15.1

The	Ciliary,	Sphenopalatine,	Otic,	and	Submaxillary	Ganglia

The	 ciliary	 ganglion,	 located	 in	 the	 posterior	 orbit,	 receives	 sensory	 fibers
from	 the	 nasociliary	 branch	 of	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN)	 V1	 (the	 long	 root	 of	 the
ciliary	ganglion),	parasympathetic	fibers	from	the	Edinger-Westphal	nucleus
through	 the	 inferior	 division	 of	 CN	 III	 (the	 short	 root),	 and	 sympathetic
fibers	 from	 the	 cavernous	 sympathetic	 plexus,	 running	 through	 the	 long
ciliary	 nerves.	 Its	 branches,	 the	 short	 ciliary	 nerves,	 supply	 the	 ciliary
muscle,	sphincter	and	dilator	of	the	pupil,	and	cornea.

The	 sphenopalatine	 ganglion,	 located	 in	 the	 pterygopalatine	 fossa,
receives	 sensory	 fibers	 from	 the	 sphenopalatine	 branches	 of	 CN	 V2,
parasympathetic	 fibers	 from	 the	 nervus	 intermedius	 via	 the	 greater
superficial	petrosal	nerve,	and	sympathetic	fibers	from	the	pericarotid	plexus
through	 the	 deep	 petrosal	 nerve.	 The	 deep	 and	 greater	 superficial	 petrosal
nerves	join	to	form	the	vidian	nerve,	or	nerve	of	the	pterygoid	canal,	before
entering	 the	 ganglion.	 The	 sphenopalatine	 ganglion	 sends	 branches	 to	 the
posterior	ethmoidal	and	sphenoidal	sinuses,	the	hard	and	soft	palates,	tonsils,
uvula,	 nasal	 mucosa,	 and	 nasopharynx.	 Lacrimal	 fibers	 pass	 along	 the
zygomaticotemporal	branch	of	CN	V2	to	the	lacrimal	branch	of	CN	V1,	then
to	the	lacrimal	gland.

The	 otic	 ganglion,	 located	 in	 the	 infratemporal	 fossa	 just	 below	 the
foramen	ovale,	receives	a	motor	and	possibly	a	sensory	branch	from	CN	V3,

parasympathetic	 and	 sensory	 fibers	 from	 CN	 IX	 through	 the	 lesser
superficial	 petrosal	 nerve,	 and	 sympathetic	 fibers	 from	
the	 plexus
surrounding	 the	 middle	 meningeal	 artery.	 It	 sends	 motor	 branches	 to	 the
tensor	 tympani	 and	 tensor	 veli	 palatini	 muscles	 and	 secretory	 fibers	 to	 the
parotid	gland	through	the	auriculotemporal	nerve.

The	submaxillary	ganglion,	located	near	the	submaxillary	gland,	receives
sensory	 fibers	 from	 the	 lingual	 branch	 of	 CN	 V3,	 parasympathetic	 fibers
from	the	superior	salivatory	nucleus	of	CN	VII	through	the	chorda	tympani,
and	sympathetic	fibers	from	a	plexus	around	the	external	maxillary	artery.	It
sends	 secretory	 fibers	 to	 the	 submaxillary	 and	 sublingual	 glands	 and	 the
mucous	membrane	of	the	mouth	and	tongue.

FIGURE	 15.7	 Infranuclear	 paralysis	 of	 the	 right	 trigeminal,	 facial,	 and	 hypoglossal
nerves	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 metastatic	 carcinoma,	 showing	 deviation	 of	 the	 tongue	 and
mandible	to	the	right.

Careful	observation	of	jaw	opening	is	often	the	earliest	clue	to	the	presence	of
an	 abnormality.	 It	 is	 occasionally	 difficult	 to	 be	 certain	 whether	 the	 jaw	 is
deviating	 or	 not.	 Note	 the	 relationship	 of	 the	 midline	 notch	 between	 the	 upper
and	lower	incisor	teeth;	it	is	a	more	reliable	indicator	than	lip	movement.	The	tip
of	the	nose	and	the	interincisural	notches	should	line	up.	A	straightedge	against
the	lips	can	help	detect	deviation.	Another	useful	technique	is	to	draw	a	vertical
line	across	the	midline	upper	and	lower	lips	using	a	felt-tip	marker.	Failure	of	the

two	vertical	marks	to	match	when	the	jaw	is	opened	indicates	deviation.	If	there
is	any	suggestion	of	a	problem,	have	the	patient	move	the	jaw	from	side	to	side.
With	unilateral	weakness,	the	patient	is	unable	to	move	the	jaw	contralaterally.
To	 review,	 weakness	 of	 the	 right	 pterygoids	 causes	 deviation	 of	 the	 jaw	 to	 the
right	 on	 spontaneous	 opening	 and	 inability	 to	 move	 the	 jaw	 to	 the	 left	 on
command.	With	facial	weakness,	there	may	be	apparent	deviation	of	the	jaw,	and
of	 the	 tongue,	 because	 of	 the	 facial	 asymmetry.	 Holding	 up	 the	 weak	 side
manually	will	sometimes	eliminate	the	pseudo-deviation.

Other	techniques	for	examining	trigeminal	motor	function	include	having	the
patient	protrude	and	retract	the	jaw,	noting	any	tendency	toward	deviation,	and
having	the	patient	bite	on	tongue	depressors	with	the	molar	teeth,	comparing	the
impressions	on	the	two	sides	and	comparing	the	difficulty	of	extracting	a	tongue
depressor	held	by	the	molar	teeth	on	each	side.

Unilateral	weakness	of	CN	V–innervated	muscles	generally	signifies	a	lesion
involving	the	brainstem,	gasserian	ganglion,	or	the	motor	root	of	CN	V	zat	the
base	of	the	skull.	Severe	bilateral	weakness	of	the	muscles	of	mastication	with
inability	 to	 close	 the	 mouth	 (dangling	 jaw)	 suggests	 motor	 neuron	 disease,	 a
neuromuscular	transmission	disorder,	or	a	myopathy.	With	significant	atrophy	of
one	 masseter,	 a	 flattening	 of	 the	 jowl	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 may	 be	 apparent
(Figure	15.8).	With	temporalis	atrophy,	there	may	be	a	hollowing	of	the	temple.
Rarely,	fasciculations	or	other	abnormal	involuntary	movements	occur.	There	is
no	reliable	or	realistic	method	for	examination	of	the	other	muscles	supplied	by
CN	V.	Paralysis	of	the	tensor	tympani	may	cause	difficulty	hearing	high	notes.
Because	 of	 bilateral	 innervation,	 unilateral	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 lesions	 rarely
cause	significant	impairment	of	trigeminal	motor	function.	There	may	be	mild,
transitory	 unilateral	 weakness.	 The	 amount	 of	 involvement	 depends	 on	 the
extent	 of	 decussation.	 In	 bilateral	 supranuclear	 lesions,	 there	 may	 be	 marked
paresis.

Examination	of	the	Sensory	Functions

In	 testing	 facial	 sensation,	 touch,	 pain,	 and	 occasionally	 temperature	 are
examined	in	the	same	manner	as	elsewhere	on	the	body	(Chapter	32),	searching
for	areas	of	altered	sensation.	It	is	better	to	ask	the	patient	if	the	stimuli	feel	the
same	on	the	two	sides,	rather	than	suggesting	they	might	feel	different.	Sensation
should	 be	 compared	 in	 each	 trigeminal	 division,	 and	 the	 perioral	 region
compared	 to	 the	 posterior	 face	 to	 exclude	 an	 onionskin	 pattern.	 Pain	 or

temperature	should	be	compared	with	touch	to	exclude	dissociated	sensory	loss
(a	 common	 finding	 in	 lateral	 medullary	 syndrome).	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 useful	 to
examine	 the	 nostrils,	 gums,	 tongue,	 and	 insides	 of	 the	 cheeks.	 Proprioception
cannot	 be	 adequately	 tested,	 but	 one	 can	 test	 for	 extinction	 and	 the	 ability	 to
identify	figures	written	on	the	skin.

FIGURE	15.8	 Infranuclear	 paralysis	 of	 the	 right	 trigeminal	 nerve	 with	 atrophy	 of	 the
muscles	of	mastication.

There	 are	 three	 common	 exercises	 in	 evaluating	 facial	 sensation:	 (a)
determining	 whether	 sensory	 loss	 is	 organic	 or	 nonorganic,	 (b)	 determining
which	modalities	are	involved,	and	(c)	defining	 the	 distribution.	 Complaints	 of
facial	 numbness	 are	 common,	 and	 not	 all	 are	 organic.	 However,	 real	 facial
sensory	 loss	 can	 be	 a	 serious	 finding,	 occasionally	 signifying	 underlying
malignancy.	 The	 various	 methods	 and	 tricks	 for	 detecting	 nonorganic	 sensory
loss	 are	 not	 entirely	 reliable,	 and	 this	 diagnosis	 should	 be	 made	 with	 caution.
Patients	with	nonorganic	sensory	loss	may	have	a	demarcation	of	the	abnormal
area	 at	 the	 hairline	 rather	 than	 the	 scalp	 vertex.	 On	 the	 lower	 face,	 functional
sensory	loss	tends	to	follow	the	jaw	line	and	involve	the	notch	over	the	masseter
muscle,	which	is	not	trigeminal	innervated	(Figure	15.6).	However,	patients	with
intramedullary	 lesions	 may	 have	 involvement	 of	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 jaw.	 On	 the
trunk,	 organic	 sensory	 loss	 typically	 stops	 short	 of	 midline	 because	 of	 the
overlap	 from	 the	 opposite	 side,	 and	 splitting	 of	 the	 midline	 suggests
nonorganicity.	 This	 finding	 is	 not	 reliable	 on	 the	 face	 because	 there	 is	 less
midline	 overlap,	 so	 organic	 facial	 sensory	 loss	 may	 extend	 to	 the	 midline.	 The
corneal	 and	 sternutatory	 reflexes	 (see	 below)	 should	 be	 normal	 in	 nonorganic
sensory	 loss.	Splitting	 of	vibration	along	the	 midline	 is	reputedly	a	nonorganic
sign.	Because	the	frontal	bone	and	mandible	are	single	bones,	there	should	be	no
difference	in	vibratory	sensibility	on	either	side	of	midline.	Patients	who	report	a
difference	 in	 vibratory	 sensibility	 on	 testing	 just	 to	 either	 side	 of	 midline	 may
have	nonorganic	sensory	loss.	The	reliability	of	this	sign	has	not	been	validated;
it	 can	 be	 misleading.	 Other	 signs	 suggestive	 of	 nonorganicity	 include
dissociation	 between	 pinprick	 and	 temperature,	 variability	 from	 trial	 to	 trial,
history	of	hypochondriasis,	secondary	gain,	la	belle	indifference,	nonanatomical
sensory	 loss,	 and	 changing	 boundaries	 of	 hypalgesia.	 Gould	 et	 al.	 have
appropriately	cautioned	about	the	validity	of	hysterical	signs	and	symptoms.

Examination	of	the	Reflexes

The	corneal,	sternutatory,	and	jaw	reflexes	are	the	reflexes	most	often	assessed
in	evaluating	the	trigeminal	nerve.

The	Jaw,	Masseter,	or	Mandibular	Reflex

To	elicit	the	jaw	(or	jaw	muscle)	reflex,	the	examiner	places	an	index	finger	or
thumb	 over	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 patient’s	 chin,	 holding	 the	 mouth	 open	 about

midway	with	the	jaw	relaxed,	then	taps	the	finger	with	the	reflex	hammer.	The
response	 is	 an	 upward	 jerk	 of	 the	 mandible.	 Other	 methods	 to	 elicit	 the	 reflex
include	tapping	the	chin	directly	and	placing	a	tongue	blade	over	the	tongue	or
the	 lower	 incisor	 teeth	 and	 tapping	 the	 protruding	 end.	 All	 of	 these	 cause	 a
bilateral	 response.	 A	 unilateral	 response	 may	 sometimes	 be	 elicited	 by	 tapping
the	 angle	 of	 the	 jaw	 or	 by	 placing	 a	 tongue	 blade	 over	 the	 lower	 molar	 teeth
along	one	side	and	tapping	the	protruding	end.

The	afferent	impulses	of	this	reflex	are	carried	through	the	sensory	portion	of
the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 to	 the	 mesencephalic	 nucleus,	 with	 the	 efferent	 impulses
through	its	motor	portion.	In	normal	individuals,	the	jaw	jerk	is	minimally	active
or	 absent.	 Its	 greatest	 use	 is	 in	 distinguishing	 limb	 hyperreflexia	 because	 of	 a
cervical	spine	lesion	(where	the	jaw	jerk	is	normal)	from	a	state	of	generalized
hyperreflexia	 (where	 the	 jaw	 jerk	 is	 increased	 along	 with	 all	 of	 the	 other
reflexes).	The	jaw	reflex	is	exaggerated	with	lesions	affecting	the	corticobulbar
pathways	 above	 the	 motor	 nucleus,	 especially	 if	 bilateral,	 as	 in	 pseudobulbar
palsy	 or	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 (ALS).	 It	 is	 sometimes	 possible	 to	 elicit
extra	beats	or	jaw	clonus.	For	a	video	of	a	hyperactive	jaw	reflex	see	Osama	et
al.	The	reflex	may	be	unilaterally	depressed	in	lesions	involving	the	reflex	arc.

The	Corneal	Reflex

The	corneal	reflex	is	elicited	by	lightly	touching	the	cornea	with	a	wisp	of	cotton
or	 tissue.	 It	 is	 used	 to	 assess	 CN	 V1	 function.	 The	 stimuli	 should	 ideally	 be
delivered	 to	 the	 upper	 cornea,	 because	 the	 lower	 cornea	 may	 be	 CN	 V2
innervated	in	some	individuals.	The	stimuli	should	be	brought	in	from	below	or
from	 the	 side	 so	 the	 patient	 cannot	 see	 it	 (Figure	 15.9).	 The	 stimulus	 must	 be
delivered	to	the	cornea,	not	the	sclera.	If	there	is	any	evidence	of	eye	infection,
different	 pieces	 of	 cotton	 or	 tissue	 should	 be	 used	 for	 the	 two	 eyes.	 Crude
stimuli,	such	as	a	large	blunt	object	or	fingertip,	should	never	be	used,	even	in
comatose	patients.

FIGURE	15.9	Eliciting	the	corneal	reflex.	The	stimulating	object	should	be	brought	in
outside	the	patient’s	vision.	The	patient	should	look	upward	as	the	object	is	brought	in
from	 below,	 or	 laterally	 as	 the	 object	 is	 brought	 in	 from	 the	 other	 side.	 The	 stimulus
must	be	applied	to	the	cornea,	not	the	sclera.

In	response	to	the	corneal	stimulus,	there	should	be	blinking	of	the	ipsilateral
(direct	reflex)	and	contralateral	(consensual	reflex)	eyes.	The	afferent	limb	of	the
reflex	is	mediated	by	CN	V1,	the	efferent	limb	by	CN	VII.	The	blink	reflex	is	an
electrophysiologic	 test	 in	 which	 an	 electrical	 stimulus	 is	 delivered	 to	 the
trigeminal	nerve,	and	a	response	is	recorded	from	facial	muscles.	It	can	provide
further	information	about	CN	V,	CN	VII,	and	the	connections	between	them.	For
brainstem	 lesions,	 electrophysiologic	 lesion	 localization	 corresponds	 well	 with
imaging	findings.

With	 a	 unilateral	 trigeminal	 lesion	 both	 the	 direct	 and	 consensual	 responses
may	 be	 absent;	 neither	 eye	 blinks.	 Stimulation	 of	 the	 opposite	 eye	 produces
normal	 direct	 and	 consensual	 responses.	 With	 a	 unilateral	 CN	 VII	 lesion,	 the
direct	 response	 may	 be	 impaired,	 but	 the	 consensual	 reflex	 should	 be	 normal.
Stimulation	 of	 the	 opposite	 side	 produces	 a	 normal	 direct	 response	 but	 an

impaired	 consensual	 response.	 These	 patterns	 are	 summarized	 in	 Table	 15.2.
Lesions	 involving	 the	 brainstem	 polysynaptic	 trigeminofacial	 connections	 may
produce	impairment	of	both	direct	and	consensual	responses.	The	corneal	reflex
may	be	depressed	with	lesions	of	the	contralateral	hemisphere,	especially	if	there
is	thalamic	involvement.	Because	of	the	descent	of	the	spinal	tract	and	nucleus
of	CN	V	into	the	upper	cervical	cord,	lesions	there	sometimes	affect	the	corneal
reflex.	Corneal	anesthesia	can	be	a	complication	of	cervical	tractotomy	done	for
chronic	 pain.	 Corneal	 sensation	 may	 be	 impaired	 in	 contact	 lens	 wearers,	 even
when	the	lenses	are	out.

The	Sternutatory	(Nasal,	Sneeze)	Reflex

Stimulation	 of	 the	 nasal	 mucous	 membrane	 with	 cotton,	 a	 spear	 of	 tissue,	 or
similar	 objects	 causes	 wrinkling	 of	 the	 nose,	 eye	 closure,	 and	 often	 a	 forceful
exhalation	resembling	a	feeble	sneeze,	as	the	nose	tries	to	rid	itself	of	the	foreign
object.	The	ophthalmic,	 not	 the	 maxillary,	division	of	 the	trigeminal	innervates
the	nasal	septum	and	the	anterior	nasal	passages.	The	afferent	limb	of	the	reflex
arc	 is	 carried	 over	 CN	 V1,	 the	 efferent	 limb	 over	 CNs	 V,	 VII,	 IX,	 X,	 and	 the
motor	nerves	of	the	cervical	and	thoracic	spinal	cord.	The	reflex	center	is	in	the
brainstem	 and	 upper	 spinal	 cord.	 The	 nasal	 mucosa	 may	 also	 be	 stimulated	 by
irritating	 inhalants;	 this	 is	 a	 nasal	 reflex	 that	 should	 not	 be	 confused	 with
olfaction	(Chapter	12).	The	primary	clinical	use	of	the	sternutatory	reflex	is	as	a
cross-check	on	the	corneal	reflex.	The	ordinary	sneeze	reflex	can	obviously	be
elicited	 in	 many	 ways.	 An	 interesting	 phenomenon	 is	 the	 photic	 sneeze,
photosternutatory,	 or	 “ACHOO”	 (autosomal	 dominant	 compelling	 helio-
ophthalmic	 outburst)	 reflex—sneezing	 in	 response	 to	 looking	 at	 a	 bright	 light,
which	 is	 seen	 in	 many	 normal	 individuals.	 Pryse-Phillips	 commented,	 “The
acronym	is	slightly	forced,	but	remains…	the	best	of	the	decade.”

TABLE
15.2

Patterns	of	Direct	and	Consensual	Corneal	Reflex
Abnormality	with	Trigeminal	and	Facial	Nerve	Lesions

Other	Trigeminal	Mediated	Reflexes

Other	reflexes	mediated	in	part	by	CN	V	include	the	nonfocal	orbicularis	oculi
reflex	 and	 other	 trigeminofacial	 responses	 (Chapter	 16),	 corneomandibular
reflex	(Chapter	40),	and	the	snout	reflex	(Chapter	40).	Many	other	reflexes	have
been	described,	but	they	are	of	limited	value	and	are	seldom	used.	The	afferent
limbs	of	these	reflexes	are	trigeminal	mediated.	In	some,	the	efferent	limb	is	also
trigeminal	 (e.g.,	 the	 jaw	 jerk);	 in	 others,	 the	 efferent	 limb	 is	 executed	 through
connections	with	CN	III,	CN	VII,	or	other	pathways.

Disorders	of	Function

lesions	 may	 cause	 weakness,	 abnormal	

Trigeminal	 nerve	
involuntary
movements,	 sensory	 loss	 or	 other	 sensory	 abnormalities,	 facial	 pain,	 trophic
abnormalities,	autonomic	dysfunction,	or	abnormalities	of	the	reflexes	mediated
by	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve.	 The	 conditions	 most	 commonly	 seen	 are	 facial	 pain,
particularly	TN,	and	facial	numbness.

Motor	Dysfunction

Because	 of	 the	 bilateral	 hemispheric	 innervation,	 weakness	 in	 the	 trigeminal
distribution	 does	 not	 often	 occur	 with	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 lesions,	 although
slight	weakness	of	the	contralateral	muscles	with	an	exaggerated	jaw	reflex	can
occur.	Bilateral	supranuclear	lesions,	as	in	pseudobulbar	palsy	or	ALS,	can	cause
marked	weakness,	often	with	a	grossly	exaggerated	jaw	reflex.	In	supranuclear
lesions,	no	atrophy	or	fasciculations	occur.

Significant	 weakness	 in	 the	 trigeminal	 motor	 distribution	 is	 most	 often	 the
result	 of	 a	 neuromuscular	 transmission	 disorder	 or	 ALS.	 Patients	 with
myasthenia	gravis	(MG)	may	have	chewing	difficulties	with	masticatory	fatigue,
especially	 when	 eating	 difficult-to-chew	 things	 such	 as	 tough	 meat.	 When

severe,	MG	may	cause	an	inability	to	close	the	mouth	(jaw	drop).	Patients	with
severe	polymyositis,	rarely	with	other	myopathies,	may	also	have	difficulty	with
jaw	 power.	 Patients	 with	 giant	 cell	 arteritis	 commonly	 have	 jaw	 claudication
with	 focal	 pain	 in	 the	 masseter	 when	 chewing,	 which	 can	 be	 confused	 with
weakness.	 ALS	 commonly	 causes	 a	 jaw	 drop,	 often	 with	 dysphagia	 and
difficulty	swallowing	saliva,	requiring	the	patients	to	constantly	keep	absorbent
materials	in	their	mouth.	Jaw	drop	may	also	occur	in	Kennedy’s	disease.	Needle
electromyography	of	trigeminal	innervated	muscles	may	demonstrate	subclinical
involvement.	Lesions	anywhere	along	the	course	of	the	lower	motor	neuron	can
cause	weakness	accompanied	by	atrophy,	sometimes	marked;	fasciculations;	and
a	decreased	jaw	jerk	(Figure	15.7).

Abnormal	 involuntary	 movements	 commonly	 affect	 the	 jaw.	 Oromandibular
dystonia	produces	a	variety	of	abnormal	movements:	jaw	opening,	jaw	closing,
lateral	movements,	bruxism,	and	combinations	of	these	(see	Video	Link	15.2).
Jaw	 dystonia	 may	 occur	 as	 part	 of	 an	 extrapyramidal	 syndrome	 due	 to
psychoactive	drugs,	and	abnormal	jaw	movements	are	a	common	manifestation
of	 tardive	 dyskinesias.	 Meige’s	 syndrome	 is	 oromandibular	 dystonia	 and
blepharospasm.	 Chewing	 movements	 and	 grinding	 of	 the	 teeth	 are	 sometimes
present	 in	 psychoses,	 and	 chewing	 or	 tasting	 movements	 in	 complex	 partial
seizures.	Bruxism	may	occur	as	a	side	effect	of	levodopa.	Rarely,	a	focal	seizure
limited	 to	 the	 muscles	 of	 mastication	 may	 cause	 clenching	 of	 the	 jaws	 with
biting	 of	 the	 tongue	 or	 cheeks.	 Trismus	 is	 marked	 spasm	 of	 the	 muscles	 of
mastication:	The	teeth	are	tightly	clenched,	the	muscles	hard	and	firm,	and	the
patient	is	unable	to	open	his	jaws.	It	is	a	classical	manifestation	of	tetanus,	and
sometimes	 occurs	 in	 encephalitis,	 rabies,	 acute	 dystonic	 reactions	 due	 to
neuroleptic	medications,	and	tetany.	Trismus	may	occur	in	Foix-Chavany-Marie
syndrome	(Chapter	9).	Some	myopathies,	especially	polymyositis,	may	result	in
fibrosis	 of	 the	 masseters,	 which	 causes	 painless	 trismus.	 Trismus	 may	 be
psychogenic.	 Patients	 with	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 may	 have	
tremor.
Hemimasticatory	spasm	is	a	syndrome	of	brief,	sometimes	painful,	involuntary
contractions	or	spasms	of	the	jaw-closing	muscles	unilaterally.	It	may	eventually
result	in	masseter	hypertrophy.	Hemimasticatory	spasm	may	be	associated	with
other	conditions,	including	scleroderma	and	facial	hemiatrophy.	Neuromyotonia
of	the	jaw	muscles	may	follow	cranial	irradiation.

jaw	

Sensory	Dysfunction

Supranuclear	lesions,	particularly	of	the	parietal	lobe	or	sensory	radiations,	may
raise	the	sensory	threshold	of	the	contralateral	face;	a	thalamic	lesion	may	cause
facial	hypesthesia	with	hyperpathia	or	allodynia.	Lesions	of	the	principal	sensory
nucleus	in	the	pons	may	cause	diminished	tactile	sensation	involving	both	skin
and	mucous	membranes	on	the	involved	side,	and	loss	of	reflexes	in	which	the
afferent	 arc	 is	 mediated	 by	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 spinal	 tract	 or
nucleus	 cause	 a	 disturbance	 of	 the	 pain	 and	 temperature	 modalities,	 and,
possibly	to	a	lesser	extent,	of	tactile	sense.

Dissociation	of	sensation,	with	different	degrees	of	involvement	of	light	touch
as	 compared	 to	 pain	 and	 temperature,	 suggests	 a	 lesion	 in	 the	 substance	 of	 the
brainstem	(intramedullary),	where	the	different	sensory	pathways	are	running	in
widely	 separate	 locations.	 Extramedullary	 lesions	 are	 characterized	 by	 loss	 or
diminution	of	all	types	of	exteroceptive	sensation,	dysesthesias	or	paresthesias,
or	spontaneous	pain.	A	lesion	central	to	or	at	the	gasserian	ganglion	will	affect
all	three	divisions;	a	lesion	peripheral	to	the	ganglion,	will	involve	only	isolated
divisions	or	branches.	There	may	also	be	reflex	changes,	such	as	absence	of	the
corneal	or	sternutatory.

Trigeminal	nerve	lesions	may	also	cause	trophic	changes.	With	CN	V1	lesions
impaired,	 corneal	 sensation	 may	 result	 in	 corneal	 ulcerations	 and	 other	 ocular
complications.	 The	 eye	 must	 be	 scrupulously	 protected	 when	 the	 cornea	 is
anesthetic.	 Interaction	 between	 the	 trigeminal	 and	 olfactory	 systems	 has	 a
powerful	influence	on	the	perception	of	odors,	and	trophic	changes	in	the	nasal
mucosa	 because	 of	 a	 trigeminal	 lesion	 may	 cause	 a	 secondary	 anosmia.	 Nasal
anesthesia	may	result	in	disfiguring	erosion	of	the	ala	nasi.	Because	of	the	many
connections	of	CN	V	with	other	CNs,	particularly	CNs	VII	and	IX,	a	decrease	or
increase	 in	 lacrimal,	 salivary,	 and	 mucous	 secretion	 can	 follow	 a	 trigeminal
lesion,	particularly	when	the	functions	are	trigeminal-mediated	reflex	responses.
Even	 taste,	 not	 a	 trigeminal	 function,	 may	 be	 affected	 because	 of	 taste	 fibers
carried	through	the	lingual	nerve	to	the	chorda	tympani.

The	most	common	disorder	to	involve	trigeminal	sensory	function	is	TN,	or
tic	 douloureux.	 TN	 causes	 paroxysms	 of	 fleeting	 but	 excruciating	 unilateral
facial	pain.	It	usually	involves	the	second	or	third	division,	rarely	the	first	(the
inverse	of	herpes	zoster	[HZ]).	Occasional	patients	have	involvement	of	both	CN
V2	and	CN	V3.	The	lancinating	pain	usually	lasts	only	seconds,	occasionally	up
to	2	minutes,	but	may	occur	many	times	a	day.	The	patient	may	wince,	hence	the
designation	 “tic.”	 Stimulation	 of	 some	 specific	 area,	 a	 trigger	 zone,	 in	 the
involved	nerve	distribution	will	often	provoke	a	paroxysm	of	pain.	Pain	may	be

brought	 on	 by	 activities	 such	 as	 talking,	 chewing,	 brushing	 teeth,	 exposure	 to
cold,	or	by	wind	on	the	face.	Men	may	present	with	the	trigger	zone	unshaven,
women	 with	 it	 not	 made	 up.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 reluctant	 to	 allow	 neurologic
examination	 of	 the	 involved	 area	 for	 fear	 of	 triggering	 a	 paroxysm	 of	 pain.
Trigger	zones	are	small,	sometimes	punctate.	Stimulus-evoked	pain	is	one	of	the
most	striking	features	of	TN	and	has	high	diagnostic	value.	A	refractory	period
lasting	seconds	or	minutes	following	a	provoked	paroxysm	may	occur.	TN	enters
into	periods	of	complete	remission	in	up	to	63%	of	patients.

The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 TN	 is	 compression	 of	 the	 sensory	 root	 by	 an
ectatic	arterial	loop	off	the	basilar	artery,	usually	the	anterior	inferior	cerebellar
or	 superior	 cerebellar.	 However,	 advanced	 imaging	 studies	 have	 shown	 that
some	 contact	 between	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 and	 nearby	 vessels	 occurs	 in
asymptomatic	 individuals.	 A	 meta-analysis	 showed	 neurovascular	 contact	 in
89%	of	symptomatic	nerves,	but	also	in	36%	of	asymptomatic	nerves,	indicating
high	 sensitivity	 but	 poor	 specificity.	 Displacement,	 distortion,	 flattening,	 or
atrophy	of	the	nerve	roots	are	sensitive	signs	of	clinically	relevant	neurovascular
compression.	 MRI	 in	 TN	 is	 rarely	 abnormal	 except	 for	 vascular	 loops	 or
abnormalities	related	to	vascular	compression.

Rarely,	structural	lesions	may	cause	facial	pain	resembling	TN,	referred	to	as
secondary	 or	 symptomatic	 TN.	 These	 lesions	 may	 cause	 sensory	 loss	 in	 the
involved	 distribution,	 motor	 dysfunction,	 or	 involve	 neighboring	 structures.
Examples	 include	 multiple	 sclerosis	 (MS),	 tumors	 involving	 the	 gasserian
ganglion	or	its	branches,	and	other	tumors	in	the	cerebellopontine	angle.	Among
patients	with	TN-like	symptoms,	6%	to	16%	are	variously	reported	to	harbor	an
intracranial	tumor,	such	as	an	acoustic	neuroma.	The	presence	of	a	complaint	of
numbness,	 impaired	 sensation	 on	 examination,	 other	 neurologic	 abnormalities,
history	 of	 symptom	 progression,	 and	 duration	 of	 symptoms	 of	 less	 than	 1	 year
increase	 the	 likelihood	 of	 an	 abnormal	 imaging	 study.	 Other	 central	 processes
involving	 the	 trigeminal	 pathways	 in	 the	 brainstem,	 such	 as	 syringobulbia	 and
infarction,	 may	 cause	 pain	 resembling	 TN.	 Facial	 pain	 is	 not	 uncommon	 in
Wallenberg’s	lateral	medullary	syndrome	and	may	rarely	resemble	TN.

Patients	 with	 idiopathic	 or	 classical	 TN	 have	 no	 clinical	 motor	 or	 sensory
deficit	in	the	distribution	of	the	involved	nerve.	Absence	of	a	sensory	deficit	is
one	 criterion	for	 the	diagnosis	of	 classical	 TN.	 Subtle	 sensory	changes	may	be
detected	with	quantitative	sensory	testing.	Reports	indicate	that	about	one-third
of	 patients	 with	 TN	 because	 of	 tumor	 or	 MS	 have	 a	 demonstrable	 sensory
deficit,	but	the	absence	of	a	sensory	deficit	does	not	exclude	secondary	TN.

Occasional	patients	develop	persistent,	non-paroxysmal,	pain	in	the	involved
distribution,	 frequently	 described	 as	 dull,	 burning,	 or	 tingling.	 This	 has	 been
referred	to	as	atypical	TN	or	TN2.	The	term	atypical	TN	is	problematic	because
of	potential	confusion	with	the	entity	of	atypical	facial	pain.	Some	have	used	the
term	TN2,	or	atypical	TN,	in	referring	to	what	others	would	cause	atypical	facial
pain.

TN	 occurs	 in	 MS	 patients	 much	 more	 commonly	 than	 in	 the	 general
population;	 it	 is	 usually	 caused	 by	 a	 demyelinating	 lesion	 involving	 the
trigeminal	root	entry	zone	in	the	pons,	although	vascular	compression	at	the	root
entry	 zone	 can	 occur	 even	 in	 MS	 patients.	 TN	 occurs	 in	 2%	 to	 5%	 of	 patients
with	 MS,	 and	 MS	 is	 found	 in	 2%	 to	 14%	 of	 patients	 presenting	 with	 TN.
Bilateral	 TN	 is	 especially	 suggestive	 of	 MS.	 Most	 TN	 patients	 are	 in	 the	 fifth
decade	 or	 beyond;	 onset	 in	 a	 young	 person	 should	 prompt	 consideration	 of
symptomatic	TN,	especially	due	to	demyelinating	disease.
Some	 published	 diagnostic	 guidelines	 have	

the
classification	of	TN	more	difficult.	The	most	recent	version	of	the	International
Classification	 of	 Headache	 Disorders	 no	 longer	 includes	 symptomatic	 or
secondary	 TN	 as	 a	 diagnostic	 category.	 Crucco	 et	 al.	 proposed	 a	 new
classification	 and	 diagnostic	 grading	 scheme	 for	 practice	 and	 research.	 In	 this
scheme,	 classical	 TN	 is	 defined	 as	 a	 specific	 category	 in	 which	 MRI
demonstrates	vascular	compression	with	morphologic	changes	of	the	trigeminal
nerve	root.	Secondary	TN	is	that	due	to	a	major	underlying	neurologic	disease,
such	 as	 tumor	 or	 MS.	 The	 category	 of	 idiopathic	 TN	 is	 reserved	 for	 the	 small
proportion	of	patients	in	which	imaging	studies	are	completely	normal	except	for
incidental	vascular	contact.	TN	with	continuous	pain	refers	to	those	patients	who
experience	nonparoxysmal	pain	between	attacks.

inadvertently	 made	

The	operative	technique	of	microvascular	decompression	insulates	the	nerve
from	 a	 compressing	 vessel.	 Microvascular	 decompression	 is	 widely	 performed
and	 quite	 effective.	 In	 the	 past,	 ablative	 involvement	 procedures	 such	 as
retrogasserian	 rhizotomy	 were	 often	 performed	 on	 the	 gasserian	 ganglion	 or
sensory	 root.	 These	 would	 leave	 the	 patient’s	 face	 numb	 to	 various	 degrees.
Sometimes	 the	 operation	 would	 cause	 facial	 numbness	 but	 fail	 to	 relieve	 the
pain,	 leaving	 the	 patient	 with	 a	 numb	 but	 painful	 face,	 a	 condition	 called
anesthesia	dolorosa	or	 deafferentation	pain.	Ablative	 procedures	 used	currently
in	resistant	cases	can	also	cause	anesthesia	dolorosa.

Many	 other	 craniofacial	 neuralgias	 have	 been	 described,	 but	 most	 of	 these
syndromes	have	not	withstood	the	test	of	time	and	their	existence	as	real	entities

remains	 in	 doubt.	 These	 include	 Sluder’s,	 or	 sphenopalatine,	 neuralgia,	 vidian
neuralgia,	 Costen’s	 syndrome,	 and	 Eagle’s	 syndrome.	 The	 term	 persistent
idiopathic	 facial	 pain,	 formerly	 called	 atypical	 facial	 pain,	 is	 used	 to	 refer	 to	 a
syndrome	of	facial	pain	that	does	not	have	the	characteristics	of	TN.	The	pain	in
atypical	facial	pain	is	typically	constant	and	not	paroxysmal,	described	as	deep
and	 poorly	 localized,	 not	 restricted	 to	 a	 single	 trigeminal	 division,	 not
lancinating,	and	not	associated	with	any	trigger	zone.	No	identifiable	etiology	is
usually	apparent,	and	the	pain	is	often	attributed	to	depression	or	other	emotional
factors.	There	is	increasing	evidence	that	in	some	cases	it	is	a	neuropathic	pain
syndrome	 with	 objective	 abnormalities	 on	 neurophysiologic	 testing.	 Forssell	 et
al.	found	that	75%	of	a	series	of	20	patients	with	atypical	facial	pain	had	either
an	 abnormal	 electrodiagnostic	 blink	 reflex	 or	 abnormal	 thermal	 quantitative
thermal	sensory	testing.	Aching	pain	in	the	face	may	precede	the	development	of
TN	(preTN).

Unusual	facial	pain	may	occur	in	Gradenigo’s	syndrome	because	of	gasserian
ganglion	involvement	in	lesions	at	the	petrous	apex.	Affected	patients	may	have
pain	 and	 sensory	 disturbances	 in	 the	 V1	 distribution,	 accompanied	 by	 CN	 VI
palsy	 (Chapter	 14).	 In	 Raeder’s	 paratrigeminal	 syndrome	 (paratrigeminal
oculosympathetic	syndrome),	there	is	headache,	facial	pain	in	the	distribution	of
V1	 and	 an	 oculosympathetic	 paresis.	 There	 is	 no	 anhidrosis	 as	 in	 Horner’s
syndrome	because	those	fibers	travel	via	the	external	carotid	artery.	There	may
or	 may	 not	 be	 demonstrable	 trigeminal	 sensory	 loss.	 Other	 CNs	 may	 be
involved.	The	responsible	lesion	lies	in	the	middle	cranial	fossa	near	the	petrous
apex.	Headache	and	oculosympathetic	paresis	(or	Horner’s	syndrome)	may	also
occur	with	cluster	headache	and	carotid	dissecting	aneurysms.	CN	V1	or	V2,	or
both,	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 lesions	 of	 the	 cavernous	 sinus	 (Chapter	 21).	 In	 the
superior	orbital	fissure	syndrome,	there	is	involvement	of	V1	and	other	structures
passing	through	the	fissure	(Chapter	21).	Only	when	V2	is	affected	can	lesions	of
the	 cavernous	 sinus	 and	 superior	 orbital	 fissure	 be	 clinically	 differentiated.
Nurmikko	 stressed	 the	 value	 of	 a	 semi-structured	 interview,	 posing	 a	 series	 of
specific	questions,	in	the	differential	diagnosis	of	facial	pain	syndromes.

Acute	 HZ	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 is	 extremely	 painful.	 It	 is	 usually	 seen	 in
elderly	 or	 immunocompromised	 patients,	 and	 affects	 CN	 V1	 in	 80%	 of	 cases,
causing	 pain	 and	 vesicles	 over	 the	 forehead,	 eyelid,	 and	 cornea	 (herpes
ophthalmicus).	The	inflammation	causes	neuronal	loss	in	the	affected	ganglion,
and	 a	 reduction	 of	 both	 axons	 and	 myelin	 in	 the	 affected	 nerve.	 Cutaneous

scarring	 is	 common	 (Figure	 15.4).	 Ophthalmic	 involvement	 may	 lead	 to
keratitis,	 corneal	 ulcerations,	residual	 corneal	scarring,	and	sometimes	result	in
blindness.	In	some	patients,	only	the	eye,	mainly	the	cornea,	is	involved.	Zoster
may	affect	any	of	the	trigeminal	divisions,	and	there	may	be	motor	involvement
(Figure	15.10).	Rarely,	trigeminal	HZ	may	 be	complicated	by	 encephalitis	 or	a
syndrome	 of	 delayed	 contralateral	 hemiparesis	 due	 to	 arteritis.	 Pain	 without	 a
cutaneous	eruption	is	referred	to	as	zoster	sine	zoster	or	zoster	sine	herpete.

Postherpetic	Neuralgia

In	some	patients	with	trigeminal	HZ,	the	pain	of	the	acute	phase	evolves	into	a
dreadful,	 persistent	 neuralgic	 pain	 syndrome	 called	 postherpetic	 neuralgia
(PHN).	 Pain	 persisting	 for	 more	 than	 3	 months	 after	 the	 acute	 eruption	 is
appropriately	 labeled	 as	 PHN.	 The	 pain	 is	 probably	 related	 to	 deafferentation
and	 mediated	 centrally.	 It	 is	 typically	 dysesthetic	 with	 a	 burning	 component,
constant	 but	 with	 superimposed	 paroxysms	 of	 lancinating	 pain	 that	 may	 be
provoked	 by	 touching	 certain	 spots	 within	 the	 affected	 area.	 There	 may	 be
hypesthesia	or	hyperesthesia	in	the	affected	area.	Age	is	an	important	factor	in
predisposing	to	PHN;	it	develops	in	only	10%	of	those	less	than	age	60,	but	in
40%	of	those	over	60	years.

FIGURE	 15.10	 A	 patient	 with	 herpes	 zoster	 of	 the	 mandibular	 division	 on	 the	 left
involving	the	motor	root,	producing	weakness	of	the	pterygoids,	and	causing	deviation
of	the	jaw	to	the	left.	The	herpetic	rash	is	in	the	distribution	of	CN	V3.

Facial	Numbness

Isolated	 facial	 numbness	 is	 a	 common	 problem.	 Facial	 sensory	 loss	 may	 occur
with	lesions	involving	the	main	trigeminal	divisions	or	their	distal	branches.	A
number	 of	 processes,	 some	 ominous,	 may	 be	 responsible.	 The	 numb	 chin
syndrome	refers	to	hypesthesia	and	sometimes	paresthesias	involving	the	lower
lip	 and	 chin,	 approximately	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 mental	 nerve	 (chin
neuropathy,	Roger’s	sign).	The	numb	chin	syndrome	is	often	due	to	a	neoplastic

process,	with	metastasis	either	to	the	mental	foramen	of	the	mandible	or	to	the
intracranial	meninges	or	skull	base,	often	from	carcinoma	of	the	breast	or	lung.
Lesions	of	the	inferior	alveolar	nerve	may	also	be	responsible.	The	predilection
for	 involvement	 of	 the	 CN	 V3	 distribution	 may	 reflect	 the	 relatively	 protected
position	 of	 the	 other	 trigeminal	 divisions	 in	 the	 cavernous	 sinus,	 with	 greater
exposure	 of	 the	 third	 division	 to	 neoplastic	 processes	 involving	 the	 meninges
and	 base	 of	 the	 skull.	 Possible	 clues	 to	 a	 skull	 base	 or	 meningeal	 origin	 of	 a
numb	 chin	 include	 sensory	 disturbance	 extending	 beyond	 the	 chin	 or
involvement	 of	 other	 CNs.	 Loss	 of	 sensation	 of	 the	 anterior	 teeth	 and	 gums
suggests	 a	 distal	 process	 involving	 the	 inferior	 alveolar	 nerve.	 Sparing	 of	 oral
sensation	or	dissociation	of	modalities	suggests	an	intraparenchymal	CNS	lesion.
In	 a	 series	 of	 42	 numb	 chin	 patients	 with	 cancer,	 50%	 had	 metastases	 to	 the
mandible,	 22%	 had	 neoplastic	 meningitis	 and	 14%	 had	 metastases	 to	 the	 skull
base.	Non-neoplastic	causes	include	dental	procedures,	tooth	abscess,	connective
tissue	disease,	sickle	cell	disease,	tumors	or	cysts	of	the	mandible,	erosion	of	the
mental	 foramen	 in	 edentulous	 patients,	 and	 trauma.	 In	 one	 series,	 the	 most
common	etiology	of	the	numb	chin	syndrome	was	dental.

The	 numb	 cheek	 syndrome	 is	 similar	 but	 usually	 because	 of	 a	 lesion
involving	the	infraorbital	nerve	with	perineural	spread	of	a	tumor	(Figure	 15.5).
When	hypesthesia	also	involves	the	medial	and	lateral	upper	incisors	and	canine
teeth	(distribution	of	the	anterior	superior	alveolar	branch),	and	adjacent	gingiva,
sparing	 the	 more	 posterior	 teeth	 and	 gums,	 the	 pathologic	 process	 localizes	 to
the	infraorbital	foramen	and	makes	involvement	of	the	maxillary	division	more
proximally	 unlikely.	 Perineural	 spread	 of	 skin	 cancer	 is	 the	 most	 common
etiology.	The	molar	and	premolar	teeth	and	gums	are	innervated	by	the	posterior
and	middle	superior	alveolar	nerves.	The	numb	cheek-limp	lower	lid	syndrome
includes	 weakness	 involving	 the	 distal	 branches	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve	 because	 of
carcinoma	infiltrating	the	infraorbital	and	facial	nerves.

The	 numb	 chin	 or	 cheek	 syndrome	 can	 be	 the	 presenting	 manifestation	 of
cancer,	 more	 often	 it	 is	 due	 to	 progression	 or	 relapse	 of	 a	 known	 malignancy.
Unusual	 causes	 of	 trigeminal	 sensory	 dysfunction	 include	 pontine	 hemorrhage,
Wegener’s	 granulomatosis,	 localized	 hypertrophic	 mononeuropathy,	 and	 a
midbrain	lesion	affecting	the	trigeminothalamic	fibers.	Trauma	may	involve	the
distal	 trigeminal	 branches.	 Trumpet	 player’s	 neuropathy	 affects	 musicians,
causing	 pain	 and	 numbness	 of	 the	 upper	 lip	 because	 of	 injury	 to	 the	 anterior
superior	alveolar	nerve.

Trigeminal	sensory	neuropathy	(TSN)	refers	to	a	syndrome	of	isolated	facial

numbness,	usually	gradual	in	onset,	which	may	involve	a	single	division	or	the
entire	 face;	 it	 is	 occasionally	 bilateral.	 Some	 patients	 have	 paresthesias	 and
dysesthesias.	 The	 pathology	 probably	 involves	 the	 ganglion.	 Some	 cases	 are
tissue
idiopathic,	 but	 many	 underlying	 diseases,	 particularly	 connective	
disorders,	can	cause	TSN	(Table	15.3).	Occasionally,	 TSN	 is	part	of	a	multiple
cranial	 neuropathy	 syndrome,	 especially	 in	 patients	 with	 scleroderma.	 Some
patients	 with	 idiopathic	 TSN	 have	 shown	 gadolinium	 enhancement	 in	 the
cisternal	segment	suggesting	a	similarity	to	Bell’s	palsy.

TABLE	15.3

Some	Causes	of	Trigeminal	Sensory	Neuropathy

Idiopathic
Connective	tissue	disorder
			Sjögren’s	syndrome
			Scleroderma
			Mixed	connective	tissue	disorder
			Other
Sarcoidosis
Wegener’s	granulomatosis
Giant	cell	arteritis
Multiple	sclerosis
Tumor
Diabetes
Syringobulbia
Toxins
			Trichlorethylene
			Stilbamidine
			Mefloquine

Facial	 sensory	 loss	 is	 common	 in	 brainstem	 lesions;	 most	 are	 vascular.	 A
frequent	 cause	 is	 the	 lateral	 medullary	 syndrome	 (Wallenberg’s),	 which
classically	causes	loss	of	pain	and	temperature	sensation	over	the	ipsilateral	face
and	 contralateral	 body.	 Variations	 on	 this	 pattern	 have	 been	 well	 reported,
including	sensory	loss	of	only	V1,2	or	only	V2,3.	In	a	series	of	50	patients,	only

13	 (26%)	 had	 the	 classic	 pattern.	 Others	 had	 bilateral	 facial	 sensory	 loss,
contralateral	 facial	 sensory	 loss,	 only	 body	 and	 limb	 loss,	 only	 facial	 loss	 not
involving	 the	 body,	 or	 no	 sensory	 signs.	 When	 facial	 sensory	 loss	 occurred,	 it
was	most	often	in	an	onionskin	distribution.	Intraoral	sensation	may	be	spared.

Other	Trigeminal	Nerve	Disorders

Pathology	 involving	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 and	 its	 connections	 may	 result	 in
misdirection	 of	 nerve	 fibers,	 producing	 unusual	 and	 interesting	 effects.
Congenital	 ocular	 aberrant	 innervation	 syndromes	 are	 a	 complex	 group	 of
disorders	involving	abnormal	miswiring	of	the	extraocular	muscles	(Chapter	14).
The	 Marcus	 Gunn	 phenomenon,	 or	 jaw-winking,	 occurs	 in	 patients	 with
congenital	ptosis;	opening	the	mouth,	chewing,	or	lateral	jaw	movements	causes
an	 exaggerated	 reflex	 elevation	 of	 the	 ptotic	 lid,	 see	 Video	 Link	 15.3.	 The
phenomenon	 may	 be	 the	 result	 of	 proprioceptive	 impulses	 from	 the	 pterygoid
muscles	 being	 misdirected	 to	 the	 oculomotor	 nucleus.	 Trigemino-abducens
synkinesis	 is	 due	 to	 abnormal	 communications	 between	 CN	 V	 and	 CN	 VI.
Involuntary	closure	of	one	eye	on	mouth	opening	(reversed	Gunn	phenomenon,
inverse	 jaw	 winking,	 or	 Marin	 Amat	 sign)	 is	 a	 synkinesia	 because	 of	 aberrant
regeneration	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve;	 it	 occurs	 most	 often	 following	 Bell’s	 palsy
(Chapter	 16).	 The	 auriculotemporal	 (Frey)	 syndrome	 produces	 flushing,
warmness,	 and	 excessive	 perspiration	 over	 the	 cheek	 and	 pinna	 on	 one	 side
following	ingestion	of	spicy	food	(gustatory	sweating).	This	syndrome	is	due	to
misdirection	of	the	secretory	fibers	to	the	parotid	gland	to	the	sweat	glands	and
vasodilator	endings	in	the	auriculotemporal	nerve	distribution;	it	usually	follows
trauma	or	infection	of	the	parotid	gland	or	local	nerve	injury.

Migraine	 may	 be	 a	 neurovascular	 syndrome	 related	 to	 abnormalities	 in	 the
trigeminovascular	 system	 with	 serotonin	 playing	 an	 important	 role.	 Other
trigeminal	 autonomic	 cephalgias	 involve	 pain	 in	 the	 V1	 distribution	 and
autonomic	 symptoms.	 There	 include	 cluster	 headache;	 paroxysmal	 hemicrania;
and	 the	 short-lasting,	 unilateral,	 neuralgiform	 headache	 with	 conjunctival
injection,	 and	 tearing	 syndrome.	 In	 encephalotrigeminal	 angiomatosis	 (Sturge-
Weber	 syndrome,	 or	 Weber-Dimitri	 disease),	 there	 are	 congenital	 nevi	 or
angiomas	over	one	side	of	the	face	in	the	trigeminal	distribution	with	associated
intracortical	 calcifications	 with
ipsilateral	
attendant	 neurologic	 complications	 (Figure	15.11).	 Neck-tongue	 syndrome	 is	 a
rare	 disorder	 involving	 the	 trigeminal	 and	 upper	 cervical	 nerves.	 Pain	 and

leptomeningeal	 angiomas	 and	

numbness	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 lingual	 nerve	 and	 C2	 root	 are	 provoked	 by
sudden	head	 turning.	Afferent	fibers	 from	 the	lingual	 nerve	are	 thought	 to	 join
the	 hypoglossal	 nerve	 and	 send	 filaments	 to	 the	 upper	 cervical	 nerves.	 The
symptoms	 are	 allegedly	 caused	 by	 minor	 subluxation	 of	 the	 C2	 articulatory
process	tweaking	these	nearby	structures.

Localization	of	Trigeminal	Nerve	Lesions

In	 reviews	 of	 the	 regional	 pathology	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 from	 an	 imaging
perspective,	 the	 common	 brainstem	 lesions	 were	 neoplasms,	 vascular	 disease,
and	demyelinating	processes.

lymphoma,	 epidermoid	 cyst,	

The	most	common	causes	in	the	segment	from	the	brainstem	to	the	skull	base
—including	 the	 cisternal,	 Meckel	 cave,	 and	 cavernous	 sinus	 segments—were
neurovascular	 compression,	 followed	 by	 acoustic	 or	 trigeminal	 schwannoma,
lipoma,	 pituitary	 adenoma,
meningioma,	
metastasis,	 and	 aneurysm.	 Skull	 base	 abnormalities	 included	 chordoma,
chondrosarcoma,	 metastasis,	 bone	 dysplasias,	 and	 Paget’s	 disease.	 The
peripheral	 divisions	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve	 were	 commonly	 involved	 by
adjacent	 inflammatory	 disease	 in	 the	 sinuses,	 perineural	 spread	 of	 malignancy,
and	 schwannoma.	 Trauma	 is	 a	 common	 cause	 of	 impaired	 trigeminal	 sensory
dysfunction,	 because	 of	 dental	 and	 other	 surgical	 procedures,	 dental	 anesthetic
injections	and	facial	fractures.

FIGURE	15.11	Child	with	the	Sturge-Weber	syndrome,	causing	the	typical	port-wine

hemangioma	of	the	skin	along	the	distribution	of	the	left	trigeminal	nerve.	(Reprinted
from	 Allingham	 RR,	 Damji	 KF,	 Shields	 MB.	 Shields’	 Textbook	 of	 Glaucoma.	 6th	 ed.
Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,	 2011,	 with
permission).

Video	Links

Video	Link	15.1.	Jaw	deviation.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=cbW6ki4g0JE

Video	Link	15.2.	Oromandibular	dystonia.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Oromandibular_dystonia

Video	Link	15.3.	Marcus	Gunn	phenomenon	(jaw-winking).

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Jaw_winking

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Agostoni	 E,	 Frigerio	 R,	 Santoro	 P.	 Atypical	 facial	 pain:	 clinical	 considerations

and	differential	diagnosis.	Neurol	Sci	2005;26(Suppl	2):S71–S74.

Akita	K,	Shimokawa	T,	Sato	T.	Positional	relationships	between	the	masticatory
muscles	 and	 their	 innervating	 nerves	 with	 special	 reference	 to	 the	 lateral
pterygoid	and	the	midmedial	and	discotemporal	muscle	bundles	of	temporalis.
J	Anat	2000;197(Pt	2):291–302.

Becker	 M,	 Kohler	 R,	 Vargas	 MI,	 et	 al.	 Pathology	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 nerve.

Neuroimaging	Clin	N	Am	2008;18:283–307.

Bennetto	L,	Patel	NK,	Fuller	G.	Trigeminal	neuralgia	and	its	management.	BMJ

2007;334:201–205.

Boerman	RH,	Maassen	EM,	Joosten	J,	et	al.	Trigeminal	neuropathy	secondary	to
perineural	 invasion	 of	 head	 and	 neck	 carcinomas.	 Neurology	 1999;53:213–
216.

Bowsher	 D.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia:	 an	 anatomically	 oriented	 review.	 Clin	 Anat

1997;10:409–415.

Brazis	 PW,	 Vogler	 JB,	 Shaw	 KE,	 et	 al.	 The	 “numb	 cheek-limp	 lower	 lid”

syndrome.	Neurology	1991;41:327–328.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Calverly	 JR,	 Mohnac	 AM.	 Syndrome	 of	 the	 numb	 chin.	 Arch	 Intern	 Med

1963;112:819–821.

Campbell	WW	Jr.	The	numb	cheek	syndrome:	a	sign	of	infraorbital	neuropathy.

Neurology	1986;36:421–423.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Caranci	 G,	 Mercurio	 A,	 Altieri	 M,	 et	 al.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia	 as	 the	 sole
manifestation	of	an	Arnold-Chiari	type	I	malformation:	case	report.	Headache
2008;48:625–627.

Caselli	 RJ,	 Hunder	 GG.	 Neurologic	 complications	 of	 giant	 cell	 (temporal)

arteritis.	Semin	Neurol	1994;14:349–353.

Catalano	 PJ,	 Sen	 C,	 Biller	 HF.	 Cranial	 neuropathy	 secondary	 to	 perineural

spread	of	cutaneous	malignancies.	Am	J	Otolaryngol	1995;16:772–777.

Chang	 HS.	 Cervical	 central	 cord	 syndrome	 involving	 the	 spinal	 trigeminal

nucleus:	a	case	report.	Surg	Neurol	1995;44:236–239.

Chang	 Y,	 Horoupian	 DS,	 Jordan	 J,	 et	 al.	 Localized	 hypertrophic
trigeminal	 nerve.	 Arch	 Pathol	 Lab	 Med

the	

mononeuropathy	 of	
1993;117:170–176.

Colella	 G,	 Giudice	 A,	 Siniscalchi	 G,	 et	 al.	 Chin	 numbness:	 a	 symptom	 that
should	 not	 be	 underestimated:	 a	 review	 of	 12	 cases.	 Am	 J	 Med	 Sci
2009;337:407–410.

Cruccu	G,	Leandri	M,	Feliciani	M,	et	al.	Idiopathic	and	symptomatic	trigeminal

pain.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1990;53:1034.

Cruccu	G,	Truini	A,	Priori	A.	Excitability	of	the	human	trigeminal	motoneuronal
pool	 and	 interactions	 with	 other	 brainstem	 reflex	 pathways.	 J	 Physiol
2001;531:559–571.

Cruccu	 G,	 Finnerup	 NB,	 Jensen	 TS,	 et	 al.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia:	 new
classification	 and	 diagnostic	 grading	 for	 practice	 and	 research.	 Neurology
2016;87:220–228.

Cruccu	 G,	 Bonamico	 LH,	 Zakrzewska	 JM.	 Cranial	 neuralgias.	 Handb	 Clin

Neurol	2010;97:663–678.

Currier	 RD,	 Giles	 CL,	 DeJong	 RN.	 Some	 comments	 on	 Wallenberg’s	 lateral

medullary	syndrome.	Neurology	1961;	11:778–791.

Dean	L.	ACHOO	syndrome.	In:	Pratt	V,	McLeod	H,	Dean	L,	et	al.,	eds.	Medical
Genetics	Summaries	[Internet].	Bethesda:	National	Center	for	Biotechnology
Information,	
from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK109193/.	Updated	on	July	27,	2015.
Dillingham	 TR,	 Spellman	 NT,	 Chang	 AS.	 Trigeminal	 motor	 nerve	 conduction:

Available	

2012.	

deep	temporal	and	mylohyoid	nerves.	Muscle	Nerve	1996;19:277–284.

Ertekin	 C,	 Celebisoy	 N,	 Uludag	 B.	 Trigeminocervical	 reflexes	 elicited	 by
infraorbital	 nerve:	 head	 retraction	 reflex.	 J	 Clin

stimulation	 of	

the	

Neurophysiol	2001;18:378–385.

Evans	 RW,	 Agostoni	 E.	 Persistent	

idiopathic	

facial	 pain.	 Headache

2006;46:1298–1300.

Finsterer	 J,	 Erdorf	 M,	 Mamoli	 B,	 et	 al.	 Needle	 electromyography	 of	 bulbar
muscles	in	patients	with	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis:	evidence	of	subclinical
involvement.	Neurology	1998;51:1417–1422.

Forssell	H,	Tenovuo	O,	Silvoniemi	P,	et	al.	Differences	and	similarities	between
trigeminal	 neuropathic	 pain.	 Neurology

facial	 pain	 and	

atypical	
2007;69:1451–1459.

Fromm	 GH,	 Graff-Radford	 SB,	 Terrence	 CF,	 et	 al.	 Pre-trigeminal	 neuralgia.

Neurology	1990;40:1493.

Frontera	 JA,	 Palestrant	 D.	 Acute	 trismus	 associated	 with	 Foix-Marie-Chavany

syndrome.	Neurology	2006;66:454–455.

Frucht	S.	Anterior	superior	alveolar	neuropathy:	an	occupational	neuropathy	of

the	embouchure.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2000;69:563.

Furukawa	T.	Numb	chin	syndrome	in	the	elderly.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry

1990;53:173–176.

Gass	A,	Kitchen	N,	MacManus	DG,	et	al.	Trigeminal	neuralgia	in	patients	with
multiple	 sclerosis:	 lesion	 localization	 with	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging.
Neurology	1997;49:1142–1144.

Go	 JL,	 Kim	 PE,	 Zee	 CS.	 The	 trigeminal	 nerve.	 Semin	 Ultrasound	 CT	 MR

2001;22:502–520.

Goadsby	 PJ.	 Raeder’s	 syndrome	 [corrected]:	 paratrigeminal	 paralysis	 of	 the
oculopupillary	 sympathetic	 system.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry
2002;72:297–299.

Gonella	 MC,	 Fischbein	 NJ,	 So	 YT.	 Disorders	 of	 the	 trigeminal	 system.	 Semin

Neurol	2009;29:36–44.

Gould	 R,	 Miller	 BL,	 Goldberg	 MA,	 et	 al.	 The	 validity	 of	 hysterical	 signs	 and

symptoms.	J	Nerv	Ment	Dis	1986;174:593–597.

Govsa	 F,	 Kayalioglu	 G,	 Erturk	 M,	 et	 al.	 The	 superior	 orbital	 fissure	 and	 its

contents.	Surg	Radiol	Anat	1999;21:181–185.

Graham	SH,	Sharp	FR,	Dillon	W.	Intraoral	sensation	in	patients	with	brainstem
lesions:	 role	 of	 the	 rostral	 spinal	 trigeminal	 nuclei	 in	 pons.	 Neurology
1988;38:1529–1533.

Hamlyn	 PJ,	 King	 TT.	 Neurovascular	 compression	 in	 trigeminal	 neuralgia:	 a

clinical	and	anatomical	study.	J	Neurosurg	1992;76:948.

Hargreaves	RJ,	Shepheard	SL.	Pathophysiology	of	migraine—new	insights.	Can

J	Neurol	Sci	1999;26:S12–S19.

Hummel	 T,	 Livermore	 A.	 Intranasal	 chemosensory	 function	 of	 the	 trigeminal
nerve	and	aspects	of	its	relation	to	olfaction.	Int	Arch	Occup	Environ	Health
2002;75:305–313.

Kakizawa	 Y,	 Seguchi	 T,	 Kodama	 K,	 et	 al.	 Anatomical	 study	 of	 the	 trigeminal
and	facial	cranial	nerves	with	the	aid	of	3.0-tesla	magnetic	resonance	imaging.
J	Neurosurg	2008;108:483–490.

Kalladka	 M,	 Proter	 N,	 Benoliel	 R,	 et	 al.	 Mental	 nerve	 neuropathy:	 patient
characteristics	 and	 neurosensory	 changes.	 Oral	 Surg	 Oral	 Med	 Oral	 Pathol
Oral	Radiol	Endod	2008;106:364–370.

Kamel	 HA,	 Toland	 J.	 Trigeminal	 nerve	 anatomy:	 illustrated	 using	 examples	 of

abnormalities.	AJR	Am	J	Roentgenol	2001;	176:247–251.

Katusic	 S,	 Beard	 CM,	 Bergstralh	 E,	 et	 al.	 Incidence	 and	 clinical	 features	 of
trigeminal	 neuralgia,	 Rochester,	 Minnesota,	 1945–1984.	 Ann	 Neurol
1990;27:89.

Kehrli	P,	Maillot	C,	Wolff	MJ.	Anatomy	and	embryology	of	the	trigeminal	nerve

and	its	branches	in	the	parasellar	area.	Neurol	Res	1997;19(1):57–65.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kim	 JS.	 Trigeminal	 sensory	 symptoms	 due	 to	 midbrain	 lesions.	 Eur	 Neurol

1993;33:218–220.

Kim	 JS,	 Choi-Kwon	 S.	 Sensory	 sequelae	 of	 medullary	 infarction:	 differences
between	lateral	and	medial	medullary	syndrome.	Stroke	1999;30:2697–2703.
Kim	 HJ,	 Jeon	 BS,	 Lee	 KW.	 Hemimasticatory	 spasm	 associated	 with	 localized

scleroderma	and	facial	hemiatrophy.	Arch	Neurol	2000;57:576–580.

Kim	 JS,	 Kang	 JH,	 Lee	 MC.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia	 after	 pontine	 infarction.

Neurology	1998;51:1511–1512.

Kim	 JS,	 Lee	 MC,	 Kim	 HG,	 et	 al.	 Isolated	 trigeminal	 sensory	 change	 due	 to

pontine	hemorrhage.	Clin	Neurol	Neurosurg	1994;96:168–169.

Kim	JS,	Lee	JH,	 Lee	 MC.	Patterns	of	 sensory	 dysfunction	 in	 lateral	 medullary

infarction.	Clinical-MRI	correlation.	Neurology	1997;49:1557–1563.

Kodsi	 S.	 Marcus	 Gunn	 jaw	 winking	 with	 trigemino-abducens	 synkinesis.	 J

AAPOS	2000;4:316–317.

Komisaruk	BR,	Mosier	KM,	Liu	WC,	et	al.	Functional	localization	of	brainstem
and	cervical	spinal	cord	nuclei	in	humans	with	fMRI.	AJNR	Am	J	Neuroradiol
2002;23(4):609–617.

Lance	JW.	Current	concepts	of	migraine	pathogenesis.	Neurology	1993;43:S11–

S15.

Lance	JW,	Anthony	M.	Neck-tongue	syndrome	on	sudden	turning	of	the	head.	J

Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1980;43:97–101.

Lossos	A,	Siegal	T.	Numb	chin	syndrome	in	cancer	patients:	etiology,	response

to	treatment,	and	prognostic	significance.	Neurology	1992;42:1181–1184.

Macaluso	 GM,	 De	 Laat	 A.	 H-reflexes	 in	 masseter	 and	 temporalis	 muscles	 in

man.	Exp	Brain	Res	1995;107(2):315–320.

Majoie	 CB,	 Aramideh	 M,	 Hulsmans	 FJ,	 et	 al.	 Correlation	 between
electromyographic	 reflex	 and	 MR	 imaging	 examinations	 of	 the	 trigeminal
nerve.	AJNR	Am	J	Neuroradiol	1999;20:1119–1125.

Majoie	CB,	Hulsmans	FJ,	Castelijns	JA,	et	al.	Symptoms	and	signs	related	to	the
trigeminal	nerve:	diagnostic	yield	of	MR	imaging.	Radiology	1998;209:557–
562.

Majoie	 CB,	 Verbeeten	 B	 Jr,	 Dol	 JA,	 et	 al.	 Trigeminal	 neuropathy:	 evaluation

with	MR	imaging.	Radiographics	1995;15:795–811.

Marsot-Dupuch	 K,	 De	 Givry	 SC,	 Ouayoun	 M.	 Wegener	 granulomatosis
involving	the	pterygopalatine	fossa:	an	unusual	case	of	trigeminal	neuropathy.
Am	J	Neuroradiol	2002;23:312–315.

Matsuka	 Y,	 Fort	 ET,	 Merrill	 RL.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia	 due	 to	 an	 acoustic

neuroma	in	the	cerebellopontine	angle.	J	Orofac	Pain	2000;14:147–151.

May	A,	Goadsby	PJ.	The	trigeminovascular	system	in	humans:	pathophysiologic
implications	for	primary	headache	syndromes	of	the	neural	influences	on	the
cerebral	circulation.	J	Cereb	Blood	Flow	Metab	1999;19:115–127.

Meaney	 JF,	 Watt	 JW,	 Eldridge	 PR,	 et	 al.	 Association	 between	 trigeminal
neuralgia	and	multiple	sclerosis:	role	of	magnetic	resonance	imaging.	J	Neurol
Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1995;	59:253–259.

Mellgren	SI,	 Goransson	LG,	Omdal	 R.	 Primary	Sjogren’s	 syndrome	 associated

neuropathy.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2007;34:280–287.

Merello	M,	Lees	AJ,	Leiguarda	R,	et	al.	Inverse	masticatory	muscle	activity	due

to	syringobulbia.	Mov	Disord	1993;8:359–360.

Mokri	 B.	 Raeder’s	 paratrigeminal	 syndrome.	 Original	 concept	 and	 subsequent

deviations.	Arch	Neurol	1982;39:395–399.

Murphy	 MA,	 Szabados	 EM,	 Mitty	 JA.	 Lyme	 disease	 associated	 with
postganglionic	 Horner	 syndrome	 and	 Raeder	 paratrigeminal	 neuralgia.	 J
Neuroophthalmol	2007;27:123–124.

Nakamura	K,	Yamamoto	T,	Yamashita	M.	Small	medullary	infarction	presenting

as	 painful	 trigeminal	 sensory	 neuropathy.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry
1996;61:138.

Nemzek	WR.	The	trigeminal	nerve.	Top	Magn	Reson	Imaging	1996;8:132–154.
Nurmikko	TJ.	Altered	cutaneous	sensation	in	trigeminal	neuralgia.	Arch	Neurol

1991;48:523.

Nurmikko	 T,	 Bowsher	 D.	 Somatosensory	 findings	 in	 postherpetic	 neuralgia.	 J

Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1990;53:135.

Nurmikko	TJ.	Recent	advances	in	the	diagnosis	and	management	of	trigeminal

neuralgia.	Int	J	Pain	Palliat	Care	2003;3:2–11.

Nurmikko	 TJ.	 Trigeminal	 neuralgia	 and	 other	 facial	 neuralgias.	 Handb	 Clin

Neurol	2006;81:573–596.

Ordas	 CM,	 Cuadrado	 ML,	 Simal	 P,	 et	 al.	 Wallenberg’s	 syndrome	 and

symptomatic	trigeminal	neuralgia.	J	Headache	Pain	2011;	12:377–380.

Orrell	 RW,	 Marsden	 CD.	 The	 neck-tongue	 syndrome.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg

Psychiatry	1994;57:348–352.

Osama	 SM,	 Amin	 FACP,	 Shwani	 SS.	 Exaggerated	 Jaw	 Jerk.	 Available	 from
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctFvOasAKo0.	 Accessed	 on	 February	 10,
2018.

Papanastassiou	AM,	Schwartz	RB,	Friedlander	RM.	Chiari	I	malformation	as	a
cause	of	trigeminal	neuralgia:	case	report.	Neurosurgery	2008;63:E614–E615.
Pavesi	 G,	 Macaluso	 GM,	 Marchetti	 P,	 et	 al.	 Trigemino-facial	 reflex	 inhibitory

responses	in	some	lower	facial	muscles.	Muscle	Nerve	2000;23:939–945.

Reske-Nielsen	 E,	 Oster	 S,	 Pedersen	 B.	 Herpes	 zoster	 ophthalmicus	 and	 the
Immunol	 Scand	 A

mesencephalic	 nucleus.	 Acta	 Pathol	 Microbiol	
1986;94:263.

Rorick	 MB,	 Chandar	 K,	 Colombi	 BJ.	 Inflammatory	 trigeminal	 sensory
neuropathy	mimicking	trigeminal	neurinoma.	Neurology	1996;46:1455–1457.
Seidel	 E,	 Hansen	 C,	 Urban	 PP,	 et	 al.	 Idiopathic	 trigeminal	 sensory	 neuropathy
the	 cisternal	 segment.	 Neurology
in	

with	 gadolinium	 enhancement	
2000;54:1191–1192.

Shankland	 WE	 II.	 The	 trigeminal	 nerve.	 Part	 I:	 an	 overview.	 Cranio

2000;18(4):238–248.

Shoja	 MM,	 Tubbs	 RS,	 Ghabili	 K,	 et	 al.	 Johan	 Georg	 Raeder	 (1889-1959)	 and

paratrigeminal	sympathetic	paresis.	Childs	Nerv	Syst	2010;26:373–376.

Singer	 PA,	 Chikarmane	 A,	 Festoff	 BW,	 et	 al.	 Trismus.	 An	 unusual	 sign	 in

polymyositis.	Arch	Neurol	1985;42:1116–1118.

Soeira	 G,	 Abd	 el-Bary	 TH,	 Dujovny	 M,	 et	 al.	 Microsurgical	 anatomy	 of	 the

trigeminal	nerve.	Neurol	Res	1994;16(4):273–283.

Solomon	S.	Raeder	syndrome.	Arch	Neurol	2001;58:661–662.
Sumner	 CJ,	 Fischbeck	 KH.	 Jaw	 drop	 in	 Kennedy’s	 disease.	 Neurology

2002;59:1471–1472.

Szewka	AJ,	Purdy	H,	Topel	J,	et	al.	Teaching	neuroimages:	numb	chin	syndrome

in	an	edentulous	patient.	Neurology	2011;77:e38.

ten	Hove	MW,	Glaser	JS,	Schatz	NJ.	Occult	perineural	tumor	infiltration	of	the
trigeminal	nerve.	Diagnostic	considerations.	J	Neuroophthalmol	1997;17:170–
177.

Warden	 KF,	 Parmar	 H,	 Trobe	 JD.	 Perineural	 spread	 of	 cancer	 along	 the	 three

trigeminal	divisions.	J	Neuroophthalmol	2009;29:300–307.

Watt-Smith	 S,	 Mehta	 K,	 Scully	 C.	 Mefloquine-induced	 trigeminal	 sensory
neuropathy.	 Oral	 Surg	 Oral	 Med	 Oral	 Pathol	 Oral	 Radiol	 Endod
2001;92:163–165.

Wilson-Pauwels	L,	Stewart	PA,	Akesson	EJ,	et	al.	Cranial	Nerves:	Function	and

Dysfunction.	3rd	ed.	Shelton:	People’s	Medical	Publishing	House,	2010.

Woolfall	 P,	 Coulthard	 A.	 Pictorial	 review:	 trigeminal	 nerve:	 anatomy	 and

pathology.	Br	J	Radiol	2001;74:458–467.

CHAPTER	16

The	Facial	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	 facial,	 or	 seventh,	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN	 VII)	 is	 a	 predominantly	 motor	 nerve
that	innervates	the	muscles	of	facial	expression	and	the	muscles	of	the	scalp	and
ear,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 buccinator,	 platysma,	 stapedius,	 stylohyoid,	 and	 posterior
belly	 of	 the	 digastric.	 In	 addition,	 it	 carries	 parasympathetic	 secretory	 fibers	 to
the	submandibular	and	sublingual	salivary	glands,	the	lacrimal	gland,	and	to	the
mucous	membranes	of	the	oral	and	nasal	cavities.	It	has	some	sensory	functions;
the	most	important	is	to	mediate	taste	from	the	anterior	two-thirds	of	the	tongue.
It	also	conveys	exteroceptive	sensation	from	the	eardrum	and	external	auditory
canal,	proprioceptive	sensation	from	the	muscles	it	supplies,	and	general	visceral
sensation	 from	 the	 salivary	 glands	 and	 mucosa	 of	 the	 nose	 and	 pharynx.
Anatomically,	the	motor	division	of	the	nerve	is	separate	from	the	sensory	and
parasympathetic	 portions.	 In	 its	 course	 from	 its	 exit	 from	 the	 pons	 until	 its
terminal	arborizations,	several	important	branches	are	given	off	in	the	following
order:	the	greater	(superficial)	petrosal	nerve,	the	nerve	to	the	stapedius,	and	the
chorda	tympani.

The	 nerve	 may	 be	 understood	 as	 a	 series	 of	 segments:	 a	 brainstem	 or
intramedullary	segment	(from	the	brainstem	nuclei	to	the	exit	point),	a	segment
from	 the	 exit	 point	 to	 the	 entrance	 into	 the	 internal	 auditory	 canal	 (IAC)	 or
cisternal	 segment,	 a	 meatal	 or	 canal	 segment	 (course	 through	 the	 IAC)	 to	 the
entrance	to	the	facial	canal,	a	labyrinthine	segment	(from	there	to	the	geniculate
ganglion),	 a	 short	 horizontal	 segment	 (from	 the	 geniculate	 ganglion	 to	 the
pyramidal	 eminence	 of	 the	 posterior	 wall	 of	 the	 tympanic	 cavity),	 a	 mastoid
segment	 (from	 the	 pyramidal	 eminence	 to	 the	 stylomastoid	 foramen),	 and	 an
extratemporal	or	peripheral	segment	(from	the	stylomastoid	foramen	to	the	pes
anserinus).	 These	 segments	 are	 discussed	 in	 more	 detail	 below.	 The	 associated

findings	in	CN	VII	palsy	often	allow	identification	of	the	involved	segment.

The	Motor	Portion

The	supranuclear	innervation	to	the	muscles	of	facial	expression	arises	from	the
lower	 third	 of	 the	 contralateral	 precentral	 gyrus	 in	 the	 facial	 area	 of	 the	 motor
homunculus.	Fibers	descend	in	the	corticobulbar	tract	through	the	corona	radiata,
genu	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule,	 medial	 portion	 of	 the	 cerebral	 peduncles	 and	 into
the	pons,	and	then	decussate	to	converge	on	the	facial	nuclei.	The	portion	of	the
nucleus	that	innervates	the	lower	half	to	two-thirds	of	the	face	has	predominantly
contralateral	supranuclear	control;	the	portion	that	innervates	the	upper	third	to
half	has	bilateral	control.	The	muscles	of	the	lower	face	may	also	receive	more
abundant	 cortical	 innervation	 than	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 upper	 face	 and	 forehead.
This	 scheme	 applies	 to	 voluntary	 facial	 movements.	 Unconscious,	 emotional,
involuntary	 supranuclear	 control	 follows	 a	 different	 pathway.	 Patients	 with
lesions	 in	 certain	 parts	 of	 the	 nervous	 system	 may	 have	 different	 degrees	 of
involvement	of	the	voluntary	and	involuntary	systems	(see	below).

Studies	in	humans	and	nonhuman	primates	show	distributed	motor	control	of
facial	expression	with	at	least	five	cortical	regions	involved:	the	primary	motor
cortex,	the	ventral	lateral	premotor	cortex,	the	supplementary	motor	area,	and	the
cingulate	cortex.	Recent	investigations	confirm	the	long	established	paradigm	of
bilateral	control	of	the	upper	face	and	mainly	contralateral	control	of	the	lower
face.	 The	 primary	 motor	 cortex,	 the	 ventral	 lateral	 premotor	 cortex,	 and	 the
supplementary	 motor	 area	 are	 essential	 for	 voluntary	 control	 of	 facial
expressions.	The	cingulate	cortical	areas	receive	input	from	different	structures
of	the	limbic	system	and	are	important	for	emotional	facial	expression.

Although	most	corticobulbar	fibers	to	the	facial	nuclei	decussate	in	or	rostral
to	 the	 pons,	 some	 descend	 in	 the	 aberrant	 pyramidal	 tract	 to	 medullary	 levels,
decussate	 there,	 and	 ascend	 contralaterally	 in	 the	 dorsolateral	 medulla	 to	 reach
the	facial	nucleus.	The	aberrant	pyramidal	tract	is	a	normal	descending	fiber	tract
that	 leaves	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 in	 the	 crus	 cerebri	 and	 travels	 in	 the	 medial
lemniscus	 to	 the	 upper	 medulla.	 Involvement	 of	 the	 aberrant	 pyramidal	 tract
explains	 the	 occurrence	 of	 ipsilateral	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 facial	 palsy	 in	 the
lateral	medullary	syndrome.

A	 study	 using	

the
transcranial	 magnetic	 stimulation	
corticofacial	projections	found	that	in	the	majority	of	patients,	the	corticofacial
fibers	 traveled	 in	 the	 base	 of	 the	 pons	 and	 crossed	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 facial

investigate	

to	

nucleus.	 But	 in	 some	 individuals,	 corticofacial	 fibers	 formed	 an	 “aberrant
bundle”	 in	 a	 paralemniscal	 position	 at	 the	 dorsal	 edge	 of	 the	 pontine	 base.	 In
other	 patients,	 the	 corticofacial	 fibers	 looped	 down	 into	 the	 ventral	 upper
medulla,	crossed	the	midline,	and	ascended	in	the	dorsolateral	medullary	region
ipsilateral	to	the	facial	nucleus.	The	findings	suggest	that	facial	paresis	because
of	a	brainstem	lesion	may	present	as	contralateral	supranuclear	facial	paresis	by
a	 lesion	 of	 the	 cerebral	 peduncle,	 pontine	 base,	 the	 aberrant	 bundle,	 and	 the
ventral	 medulla.	 Supranuclear	 facial	 paresis	 ipsilateral	 to	 the	 lesion	 side	 may
result	from	a	lesion	in	the	lateral	medulla,	and	facial	paresis	of	the	supranuclear
type	may	be	imitated	by	a	lesion	of	the	peripheral	facial	nerve	in	the	dorsolateral
medulla	 with	 involvement	 of	 the	 lower	 pons.	 The	 facial	 nuclei	 also	 receive
bilateral	 extrapyramidal,	 basal	 ganglia,	 and	 hypothalamic	 innervations	 that	 are
concerned	 with	 maintaining	 facial	 muscle	 tone	 and	 with	 automatic	 and
emotional	movements.

The	facial	nucleus	is	special	visceral	efferent,	or	branchiomotor;	it	innervates
the	 muscles	 of	 the	 second	 branchial	 arch.	 It	 lies	 deep	 in	 the	 tegmentum	 of	 the
caudal	 pons,	 anteromedial	 to	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 spinal	 tract	 of	 CN	 V,
anterolateral	 to	 the	 nucleus	 of	 CN	 VI,	 and	 posterior	 to	 the	 superior	 olivary
nucleus	 (Figures	 11.6	 and	 14.8).	 The	 facial	 motor	 nucleus	 has	 lateral,	 medial,
and	dorsal	subnuclei,	arranged	in	columns.	The	subnuclear	innervation	pattern	is
not	as	well	worked	out	as	for	the	oculomotor	nucleus,	but	the	lateral	subnucleus
is	 thought	 to	 innervate	 the	 lower	 facial	 muscles	 and	 buccinators;	 the	 medial
subnucleus	the	posterior	auricular,	platysma,	and	occipital	muscles,	and	probably
the	 stapedius;	 and	 the	 dorsal	 subnucleus	 the	 upper	 facial	 muscles	 via	 the
temporal,	orbital,	and	zygomatic	branches.	Other	schemes	of	organization	have
been	postulated.

Axons	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve	 arise	 from	 the	 dorsal	 surface	 of	 the	 nucleus	 and
travel	 dorsomedially,	 moving	 up	 and	 around	 to	 encircle	 the	 abducens	 nucleus
and	forming	the	internal	genu	of	the	facial	nerve.	The	internal	loop	of	CN	VII
fibers	 around	 the	 CN	 VI	 nucleus	 forms	 the	 facial	 colliculus,	 a	 bump	 in	 the
rhomboid	 fossa	 in	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle,	 a	 prominent	 landmark	 for
surgeons	working	in	the	area	(Figure	11.4).	The	facial	nucleus	is	in	a	somewhat
aberrant	 position	 more	 anterolaterally	 than	 expected,	 even	 considering	 its
branchial	 arch	 relationships.	 In	 embryonic	 life,	 the	 nucleus	 is	 more	 dorsal	 and
medial,	near	the	CN	VI	nucleus,	but	with	maturation	moves	to	its	adult	position
trailing	its	axons	behind.	In	their	course,	the	facial	nerve	axons	run	in	proximity
to	the	nucleus	and	fibers	of	CN	VI,	the	pontine	paramedian	reticular	formation,

CN	 V,	 and	 CN	 VIII	 as	 well	 as	 the	 descending	 and	 ascending	 long	 tracts	 that
course	through	the	pons.

The	facial	nerve	has	two	components,	the	motor	root,	which	makes	up	about
70%	 of	 the	 fibers,	 and	 the	 sensory	 root,	 which	 accounts	 for	 30%.	 The	 sensory
root	forms	the	nervus	intermedius	(NI)	and	contains	both	sensory	and	autonomic
fibers.	 The	 autonomic	 fibers	 run	 near	 the	 incoming	 sensory	 fibers	 through	 the
pons.	 The	
thus	 consist	 of	 exiting
branchiomotor	and	parasympathetic	fibers,	and	incoming	sensory	fibers	(Figure
16.1).

intrapontine	 filaments	 of	 CN	 VII	

CN	VII	exits	the	pons	laterally	at	the	pontomedullary	junction,	just	caudal	to
the	roots	of	CN	V	between	the	olive	and	the	inferior	cerebellar	peduncle	(Figure
11.3).	 The	 NI	 is	 a	 small	 bundle	 that	 usually	 leaves	 the	 pons	 closer	 to	 CN	 VIII
than	 CN	 VII	 and	 runs	 between	 the	 larger	 trunks	 across	 the	 cerebellopontine
angle	(CPA).	In	about	20%	of	specimens,	the	NI	is	not	identifiable	as	a	separate
structure	in	the	CPA.	At	the	entrance	to	the	IAC,	the	facial	nerve	motor	root	lies
in	a	groove	on	the	anterosuperior	surface	of	the	vestibulocochlear	nerve,	with	the
NI	in	between.	In	this	segment,	CN	VII	is	a	paler	white	color	than	CN	VIII.	The
facial	nerve	at	this	point	lies	in	close	proximity	to	the	anterior	inferior	cerebellar
artery	(AICA).	In	some	individuals,	the	AICA	loops	down	into	the	IAC.	As	with
the	vaginal	sheaths	of	the	optic	nerve,	the	subarachnoid	space	extends	along	the
facial	nerve	to	the	geniculate	ganglion.

At	the	bottom	or	lateral	end	of	the	IAC,	the	nerve	pierces	the	meninges	and
enters	the	facial	canal,	or	fallopian	aqueduct.	The	point	of	entry	is	the	narrowest
portion	of	the	canal.	The	facial	nerve	and	the	NI	merge	as	the	nerve	enters	the
canal.	In	traversing	the	facial	canal,	the	nerve	makes	two	abrupt,	tortuous	turns,
creating	 two	 external	 genus.	 In	 its	 course	 through	 the	 petrous	 bone,	 from	 its
entrance	 into	 the	 facial	 canal	 until	 its	 exit	 from	 the	 stylomastoid	 foramen,	 the
nerve	 has	 three	 segments:	 labyrinthine,	 horizontal	 or	 tympanic,	 and	 mastoid	 or
vertical.	 The	 labyrinthine	 segment	 lies	 laterally	 between	 the	 cochlea	 and
running
vestibule,	
perpendicularly	 to	 the	 long	 axis	 of	 the	 petrous	 pyramid.	 The	 labyrinthine
segment	ends	at	the	first	external	genu	where	the	geniculate	ganglion	lies.	At	this
point,	 the	 nerve	 turns	 abruptly	 and	 runs	 horizontally	 for	 about	 1	 cm	 (the
horizontal	 or	 tympanic	 segment),	 then	 turns	 backward	 and	 arches	 downward
behind	 the	 tympanic	 cavity	 (mastoid	 or	 vertical)	 segment.	 The	 branch	 to	 the
stapedius	 muscle	 arises	 from	 the	 distal	 tympanic	 or	 upper	 end	 of	 the	 mastoid
segment.	At	the	end	of	the	tympanic	segment,	the	nerve	encounters	the	second

the	 medial	 wall	 of	

tympanic	 cavity,	

toward	

the	

external	 genu	 as	 it	 makes	 a	 90-degree	 turn	 to	 enter	 the	 mastoid	 segment.	 The
mastoid	segment	then	descends	toward	the	stylomastoid	foramen,	gives	 off	the
chorda	tympani	about	6	mm	before	its	exit,	and	emerges	from	the	stylomastoid
foramen.	The	tight	confines	of	the	bony	canal	may	make	the	nerve	particularly
vulnerable	 to	 damage	 from	 inflammation	 and	 edema,	 a	 point	 of	 possible
significance	 in	 some	 CN	 VII	 neuropathies	 (see	 below).	 In	 patients	 with	 Bell’s
palsy,	 the	 involved	 side	 usually	 correlates	 with	 the	 side	 of	 the	 narrower	 facial
canal	 as	 determined	 by	 high-resolution	 computed	 tomography	 (CT).	 CN	 VII
runs	 along	 with	 the	 labyrinthine	 branch	 of	 the	 AICA,	 but	 there	 is	 evidence	 to
suggest	that	it	is	less	well	vascularized	in	its	intrapetrous	segment,	particularly	in
the	 labyrinthine	 segment,	 than	 elsewhere	 along	 its	 course.	 This	 may	 also	 have
relevance	to	the	pathologic	changes	in	Bell’s	palsy.

FIGURE	16.1	Components	of	the	facial	nerve	in	the	pons.	(Modified	from	Kiernan	JA.
Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 9th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:
Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott,	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009,	with	permission.)

There	may	be	anatomical	variations	in	the	nerve’s	course	through	the	petrous
bone.	It	may	split	into	two	or	three	strands	at	or	distal	to	the	geniculate	ganglion.
The	 more	 proximal	 the	 division	 into	 strands,	 the	 more	 bizarre	 the	 subsequent
course.	Facial	motor	fibers	may	run	in	an	enlarged	chorda	tympani,	diminishing
the	 distal	 facial	 nerve	 into	 a	 tenuous	 strand	 exiting	 through	 a	 narrowed
stylomastoid	foramen.

Just	after	exit,	the	posterior	auricular,	digastric,	and	stylohyoid	branches	arise.
The	 posterior	 auricular	 branch	 supplies	 the	 occipitalis,	 posterior	 auricular,	 and
transverse	and	oblique	auricular	muscles.	The	digastric	and	stylohyoid	branches
supply,	respectively,	the	posterior	belly	of	the	digastric	and	the	stylohyoid.	The
nerve	 turns	 forward	 and	 passes	 into	 the	 parotid	 gland.	 Within	 the	 substance	 of
the	 parotid,	 it	 divides	 into	 temporofacial	 and	 cervicofacial	 divisions	 at	 the	 pes
anserinus	(intraparotid	plexus)	in	the	cleft	between	the	superficial	and	deep	lobes
of	the	gland	(Figure	16.2).	The	temporofacial	branch	crosses	the	zygoma	about	1
cm	anterior	to	the	ear,	where	it	is	vulnerable	to	injury.

FIGURE	16.2	Branches	and	distribution	of	the	facial	nerve.

The	facial	nerve	supplies	all	the	muscles	of	facial	expression	from	the	scalp
and	forehead	through	the	platysma,	including	the	extrinsic	and	intrinsic	muscles
of	the	ear.	The	muscles	of	facial	expression	are	responsible	for	all	voluntary	and
involuntary	 movements	 of	 the	 face	 except	 those	 associated	 with	 movement	 of
the	jaws	and	for	all	play	of	emotions	upon	the	face.	The	muscles	innervated	by
the	terminal	branches	are	summarized	in	Table	16.1.

The	Nervus	Intermedius

The	NI	is	the	sensory	and	autonomic	component	of	the	facial	nerve.	It	runs	in	a
position	 intermediate	 between	 CNs	 VII	 and	 VIII	 across	 the	 CPA,	 moving	 ever
closer	to	the	main	facial	nerve	trunk	as	it	enters	the	facial	canal.	At	the	external
first	external	genu,	the	NI	fuses	with	the	geniculate	ganglion.	The	sensory	cells
located	in	the	geniculate	ganglion	are	general	somatic	afferent	(GSA)	and	special
visceral	 afferent	 (SVA).	 The	 GSA	 fibers	 carry	 exteroceptive	 impulses	 from	 the
region	 of	 the	 external	 auditory	 canal	 and	 tympanic	 membrane.	 The	 SVA	 fibers
convey	 taste	 from	 the	 anterior	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 tongue.	 The	 autonomic
component	 of	 the	 NI	 consists	 of	 preganglionic	 general	 visceral	 efferent
parasympathetic	 fibers	 from	 the	 superior	 salivatory	 and	 lacrimal	 nuclei,	 which
consist	 of	 scattered	 cells	 in	 the	 reticular	 formation	 near	 the	 caudal	 end	 of	 the
motor	 nucleus.	 Their	 axons	 are	 bound	 for	 the	 submandibular	 gland	 en	 route	 to
the	 sublingual	 and	 submaxillary	 glands,	 the	 lacrimal	 glands,	 and	 glands	 in	 the
nasal	mucosa.

TABLE	16.1 Muscles	of	the	Face,	Their	Actions,	and	Innervations

Nerve
Branch

Muscle
Innervated

Muscle	Action

Temporal
branch

Frontalis

Raises	eyebrows	and	skin	over	the	root
of	the	nose;	draws	scalp	forward,
throwing	forehead	into	transverse
wrinkles

Corrugator

(corrugator
supercilii)

Draws	eyebrow	down	and	medially,
produces	vertical	wrinkles	in	the
forehead	(the	frowning	muscle)

Upper	part	of

Eyelid	sphincter;	palpebral	portion

the
orbicularis
oculi
(orbicularis
palpebrarum)

narrows	palpebral	fissure	and	gently
closes	eyelids;	orbital	portion	draws
skin	of	forehead,	temple,	and	cheek
toward	medial	orbit,	pulls	eyebrow
down,	draws	skin	of	cheek	up;	closes
eye	firmly

Occipitalis

Draws	scalp	backward

Procerus

Draws	medial	eyebrow	downward,

(pyramidalis
nasi)

produces	transverse	wrinkles	over
bridge	of	nose

Zygomatic

Buccal

Lower	and
lateral
orbicularis
oculi

Orbicularis
oculi

Eyelid	sphincter

Eyelid	sphincter

Buccinator

Compresses	cheeks,	keeps	food	under

pressure	of	cheeks	in	chewing

Zygomaticus

Draws	mouth	backward	and	upward

Nasalis

Depresses	cartilaginous	portion	of	nose,

(compressor
nares)

draws	the	ala	toward	septum

Levator	anguli

Raises	angle	of	mouth

oris
(caninus)

Levator	labii
superioris
(quadratus
labii
superioris)

Elevates	upper	lip,	dilates	nostril

Mandibular Lower	part	of

Sphincter	of	the	mouth;	closes	lips;

the
orbicularis
oris

superficial	fibers	protrude	lips;	deep
fibers	draw	lips	in	and	press	them
against	teeth

Mentalis

Protrudes	lower	lip,	wrinkles	skin	of	chin

Risorius

Retracts	angle	of	mouth

Triangularis

Depresses	angle	of	mouth

(depressor
anguli	oris)

Depressor	labii
inferioris
(quadratus
labii
inferioris)

Draws	lower	lip	downward	and

lateralward

Cervical

Platysma

Pulls	lower	lip	and	angle	of	mouth	down;

depresses	lower	jaw;	raises	and
wrinkles	skin	of	neck

Course	and	Branches	of	the	Facial	Nerve

The	first	branch	given	off	in	the	facial	nerve’s	course	is	the	greater	(superficial)
petrosal	nerve,	which	carries	preganglionic	parasympathetic	fibers	(Figure	16.3).
These	 fibers	 are	 conveyed	 by	 the	 NI	 to	 the	 geniculate	 ganglion.	 They	 pass
through	 the	 ganglion	 without	 synapsing	 into	 the	 greater	 petrosal	 nerve,	 which
goes	forward	through	the	hiatus	of	the	facial	canal	to	join	the	deep	petrosal	nerve
from	the	carotid	sympathetic	plexus	to	form	the	vidian	nerve,	or	the	nerve	of	the
pterygoid	 canal,	 which	 runs	 to	 the	 sphenopalatine	 ganglion,	 from	 where
postganglionic	fibers	proceed	to	the	lacrimal	gland.

Distal	 to	 the	 geniculate	 ganglion,	 the	 facial	 nerve	 continues	 to	 descend.	 As
above,	 the	 nerve	 to	 the	 stapedius	 arises	 from	 the	 distal	 tympanic	 or	 upper
mastoid	segment	and	passes	forward	through	a	small	canal	to	reach	the	muscle.
Although	there	is	some	variability,	the	chorda	tympani	usually	leaves	the	main
trunk	 slightly	 above	 the	 stylomastoid	 foramen;	 it	 carries	 taste	 and	 general
visceral	afferent	(GVA)	fibers	as	well	as	preganglionic	parasympathetics.	It	runs
forward	 and	 upward	 in	 a	 minute	 canal	 in	 the	 posterior	 wall	 of	 the	 tympanic
cavity,	acquires	a	mucous	membrane	investment,	and	then	enters	and	crosses	the
middle	 ear.	 It	 is	 sometimes	 visible	 as	 a	 small	 white	 cord	 behind	 the	 tympanic
membrane	 on	 otoscopic	 examination.	 The	 chorda	 tympani	 runs	 downward	 and
forward	to	exit	the	skull	and	join	the	lingual	nerve,	a	branch	of	the	mandibular
division	of	CN	V,	on	its	posterior	border.

Fibers	carrying	somatosensory	afferents	in	the	chorda	tympani	have	their	cell

bodies	in	the	geniculate	ganglion.	The	peripheral	processes	innervate	part	of	the
external	auditory	canal,	the	tympanic	membrane,	lateral	surface	of	the	pinna,	and
a	 small	 area	 behind	 the	 ear	 and	 over	 the	 mastoid	 process.	 There	 is	 a	 marked
individual	variation	in	this	distribution.	Their	central	processes	terminate	in	the
spinal	 tract	 and	 nucleus	 of	 the	 trigeminal,	 and	 the	 central	 connections	 are
identical	with	those	of	the	trigeminal	nerve.	CN	VII	may	also	subserve	deep	pain
and	deep	pressure	from	the	face.

FIGURE	16.3	Course	and	branches	of	the	facial	nerve.

Taste	sensation	from	the	anterior	two-thirds	of	the	tongue	is	carried	through
the	lingual	nerve	to	the	chorda	tympani,	then	to	the	geniculate	ganglion.	CN	VII
may	 also	 carry	 taste	 sensation	 from	 the	 mucosa	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 through	 the
sphenopalatine	 ganglion.	 Central	 processes	 carrying	 taste	 and	 GVA	 sensation

terminate	 in	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 solitary	 tract.	 The	 solitary	 tract	 sends
communications	 to	 the	 superior	 and	 inferior	 salivatory	 nuclei,	 which	 send
parasympathetics	 to	 the	 salivary	 glands.	 Other	 fibers	 synapse	 in	 the	 reticular
formation;	 next	 order	 neurons	 form	 a	 component	 of	 the	 reticulospinal	 tract
bilaterally	 to	 synapse	 with	 sympathetic	 neurons	 in	 the	 intermediolateral	 gray
column	 of	 the	 upper	 thoracic	 spinal	 cord.	 These	 send	 sympathetic	 innervation
via	the	superior	cervical	ganglion	to	the	salivary	glands.	Fibers	subserving	taste
sensation	 ascend	 with	 the	 contralateral	 medial	 lemniscus	 to	 the	 thalamus.	 The
primary	 gustatory	 cortex,	 located	 in	 the	 anterior	 insula	 and	 the	 frontal
operculum,	mediates	the	perception	of	taste.	Taste	fibers	also	communicate	with
the	hypothalamus	and	the	olfactory	system.

The	chorda	tympani	also	carries	preganglionic	parasympathetic	 fibers	to	the
submandibular	ganglion.	Postganglionic	fibers	convey	secretory	and	vasodilator
impulses	 to	 the	 submandibular	 and	 sublingual	 salivary	 glands	 and	 mucous
membranes	 of	 the	 mouth	 and	 tongue	 (Figure	 16.3).	 These	 glands	 also	 receive
sympathetic	 innervation	 through	 the	 superior	 cervical	 ganglion	 and	 the	 carotid
plexus.	 The	 parasympathetic	 fibers	 cause	 vasodilation	 and	 a	 copious,	 thin,
watery	secretion	high	in	enzymes;	the	sympathetic	fibers	cause	vasoconstriction
and	a	scant,	thick,	mucoid	secretion	low	in	enzyme	content.

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION

Examination	of	the	Motor	Functions

Examination	of	facial	nerve	motor	functions	centers	on	assessment	of	the	actions
of	 the	 muscles	 of	 facial	 expression.	 A	 great	 deal	 can	 be	 learned	 from	 simple
inspection.	At	rest	the	face	is	generally	symmetric,	at	least	in	young	individuals.
With	aging,	the	development	of	character	lines	may	cause	asymmetry	that	does
not	 indicate	 disease.	 Distinguishing	 minor,	 clinically	 insignificant,	 facial
asymmetry	from	subtle	facial	weakness	is	sometimes	challenging.	Note	the	tone
of	the	muscles	of	facial	expression,	and	look	for	atrophy	and	fasciculations.	Note
the	 resting	 position	 of	 the	 face	 and	 whether	 there	 are	 any	 abnormal	 muscle
contractions.	 Note	 the	 pattern	 of	 spontaneous	 blinking	 for	 frequency	 and
symmetry.	 A	 patient	 with	 parkinsonism	 may	 have	 infrequent	 blinking	 and	 an
immobile,	 expressionless,	 “masked”	 face.	 Facial	 dystonia	 causes	 an	 abnormal
fixed	 contraction	 of	 a	 part	 of	 the	 face,	 often	 imparting	 a	 curious	 facial

expression.	 The	 procerus	 sign	 is	 seen	 most	 characteristically	 in	 progressive
supranuclear	palsy	(PSP)	and	corticobasal	degeneration.	There	is	contraction	of
the	forehead	muscles,	 particularly	the	procerus	and	corrugator,	with	knitting	of
the	 brows,	 raised	 eyebrows,	 lid	 retraction,	 widening	 of	 the	 palpebral	 fissures,
and	 reduced	 blinking.	 The	 expression	 is	 one	 of	 surprise,	 astonishment,
perplexity,	 or	 consternation	 (Figure	 16.4).	 Synkinesis	 causes	 abnormal
contractions	 of	 the	 face,	 often	 subtle,	 synchronous	 with	 blinking	 or	 mouth
movements.	 Synkinesis	 suggests	 remote	 facial	 nerve	 palsy	 with	 aberrant
regeneration	(Video	16.1).	Spontaneous	contraction	of	the	face	may	be	due	to
hemifacial	 spasm	 (HFS)	 (see	 below).	 Other	 types	 of	 abnormal	 involuntary
movements	 that	 may	 affect	 the	 facial	 muscles	 include	 tremors,	 tics,	 myoclonic
jerks,	chorea,	and	athetosis	(see	below).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	16.1	Facial	synkinesis	following	Bell’s	palsy	and	after	attempted	surgical
reanimation.

FIGURE	16.4	Procerus	sign	in	a	patient	with	progressive	supranuclear	palsy.

Observe	the	nasolabial	folds	for	depth	and	symmetry	and	note	whether	there
is	any	asymmetry	in	forehead	wrinkling	or	in	the	width	of	the	palpebral	fissures
with	 the	 face	 at	 rest.	 A	 flattened	 nasolabial	 fold	 with	 symmetric	 forehead
wrinkles	 suggests	 a	 central	 (upper	 motor	 neuron)	 facial	 palsy;	 a	 flattened
nasolabial	 fold	 with	 smoothing	 of	 the	 forehead	 wrinkles	 on	 the	 same	 side
suggests	 a	 peripheral	 (lower	 motor	 neuron)	 facial	 nerve	 palsy.	 Eyelid	 position
and	the	width	of	the	palpebral	fissures	often	provide	subtle	but	important	clinical
clues.	Eyelid	position	is	discussed	further	in	Chapter	14.	A	unilaterally	widened
palpebral	 fissure	 suggests	 a	 facial	 nerve	 lesion	 causing	 loss	 of	 tone	 in	 the

orbicularis	 oculi	 muscle,	 the	 eye	 closing	 sphincter;	 this	 is	 sometimes	 confused
with	ptosis	of	the	opposite	eye.	It	is	a	common	misconception	that	facial	nerve
palsy	causes	ptosis.

Some	diseases	cause	a	characteristic	abnormality	of	facial	expression	that	can
sometimes	 be	 recognized	 at	 a	 glance,	 either	 because	 of	 facial	 immobility	 or
some	 peculiar	 facial	 expression.	 Examples	 of	 primarily	 neurologic	 conditions
include	parkinsonism	and	related	extrapyramidal	disorders	(masked	facies),	PSP
(facial	dystonia,	procerus	sign),	Möbius’	syndrome,	myotonic	dystrophy	(hatchet
face,	 myopathic	 face,	 Figure	 16.5),	 facioscapulohumeral	 muscular	 dystrophy
(myopathic	 face,	
transverse	 smile),	 general	 paresis	 (facies	 paralytica),
myasthenia	gravis	(myasthenic	snarl,	see	below),	facial	nerve	palsy	(unilateral	or
bilateral),	 and	 Wilson’s	 disease	 (risus	 sardonicus,	 Chapter	 30).	 There	 are	 of
course	 numerous	 congenital	 syndromes	 that	 cause	 distinctively	 dysmorphic
facies.

Observe	 the	 movements	 during	 spontaneous	 facial	 expression	 as	 the	 patient
talks,	 smiles,	 or	 frowns.	 Certain	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 facial	 palsies	 are	 more
apparent	during	spontaneous	smiling	than	when	the	patient	is	asked	to	smile	or
show	 the	 teeth.	 In	 infants,	 facial	 movements	 are	 observed	 during	 crying.	 Have
the	patient	grin,	vigorously	drawing	back	the	angles	of	the	mouth	and	baring	the
teeth.	 Note	 the	 symmetry	 of	 the	 expression,	 how	 many	 teeth	 are	 seen	 on	 each
side	and	the	relative	amplitude	and	velocity	of	the	lower	facial	contraction.	Have
the	 patient	 close	 her	 eyes	 tightly	 and	 note	 the	 symmetry	 of	 the	 upper	 facial
contraction.	How	completely	the	patient	buries	the	eyelashes	on	the	two	sides	is
a	sensitive	indicator	of	orbicularis	oculi	strength.

FIGURE	 16.5	 Myopathic	 facies	 in	 a	 newly	 diagnosed	 young	 mother	 with	 myotonic
dystrophy,	holding	her	hypotonic	infant,	who	has	the	congenital	form.	The	mother	has
bilateral	ptosis,	hollowed	temporalis,	and	a	slack	lower	face.	The	infant	has	ptosis	and
the	 classic	 “tented	 upper	 lip.”	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in
Neurology:	A	Compendium.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2016,	with	permission.)

Other	useful	movements	include	having	the	patient	raise	the	eyebrows,	singly
or	 in	 unison,	 and	 noting	 the	 excursion	 of	 the	 brow	 and	 the	 degree	 of	 forehead
wrinkling;	close	each	eye	in	turn;	corrugate	the	brow;	puff	out	the	cheeks;	frown;
pucker;	whistle;	alternately	smile	and	pucker;	contract	the	chin	muscles;	and	pull
the	corners	of	the	mouth	down	in	an	exaggerated	frown	to	activate	the	platysma.
There	is	no	good	command	for	platysma	contraction,	and	the	movement	must	be
demonstrated.	The	platysma	can	also	be	activated	by	having	the	patient	open	the
mouth	 against	 resistance	 or	 clinch	
teeth.	 The	 patient	 may	 smile
spontaneously	after	attempting	to	whistle,	or	the	examiner	may	make	an	amusing
comment	to	assess	emotional	facial	movement.	Because	of	their	paucity	of	facial
expression,	patients	with	Parkinson’s	disease	may	fail	to	smile	after	being	asked
to	whistle:	the	whistle-smile	(Hanes)	sign.

the	

Trying	to	gently	push	down	the	uplifted	eyebrow	may	detect	mild	weakness.
It	 is	 difficult	 to	 pry	 open	 the	 tightly	 shut	 orbicularis	 oculi	 in	 the	 absence	 of
weakness.	 Vigorously	 pulling	 with	 the	 thumbs	 may	 sometimes	 crack	 open	 a
normal	eye.	If	the	examiner	can	force	the	eye	open	with	her	small	fingers,	then

the	orbicularis	oculi	is	definitely	weak.	Likewise,	it	is	difficult	to	force	open	the
tightly	pursed	lips	in	a	normal	individual.	When	the	orbicularis	oris	sphincter	is
impaired,	the	examiner	may	be	able	to	force	air	out	of	the	puffed	cheek	through
the	weakened	lips.	Testing	ear	and	scalp	movements	is	seldom	useful,	although
loss	of	the	ability	to	wiggle	the	ear	in	someone	previously	able	to	do	so	has	been
cited	as	a	sensitive	sign	of	peripheral	facial	palsy	(PFP).	The	stylohyoid	muscle
and	posterior	belly	of	the	digastric	cannot	be	adequately	tested.	With	stapedius
weakness,	 the	 patient	 may	 complain	 of	 hyperacusis,	 especially	 for	 low	 tones.
Other	 tests	 of	 motor	 function	 and	 confirmatory	 signs	 of	 facial	 paresis	 are
discussed	 in	 the	 following	 sections.	 It	 is	 important	 in	 patients	 with	 PFP	 to
examine	the	ear	for	vesicles	or	rash,	indicative	of	zoster	infection,	and	to	palpate
the	parotid	to	exclude	a	mass	lesion.

Examination	of	the	Reflexes

The	 corneal	 and	 other	 reflexes	 mediated	 largely	 by	 CN	 V	 are	 discussed	 in
Chapter	 15.	 Frontal	 release	 signs	 such	 as	 the	 snout,	 suck,	 and	 palmomental
reflexes	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 40.	 Various	 other	 reflexes	 mediated	 in	 large
part	by	CN	VII	can	be	obtained	but	are	of	little	practical	value.	Some	merit	brief
discussion.	They	are	summarized	in	Table	16.2.

TABLE	16.2

Facial	Reflexes

Reflex

Technique

Orbicularis	oculi—

focal

Best	elicited	by	pulling	back,	between	the	thumb
and	index	finger,	a	fold	of	skin	on	the	temple
lateral	to	the	outer	canthus,	then	briskly
tapping	the	thumb	or	finger.	Sudden	stretch	of
the	muscle	causes	contraction	of	orbicularis
oculi	with	closing	of	the	eye.

Orbicularis	oculi—

nonfocal
(supraorbital,
trigeminofacial,
McCarthy’s,	or

Tapping	over	outer	aspect	of	supraorbital	ridge,
over	glabella,	or	around	orbital	margin;	can
sometimes	be	elicited	by	tapping	the
forehead	as	far	back	as	the	hairline.	Causes
bilateral	eye	blinking.	Response	can	normally

nasopalpebral
reflex,	glabellar	tap,
Myerson’s	sign—
depending	on	the
site	of	stimulus)

be	inhibited;	in	patients	with	Parkinson’s
disease	and	other	conditions,	the	patient
cannot	suppress	the	blinking.

Auditory-palpebral,

Reflex	contraction	of	the	orbicularis	oculi

auro-	or
acousticopalpebral,
cochleopalpebral,
or	cochleo-
orbicularis	reflex

causing	eye	closure,	usually	bilateral	but
more	marked	on	the	ipsilateral	side,	in
response	to	a	sudden	loud	noise.

Visuopalpebral,	visual

Reflex	eye	closure	in	response	to	a	strong	light

orbicularis,
opticofacial,	blink,
or	menace	reflex

or	a	sudden	visual	stimulus.

Palpebro-oculogyric

Tight	eye	closure	causes	eyeballs	to	turn

reflex	(Bell’s
phenomenon)

upward,	a	normal	response	but	obvious	only
when	eye	closure	is	weak	and	the	rolling	of
the	eyes	is	seen	through	the	incompletely
closed	lids.	A	method	for	testing	reflex
upgaze	in	patients	with	upgaze	deficits.

Chvostek’s	sign

A	spasm	or	tetanic,	cramp-like	contraction,	of

the	ipsilateral	facial	muscles	on	tapping	over
the	pes	anserinus	anterior	to	the	ear;	various
degrees	of	response	may	occur.	A	sign	of
tetany,	but	also	occurs	with	hyperreflexia
because	of	upper	motor	neuron	dysfunction.
Likely	a	motor	example	of	Tinel’s	sign.

Wartenberg	 wrote	 at	 length	 about	 the	 orbicularis	 oculi	 reflex,	 which	 he
considered	an	important	reflex,	and	the	“chaos	of	nomenclature	concerned	with
this	reflex.”	A	reflex	contraction	of	the	orbicularis	oculi	causing	an	eye	blink—
the	 nonfocal	 orbicularis	 oculi	 reflex—can	 be	 elicited	 in	 different	 ways	 (Video
38.2).	The	threshold	for	reflex	contraction	is	very	low,	and	the	reaction	is	very

quick.	 Tapping	 with	 a	 finger	 or	 percussing	 with	 a	 reflex	 hammer	 at	 many
different	sites	over	the	forehead	and	about	the	eyes	may	elicit	a	reflex	eye	blink.
Wartenberg	said	the	muscle	“reacts…	easily	to…a	multitude	of	external	stimuli.”
Different	 names	 were	 given	 to	 methods	 of	 eliciting	 the	 reflex	 by	 stimulating
different	 areas,	 all	 essentially	 the	 same	 response.	 The	 most	 frequently	 used
version	 currently	 is	 the	 glabellar	 tap.	 Patients	 with	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 are
unable	 to	 inhibit	 the	 reflexive	 eye	 blinks	 (Myerson’s	 sign;	 not	 to	 be	 confused
with	Myerson’s	reflex).	Despite	the	widespread	use	of	the	eponym,	it	is	in	fact
difficult	to	find	any	clear	reference	linking	Myerson	to	the	glabellar	tap	reflex.

A	 more	specific	orbicularis	 oculi	reflex	 is	the	 focal	 “deep	 muscle”	response
elicited	from	one	side	by	a	percussion	that	stretches	the	muscle	(Video	38.2).	A
fold	 of	 the	 muscle	 at	 the	 temple	 is	 held	 between	 the	 thumb	 and	 forefinger	 and
then	percussed	to	stretch	it	back	toward	the	ear.	Wartenberg	thought	this	reflex
useful	 because	 it	 may	 be	 decreased	 in	 PFP	 in	 proportion	 to	 the	 severity	 of	 the
palsy,	but	it	is	normal	or	increased	with	facial	weakness	of	central	origin.

Examination	of	the	Sensory	Functions

Testing	 of	 CN	 VII	 sensory	 functions	 is	 limited	 to	 taste.	 Although	 Hitselberg
described	 hypesthesia	 of	 the	 posterior	 wall	 of	 the	 external	 auditory	 meatus	 in
proximal	facial	nerve	lesions,	there	is	no	reliable	way	to	assess	the	small	sensory
contribution	 the	 nerve	 makes	 to	 the	 skin	 of	 the	 external	 ear	 region.	 The
peripheral	receptors	are	the	taste	buds	embedded	in	the	tongue	epithelium	and	to
a	lesser	extent	in	the	soft	palate	and	epiglottis.	Taste	buds	respond	preferentially,
but	 not	 solely,	 to	 one	 taste	 quality.	 Taste	 is	 also	 carried	 through	 CN	 IX	 and
probably	CN	X.

There	are	five	primary	tastes:	bitter,	sour,	sweet,	salty,	and	umami	(delicious
or	 savory).	 Umami	 has	 only	 recently	 been	 added	 to	 the	 list.	 It	 is	 a	 response	 to
compounds	of	some	amino	acids,	particularly	l-glutamate.	Umami	is	a	Japanese
term	that	has	no	English	translation.	The	many	flavors	encountered	in	life	are	a
combination	 of	 the	 primary	 tastes	 plus	 olfaction	 and	 oral	 sensory	 information
(“mouth	 feel”).	 Sweet	 and	 salty	 substances	 are	 most	 commonly	 employed	 for
clinical	 bedside	 testing	 because	 of	 their	 ready	 availability;	 sour	 and	 bitter	 are
more	 difficult	 to	 come	 by.	 Chemosensory	 referral	 centers	 typically	 use	 four
substances	for	testing:	sucrose	(sweet),	sodium	chloride	(salty),	quinine	(bitter),
and	citric	acid	(sour).	CN	VII	only	subserves	taste	on	the	anterior	two-thirds	of
the	tongue.	When	the	tongue	is	retracted	into	the	mouth,	there	is	rapid	dispersion

of	 the	 test	 substance	 outside	 the	 area	 of	 interest.	 The	 tongue	 must	 therefore
remain	 protruded	 throughout	 testing	 of	 an	 individual	 substance,	 and	 the	 mouth
must	be	rinsed	between	tests.	If	bitter	is	tested,	it	should	be	last	because	it	leaves
the	most	aftertaste.

Some	examiners	prefer	to	manually	hold	the	patient’s	tongue	with	a	piece	of
gauze	to	prevent	retraction.	Because	the	patient	will	be	unable	to	speak	with	the
tongue	 protruded,	 instructions	 must	 be	 clear	 in	 advance.	 The	 patient	 may	 raise
the	 hand	 using	 some	 signaling	 system	 when	 taste	 is	 perceived,	 point	 to	 words
written	on	paper,	or	make	a	similar	nonverbal	response.	A	damp	applicator	stick
may	be	dipped	into	a	packet	of	sugar,	artificial	sweetener,	or	salt	and	coated	with
the	test	substance	and	then	placed	on	one	side	of	the	patient’s	tongue	and	rubbed
around.	The	patient	signals	whether	she	can	identify	the	substance.	Most	patients
will	identify	the	test	substance	in	less	than	10	seconds.	Taste	sensation	is	less	on
the	 tip	 of	 the	 tongue,	 and	 the	 substance	 is	 best	 applied	 to	 the	 dorsal	 surface	 at
about	the	junction	of	the	anterior	and	middle	third	of	the	tongue.	The	sweetness
of	 artificial	 sweeteners	 such	 as	 saccharine	 and	 aspartame	 is	 more	 intense,	 and
they	may	make	better	test	substances	than	ordinary	sugar.	For	a	demonstration	of
taste	 testing	technique,	see	Video	Link	16.1.	 More	 sophisticated	 methods	 are
available	 to	 test	 for	 subtle	 dysfunction	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 primary	 taste	 and
smell	 complaints.	 There	 are	 many	 referral	 centers	 that	 specialize	 in	 the
management	 of	 taste	 and	 smell	 disorders	 (see	 Chapter	 12).	 There	 are	 now
commercially	 available	 filter	 paper	 strips	 impregnated	 with	 sweet,	 sour,	 salty,
and	 bitter	 in	 different	 concentrations	 (taste	 strips).	 It	 is	 seldom	 necessary	 or
practical	to	examine	taste	on	the	posterior	third	of	the	tongue.

The	most	common	situation	calling	for	assessment	of	taste	is	the	evaluation
of	facial	nerve	palsy.	If	a	patient	with	a	peripheral	pattern	of	facial	weakness	has
impaired	taste,	the	lesion	is	proximal	to	the	junction	with	the	chorda	tympani.	A
lesion	 at	 or	 distal	 to	 the	 stylomastoid	 foramen	 (e.g.,	 in	 the	 parotid	 gland)	 does
not	affect	taste.

Ageusia	is	the	complete	inability	to	taste.	With	hypogeusia,	taste	perception	is
blunted	or	delayed.	Perversions	or	abnormal	perceptions	of	taste	are	parageusias.
There	 is	 marked	 individual	 variation	 in	 taste.	 Complete	 ageusia	 is	 rare	 unless
there	is	also	loss	of	smell.	If	there	is	loss	of	taste,	one	should	first	eliminate	the
possibility	of	disease	of	the	tongue.	Some	causes	of	disturbed	taste	are	listed	in
Table	 16.3.	 There	 are	 many	 medications	 that	 reportedly	 alter	 taste;	 some
commonly	 used	 in	 neurologic	 practice	 include	 the	 following:	 carbamazepine,
hydrocortisone,
phenytoin,	

dexamethasone,	

antidepressants,	

tricyclic	

penicillamine,	
clozapine,	trifluoperazine,	baclofen,	and	dantrolene.

lithium,	 methotrexate,	

levodopa	 or	

levodopa/carbidopa,

Examination	of	the	Secretory	Functions

The	 secretory	 functions	 of	 CN	 VII	 can	 usually	 be	 evaluated	 by	 history	 and
observation.	 Increased	 tearing	 is	 usually	 apparent;	 decreased	 tearing	 may	 be
determined	 from	 the	 history.	 Tear	 production	 may	 be	 quantitated	 with	 the
Schirmer	 test.	 Commercially	 available	 filter	 strips	 are	 placed	 in	 the	 inferior
conjunctival	sac	and	left	in	place	for	5	minutes.	The	advancing	edge	of	moisture
down	the	strip	is	proportional	to	the	moisture	in	the	eye;	the	results	are	expressed
in	 millimeters.	 This	 test	 is	 simple	 and	 does	 not	 require	 referral	 to	 an
ophthalmologist.

TABLE	16.3

Possible	Causes	of	Disturbed	Taste

Oral	and	perioral	infections	(e.g.,	candidiasis,	gingivitis,	periodontitis)
Bell’s	palsy
Medications
Dental	procedures
Dentures	and	other	dental	devices
Age
Nutritional	compromise	(e.g.,	vitamin	B12	deficiency,	zinc	deficiency,

malnutrition,	chronic	disease)

Lesions	involving	neural	taste	pathways
Head	trauma
Toxic	chemical	exposure
Radiation	treatment	of	head	and	neck
Psychiatric	conditions	(e.g.,	depression,	anorexia	nervosa,	bulimia)
Epilepsy	(gustatory	aura)
Migraine	headache	(gustatory	aura)
Sjögren’s	syndrome
Multiple	sclerosis
Endocrine	disorders	(e.g.,	diabetes	mellitus,	hypothyroidism)

Modified	from	Bromley	SM.	Smell	and	taste	disorders:	a	primary	care	approach.	Am	Fam
Physician	2000;61:427–436,	438.

The	 lacrimal	 reflex	 is	 tearing,	 usually	 bilateral,	 caused	 by	 stimulating	 the
cornea.	The	nasolacrimal	reflex	is	elicited	by	mechanical	stimulation	of	the	nasal
mucosa	or	by	chemical	stimulation	using	irritating	substances	such	as	ammonia.
the	 history.
Abnormalities	 of	
Otolaryngologists	 and	 oral	 surgeons	 can	 use	 special	 techniques	 to	 quantitate
salivary	flow.

salivation	 are	 usually	

suggested	 by	

DISORDERS	OF	FUNCTION

Motor	 abnormalities,	 either	 weakness	 or	 abnormal	 movements,	 account	 for	 the
preponderance	 of	 clinical	 abnormalities	 of	 facial	 nerve	 function.	 Changes	 in
sensation,	 primarily	 taste,	 and	 in	 secretory	 function,	 sometimes	 occur	 as	 a
sidebar,	 but	 are	 rarely	 if	 ever	 the	 major	 manifestation	 of	 disease	 of	 CN	 VII.
Changes	in	these	functions	can	help	to	localize	the	lesion	along	the	course	of	the
nerve,	 although	 this	 exercise	 has	 little	 practical	 value.	 The	 major	 branches	 in
sequence	are	the	greater	superficial	petrosal,	nerve	to	the	stapedius,	and	chorda
tympani,	 after	 which	 the	 nerve	 continues	 to	 the	 facial	 muscles.	 The	 mnemonic
tear-hear-taste-face	may	help	recall	the	sequence.

Facial	Weakness

There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 neurogenic	 facial	 nerve	 weakness:	 peripheral,	 or	 lower
motor	neuron;	and	central,	or	upper	motor	neuron.	PFP	may	result	from	a	lesion
anywhere	from	the	CN	VII	nucleus	in	the	pons	to	the	terminal	branches	in	the
face.	 Central	 facial	 palsy	 (CFP)	 is	 due	 to	 a	 lesion	 involving	 the	 supranuclear
pathways	 before	 they	 synapse	 on	 the	 facial	 nucleus.	 PFP	 results	 from	 an
ipsilateral	lesion,	whereas	CFP,	with	rare	exception,	results	from	a	contralateral
lesion.

Peripheral	Facial	Palsy

With	PFP,	there	is	flaccid	weakness	of	all	the	muscles	of	facial	expression	on	the
involved	side,	both	upper	and	lower	face,	and	the	paralysis	is	usually	complete
(prosopoplegia).	The	affected	side	of	the	face	is	smooth;	there	are	no	wrinkles	on

the	 forehead;	 the	 eye	 is	 open;	 the	 inferior	 lid	 sags;	 the	 nasolabial	 fold	 is
flattened;	 and	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 mouth	 droops	 (Figure	16.6).	 The	 patient	 cannot
raise	the	eyebrow,	wrinkle	the	forehead,	frown,	close	the	eye,	laugh,	smile,	bare
the	teeth,	blow	out	the	cheeks,	whistle,	pucker,	retract	the	angle	of	the	mouth,	or
contract	the	chin	muscles	or	platysma	on	the	involved	side.	She	talks	and	smiles
with	 one	 side	 of	 the	 mouth,	 and	 the	 mouth	 is	 drawn	 to	 the	 sound	 side	 on
attempted	 movement.	 The	 cheek	 is	 flaccid	 and	 food	 accumulates	 between	 the
teeth	 and	 the	 paralyzed	 cheek;	 the	 patient	 may	 bite	 the	 cheek	 or	 lip	 when
chewing.	Food,	liquids,	and	saliva	may	spill	from	the	corner	of	the	mouth.	The
cheek	 may	 puff	 out	 on	 expiration	 because	 of	 buccinator	 weakness.	 The	 facial
asymmetry	may	cause	an	apparent	deviation	of	the	tongue	(see	Chapter	20	and
Figure	15.7).	A	patient	with	an	incomplete	PFP	may	be	able	to	close	the	eye,	but
not	with	full	power	against	resistance.	Inability	to	wink	with	the	involved	eye	is
common.	 The	 palpebral	 fissure	 is	 open	 wider	 than	 normal,	 and	 there	 may	 be
inability	 to	 close	 the	 eye	 (lagophthalmos).	 During	 spontaneous	 blinking,	 the
involved	 eyelid	 tends	 to	 lag	 behind,	 sometimes	 conspicuously.	 Very	 mild	 PFP
may	 produce	 only	 a	 slower	 and	 less	 complete	 blink	 on	 the	 involved	 side.
Attempting	 to	 close	 the	 involved	 eye	 causes	 a	 reflex	 upturning	 of	 the	 eyeball
(Bell’s	 phenomenon).	 The	 iris	 may	 completely	 disappear	 upwardly.	 This	 is	 a
normal	response,	but	only	visible	in	the	patient	with	orbicularis	oculi	weakness.
To	 elicit	 the	 levator	 sign	 of	 Dutemps	 and	 Céstan,	 have	 the	 patient	 look	 down,
then	 close	 the	 eyes	 slowly;	 because	 the	 function	 of	 the	 levator	 palpebrae
superioris	is	no	longer	counteracted	by	the	orbicularis	oculi,	the	upper	lid	on	the
paralyzed	 side	 moves	 upward	 slightly.	 Akin	 to	 Bell’s	 phenomenon	 is	 Negro’s
sign,	where	the	eyeball	on	the	paralyzed	side	deviates	outward	and	elevates	more
than	the	normal	one	when	the	patient	raises	her	eyes	(not	to	be	confused	with	the
other	Negro’s	sign,	cogwheel	rigidity).

A	 sensitive	 sign	 of	 upper	 facial	 weakness	 is	 loss	 of	 the	 fine	 vibrations
palpable	 with	 the	 thumbs	 or	 fingertips	 resting	 lightly	 on	 the	 lids	 as	 the	 patient
tries	 to	 close	 the	 eyes	 as	 tightly	 as	 possible	 (Bergara-Wartenberg	 sign).	 The
platysma	sign	of	Babinski	is	an	asymmetric	contraction	of	the	platysma,	less	on
the	involved	side,	when	the	mouth	is	opened	(Figure	16.7).	Labials	and	vowels
are	produced	by	pursing	the	lips;	patients	with	peripheral	facial	weakness	have	a
great	deal	of	difficulty	in	articulating	these	sounds.	Articulation	of	labial	sounds
is	 discussed	 further	 in	 Chapter	 9.	 The	 House-Brackmann	 scale,	 Burres-Fisch
index,	 and	 facial	 nerve	 function	 index	 may	 be	 useful	 to	 try	 to	 quantitate	 the
degree	of	weakness.

FIGURE	16.6	A	patient	with	a	peripheral	facial	nerve	palsy	on	the	right.	A.	The	patient
is	 attempting	 to	 retract	 both	 angles	 of	 the	 mouth.	 B.	 The	 patient	 is	 attempting	 to
elevate	both	eyebrows.

Because	of	weakness	of	the	lower	lid	sphincter,	tears	may	run	over	and	down
the	 cheek	 (epiphora),	 especially	 if	 there	 is	 corneal	 irritation	 because	 of
inadequate	 eye	 protection.	 A	 lack	 of	 tearing	 may	 signal	 very	 proximal
involvement,	 above	 the	 origin	 of	 the	 greater	 superficial	 petrosal	 nerve.	 With
severe	 weakness,	 the	 eye	 never	 closes,	 even	 in	 sleep.	 The	 involvement	 of	 the
intrinsic	and	extrinsic	ear	muscles,	stylohyoid	and	posterior	belly	of	the	digastric
cannot	 be	 demonstrated	 by	 clinical	 examination.	 Electromyographic	 needle
examination	 can	 sample	 some	 of	 these	 muscles,	 particularly	 the	 posterior
auricular	 and	 posterior	 belly	 of	 the	 digastric.	 Denervation	 in	 these	 muscles
indicates	a	very	proximal	lesion	and	may	be	of	help	in	some	cases,	particularly
in	 distinguishing	 Möbius’	 syndrome	 from	 birth-related	 facial	 nerve	 trauma.
Weakness	 of	 the	 stapedius	 may	 produce	 hyperacusis,	 especially	 for	 low	 tones
that	sound	louder	and	higher.

The	 facial	 weakness	 in	 PFP	 is	 obvious	 on	 both	 voluntary	 and	 spontaneous
contraction.	There	 is	no	 dissociation.	 With	a	severe	 lesion,	 the	passage	of	time
may	 lead	 to	 atrophy	 of	 the	 involved	 muscles.	 With	 PFP,	 the	 motor	 limb	 of	 the
direct	corneal	reflex	is	impaired,	but	the	consensual	is	intact;	in	the	opposite	eye,

the	 direct	 response	 is	 intact	 and	 the	 consensual	 impaired	 (Table	15.3);	in	 other
words,	the	involved	eye	does	not	blink	no	matter	which	side	is	stimulated,	and
the	 normal	 eye	 does	 blink	 no	 matter	 which	 side	 is	 stimulated.	 The	 various
reflexes	that	involve	motor	responses	of	CN	VII	supplied	muscles	are	impaired.
Some	patients	with	PFP	complain	of	numbness	of	the	face.	Sometimes,	they	are
describing	the	wooden	feeling	that	accompanies	immobility,	but	at	other	times,
patients	 seem	 to	 have	 slight	 sensory	 loss	 that	 is	 real	 and	 more	 than	 logically
expected	 for	 a	 lesion	 of	 a	 predominantly	 motor	 nerve.	 The	 cause	 of	 this	 is
unclear.

FIGURE	 16.7	 On	 the	 patient’s	 right	 side,	 there	 is	 a	 clear	 difference	 between	 the
appearance	 of	 the	 platysma	 muscle	 at	 rest	 (view	 at	 upper	 left	 in	 composite
photograph)	and	during	voluntary	effort	to	retract	both	corners	of	the	mouth	(view	at
lower	left).	On	the	patient’s	left	side,	there	is	only	minimal	contraction	(views	at	upper
and	lower	right).	In	the	frontal	view,	the	fully	contracting	right	platysma	(arrow)	can	be
directly	 compared	 with	 the	 paretic	 muscle	 on	 the	 left	 (question	mark).	 Note	 also	 the
incomplete	retraction	of	the	left	corner	of	the	mouth.	(Reprinted	from	Leon-Sarmiento
FE,	Prada	LJ,	Torres-Hillera	M.	The	first	sign	of	Babinski.	Neurology	2002;59[7]:1067,
with	permission.)

In	 comatose	 or	 otherwise	 uncooperative	 patients,	 facial	 movements	 can	 be
elicited	 by	 painful	 pressure	 over	 the	 supraorbital	 nerves	 or	 by	 other	 painful
stimuli	applied	to	the	face	to	elicit	an	avoidance	response.	Pinprick	marks	on	a
comatose	patient’s	face	are	best	avoided.	The	jab	of	a	broken	applicator	stick	is
usually	sufficient	and	causes	less	tissue	damage.	The	groove	between	the	nostrils
and	the	cheek	is	particularly	sensitive	for	these	purposes.

Minimal	 facial	 weakness	 on	 one	 side	 must	 be	 differentiated	 from	 a	 facial
contracture	on	the	opposite	side,	which	can	cause	the	normal	nasolabial	fold	to
appear	 flattened	 in	 comparison.	 Bona	 fide	 facial	 weakness	 must	 also	 be
differentiated	 from	 developmental	 asymmetry,	 facial	 hemiatrophy,	 character
lines,	 and	 habitual	 emphasis	 on	 the	 use	 of	 one	 side	 of	 the	 mouth	 (“Brooklyn
facial”).	 Unequal	 palpebral	 fissures	 from	 ptosis	 on	 one	 side	 may	 be	 confused
with	 facial	 weakness	 on	 the	 opposite	 side	 causing	 widening	 of	 the	 fissure;	 the
usual	error	is	the	reverse.

Localization	of	Peripheral	Facial	Nerve	Palsy

PFP	can	occur	from	a	lesion	involving	the	facial	nerve	nucleus	in	the	pons	or	at
any	point	along	the	infranuclear	segment.	The	weakness	of	the	muscles	of	facial
expression	 is	 the	 same	 with	 lesions	 anywhere	 along	 the	 course	 of	 the	 nerve.
Diagnostic	localization	depends	on	the	associated	findings,	such	as	hyperacusis,
decreased	 tearing,	 impaired	 taste,	 and	 involvement	 of	 neural	 structures	 beyond
CN	 VII.	 Table	 16.4	 summarizes	 the	 localization	 and	 differential	 diagnosis	 of
PFP.	The	most	common	cause	of	PFP	by	far	is	Bell’s	palsy.

Bell’s	Palsy

Most	cases	of	idiopathic	facial	paralysis	(Bell’s	palsy,	for	Sir	Charles	Bell	[Box
16.1])	are	 likely	due	to	 Herpes	simplex	virus	activation,	 but	 there	is	no	simple
method	 of	 confirming	 this	 mechanism	 in	 clinical	 practice.	 Polymerase	 chain
reaction	 (PCR)	 testing	 suggests	 viral	 reactivation	 leading	 to	 inflammation	 and
demyelination.	Herpes	zoster,	Ramsay	Hunt	syndrome	(see	below),	is	probably
the	 second	 most	 common	 viral	 infection	 associated	 with	 PFP.	 Other	 viruses
implicated	 include	 cytomegalovirus,	 Epstein-Barr	 virus,	 human	 herpes	 virus	 6,
and	 coxsackie.	 Unfortunately,	 antiviral	 treatment	 has	 not	 proved	 particularly
efficacious.	 An	 inactivated	 intranasal	 influenza	 vaccine	 was	 associated	 with	 an
increased	 incidence	 of	 Bell’s	 palsy	 and	 subsequently	 withdrawn	 from	 the
market.	Pathologically,	abnormalities	are	present	throughout	the	bony	course	of
the	 nerve,	 but	 nerve	 damage	 is	 concentrated	 in	 the	 narrow	 labyrinthine	 part	 of
the	 facial	 canal,	 probably	 because	 of	 compression	 related	 to	 edema	 and	 the
tenuous	blood	supply	in	that	segment.	Ischemia	has	long	been	thought	to	play	a
role	in	the	development	of	Bell’s	palsy.	There	may	be	a	genetic	predisposition	in
some	cases.	Bell’s	palsy	is	more	prevalent	in	women	who	are	pregnant	or	have

recently	given	birth.	The	risk	is	three	times	greater	during	pregnancy,	especially
in	the	third	trimester	or	in	the	first	postpartum	week.

TABLE	16.4 Differential	Diagnosis	of	Lesions	of	the	Facial	Nerve

BOX	16.1

Sir	Charles	Bell

Bell’s	palsy	is	named	for	Sir	Charles	Bell,	a	Scottish	surgeon,	anatomist,	and
artist.	 Early	 in	 his	 career,	 he	 published	 a	 book	 on	 anatomy	 of	 facial
expression	 for	 artists.	 Among	 his	 many	 contributions	 (Moritz	 Romberg
proclaimed	Bell	to	be	the	“Harvey	of	our	century”)	was	a	description	of	the
nerve	supply	to	the	muscles	of	the	face.	He	described	facial	palsy	of	various
etiologies,	 including	 one	 patient	 who	 was	 gored	 in	 the	 face	 by	 an	 ox.	 He
provided	the	illustrations	for	his	own	dissections.	It	is	fitting	that	the	Mona
Lisa	 syndrome	 refers	 to	 the	 facial	 synkinesis	 that	 sometimes	 follows	 Bell’s
palsy,	hypothesized	to	be	the	basis	for	the	enigmatic	Gioconda	half	smile	in
da	Vinci’s	painting.

Certain	 criteria	 should	 be	 fulfilled	 to	 confirm	 a	 diagnosis	 of	 Bell’s	 palsy.
There	 should	 be	 diffuse	 PFP,	 onset	 over	 a	 day	 or	 2,	 paralysis	 reaching	 a
maximum	 within	 3	 weeks,	 and	 full	 or	 partial	 recovery	 within	 6	 months.	 A
prolonged,	 progressive	 course	 suggests	 a	 tumor,	 as	 does	 distal	 involvement	 of
only	some	branches	or	the	presence	of	a	parotid	mass.	Involvement	of	individual
distal	branches	can	also	occur	from	trauma,	as	by	obstetrical	forceps.

Symptoms	often	begin	with	pain	behind	the	ear,	followed	within	a	day	or	2	by
facial	 weakness.	 The	 pain	 may	 rarely	 precede	 the	 paralysis	 by	 up	 to	 2	 weeks.
There	 is	 peripheral	 facial	 weakness	 involving	 both	 upper	 and	 lower	 face.	 The
paralysis	 is	 complete	 in	 approximately	 70%	 of	 patients.	 Some	 authorities
contend	there	are	often	subtle	or	subclinical	abnormalities	of	other	CNs.	About
25%	of	patients	report	some	degree	of	facial	numbness	that	is	often	dismissed	as
an	odd	sensation	related	to	the	immobility.	Depending	on	the	relationship	of	the
lesion	to	the	geniculate	ganglion,	to	the	takeoff	of	the	chorda	tympani,	and	to	the
takeoff	of	the	branch	to	the	stapedius,	patients	may	note	loss	of	taste	sensation
on	 the	 ipsilateral	 anterior	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 tongue,	 dryness	 of	 the	 eye,	 or
hyperacusis	 for	 low	 tones.	 The	 most	 common	 symptoms	 accompanying	 Bell’s
palsy	 are	 increased	 tearing,	 pain	 in	 or	 around	 the	 ear,	 and	 taste	 abnormalities.
Trying	 to	 localize	 the	 lesion	 by	 testing	 taste	 and	 lacrimation	 are	 not	 very
accurate	 and	 of	little	practical	value.	 In	patients	 studied	at	surgery,	only	 6%	 of
lesions	were	distal	to	the	geniculate	ganglion.

Dysgeusia	occurs	in	about	60%	of	patients,	ageusia	in	about	10%.	There	may
be	drooling	and	difficulty	speaking	because	of	the	slack	facial	muscles.	Patients

are	often	unable	to	close	the	eye,	liquids	and	saliva	may	drool	from	the	affected
corner	 of	 the	 mouth,	 and	 tears	 may	 spill	 down	 the	 cheek.	 The	 majority	 of
patients	 with	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 Lyme	 disease,	 and	 geniculate	 herpes	 will	 show
enhancement	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve	 on	 gadolinium	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging
(MRI).	 Some	 enhancement	 may	 be	 seen	 in	 normals,	 but	 enhancement	 of	 the
distal	 intrameatal	 and	 labyrinthine	 segments	 appears	 specific	 for	 facial	 nerve
palsy.

Age-adjusted	incidence	rates	are	higher	in	the	elderly.	About	1%	of	cases	are
bilateral.	 About	 80%	 of	 patients	 recover	 fully	 within	 6	 months;	 some	 have
persistent	synkinesis	because	of	aberrant	regeneration,	and	the	rare	patient	is	left
with	 complete	 permanent	 paralysis.	 The	 prognosis	 is	 age	 related:	 best	 in
children,	 worst	 in	 patients	 over	 55.	 The	 condition	 may	 recur	 in	 6%	 to	 7%	 of
patients.	Those	without	enhancement	may	have	a	better	prognosis.

Aberrant	regeneration	is	common	after	Bell’s	palsy	and	after	traumatic	nerve
injury.	Axons	destined	for	one	muscle	regrow	to	innervate	another,	so	that	there
is	 abnormal	 twitching	 of	 the	 face	 outside	 the	 area	 of	 intended	 movement.	 On
blinking	 or	 winking,	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 mouth	 may	 twitch.	 On	 smiling,	 the	 eye
may	 close	(Video	16.1).	These	synkinesis	can	be	 prominent	 in	some	 patients;
more	 often,	 they	 are	 subtle,	 such	 as	 a	 slight	 twitch	 of	 the	 orbicularis	 oris
synchronous	 with	 blinking	 of	 the	 eye.	 When	 misdirection	 is	 conspicuous,	 the
main	effect	of	smiling	on	the	involved	side	of	the	face	may	be	eye	closure.	The
automatic	 closure	 of	 one	 eye	 on	 opening	 the	 mouth,	 the	 Marin	 Amat	 sign,	 or
inverted	 or	 reversed	 Gunn	 phenomenon	 (inverse	 jaw	 winking),	 has	 been
explained	 as	 a	 trigeminofacial	 associated	 movement.	 However,	 it	 occurs
primarily	in	patients	who	have	had	a	peripheral	facial	paralysis	and	is	probably
an	intrafacial	synkinesis.

Aberrant	 regeneration	 may	 also	 involve	 autonomic	 and	 taste	 fibers.	 The
syndrome	 of	 crocodile	 tears	 is	 a	 gustatory-lacrimal	 reflex,	 characterized	 by
tearing	when	eating,	especially	highly	flavored	foods.	It	is	due	to	misdirection	of
salivary	axons	to	the	lacrimal	gland.	Frey	auriculotemporal	syndrome	is	similar,
but	with	sweating	and	flushing	over	the	cheek	rather	than	lacrimation	(Chapter
15).	In	the	chorda	tympani	syndrome,	there	is	unilateral	swelling	and	flushing	of
the	submental	region	after	eating.

Other	Causes	of	Peripheral	Facial	Weakness

There	 are	 numerous	 other	 causes	 of	 PFP.	 Common	 processes	 involving	 the

motor	neurons	of	the	CN	VII	nucleus	in	the	pons	include	motor	neuron	disease
and	Möbius’	syndrome.	Clinical	involvement	of	facial	muscles	is	more	likely	in
progressive	bulbar	palsy	than	in	classical	sporadic	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis
(ALS);	needle	electromyography	may	show	subclinical	changes.	In	spinobulbar
muscular	 atrophy	 (Kennedy’s	 syndrome),	 facial	 fasciculations	 and	 facial
weakness	are	often	prominent.	Facial	nerve	paralysis,	unilateral	or	bilateral,	may
be	 congenital.	 Möbius’	 syndrome	 (congenital	 oculofacial	 paralysis)	 is	 the
association	 of	 congenital	 facial	 nerve	 palsy	 with	 paralysis	 of	 the	 extraocular
muscles,	especially	the	lateral	rectus	because	of	hypoplasia	or	aplasia	of	the	CN
nuclei	(Figure	16.8).	For	a	courageous	and	dramatic	video	of	Möbius’	syndrome
by	an	affected	patient,	see	Video	Link	16.2.	Other	CN-innervated	muscles	may
be	 involved,	 and	 there	 may	 be	 other	 developmental	 defects.	 The	 condition	 is
sporadic.	Reportedly,	involvement	of	facial	nerve	motoneurons	can	be	the	only
manifestation	of	an	acute	attack	of	paralytic	poliomyelitis.	PFP	has	been	reported
in	hereditary	neuropathy	with	liability	to	pressure	palsies.

Lesions	 involving	 the	 facial	 nerve	 fibers	 in	 the	 pons	 may	 cause	 PFP.	 There
are	 usually,	 but	 not	 always,	 associated	 findings	 to	 indicate	 the	 lesion	 is
intramedullary.	 Fascicular	 lesions	 may	 or	 may	 not	 involve	 tearing	 and	 taste.
Many	 disorders	 may	 affect	 the	 intrapontine	 fibers	 of	 CN	 VII	 (Table	 16.4).
Ischemic	 lesions	 are	 common.	 Millard-Gubler	 syndrome	 is	 ipsilateral	 PFP	 and
contralateral	 hemiparesis,	 which	 may	 be	 due	 to	 pontine	 stroke,	 hemorrhage,	 or
tumor.	A	CN	VI	palsy	is	often	but	incorrectly	included	as	part	of	Millard-Gubler
syndrome	 (Chapter	 21,	 Box	 21.1).	 Foville	 syndrome	 is	 ipsilateral	 PFP	 and
horizontal	gaze	palsy	with	contralateral	hemiparesis	(Chapter	21,	Box	21.1).	The
“eight	 and	 a	 half	 syndrome”	 is	 a	 one-and-half	 syndrome	 (Chapter	 14)	 in
association	 with	 a	 facial	 palsy	 due	 to	 a	 pontine	 lesion.	 Combined	 PFP	 and
abducens	 palsy	 in	 isolation,	 without	 a	 hemiparesis,	 has	 been	 reported	 with	 an
infarction	 of	 the	 caudal	 pontine	 tegmentum.	 A	 PFP	 has	 also	 been	 reported	 in
Wallenberg’s	syndrome	because	of	extension	of	the	infarct	into	the	caudal	pons.

FIGURE	 16.8	 Child	 with	 Moebius	 syndrome	 with	 typical	 masklike	 facies	 and
downslanted	 oral	 commissures.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Thorne	 C,	 Chung	 KC,	 Gosain	 A,	 et
al.,	 eds.	 Grabb	 and	 Smith’s	 Plastic	 Surgery.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer
Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014,	with	permission.)

Other	 processes	 that	 may	 affect	 CN	 VII	 fibers	 in	 the	 pons	 include	 abscess,
syringobulbia,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 and	 trauma.	 Because	 of	 the	 proximity	 of
the	 nucleus	 and	 fibers	 of	 CN	 VII	 to	 the	 nucleus	 and	 fibers	 of	 CN	 VI,	 pontine
lesions	 frequently	 cause	 both	 an	 ipsilateral	 facial	 paralysis	 and	 an	 ipsilateral
lateral	rectus	paralysis.	Pontine	lesions	are	discussed	further	in	the	Chapter	21.

Mass	 lesions	 in	 the	 CPA,	 such	 as	 acoustic	 neuroma	 and	 meningioma,
commonly	 extend	 to	 involve	 CN	 VII,	 the	 NI,	 CN	 VIII,	 CN	 V,	 the	 cerebellar

peduncles,	and	the	cerebellum.	Because	of	the	associated	hearing	loss,	there	may
not	 be	 hyperacusis	 even	 though	 the	 lesion	 is	 proximal	 to	 the	 branch	 to	 the
stapedius.	There	is	usually	hearing	loss,	facial	sensory	changes,	ipsilateral	ataxia,
and	nystagmus.	CPA	syndromes	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	17.

BOX	16.2

Ramsay	Hunt	Syndromes

Other	conditions	sometimes	referred	to	as	Ramsay	Hunt	syndrome	are	deep
palmar	 branch	 ulnar	 neuropathy,	 dyssynergia	 cerebellaris	 myoclonica,
juvenile	Parkinson’s	disease,	and	dentatorubropallidoluysian	atrophy.

In	Ramsay	Hunt	syndrome	(herpes	zoster	oticus,	Hunt	syndrome,	geniculate
herpes),	 the	 PFP	 is	 due	 to	 a	 reactivation	 of	 varicella	 zoster	 virus	 (VZV)
involving	 the	 geniculate	 ganglion.	 Geniculate	 herpes	 is	 one	 of	 five	 conditions
eponymically	 tied	 to	 James	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 (Box	 16.2).	 Because	 of	 the	 very
proximal	involvement,	the	facial	weakness	is	accompanied	by	taste	impairment,
hyperacusis,	 and	 diminution	 of	 salivary	 and	 lacrimal	 secretion.	 Pain	 in	 and
behind	 the	 ear	 may	 be	 prominent.	 There	 may	 be	 vesicles	 on	 the	 tympanic
membrane,	in	the	external	auditory	canal,	on	the	lateral	surface	of	the	pinna,	and
in	the	cleft	between	the	ear	and	mastoid	process	(Figure	16.9).	Occasionally,	the
herpetic	eruption	may	also	involve	the	anterior	faucial	pillar	of	the	palate	or	the
neck.	 Hunt	 described	 two	 types:	 an	 otalgic	 form	 with	 pain	 in	 the	 ear	 and	 a
prosopalgic	 form	 with	 pain	 deep	 in	 the	 face,	 primarily	 in	 the	 posterior	 orbit,
palate,	and	nose.	The	latter	may	result	from	involvement	of	sensory	fibers	in	the
greater	superficial	petrosal	nerve.

FIGURE	 16.9	 Vesicles	 in	 the	 external	 ear	 canal	 in	 a	 case	 of	 geniculate	 herpes
(Ramsay	Hunt	syndrome).

Some	 patients	 develop	 facial	 paralysis	 without	 ear	 or	 mouth	 rash	 but
associated	 with	 serologic	 or	 DNA	 evidence	 of	 VZV	 infection	 (zoster	 sine
herpete,	zoster	sine	zoster).	Preherpetic	neuralgia	refers	to	pain	and	dysesthesias
preceding	 the	 development	 of	 rash.	 In	 one	 study,	 14%	 of	 patients	 developed
vesicles	 only	 after	 the	 onset	 of	 facial	 weakness.	 It	 is	 likely	 that	 some	 patients
with	 Bell’s	 palsy	 have	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome	 without	 a	 herpetic	 eruption.	 It
has	 been	 estimated	 that	 up	 to	 one-third	 of	 idiopathic	 PFP	 cases	 may	 be	 due	 to
zoster	 sine	 herpete.	 Imaging	 and	 virologic	 studies	 have	 shown	 that	 extensive

viral	 attack	 beyond	 the	 facial	 nerve	 occurs	 frequently.	 Tinnitus,	 hearing	 loss,
nausea,	 vomiting,	 vertigo,	 and	 nystagmus	 from	 involvement	 of	 CN	 VIII	 are
common.	 Rarely,	 cochleovestibular	 symptoms	 outweigh	 the	 PFP,	 presumably
because	 of	 VZV	 reactivation	 in	 the	 ganglia	 of	 CN	 VIII.	 Other	 CNs	 may	 be
affected	 as	 well.	 Compared	 with	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 patients	 with	 Ramsay	 Hunt
syndrome	often	have	more	severe	paralysis	at	onset	and	are	less	likely	to	recover
completely.

Patients	 with	 diabetes	 mellitus	 have	 a	 four-	 to	 fivefold	 increased	 risk	 of
developing	 acute	 PFP,	 and	 diabetes	 is	 present	 in	 about	 5%	 to	 10%	 of	 patients
with	 PFP.	 Diabetes	 is	 particularly	 likely	 in	 older	 patients,	 and	 those	 with
recurrent	 or	 bilateral	 PFP.	 Slowly	 progressive	 facial	 weakness	 can	 occur	 with
neoplasms	involving	either	the	pons	or	the	facial	nerve	peripherally.	Both	HIV
infection	 and	 Lyme	 disease	 can	 occasionally	 present	 with	 facial	 neuropathy.
Lyme	disease	may	cause	10%	to	25%	of	cases	of	Bell’s	palsy	in	hyperendemic
areas;	 there	 may	 be	 no	 history	 of	 tick	 bite	 or	 erythema	 migrans,	 and	 some
patients	are	not	seropositive	initially.	The	cerebrospinal	fluid	(CSF)	is	often	but
not	invariably	normal.	PFP	because	of	Lyme	disease	is	particularly	prone	to	be
bilateral.

Fractures	 of	 the	 petrous	 bone	 because	 of	 closed	 head	 injury	 may	 injure	 the
facial	 nerve.	 The	 fracture	 may	 occur	 longitudinally	 down	 the	 long	 axis	 of	 the
petrous	 pyramid	 or	 transversely	 across	 it.	 The	 facial	 nerve	 may	 be	 injured	 in
either	 type.	 With	 the	 more	 common	 longitudinal	 fractures,	 the	 facial	 palsy	 is
usually	 due	 to	 edema,	 does	 not	 occur	 immediately,	 and	 tends	 to	 resolve
spontaneously.	With	transverse	fractures,	the	nerve	is	often	lacerated,	contused,
or	 severed;	 the	 facial	 palsy	 comes	 on	 immediately	 and	 may	 be	 permanent.
Rupture	of	the	ear	drum	and	bleeding	from	the	ear	suggest	longitudinal	fracture.
The	 tympanic	 membrane	 appears	 bright	 red,	 dark	 red,	 brown	 or	 bluish
depending	 on	 the	 color	 of	 the	 fluid	 in	 the	 middle	 ear	 (Figure	 16.10).	 CSF
otorrhea	is	more	common	with	transverse	fractures	(Chapter	17).

FIGURE	16.10	Hemotympanum	due	to	a	left	temporal	bone	fracture.	(Reprinted	from
Chung	 EK,	 Atkinson-McEvoy	 LR,	 Lai	 N,	 et	 al.	 Visual	 Diagnosis	 and	 Treatment	 in
Pediatrics.	3rd	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2015,	with	permission).

Melkersson	syndrome	(Melkersson-Rosenthal	syndrome)	is	characterized	by
recurrent	 attacks	 of	 facial	 palsy,	 nonpitting	 facial	 and	 lip	 edema,	 and	 a
congenitally	 furrowed	 and	 fissured	 tongue	 (lingua	 plicata,	 scrotal	 tongue);	 it	 is
sometimes	familial	and	usually	begins	in	childhood.	Its	cause	is	unknown.

Bilateral	 facial	palsy	 (facial	diplegia)	 refers	to	 bilateral	 PFP;	it	is	much	 less
common	but	much	more	ominous	than	unilateral	PFP.	Bilateral	facial	weakness
can	also	occur	because	of	neuromuscular	disorders,	including	myasthenia	gravis,
bulbospinal	 neuronopathy,	 and	 muscle	 disease.	 Myasthenia	 gravis	 may	 cause
marked	 facial	 weakness,	 with	 difficulty	 in	 both	 closing	 and	 opening	 the	 eyes.
The	 pattern	 of	perioral	 muscle	involvement	 is	 capricious.	In	some	 patients,	the
smile	looks	like	a	weak,	halfhearted	effort,	no	matter	the	underlying	jocularity,
and	 may	 be	 more	 vertical	 than	 horizontal	 (Figure	 16.11).	 The	 vertical
myasthenic	 smile	 may	 look	 more	 like	 a	 snarl	 and	 is	 not	 without	 social
consequences	 (myasthenic	 smile,	 myasthenic	 snarl).	 Ectropion,	 worse	 in	 the
afternoon	and	responsive	to	anticholinesterase	agents,	is	a	rare	manifestation	of
myasthenic	weakness	of	the	orbicularis	oculi	(Figure	16.12).	 Some	 myopathies
are	 particularly	 likely	 to	 involve	 the	 facial	 muscles.	 Myopathic	 facies	 are
particularly	 typical	 of	 facioscapulohumeral	 muscular	 dystrophy	 (Landouzy-
Dejerine	 syndrome).	 The	 eyelids	 droop,	 but	 the	 eyes	 cannot	 be	 tightly	 closed.
The	 lips	 cannot	 be	 pursed,	 but	 protrude	 and	 droop	 tonelessly,	 leaving	 an

involuntary	protrusion	of	the	upper	lip	(bouche	de	tapir).	On	smiling,	the	risorius
pulls	at	the	angle	of	the	mouth,	but	the	zygomaticus	is	unable	to	elevate	the	lips
and	the	smile	is	transverse,	see	Video	Link	16.3.

FIGURE	16.11	The	vertical	myasthenic	smile	or	snarl.

In	 facial	 hemiatrophy	 (progressive	 facial	 hemiatrophy,	 Parry-Romberg
syndrome,	 Wartenberg	 syndrome),	
is	 either	 congenital	 failure	 of
there	
development	 or	 a	 progressive	 atrophy	 of	 the	 skin,	 subcutaneous	 fat,	 and
musculature	 of	 one	 half	 of	 the	 face,	 sometimes	 with	 trophic	 changes	 in	 the
connective	 tissue,	 cartilage,	 and	 bone	 (Figure	 16.13).	 Loss	 of	 tongue	 muscle

occurs	in	some	patients.	The	disorder	may	be	a	form	of	localized	scleroderma.
Accompanying	 changes	 may	 include	 trophic	 changes	 in	 the	 hair,	 with	 loss	 of
pigmentation	and	circumscribed	alopecia	and	vitiligo.	The	facial	atrophy	may	be
accompanied	 by	 classic	 linear	 scleroderma	 lesions	 on	 the	 face	 or	 elsewhere.
Rarely,	there	is	hemihypertrophy	instead	of	hemiatrophy.	The	disease	may	be	a
neural	crest	migration	disorder.

FIGURE	 16.12	 Myasthenia	 gravis.	 A.	 Asymmetric	 ectropion	 due	 to	 orbicularis	 oculi
weakness.	B.	Improvement	after	administration	of	neostigmine.	(Reprinted	from	Solé
G,	 Perez	 F,	 Ferrer	 X.	 Teaching	 NeuroImages:	 reversible	 ectropion	 in	 myasthenia
gravis.	Neurology	2009;73[16]:e83,	with	permission.)

syndrome,	 carcinomatous	 or	

When	 bilateral	 facial	 weakness	 is	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 CN	 VII,	 the	 differential
diagnosis	 includes	 bilateral	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 sarcoidosis,	 Lyme	 disease,	 diabetes,
head	 trauma,	 HIV	 infection,	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome,	 the	 Fisher	 variant	 of
lymphomatous	 meningitis,
Guillain-Barré	
tuberculous	 or	 fungal	 meningitis,	 pontine	
tumor,	 Melkersson-Rosenthal
syndrome,	 pseudotumor	 cerebri,	 Möbius’	 syndrome,	 and	 a	 long	 list	 of	 other
conditions.	Leprosy	may	cause	bilateral	facial	paralysis	with	greater	involvement
of	 the	 upper	face.	 In	 Keane’s	 series	of	 inpatients	 with	facial	 diplegia,	 the	 most
common	 causes	 were	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome,	 meningeal	 tumor,
tumor,
idiopathic	 cranial	 polyneuropathy,	
prepontine	
brainstem	 encephalitis,	 and	 syphilis.	 Bilateral	 PFP	 must	 be	 differentiated	 from
other	causes	of	bifacial	weakness,	such	as	myopathies	and	myasthenia	gravis.

intrapontine	

tumor,	

FIGURE	 16.13	 Facial	 hemiatrophy	 (Parry-Romberg	 syndrome)	 with	 atrophy	 of	 the
skin,	subcutaneous	fat,	and	musculature	of	one	half	of	the	face.

In	 its	 course	 across	 the	 middle	 ear,	 the	 chorda	 tympani	 may	 be	 damaged
during	middle	ear	surgery.	Interestingly,	disturbed	taste	after	middle	ear	surgery
is	 usually	 transient,	 even	 when	 the	 chorda	 tympanis	 are	 sectioned	 bilaterally.
However,	 bilateral	 chorda	 tympani	 lesions	 may	 lead	 to	 severe	 and	 persistent
xerostomia	 because	 of	 damage	 to	 the	 autonomic	 fibers.	 A	 syndrome	 of
paroxysmal	otalgia	because	of	neurovascular	compression	of	the	chorda	tympani
has	been	described,	with	evidence	of	compression	of	the	nervus	intermedius	by	a
branch	 of	 the	 AICA	 in	 the	 IAC	 demonstrated	 by	 magnetic	 resonance
angiography	(MRA).

Facial	Weakness	of	Central	Origin

In	 a	 supranuclear,	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 or	 CFP,	 there	 is	 weakness	 of	 the	 lower
face,	 with	 relative	 sparing	 of	 the	 upper	 face.	 The	 upper	 face	 has	 both
contralateral	and	ipsilateral	supranuclear	innervation,	and	cortical	innervation	of
the	facial	nucleus	may	be	more	extensive	for	the	lower	face	than	the	upper.	The
paresis	is	rarely	complete.

A	lesion	involving	the	corticobulbar	fibers	anywhere	prior	to	their	synapse	on

the	facial	nerve	nucleus	will	cause	a	CFP.	Lesions	are	most	often	in	the	cortex	or
internal	capsule.	Occasionally,	a	lesion	as	far	caudal	as	the	medulla	can	cause	a
CFP	 because	 of	 involvement	 of	 the	 aberrant	 pyramidal	 tract.	 There	 is
considerable	 individual	 variation	 in	 facial	 innervation,	 and	 the	 extent	 of
weakness	in	a	CFP	may	vary	from	the	lower	half	to	two-thirds	of	the	face.	The
upper	 face	 is	 not	 necessarily	 completely	 spared,	 but	 it	 is	 always	 involved	 to	 a
lesser	 degree	 than	 the	 lower	 face.	 There	 may	 be	 subtle	 weakness	 of	 the
orbicularis	 oculi,	 the	 palpebral	 fissure	 may	 be	 slightly	 wider	 on	 the	 involved
side,	 and	 there	 may	 be	 a	 decrease	 in	 palpable	 lid	 vibrations.	 However,
involvement	of	the	corrugator	and	frontalis	is	unusual,	and	the	patient	should	be
able	to	elevate	the	eyebrow	and	wrinkle	the	forehead	with	no	more	than	minimal
asymmetry.	 Inability	 to	 independently	 wink	 the	 involved	 eye	 may	 be	 the	 only
demonstrable	deficit.	Occasionally,	a	patient	with	incompletely	developed	Bell’s
palsy	will	have	relative	sparing	of	the	upper	face,	causing	confusion	with	a	CFP.
Even	if	there	is	some	degree	of	upper	facial	involvement	in	a	CFP,	the	patient
is	always	able	to	close	the	eye,	Bell’s	phenomenon	is	absent,	the	corneal	reflex	is
present,	and	the	orbicularis	oculi	reflex	may	be	exaggerated.	In	CFP,	the	lower
face	 is	 weak,	 the	 nasolabial	 fold	 is	 shallow,	 and	 facial	 mobility	 is	 decreased.
However,	 the	 lower	 face	 weakness	 is	 never	 as	 severe	 as	 with	 a	 PFP,	 which
suggests	that	there	may	be	some	direct	cortical	innervation	to	the	lower	face	as
well	 as	 the	 upper.	 Separating	 CFP	 and	 PFP	 is	 rarely	 difficult.	 CFP	 is	 typically
part	of	a	more	extensive	paralysis	because	of	a	lesion	of	the	upper	motor	neuron
pathways.	 Rarely,	
isolation	 without	 other	 neurologic
in	
abnormalities;	 this	 pattern	 has	 been	 reported	 with	 a	 lacunar	 lesion	 of	 the
contralateral	basis	pontis.

it	 may	 occur	

FIGURE	 16.14	 Patient	 with	 left	 thalamic	 tumor	 with	 face	 at	 rest	 (A),	 on	 voluntarily
baring	the	teeth	(B),	and	on	reflex	smiling	(C);	there	is	right	facial	paresis	on	smiling
but	not	on	voluntary	contraction,	an	emotional	facial	palsy.	Patient	with	a	lesion	of	the
corticobulbar	 fibers	 in	 the	 genu	 of	 the	 left	 internal	 capsule	 with	 face	 at	 rest	 (D),	 on
voluntarily	baring	the	teeth	(E),	and	on	reflex	smiling	(F);	there	is	right	facial	paresis
on	 voluntary	 contraction	 but	 not	 on	 smiling,	 a	 volitional	 facial	 palsy.	 (From	 Ross	 RT,
Mathiesen	R.	Images	in	clinical	medicine.	Volitional	and	emotional	supranuclear	facial
weakness.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med	 1998;338[21]:1515.	 Copyright	 ©	 1998	 Massachusetts
Medical	Society.	Reprinted	with	permission	from	Massachusetts	Medical	Society.)

There	 are	 two	 variations	 of	 CFP:	 (a)	 volitional,	 or	 voluntary;	 and	 (b)
emotional,	or	mimetic.	In	most	instances	of	CFP,	the	facial	asymmetry	is	present
both	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 asked	 to	 smile	 or	 show	 the	 teeth,	 and	 during
spontaneous	 facial	 movements	 such	 as	 smiling	 and	 laughing.	 However,
spontaneous	movements	and	deliberate,	willful	movements	may	show	different
degrees	of	weakness	(Figure	16.14).	When	asymmetry	is	more	apparent	with	one
than	 the	 other,	 the	 facial	 weakness	 is	 said	 to	 be	 dissociated.	 Facial	 asymmetry

more	 apparent	 with	 spontaneous	 expression,	 as	 when	 laughing,	 is	 called	 a
mimetic,	emotive	or	emotional	facial	palsy	(EFP)	(see	Figure	16.14C);	weakness
more	marked	on	voluntary	contraction,	when	the	patient	is	asked	to	smile	or	bare
her	teeth,	is	called	a	volitional	facial	palsy	(VFP)	(see	Figure	16.14E).	With	VFP,
automatic	 or	 spontaneous	 movements	 may	 not	 only	 be	 preserved,	 but	 at	 times
exaggerated.	VFP	may	result	from	a	lesion	involving	either	the	cortical	center	in
the	 lower	 third	 of	 the	 precentral	 gyrus	 that	 controls	 facial	 movements,	 or	 the
corticobulbar	 tract.	 The	 lesion	 thus	 may	 be	 either	 in	 the	 cortex	 or	 in	 the
subcortical	 corticobulbar	 pathways	 as	 they	 go	 through	 the	 internal	 capsule,	 the
cerebral	peduncle,	or	the	pons	above	the	facial	nucleus.	The	dissociation	may	be
due	to	bilateral	supranuclear	innervation	for	lower	facial	spontaneous,	emotional
movements	not	present	for	volitional	movements.	In	EFP,	the	weakness	is	most
marked	 with	 spontaneous	 facial	 movements,	 and	 the	 patient	 can	 contract	 the
lower	facial	muscles	on	command	without	difficulty.	The	anatomical	explanation
for	EFP	is	unclear.	Facial	weakness	seen	only	with	emotional	movements	most
commonly	 results	 from	 thalamic	 or	 striatocapsular	 lesions,	 usually	 infarction,
rarely	with	brainstem	lesions.	It	has	been	described	in	lesions	of	the	frontal	lobe
anterior	 to	 the	 precentral	 gyrus	 involving	 the	 supplementary	 motor	 area.	 The
fibers	 that	 mediate	 the	 emotional	 response	 travel	 through	 pathways	 other	 than
the	 corticobulbar	 tracts.	 Facial	 asymmetry	 has	 been	 described	 in	 patients	 with
temporal	lobe	seizure	foci;	the	weaker	side	is	usually	contralateral	to	the	lesion.

Abnormal	Facial	Movements

Some	 conditions	 involving	 the	 face	 produce	 abnormal	 movements	 rather	 than
weakness.	 Common	 disorders	 causing	 abnormal	 facial	 movements	 include
aberrant	 regeneration	 because	 of	 facial	 nerve	 palsy,	 blepharospasm,	 HFS,	 and
facial	myokymia.

Hemifacial	Spasm

Facial	 synkinesis	 may	 progress	 to	 a	 stage	 of	 HFS.	 More	 often,	 HFS	 arises	 de
novo,	 because	 of	 intermittent	 compression	 by	 an	 ectatic	 arterial	 loop	 in	 the
posterior	circulation,	most	often	a	redundant	loop	of	the	AICA.	The	compression
is	usually	near	the	anterior	aspect	of	the	root	exit	zone.	The	pathophysiology	is
similar	 to	 that	 in	 some	 cases	 of	 trigeminal	 neuralgia	 (Chapter	 15).	 The	 arterial
pulsations	are	thought	to	cause	demyelination	and	focal	nerve	damage	leading	to

ephaptic	transmission	and	ectopic	excitation.	Combined	studies	using	MRI	and
MRA	may	demonstrate	the	neurovascular	compression.	An	MRI	study	using	3D
reconstruction	confirmed	the	AICA	as	the	most	common	causative	vessel,	with
the	 posterior	 inferior	 cerebellar	 artery,	 vertebral	 artery,	 internal	 auditory	 artery,
and	veins	occasionally	causing	facial	nerve	compression	at	the	root	entry	zone.
However,	 radiographic	 studies	 using	 a	 3T	 MRI	 has	 shown	 that	 some	 contact
between	 the	 facial	 nerve	 and	 nearby	 vessels,	 even	 enough	 to	 cause	 mild	 nerve
deviation,	is	the	rule	rather	than	the	exception.

Microvascular	decompression	is	sometimes	done	and	may	effectively	halt	the
movements.	 The	 lateral	 spread	 response	 is	 an	 electrophysiologic	 phenomenon
seen	in	HFS.	Stimulation	of	the	mandibular	branch	of	the	facial	nerve	may	cause
a	 compound	 muscle	 action	 potential	 to	 appear	 in	 the	 orbicularis	 oculi.	 This
response	 does	 not	 occur	 in	 normals.	 The	 lateral	 spread	 response	 is	 objective
evidence	 of	 ephaptic	 transmission	 from	 one	 facial	 nerve	 branch	 to	 another.
During	microvascular	decompression,	the	lateral	spread	response	may	disappear
when	the	offending	vessel	is	lifted	off	the	nerve,	and	the	status	of	the	response
may	be	used	as	an	indicator	of	the	effectiveness	of	the	decompression.	HFS	may
also	 occur	 with	 other	 extra-axial	 or	 intra-axial	 lesions,	 including	 aneurysm,
tumor,	multiple	sclerosis,	or	basilar	meningitis.

HFS	usually	develops	in	older	patients,	and	the	condition	is	twice	as	common
in	women	than	men.	Twitching	usually	begins	in	the	orbicularis	oculi,	less	often
in	the	oris.	Initially,	the	twitching	may	be	subtle	and	difficult	to	distinguish	from
facial	 synkinesis.	 HFS	 may	 involve	 the	 entire	 facial	 nerve	 distribution,	 or	 only
certain	 nerve	 branches;	 it	 may	 propagate	 from	 one	 branch	 to	 another.	 Over
months	to	years,	HFS	usually	spreads	to	involve	all	of	the	facial	muscles	on	one
side,	but	it	remains	strictly	limited	to	the	muscles	supplied	by	the	facial	nerve.
As	 HFS	 worsens,	 it	 may	 involve	 the	 auricular	 muscles	 even	 when	 the	 patient
cannot	 deliberately	 wiggle	 the	 ears;	 the	 platysma	 may	 also	 be	 affected.	 Fully
developed	HFS	causes	repetitive,	paroxysmal,	involuntary,	spasmodic,	tonic	and
clonic	contractions	of	the	muscles	innervated	by	the	facial	nerve	on	the	involved
side	 of	 the	 face.	 The	 mouth	 twists	 to	 the	 affected	 side,	 the	 nasolabial	 fold
deepens,	the	eye	closes,	and	there	is	contraction	of	the	frontalis	muscle	(Video
16.2).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	16.2	Hemifacial	spasm.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	Reich.)

The	 spasms	 may	 persist	 in	 sleep	 and	 are	 often	 exacerbated	 by	 chewing	 or
speaking.	 Synkinesis	 following	 PFP	 may	 cause	 movements	 resembling	 HFS.
The	essential	difference	is	that	synkinesis	is	provoked	by	a	voluntary	movement,
whereas	 HFS	 is	 a	 spontaneous,	 involuntary	 contraction.	 HFS	 is	 commonly
associated	 with	 some	 degree	 of	 facial	 weakness	 because	 of	 underlying	 nerve
damage.	 Rare	 patients	 may	 have	 both	 HFS	 and	 trigeminal	 neuralgia,	 with
lancinating	pain	accompanying	the	facial	spasms	(tic	convulsif).	Brissaud-Sicard
syndrome	is	HFS	with	contralateral	hemiparesis	because	of	a	lesion	in	the	pons.
Babinski’s	brow	lift	sign	is	seen	only	in	HFS	and	consists	of	cocontraction	of
the	frontalis	and	orbicularis	oculi	muscles	causing	simultaneous	eye	closure	and
paradoxical	 elevation	 of	 the	 eyebrow	 during	 a	 spasm.	 This	 movement	 is
impossible	 to	 execute	 voluntarily	 and	 does	 not	 occur	 in	 blepharospasm,	 tic	 or
psychogenic	movement	disorders.	The	brow	lift	sign	has	been	referred	to	as	the
“other	 Babinski	 sign,”	 but	 at	 least	 nine	 signs	 bear	 Babinski’s	 name	 and	 this
designation	 has	 been	 used	 for	 other	 signs	 as	 well,	 most	 notably	 Babinski’s
platysma	sign.

involuntary	

Blepharospasm	 (nictitating	 spasm)	 causes	

that
primarily	involves	the	orbicularis	oculi	and	frontalis	muscles.	Blepharospasm	is
most	often	idiopathic	or	“essential”	and	is	a	form	of	focal	dystonia	(Chapter	30,
Video	30.5).	Blepharospasm	is	always	bilateral	and	fairly	symmetric.	Meige’s
syndrome	 is	 the	 association	 of	 blepharospasm	 with	 oromandibular	 dystonia.
Patients	 with	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)	 Whipple’s	 disease	 may	 have	 an
oculofacial,	 more	 often	 an	 oculomasticatory,	 myorhythmia	 (see	 Video	 Link
16.4).

twitching	

Tic,	 or	 habit	 spasm,	 can	 cause	 a	 movement	 resembling	 HFS	 or

blepharospasm.	Tic	often	causes	retraction	of	the	angle	of	the	mouth,	contraction
of	 the	 orbicularis	 oculi	 or	 platysma,	 or	 eye	 blinking.	 The	 movements	 are
somewhat	more	bizarre	and	purposeful,	and	other	muscles	not	innervated	by	CN
VII	 may	 be	 brought	 into	 action.	 Bizarre	 grimacing	 movements	 of	 the	 face	 are
usually	 habit	 spasms.	 The	 movements	 in	 HFS	 and	 essential	 blepharospasm	 are
stereotyped.	 The	 patient	 with	 tic	 can	 suppress	 the	 movements,	 at	 least
temporarily,	while	the	movements	of	HFS	and	blepharospasm	are	totally	beyond
volitional	control	and	cannot	be	suppressed	or	imitated.

Spastic	Paretic	Facial	Contracture

Instead	 of	 spasm,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 facial	 contracture	 causing	 a	 fixed	 expression
with	wrinkling	of	the	forehead,	narrowing	of	the	palpebral	fissure,	drawing	up	or
twisting	of	the	angle	of	the	mouth,	and	increased	depth	of	the	nasolabial	fold.	A
facial	 contracture	 may	 give	 the	 faulty	 impression	 of	 weakness	 on	 the	 opposite
side.	Facial	contracture	may	follow	a	facial	paralysis,	or	occur	de	novo.	Careful
testing	 may	 reveal	 that	 the	 affected	 muscles	 are	 still	 paretic,	 even	 though	 in	 a
state	 of	 contracture.	 This	 type	 of	 spastic	 paretic	 facial	 contracture	 may	 occur
with	 a	 progressive	 lesion	 of	 the	 pons	 and	 is	 suspicious	 for	 neoplasm.	 When
facial	myokymia	and	spastic	paretic	contracture	occur	together,	the	likelihood	of
pontine	neoplasm	is	very	high.

Facial	Myokymia

Facial	 myokymia	 is	 a	 continuous,	 involuntary	 muscular	 quivering	 that	 has	 a
rippling,	 wormlike,	 appearance	 (Chapter	 30).	 It	 is	 usually	 unilateral.	 Facial
myokymia	 has	 been	 reported	 with	 numerous	 conditions,	 most	 intrinsic	 to	 the
brainstem.	 It	 is	 a	 classic	 feature	 of	 multiple	 sclerosis	 but	 may	 also	 occur	 with
pontine	tumor,	CPA	tumors,	Guillain-Barré	syndrome,	facial	nerve	compression,
rattlesnake	 envenomation,	 subarachnoid	 hemorrhage,	 meningeal	 neoplasia,
basilar	 invagination	 and	 in	 association	 with	 high	 titers	 of	 voltage-gated	 K+
channel	 antibodies	 (see	 Video	 Link	 16.5).	 Facial	 myokymia	 may	 occur	 after
cardiac	 arrest,	 even	 in	 some	 patients	 with	 brain	 death.	 With	 intraparenchymal
lesions,	 the	 facial	 nucleus	 itself	 is	 usually	 intact,	 but	 the	 process	 disrupts	 its
connections,	possibly	disinhibiting	some	neural	generator.	Mild,	usually	fleeting,
myokymia	 is	 common,	 especially	 in	 the	 orbicularis	 oculi,	 and	 of	 no	 clinical
significance.	 These	 movements	 often	 worsen	 with	 fatigue	 and	 with	 hyper

caffeinism.	Patients	often	require	reassurance.

Other	Abnormal	Facial	Movements

Focal	 seizures	 involving	 the	 face	 may	 occur	 with	 seizure	 foci	 in	 the	 motor
cortex.	 Facial	 seizures	 may	 be	 part	 of	 a	 versive	 seizure	 or	 Jacksonian	 march.
Disease	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia	 or	 extrapyramidal	 system	 may	 involve	 the	 facial
muscles	 causing	 hypokinesia	 or	hyperkinesia	 (Chapter	 30).	 Parkinson’s	 disease
include	 dyskinesias,
causes	 hypokinesia.	 Forms	 of	 facial	 hyperkinesias	
choreiform,	 athetoid,	 dystonic,	 grimacing,	 and	 myoclonic	 movements	 and
tremors.	 Oral-facial	 dyskinesias	 are	 common,	 most	 often	 as	 a	 tardive
manifestation	of	psychoactive	drug	use.	Facial	muscles,	especially	the	platysma,
may	 sometimes	 be	 involved	 in	 palatal	 myoclonus,	 which	 is	 a	 persistent,
rhythmic	movement	in	contrast	to	other	forms	of	myoclonus	(Chapter	30).	Facial
myoclonus	 can	 occur	 with	 dolichoectasia	 of	 the	 vertebral	 artery,	 with
hypocalcemia,	 serotonin	 syndrome,	 and	 other	 conditions.	 Facial	 fasciculations
may	 occur	 in	 any	 motor	 neuron	 disease;	 perioral	 and	 chin	 fasciculations	 are
frequent	in	Kennedy’s	disease.

Sensory	Involvement

Except	for	disturbances	of	taste,	sensory	abnormalities	are	not	a	common	part	of
facial	 nerve	 lesions.	 Taste	 may	 be	 affected	 with	 lesions	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve
proximal	to	the	takeoff	of	the	chorda	tympani.	Permanent	taste	disturbances	may
follow	 Bell’s	 palsy.	 Disturbances	 of	 taste	 and	 smell	 often	 occur	 together.	 Taste
abnormalities	 are	 usually	due	 to	 olfactory	 dysfunction	 (Chapter	12).	 Dysgeusia
may	 be	 a	 direct	 or	 indirect	 effect	 of	 malignancy.	 Hypergeusia	 and	 parageusias
may	 occur	 in	 psychoses	 and	 conversion	disorder.	 Gustatory	hallucinations	may
occur	 with	 complex	 partial	 seizures	 and	 with	 tumors	 involving	 the	 uncus	 or
parietal	operculum.	Gustatory	and	olfactory	hallucinations	often	occur	together.
Elderly	patients	sometimes	develop	dysgeusia	of	obscure	origin	that	may	lead	to
anorexia	 and	 weight	 loss.	 Increased	 taste	 sensitivity	 occurs	 in	 patients	 with
Addison	disease,	pituitary	deficiency,	and	cystic	fibrosis.

Geniculate	 neuralgia	 causes	 paroxysmal	 pain	 deep	 in	 the	 ear,	 sometimes
radiating	 to	 the	 face.	 “Tic	 douloureux	 of	 the	 chorda	 tympani”	 has	 also	 been
described.	Lesions	of	the	lingual	nerve	may	cause	loss	of	taste	together	with	loss
of	 exteroceptive	 sensation	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 of	 the	 tongue;	 there	 is	 also

usually	subjective	numbness.

Secretory	Changes

CN	 VII	 is	 involved	 in	 lacrimation	 and	 salivation;	 lesions	 of	 the	 nerve	 at	 or
proximal	to	the	geniculate	ganglion	can	cause	abnormalities	of	these	functions.
Absence	 of	 salivation	 occurs	 only	 with	 bilateral	 lesions.	 Central	 lesions,
especially	those	involving	the	hypothalamus	or	the	autonomic	connections,	may
cause	 changes	 in	 secretory	 function.	Changes	 in	lacrimal	 and	salivary	 flow	 are
more	often	the	result	of	systemic	processes.	Anticholinergic	drugs	often	cause	an
unpleasantly	 dry	 mouth.	 Keratoconjunctivitis	 sicca,	 which	 occurs	 in	 Sjögren’s
syndrome	and	other	connective	tissue	disorders,	causes	deficient	secretion	of	the
lacrimal,	salivary,	and	mucosal	glands.	This	in	turn	causes	dryness	of	the	eyes,
mouth,	and	upper	respiratory	tract.	Sialorrhea	(ptyalism)	is	an	excess	of	saliva.	It
occurs	in	Parkinson’s	disease	and	when	patients	are	unable	to	swallow,	such	as
in	bulbar	involvement	with	motor	neuron	disease.

An	 increase	 or	 decrease	 in	 lacrimal	 or	 salivary	 secretion	 may	 occur	 on	 a
psychogenic	 basis.	 Lacrimation,	 of	 course,	 is	 most	 frequently	 the	 result	 of	 an
emotional	stimulus.	Salivation	may	occur	from	the	smell,	taste,	sight,	or	thought
of	food.	Xerostomia	is	common	in	depressed	and	anxious	patients.

Video	Links

Video	Link	16.1.	Demonstration	of	taste	testing	technique.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=ldkpd88KSUA&feature=mfu_in_order&list=UL

Video	Link	16.2.	Möbius’	syndrome.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=3FJPvBcMNAE

Video	Link	16.3.	Myopathic	facies.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Myopathic_facies
Video	Link	16.4.	Oculomasticatory	myorhythmia	in	CNS	Whipple’s	disease.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Oculomasticatory_myorhythmia

Video	Link	16.5.	Facial	myokymia	after	rattlesnake	bite.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KaM3-qy8uqU

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abboud	O,	Saliba	I.	Isolated	bilateral	facial	paralysis	revealing	AIDS:	a	unique

presentation.	Laryngoscope	2008;118:580–584.

Adour	 KK.	 Mona	 Lisa	 syndrome:	 solving	 the	 enigma	 of	 the	 Gioconda	 smile.

Ann	Otol	Rhinol	Laryngol	1989;98:196–199.

Agarwal	 R,	 Manandhar	 L,	 Saluja	 P,	 et	 al.	 Pontine	 stroke	 presenting	 as	 isolated
facial	nerve	palsy	mimicking	Bell’s	Palsy:	a	case	report.	J	Med	Case	Reports
2011;5:287.

Baizabal-Carvallo	 JF,	 Jankovic	 J.	 Distinguishing	 features	 of	 psychogenic
(functional)	versus	organic	hemifacial	spasm.	J	Neurol	2017;264(2):359–363.
Campos-Benitez	 M,	 Kaufmann	 AM.	 Neurovascular	 compression	 findings	 in

hemifacial	spasm.	J	Neurosurg	2008;109:416–420.

Cerrato	P,	Imperiale	D,	Bergui	M,	et	al.	Emotional	facial	paresis	in	a	patient	with

a	lateral	medullary	infarction.	Neurology	2003;60:723–724.

Cho	HJ,	Kim	HY.	Interesting	sign	of	Bell’s	palsy	in	an	ear	wiggler.	Neurol	Sci

2009;30:345–347.

Clement	 WA,	 White	 A.	 Idiopathic	 familial	 facial	 nerve	 paralysis.	 J	 Laryngol

Otol	2000;114:132–134.

Compston	A.	Facial	reflexes.	Brain.	2005;128(Pt	2):235–236.
Croxson	 G,	 May	 M,	 Mester	 SJ.	 Grading	 facial	 nerve	 function:	 House-

Brackmann	versus	Burres-Fisch	methods.	Am	J	Otol	1990;11:240–246.

Eggenberger	 E.	 Eight-and-a-half	 syndrome:	 one-and-a-half	 syndrome	 plus

cranial	nerve	VII	palsy.	J	Neuroophthalmol	1998;18:114–116.

Evidente	 VG,	 Adler	 CH.	 Hemifacial	 spasm	 and	 other	 craniofacial	 movement

disorders.	Mayo	Clin	Proc	1998;73:67–71.

Gilchrist	JM.	AAEM	case	report	#26:	seventh	cranial	neuropathy.	Muscle	Nerve

1993;16:447–452.

Gilchrist	JM.	Seventh	cranial	neuropathy.	Semin	Neurol	2009;29:5–13.
Guinand	N,	Just	T,	Stow	NW,	et	al.	Cutting	the	chorda	tympani:	not	just	a	matter

of	taste.	J	Laryngol	Otol	2010;124:999–1002.

Gutmann	 L.	 AAEM	 minimonograph	 #37:	 facial	 and	 limb	 myokymia.	 Muscle

Nerve	1991;14:1043–1049.

Gutmann	 L,	 Tellers	 JG,	 Vernino	 S.	 Persistent	 facial	 myokymia	 associated	 with

K(+)	channel	antibodies.	Neurology	2001;57(9):1707–1708.

Hunt	JR.	On	herpetic	inflammations	of	the	geniculate	ganglion:	a	new	syndrome

and	its	complications.	J	Nerv	Ment	Dis	1907;34:73.

James	DG.	All	that	palsies	is	not	Bell’s.	J	R	Soc	Med	1996;89:184–187.
Kakizawa	 Y,	 Seguchi	 T,	 Kodama	 K,	 et	 al.	 Anatomical	 study	 of	 the	 trigeminal
and	facial	cranial	nerves	with	the	aid	of	3.0-tesla	magnetic	resonance	imaging.
J	Neurosurg	2008;108:483–490.

Kanoh	N,	Nomura	J,	Satomi	F.	Nocturnal	onset	and	development	of	Bell’s	palsy.

Laryngoscope	2005;115:99–100.

Karadan	 U,	 Manappallil	 RG,	 Jayakrishnan	 C,	 et	 al.	 Pontine	 haemorrhage

disguised	as	Bell’s	palsy.	BMJ	Case	Rep	2018;5:2018.

Keane	JR.	Bilateral	seventh	nerve	palsy:	analysis	of	43	cases	and	review	of	the

literature.	Neurology	1994;44:1198–1202.

Kefalidis	 G,	 Riga	 M,	 Argyropoulou	 P,	 et	 al.	 Is	 the	 width	 of	 the	 labyrinthine
portion	 of	 the	 fallopian	 tube	 implicated	 in	 the	 pathophysiology	 of	 Bell’s
tomography.
palsy?:	 a	 prospective	 clinical	
Laryngoscope	2010;120:1203–1207.

study	 using	 computed	

Kim	 YH,	 Choi	 IJ,	 Kim	 HM,	 et	 al.	 Bilateral	 simultaneous	 facial	 nerve	 palsy:

clinical	analysis	in	seven	cases.	Otol	Neurotol	2008;29:397–400.

Kinoshita	T,	Ishii	K,	Okitsu	T,	et	al.	Facial	nerve	palsy:	evaluation	by	contrast-

enhanced	MR	imaging.	Clin	Radiol	2001;56:926–932.

Krauss	 JK,	 Wakhloo	 AK,	 Scheremet	 R,	 et	 al.	 Facial	 myokymia	 and	 spastic
paretic	 facial	 contracture	 as	 the	 result	 of	 anaplastic	 pontocerebellar	 glioma.
Neurosurgery	1993;32:1031–1034.

Kugelberg	E.	Facial	reflexes.	Brain	1952;75:385.
Kuhweide	 R,	 Van	 de	 Steene	 V,	 Vlaminck	 S,	 et	 al.	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome:
symptoms.	 J	 Laryngol	 Otol

pathophysiology	 of	 cochleovestibular	
2002;116:844–848.

Malhotra	 A.	 Marin-Amat	 syndrome:	 a	 case	 of	 acquired	 facial	 synkinesis.	 BMJ

Case	Rep	2013;18:2013.

Mansoor	 AM,	 Sullivan	 PD.	

Intrafacial	 synkinesis.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med

2016;374(22):e27.

Morris	 HH,	 Estes	 ML.	 Bilateral	 facial	 myokymia	 following	 cardiopulmonary

arrest.	Arch	Neurol	1981;38:393–394.

Morris	 AM,	 Deeks	 SL,	 Hill	 MD,	 et	 al.	 Annualized	 incidence	 and	 spectrum	 of
illness	 from	 an	 outbreak	 investigation	 of	 Bell’s	 palsy.	 Neuroepidemiology
2002;21:255–261.

Müri	RM.	Cortical	control	of	facial	expression.	J	Comp	Neurol	2016;524:1578–

1585.

Mutsch	M,	Zhou	W,	Rhodes	P,	et	al.	Use	of	the	inactivated	intranasal	influenza
vaccine	 and	 the	 risk	 of	 Bell’s	 palsy	 in	 Switzerland.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med
2004;350:896–903.

Naraghi	 R,	 Tanrikulu	 L,	 Troescher-Weber	 R,	 et	 al.	 Classification	 of
neurovascular	 compression	 in	 typical	 hemifacial	 spasm:	 three-dimensional

visualization	 of	 the	 facial	 and	 the	 vestibulocochlear	 nerves.	 J	 Neurosurg
2007;107:1154–1163.

Nielsen	VK.	Pathophysiology	of	hemifacial	spasm.	I.	Ephaptic	transmission	and

ectopic	excitation.	Neurology	1984;34:418.

Patel	 AA,	 Tanna	 N.	 In:	 Meyers	 AD,	 ed.	 Facial	 Nerve	 Anatomy.	 Available	 at:
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/835286-overview.	 Accessed	 July	 11,
2011.

Pavone	P,	Garozzo	R,	Trifiletti	RR,	et	al.	Marin-Amat	syndrome:	case	report	and

review	of	the	literature.	J	Child	Neurol	1999;14:266–268.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Riaz	 G,	 Campbell	 WW,	 Carr	 J,	 et	 al.	 Facial	 myokymia	 in	 syringobulbia.	 Arch

Neurol	1990;47:472–474

Roh	 JK,	 Kim	 BK,	 Chung	 JM.	 Combined	 peripheral	 facial	 and	 abducens	 nerve
palsy	caused	by	caudal	tegmental	pontine	infarction.	Eur	Neurol	1999;41:99–
102.

Ronthal	 M.	 Bell’s	 palsy:	 pathogenesis,	 clinical	 features,	 and	 diagnosis.	 In:
Shefner	 JM,	 Eichler	 AF,	 eds.	 UpToDate.	 Available	 at:	 www.uptodate.com.
Accessed	February	28,	2018.

Rowlands	 S,	 Hooper	 R,	 Hughes	 R,	 et	 al.	 The	 epidemiology	 and	 treatment	 of

Bell’s	palsy	in	the	UK.	Eur	J	Neurol	2002;9:63–67.

Rubin	 DI,	 Matsumoto	 JY,	 Suarez	 GA,	 et	 al.	 Facial	 trigeminal	 synkinesis

associated	with	a	trigeminal	schwannoma.	Neurology	1999;53:635–637.

Sakas	 DE,	 Panourias	 IG,	 Stranjalis	 G,	 et	 al.	 Paroxysmal	 otalgia	 due	 to
compression	of	the	intermediate	nerve:	a	distinct	syndrome	of	neurovascular
conflict	
J	 Neurosurg
2007;107:1228–1230.

confirmed	 by	 neuroimaging.	 Case	

report.	

Sarwal	 A,	 Garewal	 M,	 Sahota	 S,	 et	 al.	 Eight-and-a-half	 syndrome.	 J

Neuroimaging	2009;19:288–290.

Solé	 G,	 Perez	 F,	 Ferrer	 X.	 Teaching	 NeuroImages:	 reversible	 ectropion	 in

myasthenia	gravis.	Neurology	2009;73:e83.

Stamey	W,	Jankovic	J.	The	other	Babinski	sign	in	hemifacial	spasm.	Neurology

2007;69:402–404.

Sweeney	 CJ,	 Gilden	 DH.	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg

Psychiatry	2001;71:149–154.

Tzafetta	 K,	 Terzis	 JK.	 Essays	 on	 the	 facial	 nerve:	 part	 I.	 Microanatomy.	 Plast

Reconstr	Surg	2010;125:879–889.

Urban	PP,	Wicht	S,	Marx	J,	et	al.	Isolated	voluntary	facial	paresis	due	to	pontine

ischemia.	Neurology	1998;50:1859–1862.

Urban	PP,	Wicht	S,	Vucorevic	G,	et	al.	The	course	of	corticofacial	projections	in

the	human	brainstem.	Brain	2001;124(Pt	9):1866–1876.

Valls-Solé	 J.	 Facial	 nerve	 palsy	 and	 hemifacial	 spasm.	 Handb	 Clin	 Neurol

2013;115:367–380.

Varanda	 S,	 Rocha	 S,	 Rodrigues	 M,	 et	 al.	 Role	 of	 the	 “other	 Babinski	 sign”	 in

hyperkinetic	facial	disorders.	J	Neurol	Sci	2017;378:36–37.

Vrabec	JT,	Isaacson	B,	Van	Hook	JW.	Bell’s	palsy	and	pregnancy.	Otolaryngol

Head	Neck	Surg	2007;137:858–861.

Weijnen	FG,	van	der	Bilt	A,	Wokke	JH,	et	al.	What’s	in	a	smile?	Quantification
of	 the	 vertical	 smile	 of	 patients	 with	 myasthenia	 gravis.	 J	 Neurol	 Sci
2000;173:124–128.

Xanthopoulos	 J,	 Noussios	 G,	 Papaioannides	 D,	 et	 al.	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome
presenting	 as	 a	 cranial	 polyneuropathy.	 Acta	 Otorhinolaryngol	 Belg
2002;56:319–323.

Yamashita	M,	Yamamoto	T.	Aberrant	pyramidal	tract	in	the	medial	lemniscus	of
the	 human	 brainstem:	 normal	 distribution	 and	 pathological	 changes.	 Eur
Neurol	2001;45:75–82.

CHAPTER	17

The	Acoustic	(Vestibulocochlear)
Nerve

The	 vestibulocochlear,	 acoustic,	 or	 eighth	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN	 VIII)	 has	 two
components,	 the	 vestibular	 and	 the	 cochlear,	 blended	 into	 a	 single	 trunk.	 The
cochlear	portion	subserves	hearing;	the	vestibular	nerve	subserves	equilibration,
coordination,	 and	 orientation	 in	 space.	 Both	 are	 classified	 as	 special	 sensory
afferent	 nerves.	 The	 two	 components	 originate	 in	 separate	 peripheral	 receptors
and	 have	 distinct	 central	 connections.	 Although	 they	 are	 united	 along	 their
course	 through	 the	 skull,	 they	 differ	 so	 greatly	 both	 functionally	 and	 in	 their
anatomic	relationships	that	they	should	be	considered	separately.

THE	COCHLEAR	NERVE

Anatomy	and	Physiology

Sound	is	a	form	of	energy	produced	by	vibrations	that	create	a	sinusoidal	wave
of	alternating	condensations	and	rarefactions	in	a	conductive	medium	such	as	air.
Sound	 waves	 converge	 on	 the	 tympanic	 membrane	 and	 are	 transmitted	 by	 the
auditory	ossicles	(malleus,	incus,	and	stapes)	to	the	inner	ear,	or	labyrinth.	The
labyrinth	is	a	complex	of	interconnecting	cavities,	tunnels,	ducts,	and	canals	that
lies	 in	 the	 petrous	 portion	 of	 the	 temporal	 bone	 (Figure	 17.1).	 The	 vestibule,
cochlea,	and	semicircular	canals	form	the	bony,	or	osseous,	labyrinth,	which	is
made	 of	 compact	 bone	 and	 can	 be	 dissected	 free	 of	 the	 cancellous	 bone	 that
surrounds	it	(Figure	17.2).

The	 bony	 labyrinth	 is	 filled	 with	 perilymph,	 a	 thin	 watery	 fluid	 similar	 to
cerebrospinal	 fluid.	 The	 membranous	 labyrinth	 is	 an	 arrangement	 of	 sacs	 and
ducts	 that	 lies	 within	 the	 bony	 labyrinth,	 generally	 follows	 its	 outline,	 and	 is

filled	 with	 endolymph	 (Scarpa’s	 fluid	 [Antonio	 Scarpa	 was	 an	 Italian	 surgeon,
anatomist,	 and	 artist	 who	 first	 described	 many	 structures	 of	 the	 ear]).	 The
membranous	labyrinth	has	two	major	components:	the	vestibular	apparatus	and
the	 cochlear	 duct	 (Figure	 17.3).	 The	 ossicles	 span	 the	 middle	 ear	 cavity	 and
transmit	the	oscillations	of	the	tympanic	membrane	to	the	footplate	of	the	stapes,
which	 sits	 in	 the	 oval	 window	 (fenestra	 vestibuli).	 The	 ossicles	 function	 as	 an
amplifier	 and	 help	 to	 compensate	 for	 the	 loss	 of	 energy	 as	 sound	 waves	 are
transmitted	 from	 the	 air	 to	 the	 perilymph	 behind	 the	 oval	 window.	 The	 tensor
tympani	muscle,	which	inserts	on	the	malleus,	and	the	stapedius,	which	inserts
on	 the	 stapes,	 provide	 reflex	 protection	 against	 sudden,	 loud	 noise.	 The	 oval
window	opens	into	the	vestibule	of	the	inner	ear,	which	connects	on	one	side	to
the	cochlea	and	on	the	other	to	the	semicircular	canals.	The	cochlea	spirals	for
2.5	 to	 2.75	 turns	 to	 reach	 its	 apex.	 The	 base	 of	 the	 cochlea	 faces	 the	 internal
acoustic	meatus	and	contains	myriad	fenestrations	that	admit	the	filaments	of	the
cochlear	nerve.	The	middle	ear	cavity	acts	as	an	impedance-matching	device	to
transfer	sound	energy	from	the	low	impedance	of	air	to	the	high	impedance	of
fluid	in	the	cochlea.

The	 central	 axis	 of	 the	 cochlea	 is	 the	 modiolus;	 from	 it	 projects	 a	 delicate
bony	 shelf,	 the	 spiral	 lamina,	 which	 partially	 divides	 the	 cochlear	 passageway
into	two	parallel	channels—the	scala	tympani	and	the	scala	vestibuli.	The	scala
media,	or	cochlear	duct,	is	part	of	the	membranous	labyrinth.	It	lies	in	the	center
of	the	spirals	of	the	cochlea,	completing	the	partition	between	the	scala	tympani
and	 scala	 vestibuli	(Figure	17.4).	 At	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 modiolus,	 the	 cochlear	 duct
ends	blindly;	a	narrow	slit	at	the	very	apex	of	the	cochlea,	the	helicotrema	(Gr.
“hole	in	a	helix”),	allows	for	communication	and	the	flow	of	perilymph	between
the	scala	tympani	and	vestibuli.

The	basilar	membrane	of	the	cochlear	duct	projects	from	the	spiral	lamina	of
the	modiolus	to	the	outer	wall	of	the	cochlea.	The	spiral	ganglion	of	the	cochlear
nerve	lies	in	the	spiral	canal	of	the	modiolus	(Rosenthal’s	canal).	The	organ	of
Corti	rests	on	the	basilar	membrane	and	contains	inner	and	outer	hair	cells.	The
inner	hair	cells	are	the	receptors,	or	end	organs,	of	the	cochlear	nerve.	From	the
apex	of	each	inner	hair	cell,	a	stereocilium	extends	to	just	beneath	the	tectorial
membrane	 (Figure	17.4).	Sound	waves	 induce	vibrations	 in	 the	cochlea,	which
cause	movement	of	the	basilar	and	tectorial	membranes.	This	movement	flexes
the	 stereocilia,	 which	 activates	 the	 hair	 cell,	 causing	 impulses	 in	 the	 spiral
ganglion.

FIGURE	17.1	The	right	osseous	labyrinth	in	the	temporal	bone	viewed	from	above.

Because	 of	 the	 varying	 width	 of	 the	 basilar	 membrane,	 sound	 of	 a	 certain
frequency	 induces	 harmonic	 oscillations	 maximal	 at	 a	 certain	 point	 along	 the
cochlear	 duct,	 which	 focally	 activates	 certain	 hair	 cells	 and	 encodes	 the
frequency	(Box	17.1).	The	round	window	(fenestra	cochlea)	lies	below	the	oval
window	 (Figure	 17.2).	 It	 is	 covered	 by	 a	 delicate	 membrane,	 the	 secondary
tympanic	membrane,	which	allows	for	compliance	in	the	perilymph	system	and
permits	the	waves	of	vibration	initiated	at	the	oval	window	to	dissipate.

The	spiral	ganglion	consists	of	type	I	and	type	II	bipolar	neurons	that	lie	in
the	modiolus.	Inner	hair	cells	synapse	on	type	I	neurons,	which	make	up	95%	of
the	ganglion.	Axons	of	the	spiral	ganglion	cells	form	the	cochlear	nerve,	which
contains	 some	 30,000	 fibers	 (Figure	 17.6).	 Axons	 from	 type	 I	 cells	 are
myelinated	 and	 form	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 nerve.	 The	 type	 II	 cells	 connect	 with	 the
outer	hair	cells	and	modulate	the	activity	of	the	inner	hair	cells	(Box	17.1).

The	 acoustic	 nerve	 traverses	 the	 internal	 auditory	 canal	 (IAC),	 where	 it	 lies
lateral	 and	 inferior	 to	 the	 facial	 nerve.	 It	 crosses	 the	 cerebellopontine	 angle,
passes	around	the	inferior	 cerebellar	peduncle,	and	enters	the	 upper	 medulla	at
its	junction	with	the	pons	near	the	lateral	recess	of	the	fourth	ventricle	(Figure
17.7).	Each	entering	fiber	bifurcates	to	synapse	in	both	the	dorsal	(posterior)	and
ventral	 (anterior)	 cochlear	 nuclei.	 The	 ventral	 nucleus	 may	 be	 divided	 into
anteroventral	and	posteroventral	portions.	This	dual	termination	is	the	beginning
of	a	great	deal	of	redundancy	in	the	auditory	system.

FIGURE	17.2	The	right	osseous	labyrinth,	lateral	view.

FIGURE	17.3	The	membranous	labyrinth.

FIGURE	17.4	 Structure	 of	 the	 cochlear	 duct	 and	 the	 spiral	 organ	 of	 Corti.	 (Modified
from	Kiernan	JA.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical	Viewpoint.	7th
ed.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott-Raven,	1998,	with	permission.)

BOX	17.1

Tonotopic	Organization

The	 organ	 of	 Corti	 is	 tonotopically	 organized.	 The	 width	 of	 the	 basilar
membrane	of	the	cochlear	duct	is	least	at	the	base	of	the	cochlea,	where	the
spinal	lamina	of	the	modiolus	extends	farthest	into	the	coils	of	the	cochlea.
This	 part	 of	 the	 cochlea	 is	 most	 efficiently	 activated	 by	 high	 frequencies.
Near	 the	 apex,	 the	 basilar	 membrane	 is	 wider	 and	 responds	 to	 low-pitched
tones.	The	inner	hair	cell-spiral	ganglion	cell	complex	at	a	given	point	along

the	 organ	 of	 Corti	 is	 frequency	 dependent,	 responding	 best	 to	 a	 particular
pitch	 and	 coding	 for	 that	 pitch	 by	 its	 discharges	 in	 the	 cochlear	 nerve.
Tonotopic	organization	continues	to	varying	degrees	throughout	the	auditory
system.

Imagine	a	spiral	staircase	in	the	center	of	a	silo—steps	winding	around	a
central	 core,	 steps	 wider	 at	 the	 bottom	 and	 progressively	 narrowing,	 and
from	 each	 step	 a	 cable	 of	 violin	 string	 extending	 to	 the	 wall	 of	 the	 silo
(Figure	17.5).	The	central	core	represents	the	modiolus;	the	steps,	the	spiral
lamina;	and	the	violin	strings,	the	basilar	membrane.	A	low-tone	sounding	in
the	silo	would	set	the	long	strings	near	the	top	of	the	silo	in	vibration;	a	high-
pitched	tone	would	affect	the	short	strings	near	the	bottom.	Coil	the	silo	into
a	conch	to	match	the	turns	in	the	staircase	to	complete	the	resemblance	to	the
cochlear	duct.

The	 stereocilia	 of	 the	 outer	 hair	 cells	 are	 imbedded	 in	 the	 tectorial
membrane	and	have	contractile	properties.	They	help	adjust	and	control	the
oscillations	 of	 the	 membrane	 and	 thereby	 regulate	 to	 some	 degree	 the
activation	 of	 the	 inner	 hair	 cells.	 The	 outer	 hair	 cells	 receive	 innervation
from	 the	 efferent	 cochlear,	 or	 olivocochlear,	 bundle,	 which	 arises	 from	 the
superior	olivary	nucleus	in	the	pons.	By	controlling	the	outer	hair	cells,	the
olivocochlear	 bundle	 helps	 regulate	 afferent	 cochlear	 traffic	 and	 may	 be
involved	in	attentiveness	to	auditory	stimuli.

FIGURE	17.5	The	cochlear	duct	and	organ	of	Corti	as	a	spiral	staircase	in	a	silo	(see
Box	17.1).

FIGURE	17.6	The	acoustic	nerve	and	its	connections.

Tonotopic	 organization	 is	 maintained	 in	 the	 auditory	 nuclei	 and	 throughout
the	higher	auditory	relay	centers;	the	location	of	fibers	is	related	to	their	site	of
origin	in	the	cochlea,	which	in	turn	is	a	reflection	of	the	activating	frequency.	In
the	 cochlear	 nuclei,	 low-frequency	 tones	 are	 processed	 ventrally	 and	 high
frequencies	dorsally.	Second-order	neurons	in	the	cochlear	nuclei	give	rise	to	the
dorsal,	ventral,	and	intermediate	acoustic	stria.	The	dorsal	acoustic	stria	consists
of	fibers	from	the	dorsal	cochlear	nucleus	that	pass	over	the	inferior	cerebellar
peduncle,	 cross	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle	 under	 the	 striae	 medullares
(fibers	of	Piccolomini),	and	then	pass	ventrally	into	the	pons,	near	the	superior
olivary	 nucleus,	 to	 join	 the	 contralateral	 lateral	 lemniscus	 (Figure	 17.8).	 The
intermediate	 and	 ventral	 acoustic	 striae	 arise	 from	 the	 ventral	 cochlear	 nuclei.
The	 intermediate	 stria	 passes	 over	 the	 inferior	 peduncle	 and	 crosses	 the
tegmentum	to	join	the	contralateral	lateral	lemniscus.	Fibers	of	the	ventral	stria
pass	ventral	to	the	peduncle.	Some	cross	the	pons	as	trapezoid	fibers	to	synapse
in	the	contralateral	nucleus	of	the	trapezoid	body.	Others	synapse	ipsilaterally	in
the	nucleus	of	the	trapezoid	body.

FIGURE	17.7	Section	through	the	junction	of	the	pons	and	medulla	at	the	level	of	the
cochlear	nuclei.

Auditory	 fibers	 ascend	 from	 the	 trapezoid	 body	 as	 the	 lateral	 lemniscus.
Fibers	 in	 the	 dorsal	 and	 intermediate	 acoustic	 stria	 run	 to	 the	 contralateral
inferior	colliculus,	most	directly,	some	after	a	relay	in	the	nucleus	of	the	lateral
lemniscus.	 This	 crossed,	 monaural	 auditory	 pathway	 primarily	 carries
information	about	sound	frequency.	Fibers	of	the	ventral	acoustic	stria	are	both
crossed	 and	 uncrossed	 and	 may	 synapse	 in	 the	 nuclei	 of	 the	 trapezoid	 body,
superior	olive,	or	lateral	lemniscus.	The	binaural	pathway,	especially	the	superior
olivary	complex	component,	can	determine	the	time	difference	between	the	two
ears	 and	 aid	 in	 the	 localization	 of	 sound.	 Ascending	 auditory	 fibers	 send
collaterals	to	the	brainstem	reticular	formation	and	to	the	nuclei	of	CNs	V	and
VII;	these	connections	mediate	various	reflexes	related	to	hearing.

Fibers	from	the	lateral	lemnisci	ascend	to	synapse	in	the	central	nucleus	of	the
inferior	colliculus,	an	auditory	reflex	center	that	is	also	tonotopically	organized.
The	inferior	colliculus	is	the	central	relay	nucleus	of	the	auditory	pathway	and
receives	both	ascending	and	descending	input.	Axons	from	the	inferior	colliculus
pass	 through	 the	 brachium	 of	 the	 inferior	 colliculus	 to	 the	 medial	 geniculate

body	 (MGB),	 a	 special	 sensory	 nucleus	 of	 the	 thalamus	 that	 is	 the	 final	 relay
station	 in	 the	 auditory	 pathway.	 In	 the	 MGB,	 fibers	 conveying	 high	 tones	 lie
medially	 and	 low	 tones	 laterally.	 From	 the	 MGB,	 auditory	 fibers	 pass	 through
the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 as	 the	 geniculotemporal	 tract,	 or
auditory	radiations,	which	runs	through	the	sublenticular	portion	of	the	internal
capsule.	 The	 fibers	 terminate	 in	 the	 cortex	 of	 the	 transverse	 temporal
convolutions	(Heschl’s	gyrus)	and	the	adjacent	planum	temporale	portion	of	the
superior	 temporal	 gyrus.	 The	 transverse	 temporal	 gyri	 and	 parts	 of	 the	 planum
temporale	 make	 up	 the	 primary	 and	 secondary	 auditory	 cortex	 (Brodmann’s
areas	 41	 and	 42).	 The	 primary	 auditory	 cortex	 is	 tonotopically	 organized	 with
high	 frequencies	 medial	 and	 low	 frequencies	 lateral.	 The	 auditory	 association
cortex	 (Wernicke’s	 area	 in	 the	 dominant	 hemisphere)	 lies	 just	 posterior	 to	 the
primary	auditory	cortex.

FIGURE	17.8	The	cochlear	pathway.

There	is	extensive	crossing	of	the	central	auditory	pathways	above	the	level
of	the	cochlear	nuclei.	Commissures	connect	the	nuclei	of	the	lateral	lemniscus
(commissure	 of	 Probst)	 and	 the	 inferior	 colliculi	 (commissure	 of	 the	 inferior
colliculus).	There	are	connections	through	the	brachium	of	the	inferior	colliculus
between	 the	 central	 nucleus	 of	 the	 inferior	 colliculus	 on	 one	 side	 and	 the
contralateral	 MGB.	 In	 addition,	 there	 is	 the	 direct,	 tonotopically	 organized
auditory	pathway,	the	core	projection,	and	an	additional,	less-organized	pathway,
the	belt	projection.	The	core	system	includes	the	central	nucleus	of	the	inferior

colliculus,	 portions	 of	 the	 MGB,	 and	 the	 primary	 auditory	 cortex.	 The	 belt
projection	 includes	 the	 pericentral	 region	 of	 the	 inferior	 colliculus,	 the
nonlaminated	 portion	 of	 the	 MGB,	 and	 the	 secondary	 auditory	 cortex.	 The
corpus	 callosum	 contains	 fibers	 that	 connect	 the	 auditory	 cortices	 of	 the	 two
hemispheres.

Descending	auditory	 projections	run	parallel	to	the	ascending	fibers	 and	are
concerned	 with	 auditory	
the
corticogeniculate,	 corticocollicular,	 geniculocollicular,	 and	 collicular	 efferents.
The	efferent	cochlear	bundle	projects	from	the	superior	olive	to	the	cochlea	(Box
17.1).

reflexes.	 Descending	 pathways	

include	

Clinical	Examination

Some	 information	 about	 hearing	 may	 be	 obtained	 simply	 by	 observation	 and
gauging	the	patient’s	ability	to	understand	soft	and	loud	tones	and	low	and	high
pitches;	 note	 signs	 of	 deafness,	 such	 as	 a	 tendency	 to	 turn	 the	 head	 when
listening,	 lipreading,	 or	 speaking	 with	 a	 loud	 voice.	 Any	 history	 of	 hearing
difficulty,	 such	 as	 trouble	 using	 the	 telephone	 or	 hearing	 conversation	 in	 noisy
environments,	 or	 complaints	 from	 family	 members,	 should	 prompt	 a	 careful
evaluation.	 Before	 testing	 hearing,	 otoscopic	 examination	 should	 be	 done	 to
ensure	the	tympanic	membrane	is	intact	and	to	exclude	the	presence	of	wax,	pus,
blood,	foreign	bodies,	and	exudate.	The	mastoid	region	should	be	examined	for
swelling	and	tenderness.

Conductive	hearing	loss	(CHL)	is	that	due	to	impaired	conduction	of	sound	to
the	cochlea	and	may	be	due	to	occlusion	of	the	external	auditory	canal,	middle
ear	disease	(e.g.,	otitis),	or	abnormality	of	the	ossicular	chain	(e.g.,	otosclerosis).
Sensorineural	 hearing	 loss	 (SNHL)	 is	 that	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 cochlea	 (e.g.,
Ménière’s	disease)	or	eighth	CN	(e.g.,	acoustic	neuroma).	As	a	generality,	CHL
affects	low	frequencies	and	SNHL	affects	high	frequencies.	Ménière’s	disease	is
a	notable	exception,	causing	predominantly	low-frequency	hearing	loss,	at	least
early	 in	 the	 course.	 Central	 hearing	 loss	 is	 that	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 central
pathways.	 Central	 hearing	 loss	 is	 very	 rare	 because	 of	 the	 bilaterality	 and
redundancy	 of	 the	 auditory	 system;	 unilateral	 lesions	 of	 the	 central	 auditory
pathways	typically	do	not	cause	any	deficit	detectable	by	routine	clinical	testing.
There	are	many	ways	to	assess	hearing	at	the	bedside.	All	are	crude	compared
to	the	information	that	can	be	obtained	with	a	formal	audiogram.	The	subject	of
audiography	is	complex.	Box	17.2	summarizes	some	of	the	basic	principles.

Bedside	 clinical	 testing	 of	 hearing	 may	 theoretically	 use	 any	 available
instrument	 that	 is	 capable	 of	 making	 a	 sound.	 Because	 the	 ability	 to	 hear	 and
understand	speech	is	the	most	important	functional	aspect	of	audition,	whispered
voice	is	useful.	Inability	to	whisper	at	exactly	the	same	level	for	testing	each	ear,
and	inter-	and	intraindividual	variation	in	the	intensity	and	pitch	of	the	voice,	is	a
theoretical	limitation,	but	clinically	significant	hearing	loss	is	usually	detectable
with	 this	 simple	 technique.	 Whispered	 voice	 has	 been	 recommended	 as	 an
excellent	screening	test.	Inability	to	perceive	a	whispered	voice	has	a	likelihood
ratio	 (LR)	 of	 6.1	 (95%	 CI,	 4.5	 to	 8.4)	 for	 clinically	 significant	 hearing	 loss;
normal	perception	has	an	LR	of	0.03	(95%	CI,	0	to	0.24).

Despite	 its	 disability	 for	 the	 patient,	 high-frequency	 SNHL	 of	 the	 type
associated	 with	 presbycusis	 and	 acoustic	 trauma	 is	 not	 generally	 of	 neurologic
significance;	 the	 use	 of	 high-pitched	 sounds,	 such	 as	 a	 ticking	 watch,	 seldom
provides	 useful	 information	 for	 neurologic	 examination	 purposes.	 In	 certain
types	of	deafness,	loss	of	speech	discrimination	is	of	clinical	significance,	even
though	 pure	 tone	 and	 even	 speech	 thresholds	 are	 normal.	 Few	 conditions	 of
neurologic	 importance	 cause	 bilaterally	 symmetric	 hearing	 loss,	 and	 an
examination	 designed	 to	 detect	 auditory	 asymmetry	 usually	 suffices.	 Other
useful	sounds	for	bedside	testing	include	finger	rub—the	noise	made	by	rubbing
the	 thumb	 and	 index	 finger	 together	 beside	 the	 external	 auditory	 meatus—and
pure	tones	created	by	a	tuning	fork.

Detailed	 testing	 of	 hearing	 is	 done	 monaurally,	 ideally	 while	 occluding	 the
opposite	 ear,	 by	 pressing	 the	 tragus	 over	 the	 canal.	 For	 screening	 purposes	 in
low-yield	 situations,	 occlusion	 of	 the	 opposite	 ear	 is	 sometimes	 omitted,	 and
occasionally,	finger	rub	is	done	binaurally.	In	each	instance,	the	patient	is	asked
to	 compare	 the	 sound	 intensity	 between	 the	 two	 ears.	 The	 examiner	 may	 also
compare	the	distance	from	each	ear	at	which	a	sound	of	the	same	intensity	can
be	 heard.	 An	 occasionally	 useful	 method	 is	 to	 place	 the	 earpieces	 of	 a
stethoscope	into	the	patient’s	ears.	Then,	whisper	into,	scratch	softly	on,	or	hold
a	tuning	fork	to	the	chest	piece,	and	ask	the	patient	to	compare	the	sounds	heard.
One	 side	 of	 the	 tubing	 can	 be	 occluded	 to	 direct	 the	 sound	 into	 one	 ear.	 Ross’
method	is	to	stand	at	a	fixed	distance	(e.g.,	6	ft)	at	a	right	angle	from	the	patient,
have	 the	 patient	 occlude	 the	 far	 ear,	 and	 whisper;	 repeat	 for	 the	 other	 ear,	 and
compare	the	auditory	acuity	on	the	two	sides.

BOX	17.2

Audiometry

Detailed	 assessment	 of	 hearing	 is	 done	 with	 audiometry,	 which	 is	 usually
performed	as	a	battery	of	tests.	The	range	of	human	hearing	is	20	to	20,000
Hz	 (about	 11	 octaves).	 Speech	 usually	 falls	 in	 the	 300-	 to	 3,000-Hz	 range.
There	are	many	different	audiologic	techniques;	those	used	most	commonly
for	neurologic	purposes	are	pure	tone	and	speech	audiometry.	An	audiogram
is	 a	 plot	 of	 the	 threshold	 of	 audition	 for	 short	 pure	 tones	 as	 a	 function	 of
frequency	on	a	logarithmic	decibel	scale.	Air	conduction	(AC),	assessed	with
earphones,	tests	the	entire	auditory	pathway.	Bone	conduction	(BC)	sends	a
signal	directly	to	the	cochlea,	bypassing	the	outer	and	middle	ear	structures.
The	pure	tone	audiogram	displays	the	severity	of	any	hearing	loss	in	relation
to	established	reference	values,	and	the	pattern	may	suggest	the	etiology.	As
with	tuning	fork	testing,	a	decrease	in	AC	with	normal	BC,	an	air-bone	gap,
indicates	 conductive	 hearing	 loss,	 and	 a	 decrease	 in	 both	 AC	 and	 BC
indicates	sensory	or	neural	loss.	The	pure	tone	audiogram	is	usually	normal
with	lesions	involving	the	central	auditory	pathways.

Speech	 audiometry	 uses	 spoken	 words	 and	 sentences	 instead	 of	 pure
tones.	 The	 speech	 reception	 threshold	 is	 considered	 the	 intensity	 level	 at
which	 the	 patient	 can	 correctly	 understand	 50%	 of	 the	 material	 presented.
Speech	discrimination,	or	intelligibility,	is	the	proportion	of	the	material	the
patient	can	understand	when	presented	at	a	level	that	should	be	easily	heard.
The	loss	of	discrimination	is	proportional	to	the	severity	of	the	hearing	loss
in	 patients	 with	 cochlear	 lesions.	 Poor	 speech	 discrimination,	 out	 of
proportion	 to	 pure	 tone	 hearing	 loss,	 is	 characteristic	 of	 a	 retrocochlear
lesion,	 such	 as	 a	 cerebellopontine	 angle	 tumor.	 In	 cranial	 nerve	 (CN)	 VIII
lesions,	discrimination	may	even	paradoxically	decline	as	intensity	is	raised.
A	tympanogram	measures	the	impedance	of	the	tympanic	membrane.	An
abnormal	tympanogram	is	seen	in	such	conditions	as	otitis	media,	tympanic
membrane	 perforation,	 ossicular	 dislocation,	 otosclerosis,	 cerumen
impaction,	and	eustachian	tube	dysfunction.

The	 stapedius	 reflex,	 or	 acoustic	 reflex,	 measures	 the	 change	 in
compliance	in	response	to	loud	sounds	to	assess	the	function	of	the	stapedial
muscle.	The	reflex	arc	is	via	CN	VIII,	brainstem	interneurons,	and	CN	VII.
In	 the	 absence	 of	 severe	 hearing	 loss,	 an	 abnormal	 stapedius	 reflex	 may
suggest	a	lesion	of	CN	VII	or	VIII	or	the	brainstem.

The	 AEP,	 also	 known	 as	 the	 auditory	 evoked	 response,	 or	 brainstem

auditory	evoked	potential/response	(BAEP/BAER),	is	a	minuscule	potential
produced	 by	 auditory	 stimuli	 and	 recorded	 using	 electroencephalogram
(EEG)	 electrodes.	 The	 potential	 is	 discernible	 from	 the	 much	 more
prominent	background	EEG	activity	because	it	is	time	locked	to	the	auditory
stimuli.	 This	 temporal	 relationship	 is	 only	 apparent	 after	 averaging	 a	 large
number	of	responses.	The	background	EEG	activity	is	random	and	not	time
locked	to	the	stimuli.	It	tends	to	cancel	itself	out	if	enough	auditory	stimuli
are	given,	and	the	signal	(the	BAER)	gradually	emerges	from	the	noise	(the
background	EEG	activity).	The	waves	that	occur	in	the	first	10	ms	after	an
auditory	 stimulus	 are	 short-latency	 far-field	 potentials	 because	 of	 electrical
activity	at	various	points	along	the	auditory	pathway.	These	are	reproducible
and	reliable	wave	forms.	BAERs	are	used	primarily	for	evaluating	suspected
CN	 VIII	 and	 brainstem	 lesions.	 There	 are	 five	 to	 seven	 waves	 in	 the	 AEP;
the	 correlation	 of	 the	 waveforms	 with	 specific	 anatomic	 structures	 is	 based
primarily	on	animal	studies	and	remains	somewhat	uncertain.	Wave	I	is	the
auditory	 nerve	 action	 potential.	 Wave	 II	 is	 thought	 to	 reflect	 activity	 in	 the
cochlear	nuclei,	although	it	may	be	generated	by	the	intracranial	segment	of
the	auditory	nerve.	Wave	III	is	thought	to	come	from	the	superior	olive,	and
waves	IV	and	V	are	from	the	inferior	colliculus.	The	origin	of	waves	VI	and
VII	is	unclear,	but	wave	VI	may	come	from	the	medial	geniculate	body	and
wave	VII	from	the	auditory	radiations.

The	 relationship	 of	 the	 BAER	 waveforms	 to	 the	 anatomic	 pathways
allows	 for	 lesion	 localization	 predicated	 on	 changes	 in	 interpeak	 latencies
and	differences	in	latencies	between	the	two	ears.	A	delay	between	waves	I
and	III	suggests	a	lesion	between	the	eighth	nerve	near	the	cochlea	and	the
lower	pons;	an	interpeak	latency	delay	between	waves	III	and	V	suggests	a
lesion	 between	 the	 lower	 pons	 and	 midbrain.	 The	 primary	 clinical
applications	 of	 BAERs	 have	 been	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 patients	 with
cerebellopontine	 angle	 tumors	 and	 demyelinating	 disease	 and	 in	 coma	 and
brain	 death.	 It	 is	 also	 of	 considerable	 value	 in	 newborn	 and	 infant	 hearing
assessment.

When	 using	 whispered	 voice,	 certain	 tones	 are	 heard	 better	 and	 at	 a	 greater
distance	than	others.	Sibilants,	and	the	short	vowels	such	as	a,	e,	and	i,	are	heard
at	 a	 greater	 distance	 than	 broad	 consonants	 such	 as	 1,	 m,	 n,	 and	 r,	 and	 such
vowels	 as	 o	 and	 u.	 “Seventy-six”	 and	 “sixty-seven”	 can	 be	 heard	 at	 a	 greater

distance	 than	 “ninety-nine”	 and	 “fifty-three.”	 One	 key	 to	 the	 effective	 use	 of
whisper	is	unpredictability	of	the	stimulus,	for	example,	the	numbers	“1,	2,	3”	in
one	ear	and	“7,	8,	9”	in	the	other.	Monosyllables	are	preferable	to	common	stock
questions	such	as	“How	are	you?”	in	which	hearing	a	small	part	may	enable	the
patient	 to	 “hear”	 the	 rest	 in	 context.	 Alternating	 words	 and	 numbers	 is	 a
challenging	test	of	hearing.

Tuning	 forks—typically	 128,	 256,	 or	 512	 Hz—are	 sometimes	 used	 to	 give
more	 specific	 information	 and	 to	 assess	 air	 conduction	 (AC)	 and	 bone
conduction	 (BC).	 When	 testing	 AC,	 the	 tuning	 fork	 should	 be	 kept	 in	 gentle
motion	to	avoid	null	points.	The	patient	may	be	asked	to	compare	the	loudness
of	the	vibrating	fork	in	the	two	ears,	or	the	examiner	may	compare	the	distance
on	 each	 side	 at	 which	 the	 fork	 begins	 or	 ceases	 to	 be	 heard.	 The	 gradual
dampening	of	the	oscillations	makes	precision	difficult.	The	examiner	with	good
hearing	may	compare	the	patient’s	AC	and	BC	with	his	own	(Schwabach	test).
In	evaluating	BC,	be	certain	the	patient	hears	rather	than	feels	 the	tuning	fork.
How	useful	tuning	fork	tests	are	for	general	screening	has	been	questioned.	But
the	primary	usefulness	of	both	the	Weber	and	Rinne	tests	(see	below)	is	not	as	a
screening	tool	but	to	make	an	initial	differentiation	between	SNHL	and	CHL	in	a
patient	complaining	of	unilateral	symptoms	of	hearing	loss	or	tinnitus.

The	Rinne	test	compares	the	patient’s	AC	and	BC;	it	can	be	done	in	at	least
two	ways.	An	activated	fork	may	be	placed	first	on	the	mastoid	process	and	then
immediately	 beside	 the	 ear	 (or	 vice	 versa),	 and	 the	 patient	 is	 asked	 which	 is
louder;	 it	 should	 always	 be	 louder	 by	 the	 ear.	 The	 more	 time-consuming,
traditional	method	is	to	place	the	tuning	fork	on	the	mastoid	and	when	no	longer
heard	 there	 move	 it	 beside	 the	 ear,	 where	 it	 should	 still	 be	 audible.	 The	 fork
should	 be	 heard	 twice	 as	 long	 by	 AC	 as	 by	 BC.	 The	 Rinne	 test	 is	 normal	 or
positive	when	AC	is	better	than	BC	either	by	subjective	assessment	of	loudness
or	by	the	length	of	time	the	tuning	fork	is	heard	in	the	two	locations.	In	CHL,
BC	 is	 better	 than	 AC,	 and	 the	 Rinne	 test	 is	 said	 to	 be	 negative.	 Sound	 is	 not
conducted	normally	through	the	canal	or	from	the	tympanic	membrane	through
the	ossicular	chain	to	the	cochlea,	but	the	sensorineural	mechanisms	are	intact;
AC	 is	 impaired	 but	 BC	 is	 preserved.	 In	 CHL,	 BC	 may	 even	 be	 exaggerated
beyond	the	normal	because	the	middle	ear	cavity	becomes	a	resonating	chamber.
In	 sensorineural	 deafness,	 both	 AC	 and	 BC	 are	 impaired	 while	 retaining	 their
normal	relationship	of	AC	better	than	BC;	the	Rinne	test	is	positive	or	normal.
With	 severe	 sensorineural	 deafness,	 BC	 may	 be	 lost	 whereas	 slight	 AC	 is
preserved.	 Because	 of	 inconsistent	 use	 of	 the	 terms	 positive	 and	 negative,	 it	 is

preferable	to	state	that	AC	is	better	than	BC	or	that	the	Rinne	test	is	normal.

In	 the	 Weber	 test,	 a	 vibrating	 tuning	 fork	 is	 placed	 in	 the	 midline	 on	 the
vertex	 of	 the	 skull.	 It	 may	 be	 placed	 anywhere	 in	 the	 midline,	 over	 the	 nasal
bridge,	the	forehead,	or	the	maxilla	but	works	best	over	the	vertex.	Normally,	the
sound	is	heard	equally	in	both	ears	or	seems	to	resonate	somewhere	in	the	center
of	 the	 head;	 it	 is	 “not	 lateralized.”	 In	 CHL,	 the	 sound	 is	 heard	 better
(“lateralized”)	to	the	involved	side.	A	simple	way	to	remember	this	phenomenon
is	for	the	examiner	to	place	a	tuning	fork	over	his	own	vertex	and	then	induce
conductive	loss	by	inserting	a	finger	in	one	ear;	the	sound	will	be	louder	on	the
side	of	the	occluded	canal.	In	sensorineural	deafness,	the	sound	is	heard	best	in
the	normal	ear.

In	 summary,	 with	 unilateral	 CHL,	 AC	 is	 less	 than	 BC	 (the	 Rinne	 test	 is
negative),	and	the	Weber	lateralizes	to	the	involved	side.	In	unilateral	SNHL,	AC
is	greater	than	BC	(Rinne	test	positive	or	normal),	and	the	Weber	lateralizes	to
the	normal	side	(Table	17.1).

Auditory	 reflex	 responses	 are	 occasionally	 useful	 in	 evaluating	 hearing	 in
children,	patients	with	altered	mental	status,	and	in	hysteria	or	malingering.	The
auditory-palpebral	 reflex	 is	 a	 blink	 or	 reflex	 eye	 closure	 in	 response	 to	 a	 loud,
sudden	noise.	The	cochleopupillary	reflex	is	pupillary	dilatation,	or	 contraction
followed	 by	 dilatation,	 in	 response	 to	 a	 loud	 noise.	 The	 auditory-oculogyric
reflex	is	eye	deviation	toward	a	sound.	The	general	acoustic	muscle	reflex	is	a
general	jerking	of	the	body	in	response	to	a	loud,	sudden	noise.

TABLE	17.1

Rinne	and	Weber	Tests

Normally,	the	auditory	acuity	is	equal	in	both	ears,	air	conduction	is
greater	than	bone	conduction	(Rinne	test	normal	or	positive)	bilaterally,
and	the	Weber	test	is	nonlateralizing	(midline).	The	table	depicts	the
pattern	on	the	involved	side	with	unilateral	conductive	or	sensorineural
hearing	loss.

Auditory
Acuity

Rinne	Test

Weber	Test

Conductive

Decreased BC	>	AC	(Rinne

hearing	loss

negative	or
abnormal)

Lateralizes	to	the
abnormal	side

	
Sensorineural
hearing	loss

Decreased AC	>	BC	(Rinne

positive	or	normal)

Lateralizes	to	the
normal	side

The	 laboratory	 evaluation	 of	 hearing	 is	 done	 primarily	 by	 electronic

audiometry	and	auditory	evoked	potentials.	These	are	discussed	in	Box	17.2.

Disorders	of	Function

Dysfunction	 of	 the	 cochlear	 nerve	 and	 its	 connections	 usually	 causes	 either
diminution	 or	 loss	 of	 hearing	 (hypacusis	 or	 anacusis),	 with	 or	 without	 tinnitus.
Hyperacusis	 occurs	 most	 often	 with	 paralysis	 of	 the	 stapedius	 muscle	 in
disorders	 affecting	 CN	 VII,	 but	 it	 may	 occur	 as	 an	 epileptic	 aura,	 in	 migraine
(sonophobia	 or	 phonophobia),	 and	 in	 certain	 psychiatric	 conditions	 and	 drug-
related	disorders.	Dysacusis	is	impairment	of	hearing	that	is	not	primarily	a	loss
of	 auditory	 acuity;	 rather,	 it	 is	 related	 to	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 cochlea	 or	 central
auditory	pathways.	Diplacusis	is	a	condition	in	which	there	is	a	difference	in	the
pitch	 or	 intensity	 of	 the	 same	 sound	 as	 heard	 in	 the	 two	 ears	 or	 when	 a	 single
sound	 is	 heard	 as	 having	 two	 components;	 it	 is	 usually	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the
cochlea.	 Paracusis	 is	 perversion	 or	 distortion	 of	 hearing.	 Paracusis	 of	 Willis
(paracusis	 Willisii)	 is	 an	 interesting	 phenomenon	 in	 which	 the	 ability	 to	 hear
improves	in	the	presence	of	loud	noises.	Thomas	Willis	described	a	patient	who
heard	 better	 when	 a	 drum	 was	 beating	 loudly	 nearby.	 It	 is	 a	 feature	 of
otosclerosis.	 Disturbances	 of	 hearing	 because	 of	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)
lesions	are	rare.

CHL	 is	 due	 to	 interference	 with	 the	 transmission	 of	 sound	 to	 the	 cochlea.
SNHL	 is	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 cochlea	 or	 its	 central	 connections.	 In	 essence,
CHL	is	due	to	disease	external	to	the	oval	window,	and	SNHL	is	due	to	disease
central	 to	 the	 oval	 window.	 With	 CHL,	 there	 is	 primarily	 loss	 of	 AC;	 BC	 is
preserved	 or	 even	 exaggerated	 (Table	 17.1).	 The	 Weber	 is	 referred	 to	 the
involved	 side.	 Low	 tones	 are	 lost,	 as	 are	 some	 of	 the	 broad	 or	 flat	 consonants
and	 vowels	 such	 as	 m,	 n,	 l,	 r,	 o,	 and	 u.	 Impairment	 of	 speech	 discrimination
parallels	 the	 loss	 for	 pure	 tones.	 There	 is	 no	 recruitment,	 and	 tone	 decay	 is
normal.	Patients	with	CHL	tend	to	hear	speech	better	in	a	noisy	background	than
in	a	quiet	setting.	Mixed	hearing	loss,	with	elements	of	both	CHL	and	SNHL,	is
not	uncommon.	Some	causes	of	hearing	loss	are	listed	in	Table	17.2.

With	 unilateral	 SNHL,	 AC	 and	 BC	 are	 both	 diminished,	 but	 AC	 remains
better	 than	 BC	 (Table	 17.1)	 and	 the	 Weber	 lateralizes	 to	 the	 normal	 ear.	 The

hearing	 loss	 is	 worse	 for	 higher	 frequencies	 (Figure	 17.9),	 and	 there	 is	 greater
difficulty	with	sibilants,	sharp	consonants,	and	short	vowels	(e.g.,	in	the	words
sister,	fish,	twenty,	water,	and	date).	A	clearly	enunciated	whisper	is	sometimes
more	easily	understood	than	a	loud,	indistinct	shout.

TABLE	17.2

Causes	of	Hearing	Loss

Conductive	hearing	loss

External	auditory	canal	obstruction	(e.g.,	cerumen,	foreign	bodies,

water,	blood)

Perforation	of	the	tympanic	membrane
Disease	of	the	middle	ear

Disease	of	the	nasopharynx	with	obstruction	of	the	eustachian	tube

Sensorineural	hearing	loss
Disease	of	the	cochlea
Acoustic	trauma
Ménière’s	disease
Infections
Congenital	conditions	(e.g.,	congenital	rubella)
Presbycusis

Disease	of	the	cochlear	nerve	or	nuclei
Tumors	(e.g.,	acoustic	neuroma)
Trauma	(e.g.,	skull	fracture)
Infection	(meningitis,	syphilis)
Toxins	or	drugs
Presbycusis
Nuclear	lesions	(e.g.,	vascular,	inflammatory,	or	neoplastic)

Lesions	of	the	central	auditory	pathways

FIGURE	17.9	Audiogram	of	a	patient	with	sensorineural	deafness.

SNHL	may	be	due	to	disease	of	the	cochlea	(end-organ	deafness),	such	as	in
Ménière’s	 disease,	 or	 to	 disease	 of	 CN	 VIII	 or	 more	 central	 structures
(retrocochlear),	 as	 in	 acoustic	 neuroma.	 Typical	 of	 cochlear	 disease	 is	 loss	 of
acuity	 for	 pure	 tones	 with	 a	 parallel	 impairment	 of	 speech	 discrimination,
recruitment,	 and	 tone	 decay.	 Recruitment	 is	 an	 abnormal	 loudness	 of	 sounds
because	of	cochlear	dysfunction,	which	can	cause	a	paradoxical	increase	in	the
perception	 of	 louder	 sounds,	 sometimes	 accompanied	 by	 sound	 distortion.
Recruitment	occurs	when	there	is	a	reduction	in	the	number	of	hair	cells,	which
causes	a	loss	of	the	ability	to	process	fine	gradations	in	sound	intensity.	A	small
increase	 in	 intensity	 causes	 an	 abnormally	 large	 recruitment	 of	 nerve	 fibers
responding,	and	the	sound	is	perceived	as	abnormally	loud.	Tone	decay	measures
auditory	 adaption	 by	 assessing	 the	 ability	 to	 maintain	 the	 perception	 of	 a	 pure
tone	 continuously.	 Tone	 decay	 does	 not	 occur	 with	 cochlear	
lesions.
Retrocochlear	 lesions	 tend	 to	 cause	 a	 loss	 of	 speech	 discrimination	 out	 of
proportion	 to	 the	 loss	 for	 pure	 tones,	 no	 recruitment,	 and	 abnormal	 auditory
adaptation	by	tone	decay.	There	is	a	debate	about	the	existence	of	a	syndrome	of
purely	cochlear	Ménière’s	disease.

SNHL	 may	 be	 bilateral	 and	 slowly	 progressive,	 as	 with	 presbycusis	 or
exposure	 to	 ototoxic	 drugs,	 for	 example,	 aminoglycoside	 antibiotics	 or	 loop
diuretics.	 Gabapentin	 may	 cause	 reversible	 hearing	 loss	 in	 patients	 with	 renal

insufficiency.	SNHL	may	be	unilateral	and	progressive,	as	in	Ménière’s	disease
or	 acoustic	 neuroma.	 It	 may	 be	 unilateral	 and	 relatively	 sudden,	 over	 hours	 to
days,	 in	 vascular	 disease	 (e.g.,	 internal	 auditory	 artery	 [IAA]	 occlusion),	 viral
infection,	 or	 autoimmune	 hearing	 loss.	 The	 syndrome	 of	 sudden,	 unilateral
SNHL	 is	 due	 to	 dysfunction	 involving	 the	 cochlea	 or	 CN	 VIII	 with	 variable,
often	 poor,	 recovery.	 The	 pathogenesis	 is	 unknown;	 autoimmunity,	 viral
infection,	and	vascular	disease	are	suspected	etiologies.	The	IAA	may	arise	from
the	 anterior	 inferior	 cerebellar	 artery	 (AICA)	 or	 directly	 from	 the	 basilar.
Isolated	 IAA	 ischemia	 causes	 hearing	 loss	 often	 associated	 with	 vestibular
dysfunction.	 Ischemia	
the	 AICA	 distribution	 produces	 other	 CNS
manifestations	(see	Chapter	21).

in	

The	cochlear	and	vestibular	nerves	run	together	in	a	common	sheath	from	the
brainstem	 to	 their	 respective	 end	 organs,	 and	 disorders	 of	 the	 eighth	 nerve
between	 the	 cochlea	 and	 brainstem	 may	 cause	 hearing	 loss.	 Some	 disease
processes	affect	both	divisions	peripherally	(e.g.,	labyrinthitis)	or	centrally	(e.g.,
brainstem	neoplasm).	In	its	course	across	the	CPA,	the	most	important	disorder
to	 affect	 both	 divisions	 is	 a	 neoplasm.	 Acoustic	 neuroma	 (acoustic	 neurinoma,
acoustic	 schwannoma)	 is	 most	 common,	 but	 neurofibroma,	 meningioma,	 facial
nerve	schwannoma,	cholesteatoma,	epidermoid	cyst,	and	other	tumors	may	arise
here	 as	 well.	 Acoustic	 neuromas	 usually	 present	 with	 insidious,	 progressive
hearing	 loss;	 rarely,	 sudden	 deafness	 may	 occur,	 sometimes	 as	 the	 presenting
manifestation,	presumably	because	of	intratumoral	hemorrhage	or	IAA	ischemia.
Vague	 disequilibrium	 and	 imbalance	 are	 more	 common	 symptoms	 than	 true
vertigo.	Subsequent	manifestations	depend	on	the	direction	of	tumor	extension.
With	 anterior	 extension,	 CNs	 V	 and	 VI	 are	 involved.	 With	 inferior	 extension,
CNs	 IX,	 X,	 and	 XI	 are	 involved.	 CN	 VII	 is	 commonly	 affected	 in	 either	 case,
causing	 all	 the	 signs	 of	 a	 far	 proximal	 lesion	 (see	 Chapter	 16).	 With	 medial
extension,	there	is	mass	effect	on	the	brainstem	and	cerebellum,	often	leading	to
ipsilateral	 ataxia	 and	 evidence	 of	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure.	 Other
conditions	 of	 CN	 VIII	 that	 may	 cause	 hearing	 loss	 include	 toxins;	 superficial
siderosis;	 postinflammatory	 scarring,	 as	 from	 meningitis;	 and	 hereditary
conditions.	 Other	 conditions	 that	 may	 cause	 both	 hearing	 loss	 and	 vertigo
include	 Ménière’s	 disease,	 labyrinthitis,	 viral	 infection	 (especially	 herpes),
trauma,	 meningitis,	 vascular	 occlusion	 (internal	 auditory	 or	 anterior	 inferior
syndrome,	 Fabry’s	 disease,
cerebellar),	 Susac’s	
perilymphatic	fistula,	toxins,	and	drugs.

syndrome,	 Cogan’s	

Lesions	of	the	central	auditory	pathways	(brainstem	and	central	connections)

rarely	 cause	 clinical	 loss	 of	 hearing,	 although	 detailed	 audiometric	 testing	 and
BAERs	 may	 show	 abnormalities.	 However,	 midbrain	 lesions	 or	 tumors	 of	 the
posterior	third	ventricle—or	the	aqueduct	region	with	compression	of	either	the
medial	 geniculate	 bodies	 or	 the	 inferior	 colliculi—may	 cause	 bilateral	 hearing
deficits,	 presumably	 because	 the	 auditory	 pathways	 run	 close	 together	 in	 this
region.	Impairment	of	sound	localization	contralateral	to	a	temporal	lobe	lesion
has	 been	 described.	 Wernicke’s	 aphasia	 is	 characterized	 by	 the	 inability	 to
interpret	or	comprehend	spoken	words	despite	normal	hearing;	it	may	occur	with
dominant	temporal	lobe	lesions.	Pure	word	deafness	follows	bilateral	damage	to
the	 posterior-superior	 temporal	 lobes	 bilaterally,	 causing	 an	 inability	 to
comprehend	 speech	 with	 intact	 hearing	 and	 reading.	 Other	 cortical	 syndromes
involving	 hearing	 include	 auditory	 agnosia,	 amusia,	 and	 disturbances	 in	 the
temporal	analysis	of	sounds.

Pseudohypacusis	refers	to	hearing	loss	in	the	absence	of	any	organic	disease
or	hearing	loss	that	is	exaggerated.	It	is	more	common	for	real	hearing	loss	to	be
exaggerated	 in	 severity	 than	 for	 it	 to	 be	 feigned	 with	 entirely	 normal	 hearing.
The	mainstay	of	diagnosis	is	inconsistency	in	the	performance	on	hearing	tests
and	 the	 absence	 of	 verifiable	 abnormalities	 on	 objective	 tests.	 A	 diagnosis	 of
pseudohypacusis	 is	 easier	 to	 establish	 in	 children	 because	 they	 are	 less	 able	 to
reproduce	factitious	abnormalities	on	repeated	testing.

Nonorganic	hearing	loss	may	be	partial	or	total	and	unilateral	or	bilateral.	It	is
often	bilateral	and	total,	and	the	patient	makes	no	attempt	to	hear	what	is	said	or
to	read	the	speaker’s	lips.	In	most	instances,	it	is	a	transient	symptom	related	to
acute	 emotional	 stress.	 Psychogenic	 hearing	 loss	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 other
nonorganic	 symptoms,	 such	 as	 mutism	 and	 blindness.	 When	 there	 are	 also
nonorganic	 motor	 and	 sensory	 disturbances,	 the	 hearing	 loss	 is	 usually
incomplete	 and	 on	 the	 same	 side.	 In	 malingering,	 the	 deafness	 is	 usually
unilateral	 and	 occurs	 after	 trauma	 in	 the	 face	 of	 potential	 secondary	 gain.
Organic	 posttraumatic	 hearing	 loss	 is	 typically	 associated	 with	 impairment	 of
vestibular	function.	 Normal	labyrinthine	responses	suggest	 the	 claimed	 hearing
loss	 is	 either	 simulated	 or	 exaggerated.	 Inconsistent	 responses	 on	 bedside
hearing	 tests	 suggest	 nonorganicity.	 Discrepancies	 and	 inconsistencies	 on
repeated	audiometric	examinations	are	typical.	The	BAER	is	normal.

Patients	 simulating	 bilateral	 deafness	 do	 not	 behave	 as	 a	 deaf	 person	 does.
Deaf	 individuals	 usually	 raise	 their	 voices	 during	 conversation	 and	 keep	 their
eyes	fixed	on	the	speaker’s	face	and	lips,	watching	for	any	gesture	that	may	help
understanding.	 A	 deaf	 man	 eager	 to	 hear	 will	 automatically	 turn	 his	 best	 ear

toward	 the	 speaker.	 Experienced	 lip	 readers	 have	 difficulty	 with	 sound-alike
words;	 the	 dissembler	 may	 do	 better	 than	 expected	 because	 the	 words	 are
actually	 heard.	 Many	 tests	 have	 been	 devised	 for	 detection	 of	 nonorganic
deafness.	The	diagnosis	is	best	made	audiometrically.

Tinnitus

Tinnitus	is	spontaneous	noise	in	the	ears	originating	inside	the	head.	There	are
many	types,	and	the	causes	are	protean.	In	many	cases,	no	precise	etiology	can
be	 established.	 The	 most	 common	 identifiable	 cause	 is	 noise	 exposure,	 either
acute	or	chronic.	Objective	tinnitus	refers	to	noise	audible	to	both	the	patient	and
the	examiner,	as	occurs	in	carotid	stenosis.	Most	tinnitus	is	subjective	tinnitus.	It
may	vary	in	pitch	and	intensity	and	may	be	continuous	or	intermittent.	It	may	be
described	in	many	ways,	such	as	ringing,	buzzing,	blowing,	whistling,	swishing,
or	 roaring.	 Tinnitus	 is	 commonly	 associated	 with	 deafness.	 It	 is	 common	 in
presbycusis	 and	 in	 other	 types	 of	 SNHL	 and	 is	 a	 fairly	 constant	 feature	 of
otosclerosis.	It	is	caused	by	the	abnormal	excitation	of	the	auditory	apparatus	or
its	afferent	pathways,	but	the	exact	mechanism	is	often	unclear.	Most	cases	are
due	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 cochlea	 or	 eighth	 nerve;	 some	 are	 due	 to	 CNS	 disease.
Tinnitus	 is	 often	 more	 noticeable	 at	 night	 when	 environmental	 noises	 are
diminished,	and	it	may	interfere	with	sleep.	To	the	patient,	tinnitus	may	be	more
distressing	 than	 the	 accompanying	 deafness,	 and	 it	 may	 cause	 depression	 in
elderly	individuals.

Pulsatile	tinnitus	is	synchronous	with	the	pulse;	it	is	in	reality	a	bruit.	Causes
include	 carotid	 stenosis;	 arteriovenous	 malformations,	 particularly	 of	 the	 dura;
glomus	 tumors;	 venous	 hums;	 and	 hypertension.	 Pulsatile	 tinnitus	 is	 fairly
common	 in	 pseudotumor	 cerebri,	 and	 it	 occurs	 occasionally	 in	 increased
intracranial	 pressure	 of	 other	 origins.	 The	 perilymphatic	 duct	 connects	 the
perilymph-filled	 spaces	 of	 the	 cochlea	 and	 an	 extension	 of	 the	 subarachnoid
space	in	the	region	of	the	jugular	foramen.	Through	this	channel,	pulsations	in
the	 subarachnoid	 space	 are	 transmitted	 to	 the	 cochlea.	 Vascular	 tinnitus	 may
occasionally	 be	 affected	 by	 carotid	 artery	 compression.	 Rhythmic	 tinnitus	 not
synchronous	 with	 the	 pulse	 may	 occur	 with	 palatal	 myoclonus	 (palatal
microtremor).	Gaze-evoked	tinnitus	is	tinnitus	associated	with	eye	movements;	it
may	 be	 due	 to	 abnormal	 communications	 between	 the	 cochlear	 and	 vestibular
nuclei.

Other	causes	of	tinnitus	include	cerumen	impaction,	medications	(particularly

ototoxic	drugs),	Ménière’s	disease,	acoustic	neuroma,	acute	or	chronic	acoustic
trauma,	Paget’s	disease,	anemia,	labyrinthitis,	and	Arnold-Chiari	malformation.
Muscle	 spasm,	 contraction	 of	 the	 tensor	 tympani,	 nasopharyngeal	 sounds,	 and
temporomandibular	 joint	 clicking	 may	 also	 simulate	 tinnitus.	 Tinnitus	 may	 be
psychogenic.	 Bizarre	 types	 of	 tinnitus	 may	 occur	 with	 pontine	 and	 cerebral
lesions.	Auditory	hallucinations	may	occur	in	lesions	of	the	temporal	lobe;	these
are	frequently	epileptic	auras.	More	bizarre	hallucinations	occur	in	psychotic	and
drug-induced	 states.	 Tinnitus	 that	 is	 unilateral,	 pulsatile,	 fluctuating,	 or
associated	with	vertigo	is	more	likely	to	indicate	a	serious	underlying	condition.

The	Vestibular	Nerve

The	vestibule	of	the	labyrinth	connects	with	five	structures	that	are	involved	in
vestibular	 function:	 the	 utricle,	 the	 saccule,	 and	 the	 three	 semicircular	 canals.
Each	 of	 these	 components	 lies	 in	 the	 membranous	 labyrinth,	 is	 bathed	 in
endolymph,	 and	 contains	 sensory	 neuroepithelium.	 The	 sensory	 epithelium
consists	of	cells	bearing	microvilli,	which	are	referred	to	as	hair	cells.	The	hair
cells	are	the	peripheral	receptors	of	the	vestibular	apparatus.	Each	hair	cell	bears
a	 single	 long	 kinocilium	 and	 an	 array	 of	 shorter	 stereocilia.	 The	 cilia	 are
imbedded	 in	 the	 maculae	 of	 the	 utricle	 and	 saccule	 and	 in	 the	 cupulae	 of	 the
semicircular	 canals.	 Movement	 of	 the	 macula	 or	 cupula	 bends	 the	 cilia.
Endolymph	flows	throughout	the	membranous	labyrinth.	Changes	in	endolymph
flow	in	response	to	external	forces	or	head	movement,	as	well	as	the	effects	of
gravity	 and	 changes	 in	 head	 position,	 affect	 neural	 impulses	 arising	 from	 the
areas	of	sensory	epithelium.	This	is	the	substrate	for	vestibular	function.

The	hair	cells	function	as	transducers,	converting	mechanical	deformation	of
their	cilia	into	receptor	potentials.	Because	of	the	location	of	the	stereocilia	and
the	 kinocilium,	 each	 hair	 cell	 is	 structurally	 polarized.	 The	 orientation	 of	 each
individual	hair	cell	and	the	arrangement	of	its	microvilli	determine	its	functional
response	to	mechanical	stimuli.	The	cilia	contain	actin	filaments.	Bending	of	the
cilia	 in	 a	 specific	 direction	 causes	 the	 cell	 to	 become	 either	 depolarized	 or
hyperpolarized.	Bending	in	the	opposite	direction	causes	the	opposite	response.
Deformation	causes	ion	fluxes	in	mechanically	sensitive	channels	in	the	cilium.
Calcium	 influx	 because	 of	 mechanical	 deformation	 depolarizes	 the	 cell	 and
causes	release	of	neurotransmitter.	A	few	channels	remain	open	even	in	the	erect
cilia,	which	produces	a	moderate	level	of	tonic	activity	in	the	vestibular	system.
The	receptors	send	signals	by	increasing	or	decreasing	this	tonic	discharge.

The	utricle	and	saccule	constitute	the	otolith	organ	and	are	referred	to	as	the
static	 labyrinth.	 It	 is	 designed	 to	 detect	 gravitational	 effects	 and	 linear
acceleration	 and	 to	 monitor	 head	 position.	 The	 utricle	 is	 an	 oblong	 sac	 that
extends	 from	 the	 posterior-superior	 portion	 of	 the	 vestibular	 part	 of	 the
membranous	labyrinth	(Figure	17.3).	The	saccule	is	a	smaller	expansion	that	lies
near	the	opening	of	the	scala	vestibuli	of	the	cochlea.	The	utriculosaccular	duct
connects	 the	 saccule	 to	 the	 utricle	 and	 endolymphatic	 duct,	 and	 the	 ductus
reuniens	connects	it	to	the	cochlea.	The	osseous	ampulla	of	a	semicircular	canal
is	a	bulbous	expansion	at	the	point	where	the	canal	joins	the	vestibule,	and	it	is
about	twice	the	diameter	of	the	rest	of	the	canal	(Figure	17.2).	The	semicircular
ducts	 are	 membranous	 labyrinth	 tubules	 that	 follow	 the	 semicircular	 canals	 in
the	same	way	the	cochlear	duct	follows	the	spirals	of	the	cochlea.	The	ampullae
of	the	ducts	open	off	the	utricle.

The	 utricle	 and	 saccule	 each	 contain	 a	 macule.	 Covering	 the	 maculae	 is	 a
gelatinous	 layer,	 the	 otolithic	 or	 statoconial	 membrane.	 Embedded	 in	 the
otolithic	membrane	are	millions	of	crystals,	the	otoliths	(statoliths,	otoconia,	or
statoconia).	The	utricle	and	saccule	respond	to	linear	acceleration	and	to	gravity
because	of	 the	mass	 of	 the	 otoliths.	 They	 monitor	the	 position	 of	the	 head	and
movement	of	the	head	in	relation	to	gravity.	In	the	ampulla	of	each	semicircular
canal	 is	 a	 gelatinous	 structure	 called	 a	 cupula.	 The	 canals	 do	 not	 respond	 to
gravity	because	there	are	no	otoliths	in	the	semicircular	canals	and	because	the
cupula	has	the	same	specific	gravity	as	the	endolymph.	Instead,	movement	of	the
head	 causes	 endolymph	 to	 flow,	 which	 displaces	 the	 cupula	 and	 stimulates	 or
inhibits	the	hair	cells.

The	macula	of	the	utricle	lies	horizontally	in	the	floor	of	the	utricle,	parallel
to	 the	 skull	 base.	 The	 macula	 of	 the	 saccule	 lies	 vertically	 in	 the	 wall	 of	 the
saccule.	 Hair	 cells	 are	 oriented	 in	 every	 conceivable	 direction.	 Bending	 of	 the
cilia	either	depolarizes	or	hyperpolarizes	the	cell,	depending	on	the	direction	of
movement.	Because	of	the	multidirectional	orientation	of	the	hair	cells	and	the
geometry	 of	 the	 maculae,	 head	 movement	 in	 any	 direction	 can	 be	 detected.
Because	of	its	orientation,	the	macula	of	the	utricle	responds	maximally	to	head
movement	 in	 the	 sagittal	 plane,	 whereas	 the	 macula	 of	 the	 saccule	 responds
maximally	to	head	movement	in	the	coronal	plane.

The	semicircular	canals	are	the	kinetic	or	dynamic	labyrinth	and	are	designed
to	 detect	 angular	 acceleration	 or	 rotation.	 The	 crista	 ampullaris,	 or	 ampullary
crest,	 is	 a	 focal	 thickening	 in	 the	 membrane	 lining	 the	 ampullae	 of	 the
semicircular	canals.	The	cristae	are	covered	with	the	sensory	neuroepithelium	of

the	 canals.	 The	 tips	 of	 the	 cilia	 of	 the	 hair	 cells	 are	 imbedded	 in	 the	 cupula,
which	 forms	 a	 dome-shaped	 cap	 over	 the	 cristae.	 When	 rotation	 of	 the	 head
occurs,	 the	 endolymph	 lags	 behind,	 tilting	 the	 cupula	 and	 affecting	 the	 neural
discharges	in	the	hair	cells	of	the	cristae.

The	 semicircular	 canals	 are	 designed	 to	 detect	 rotation.	 Their	 orientation	 in
three	 perpendicular	 planes	 and	 their	 oval	 structure	 guarantee	 that	 head
movement	in	any	direction	will	be	detected.	The	three	canals	are	the	horizontal
(lateral),	vertical	(anterior	or	superior),	and	posterior	(inferior).	The	labyrinth	is
imbedded	deep	in	the	petrous	ridge.	In	turn,	the	petrous	ridge	is	set	at	an	angle	of
about	 45	 degrees	 from	 the	 sagittal	 plane	 of	 the	 skull.	 The	 canals	 are	 named
because	of	their	anatomical	relationships	to	the	labyrinth	and	to	each	other,	more
so	 than	 their	 relationship	 to	 the	 skull.	 Different	 names	 for	 the	 same	 canal
compound	 the	 difficulty.	 The	 following	 is	 a	 useful	 approximation	 for	 the
orientation	of	the	canals.	The	horizontal	canal	lies	horizontally;	the	anterior	and
posterior	canals	stand	vertically.	The	horizontal	canal	is	convex	laterally,	and	it
is	 also	 called	 the	 lateral	 canal;	 it	 actually	 slants	 downward	 from	 anterior	 to
posterior	 at	 an	 angle	 of	 about	 30	 degrees.	 The	 posterior	 canal	 arcs	 posteriorly
parallel	 to	 the	 long	 axis	 of	 the	 petrous	 bone,	 toward	 the	 base	 of	 the	 petrous
pyramid.	 The	 anterior	 canal	 lies	 perpendicular	 to	 the	 long	 axis	 of	 the	 petrous
bone,	 anterior	 to	 the	 other	 canals,	 and	 toward	 the	 apex	 of	 the	 petrous	 bone.	 In
addition,	 it	 extends	 above	 the	 other	 canals	 and	 is	 also	 known	 as	 the	 superior
canal.	If	the	head	is	placed	forward	30	degrees,	the	lateral	canals	are	horizontal
and	the	vertical	canals	are	vertical.

The	 canals	 are	 maximally	 stimulated	 by	 movement	 in	 the	 plane	 of	 their
anatomical	axis.	The	horizontal	canal	best	detects	rotational	head	movement	in
the	side-to-side	(“no-no”)	direction	(with	the	chin	tucked	to	bring	the	canal	fully
horizontal).	 The	 posterior	 canal	 best	 detects	 movement	 in	 the	 anteroposterior
plane	 (“yes-yes”),	 and	 the	 anterior	 canal	 is	 oriented	 to	 detect	 lateral	 tilting
movement.	The	canals	on	the	two	sides	have	been	said	to	form	functional	pairs.
The	 horizontal	 canals	 work	 together.	 The	 anterior	 canal	 of	 one	 side	 is
approximately	 parallel	 to	 the	 posterior	 canal	 on	 the	 opposite	 side,	 forming	 a
spatial	pair.	How	closely	these	angles	actually	match	has	been	questioned.

The	hair	cells	of	both	the	maculae	and	the	cristae	produce	a	tonic	discharge	in
the	 vestibular	 nerve.	 The	 discharge	 rate	 increases	 and	 decreases	 in	 response	 to
the	 bending	 of	 the	 hair	 cells.	 Endolymph	 flow	 toward	 the	 utricle	 is	 excitatory.
Normally,	the	two	labyrinths	are	in	balance,	with	symmetric	activity	in	the	two
vestibular	nerves	and	reciprocal	changes	induced	by	head	movement.	When	this

balance	is	disturbed,	the	clinical	signs	and	symptoms	of	vestibulopathy	follow.

Afferent	 impulses	 from	 the	 hair	 cells	 travel	 centrally	 via	 the	 peripheral
processes	of	bipolar	neurons	in	the	vestibular	(Scarpa’s)	ganglion	in	the	internal
acoustic	 meatus.	 Central	 processes	 of	 the	 vestibular	 ganglion	 cells	 form	 the
vestibular	 nerve.	 There	 are	 three	 peripheral	 divisions	 of	 the	 vestibular	 nerve,
which	 arise	 from	 different	 portions	 of	 the	 labyrinth.	 These	 join	 to	 form	 the
vestibular	 nerve	 proper	 (Figure	 17.6).	 The	 vestibular	 component	 of	 CN	 VIII
joins	the	cochlear	component	in	a	common	sheath;	the	vestibular	component	is
the	 larger	 of	 the	 two.	 The	 nerve	 passes	 through	 the	 IAC	 in	 company	 with	 the
facial	nerve	and	the	nervus	intermedius.	It	crosses	the	cerebellopontine	angle	and
enters	the	brainstem	between	the	inferior	cerebellar	peduncle	and	the	olive.	The
cochlear	nerve	is	slightly	lateral	and	caudal	to	the	vestibular	component.	Within
the	 IAC,	 CN	 VIII	 is	 lateral	 and	 inferior	 to	 CN	 VII.	 At	 the	 pontomedullary
junction,	CN	VIII	is	slightly	lateral	and	posterior	to	CN	VII.

Entering	 vestibular	 fibers	 pass	 between	 the	 inferior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 and
the	 spinal	 tract	 of	 CN	 V.	 They	 divide	 into	 ascending	 and	 descending	 branches
that	 end	 primarily	 in	 the	 four	 vestibular	 nuclei:	 lateral,	 medial,	 superior,	 and
inferior	 (Figure	 17.10).	 The	 vestibular	 nuclei	 lie	 in	 the	 rostral	 medulla	 and
caudal	pons.	Some	fibers	form	the	vestibulocerebellar	tract	and	pass	directly	to
the	cerebellum,	without	synapsing	in	the	vestibular	nuclei,	in	the	juxtarestiform
body.	 The	 medial	 (Schwalbe’s)	 vestibular	 nucleus	 is	 the	 largest	 subdivision	 of
the	vestibular	nuclear	complex,	extending	from	the	medulla	into	the	pons.	It	lies
in	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle,	 beneath	 the	 striae	 medullares.	 The	 inferior
(descending,	spinal,	Roller)	nucleus	lies	lateral	to	the	medial,	between	the	medial
nucleus	and	inferior	cerebellar	peduncle,	and	descends	further	inferiorly	to	reach
lower	 medullary	 levels.	 The	 lateral	 (Deiters’)	 and	 superior	 (Bechterew’s)
subnuclei	are	smaller	than	the	medial	and	inferior.	The	lateral	nucleus	is	lateral
to	the	rostral	end	of	the	medial	nucleus.	The	superior	nucleus	extends	higher	into
the	 pons	 than	 other	 subdivisions,	 forming	 a	 cap	 on	 the	 nuclear	 complex.
Vestibular	 afferents	 to	 the	 superior	 and	 medial	 subnuclei	 arise	 predominantly
from	the	semicircular	canals	and	less	so	from	the	otolith	organs.	Afferents	to	the
lateral	 and	 inferior	 subnuclei	 arise	 predominantly	 from	 the	 otolith	 organs	 and
less	so	from	the	semicircular	canals.	The	vestibular	nuclei	also	receive	afferent
cerebellovestibular	 fibers	 through	 the	 juxtarestiform	 body	 (part	 of	 the	 inferior
cerebellar	 peduncle),	 primarily	 from	 the	 flocculonodular	 lobe,	 as	 well	 as
afferents	from	the	spinal	cord	and	reticular	formation.

FIGURE	17.10	The	vestibular	pathway.

The	vestibular	nuclei	make	connections	with	four	primary	areas:	cerebellum,
spinal	 cord,	 oculomotor	 system,	 and	 cortex.	 The	 juxtarestiform	 body	 is	 a
collection	 of	 fibers	 medial	 to	 the	 inferior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 (restiform	 body).
Vestibulocerebellar	fibers	run	through	the	juxtarestiform	body	and	form	part	of
the	mossy	fiber	input	to	the	cerebellum.	The	direct	(primary)	vestibulocerebellar
tract	 bypasses	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei;	 its	 fibers	 terminate	 primarily	 in	 the
ipsilateral	 nodulus,	 uvula,	 and	 fastigial	 nucleus.	 The	 indirect	 (secondary)
vestibulocerebellar	fibers	arise	from	the	superior,	medial,	and	inferior	nuclei	and
terminate	primarily	in	the	flocculus	bilaterally	and	in	the	same	areas	that	receive
the	 direct	 vestibulocerebellar	 input.	 The	 vestibular	 nuclei	 also	 receive	 fibers
from	the	cerebellum.	The	fastigial	nucleus	of	the	cerebellum	connects	with	the
vestibular	 nuclei	 by	 the	 uncinate	 fasciculus	 (hook	 bundle	 of	 Russell),	 which	 is
the	 major	 outflow	 of	 the	 fastigial	 nucleus.	 The	 uncinate	 fasciculus	 forms	 a
distinctive	 arc	 over	 the	 superior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 and	 then	 descends	 in	 the
juxtarestiform	 body	 to	 enter	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei.	 Multiple	 areas	 of	 the	 cortex

receive	vestibular	input,	and	there	is	probably	no	primary	vestibular	cortex.

All	 four	 vestibular	 subnuclei	 may	 send	 fibers	 into	 the	 medial	 longitudinal
fasciculus	 (MLF),	 but	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 the	 ascending	 fibers	 arise	 from	 the
superior	and	medial	nuclei.	This	pathway,	through	connections	with	the	nuclei	of
CNs	 III,	 IV,	 and	 VI,	 and	 the	 nuclei	 of	 CN	 XI	 and	 upper	 cervical	 nerves,	 is
important	 in	 regulating	 movements	 of	 the	 eyes,	 head,	 and	 neck	 in	 response	 to
stimulation	 of	 the	 semicircular	 canals.	 Fibers	 from	 the	 superior	 and	 medial
nuclei	 form	 the	 indirect	 vestibulocerebellar	 pathway,	 and	 the	 medial	 nucleus
receives	cerebellar	input	through	cerebellovestibular	fibers.

Fibers	 from	 the	 lateral	 and	 inferior	 vestibular	 nuclei	 go	 down	 the	 ipsilateral
spinal	 cord	 as	 the	 lateral	 vestibulospinal	 tract,	 which	 is	 important	 in	 the
regulation	 of	 muscle	 tone	 and	 posture	 by	 increasing	 extensor	 muscle	 tone,
particularly	of	the	trunk.	Impulses	from	the	medial	vestibular	nuclei	descend	to
the	 cervical	 and	 upper	 thoracic	 spinal	 cord	 through	 the	 crossed	 medial
vestibulospinal	 tract.	 The	 inferior	 nucleus	 sends	 bilateral	 projections	 into	 the
descending	 MLF	 and	 also	 provides	 vestibular	 input	 to	 the	 cerebellum.	 The
vestibular	nuclei	also	have	connections	with	the	reticular	formation	and	through
this	with	the	dorsal	efferent	nucleus	of	the	vagus	and	with	the	spinal	cord.	They
also	 send	 efferent	 fibers	 back	 to	 the	 vestibular	 ganglion.	 Ascending	 vestibular
connections	 extend	 rostrally	 to	 the	 ventrolateral	 and	 ventral	 posterior	 thalamic
nuclei	and	from	the	thalamus	to	the	somatosensory	cortex	to	provide	conscious
perception	 of	 head	 position	 and	 movement.	 There	 are	 also	 projections	 to	 the
posterior	portion	of	the	superior	temporal	gyrus	that	are	important	in	vestibulo-
ocular	function.

Vestibular	Physiology

The	utricle	and	saccule	respond	to	linear	acceleration,	whereas	the	semicircular
canals	 respond	 to	 angular	 acceleration.	 These	 responses	 are	 mediated	 by	 hair
cells	 and	 transmitted	 to	 the	 vestibular	 ganglion	 and	 subsequently	 to	 the
vestibular	 nuclei.	 Under	 normal	 circumstances,	 the	 neural	 activity	 in	 the
labyrinths	is	equal	on	both	sides.	It	is	convenient	to	visualize	the	action	of	each
vestibular	 system	 as	 “pushing”	 toward	 the	 opposite	 side.	 When	 the	 two
labyrinths	push	equally,	the	system	is	in	balance	and	function	is	normal.	When
one	labyrinth	is	underactive,	the	opposite	labyrinth	pushes	the	eyes,	extremities,
and	 body	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 underactivity.	 The	 clinical	 manifestations	 of
vestibular	dysfunction	include	vertigo,	oscillopsia,	nausea,	vomiting,	nystagmus,

past	pointing,	and	lateropulsion.

Nystagmus	results	from	a	corrective	saccade	initiated	by	the	frontal	eye	fields
in	response	to	the	deviation	of	gaze	toward	the	side	of	the	less	active	labyrinth.
The	fast	component	of	the	nystagmus	is	therefore	in	the	opposite	direction	from
the	 hypoactive	 labyrinth.	 Without	 visual	 information	 to	 correct	 for	 errors	 (i.e.,
with	 eyes	 closed),	 patients	 with	 an	 acutely	 hypoactive	 labyrinth	 will	 have
deviation	 of	 their	 extremities	 toward	 the	 underactive	 side	 on	 finger-to-nose
testing.	 When	 attempting	 to	 walk	 with	 eyes	 closed,	 they	 will	 drift	 toward	 the
side	of	the	hypoactive	labyrinth.	On	the	Unterberger-Fukuda	stepping	test,	they
will	turn	toward	the	hypoactive	side.

When	 both	 labyrinths	 are	 diseased	 or	 malfunctioning,	 as	 might	 occur,	 for
example,	with	ototoxic	drug	effects,	there	is	no	vestibular	imbalance	and	hence
no	 nystagmus,	 vertigo,	 past	 pointing,	 and	 the	 like.	 Patients	 with	 bilateral
labyrinthine	 disease	 may	 nonetheless	 have	 great	 difficulty	 with	 balance	 and
equilibrium.

TABLE	17.3

Some	Causes	of	“Dizziness”

Symptom
Description

Characteristics

Possible	Etiologies

Vertigo

Illusion	of	motion	of

Dysfunction	of	the	vestibular

(spinning,
whirling,
tilting,	falling)

Disequilibrium

(poor	balance
but	not
“dizzy”)

self	or
environment

Impaired	balance,
unsteady	gait

system,	peripheral	or	central

Bilateral	vestibular	dysfunction;
deafferentation	(peripheral
neuropathy,	posterior	column
disease);	brainstem	lesion;
cerebellar	lesion;
extrapyramidal	disorder;	drug
effects

Presyncope

Light-headedness;

Global	cerebral	hypoperfusion

(light-headed,
drunk,	woozy,
faint)

often	with
systemic
symptoms	(e.g.,

(numerous	causes)

diaphoresis,
nausea,	graying
of	vision)	inciting
event

Multiple	sensory

Elderly	patient,

Multiple	concurrent	problems

deficits

Ill	defined

vague
complaints,
difficulty	walking

Histrionic	but	vague
description	and
nonspecific
complaints

Clinical	Examination

Psychogenic

Dr.	W.	B.	Matthews	said,	“There	can	be	few	physicians	so	dedicated…that	they
do	not	experience	a	slight	decline	in	spirits	when	they	learn	that	their	patient’s
complaint	is	giddiness.”	The	conditions	that	may	present	as	dizziness	range	from
trivial	 to	 life	 threatening	 and	 are	 often	 difficult	 to	 evaluate	 and	 manage.	 The
nebulousness	of	the	patient’s	description	of	dizziness	often	produces	frustration
on	the	part	of	the	clinician,	yet	in	few	other	conditions	are	the	historical	details
so	 pivotal	 in	 correct	 diagnosis.	 Fortunately,	 the	 truly	 serious	 conditions	 that
present	as	dizziness	are	rare.

Evaluation	of	the	dizzy	patient	is	a	very	common	clinical	exercise,	and	much
has	been	written	on	the	subject.	A	careful	appraisal	of	the	patient’s	symptoms	is
often	helpful,	but	even	the	skilled	clinician	is	sometimes	unsure	after	hearing	the
patient’s	complaints.	The	first	step	in	understanding	the	symptom	is	to	have	the
patient	 describe	 what	 he	 means	 by	 “dizziness.”	 Patients	 use	 the	 word	 dizzy	 to
describe	 vertigo,	 as	 well	 as	 a	 number	 of	 other	 sensations,	 such	 as	 light-
headedness	 or	 giddiness,	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 pseudovertigo.	 Concomitant
dysfunction	 in	 several	 systems	 may	 cause	 dizziness.	 Conflicting	 sensory
information	may	certainly	cause	dizziness;	the	sensory	mismatch	from	watching
a	motion	picture	with	dramatic	movement	in	the	visual	panorama	while	sitting	in
a	 stationary	 seat	 illustrates	 the	 effect.	 Simply	 looking	 down	 from	 a	 height	 can
cause	a	sense	of	dizziness	(the	subject	of	the	Alfred	Hitchcock	movie	Vertigo).	It

is	 important	 to	 determine	 if	 there	 are	 concomitant	 auditory	 symptoms;	 their
presence	changes	the	differential	diagnosis	dramatically.

In	a	study	of	100	dizzy	patients	in	an	ambulatory	setting,	the	causes	were	as
follows:	 vestibulopathy	 (54),	 psychiatric	 disorders	 (16),	 multifactorial	 (13),
unknown	 (8),	 presyncope	(6),	 disequilibrium	 (2),	 and	hyperventilation	 (1).	The
most	common	treatable	conditions	were	benign	positional,	or	benign	paroxysmal
positional	vertigo	(BPPV),	and	psychiatric	disorders.	Other	studies	have	shown	a
similar	 distribution.	 Some	 of	 the	 causes	 of	 dizziness	 are	 listed	 in	 Table	 17.3.
Table	17.4	lists	causes	of	dizziness	because	of	labyrinthine	or	vestibular	pathway
dysfunction.	 Before	 discussing	 vestibular	 disease,	 some	 discussion	 of
nonspecific	dizziness	is	warranted,	because	patients	with	such	complaints	make
up	a	large	proportion	of	the	dizzy	population.

TABLE	17.4

Some	Common	Causes	of	Vertigo

Otologic	disorders

Benign	paroxysmal	positional	vertigo
Ménière’s	disease
Vestibular	neuronitis

Neurologic	disorders

Migraine-associated	vertigo
Vertebrobasilar	ischemia

sensation	 of	

Cerebral	 hypoperfusion	 produces	 a	

light-headedness,
drunkenness,	 or	 impending	 syncope	 without	 spinning,	 whirling,	 or	 any	 illusion
of	 environmental	 motion.	 Such	 hypoperfusion	 may	 occur	 under	 a	 variety	 of
circumstances,	 all	 of	 which	 may	 lead	 the	 patient	 to	 seek	 medical	 attention
because	 of	 “dizziness.”	 In	 hyperventilation	 syndrome,	 hypocapnia-induced
cerebral	 arterial	 constriction	 and	 the	 resultant	 hypoperfusion	 induce	 light-
headedness	along	with	other	symptoms,	such	as	chest	pain;	headache;	numbness
and	tingling	of	the	hands,	feet,	and	circumoral	region;	and	occasionally	outright
syncope.	 Frequently,	 patients	 are	 unaware	 of	 their	 overbreathing,	 but	 the	 high
minute	volume	of	respiration	produces	dryness	of	the	mouth,	which	the	patient
may	 describe	 spontaneously	 or	 respond	 to	 on	 specific	 questioning.	 Induced
hyperventilation	 may	 reproduce	 the	 symptom	 complex.	 Hyperventilation	 may
also	
in	 patients	 with	 acoustic	 neuroma.	 Orthostatic
hypotension	because	of	drugs,	prolonged	standing,	dehydration,	increased	vagal

induce	 nystagmus	

tone,	 or	 dysautonomia	 likewise	 may	 present	 as	 light-headedness	 or	 faintness.
Accompanying	 symptoms	 are	 few,	 and	 only	 a	 careful	 history	 eliciting	 the
relationship	of	the	dizziness	to	posture	will	make	the	diagnosis.	Global	cerebral
hypoperfusion	may	also	result	from	decreased	cardiac	output	via	any	number	of
mechanisms;	arrhythmia	is	the	primary	concern.

Elderly	 patients	 “deafferented”	 because	 of	 separate	 disease	 processes
affecting	 different	 sensory	 systems	 may	 present	 with	 complaints	 of	 vague
dizziness,	 unsteadiness,	 and	 difficulty	 with	 balance,	 particularly	 when	 turning
(multiple	sensory	defect	vertigo).	Patients	can	apparently	tolerate	problems	with
any	one	afferent	system,	but	when	multiple	systems	are	involved,	imbalance	and
dizziness	result.	Thus,	patients	typically	will	suffer	from	various	combinations	of
poor	 vision	 (e.g.,	 cataracts,	 macular	 degeneration),	 poor	 hearing	 (presbycusis),
mild	 peripheral	 neuropathy,	 and	 cervical	 spondylosis.	 The	 term	 presbylibrium
has	been	applied	to	poor	balance	because	of	aging.

Numerous	terms	have	been	employed	to	describe	the	clinical	phenomenology
of	 vestibular	 disease;	 not	 all	 are	 helpful.	 Vertigo	 is	 the	 sensation	 of
environmental	 motion	 (spinning,	 whirling,	 lateropulsion,	 tilt).	 The	 term	 “true
vertigo”	 is	 sometimes	 used	 to	 describe	 this	 symptom.	 When	 true	 vertigo	 is
present,	 the	 problem	 is	 usually	 an	 acute	 peripheral	 vestibular	 disturbance.
Objective	vertigo	creates	the	sensation	that	the	environment	is	spinning,	whereas
subjective	vertigo	creates	the	sensation	that	the	patient	is	spinning.	The	absence
of	 true	 vertigo	 does	 not	 exclude	 peripheral	 vestibular	 disease,	 especially	 if
bilateral	 pathology	 exists,	 such	 as	 in	 ototoxicity	 because	 of	 drugs.	 Central
vertigo	 is	 due	 to	 CNS	 disease;	 peripheral	 vertigo	 is	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the
peripheral	 vestibular	 apparatus	 or	 its	 connections.	 Patients	 with	 CNS	 lesions
may	 not	have	 true	 vertigo.	 Patients	 with	true	vertigo,	especially	when	due	to	a
peripheral	 lesion,	 often	 experience	 vegetative	 symptoms	 such	 as	 nausea	 and
vomiting,	because	of	projections	to	the	medullary	vomiting	centers,	pallor,	and
sweating.	 Acoustic	 neuroma	 causes	 a	 gradual	 unilateral	 loss	 of	 vestibular
function	 and	 is	 more	 prone	 to	 cause	 imbalance	 than	 true	 vertigo.	 Some	 other
serious	conditions	may	present	as	dizziness	without	true	vertigo,	such	as	cardiac
dysrhythmias	 and	 dysautonomic	 orthostasis.	 Physicians	 should	 not	 make	 too
much	of	the	presence	or	absence	of	true	vertigo	in	judging	how	seriously	to	take
a	patient’s	complaint	of	dizziness.

Dizziness	 may	 be	 present	 constantly	 or	 intermittently.	 If	 intermittent,	 as	 in
BPPV,	one	of	the	most	common	causes	of	dizziness,	the	episodes	may	occur	so
frequently	that	the	initial	description	may	lend	the	impression	the	symptoms	are

constant.	If	the	episodes	are	intermittent,	the	duration	of	the	attacks	is	important.
Attack	duration	is	one	of	the	most	important	features	in	distinguishing	between
central	and	peripheral	vertigo.	In	vertigo	due	to	BPPV,	the	attacks	last	10	to	30
seconds;	 in	 other	 peripheral	 vestibulopathies,	 such	 as	 Ménière’s	 disease,	 the
attacks	 last	 hours;	 and	 in	 vertebrobasilar	 insufficiency,	 the	 episodes	 last	 for
minutes.	 Exploring	 the	 precipitating	 factors	 is	 very	 helpful.	 Dizziness	 may	 be
provoked	 by	 head	 or	 body	 movement,	 standing,	 or	 lying	 down	 or	 occur
spontaneously.	The	presence	of	associated	symptoms,	such	as	nausea,	vomiting,
the	 eyes,	 oscillopsia,	 disturbances	 of	 balance,
staggering,	 deviation	 of	
prostration,	tinnitus,	hearing	loss,	autophony	(perception	of	the	reverberation	of
patient’s	 own	 voice),	 or	 loss	 of	 consciousness,	 is	 important.	 Table	3.8	 reviews
some	of	the	pertinent	history	to	explore	in	a	dizzy	patient.

Useful	 bedside	 testing	 of	 vestibular	 function	 includes	 assessment	 of
vestibulospinal	 reflexes	 (past	 pointing,	 Romberg,	 Unterberger-Fukuda	 stepping
test),	tests	of	vestibulo-ocular	reflexes	(VORs)	(oculocephalic	reflex,	head	thrust
[head	impulse]	test,	dynamic	visual	acuity,	and	caloric	responses),	and	searching
for	 nystagmus	 (spontaneous,	 positional,	 or	 after	 head	 shaking).	 For	 vestibular
tests	 of	 ocular	 function,	 patients	 should	 wear	 their	 customary	 correction.	 In
recalling	the	expected	pattern	of	responses	to	some	of	these,	remember	that	the
vestibular	 system	 tends	 to	 push	 (eyes,	 limbs,	 and	 body)	 to	 the	 opposite	 side;
when	the	system	is	in	balance,	the	eyes	are	midline	and	the	limbs	and	body	can
accurately	 find	 a	 target.	 When	 disease	 is	 present,	 the	 involved	 labyrinth	 is
usually	 hypoactive	 and	 the	 uninvolved	 labyrinth	 pushes	 toward	 the	 abnormal
side.	 This	 can	 be	 simulated	 in	 a	 normal	 volunteer	 with	 minicalorics,	 the
instillation	 of	 2	 to	 5	 mL	 of	 ice	 water	 into	 one	 ear.	 Cold	 irrigation	 mimics	 an
acute	destructive	lesion,	and	for	a	brief	time	thereafter,	the	subject	will	display
the	 same	 clinical	 findings	 seen	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 an	 acute	 peripheral
vestibulopathy	 (APV).	 The	 caloric	 demonstration	 is	 a	 useful	 teaching	 exercise
for	 a	 group	 of	 trainees.	 It	 is	 also	 enlightening	 to	 do	 bilateral	 cold	 calorics	 to
demonstrate	that	when	both	labyrinths	are	not	functioning,	normally	the	affected
individual	is	still	quite	impaired,	despite	the	lack	of	labyrinthine	imbalance.	The
bedside	tests	of	vestibular	function	are	listed	in	Table	17.5.

A	 systematic	 examination	 of	 the	 dizzy	 patient	 is	 in	 use	 at	 Washington
University	that	only	requires	10	minutes	in	experienced	hands.	The	components
are	 (a)	 observation	 for	 spontaneous	 and	 gaze-evoked	 nystagmus	 and	 fixation
suppression;	(b)	evaluation	of	extraocular	movement;	(c)	vestibulo-ocular	reflex
testing;	 (d)	 Dix-Hallpike	 and	 static	 positioning	 (side-lying)	 tests;	 (e)	 limb

coordination,	 primarily	 searching	 for	 past	 pointing	 and	 ataxia;	 and	 (f)	 gait	 and
Romberg	test.

TABLE
17.5

Useful	Bedside	Tests	and	Signs	to	Elicit	in	the
Evaluation	of	Vestibular	Function

Note:	Fresnel	(or	high	+)	lenses	and/or	hyperventilation	may	bring	out
some	of	these	signs

Observation	for	spontaneous	nystagmus
Evaluation	of	eye	movements
Head	thrust	test
Dynamic	visual	acuity
Subjective	visual	vertical
Vibration-induced	nystagmus
Head-shaking	nystagmus
Head-tapping	test
Past	pointing
Dix-Hallpike	maneuver
Evaluation	of	gait,	especially	tandem
Romberg
Walking	straight	line,	eyes	closed
Star	walking	test
Unterberger-Fukuda	stepping	test
Calorics

Vestibulospinal	Reflexes

Past	 pointing	 is	 a	 deviation	 of	 the	 extremities	 caused	 by	 either	 cerebellar	 or
vestibular	 disease.	 These	 two	 types	 of	 past	 pointing	 have	 different	 patterns
(Video	43.2).	 Testing	 is	 usually	 done	 with	 the	 upper	 extremities.	 A	 quick	 and
effective	 technique	 is	 simply	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 close	 his	 eyes	 while	 doing
traditional	cerebellar	finger-to-nose	testing.	If	past	pointing	is	present,	the	limb
will	deviate	to	the	side	of	the	target	because	of	the	absence	of	visual	correction.

This	method	will	usually	bring	out	past	pointing	if	it	is	present.	The	traditional
method	is	to	have	the	patient	extend	the	arm	and	place	his	extended	index	finger
on	 the	 examiner’s	 index	 finger;	 then	 with	 eyes	 closed,	 raise	 the	 arm	 directly
overhead;	 then	 bring	 it	 back	 down	 precisely	 onto	 the	 examiner’s	 finger.	 With
acute	vestibular	imbalance,	the	normal	(more	active)	labyrinth	will	push	the	limb
toward	the	abnormal	(less	active)	side,	and	the	patient	will	miss	the	target.	The
past	 pointing	 will	 always	 be	 to	 the	 same	 side	 of	 the	 target	 and	 will	 occur	 with
either	 limb.	 With	 a	 cerebellar	 hemispheric	 lesion,	 the	 ipsilateral	 limbs	 have
ataxia	and	incoordination;	past	pointing	occurs	only	with	the	involved	arm	and
may	 be	 to	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 or	 erratically	 to	 either	 side	 of	 the	 target.	 In
vestibulopathy,	after	a	period	of	compensation,	the	past	pointing	disappears	and
may	even	begin	to	occur	in	the	opposite	direction.

Romberg’s	 test	 is	 described	 in	 more	 detail	 in	 Chapter	 44.	 In	 brief,	 the
Romberg	compares	balance	as	the	patient	stands	with	eyes	open	and	eyes	closed.
The	feet	should	be	brought	as	close	together	as	will	allow	the	patient	to	maintain
eyes	 open	 balance.	 A	 normal	 individual	 can	 stand	 feet	 together	 and	 eyes	 open
without	difficulty,	but	not	all	patients	can.	The	critical	observation	is	eyes	open
versus	 eyes	 closed.	 Inability	 to	 maintain	 balance	 with	 eyes	 open	 and	 feet
together	is	not	a	positive	Romberg.	In	unilateral	vestibulopathy,	if	balance	is	lost
with	eyes	closed,	the	patient	will	tend	to	fall	toward	the	side	of	the	lesion,	as	the
normal	 vestibular	 system	 pushes	 him	 over.	 If	 the	 patient	 has	 spontaneous
nystagmus	because	of	a	vestibular	lesion,	the	fall	will	be	in	the	direction	of	the
slow	 phase.	 In	 peripheral	 vestibular	 disease,	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 fall	 can	 be
affected	by	changing	head	position;	the	patient	will	fall	toward	the	abnormal	ear.
With	a	right	vestibulopathy	and	facing	straight	ahead,	eye	closure	will	cause	the
patient	to	fall	to	the	right;	looking	over	his	right	shoulder,	he	will	fall	backward;
and	looking	over	his	left	shoulder,	he	will	fall	forward.	The	sharpened	Romberg
(tandem	Romberg)	test,	which	is	done	by	having	the	patient	stand	tandem	with
eyes	closed,	may	be	useful	in	some	circumstances.

The	patient	with	an	acute	vestibulopathy	may	have	difficulty	with	tandem	gait
with	a	tendency	to	fall	to	the	side	of	the	lesion,	but	normal	straightaway	walking
may	 appear	 unimpaired	 because	 visual	 cues	 compensate	 for	 the	 vestibular
abnormality.	But	straightaway	walking	with	eyes	closed	may	be	informative.	A
normal	individual	can	walk	without	visual	clues	well	enough	to	point	his	index
finger	at	the	palm	of	the	examiner’s	hand,	close	his	eyes,	walk	along	a	path	of	20
ft	or	so,	and	then	touch	the	finger	to	the	examiner’s	palm.	The	patient	with	acute
vestibulopathy	 may	 drift	 toward	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 and	 end	 up	 well	 off	 the

target,	the	gait	equivalent	of	past	pointing.

The	Unterberger-Fukuda	stepping	test	is	analogous.	The	patient,	eyes	closed,
marches	in	place	for	1	minute	(Video	43.2).	A	normal	individual	will	continue
to	face	in	the	same	direction,	but	a	patient	with	acute	vestibulopathy	will	slowly
pivot	 toward	 the	 lesion.	 In	 the	 star	 walking	 test,	 the	 patient,	 eyes	 closed,	 takes
several	 steps	 forward	 then	 several	 steps	 backward,	 over	 and	 over.	 A	 normal
individual	 will	 begin	 and	 end	 oriented	 approximately	 along	 the	 same	 line.	 A
patient	 with	 acute	 vestibulopathy	 will	 drift	 toward	 the	 involved	 side	 walking
forward	 and	 continue	 to	 drift	 during	 the	 backward	 phase.	 The	 resulting	 path
traces	out	a	multipointed	star	pattern	(“star	walking”).	As	with	past	pointing,	the
direction	of	gait	drift,	pivoting	on	the	stepping	test,	and	similar	findings	do	not
reliably	 indicate	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 in	 patients	 with	 chronic	 vestibulopathy
after	 compensation	 has	 occurred.	 These	 vestibulospinal	 tests	 may	 be	 abnormal
when	all	other	clinical	tests	of	vestibular	function	are	unrevealing.

Vestibulo-Ocular	Reflexes

The	 VOR	 serves	 to	 move	 the	 eyes	 at	 an	 equal	 velocity	 but	 in	 the	 direction
opposite	a	head	movement;	this	keeps	the	eyes	still	in	space	and	maintains	visual
fixation	 while	 the	 head	 is	 in	 motion	 (see	 also	 Chapter	 14).	 There	 are	 several
ways	 to	 examine	 the	 VOR,	 including	 the	 doll’s	 eye	 test,	 head	 thrust	 test,
dynamic	visual	acuity,	and	calorics.

Oculocephalic	Reflex	(Doll’s	Eye	Test)

The	 oculocephalic	 response	 is	 primarily	 useful	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 comatose
patients.	Turning	the	head	in	one	direction	causes	the	eyes	to	turn	in	the	opposite
direction.	 This	 response	 indicates	 that	 the	 pathways	 connecting	 the	 vestibular
nuclei	 in	 the	 medulla	 to	 the	 extraocular	 nuclei	 in	 the	 pons	 and	 midbrain	 are
functioning	and	that	the	brainstem	is	intact.	In	an	alert	patient,	visuomotor	and
ocular	 fixation	 mechanisms	 come	 into	 play,	 limiting	 the	 drawing	 of	 any
conclusions	about	vestibular	function.

Head	Thrust	Test

The	 doll’s	 eye	 test	 utilizes	 slow	 side-to-side	 head	 movements	 in	 a	 comatose
patient.	 The	 head	 thrust	 test	 is	 done	 in	 an	 awake	 patient.	 Abrupt,	 rapid

movements	 are	 made	 in	 each	 direction	 while	 the	 patient	 attempts	 to	 maintain
fixation	 straight	 ahead,	 as	 on	 the	 examiner’s	 nose	 (Figure	 17.11).	 The	 ocular
smooth	pursuit	mechanism	cannot	compensate	for	head	movements	done	at	such
high	 velocity,	 but	 normally,	 the	 VOR	 will	 maintain	 fixation	 and	 the	 eyes	 will
hold	 on	 target.	 When	 the	 VOR	 is	 impaired,	 the	 compensatory	 eye	 movement
velocity	is	less	than	the	head	movement	velocity;	the	eyes	lag	behind	the	head
movement	and	a	corrective	“catch-up”	saccade	must	be	made	to	resume	fixation
in	 the	 eccentric	 position.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 the	 head	 thrust	 test,	 see	 Video	 Link
17.1.

Dynamic	Visual	Acuity

The	ability	of	the	VOR	to	maintain	ocular	fixation	means	that	a	patient	can	read
even	 while	 shaking	 the	 head	 to	 and	 fro.	 The	 dynamic	 visual	 acuity	 test	 is
performed	by	obtaining	a	baseline	acuity	and	then	determining	the	acuity	during
rapid	 head	 shaking.	 Degradation	 by	 more	 than	 three	 lines	 on	 the	 Snellen	 chart
suggests	 impaired	 vestibular	 function.	 One	 symptomatic	 corollary	 of	 impaired
dynamic	acuity	is	oscillopsia,	a	visual	illusion	of	environmental	motion	causing
jiggling	while	walking	or	in	a	car,	and	difficulty	reading	signs	while	in	motion.

Caloric	Tests

Robert	 Bárány	 was	 an	 otologist	 who	 pioneered	 the	 understanding	 of	 vestibular
function	 and	 disease.	 He	 developed	 caloric	 testing	 for	 vestibular	 function	 in
1906;	 it	 is	 still	 in	 use	 over	 a	 century	 later.	 He	 did	 not	 in	 fact	 describe	 the
maneuver	to	test	for	positional	vertigo,	although	his	name	is	linked	to	it.

Caloric	 responses	 are	 frequently	 used	 to	 check	 for	 brainstem	 integrity	 in
comatose	 patients.	 Ice	 water	 instilled	 into	 one	 ear	 canal	 will	 abruptly	 decrease
the	 tonic	 activity	 from	 the	 labyrinth	 on	 the	 irrigated	 side.	 Cold	 calorics	 in	 a
comatose	 patient	 with	 an	 intact	 brainstem	 cause	 tonic	 deviation	 of	 the	 eyes
toward	 the	 side	 of	 irrigation	 as	 the	 normally	 active	 labyrinth	 pushes	 the	 eyes
toward	 the	 hypoactive,	 irrigated	 labyrinth.	 In	 an	 awake	 patient,	 cold	 calorics
cause	nystagmus	with	the	fast	component	away	from	the	irrigated	side	because
the	cerebral	cortex	produces	a	compensatory	saccade	that	jerks	in	the	direction
opposite	 the	 tonic	 deviation.	 The	 familiar	 mnemonic	 “COWS”	 (cold	 opposite,
warm	 same)	 refers	 to	 the	 fast	 phase	 of	 the	 nystagmus,	 not	 to	 the	 tonic	 gaze
deviation.	 Nystagmus	 is	 seen	 only	 when	 the	 cortex	 is	 functioning	 normally.

Warm	 water	 irrigation	 has	 opposite	 effects.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 the	 normal	 caloric
response,	 see	 Video	 Link	 17.2.	 Bilateral	 simultaneous	 cold	 calorics	 induce
tonic	downgaze	and	warm	calorics	upgaze.

FIGURE	 17.11	 Head	 thrust	 test	 with	 a	 defective	 left	 labyrinth.	 The	 normal	 patient
maintains	fixation	throughout.	The	patient	with	a	defective	left	labyrinth	loses	fixation
with	 the	 rapid	 head	 movement	 and	 must	 make	 a	 catch-up	 saccade	 to	 the	 right.
(Modified	 from	 Barraclough	 K,	 Bronstein	 A.	 Diagnosis	 in	 general	 practice:	 vertigo.
BMJ	2009;339:b3493.)

In	comatose	patients,	large	volumes	of	ice	water,	30	to	50	mL,	are	commonly
used	because	it	is	imperative	to	elicit	the	response	if	it	is	present.	Calorics	can
also	 be	 done	 to	 assess	 vestibular	 function	 in	 dizzy	 patients,	 either	 using	 much
smaller	volumes,	2	to	10	mL	of	an	ice	and	water	slush	(minicalorics),	or	larger
volumes	of	water	that	is	less	cold.	The	latency	to	onset	and	the	duration	of	the

nystagmus	 elicited	 are	 compared	 on	 the	 two	 sides.	 A	 difference	 of	 more	 than
20%	 in	 nystagmus	 duration	 suggests	 a	 lesion	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 decreased
response.

Whether	in	comatose	or	awake	patients,	the	head	is	positioned	so	as	to	bring
the	 horizontal	 canal	 into	 a	 position	 to	 elicit	 a	 maximal	 response.	 In	 comatose
patients	lying	supine,	this	is	done	with	the	head	flexed	30	degrees	to	bring	the
horizontal	canal	vertical.	For	awake	patients,	the	same	position	may	be	used,	or
the	head	may	be	extended	with	the	seated	patient	looking	at	the	ceiling.

Nystagmus

Nystagmus	 is	 discussed	 in	 greater	 detail	 in	 Chapter	 14.	 The	 characteristics	 of
vestibular	nystagmus	will	be	briefly	reviewed.	Nystagmus	because	of	vestibular
disease	may	occur	spontaneously	or	be	produced	by	various	maneuvers.	Careful
eye	 observation	 may	 reveal	 other	 relevant	 abnormalities,	 such	 as	 fixation
instability,	 for	 example,	 because	 of	 macro	 square	 jerks,	 or	 skew	 deviation	 (see
Chapter	14).

Spontaneous	Nystagmus

The	slow	phase	of	spontaneous	vestibular	nystagmus	is	usually	in	the	direction
of	 the	 lesion,	 with	 the	 fast	 phase	 away,	 because	 an	 acute	 vestibular	 lesion
typically	causes	hypoactivity	of	the	labyrinth.	The	findings	are	similar	to	those
produced	by	ice	water	irrigation	of	the	ear	and	are	due	to	the	normal	labyrinth
pushing	the	eyes	toward	the	diseased	side	with	the	cortex	generating	a	corrective
saccade	 away	 from	 the	 abnormal	 side.	 Because	 of	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 three
different	 semicircular	 canals,	 vestibular	 nystagmus	 may	 beat	 in	 more	 than	 one
direction,	the	summation	of	which	creates	an	admixed	rotatory	component	rarely
seen	 with	 other	 conditions.	 When	 evaluating	 nystagmus,	 the	 presence	 of	 a
torsional	component	suggests	a	peripheral	origin.	The	amplitude	increases	with
gaze	in	the	direction	of	the	fast	phase.

When	nystagmus	is	only	present	with	gaze	in	the	direction	of	the	fast	phase
(Alexander’s	 law,	 Chapter	 14),	 it	 is	 termed	 first	 degree.	 Second-degree
nystagmus	 is	 present	 in	 primary	 gaze.	 Vestibular	 nystagmus	 typically	 is	 fine,
often	present	but	easily	overlooked	in	primary	position.	Third-degree	nystagmus
(fast	component	opposite	to	the	direction	of	gaze)	rarely	occurs	with	any	other
nystagmus	 type.	 Vertigo,	 deafness,	 and	 tinnitus	 also	 help	 mark	 nystagmus	 as

vestibular.

Peripheral	 vestibular	 nystagmus	 (i.e.,	 because	 of	 disease	 of	 the	 labyrinth	 or
eighth	 nerve)	 is	 markedly	 inhibited	 by	 visual	 fixation.	 Inhibiting	 fixation	 with
Fresnel	 (Frenzel	 is	 a	 common	 misspelling)	 lenses	 (strongly	 convex	 spectacles
that	block	visual	fixation)	will	often	make	the	nystagmus	more	obvious	by	both
blocking	 fixation	 and	 magnifying	 the	 eyes.	 When	 Fresnel	 lenses	 are	 used,
torsional	 nystagmus	 is	 often	 more	 prominent	 because	 vertical	 and	 horizontal
nystagmus	are	more	easily	suppressed	by	visual	fixation.	Another	technique	is	to
have	the	patient	close	the	eyelids	gently	and	then	partially	lift	one	lid	and	look
for	 abnormal	 movements	 of	 the	 scleral	 vessels.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 vestibular
nystagmus	demonstrating	Alexander’s	law,	third-degree	nystagmus	and	fixation
suppression,	see	Video	Link	17.3.	The	fundoscopic	examination	may	bring	out
subtle	 vestibular	 nystagmus.	 The	 dim	 lighting	 lessens	 visual	 fixation,	 and	 the
disc	is	magnified.	A	rhythmic	jerking	of	the	disc	to	the	patient’s	right	indicates
left	beating	nystagmus.	Formal	eye	movement	studies	are	done	in	darkness	with
recording	of	the	eye	movements	by	electrodes	in	order	to	remove	the	effects	of
visual	 fixation.	 Failure	 of	 visual	 fixation	 to	 suppress	 nystagmus	 suggests	 the
nystagmus	may	be	of	central	origin,	usually	a	cerebellar	or	brainstem	lesion.	The
spontaneous	nystagmus	because	of	a	central	lesion	may	be	purely	horizontal	or
purely	vertical.

Nystagmus	can	sometimes	be	induced	by	having	the	patient	rapidly	turn	the
head	back	and	forth	with	the	eyes	closed	for	about	30	seconds	and	then	opening
the	eyes	(head-shaking	nystagmus).	No	nystagmus	occurs	in	normal	individuals,
but	 patients	 with	 vestibular	 imbalance	 may	 have	 brief	 spontaneous	 nystagmus
beating	away	from	the	abnormal	side.	Alternately,	the	patient	may	wear	Fresnel
lenses	 while	 shaking	 the	 head.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 head-shaking	 nystagmus,	 see
Head-Shaking	 Nystagmus	 from	 Dr.	 Daniel	 R.	 Gold,	 Neuro-Ophthalmology
Virtual	 Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,	 available	 at	 Video
Link	17.4.	 Lee	 et	 al.	 recently	 described	 a	 disorder	 characterized	 by	 recurrent
spontaneous	 vertigo	 and	 interictal	 head-shaking	 nystagmus.	 Spontaneous
nystagmus	 can	 occasionally	 be	 produced	 by	 tapping	 on	 the	 head	 or	 by	 low-
frequency	vibration	applied	to	the	mastoid.	Hyperventilation	may	also	help	bring
out	vestibular	nystagmus.

Positional	Nystagmus

When	 not	 present	 spontaneously,	 nystagmus	 can	 sometimes	 be	 elicited	 by

placing	the	patient’s	head	into	a	particular	position.	To	perform	the	Dix-Hallpike
(Hallpike	 or	 Nylen-Bárány)	 maneuver,	 the	 patient	 is	 moved	 from	 a	 seated
position	 to	 a	 supine	 position	 with	 the	 head	 extended	 45	 degrees	 and	 turned	 45
degrees	to	one	side	so	that	one	ear	is	dependent.	The	patient	is	returned	to	sitting
and	 then	 the	 maneuver	 repeated	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction.	 The	 patient	 should
become	symptomatic	when	the	affected	ear	is	dependent.	For	videos	of	the	Dix-
Hallpike	 test,	 see	 Barraclough	 and	 Bronstein	 and	 Posterior	 canal	 BPPV	 with
fixation	 and	 with	 fixation	 removed	 from	 Dr.	 Daniel	 R.	 Gold,	 Neuro-
Ophthalmology	 Virtual	 Education	 Library	 [NOVEL],	 University	 of	 Utah,
available	at	Video	Link	17.5.

If	vertigo	or	nystagmus	occurs,	the	patient	is	held	in	the	provoking	position
until	 the	 symptoms	 subside,	 and	 then,	 the	 movement	 is	 repeated	 to	 assess	 its
recurrence.	The	side-lying	test	may	be	used	in	patients	unable	to	extend	the	neck
or	 tolerate	 the	 supine	 position.	 The	 head	 is	 turned	 45	 degrees	 in	 one	 direction,
then	the	patient	lies	down	on	the	opposite	shoulder.	In	BPPV,	nystagmus	begins
after	 a	 latency	 of	 about	 3	 to	 10	 seconds,	 occasionally	 as	 long	 as	 40	 seconds;
persists	 for	 20	 to	 30	 seconds,	 rarely	 as	 long	 as	 a	 minute;	 and	 then	 gradually
abates	 (fatigues	 or	 habituates)	 after	 about	 30	 seconds,	 even	 though	 the	 head
remains	 in	 the	 provoking	 position.	 The	 nystagmus	 is	 commonly	 torsional	 with
the	 fast	 component	 toward	 the	 dependent	 ear	 (geotropic).	 For	 a	 video	 of
torsional	 nystagmus	 in	 BPPV,	 see	 Barraclough	 and	 Bronstein.	 The	 response	 is
usually	 much	 more	 dramatic	 in	 one	 particular	 head	 position.	 Typically,	 the
patient	will	experience	whirling,	occasionally	nausea,	and	rarely	vomiting.	With
BPPV	involving	canals	other	than	the	posterior	one,	the	Dix-Hallpike	maneuver
may	be	negative.	The	roll	test,	rolling	the	head	of	the	supine	patient	to	one	side,
may	provoke	a	response	with	horizontal	canal	BPPV.

In	canalithiasis,	the	response	is	transient,	and	repeating	the	maneuver	several
times	 consecutively	 provokes	 less	 of	 a	 response	 each	 time	 until	 eventually	 the
nystagmus	and	vertigo	are	nil,	adaptability.	The	term	habituation	is	used	to	refer
to	either	of	these	phenomena,	which	are	themselves	used	inconsistently.	After	a
period	of	10	to	15	minutes,	the	response	can	be	elicited	again.	In	cupulolithiasis,
latency	and	fatigability	are	absent	because	the	adherent	otoconia	are	in	constant
contact	with	the	cupula.

Positional	 nystagmus	 is	 most	 often	 due	 to	 peripheral	 vestibular	 disease.
Although	rare,	positional	vertigo	and	nystagmus	can	occur	with	a	central	lesion,
especially	one	near	the	fourth	ventricle,	but	the	characteristics	of	the	nystagmus
are	different.	With	a	central	lesion,	there	may	be	no	latency,	and	the	nystagmus

often	 begins	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 head	 is	 placed	 in	 the	 provoking	 position.	 Central
positional	 nystagmus	 is	 typically	 vertical	 (either	 up-	 or	 downbeating),	 without
the	rotatory	component	seen	with	peripheral	lesions.	When	torsional	nystagmus
is	present,	it	may	be	ageotropic,	beating	away	from	the	ground.	In	addition,	the
nystagmus	and	associated	symptoms	may	persist	for	a	prolonged	period,	longer
than	 30	 to	 40	 seconds,	 sometimes	 continuing	 as	 long	 as	 the	 head	 position	 is
maintained.	With	central	lesions,	there	may	be	a	mismatch	in	the	severity	of	the
nystagmus,	 vertigo,	 and	 nausea,	 in	 contrast	 to	 peripheral	 lesions	 where
nystagmus,	vertigo,	and	nausea	are	generally	of	comparable	intensity.

TABLE
17.6

The	Characteristics	of	Central	versus	Peripheral
Positional	Nystagmus	on	Dix-Hallpike	Maneuver

Finding

Latency

Peripheral

Central

Yes,	typically	3–10	s,	rarely	as

No

long	as	40	s

Fatigability*

(habituation)

Yes,	individual	episode	typically
lasts	10–30	s,	rarely	as	long
as	1	min

No

Adaptability*

(fatigability)

Yes,	maneuver	done	several

No

times	consecutively	provokes
less	of	a	response	each	time

Nystagmus
direction

Direction	fixed,	typically	mixed
rotational	upbeating	with
small	horizontal	component;
quick	phase	of	intorsion
movement	toward	the
dependent	ear,	upbeat	toward
forehead

Suppression	of

Yes

nystagmus	by
visual	fixation

Direction

changing,
variable,	often
purely	vertical
(either	upbeating
or	downbeating)
or	purely
horizontal

No

Severity

Severe,	marked	vertigo,	intense

Mild	vertigo,	less

nystagmus,	nausea

obvious
nystagmus,
inconspicuous
nausea

Consistency

Less	consistent

More	consistent

(reproducibility)

Past	pointing

In	direction	of	nystagmus	slow

phase

May	be	in	direction
of	fast	phase

*Adaptability	and	fatigability	are	not	used	consistently	in	the	literature.

Positional	nystagmus	can	be	divided	into	a	paroxysmal	type	that	is	fleeting,
fatigable,	often	difficult	to	reproduce,	and	associated	with	prominent	vertigo	and
a	static	type	that	does	not	fatigue,	persisting	as	long	as	the	head	is	maintained	in
the	 provoking	 position,	 often	 with	 little	 associated	 vertigo.	 The	 static	 type	 can
occur	 with	 either	 central	 or	 peripheral	 vestibular	 lesions,	 but	 a	 lack	 of	 visual
suppression	increases	the	likelihood	of	a	central	lesion.	Other	potentially	useful
tests	 in	 the	 dizzy	 patient	 include	 Valsalva	 maneuver	 (for	 perilymphatic	 fistula,
see	 below),	 tragal	 compression,	 hyperventilation,	 and	 attempts	 to	 provoke
Tullio’s	phenomenon	(see	below).

The	 characteristics	 of	 peripheral	 versus	 central	 positional	 nystagmus	 and

related	findings	are	summarized	in	Table	17.6.

Clinical	Investigation

The	 commonly	 used	 quantitative	 tests	 for	 evaluation	 of	 vestibular	 function
and
currently	
posturography.	The	tests	are	summarized	in	Box	17.3.

electronystagmography,	

rotatory	

include	

testing,	

chair	

Disorders	of	Function

The	 primary	 manifestation	 of	 disorders	 of	 the	 vestibular	 nerve	 is	 vertigo	 and
related	symptoms	such	as	imbalance.	Vertigo	will	be	used	in	this	discussion	as	a
surrogate	 for	 all	 similar	 symptoms.	 One	 of	 the	 primary	 concerns	 when	 dealing

with	a	vertiginous	patient	is	to	separate	central	vertigo,	because	of	CNS	disease,
from	peripheral	vertigo,	because	of	peripheral	vestibular	disease.	Disease	of	the
peripheral	 vestibular	 apparatus	 or	 eighth	 CN	 produces	 peripheral	 vertigo.
Disease	 of	 the	 central	 vestibular	 connections	 produces	 central	 vertigo.	 The
vestibular	 nuclei	 lie	 within	 the	 CNS	 in	 the	 dorsolateral	 medulla;	 disease	 there
may	 act	like	either	 peripheral	 or	central	 forms.	 Central	 vertigo	 is	less	common
than	 peripheral.	 Epidemiologic	 studies	
that	 central	 causes	 are
responsible	for	about	25%	of	the	dizziness	experienced	in	patients.	Some	central
causes	 of	 dizziness	 include	 cerebrovascular	 disorders,	 migraine,	 multiple
sclerosis	
hypoperfusion,
neurodegenerative	disorders,	and	drug	effects.

brainstem	

cerebral	

indicate	

lesions,	

global	

(MS),	

Certain	 features	 are	 helpful	 in	 making	 the	 distinction.	 Central	 vertigo	 is
typically	 less	 severe,	 and	 other	 neurologic	 signs	 and	 symptoms	 are	 usually
present.	 Peripheral	 vestibular	 disorders	 cause	 more	 nausea,	 vomiting,	 and
autonomic	 symptoms	 than	 do	 central	 disorders.	 Imbalance	 tends	 to	 be	 more
severe	 with	 central	 lesions,	 and	 the	 patients	 are	 often	 unable	 to	 stand	 or	 walk.
Associated	 symptoms	 are	 helpful	 if	 present.	 Aural	 symptoms	 (hearing	 loss,
tinnitus,	pain	or	fullness	in	the	ear)	suggest	a	peripheral	cause.	Facial	weakness
or	 numbness	 occurs	 with	
the
cerebellopontine	 angle.	 Processes	 in	 the	 brainstem	 typically	 cause	 prominent
neighborhood	 signs;	 isolated	 vertigo	 is	 rare.	 Occasionally,	 vertigo	 can	 be	 a
manifestation	 of	 disease	 of	 the	 more	 rostral	 vestibular	 pathways,	 including	 the
temporal	lobe.

the	 eighth	 nerve	

involving	

lesions	

in	

BOX	17.3

Electronystagmography	and	Posturography

Electrooculography	 (EOG)	 is	 a	 quantitative	 method	 of	 recording	 the
direction,	amplitude,	and	velocity	of	eye	movements	by	measuring	changes
in	the	corneoretinal	potential	with	electrodes.	EOG	done	during	stimulation
of	 the	 labyrinth	 to	 cause	 nystagmus	 is	 electronystagmography	 (ENG).
Recordings	 are	 done	 in	 the	 dark	 to	 minimize	 visual	 suppression.	 The
horizontal	 labyrinth	 may	 be	 stimulated	 by	 calorics	 using	 air	 or	 water	 or	 by
rotation.	It	is	not	possible	currently	to	effectively	study	the	vertical	canals	or
the	 otolith	 organ.	 Rotation	 can	 be	 done	 actively	 by	 the	 patient	 turning	 his
head	to	and	fro	(active	head	rotation),	by	the	examiner	turning	the	patient’s

head	(passive	head	rotation),	or	by	sitting	in	a	rotation	chair.	Rotation	testing
has	some	advantages	over	calorics,	but	a	disadvantage	is	that	both	sides	are
tested	simultaneously.

Computerized	 dynamic	 posturography	 is	 a	 technique	 that	 explores	 the
relative	 importance	 of	 the	 various	 sensory	 inputs	 critical	 for	 balance	 in
patients	 with	 complaints	 of	 dizziness	 or	 imbalance.	 A	 force	 platform
measures	 the	 compensatory	 movements	 of	 the	 patient’s	 feet	 while	 visual,
somatosensory,	and	vestibular	perceptions	are	manipulated.	Posturography	is
not	of	use	in	lesion	localization	and	provides	no	information	about	etiology.

Distinguishing	 central	 from	 peripheral	 nystagmus	 is	 a	 common	 clinical
exercise.	The	most	helpful	features	are	of	course	the	presence	of	aural	symptoms
and	signs	in	peripheral	nystagmus	and	the	presence	of	CNS	symptoms	and	signs
with	 central	 nystagmus.	 Peripheral	 vestibular	 nystagmus	 does	 not	 change
direction,	although	it	may	vary	in	amplitude	depending	on	the	direction	of	gaze,
and	 is	 strongly	 suppressed	 by	 visual	 fixation.	 Central	 nystagmus	 typically
changes	direction	and	may	not	be	affected	by	visual	fixation.

Because	 of	 the	 effects	 of	 fixation	 and	 other	 compensatory	 mechanisms,
peripheral	 nystagmus	 is	 seldom	 prominent	 after	 the	 first	 12	 to	 24	 hours,	 but
central	 nystagmus	 may	 persist	 for	 weeks	 or	 months.	 The	 vestibular	 apparatus
pushes	 not	 only	 the	 eyes	 but	 also	 the	 limbs	 and	 the	 body	 to	 the	 opposite	 side.
With	APV,	the	patient	will	past	point,	fall	on	Romberg,	turn	on	the	stepping	test,
and	drift	while	walking	eyes	closed	in	the	direction	of	the	nystagmus	slow	phase.
Failure	to	follow	these	rules	(e.g.,	past	pointing	in	the	direction	of	the	fast	phase)
suggests	 a	 central	 lesion	 but	 can	 occur	 with	 a	 compensated	 peripheral	 lesion.
Peripheral	 nystagmus	 is	 often	 positional,	 and	 the	 vertigo	 and	 vegetative
symptoms	 are	 in	 proportion	 to	 the	 nystagmus.	 With	 positional	 nystagmus,
latency	 to	 onset,	 fatigability,	 and	 adaptability	 all	 support	 a	 peripheral	 process.
Minimal	vertigo	with	prominent	nystagmus,	or	lack	of	latency,	fatigability,	and
adaptability,	suggests	a	central	process.	Peripheral	nystagmus	often	has	a	rotary
component,	and	the	horizontal	nystagmus	beats	in	the	same	direction	in	all	fields
of	 gaze	 (may	 even	 be	 third	 degree).	 Central	 nystagmus	 tends	 to	 change
directions.	 Visual	 fixation	 inhibits	 peripheral	 nystagmus	 but	 has	 no	 effect	 on
central	nystagmus.

Involvement	 of	 the	 vestibular	 nuclei	 may	 cause	 vertigo	 that	 has	 central
features.	 Common	 processes	 that	 involve	 the	 brainstem	 and	 that	 are	 likely	 to

cause	 vertigo	 include	 ischemia,	 demyelinating	 disease,	 and	 neoplasms.	 Less
common	 brainstem	 lesions	 causing	 central	 vestibular	 dysfunction	 include
arteriovenous	 malformation,	 syringobulbia,	 hematoma,	 and	 spinocerebellar
degeneration.	Lesions	in	the	cerebellopontine	angle	affect	both	the	auditory	and
vestibular	portions	of	CN	VIII.

Vertebrobasilar	transient	ischemic	attacks,	or	“vertebrobasilar	insufficiency,”
commonly	 cause	 vertigo,	 most	 often	 along	 with	 other	 signs	 and	 symptoms.
Rarely,	patients	may	have	transient	vertigo	without	accompanying	symptoms.	A
three-step	 bedside	 examination	 is	 touted	 as	 a	 reliable	 way	 to	 distinguish
brainstem	stroke	from	APV:	the	HINTS—head	impulse,	nystagmus,	test	of	skew.
A	 syndrome	 of	 acute	 vertigo	 mimicking	 labyrinthitis	 may	 occur	 with	 acute
cerebellar	infarction	or	hemorrhage.	In	acute	cerebellar	lesions,	the	patient	will
tend	to	fall	toward	the	side	of	the	lesion	on	Romberg	testing;	the	nystagmus	may
also	be	maximal	with	gaze	toward	the	lesion.	As	a	result,	the	patient	may	fall	in
the	direction	of	the	fast	phase,	opposite	the	pattern	seen	in	APV.

Dizziness,	vertigo,	and	disequilibrium	occur	commonly	in	patients	with	MS.
In	 one	 instance,	 an	 MS	 lesion	 in	 the	 medulla	 caused	 clinical	 symptoms
mimicking	 vestibular	 neuronitis.	 However,	 MS	 patients	 are	 not	 immune	 from
developing	the	common	syndrome	of	BPPV,	and	peripheral	vestibulopathy	may
be	a	more	common	cause	of	vertigo	in	such	patients	than	MS	exacerbation.

There	 is	 a	 relationship	 between	 migraine	 and	 episodic	 vertigo.	 Motion
sensitivity	is	common	in	migraineurs,	and	episodic	vertigo	occurs	in	as	many	as
25%.	 Isolated	 attacks	 of	 vertigo	 have	 been	 labeled	 as	 a	 migraine	 equivalent.
Migraine-associated	vertigo	may	be	a	symptom	of	migraine	or	a	related	disorder
(vestibular	 migraine,	 migrainous	 vertigo,	 or	 migraine-related	 vestibulopathy).
Epidemiologically,	 there	 is	 a	 strong	 link	 between	 vertigo	 and	 migraine,	 but
whether	migraine-associated	vertigo	exists	as	a	migraine	equivalent	is	unsettled.
Migraine-associated	vertigo	is	a	separate	entity	from	basilar	artery	migraine.

Occasionally,	 migraine	 patients	 may	 also	 develop	 cochlear	 symptoms,
perhaps	 because	 of	 spasm	 of	 the	 labyrinthine	 microvasculature.	 Migraine	 can
mimic	 Ménière’s	 disease.	 In	 some	 patients,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 channelopathy
involved.	There	 is	a	 malignant	 form	 of	migraine-associated	 vertigo	that	 can	 be
very	disabling.

Disorders	of	the	peripheral	vestibular	apparatus	are	the	most	common	causes
of	 vertigo	 and	 related	 symptoms.	 Table	 17.4	 lists	 some	 of	 the	 causes	 of
peripheral	vertigo.	In	BPPV,	the	most	common	peripheral	vestibulopathy,	vertigo
is	 induced	 by	 assumption	 of	 a	 particular	 head	 position	 or	 by	 rapid	 head

movement.	 Classically,	 such	 patients	 experience	 vertigo	 when	 first	 lying	 down
or	 when	 rolling	 over	 in	 bed	 at	 night,	 bending	 over,	 or	 looking	 up.	 Between
paroxysms	 of	 vertigo,	 patients	 may	 complain	 of	 poor	 balance	 or	 light-
headedness.	 BPPV	 attacks	 are	 brief,	 generally	 10	 to	 30	 seconds,	 and	 frequent.
BPPV	probably	results	from	otoliths	that	have	become	detached	from	the	macula
of	 the	 utricle	 and	 formed	 free-floating	 debris	 that	 settles	 into	 one	 of	 the
semicircular	canals	(canalithiasis)	or	becomes	adherent	to	the	matrix	gel	of	the
cupula	 (cupulolithiasis).	 Movement	 of	 the	 debris	 causes	 the	 attacks	 of	 vertigo.
Otolith	movement	causes	endolymph	movement	and	stimulation	of	the	hair	cells
of	the	cupula.	The	result	is	vertigo	until	the	otoconia	settle	to	the	bottom,	hence
the	brief	duration	of	the	attacks.	The	Dix-Hallpike	maneuver	causes	the	debris	to
move	 and	 reproduces	 the	 symptoms.	 The	 disorder	 predominantly	 affects	 the
posterior	 semicircular	 canal,	 the	 most	 dependent	 portion	 of	 the	 vestibular
labyrinth,	and	a	movement	of	the	head	backward	causes	vertigo.	Between	10%
and	30%	of	cases	involve	the	horizontal	canal	and	about	1%	the	anterior	canal.
In	 a	 series	 of	 240	 patients,	 the	 most	 common	 identifiable	 etiologies	 were	 head
trauma	(17%)	and	viral	neurolabyrinthitis	(15%).	Rarely,	patients	with	posterior
fossa	tumors	have	a	clinical	picture	nearly	identical	to	BPPV.	In	horizontal	canal
BPPV,	 there	 is	 horizontal	 nystagmus	 beating	 toward	 the	 down	 ear	 on	 rapid
turning	of	the	head	to	either	side	in	the	supine	position.	Most	cases	of	horizontal
canal	BPPV	are	due	to	cupulolithiasis	rather	than	canalithiasis.

technically,	

In	 vestibular	 neuronitis	 (neuritis,	 neurolabyrinthitis),	 APV,	 or	 labyrinthitis,
more	 severe	 attacks	 prostrate	 the	 patient	 for	 several	 days.	 Although	 often	 used
is	 accompanied	 by	 cochlear
labyrinthitis	
interchangeably,	
dysfunction	 with	 hearing	 impairment,	 whereas	 vestibular	 neuronitis	 is	 purely
vestibular.	 An	 attack	 typically	 causes	 constant	 vertigo	 lasting	 for	 days	 and	 is
accompanied	 by	 nausea,	 vomiting,	 and	 sweating.	 The	 patient	 looks	 and	 feels
extremely	 ill.	 The	 patient	 will	 have	 horizontal-torsional	 nystagmus	 in	 primary
gaze	 and	 other	 evidence	 of	 vestibular	 imbalance.	 During	 the	 acute	 phase,	 the
involved	 labyrinth	 may	 be	 hyperactive,	 and	 after	 resolution,	 the	 involved
labyrinth	is	hypoactive.

The	acute	phase	slowly	remits	over	weeks.	Improvement	is	due	to	recovery	of
nerve	function	and	CNS	compensation.	Mild,	brief	attacks	of	vertigo	similar	to
BPPV	may	plague	the	patient	for	months	to	years	after	seeming	recovery.	APV
is	often	a	viral	or	postviral	inflammation	of	the	vestibular	portion	of	CN	VIII.	It
may	 be	 simulated	 by	 hemorrhagic	 or	 ischemic	 disease	 of	 the	 brainstem	 or
cerebellum,	 MS,	 or	 the	 effects	 of	 a	 drug	 or	 toxin.	 Some	 instances	 of	 apparent

labyrinthitis	 are	 likely	 due	 to	 IAA	 ischemia.	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome	 (see
Chapter	16)	may	also	involve	CN	VIII	and	other	CNs	as	well.

In	 Ménière’s	 disease,	 the	 attacks	 of	 vertigo	 typically	 last	 minutes	 to	 several
hours,	much	longer	than	the	typical	symptoms	of	BPPV	but	much	shorter	than
with	 APV.	 Patients	 describe	 other	 symptoms,	 either	 along	 with	 the	 vertigo	 or
independently,	 including	 hearing	 loss	 (classically	 fluctuating),	 tinnitus,	 and	 a
sensation	of	vague	pain	or	fullness	in	the	ear.	The	association	of	hearing	loss	and
vertigo	 is	 classic.	 Many	 famous	 people	 have	 been	 affected,	 most	 notably
Jonathan	 Swift	 (Box	 17.4).	 Some	 patients	 have	 purely	 vestibular	 Ménière’s;
whether	 there	 is	 a	 purely	 cochlear	 form	 is	 controversial.	 Inner	 ear	 disease	 can
occasionally	cause	drop	attacks.	The	distinction	between	Ménière’s	disease	and
Ménière’s	 syndrome	 is	 no	 longer	 stressed.	 One	 of	 Ménière’s	 original	 patients
suffered	 a	 hemorrhage	 into	 the	 labyrinth.	 It	 was	 Hallpike	 who	 found
endolymphatic	 hydrops	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 Ménière’s	 syndrome,	 establishing
Ménière’s	 disease	 as	 an	 entity.	 Modern	 MRI	 has	 confirmed	 the	 presence	 of
endolymphatic	 hydrops	 in	 patients	 with	 Ménière’s	 disease.	 The	 cause	 of	 the
hydrops	remains	obscure.

Other	 conditions	 that	 may	 cause	 vertigo	 and	 be	 confused	 with	 CN	 VIII
disease	include	perilymphatic	fistula	and	superior	semicircular	canal	dehiscence.
In	perilymphatic	fistula,	there	is	an	abnormal	communication	between	the	inner
and	 middle	 ear.	 Patients	 develop	 episodic	 vertigo	 with	 or	 without	 hearing	 loss,
often	provoked	by	Valsalva	or	straining.	Vertigo	and	nystagmus	may	be	induced
by	 loud	 sounds	 (Tullio’s	 phenomenon)	 because	 of	 physical	 activation	 of	 the
vestibular	system	by	sound	vibrations.	Superior	semicircular	canal	dehiscence	is
due	 to	 a	 defect	 of	 the	 temporal	 bone	 overlying	 the	 superior	 canal,	 allowing
pressure	 induced	 by	 sound	 to	 be	 transmitted	 to	 the	 inner	 ear.	 Vertigo	 and
nystagmus	may	be	induced	by	Valsalva	or	sound.	An	otolithic	crisis	of	Tumarkin
is	a	sudden	drop	to	the	ground	followed	by	immediate	recovery	that	may	occur
in	Ménière’s	disease.

BOX	17.4

Ménière’s	Disease

Well-known	affected	individuals	include	Emily	Dickinson,	Peggy	Lee,	Alan
Shepard,	 and	 Vincent	 Van	 Gogh.	 Swift	 wrote	 extensively	 about	 his
“giddiness”	 and	 his	 deafness,	 which	 plagued	 him	 from	 an	 early	 age.	 Swift

wrote	 something	 to	 the	 effect	 that	 “my	 friend	 the	 giddiness	 would	 come	 to
visit,	then	my	friend	the	hearing	loss,	and	eventually	they	became	such	good
friends	they	came	to	visit	together.”

Other	 rare	 causes	 of	 vertigo	 include	 seizure	 disorder,	 especially	 partial
complex	 seizures	 of	 temporal	 lobe	 origin	 (tornado	 epilepsy),	 episodic	 ataxia,
benign	paroxysmal	vertigo	of	childhood,	hypothyroidism,	mal	de	debarquement
(mal	de	mer),	and	phobic	postural	vertigo.

Video	Links

Video	Link	17.1.	Head	thrust	test.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Head_impulse_test
Video	Link	17.2.	Normal	caloric	responses.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=H4iQkFUgG6k

Video	Link	17.3.	Vestibular	nystagmus.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=mghGeKkNBzQ

Video	Link	17.4.	Head-shaking	nystagmus.

https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?
id=187675&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+head+shaking+nystagmus&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

Video	Link	17.5.	The	Dix-Hallpike	test.	https://collections.lib.utah.edu/details?

id=187762&q=sort_type_t%3A%2AMovingImage%2A+AND+BPPV&fd=type_t%2Ctitle_t%2Cdescription_t%2Csubject_t%2Ccollection_t&rows=50&sort=sort_title_t+asc&facet_setname_s=ehsl_novel_%2A

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alpini	D,	Caputo	D,	Pugnetti	L,	et	al.	Vertigo	and	multiple	sclerosis:	aspects	of

differential	diagnosis.	Neurol	Sci	2001;22(Suppl	2):S84–S87.

Armato	 E,	 Ferri	 E,	 Pinzani	 A,	 et	 al.	 Cerebellar	 haemorrhage	 mimicking	 acute
peripheral	 vestibulopathy:	 the	 role	 of	 the	 video	 head	 impulse	 test	 in
differential	diagnosis.	Acta	Otorhinolaryngol	Ital	2014;34:288–291.

Asawavichiangianda	S,	Fujimoto	M,	Mai	M,	et	al.	Significance	of	head-shaking
nystagmus	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 the	 dizzy	 patient.	 Acta	 Otolaryngol	 Suppl
1999;540:27–33.

Aw	 ST,	 Todd	 MJ,	 Aw	 GE,	 et	 al.	 Benign	 positional	 nystagmus:	 a	 study	 of	 its
three-dimensional	 spatio-temporal	 characteristics.	 Neurology	 2005;64:1897–
1905.

Bagai	 A,	 Thavendiranathan	 P,	 Detsky	 AS.	 Does	 this	 patient	 have	 hearing

impairment?	JAMA	2006;295:416–428.

Baguley	D,	McFerran	D,	Hall	D.	Tinnitus.	Lancet	2013;382:1600–1607.
Baloh	 RW.	 Approach	 to	 the	 evaluation	 of	 the	 dizzy	 patient.	 Otolaryngol	 Head

Neck	Surg	1995;112:3–7.

Baloh	RW.	Neurotology	of	migraine.	Headache	1997;37:615–621.
Baloh	RW.	Dizziness:	neurological	emergencies.	Neurol	Clin	1998;16:305–321.
Baloh	RW.	Vertigo.	Lancet	1998;352:1841–1846.
Baloh	 RW.	 Differentiating	 between	 peripheral	 and	 central	 causes	 of	 vertigo.

Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	1998;119:55–59.

Baloh	RW.	Prosper	Ménière	and	his	disease.	Arch	Neurol	2001;58:1151–1156.
Baloh	 RW.	 Episodic	 vertigo:	 central	 nervous	 system	 causes.	 Curr	Opin	Neurol

2002;15:17–21.

Baloh	 RW,	 Honrubia	 V,	 Jacobson	 K.	 Benign	 positional	 vertigo:	 clinical	 and

oculographic	features	in	240	cases.	Neurology	1987;37:371–378.

Baloh	 RW,	 Jacobson	 K,	 Honrubia	 V.	 Horizontal	 semicircular	 canal	 variant	 of

benign	positional	vertigo.	Neurology	1993;43:2542–2549.

Baloh	RW,	Jacobson	K,	Winder	T.	Drop	attacks	with	Ménière’s	syndrome.	Ann

Neurol	1990;28:384–387.

Barraclough	 K,	 Bronstein	 A.	 Diagnosis	 in	 general	 practice:	 vertigo.	 BMJ

2009;339:b3493.

Bertholon	 P,	 Tringali	 S,	 Faye	 MB,	 et	 al.	 Prospective	 study	 of	 positional
in	 100	 consecutive	 patients.	 Ann	 Otol	 Rhinol	 Laryngol

nystagmus	
2006;115:587–594.

Bhupal	 HK.	 Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndrome	 presenting	 in	 primary	 care.	 Practitioner

2010;254:33–35,	3.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Brodsky	 MC.	 Three	 dimensions	 of	 skew	 deviation.	 Br	 J	 Ophthalmol

2003;87:1440–1441.

Brodsky	 MC,	 Donahue	 SP,	 Vaphiades	 M,	 et	 al.	 Skew	 deviation	 revisited.	 Surv

Ophthalmol	2006;51:105–128.

Casselman	JW.	Diagnostic	imaging	in	clinical	neuro-otology.	Curr	Opin	Neurol

2002;15:23–30.

Cha	YH,	Kane	MJ,	Baloh	RW.	Familial	clustering	of	migraine,	episodic	vertigo,

and	Meniere’s	disease.	Otol	Neurotol	2008;29:93–96.

Choi	 K-D,	 Kim	 JS.	 Hyperventilation-induced	 nystagmus	

in	 peripheral
vestibulopathy	 and	 cerebellopontine	 angle	 tumor.	 Neurology	 2007;69:1050–
1059.

Cloutier	 JF,	 Saliba	 I.	 Isolated	 vertigo	 and	 dizziness	 of	 vascular	 origin.	 J

Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	2008;37:331–339.

Cunningham	 LL,	 Tucci	 DL.	 Hearing	

loss	

in	 adults.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med

2017;377:2465–2473.

Delaney	KA.	Bedside	diagnosis	of	vertigo:	value	of	the	history	and	neurological

examination.	Acad	Emerg	Med	2003;10(12):1388–1395.

Demer	JL,	Honrubia	V,	Baloh	RW.	Dynamic	visual	acuity:	a	test	for	oscillopsia

and	vestibuloocular	reflex	function.	Am	J	Otol	1994;15:340–347.

Deplanque	D,	Godefroy	O,	Guerouaou	D,	et	al.	Sudden	bilateral	deafness:	lateral
inferior	pontine	infarction.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1998;64:817–818.
Derebery	 MJ.	 The	 diagnosis	 and	 treatment	 of	 dizziness.	 Med	 Clin	 North	 Am

1999;83:163–177.

Dieterich	M,	Brandt	T.	Episodic	vertigo	related	to	migraine	(90	cases):	vestibular

migraine?	J	Neurol	1999;246:883–892.

Dieterich	M,	Brandt	T,	Fries	W.	Otolith	function	in	man.	Results	from	a	case	of

otolith	Tullio	phenomenon.	Brain	1989;112(Pt	5):1377–1392.

Dix	MR,	Hallpike	CS.	The	pathology,	symptomatology	and	diagnosis	of	certain
common	 disorders	 of	 the	 vestibular	 system.	 Proc	 R	 Soc	 Med	 1952;45:341–
354.

Drachman	 DA,	 Hart	 CW.	 An	 approach	 to	 the	 dizzy	 patient.	 Neurology

1972;22:323–334.

Dunniway	HM,	Welling	DB.	Intracranial	tumors	mimicking	benign	paroxysmal

positional	vertigo.	Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	1998;118:429–436.

Epley	 JM.	 Human	 experience	 with	 canalith	 repositioning	 maneuvers.	 Ann	 N	 Y

Acad	Sci	2001;942:179–191.

Evans	RW,	Baloh	RW.	Episodic	vertigo	and	migraine.	Headache	 2001;41:604–

605.

Fetter	 M.	 Assessing	 vestibular	 function:	 which	 tests,	 when?	 J	 Neurol

2000;247:335–342.

Fife	TD,	Iverson	DJ,	Lempert	T,	et	al.	Practice	parameter:	therapies	for	benign
paroxysmal	 positional	 vertigo	 (an	 evidence-based	 review):	 report	 of	 the
Quality	 Standards	 Subcommittee	 of	 the	 American	 Academy	 of	 Neurology.
Neurology	2008;70:2067–2074.

Froehling	 DA,	 Silverstein	 MD,	 Mohr	 DN,	 et	 al.	 The	 rational	 clinical
examination.	 Does	 this	 dizzy	 patient	 have	 a	 serious	 form	 of	 vertigo?	 JAMA
1994;271:385–388.

Frohman	 EM,	 Zhang	 H,	 Dewey	 RB,	 et	 al.	 Vertigo	 in	 MS:	 utility	 of	 positional

and	particle	repositioning	maneuvers.	Neurology	2000;55:1566–1569.

Frohlich	 AM,	 Sutherland	 GR.	 Epidemiology	 and	 clinical	 features	 of	 vestibular

schwannoma	in	Manitoba,	Canada.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	1993;20:126–130.

Fukuda	T.	The	stepping	test.	Acta	Otolaryngol	1959;50:95.
Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Giacomini	 PG,	 Ferraro	 S,	 Di	 GS,	 et	 al.	 Benign	 paroxysmal	 positional	 vertigo
intense	 physical	 activity:	 a	 report	 of	 nine	 cases.	 Eur	 Arch

after	
Otorhinolaryngol	2009;266:1831–1835.

Goebel	 JA.	 The	 ten-minute	 examination	 of	 the	 dizzy	 patient.	 Semin	 Neurol

2001;21:391–398.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Grad	 A,	 Baloh	 RW.	 Vertigo	 of	 vascular	 origin.	 Clinical	

and

electronystagmographic	features	in	84	cases.	Arch	Neurol	1989;46:281–284.
Gresty	 MA,	 Bronstein	 AM,	 Brandt	 T,	 et	 al.	 Neurology	 of	 otolith	 function.

Peripheral	and	central	disorders.	Brain	1992;115(Pt	3):647–673.

Grommes	 C,	 Conway	 D.	 The	 stepping	 test:	 a	 step	 back	 in	 history.	 J	 Hist

Neurosci	2011;20:29–33.

Halmagyi	 GM,	 Curthoys	 IS.	 A	 clinical	 sign	 of	 canal	 paresis.	 Arch	 Neurol

1988;45:737–739.

Halmagyi	 GM,	 Cremer	 PD.	 Assessment	 and	 treatment	 of	 dizziness.	 J	 Neurol

Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2000;68:129–136.

Harner	 SG,	 Laws	 ER	 Jr.	 Clinical	 findings	 in	 patients	 with	 acoustic	 neurinoma.

Mayo	Clin	Proc	1983;58:721–728.

Hervier	 B,	 Bordure	 P,	 Masseau	 A,	 et	 al.	 Auto-immune	 sensorineural	 deafness:
physiopathology	 and	 therapeutic	 approach.	 Rev	 Med	 Interne	 2010;31:222–
228.

Hillman	 EJ,	 Bloomberg	 JJ,	 McDonald	 VP,	 et	 al.	 Dynamic	 visual	 acuity	 while
labyrinthine-deficient	 patients.	 J	 Vestib	 Res

in	 normals	 and	

walking	
1999;9:49–57.

Hoistad	 DL,	 Hain	 TC.	 Central	 hearing	 loss	 with	 a	 bilateral	 inferior	 colliculus

lesion.	Audiol	Neurootol	2003;8:111–113.

Honaker	 JA,	 Boismier	 TE,	 Shepard	 NP,	 et	 al.	 Fukuda	 stepping	 test:	 sensitivity

and	specificity.	J	Am	Acad	Audiol	2009;20:311–314.

Honrubia	 V,	 Baloh	 RW,	 Harris	 MR,	 et	 al.	 Paroxysmal	 positional	 vertigo

syndrome.	Am	J	Otol	1999;20:465–470.

Hotson	JR,	Baloh	RW.	Acute	vestibular	syndrome.	N	Engl	J	Med	1998;339:680–

685.

Huppert	 D,	 Strupp	 M,	Rettinger	 N,	 et	 al.	 Phobic	 postural	vertigo—a	 long-term

follow-up	(5	to	15	years)	of	106	patients.	J	Neurol	2005;252:564–569.

Ishiyama	 G,	 Ishiyama	 A,	 Jacobson	 K,	 et	 al.	 Drop	 attacks	 in	 older	 patients

secondary	to	an	otologic	cause.	Neurology	2001;57:1103–1106.

Jacobson	 GP,	 Newman	 CW,	 Safadi	 I.	 Sensitivity	 and	 specificity	 of	 the	 head-
shaking	 test	 for	 detecting	 vestibular	 system	 abnormalities.	 Ann	 Otol	 Rhinol
Laryngol	1990;99:539–542.

Jani	NN,	Laureno	R,	Mark	AS,	et	al.	Deafness	after	bilateral	midbrain	contusion:
a	correlation	of	magnetic	resonance	imaging	with	auditory	brain	stem	evoked
responses.	Neurosurgery	1991;29:106–108.

Jeong	 HS,	 Oh	 JY,	 Kim	 JS,	 et	 al.	 Periodic	 alternating	 nystagmus	 in	 isolated

nodular	infarction.	Neurology	2007;68:956–957.

Kattah	 JC,	 Talkad	 AV,	 Wang	 DZ,	 et	 al.	 HINTS	 to	 diagnose	 stroke	 in	 the	 acute
vestibular	 syndrome:	 three-step	 bedside	 oculomotor	 examination	 more
sensitive	 than	 early	 MRI	 diffusion-weighted	 imaging.	 Stroke	 2009;40:3504–
3510.

Keane	 JR.	 Ocular	 skew	 deviation.	 Analysis	 of	 100	 cases.	 Arch	 Neurol

1975;32:185–190.

Kerber	KA,	Burke	JF,	Skolarus	LE,	et	al.	A	prescription	for	the	Epley	maneuver:

www.youtube.com?	Neurology	2012;79:376–380.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kim	 JS,	 Lopez	 I,	 DiPatre	 PL,	 et	 al.	 Internal	 auditory	 artery	 infarction:

clinicopathologic	correlation.	Neurology	1999;52:40–44.

Kroenke	 K,	 Hoffman	 RM,	 Einstadter	 D.	 How	 common	 are	 various	 causes	 of

dizziness?	A	critical	review.	South	Med	J	2000;93:160–167.

Kroenke	 K,	Lucas	 CA,	Rosenberg	ML,	 et	 al.	Causes	of	 persistent	 dizziness.	 A
prospective	 study	 of	 100	 patients	 in	 ambulatory	 care.	 Ann	 Intern	 Med
1992;117:898–904.

Landau	ME,	Barner	KC.	Vestibulocochlear	nerve.	Semin	Neurol	2009;29:66–73.
Lanska	 DJ,	 Remler	 B.	 Benign	 paroxysmal	 positioning	 vertigo:	 classic
descriptions,	origins	of	the	provocative	positioning	technique,	and	conceptual
developments.	Neurology	1997;48:1167–1177.

Lee	 H,	 Kim	 JS,	 Chung	 EJ,	 et	 al.	 Infarction	 in	 the	 territory	 of	 anterior	 inferior

cerebellar	 artery:	 spectrum	 of	 audiovestibular	 loss.	 Stroke	 2009;40:3745–
3751.

Lee	 H,	 Yi	 HA,	 Lee	 SR,	 et	 al.	 Drop	 attacks	 in	 elderly	 patients	 secondary	 to
otologic	 causes	 with	 Meniere’s	 syndrome	 or	 non-Meniere	 peripheral
vestibulopathy.	J	Neurol	Sci	2005;232:71–76.

Lee	 SU,	 Choi	 JY,	 Kim	 HJ,	 et	 al.	 Recurrent	 spontaneous	 vertigo	 with	 interictal

headshaking	nystagmus.	Neurology	2018;90(24):e2135–e2145.

Mathias	 CJ,	 Deguchi	 K,	 Schatz	 I.	 Observations	 on	 recurrent	 syncope	 and

presyncope	in	641	patients.	Lancet	2001;357:348–353.

Matthews	WB.	Practical	Neurology.	Oxford:	Blackwell,	1963.
Mazzola	L,	Lopez	C,	Faillenot	I,	et	al.	Vestibular	responses	to	direct	stimulation

of	the	human	insular	cortex.	Ann	Neurol	2014;76:609–619.

Meador	 KJ,	 Swift	 TR.	 Tinnitus	 from	 intracranial	 hypertension.	 Neurology

1984;34:1258–1261.

Mendez	 MF,	 Geehan	 GR	 Jr.	 Cortical	 auditory	 disorders:	 clinical	 and

psychoacoustic	features.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1988;51:1–9.

Minor	 LB.	 Clinical	 manifestations	 of	 superior	 semicircular	 canal	 dehiscence.

Laryngoscope	2005;115:1717–1727.

Minor	 LB,	 Haslwanter	 T,	 Straumann	 D,	 et	 al.	 Hyperventilation-induced
nystagmus	in	patients	with	vestibular	schwannoma.	Neurology	1999;53:2158–
2168.

Moon	 IS,	 Kim	 JS,	 Choi	 KD,	 et	 al.	 Isolated	 nodular	 infarction.	 Stroke

2009;40:487–491.

Morelli	N,	Mancuso	M,	Cafforio	G,	et	al.	Ramsay-Hunt	syndrome	complicated

by	unilateral	multiple	cranial	nerve	palsies.	Neurol	Sci	2008;29:497–498.

Nascentes	SM,	Paulo	EA,	de	Andrade	EC,	et	al.	Sudden	deafness	as	a	presenting
symptom	 of	 acoustic	 neuroma:	 case	 report.	 Braz	 J	 Otorhinolaryngol
2007;73:713–716.

Nedzelski	 JM,	 Barber	 HO,	 McIlmoyl	 L.	 Diagnoses	 in	 a	 dizziness	 unit.	 J

Otolaryngol	1986;15:101–104.

Nelson	JR.	The	minimal	ice	water	caloric	test.	Neurology	1969;19:577–585.
Nodar	RH.	Tinnitus	reclassified;	new	oil	in	an	old	lamp.	Otolaryngol	Head	Neck

Surg	1996;114:582–585.

Oas	JG,	Baloh	RW.	Vertigo	and	the	anterior	inferior	cerebellar	artery	syndrome.

Neurology	1992;42:2274–2279.

Ojala	M,	Palo	J.	The	aetiology	of	dizziness	and	how	to	examine	a	dizzy	patient.

Ann	Med	1991;23:225–230.

Parnes	 LS,	 Agrawal	 SK,	 Atlas	 J.	 Diagnosis	 and	 management	 of	 benign
paroxysmal	positional	vertigo	(BPPV).	Can	Med	Assoc	J	2003;169:681–693.
Pierce	 DA,	 Holt	 SR,	 Reeves-Daniel	 A.	 A	 probable	 case	 of	 gabapentin-related
reversible	 hearing	 loss	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 acute	 renal	 failure.	 Clin	 Ther
2008;30:1681–1684.

Phillips	J,	Longridge	N,	Mallinson	A,	et	al.	Migraine	and	vertigo:	a	marriage	of

convenience?	Headache	2010;50:1362–1365.

Ralli	 G,	 Atturo	 F,	 de	 FC.	 Idiopathic	 benign	 paroxysmal	 vertigo	 in	 children,	 a
migraine	 precursor.	 Int	 J	 Pediatr	 Otorhinolaryngol	 2009;73(Suppl	 1):S16–
S18.

Rintelmann	 WF,	 Schwan	 SA,	 Blakley	 BW.	 Pseudohypacusis.	 Otolaryngol	 Clin

North	Am	1991;24:381–390.

Saunders	JE,	Luxford	WM,	Devgan	KK,	et	al.	Sudden	hearing	loss	in	acoustic

neuroma	patients.	Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	1995;113:23–31.

Schwartz	NE,	Venkat	C,	Albers	GW.	Transient	isolated	vertigo	secondary	to	an

acute	stroke	of	the	cerebellar	nodulus.	Arch	Neurol	2007;64:897–898.

Shin	 SH,	 Chun	 YM,	Lee	HK.	 A	 cochlear	 schwannoma	 presenting	 with	 sudden

hearing	loss.	Eur	Arch	Otorhinolaryngol	2008;265:839–842.

Spoelhof	 GD.	 When	 to	 suspect	 an	 acoustic	 neuroma.	 Am	 Fam	 Physician

1995;52:1768–1774.

Strupp	M,	Brandt	T,	Steddin	S.	Horizontal	canal	benign	paroxysmal	positioning
by

hypoexcitability	

reversible	

ipsilateral	

vertigo:	
canalolithiasis?	Neurology	1995;45:2072–2076.

caused	

caloric	

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Tanaka	 Y,	 Kamo	 T,	 Yoshida	 M,	 et	 al.	 ‘So-called’	 cortical	 deafness.	 Clinical,
neurophysiological	and	radiological	observations.	Brain	1991;114(Pt	6):2385–
2401.

Tarnutzer	AA,	Lee	SH,	Robinson	KA,	et	al.	Clinical	and	electrographic	findings
in	 epileptic	 vertigo	 and	 dizziness:	 a	 systematic	 review.	 Neurology
2015;84:1595–1604.

Torres-Russotto	 D,	 Landau	 WM,	 Harding	 GW,	 et	 al.	 Calibrated	 finger	 rub

auditory	screening	test	(CALFRAST).	Neurology	2009;72:1595–1600.

Tsunoda	 A,	 Komatsuzaki	 A,	 Muraoka	 H,	 et	 al.	 A	 case	 with	 symptoms	 of
vestibular	 neuronitis	 caused	 by	 an	 intramedullary	 lesion.	 J	 Laryngol	 Otol
1995;109:545–548.

Verghese	J,	Morocz	IA.	Acute	unilateral	deafness.	J	 Otolaryngol	 1999;28:362–

364.

von	 Brevern	 M,	 Clarke	 AH,	 Lempert	 T.	 Continuous	 vertigo	 and	 spontaneous
the	 horizontal	 canal.	 Neurology

to	 canalolithiasis	 of	

nystagmus	 due	
2001;56:684–686.

von	Brevern	M,	Lempert	T,	Bronstein	AM,	et	al.	Selective	vestibular	damage	in

neurosarcoidosis.	Ann	Neurol	1997;42:117–120.

von	 Brevern	 M,	 Radtke	 A,	 Clarke	 AH,	 et	 al.	 Migrainous	 vertigo	 presenting	 as

episodic	positional	vertigo.	Neurology	2004;62:469–472.

Wall	 M,	 Rosenberg	 M,	 Richardson	 D.	 Gaze-evoked	 tinnitus.	 Neurology

1987;37:1034–1036.

Weber	 KP,	 Aw	 ST.	 Horizontal	 head	

impulse	

test	 detects	 gentamicin

vestibulotoxicity.	Neurology	2009;72:1417–1424.

Yang	TH,	Oh	SY,	Kwak	K,	et	al.	Topology	of	brainstem	lesions	associated	with

subjective	visual	vertical	tilt.	Neurology	2014;82:1968–1975.

CHAPTER	18

The	Glossopharyngeal	and	Vagus
Nerves

The	glossopharyngeal	(CN	IX)	and	vagus	(CN	X)	nerves	are	intimately	related
and	similar	in	function.	Both	have	motor	and	autonomic	branches	with	nuclei	of
origin	 in	 the	 medulla.	 Both	 conduct	 general	 somatic	 afferent	 (GSA)	 as	 well	 as
general	 visceral	 afferent	 (GVA)	 fibers	 to	 related	 or	 identical	 fiber	 tracts	 and
nuclei	 in	 the	 brainstem,	 and	 both	 have	 a	 parasympathetic,	 or	 general	 visceral
efferent,	 and	 a	 branchiomotor,	 or	 special	 visceral	 efferent	 (SVE),	 component.
The	two	nerves	leave	the	skull	together,	remain	close	in	their	course	through	the
neck,	 and	 supply	 some	 of	 the	 same	 structures.	 They	 are	 often	 involved	 in	 the
same	disease	processes,	and	involvement	of	one	may	be	difficult	to	differentiate
from	involvement	of	the	other.	For	these	reasons,	the	two	nerves	are	discussed
together.

THE	GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL	NERVE

Anatomy	and	Physiology

The	 glossopharyngeal,	 as	 its	 name	 implies,	 is	 distributed	 principally	 to	 the
tongue	and	pharynx.	It	conveys	general	sensory	as	well	as	special	sensory	(taste)
fibers	 from	 the	 posterior	 third	 of	 the	 tongue.	 It	 also	 provides	 general	 sensory
innervation	 to	 the	 pharynx,	 the	 area	 of	 the	 tonsil,	 the	 internal	 surface	 of	 the
tympanic	membrane,	and	the	skin	of	the	external	ear.	It	conveys	GVAs	from	the
carotid	 body	 and	 the	 carotid	 sinus.	 Its	 skeletomotor	 neurons	 innervate	 the
stylopharyngeus	 muscle,	 and	 its	 parasympathetic	 component	 innervates	 the
parotid	gland.

Upper	 motor	 neuron	 influences	 on	 CN	 IX	 arise	 from	 the	 primary	 motor

cortex	and	descend	in	the	corticobulbar	tracts	to	synapse	in	the	rostral	portion	of
the	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 in	 the	 dorsolateral	 medulla	 (Figure	 18.1).	 The	 cortical
innervation	is	bilateral.	The	cells	in	the	nucleus	ambiguus	are	branchiomotor	and
innervate	 muscles	 derived	 from	 the	 third,	 fourth,	 and	 fifth	 branchial	 arches.	 In
keeping	 with	 the	 tendency	 of	 SVE	 axons	 to	 create	 internal	 loops,	 the	 fibers	 of
CN	 IX	 first	 head	 posteromedially	 toward	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle	 and
then	turn	and	sweep	laterally	and	forward.	The	nerve	emerges	from	the	medulla
as	three	to	six	rootlets	in	the	groove	between	the	inferior	olive	and	the	inferior
cerebellar	 peduncle,	 between	 and	 in	 line	 with	 the	 emerging	 fibers	 of	 CN	 VII
above	 and	 CN	 X	 below	 (Figure	 11.3).	 These	 rootlets	 unite	 to	 form	 a	 single
nerve,	which	leaves	the	skull	through	the	jugular	foramen.

CN	IX	exits	the	skull	through	the	jugular	foramen,	lateral	and	anterior	to	CNs
X	and	XI	within	a	separate	dural	sheath.	After	leaving	the	skull,	CN	IX	enters
the	 carotid	 sheath,	 descends	 between	 the	 internal	 jugular	 vein	 and	 internal
carotid	 artery,	 dips	 beneath	 the	 styloid	 process,	 and	 then	 passes	 between	 the
internal	and	external	carotid	arteries.	It	curves	forward,	forming	an	arch	on	the
side	of	the	neck	to	reach	the	lateral	pharyngeal	wall,	and	then	disappears	under
the	 hyoglossus	 muscle	 to	 divide	 into	 its	 terminal	 branches.	 Two	 ganglia	 lie	 on
the	nerve	just	caudal	to	the	jugular	foramen:	the	superior	(jugular)	and	inferior
(petrosal)	
superior
glossopharyngeal	ganglion	is	small,	is	inconstant,	has	no	branches,	and	is	often
fused	 with	 the	 inferior	 ganglion.	 CN	 IX	 has	 six	 terminal	 branches:	 (a)	 the
tympanic	nerve	(Jacobson’s	nerve),	(b)	carotid,	(c)	pharyngeal,	(d)	muscular,	(e)
tonsillar,	and	(f)	lingual	branches.	CN	IX	has	important	connections	with	CNs	V,
VII,	and	X	and	the	cervical	sympathetics.

glossopharyngeal	

18.2).	 The	

(Figure	

ganglia	

The	branchiomotor	fibers	of	CN	IX	go	to	the	pharynx.	The	muscular	branch
follows	 along	 the	 posterior	 border	 of	 the	 stylopharyngeus	 muscle	 and	 then
terminates	 in	 the	 belly	 of	 the	 muscle.	 Most	 of	 the	 pharyngeal	 muscles	 are
supplied	by	both	CNs	IX	and	X.	If	CN	IX	supplies	any	muscle	alone,	it	is	the
stylopharyngeus.	The	actions	of	the	stylopharyngeus	are	described	in	Table	18.1.

FIGURE	18.1	Section	through	the	medulla	at	the	level	of	the	inferior	olivary	nucleus.

CN	 IX	 supplies	 parasympathetic	 innervation	 to	 the	 parotid	 gland	 and	 to	 the
mucous	 membranes	 of	 the	 posterior-inferior	 mouth	 and	 pharynx	 (Figure	 18.2).
The	parasympathetic	nuclei	in	the	lower	brainstem	are	the	superior	and	inferior
salivatory	 and	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus	 of	 CN	 X	 (DMNX),	 also	 known	 as	 the
dorsal	motor	or	dorsal	efferent	nucleus	of	the	vagus.	The	autonomic	fibers	of	CN
IX	 arise	 primarily	 from	 the	 inferior	 salivatory	 nucleus,	 with	 some	 from	 the
DMNX.	 The	 parasympathetics	 pass	
inferior
glossopharyngeal	 ganglia	 without	 synapsing.	 Just	 below	 the	 inferior	 ganglion,
they	 exit	 to	 form	 the	 tympanic	 nerve,	 which	 ascends	 to	 the	 tympanic	 cavity
through	 a	 small	 canal	 on	 the	 undersurface	 of	 the	 temporal	 bone	 between	 the
carotid	canal	and	the	jugular	fossa	(tympanic	canaliculus).	The	tympanic	nerve
ramifies	in	the	tympanic	cavity	to	form	part	of	the	tympanic	plexus.	The	lesser
petrosal	nerve	is	a	continuation	of	the	tympanic	nerve	that	leaves	the	tympanic
plexus,	 enters	 the	 middle	 cranial	 fossa	 briefly,	 and	 then	 exits	 through	 the
foramen	 ovale	 to	 synapse	 in	 the	 otic	 ganglion.	 Postganglionic	 fibers	 join	 the
auriculotemporal	branch	of	the	mandibular	division	of	CN	V	for	distribution	to

the	 superior	 and	

through	

the	parotid	gland;	this	is	the	nerve	involved	in	gustatory	sweating	(Chapter	15).

Sensory	 neurons	 of	 CN	 IX	 are	 located	 in	 the	 superior	 and	 inferior
glossopharyngeal	 ganglia.	 There	 are	 GSA	 fibers	
that	 convey	 ordinary
exteroceptive	 sensation;	 GVA	 fibers	 that	 convey	 information	 from	 the	 carotid
body	 and	 carotid	 sinus,	 as	 well	 as	 visceral	 sensation	 from	 the	 pharynx;	 and
special	 visceral	 afferents	 that	 convey	 taste	 sensation.	 The	 GSA	 fibers	 convey
exteroceptive	 sensation	 from	 the	 mucous	 membranes	 of	 the	 tympanic	 cavity,
mastoid	 air	 cells,	 and	 auditory	 canal	 via	 the	 tympanic	 plexus	 and	 tympanic
branch.	 Sensation	 from	 the	 pharynx,	 tonsil,	 and	 posterior	 third	 of	 the	 tongue
travels	 via	 the	 pharyngeal,	 tonsillar,	 and	 lingual	 branches.	 Central	 processes	 of
these	 cells	 terminate	 in	 the	 trigeminal	 nuclei,	 and	 their	 central	 connections	 are
the	same	as	for	other	GSA	fibers.	One	of	the	most	important	functions	of	CN	IX
is	to	carry	visceral	afferent	fibers	from	the	carotid	body	and	sinus	involved	in	the
reflex	control	of	heart	rate,	blood	pressure,	and	respiration.	The	carotid	branch	of
CN	IX	(carotid	sinus	nerve)	arises	just	below	the	jugular	foramen	and	descends
on	 the	 internal	 carotid	 artery	 to	 the	 carotid	 sinus	 and	 carotid	 body.	 It	 conveys
impulses	from	carotid	body	chemoreceptors	and	carotid	sinus	baroreceptors	and
terminates	 centrally	 on	 cells	 in	 the	 middle	 third	 of	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 solitary
tract.	Other	fibers	carrying	visceral	afferent	fibers	from	the	mucous	membranes
of	 the	 pharynx,	 soft	 palate,	 and	 posterior	 third	 of	 the	 tongue	 pass	 through	 the
petrous	 ganglion	 to	 terminate	 in	 the	 solitary	 tract	 and	 nucleus.	 The	 lingual
branches	 of	 CN	 IX	 carry	 taste	 fibers	 (primarily	 sour	 and	 bitter)	 from	 the
circumvallate	 papillae,	 mucous	 membranes	 of	 the	 base	 and	 taste	 buds	 on	 the
posterior	third	of	the	tongue,	glossoepiglottic	and	pharyngoepiglottic	folds,	and
lingual	surface	of	the	epiglottis.	These	fibers	terminate	in	the	rostral	part	of	the
nucleus	of	the	solitary	tract	(gustatory	nucleus).	Their	central	connections	are	the
same	as	for	the	taste	fibers	of	CN	VII.

FIGURE	 18.2	 Peripheral	 distribution	 of	 the	 parasympathetic	 branches	 of	 the
glossopharyngeal	nerve.

Clinical	Examination

CN	IX	is	difficult	to	examine	because	most	or	all	of	its	functions	are	shared	by
other	nerves	and	because	many	of	the	structures	it	supplies	are	inaccessible.	It	is
possible	to	examine	pain	and	touch	sensation	of	the	pharynx,	tonsillar	region	and
soft	palate,	and	the	gag	reflex.	Bedside	testing	of	taste	on	the	posterior	third	of
the	 tongue	 is	 difficult	 and	 seldom	 attempted.	 It	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 isolate	 the
motor	 functions	 from	 those	 of	 the	 vagus.	 The	 small	 area	 of	 cutaneous
exteroceptive	 sensory	 supply	 is	 shared	 by	 other	 nerves.	 Patients	 with	 CN	 IX
lesions	might	theoretically	have	detectable	sensory	loss,	but	it	is	not	possible	to
find	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 undergone	 ninth	 nerve	 section	 for	 glossopharyngeal
neuralgia.

The	 only	 muscle	 to	 receive	 its	 motor	 innervation	 purely	 from	 CN	 IX	 is	 the
stylopharyngeus.	The	only	deficit	that	might	be	detectable	is	a	slight	lowering	of

the	 palatal	 arch	 at	 rest	 on	 the	 involved	 side.	 Other	 palatal	 motor	 functions	 are
subserved	 by	 either	 CN	 X	 or	 the	 two	 nerves	 working	 together.	 The	 salivary
reflex	is	flow	of	saliva	from	the	parotid	duct	after	gustatory	stimuli.	The	afferent
limb	is	through	taste	fibers	and	the	efferent	through	the	parasympathetic	outflow
of	the	superior	and	interior	salivatory	nuclei.

TABLE
18.1

Branches	of	the	Glossopharyngeal	and	Vagus	Nerves,
the	Muscles	Innervated,	and	Their	Actions

Nerve
Branch

CN	IX

Muscular
branch

CN	X

Pharyngeal
branch

Muscle	Innervated Muscle	Action

Stylopharyngeus

Raises	and	dilates	the	pharynx

Musculus	uvulae

Shortens	and	bends	the	uvula

backward;	helps	to	block	off	the
nasal	passages	in	swallowing

Levator	veli	palatini Raises	the	soft	palate	and	pulls	it
backward;	blocks	off	the	nasal
passages	in	swallowing

Palatopharyngeus

Pulls	the	pharynx	and	the	thyroid

cartilage	upward	and	depresses
the	soft	palate;	draws	the
pharyngopalatine	arches
together	and	closes	faucial
orifice

Salpingopharyngeus Blends	with	palatopharyngeus,

raises	upper	and	lateral	portion
of	the	pharynx

Palatoglossus

Elevates	posterior	part	of	the

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Superior,	middle,
and	inferior
constrictors	of	the
pharynx

tongue	and	narrows	the	fauces;
depresses	the	soft	palate

Flattens	and	contracts	the	pharynx
in	swallowing;	forces	food	into
the	esophagus	in	the	final	act	of
deglutition;	affects	speech	by
changing	the	shape	of	the
pharyngeal	resonator

Superior

Cricothyroid

Chief	tensors	of	the	vocal	cords;

laryngeal
nerve

Recurrent

Posterior

laryngeal
nerve

cricoarytenoids

elongate	the	cords	by	increasing
the	distance	between	the	vocal
processes	and	the	angle	of	the
thyroid

Chief	abductors;	separate	vocal
cords	and	open	the	glottis	by
rotating	the	arytenoids	cartilages
outward

Lateral

Chief	adductors;	close	the	glottis

cricoarytenoids

by	rotating	the	arytenoids
cartilages	inward

Thyroarytenoids

Pull	arytenoids	forward	to	shorten

(vocalis)

and	relax	the	vocal	cords

Arytenoid

Unpaired;	slides	arytenoids

together	and	closes	the	glottic
rim

The	 gag	 reflex	 is	 elicited	 by	 touching	 the	 pharynx	 or	 palate.	 Some	 sources
make	a	distinction	between	the	pharyngeal	reflex	and	the	palatal	reflex,	referring
only	to	the	former	as	the	gag	reflex.	In	common	clinical	usage,	no	distinction	is
made	between	these	two	and	either	is	referred	to	as	the	gag	reflex.	The	reflex	is
elicited	 by	 touching	 the	 lateral	 oropharynx	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 anterior	 faucial
pillar	with	a	tongue	blade,	applicator	stick,	or	similar	object	(pharyngeal	reflex),

	
	
	
	
or	 by	 touching	 one	 side	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 or	 uvula	 (palatal	 reflex).	 The
pharyngeal	 reflex	 is	 the	 more	 active	 of	 the	 two.	 The	 reflex	 also	 occurs	 with
touching	the	base	of	the	tongue	or	posterior	pharyngeal	wall.	The	afferent	limb
of	the	reflex	is	mediated	by	CN	IX	and	the	efferent	limb	through	CNs	IX	and	X.
The	 reflex	 center	 is	 in	 the	 medulla.	 The	 motor	 response	 is	 constriction	 and
elevation	of	the	oropharynx.	This	causes	the	midline	raphe	of	the	palate	and	the
uvula	to	elevate	and	the	pharyngeal	constrictors	to	contract.	The	activity	on	the
two	 sides	 is	 compared.	 The	 gag	 reflex	 is	 protective;	 it	 is	 designed	 to	 prevent
noxious	substances	or	foreign	objects	from	going	beyond	the	oral	cavity.	There
are	 three	 motor	 components:	 elevation	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 to	 seal	 off	 the
nasopharynx,	closure	of	the	glottis	to	protect	the	airway,	and	constriction	of	the
pharynx	to	prevent	entry	of	the	substance.

When	unilateral	pharyngeal	weakness	is	present,	the	raphe	will	deviate	away
from	 the	 weak	 side	 and	 toward	 the	 normal	 side.	 This	 movement	 is	 usually
dramatic	 (see	 Video	 Link	 18.1).	 Minor	 movements	 of	 the	 uvula	 and	 trivial
deviations	of	the	midline	raphe	are	not	of	clinical	significance.	In	normal	adults,
both	palatal	and	pharyngeal	reflexes	are	usually	present,	but	there	may	be	inter-
and	 intraindividual	 variation	 in	 the	 intensity	 of	 the	 stimulus	 required.	 The	 gag
reflex	may	be	bilaterally	absent	in	some	normal	individuals.	Unilateral	absence
signifies	 a	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 lesion.	 Like	 most	 bulbar	 muscles,	 the	 pharynx
receives	bilateral	supranuclear	innervation,	and	a	unilateral	cerebral	lesion	does
not	cause	detectable	weakness.

The	gag	reflex	is	often	used	to	predict	whether	or	not	a	patient	will	be	able	to
swallow.	A	poor	gag	reflex	in	an	awake	patient	with	an	acute	deficit	may	be	a
predictor	of	 swallowing	difficulties.	In	fact,	the	gag	reflex	has	 little	to	do	with
normal	 swallowing.	 Normal	 deglutition	 is	 a	 smooth	 coordinated	 sequence	 of
muscle	 contractions	 that	 propel	 a	 bolus	 of	 food	 from	 the	 mouth	 into	 the
esophagus.	 A	 normal	 swallow	 bears	 little	 resemblance	 to	 the	 chaos	 of	 a	 gag
reflex.	 Higher	 cortical	 centers	 have	 to	 inhibit	 the	 gag	 response	 during	 normal
swallowing.	The	gag	reflex	is	useful	but	limited	in	assessing	airway	protection.
A	 decreased	 gag	 reflex	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 depressed	 consciousness	 may	 portend
inadequate	guarding	of	the	airway	and	increased	aspiration	risk,	but	the	status	of
the	gag	reflex	is	not	a	completely	reliable	indicator.	Patients	with	an	apparently
intact	gag	reflex	may	still	aspirate,	and	a	patient	with	a	depressed	gag	reflex	may
not.

Davies	 et	 al.	 found	 that	 the	 gag	 reflex	 is	 absent	 in	 37%	 of	 normals,	 which
may	explain	its	low	predictive	value	in	the	assessment	of	aspiration	risk.	Leder

and	 Espinosa	 concluded	 that	 the	 clinical	 examination,	 a	 major	 component	 of
which	is	the	status	of	the	gag	reflex,	underestimated	the	probability	of	aspiration
in	patients	who	were	at	risk	and	overestimated	it	in	patients	who	were	not.	The
trigeminal	nerve	contributes	to	palatal	sensation	and	may	allow	for	paradoxical
preservation	of	the	gag	reflex	in	the	face	of	a	CN	IX	lesion.	The	gag	reflex	may
be	hyperactive	in	some	normal	individuals,	even	to	the	point	of	causing	retching
and	vomiting.	A	hyperactive	gag	reflex	may	occur	with	bilateral	cerebral	lesions,
as	in	pseudobulbar	palsy	and	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(ALS).

Disorders	of	Function

Unilateral	 supranuclear	 lesions	 cause	 no	 deficit	 because	 of	 the	 bilateral
corticobulbar	
cause
pseudobulbar	palsy	(Chapter	21).

innervation.	 Bilateral	

lesions	 may	

supranuclear	

Isolated	 lesions	 of	 CN	 IX	 are	 extremely	 rare	 if	 they	 ever	 occur.	 In	 all
instances,	the	nerve	is	involved	along	with	other	CNs,	especially	CN	X.	Nuclear
and	 infranuclear	 processes	 that	 may	 affect	 CN	 IX	 include	 intramedullary	 and
extramedullary	neoplasms	and	other	mass	lesions	(e.g.,	glomus	jugulare	tumor),
trauma	(e.g.,	basilar	skull	fracture	or	surgical	dissection),	motor	neuron	disease,
syringobulbia,	retropharyngeal	abscess,	demyelinating	disease,	birth	injury,	and
brainstem	ischemia.	Surgical	section	or	other	trauma	to	the	carotid	branch	may
cause	transient	or	sustained	hypertension.	Involvement	of	CN	IX	may	be	related
to	the	cardiovascular	dysautonomia	that	sometimes	accompanies	Guillain-Barré
syndrome.	CN	IX	may	be	involved	along	with	other	CNs	in	lesions	of	the	skull
base,	for	example,	the	jugular	foramen	syndrome	(Chapter	21).

Perhaps,	the	most	important	lesion	of	the	ninth	nerve	is	glossopharyngeal	(or
vagoglossopharyngeal)	neuralgia	or	“tic	douloureux	of	the	ninth	nerve.”	In	this
condition,	the	patient	experiences	attacks	of	severe	lancinating	pain	originating
in	one	side	of	the	throat	or	tonsillar	region	and	radiating	along	the	course	of	the
eustachian	tube	to	the	 tympanic	membrane,	external	auditory	canal,	behind	the
angle	of	the	jaw,	and	adjacent	portion	of	the	ear.	As	in	trigeminal	neuralgia,	there
may	 be	 trigger	 zones;	 they	 are	 usually	 in	 the	 pharyngeal	 wall,	 fauces,	 tonsillar
regions,	or	base	of	the	tongue.	The	pain	may	be	brought	on	by	talking,	eating,
swallowing,	or	coughing.	It	can	lead	to	syncope,	convulsions,	and	rarely	cardiac
arrest	 because	 of	 stimulation	 of	 the	 carotid	 sinus	 reflex.	 Glossopharyngeal
neuralgia	must	be	differentiated	from	other	craniofacial	neuralgias	and	from	pain
because	 of	 a	 structural	 lesion	 of	 the	 nerve.	 Some	 authorities	 differentiate

between	glossopharyngeal	neuralgia,	in	which	the	pain	radiates	from	the	throat
to	the	ear,	and	Jacobson’s	neuralgia,	in	which	the	pain	is	limited	to	the	ear	and
eustachian	 tube.	 Glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia	 is	 most	 often	 idiopathic	 but	 has
been	 reported	 with	 lesions	 involving	 the	 peripheral	 distribution	 of	 the	 nerves.
Multiple	 sclerosis	 only	 rarely	 causes	 glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia,	 although	 it	 is
commonly	associated	with	trigeminal	neuralgia.

Carotid	 sinus	 hypersensitivity	 is	 due	 to	 inadvertent	 activation	 of	 the
baroreceptors	 in	 the	 carotid	 sinus	 causing	 bradycardia	 and	 hypotension.
Identifiable	 etiologies	 may	 include	 constriction	 around	 the	 neck	 (e.g.,	 tight
collar)	 or	 a	 mass	 in	 the	 neck	 impinging	 on	 the	 sinus,	 but	 many	 cases	 are
idiopathic.

THE	VAGUS	NERVE

Anatomy	and	Physiology

The	vagus	(L.	“wandering,”	because	of	its	wide	distribution)	is	the	longest	and
most	widely	distributed	CN	(Figure	18.3).	Some	of	the	nuclei	of	origin	are	the
same	as	for	CN	IX,	and	it	shares	many	functions	with	CN	IX.	It	connects	with
four	 brainstem	 nuclei:	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus,	 the	 DMNX,	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the
spinal	 tract	 of	 CN	 V,	 and	 the	 nucleus	 of	 the	 solitary	 tract.	 It	 conveys
exteroceptive	 GSA	 sensation	 from	 the	 pharynx,	 larynx,	 ear,	 and	 meninges	 and
GVA	fibers	from	the	larynx,	viscera	of	the	thorax	and	abdomen,	and	receptors	in
the	 aorta.	 CN	 X	 carries	 skeletomotor	 axons	 from	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 to	 the
pharynx	and	larynx	and	parasympathetic	axons	from	the	DMNX	to	the	smooth
muscles	and	glands	of	the	pharynx	and	larynx	and	to	the	thoracic	and	abdominal
viscera.	Its	terminal	ramifications	reach	the	splenic	flexure	of	the	colon.

FIGURE	18.3	Peripheral	distribution	of	the	branches	of	the	vagus	nerve.

The	vagus	emerges	from	the	medulla	as	a	series	of	rootlets	just	below	those	of
the	glossopharyngeal.	CN	X	leaves	the	skull	through	the	jugular	foramen	in	the
same	 neural	 sheath	 as	 the	 cranial	 root	 of	 CN	 XI	 and	 behind	 CN	 IX.	 In	 the
jugular	 foramen,	 the	 nerve	 lies	 close	 to	 the	 jugular	 bulb,	 a	 dilatation	 of	 the
internal	 jugular	 vein	 that	 houses	 the	 glomus	 jugulare	 (tympanic	 body).	 The
glomus	 jugulare	 has	 functions	 similar	 to	 the	 carotid	 body.	 CN	 X	 descends	 the
neck	in	the	carotid	sheath,	lying	between	the	carotid	artery	and	internal	jugular
vein	to	the	upper	border	of	the	thyroid	cartilage	and	then	between	the	vein	and
common	carotid	to	the	base	of	the	neck.	Branches	leave	in	the	jugular	foramen
to	 supply	 the	 meninges	 and	 ear;	 other	 branches	 leave	 distal	 to	 the	 foramen	 to
supply	the	pharynx	and	larynx.	The	major	portion	of	the	nerve	enters	the	thorax.
The	 vagus	 has	 two	 sensory	 ganglia.	 The	 superior	 (jugular)	 vagal	 ganglion	 is
located	in	the	jugular	fossa	of	the	temporal	bone;	the	inferior	(nodose)	ganglion
is	 located	 just	 distal	 to	 the	 jugular	 foramen.	 There	 are	 10	 major	 terminal
branches	 that	 arise	 at	 different	 levels:	 (a)	 meningeal,	 (b)	 auricular,	 (c)
pharyngeal,	 (d)	 carotid,	 (e)	 superior	 laryngeal,	 (f)	 recurrent	 laryngeal,	 (g)
cardiac,	 (h)	 esophageal,	 (i)	 pulmonary,	 and	 (j)	 gastrointestinal.	 The	 terminal
branches	are	summarized	in	Table	18.2.

The	Motor	Portion

The	 cortical	 center	 regulating	 vagus	 function	 lies	 in	 the	 lower	 portion	 of	 the
precentral	gyrus;	the	supranuclear	innervation	is	bilateral	but	primarily	crossed.
Fibers	 descend	 in	 the	 corticobulbar	 tracts	 to	 synapse	 in	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus.
The	vagal	branchiomotor	fibers	follow	the	same	looping	intramedullary	course
as	 the	 fibers	 of	 CN	 IX.	 There	 are	 three	 major	 branchiomotor	 branches:
pharyngeal,	 superior	 laryngeal,	 and	 recurrent	 laryngeal.	 The	 actions	 of	 the
muscles	innervated	by	the	vagus	are	summarized	in	Table	18.1.

The	pharyngeal	branch	runs	between	the	internal	and	external	carotid	arteries
and	 enters	 the	 pharynx,	 where	 it	 ramifies	 to	 form	 the	 pharyngeal	 plexus.	 The
plexus	 also	 receives	 fibers	 from	 the	 external	 laryngeal	 branch,	 CN	 IX,	 and	 the
sympathetic	trunk.	The	vagus,	with	a	contribution	from	the	bulbar	portion	of	CN
XI,	 supplies	 all	 the	 striated	 muscles	 of	 the	 soft	 palate,	 pharynx,	 and	 larynx
except	for	the	stylopharyngeus	(CN	IX)	and	tensor	veli	palatini	(CN	V).

TABLE	18.2

The	Terminal	Branches	of	the	Vagus	Nerve

Nerve

Anatomy

Meningeal	branch Arises	from	jugular	ganglion;	recurrent	course

upward	through	the	jugular	foramen;	supplies	dura
of	the	posterior	fossa

Auricular	branch Arises	from	superior	vagal	ganglion;	receives
filament	from	the	inferior	ganglion	of	CN	IX;
supplies	GSA	fibers	to	posterior	part	of	the
tympanic	membrane,	external	acoustic	meatus,
and	the	skin	of	the	posterior	pinna;	communicates
with	posterior	auricular	branch	of	CN	VII

Pharyngeal
branch

Carotid	body
branches

Superior

laryngeal
branch

Arises	from	the	inferior	vagal	ganglion;	passes

across	internal	carotid	artery	to	the	upper	border
of	the	middle	pharyngeal	constrictor;	divides	into
numerous	filaments	that	join	branches	of	CN	IX,
superior	laryngeal	nerves	and	sympathetic	nerves
to	form	pharyngeal	plexus.	Motor	innervation	to	all
muscles	of	the	soft	palate	and	pharynx	except	for
stylopharyngeus	and	tensor	veli	palatini;	sensory
innervation	to	mucous	membrane	of	the	pharynx

Arise	from	the	inferior	vagal	ganglion,	carry	impulses
from	baro-	and	chemoreceptors	to	middle	third	of
the	nucleus	of	the	solitary	tract;	form	plexus	with
branches	of	CN	IX

Arises	from	the	inferior	vagal	ganglion;	divides	into
external	and	internal	branches.	Smaller	external
branch	innervates	cricothyroid	muscle	and	sends
branches	to	pharyngeal	plexus.	Internal	branch
provides	sensory	innervation	to	internal	surfaces
of	the	larynx	as	far	down	as	the	vocal	folds

Recurrent

laryngeal

Arise	in	the	thorax	and	ascend	back	to	the	larynx;	on

the	right,	winds	backward	around	subclavian

nerves

artery;	on	the	left,	loops	around	aortic	arch;	both
ascend	between	the	esophagus	and	trachea,
behind	common	carotid	artery	and	thyroid	gland	to
the	larynx;	distributed	to	all	muscles	of	the	larynx
except	the	cricothyroid;	supply	sensation	to	the
mucous	membrane	of	the	larynx	below	the	vocal
folds

Cardiac	branches Superior	and	inferior	branches;	superior	arises	from

the	vagus;	inferior	arises	from	the	trunk	of	the
vagus	and	recurrent	laryngeal	on	the	right,	on	the
left	from	the	recurrent	laryngeal	only;
communicates	with	cardiac	branches	of	the
sympathetic	nervous	system	to	form	the	cardiac
plexus

Pulmonary
branches

Esophageal
branches

Arise	in	the	thorax;	communicate	with	filaments	from
the	sympathetic	division	to	form	the	pulmonary
plexuses

Arise	in	the	thorax;	join	filaments	from	the

splanchnic	nerves	and	thoracic	sympathetics	to
form	esophageal	plexus

Gastrointestinal
branches

Arise	in	the	abdomen;	form	gastric,	celiac,	and

hepatic	plexuses

The	 superior	 laryngeal	 nerve	 arises	 distal	 to	 the	 pharyngeal	 branch	 and
divides	 into	 an	 internal	 and	 external	 branch.	 The	 internal	 branch	 is	 primarily
sensory.	The	external	branch	supplies	the	cricothyroid.	All	of	the	other	intrinsic
laryngeal	muscles	are	supplied	by	the	recurrent	nerves,	except	for	the	arytenoid,
which	 may	 receive	 some	 fibers	 from	 the	 internal	 branch	 of	 the	 superior
laryngeal.	The	recurrent	laryngeal	nerves	both	descend	deep	into	the	thorax	and
then	loop	back	to	the	larynx.	On	the	right,	the	recurrent	laryngeal	arches	around
the	subclavian	artery	and	on	the	left	around	the	aortic	arch.	Each	nerve	gives	off
cardiac,	 tracheal,	 and	 esophageal	 branches,	 ending	 on	 each	 side	 as	 the	 inferior
laryngeal	nerve	to	supply	the	intrinsic	muscles	of	the	larynx.

The	Parasympathetic	Portion

The	 parasympathetic	 component	 of	 CN	 X	 arises	 from	 the	 DMNX,	 a	 long	 cell
column	 just	 dorsolateral	 to	 the	 hypoglossal	 nucleus	 extending	 from	 the	 upper
pole	 of	 the	 inferior	 olive	 to	 the	 lower	 portion	 of	 the	 medulla.	 Some
parasympathetic	 neurons	 lie	 immediately	 adjacent	 in	 the	 medial	 part	 of	 the
nucleus	ambiguus.	The	neurons	in	the	nucleus	ambiguus	innervate	the	heart,	and
those	in	DMNX	supply	the	other	vagally	innervated	viscera.	The	fibers	stream
ventromedially	 and	 merge	 with	 the	 branchiomotor	 fibers	 coming	 from	 the
nucleus	 ambiguus.	 The	 autonomic	 fibers	 leave	 the	 medulla	 as	 preganglionic
fibers	 of	 the	 craniosacral	 division	 of	 the	 autonomic	 nervous	 system.	 They
terminate	 in	 ganglia	 close	 to	 the	 viscera	 they	 supply	 and	 send	 short
postganglionic	 fibers	 directly	 to	 the	 muscular	 and	 glandular	 structures	 they
innervate.	 The	 vagus	 is	 the	 longest	 parasympathetic	 nerve	 in	 the	 body	 and
mediates	many	important	functions,	which	are	discussed	in	Chapter	45.	In	brief,
a	 vagal	 discharge	 causes	 bradycardia,	 hypotension,	 bronchoconstriction,
bronchorrhea,	increased	peristalsis,	increased	gastric	secretion,	and	inhibition	of
adrenal	 function.	 The	 vagal	 centers	 in	 the	 medulla	 that	 control	 these	 functions
are	 themselves	 under	 the	 control	 of	 higher	 centers	 in	 the	 cortex	 and
hypothalamus.	Inhibition	of	vagal	function	produces	the	opposite	effects.

In	 its	 course	 through	 the	 thorax,	 the	 right	 vagus	 nerve	 gives	 off	 pulmonary
and	 esophageal	 branches,	 passes	 through	 the	 esophageal	 opening	 in	 the
diaphragm	 posterior	 to	 the	 esophagus,	 and	 then	 divides	 into	 gastric	 and	 celiac
branches.	The	left	vagus	also	gives	off	pulmonary	and	esophageal	branches	and
then	 enters	 the	 abdomen	 anterior	 to	 the	 esophagus	 and	 divides	 into	 several
gastric	branches.

The	Sensory	Portion

The	superior	vagal	ganglion	is	located	in	the	upper	part	of	the	jugular	foramen.	It
communicates	through	several	delicate	branches	with	the	cranial	portion	of	CN
XI	and	with	the	petrous	ganglion	of	CN	IX,	with	CN	VII,	and	with	the	superior
cervical	 ganglion.	 The	 inferior	 vagal	 ganglion	 lies	 just	 beneath	 the	 jugular
foramen.	 The	 cranial	 root	 of	 the	 CN	 XI	 passes	 through	 it	 to	 join	 CN	 X.	 The
inferior	 ganglion	 also	 communicates	 with	 CN	 XII,	 the	 superior	 cervical
ganglion,	 and	 the	 loop	 between	 C1	 and	 C2.	 Both	 vagal	 ganglia	 are	 sensory,
containing	 unipolar	 neurons	 that	 mediate	 general	 somatic,	 special	 visceral,	 and

general	 visceral	 afferents.	 The	 branchiomotor	 and	 parasympathetic	 axons	 pass
through	the	ganglia	without	synapsing.	The	superior	ganglion	primarily	conveys
somatic	 sensation,	 and	 most	 of	 its	 communication	 is	 with	 the	 auricular	 nerve.
The	inferior	ganglion	relays	general	visceral	sensation	and	taste.

The	 somatic	 sensory	 portion	 of	 the	 vagus	 conveys	 pain,	 temperature,	 and
touch	 sensation	 from	 the	 pharynx,	 larynx,	 ear	 canal,	 external	 surface	 of	 the
tympanic	 membrane,	 and	 meninges	 of	 the	 posterior	 fossa.	 In	 the	 larynx,	 GSA
fibers	 from	 above	 the	 vocal	 folds	 travel	 in	 the	 internal	 laryngeal	 branch	 of	 the
superior	 laryngeal	 nerve;	 fibers	 from	 below	 the	 vocal	 folds	 travel	 with	 the
recurrent	laryngeal	nerve.	Visceral	afferents	follow	the	same	pathways.	General
sensory	 fibers	 from	 the	 region	 of	 the	 ear,	 ear	 canal,	 and	 tympanic	 membrane
travel	 in	 the	 auricular	 branch	 (nerve	 of	 Arnold).	 Stimulation	 of	 the	 auricular
branch,	as	by	tickling	the	ear	canal,	can	produce	reflex	activation	of	DMNX	with
coughing,	 vomiting,	 and	 even	 syncope	 (mitempfindung;	 see	 Chapter	 31).	 The
GSA	fibers	in	CN	X	synapse	in	the	nucleus	of	the	spinal	tract	of	CN	V	and	are
relayed	to	the	thalamus	and	to	the	sensory	cortex.

Fibers	 carrying	 GVAs	 from	 the	 pharynx,	 larynx,	 vagally	 innervated	 viscera,
and	 baroreceptors	 and	 chemoreceptors	 in	 the	 aorta	 travel	 over	 the	 peripheral
processes	 of	 neurons	 in	 the	 inferior	 vagal	 ganglion.	 The	 central	 processes
terminate	 in	 the	 caudal	 portion	 of	 the	 solitary	 tract.	 Collaterals	 to	 the	 reticular
formation,	DMNX,	and	other	CN	nuclei	mediate	important	visceral	reflexes	and
are	involved	in	the	regulation	of	cardiovascular,	respiratory,	and	gastrointestinal
function.	 There	 are	 some	 taste	 fibers	 from	 the	 region	 of	 the	 epiglottis	 and
arytenoids,	which	travel	with	the	taste	fibers	of	CN	IX	to	terminate	in	the	rostral
solitary	tract.

Normal	Functions

Normal	 functions	 mediated	 by	 CNs	 IX	 and	 X	 include	 swallowing,	 phonation,
and	 airway	 protection	 and	 modulation.	 The	 complex	 process	 of	 swallowing	 is
divided	into	two	stages,	controlled	primarily	by	CNs	IX,	X,	and	XII.	In	the	first
stage,	the	food	bolus	is	driven	back	into	the	fauces	by	tongue	action.	During	the
second	stage,	the	epiglottis	closes	over	the	entrance	to	the	larynx,	and	the	bolus
glides	 along	 its	 posterior	 surface.	 The	 muscles	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 and
nasopharynx	close	above	the	bolus	to	prevent	passage	into	the	nasopharynx.	The
bolus	 is	 directed	 downward	 and	 backward	 into	 the	 pharynx,	 and	 then	 the
constrictors	contract	to	propel	it	downward	into	the	esophagus.

The	 larynx	 is	 composed	 of	 several	 cartilages.	 The	 thyroid	 and	 cricoid
cartilages	 form	 part	 of	 the	 outer	 casing.	 The	 arytenoids	 are	 paired	 cartilages
lying	in	the	interior;	they	have	a	muscular	process	and	a	vocal	process.	The	true
vocal	cords	are	mucous	membranes	that	cover	the	vocal	ligaments,	which	extend
from	the	vocal	processes	of	the	arytenoids	to	the	thyroid	cartilage.	The	larynx	is
controlled	 by	 myriad	 small	 muscles.	 The	 arytenoids	 may	 either	 slide	 or	 pivot;
either	action	changes	the	configuration	of	the	vocal	cords.	The	glottic	rim	is	the
passageway	between	the	vocal	cords.	Contraction	and	relaxation	of	the	intrinsic
laryngeal	 muscles	 change	 the	 tension	 or	 shape	 of	 the	 vocal	 cords	 and	 alter	 the
aperture	 of	 the	 glottic	 rim.	 The	 muscles	 of	 the	 larynx	 perform	 three	 basic
functions:	They	abduct	and	open	the	glottic	rim	to	allow	air	entry	and	exit,	they
adduct	 and	 close	 the	 glottic	 rim	 to	 protect	 the	 airway	 during	 swallowing,	 and
they	 regulate	 the	 tension	 on	 the	 vocal	 cords	 to	 allow	 phonation.	 The
cricothyroids,	 posterior	 and	 lateral	 cricoarytenoids,	 and	 thyroarytenoids	 are
paired	 muscles.	 The	 arytenoid	 muscle	 is	 unpaired.	 The	 actions	 of	 the	 intrinsic
laryngeal	muscles	are	summarized	in	Table	18.1	and	Figure	18.4.

FIGURE	18.4	 The	 cricothyroid	 muscles	 (not	 shown)	 tilt	 the	 thyroid	 cartilage	 forward
on	the	cricoid	cartilage,	tensing	the	vocal	cords.	The	thyroarytenoid	muscles	run	from
the	 thyroid	 cartilage	 to	 the	 arytenoid	 cartilages;	 contraction	 tenses	 the	 vocal	 cords.
The	 other	 muscles	 attach	 to	 the	 cricoid	 cartilage.	 The	 paired	 arytenoids	 may	 either
slide	 or	 pivot.	 Contraction	 of	 the	 arytenoid	 muscle	 pulls	 the	 arytenoid	 cartilages
together,	 adducting	 the	 cords	 and	 closing	 the	 glottic	 rim.	 The	 lateral	 cricoarytenoid
muscle	 causes	 the	 vocal	 process	 of	 the	 arytenoid	 to	 pivot	 medially,	 adducting	 the

cords.	 The	 posterior	 cricoarytenoid	 causes	 the	 vocal	 process	 to	 rotate	 laterally,
abducting	the	cords.

Clinical	Examination

Despite	 its	 size	 and	 importance,	 CN	 X	 is	 difficult	 to	 evaluate	 at	 the	 bedside.
function	 assessment	 can	 sometimes	 provide	 useful
Formal	 autonomic	
information.

Examination	of	the	Motor	Functions

The	motor	branches	of	CN	X	supply	the	soft	palate,	pharynx,	and	larynx	in	the
same	distribution	as	for	CN	IX	and	are	examined	in	the	same	manner.	The	gag
reflex	is	discussed	in	the	section	on	CN	IX.

insufficiency.	 Examination	 of	

The	 character	 of	 the	 voice	 and	 the	 ability	 to	 swallow	 provide	 information
about	 the	 branchiomotor	 functions	 of	 the	 vagus.	 With	 acute	 unilateral	 lesions,
the	speech	may	have	a	nasal	quality	and	dysphagia	is	often	present;	this	is	more
marked	for	liquids	than	solids,	with	a	tendency	to	nasal	regurgitation	because	of
velopharyngeal	
includes
observation	 of	 the	 position	 of	 the	 palate	 and	 uvula	 at	 rest	 and	 during	 quiet
breathing	and	phonation.	The	median	raphe	of	the	palate	rises	in	the	midline	on
phonation.	With	a	unilateral	lesion	of	the	vagus,	there	is	weakness	of	the	levator
veli	 palatini	 and	 musculus	 uvulae,	 which	 causes	 a	 droop	 of	 the	 palate	 and
flattening	of	the	palatal	arch	(Figure	18.5).	Preserved	function	of	the	tensor	veli
palatini	 (innervated	 by	 CN	 V)	 may	 prevent	 marked	 drooping	 of	 the	 palate.	 On
phonation,	 the	 median	 raphe	 deviates	 toward	 the	 normal	 side.	 The	 palatal	 gag
reflex	 may	 be	 lost	 on	 the	 involved	 side	 because	 of	 interruption	 of	 the	 motor
rather	than	sensory	path.

the	 soft	 palate	

With	 bilateral	 vagus	 involvement,	 the	 palate	 cannot	 elevate	 on	 phonation;	 it
may	or	may	not	droop,	depending	on	the	function	of	the	tensor	veli	palatini.	The
palatal	 gag	 reflex	 is	 absent	 bilaterally.	 The	 tendency	 toward	 nasal	 speech	 and
nasal	 regurgitation	 of	 liquids	 is	 pronounced.	 The	 speech	 is	 similar	 to	 that	 of	 a
patient	with	cleft	palate	(Chapter	9).

FIGURE	18.5	Unilateral	paralysis	of	the	soft	palate.

Weakness	 of	 the	 pharynx	 may	 also	 produce	 abnormalities	 of	 speech	 and
swallowing.	 With	 pharyngeal	 weakness,	 dysarthria	 is	 usually	 minimal	 unless
there	is	also	weakness	of	the	soft	palate	or	larynx.	Spontaneous	coughing	and	the
cough	reflex	may	be	impaired.	Dysphagia	may	occur	but	without	the	tendency	to
greater	difficulty	with	liquids	and	to	nasal	regurgitation	that	occurs	with	palatal
weakness.	 Dysphagia	 is	 marked	 only	 in	 acute	 unilateral	 or	 in	 bilateral	 lesions.
Examination	 of	 the	 pharynx	 includes	 observation	 of	 the	 contraction	 of	 the
pharyngeal	 muscles	 on	 phonation,	 notation	 of	 the	 elevation	 of	 the	 larynx	 on

swallowing,	 and	 testing	 the	 pharyngeal	 gag	 reflex.	 Unilateral	 weakness	 of	 the
superior	 pharyngeal	 constrictor	 may	 cause	 a	 “curtain	 movement”	 (Vernet’s
rideau	 phenomenon),	 with	 motion	 of	
the
nonparalyzed	side	on	testing	the	gag	reflex	or	at	the	beginning	of	phonation.	The
normal	 elevation	 of	 the	 larynx	 may	 be	 absent	 on	 one	 side	 in	 unilateral	 lesions
and	on	both	sides	in	bilateral	lesions.

the	 pharyngeal	 wall	

toward	

CN	 X	 innervates	 the	 vocal	 cords.	 Normal	 movement	 of	 the	 vocal	 cords	 is
necessary	 for	 three	 vital	 functions:	 breathing,	 coughing,	 and	 talking.	 During
inspiration	 and	 expiration,	 the	 cords	 abduct	 to	 allow	 for	 free	 airflow;	 when
speaking,	 the	 cords	 adduct	 and	 vibrate	 to	 accomplish	 phonation.	 The	 cords	 are
also	 adducted	 when	 coughing.	 Movements	 of	 the	 many	 small	 muscles	 that
control	the	larynx	are	complex	and	have	different	effects	on	laryngeal	function
(Table	 18.1).	 The	 effects	 of	 weakness	 of	 the	 different	 laryngeal	 muscles	 are
summarized	 in	 Table	 18.3.	 A	 unilateral	 lesion	 of	 the	 vagus	 may	 cause	 cord
weakness	or	paralysis.	Vocal	cord	dysfunction	alters	the	character	and	quality	of
the	 voice	 and	 may	 produce	 abnormalities	 of	 articulation,	 difficulty	 with
respiration,	and	impairment	of	coughing.

Spasmodic	 dysphonia	 is	 a	 common	 focal	 dystonia	 that	 involves	 the	 vocal
cords	and	causes	characteristic	voice	changes	(Chapter	30;	for	video,	see	Video
Link	 18.2).	 Spasmodic	 dysphonia	 most	 often	 causes	 abnormal	 adduction
spasms	of	both	vocal	cords,	and	the	voice	is	strained	and	high-pitched.	Abductor
dysphonia	is	due	to	spasmodic	contraction	of	the	posterior	cricoarytenoid,	which
causes	 a	 failure	 of	 normal	 adduction	 on	 phonation;	 the	 voice	 is	 breathy	 and
hoarse.	This	type	of	spasmodic	dysphonia	is	most	likely	to	be	confused	with	a
lesion	 of	 CN	 X.	 Direct	 and	 indirect	 laryngoscopy	 and	 videostroboscopy	 are
valuable	adjuncts	to	the	routine	examination.

TABLE	18.3

The	Effects	of	Weakness	of	Muscles	of	the	Larynx

Muscle

Effect	of	Weakness

Cricothyroid

Loss	of	tension;	elongation	of	the	vocal	cord	in

phonation;	loss	of	high	tones;	voice	deep,	hoarse,
and	easily	fatigued;	inspiration	normal	with	either
dyspnea	or	stridor

Thyroarytenoid Little	difficulty	with	abduction,	but	adduction	slightly

impaired;	with	bilateral	paralysis,	the	glottis	has	an

oval	instead	of	linear	appearance	on	phonation;
voice	hoarse;	no	dyspnea	or	stridor

Arytenoid

Glottis	closed	only	anteriorly;	the	larynx	shows	a	small
triangular	slit	posteriorly	during	phonation;	inspiration
is	normal

Unilateral

The	cord	lies	close	to	midline;	cannot	be	abducted	on

abductors

inspiration;	voice	hoarse,	but	phonation	and
coughing	little	affected	(adduction	is	normal);
dyspnea	uncommon	because	normal	cord	abducts
on	inspiration,	but	inspiratory	stridor	may	occur

Bilateral

Both	cords	close	to	the	midline	and	cannot	be

abductors

abducted;	voice	hoarse,	but	phonation	little	affected
and	coughing	normal	because	adduction	preserved;
severe	dyspnea	with	inspiratory	stridor

Unilateral

Paralysis	of	one	lateral	cricoarytenoid;	hoarseness	and

adductors

impairment	of	coughing

Bilateral

adductors

Cords	not	adducted	on	phonation	and	voice	either	lost
or	reduced	to	whisper;	inspiration	normal	without
stridor	or	dyspnea;	coughing	normal

Total	unilateral

Both	adduction	and	abduction	affected;	involved	cord

palsy

lies	in	cadaveric	position,	motionless	in
midabduction;	voice	low-pitched	and	hoarse;	difficulty
coughing;	little	or	no	dyspnea;	inspiratory	stridor
absent	or	present	only	with	deep	inspiration

Total	bilateral

palsy

Both	cords	in	cadaveric	position;	phonation	and
coughing	lost;	marked	dyspnea	with	stridor,
especially	on	inspiration

The	most	common	cause	of	vocal	cord	paralysis	is	a	lesion	of	one	recurrent
laryngeal	 nerve.	 The	 paralysis	 may	 evolve	 from	 mild	 abduction	 impairment
because	 of	 isolated	 involvement	 of	 the	 posterior	 cricoarytenoid	 to	 complete
paralysis	 with	 the	 cord	 in	 the	 cadaveric	 position.	 With	 slight	 weakness	 of	 the

vocal	 cords	 or	 pharynx,	 hoarseness	 and	 dysphagia	 may	 be	 apparent	 only	 when
the	head	is	turned	to	either	side.	Occasionally,	even	severe	weakness	of	a	vocal
cord	causes	little	appreciable	effect	on	the	voice	because	of	preserved	movement
of	the	normal	cord.

Examination	of	the	Autonomic	Functions

The	 autonomic	 functions	 of	 CN	 X	 are	 summarized	 above	 and	 are	 discussed	 in
more	detail	in	Chapter	45.

Examination	of	the	Sensory	Functions

The	 somatic	 sensory	 elements	 of	 CN	 X	 are	 discussed	 above.	 They	 are	 not
clinically	important	and	cannot	be	adequately	tested.

Examination	of	the	Reflexes

CN	 X	 plays	 a	 part	 in	 several	 autonomic,	 or	 visceral,	 reflexes;	 loss	 of	 these
reflexes	may	follow	a	lesion	of	the	tenth	nerve.	In	some	of	these	reflexes,	such
as	the	sternutatory,	sucking,	and	yawning,	the	vagus	plays	a	supportive	role.	The
nasal,	 sneeze,	 or	 sternutatory	 reflex	 is	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 15.	 Afferent
impulses	are	carried	over	CN	V	to	the	reflex	center	in	the	brainstem	and	upper
spinal	cord,	with	efferent	impulses	primarily	by	CN	VII	with	some	overflow	to
CNs	 IX	 and	 X	 and	 the	 phrenic	 nerve.	 In	 other	 reflexes,	 such	 as	 swallowing,
vomiting,	and	coughing,	the	vagus	is	central.	These	are	discussed	in	Box	18.1.

BOX	18.1

Vagally	Mediated	Reflexes

The	oculocardiac	reflex	is	bradycardia	caused	by	pressure	on	the	eyeball.	It
may	 also	 be	 induced	 by	 painful	 stimulation	 of	 the	 skin	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the
neck.	The	afferent	limb	is	carried	by	cranial	nerve	(CN)	V	and	the	efferent
by	 CN	 X.	 The	 reflex	 is	 inconstant,	 unstandardized,	 and	 influenced	 by
emotion.	Usually,	the	pulse	is	not	slowed	more	than	5	to	8	beats	per	minute.
The	slowing	may	be	accompanied	by	extrasystoles.	The	oculocardiac	reflex
may	 be	 absent	 in	 lesions	 involving	 CN	 X.	 It	 is	 sometimes	 used	 to	 slow	 an

excessively	rapid	heart	rate,	as	in	tachyarrhythmias.

The	 vomiting	 reflex	 produces	 reverse	 peristalsis	 in	 the	 esophagus	 and
stomach,	 with	 forceful	 ejection	 of	 material	 from	 the	 stomach.	 The	 reflex
center	 is	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 dorsal	 efferent	 nucleus.	 Vomiting	 occurs	 for
many	 reasons.	 Stimulation	 of	 the	 pharynx,	 palate,	 esophagus,	 stomach,
duodenum,	 or	 lower	 gastrointestinal	 tract	 may	 activate	 the	 reflex.	 The
afferent	limb	is	carried	by	CN	X,	probably	to	the	solitary	tract;	from	there,
the	impulse	is	relayed	to	the	dorsal	efferent	nucleus	and	also	down	the	spinal
cord	 to	 contract	 the	 diaphragm	 and	 abdominal	 muscles,	 relax	 the	 cardiac
sphincter,	and	contract	the	pyloric	sphincter.	The	swallowing	reflex	is	caused
by	 stimulation	 of	 the	 pharyngeal	 wall	 or	 back	 of	 the	 tongue.	 Afferent
impulses	 travel	 through	 CNs	 V,	 IX,	 and	 X	 and	 efferent	 impulses	 through
CNs	 IX,	 X,	 and	 XII.	 The	 cough	 reflex	 is	 activated	 by	 stimulation	 of	 the
mucous	 membrane	 of	 the	 pharynx,	 larynx,	 trachea,	 or	 bronchial	 tree.
Stimulation	 of	 the	 tympanic	 membrane	 or	 external	 auditory	 canal	 can	 also
elicit	 a	 cough	 response	 (mitempfindung).	 The	 afferent	 limb	 of	 the	 reflex	 is
carried	through	CNs	IX	and	X	to	the	solitary	tract,	and	the	efferent	impulses
descend	 to	 the	 pharyngeal	 muscles,	 tongue,	 palate,	 and	 larynx	 and	 to	 the
diaphragm,	chest,	and	abdominal	muscles.

Hiccup	 (singultus)	 is	 a	 sudden	 reflex	 contraction	 of	 the	 diaphragm
causing	a	forceful	inspiration.	Associated	laryngeal	spasm	causes	the	glottis
to	 snap	 shut,	 causing	 sudden	 arrest	 of	 the	 inspiration	 and	 the	 characteristic
sound.	 The	 phrenic	 nerves	 are	 the	 major	 pathway,	 but	 CN	 X	 contributes.
Yawning	 is	 a	 complex	 respiratory	 reflex	 with	 deep,	 prolonged	 inspiration,
usually	 involuntary,	 through	 the	 open	 mouth.	 It	 typically	 occurs	 during
sleepiness	and	fatigue	but	may	also	be	brought	on	by	suggestion	or	boredom.
Yawning	can	occur	in	neurologic	disease	as	well.

The	carotid	sinus	reflex	is	produced	by	stimulation	of	the	carotid	sinus	or
the	carotid	body	by	pressure	at	the	carotid	bifurcation.	It	causes	slowing	of
the	 heart	 rate,	 a	 fall	 in	 blood	 pressure,	 a	 decrease	 in	 cardiac	 output,	 and
peripheral	 vasodilatation.	 When	 the	 response	 is	 exaggerated,	 there	 may	 be
syncope.	 The	 afferent	 limb	 of	 the	 reflex	 is	 carried	 over	 CN	 IX	 and	 the
efferent	over	CN	X.	The	carotid	sinus	reflex	is	discussed	further	under	CN
IX.

Disorders	of	Function

A	unilateral	vagal	lesion	causes	weakness	of	the	soft	palate,	pharynx,	and	larynx.
Acute	 lesions	 may	 produce	 difficulty	 swallowing	 both	 liquids	 and	 solids	 and
hoarseness	 or	 a	 nasal	 quality	 to	 the	 voice.	 The	 only	 definite	 sensory	 change	 is
anesthesia	of	the	larynx	because	of	involvement	of	the	superior	laryngeal	nerve.
It	is	seldom	possible	to	demonstrate	loss	of	sensation	behind	the	pinna	and	in	the
external	 auditory	 canal.	 The	 gag	 reflex	 is	 absent	 on	 the	 involved	 side.
Autonomic	reflexes	(vomiting,	coughing,	and	sneezing)	are	not	usually	affected.
Tachycardia	and	loss	of	the	oculocardiac	reflex	on	the	involved	side	may	occur,
but	 usually	 there	 are	 no	 cardiac	 symptoms.	 Gastrointestinal	 disturbances	 are
inconspicuous.	 Bilateral	 complete	 vagal	 paralysis	 is	 incompatible	 with	 life.	 It
causes	 complete	 paralysis	 of	 the	 palate,	 pharynx,	 and	 larynx,	 with	 marked
dysphagia	and	dysarthria;	tachycardia;	slow,	irregular,	respiration;	vomiting;	and
gastrointestinal	atonia.	Lesions	of	individual	vagal	branches	are	rare	except	for
involvement	of	the	recurrent	laryngeal	nerve.

The	 primary	 effect	 of	 increased	 vagal	 activity	 is	 bradycardia.	 The	 term
vasovagal	refers	to	the	effects	of	the	vagus	nerve	on	the	blood	vessels.	Vasovagal
attacks	 (fainting,	 syncope)	 are	 characterized	 by	 bradycardia,	 hypotension,
peripheral	vasoconstriction,	and	faintness,	sometimes	with	loss	of	consciousness.
Vasovagal	 attacks	 are	 typically	 induced	 by	 strong	 emotion	 or	 pain.	 The
bradycardia	 and	 projectile	 vomiting	 that	 occur	 with	 increased	 intracranial
pressure	 may	 be	 vagally	 mediated.	 Cheyne-Stokes,	 Biot,	 and	 Kussmaul
breathing;	respiratory	tics;	forced	yawning;	and	other	abnormalities	of	breathing
may	 be	 vagally	 mediated	 as	 well.	 Spasm	 of	 pharyngeal	 muscles	 can	 occur	 in
certain	 central	 nervous	 system	 disorders.	 Other	 conditions	 in	 which	 there	 is
increased	activity	in	the	vagal	system	are	seldom	of	primary	neurologic	origin.

Rhythmic	 movements	 of	the	 palate	(palatal	myoclonus,	palatal	microtremor,
or	palatal	nystagmus)	can	occur	with	a	lesion	of	the	brainstem,	usually	vascular
(Video	 30.7).	 The	 movements	 are	 mediated	 by	 CN	 X.	 Palatal	 myoclonus	 is
discussed	 further	 in	 Chapter	30.	 The	 very	 rare	 syndrome	 of	 superior	 laryngeal
neuralgia	causes	lancinating	pains	that	radiate	from	the	larynx	to	the	ear.

Unilateral	 supranuclear	 lesions	 generally	 cause	 no	 dysfunction	 because	 of
bilateral	 innervation;	 dysphagia	 from	 a	 unilateral	 lesion	 can	 occur	 but	 is	 rare.
Bilateral	supranuclear	lesions,	as	from	pseudobulbar	palsy,	cause	dysphagia	and
dysarthria	(Chapter	 21).	 Extrapyramidal	 disorders	 may	 produce	 difficulty	 with
swallowing	 and	 talking.	 Patients	 with	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 typically	 have	 a
hypokinetic	dysarthria	(Chapter	9).	Laryngeal	 spasm	 with	stridor	may	occur	 in
Parkinson’s	disease	and	other	extrapyramidal	disorders.	The	voice	is	commonly

affected	by	essential	tremor.

Nuclear	 lesions	 of	 the	 nucleus	 ambiguus	 can	 occur	 with	 any	 intrinsic
brainstem	disease.	A	slowly	progressive	nuclear	lesion,	such	as	in	bulbar	ALS,
syringomyelia,	 and	 some	 neoplasms,	 may	 cause	 fasciculations	 in	 the	 palatal,
pharyngeal,	 and	 laryngeal	 muscles.	 The	 speech	 disturbances	 are	 discussed	 in
Chapter	9.	Lesions	of	the	nucleus	ambiguus	or	intramedullary	fibers	of	CNs	IX
and	 X	 commonly	 occur	 with	 vascular	 disease,	 for	 example,	 lateral	 medullary
(Wallenberg)	syndrome.	Nuclear	lesions	are	usually	associated	with	involvement
of	other	CN	nuclei	and	long	motor	or	sensory	tracts.	Because	of	the	somatotopic
organization,	lesions	limited	to	the	rostral	portion	of	the	nucleus	ambiguus	may
produce	only	weakness	of	the	palate	and	pharynx,	sparing	laryngeal	functions.

Infranuclear	involvement	may	occur	with	lesions	at	the	base	of	the	brain,	in
the	 cerebellopontine	 angle,	 in	 the	 jugular	 foramen,	 or	 along	 the	 course	 of	 the
vagus	 nerves.	 Extramedullary,	 intracranial	 involvement	 can	 occur	 in	 processes
involving	the	meninges,	extramedullary	tumors,	aneurysms,	trauma,	sarcoidosis,
and	skull	fractures.	Other	lower	CNs	are	usually	involved	as	well	(Chapter	21).
Lesions	at	the	jugular	foramen	or	in	the	retroparotid	space	usually	involve	some
combination	 of	 CNs	 IX,	 X,	 XI,	 and	 XII	 and	 the	 cervical	 sympathetics.	 These
lower	CN	syndromes	are	discussed	in	Chapter	21.	Isolated	or	multiple	lower	CN
palsies	 can	 be	 a	 manifestation	 of	 dissecting	 aneurysm	 of	 the	 cervical	 internal
carotid	artery	or	occur	as	a	complication	of	carotid	endarterectomy.	Isolated	CN
IX	 palsy	 has	 been	 reported	 as	 a	 complication	 of	 traumatic	 internal	 maxillary
artery	dissection.

The	main	trunk	of	the	vagus	may	be	injured	in	the	neck	or	thorax	by	trauma,
carotid	 aneurysms,	 or	 other	 mass	 lesions.	 Vocal	 cord	 and	 diaphragmatic
weakness	occur	in	some	forms	of	Charcot-Marie-Tooth	disease.	Individual	vagal
branches	may	be	involved	by	disease	processes	in	the	neck,	upper	mediastinum,
thorax,	 and	 abdomen.	 The	 recurrent	 laryngeal	 nerve	 is	 the	 most	 frequently
affected;	 the	 left	 is	 more	 often	 damaged	 than	 the	 right	 because	 of	 its	 longer
course.	 The	 recurrent	 laryngeals	 may	 be	 damaged	 by	 tumors	 in	 the	 neck,
especially	 carcinoma	 of	 the	 thyroid,	 cervical	 adenopathy,	 metastatic	 lesions,
Hodgkin	 disease,	 lymphosarcoma,	 aortic	 aneurysms,	 mitral	 stenosis	 with
enlargement	of	 the	left	 atrium,	 pericarditis,	 mediastinal	and	 apical	 tumors,	stab
wounds	 in	 the	 neck,	 or	 accidental	 trauma	 during	 a	 thyroidectomy	 or	 other
surgical	 procedure.	 Recurrent	 laryngeal	 weakness	 causes	 a	 flaccid	 dysphonia
with	 breathiness	 and	 mild	 inspiratory	 stridor;	 palatopharyngeal	 functions	 are
preserved.	 Diplophonia	 may	 occur	 because	 of	 unbalanced	 vocal	 cord	 vibration

frequency.	 Compression	 of	 the	 left	 recurrent	 laryngeal	 nerve	 between	 the	 aorta
and	 the	 pulmonary	 artery	 because	 of	 a	 variety	 of	 cardiovascular	 disorders	 may
cause	 hoarseness	 (cardiovocal	 or	 Ortner’s	 syndrome).	 Bilateral	 recurrent
laryngeal	 palsies	 cause	 abduction	 impairment	 and	 leave	 the	 vocal	 cords
approximating	 each	 other	 in	 the	 midline;	 the	 most	 common	 cause	 is	 thyroid
surgery.	 This	 results	 in	 dyspnea	 and	 inspiratory	 stridor.	 The	 superior	 laryngeal
and	 pharyngeal	 branches	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 trauma,	 or	 in	 neoplasms	 or
abscesses	in	the	neck,	but	clinical	dysfunction	is	scant	because	of	the	primarily
sensory	 function	 of	 the	 nerve;	 there	 may	 be	 mild	 hoarseness	 because	 of
weakness	of	the	cricothyroid	muscle.	Metastatic	breast	cancer	infiltrating	behind
the	carotid	sheath	at	C6	has	been	reported	to	produce	a	combination	of	recurrent
laryngeal	 and	 phrenic	 nerve	 dysfunction	 with	 an	 accompanying	 Horner
syndrome.	Hoarseness	and	voice	fatigue	because	of	laryngeal	involvement	may
be	prominent	in	rare	patients	with	myasthenia	gravis.

Syncope,	 sometimes	 associated	 with	 paroxysmal	 neck	 pain,	 may	 occur
because	 of	 neoplasms	 involving	 the	 carotid	 sinus	 nerve.	 The	 mechanism	 is
probably	 similar	 to	 that	 seen	 in	 syncope	 due	 to	 glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia.
Swallow	 syncope	 results	 from	 dysfunction,	 usually	 because	 of	 metastatic
disease,	 of	 CNs	 IX	 and	 X.	 The	 patient	 develops	 bradycardia	 and	 hypotension
because	of	involvement	of	the	baroreceptor	nerves.

Video	Links

Video	Link	18.1.	Palatal	deviation.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Palatal_deviation
Video	Link	18.2.	Spasmodic	dysphonia.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Spasmodic_dysphonia

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aguiar	 PH	 Jr,	 Tella	 OI	 Jr,	 Pereira	 CU,	 et	 al.	 Chiari	 type	 I	 presenting	 as	 left
glossopharyngeal	neuralgia	with	cardiac	syncope.	Neurosurg	Rev	2002;25:99–
102.

Ahn	 JY,	 Chung	 YS,	 Chung	 SS,	 et	 al.	 Traumatic	 dissection	 of	 the	 internal
maxillary	 artery	 associated	 with	 isolated	 glossopharyngeal	 nerve	 palsy:	 case
report.	Neurosurgery	2004;55:710.

Arnold	RW,	Dyer	JA	Jr,	Gould	AB	Jr,	et	al.	Sensitivity	to	vasovagal	maneuvers

in	normal	children	and	adults.	Mayo	Clin	Proc	1991;66:797–804.

Arts	 HA,	 Fagan	 PA.	 Vagal	 body	 tumors.	 Otolaryngol	 Head	 Neck	 Surg

1991;105:78–85.

Barbash	 GI,	 Keren	 G,	 Korczyn	 AD,	 et	 al.	 Mechanisms	 of	 syncope	 in
neuralgia.	 Electroencephalogr	 Clin	 Neurophysiol

glossopharyngeal	
1986;63:231–235.

Bindoff	 LA,	 Heseltine	 D.	 Unilateral	 facial	 pain	 in	 patients	 with	 lung	 cancer:	 a

referred	pain	via	the	vagus?	Lancet	1988;1:812–815.

Bleach	 NR.	 The	 gag	 reflex	 and	 aspiration:	 a	 retrospective	 analysis	 of	 120
patients	assessed	by	videofluoroscopy.	Clin	Otolaryngol	1993;18:303–307.
Blumenfeld	A,	Nikolskaya	G.	Glossopharyngeal	neuralgia.	Curr	Pain	Headache

Rep	2013;17:343.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Buchholz	DW,	Neumann	S.	Gag	reflex	and	dysphagia.	Dysphagia	1997;12:101–

102.

Ceylan	 S,	 Karakus	 A,	 Duru	 S,	 et	 al.	 Glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia:	 a	 study	 of	 6

cases.	Neurosurg	Rev	1997;20:196–200.

Chester	AC.	Referred	vagal	reflexes.	Ann	Intern	Med	1992;117:444.
Davies	 AE,	 Kidd	 D,	 Stone	 SP,	 et	 al.	 Pharyngeal	 sensation	 and	 gag	 reflex	 in

healthy	subjects.	Lancet	1995;345:487–488.

De	 SR,	 Ranieri	 A,	 Bilo	 L,	 et	 al.	 Cranial	 neuralgias:	 from	 physiopathology	 to

pharmacological	treatment.	Neurol	Sci	2008;29(Suppl	1):S69–S78.

Erman	AB,	Alexandra	E,	Kejner	BS,	et	al.	Disorders	of	cranial	nerves	IX	and	X.

Semin	Neurol	2009;29:85–92.

Flowers	 RH	 III,	 Kernodle	 DS.	 Vagal	 mononeuritis	 caused	 by	 herpes	 simplex
virus:	 association	 with	 unilateral	 vocal	 cord	 paralysis.	 Am	 J	 Med
1990;88:686–688.

Gaul	C,	Hastreiter	P,	Duncker	A,	et	al.	Diagnosis	and	neurosurgical	treatment	of
glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia:	 clinical	 findings	 and	 3-D	 visualization	 of
neurovascular	 compression	 in	 19	 consecutive	 patients.	 J	 Headache	 Pain
2011;12:527–534.

Hammond	 RR,	 Ebers	 GC.	 Chronic	 cough	 following	 cardiac	 transplantation:

vagal	Mitempfindung?	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1992;55:723–724.

Hayden	 MG,	 Tornabene	 SV,	 Nguyen	 A,	 et	 al.	 Cerebellopontine	 angle	 cyst

compressing	the	vagus	nerve:	case	report.	Neurosurgery	2007;60:E1150.

Horner	J,	Buoyer	FG,	Alberts	MJ,	et	al.	Dysphagia	following	brain-stem	stroke.

Clinical	correlates	and	outcome.	Arch	Neurol	1991;48:1170–1173.

Hughes	 TA,	 Wiles	 CM.	 Palatal	 and	 pharyngeal	 reflexes	 in	 health	 and	 in	 motor

neuron	disease.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1996;61:96–98.

Irioka	T,	Ohta	K,	Machida	A,	et	al.	Vagus	nerve	palsy	caused	by	varicella	zoster

virus	infection	without	rash.	J	Neurol	2007;254:1750–1751.

Jacobs	CJ,	Harnsberger	HR,	Lufkin	RB,	et	al.	Vagal	neuropathy:	evaluation	with

CT	and	MR	imaging.	Radiology	1987;164:97–102.

Katusic	 S,	 Williams	 DB,	 Beard	 CM,	 et	 al.	 Incidence	 and	 clinical	 features	 of
1945–1984.

Rochester,	 Minnesota,	

neuralgia,	

glossopharyngeal	
Neuroepidemiology	1991;10:266–275.

Kobata	 H,	 Kondo	 A,	 Iwasaki	 K,	 et	 al.	 Combined	 hyperactive	 dysfunction
syndrome	 of	 the	 cranial	 nerves:	 trigeminal	 neuralgia,	 hemifacial	 spasm,	 and
glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia:	 11-year	 experience	 and	 review.	 Neurosurgery
1998;43:1351–1361.

Leder	SB.	Gag	reflex	and	dysphagia.	Head	Neck	1996;18:138–141.
Leder	SB,	Espinosa	JF.	Aspiration	risk	after	acute	stroke:	comparison	of	clinical
examination	 and	 fiberoptic	 endoscopic	 evaluation	 of	 swallowing.	 Dysphagia
2002;17:214–218.

Levin	 B,	 Posner	 JB.	 Swallow	 syncope.	 Report	 of	 a	 case	 and	 review	 of	 the

literature.	Neurology	1972;22:1086–1093.

Lim	YM,	Lee	SA,	Kim	DK,	et	al.	Aneurysm	of	the	extracranial	internal	carotid
artery	 presenting	 as	 the	 syndrome	 of	 glossopharyngeal	 pain	 and	 syncope.	 J
Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2002;73:87–88.

Martino	 R,	 Foley	 N,	 Bhogal	 S,	 et	 al.	 Dysphagia	 after	 stroke:	 incidence,

diagnosis,	and	pulmonary	complications.	Stroke	2005;36:2756–2763.

Minagar	 A,	 Sheremata	 WA.	 Glossopharyngeal	 neuralgia	 and	 MS.	 Neurology

2000;54:1368–1370.

Moussouttas	 M,	 Tuhrim	 S.	 Spontaneous	 internal	 carotid	 artery	 dissection	 with

isolated	vagus	nerve	deficit.	Neurology	1998;51:317–318.

Mulpuru	 SK,	 Vasavada	 BC,	 Punukollu	 GK,	 et	 al.	 Cardiovocal	 syndrome:	 a

systematic	review.	Heart	Lung	Circ	2008;17:1–4.

Myssiorek	 D.	 Recurrent	 laryngeal	 nerve	 paralysis:	 anatomy	 and	 etiology.

Otolaryngol	Clin	North	Am	2004;37:25–44,	v.

Nusbaum	 AO,	 Som	 PM,	 Dubois	 P,	 et	 al.	 Isolated	 vagal	 nerve	 palsy	 associated
with	 a	 dissection	 of	 the	 extracranial	 internal	 carotid	 artery.	 AJNR	 Am	 J
Neuroradiol	1998;19:1845–1847.

Reddy	GD,	Viswanathan	A.	Trigeminal	and	glossopharyngeal	neuralgia.	Neurol

Clin	2014;32:539–552.

Schmall	 RJ,	 Dolan	 KD.	 Vagal	 schwannoma.	 Ann	 Otol	 Rhinol	 Laryngol

1992;101:360–362.
Schott	 GD.	 Distant	
Observations	 on	
1988;111:1187–1198.

referral	 of	 cutaneous	 sensation	
its	 normal	

(Mitempfindung).
and	 pathological	 occurrence.	 Brain

Sellars	 C,	 Campbell	 AM,	 Stott	 DJ,	 et	 al.	 Swallowing	 abnormalities	 after	 acute

stroke:	a	case	control	study.	Dysphagia	1999;14:212–218.

Smithard	 DG.	 Percutaneous	 endoscopic	 gastrostomy	 feeding	 after	 acute
dysphagic	 stroke.	 Gag	 reflex	 has	 no	 role	 in	 ability	 to	 swallow.	 BMJ
1996;312:972.

Sturzenegger	 M,	 Huber	 P.	 Cranial	 nerve	 palsies	 in	 spontaneous	 carotid	 artery

dissection.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1993;56:1191–1199.

Sweasey	TA,	Edelstein	SR,	Hoff	JT.	Glossopharyngeal	schwannoma:	review	of

five	cases	and	the	literature.	Surg	Neurol	1991;35:127–130.

Tang	SC,	Jeng	JS,	Liu	HM,	et	al.	Isolated	vagus	nerve	palsy	probably	associated
with	herpes	simplex	virus	infection.	Acta	Neurol	Scand	2001;104:174–177.
Vaghadia	 H,	 Spittle	 M.	 Newly	 recognized	 syndrome	 in	 the	 neck.	 J	 R	 Soc	 Med

1983;76:799.

Yanagisawa	K,	Kveton	JF.	Referred	otalgia.	Am	J	Otolaryngol	1992;13:323–327.

CHAPTER	19

The	Spinal	Accessory	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	 spinal	 accessory	 (SA)	 nerve,	 cranial	 nerve	 XI	 (CN	 XI),	 is	 actually	 two
nerves	 that	 run	 together	 in	 a	 common	 bundle	 for	 a	 short	 distance.	 The	 smaller
cranial	portion	(ramus	internus)	is	a	special	visceral	efferent	(SVE)	accessory	to
the	 vagus.	 Arising	 from	 cells	 within	 the	 caudal	 nucleus	 ambiguus,	 with	 some
contribution	 from	 the	 dorsal	 motor	 nucleus	 of	 the	 vagus,	 it	 emerges	 from	 the
medulla	 laterally	 as	 four	 or	 five	 rootlets	 caudal	 to	 the	 vagal	 filaments.	 The
cranial	 root	 runs	 to	 the	 jugular	 foramen	 and	 unites	 with	 the	 spinal	 portion,
traveling	with	it	for	only	a	few	millimeters	to	form	the	main	trunk	of	CN	XI.	The
cranial	root	communicates	with	the	jugular	ganglion	of	the	vagus	and	then	exits
through	the	jugular	foramen	separately	from	the	spinal	portion.	It	passes	through
the	 ganglion	 nodosum	 and	 then	 blends	 with	 the	 vagus	 (Figure	 19.1).	 It	 is
distributed	principally	with	the	recurrent	laryngeal	nerve	to	sixth	branchial	arch
muscles	 in	the	larynx,	and	 its	 contribution	is	indistinguishable	from	that	of	the
vagus	except	there	is	no	CN	XI	contribution	to	the	cricothyroid	muscle.	A	few
fibers	that	originate	in	the	dorsal	motor	nucleus	may	contribute	parasympathetic
fibers	 to	 the	 cardiac	 branches	 of	 the	 vagus.	 Lachman	 et	 al.	 have	 questioned
whether	the	cranial	root	of	the	SA	nerve	even	exists.

The	major	part	of	CN	XI	is	the	spinal	portion	(ramus	externus).	Its	function	is
to	innervate	the	sternocleidomastoid	(SCM)	and	trapezius	muscles.	The	fibers	of
the	spinal	root	arise	from	SVE	motor	cells	in	the	SA	nuclei	in	the	ventral	horn
from	C2	to	C5,	or	even	C6.	The	cell	column	of	the	SA	nucleus	lies	in	a	position
analogous	to	the	nucleus	ambiguus	in	the	medulla.	The	cell	column	making	up
the	 SA	 nucleus	 is	 somatotopically	 organized.	 The	 upper	 spinal	 cord	 portion
innervates	 primarily	 the	 ipsilateral	 SCM;	 the	 lower	 spinal	 portion	 innervates
primarily	 the	 ipsilateral	 trapezius.	 In	 keeping	 with	 the	 tendency	 of	 branchial

arch–related	 nerves	 to	 make	 internal	 loops,	 its	 axons	 arch	 posterolaterally
through	the	lateral	funiculus	and	emerge	as	a	series	of	rootlets	laterally	between
the	anterior	and	 posterior	roots.	These	 unite	 into	a	 single	trunk,	which	ascends
between	the	denticulate	ligaments	and	the	posterior	roots.	The	nerve	enters	the
skull	through	the	foramen	magnum,	ascends	the	clivus	for	a	short	distance,	and
then	curves	laterally.	The	spinal	root	joins	the	cranial	root	for	a	short	distance,
probably	 receiving	 one	 or	 two	 filaments	 from	 it.	 It	 exits	 through	 the	 jugular
foramen	in	company	with	CNs	IX	and	X.

CN	XI	emerges	from	the	skull	posteromedial	to	the	styloid	process	and	then
descends	 in	 the	 neck	 near	 the	 internal	 jugular	 vein,	 behind	 the	 digastric	 and
stylohyoid	 muscles,	 to	 enter	 the	 deep	 surface	 of	 the	 upper	 part	 of	 the	 SCM
muscle.	It	passes	through	the	SCM,	sending	filaments	to	it,	and	then	emerges	at
its	 posterior	 border	 near	 the	 midpoint,	 coursing	 near	 the	 great	 auricular	 nerve.
CN	 XI	 then	 runs	 obliquely	 across	 the	 posterior	 triangle	 of	 the	 neck	 on	 the
surface	of	the	levator	scapula	muscle,	superficially	and	in	close	proximity	to	the
lymph	nodes	of	the	posterior	cervical	triangle.	About	three	fingerbreadths	above
the	clavicle,	the	nerve	enters	the	deep	surface	of	the	anterior	border	of	the	upper
trapezius	 muscle.	 In	 the	 neck,	 the	 SA	 contributes	 fibers	 to	 the	 cervical	 plexus,
rami	trapezii,	and	then	courses	to	the	caudal	aspect	of	the	trapezius.	Most	of	the
communications	with	C2	through	C4	are	conveying	proprioceptive	information
from	CN	XI,	which	will	enter	the	spinal	cord	in	the	upper	cervical	segments.	The
innervation	 of	 the	 SCM	 may	 be	 more	 complex	 than	 is	 to	 be	 found	 in	 most
anatomical	texts,	possibly	including	fibers	from	CN	X.	Over	half	of	the	patients
undergoing	 division	 of	 the	 SA	 nerve	 and	 the	 upper	 cervical	 motor	 roots	 as
treatment	 for	 cervical	 dystonia	 had	 residual	 SCM	 activity	 of	 sufficient
magnitude	to	make	further	surgery	necessary	before	the	muscle	was	effectively
paralyzed.

FIGURE	19.1	Relationship	of	the	cranial	and	spinal	portions	of	the	accessory	nerve	to
the	vagus	and	glossopharyngeal	nerves.

The	 innervation	 of	 the	 trapezius	 shows	 some	 individual	 variability.	 The	 SA
nerve	is	the	primary	innervation	to	the	upper	trapezius,	but	Soo	et	al.	have	shown
that	the	cervical	plexus	may	contribute	motor	fibers,	especially	to	the	middle	and
lower	trapezius.	The	neurons	of	the	spinal	portion	of	XI	communicate	with	the
oculomotor,	 trochlear,	 abducens,	 and	 vestibular	 nuclei	 through	 the	 medial
longitudinal	fasciculus.	These	connections	are	important	in	controlling	conjugate
deviation	 of	 the	 head	 and	 eyes	 in	 response	 to	 auditory,	 vestibular,	 and	 other
stimuli.

The	supranuclear	innervation	of	CN	XI	arises	from	the	lower	portion	of	the
precentral	gyrus.	Fibers	from	the	lateral	corticospinal	tract	in	the	cervical	spinal
cord	communicate	with	the	SA	nucleus.	There	is	some	controversy,	but	the	bulk
of	 current	 evidence	 indicates	 that	 both	 the	 SCM	 and	 trapezius	 receive	 bilateral

supranuclear	innervation.	However,	the	input	to	the	SCM	motor	neuron	pool	is
predominantly	 ipsilateral	 and	 that	 to	 the	 trapezius	 motor	 neuron	 pool	 is
predominantly	contralateral	(Box	19.1).	The	SCM	turns	the	head	to	the	opposite
side,	and	its	supranuclear	innervation	is	ipsilateral.	Therefore,	the	right	cerebral
hemisphere	turns	the	head	to	the	left.

The	SCM	muscles	function	with	 the	other	 cervical	muscles	to	flex	the	head
and	turn	it	from	side	to	side.	When	one	SCM	contracts,	the	head	is	drawn	toward
the	 ipsilateral	 shoulder	 and	 rotates	 so	 that	 the	 occiput	 is	 pulled	 toward	 the
ipsilateral	 shoulder,	 while	 the	 face	 turns	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction	 and	 upward.
Acting	together,	the	two	muscles	flex	the	neck	and	bring	the	head	forward	and
downward.	With	the	head	fixed,	the	two	muscles	assist	in	elevating	the	thorax	in
forced	inspiration.

The	 trapezius	 retracts	 the	 head	 and	 draws	 it	 ipsilaterally.	 It	 also	 elevates,
retracts,	 and	 rotates	 the	 scapula	 and	 assists	 in	 abducting	 the	 arm	 above
horizontal.	 When	 one	 trapezius	 contracts	 with	 the	 shoulder	 fixed,	 the	 head	 is
drawn	to	that	side.	When	both	contract,	the	head	is	drawn	backward	and	the	face
deviated	 upward.	 When	 the	 head	 is	 fixed,	 the	 upper	 and	 middle	 fibers	 of	 the
trapezius	elevate,	rotate,	and	retract	the	scapula	and	shorten	the	distance	between
the	occiput	and	the	acromion.	The	lower	fibers	depress	the	scapula	and	draw	it
toward	the	midline.	The	SCM	and	trapezius	muscles	thus	act	together	to	rotate
the	head	from	side	to	side	and	to	flex	and	extend	the	neck.

BOX	19.1

Cortical	Innervation	of	the	Sternocleidomastoid	Muscle

The	sternocleidomastoid	(SCM)	may	be	an	exception	to	the	general	scheme
of	 contralateral	 hemispheric	 innervation.	 Authorities	 debate	 whether	 the
SCMs	 receive	 ipsilateral,	 contralateral,	 or	 bilateral	 cortical	 innervation.
Studying	 the	 function	 of	 the	 SCM	 muscles	 during	 intracarotid	 injection	 of
amytal	 (Wada	 testing),	 DeToledo	 et	 al.	 demonstrated	 weakness	 of	 the	 right
SCM	after	injection	into	the	right	internal	carotid	artery	in	some	patients	and
little	 to	 no	 weakness	 in	 others.	 This	 suggested	 that	 the	 SCMs	 receive
bilateral	hemispheric	innervation	with	the	maximal	input	from	the	ipsilateral
hemisphere.	 They	 proposed	 that	 the	 SA	 nucleus	 has	 rostral	 and	 caudal
portions	 and	 that	 the	 rostral	 (SCM)	 portion	 receives	 bihemispheric
projections,	 but	 the	 innervation	 of	 the	 caudal	 (trapezius)	 portion	 is

predominantly	 contralateral.	 This	 would	 be	 analogous	 to	 the	 supranuclear
innervation	 of	 the	 facial	 nerve	 nucleus,	 bilateral	 to	 the	 rostral	 portions	 but
contralateral	 to	 the	 caudal	 portions.	 Transcranial	 stimulation	 studies
concluded	 projections	 to	 the	 SCM	 were	 bilateral	 but	 predominantly
contralateral,	and	those	to	the	trapezius	exclusively	contralateral.	Some	have
contended	the	nerve	double	decussates,	but	this	remains	unproven.

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION

The	functions	of	the	cranial	portion	of	CN	XI	cannot	be	distinguished	from	those
of	CN	X,	and	examination	is	limited	to	evaluation	of	the	functions	of	the	spinal
portion.	 A	 complex	 array	 of	 many	 muscles	 is	 involved	 in	 moving	 the	 head,
including	 the	 scaleni,	 splenii	 and	 obliqui	 capitis,	 recti	 capitis,	 and	 longi	 capitis
and	 colli.	 With	 bilateral	 paralysis	 of	 CN	 XI–innervated	 muscles,	 there	 is
diminished	 but	 not	 absent	 neck	 rotation,	 and	 the	 head	 may	 droop	 or	 even	 fall
backward	 or	 forward,	 depending	 upon	 whether	 the	 SCMs	 or	 the	 trapezii	 are
more	involved.

One	 SCM	 acts	 to	 turn	 the	 head	 to	 the	 opposite	 side	 or	 to	 tilt	 it	 to	 the	 same
side.	Acting	together,	the	SCMs	thrust	the	head	forward	and	flex	the	neck.	The
muscles	 should	 be	 inspected	 and	 palpated	 to	 determine	 their	 tone	 and	 volume.
The	contours	are	distinct	even	at	rest.	With	a	nuclear	or	infranuclear	lesion,	there
may	be	atrophy	or	fasciculations.

FIGURE	 19.2	 Examination	 of	 the	 sternocleidomastoid	 (SCM)	 muscle.	 When	 the
patient	turns	his	head	to	the	right	against	resistance,	the	contracting	muscle	can	be
seen	and	palpated.

To	 assess	 SCM	 power,	 have	 the	 patient	 turn	 the	 head	 fully	 to	 one	 side	 and
hold	it	there,	and	then	try	to	turn	the	head	back	to	midline,	avoiding	any	tilting	or
leaning	motion.	The	muscle	usually	stands	out	well,	and	its	contraction	can	be
seen	and	felt	(Figure	19.2).	Significant	weakness	of	 rotation	can	be	detected	if
the	 patient	 tries	 to	 counteract	 firm	 resistance.	 Unilateral	 SCM	 paresis	 causes
little	 change	 in	 the	 resting	 position	 of	 the	 head.	 Even	 with	 complete	 paralysis,
other	 cervical	 muscles	 can	 perform	 some	 degree	 of	 rotation	 and	 flexion;	 only
occasionally	 is	 there	 a	 noticeable	 head	 turn.	 The	 two	 SCM	 muscles	 can	 be
examined	simultaneously	by	having	the	patient	flex	his	neck	while	the	examiner
exerts	pressure	on	the	forehead	or	by	having	the	patient	turn	the	head	from	side
to	side.	Flexion	of	the	head	against	resistance	may	cause	deviation	of	the	head
toward	the	paralyzed	side.	With	unilateral	paralysis,	the	involved	muscle	is	flat
and	 does	 not	 contract	 or	 become	 tense	 when	 attempting	 to	 turn	 the	 head
contralaterally	 or	 to	 flex	 the	 neck	 against	 resistance.	 Weakness	 of	 both	 SCMs
causes	 difficulty	 in	 anteroflexion	 of	 the	 neck,	 and	 the	 head	 may	 assume	 an
extended	position.	The	SCM	reflex	may	be	elicited	by	tapping	the	muscle	at	its
clavicular	origin.	Usually,	there	is	a	prompt	contraction.	The	reflex	is	mediated

by	 the	 accessory	 and	 upper	 cervical	 nerves,	 but	 has	 little	 significance	 in
neurologic	diagnosis.

FIGURE	 19.3	 Paralysis	 of	 the	 left	 trapezius	 muscle.	 There	 is	 a	 depression	 in	 the
shoulder	contour	with	downward	and	lateral	displacement	of	the	scapula.	(Reprinted
with	permission	from	Kelley	MJ,	Kane	TE,	Leggin	BG.	Spinal	accessory	nerve	palsy:
associated	 signs	 and	 symptoms.	 J	 Orthop	 Sports	 Phys	 Ther	 2008;38(2):78–86.
https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2454.	Copyright	©	Journal	of	Orthopaedic	&	Sports
Physical	Therapy®.)

With	 trapezius	 atrophy,	 the	 outline	 of	 the	 neck	 changes,	 with	 depression	 or
drooping	 of	 the	 shoulder	 contour	 and	 flattening	 of	 the	 trapezius	 ridge	 (Figure
19.3).	Severe	trapezius	weakness	causes	sagging	of	the	shoulder,	and	the	resting
position	of	the	scapula	shifts	downward.	The	upper	portion	of	the	scapula	tends
to	fall	laterally,	while	the	inferior	angle	moves	inward.	This	scapular	rotation	and
displacement	are	more	obvious	with	arm	abduction.

The	strength	of	the	trapezius	is	traditionally	tested	by	having	the	patient	shrug
the	 shoulders	 against	 resistance	 (Figure	 19.4).	 However,	 much	 of	 shoulder
shrugging	is	due	to	the	action	of	the	levator	scapulae.	A	better	test	of	the	upper
trapezius	 is	 resisting	 the	 patient’s	 attempt	 to	 approximate	 the	 occiput	 to	 the
acromion.	 The	 movement	 may	 be	 observed	 and	 the	 contraction	 seen	 and
palpated.	 To	 examine	 the	 middle	 and	 lower	 trapezius,	 place	 the	 patient’s

abducted	 arm	 horizontally,	 palm	 up,	 and	 attempt	 to	 push	 the	 elbow	 forward.
Muscle	 power	 should	 be	 compared	 on	 the	 two	 sides.	 In	 unilateral	 weakness	 of
the	trapezius,	these	movements	are	impaired.

FIGURE	 19.4	 Examination	 of	 the	 trapezius	 muscle.	 A.	 Examiner	 pressing	 the
shoulder	down	against	patient’s	resistance.	B.	Patient	attempting	to	elevate	shoulder
against	examiner’s	resistance.

The	 trapezius	 is	 one	 of	 several	 muscles	 that	 act	 to	 stabilize	 the	 scapula	 and
create	a	platform	for	movements	of	the	humerus.	The	serratus	anterior	protracts
the	scapula,	moving	it	forward	as	in	a	boxing	jab.	The	trapezius	is	a	synergist	to
the	 main	 mover,	 the	 rhomboids,	 in	 retracting	 the	 scapula.	 The	 trapezius	 and
serratus	anterior	act	in	concert	to	rotate	the	scapula	when	the	arm	is	abducting.
The	 trapezius	 brings	 the	 glenoid	 fossa	 progressively	 more	 cephalad	 so	 that	 the
abduction	motion	is	unrestricted.	In	addition,	contraction	of	the	upper	trapezius
adds	 the	 final	 few	 degrees	 of	 abduction,	 after	 the	 glenohumeral	 and
acromioclavicular	 ranges	 of	 motion	 are	 exhausted,	 so	 that	 the	 arm	 can	 be
brought	directly	overhead	(Figure	27.4).

Weakness	 of	 the	 trapezius	 disrupts	 the	 normal	 scapulohumeral	 rhythm	 and
impairs	arm	abduction.	Impairment	of	upper	trapezius	function	causes	weakness
of	 abduction	 beyond	 90	 degrees.	 Weakness	 of	 the	 middle	 trapezius	 muscle
causes	 winging	 of	 the	 scapula.	 The	 winging	 because	 of	 trapezius	 weakness	 is
more	 apparent	 on	 lateral	 abduction	 in	 contrast	 to	 the	 winging	 due	 to	 serratus
anterior	 weakness,	 which	 is	 greatest	 with	 the	 arm	 held	 in	 front.	 In	 fact,	 with
winging	due	to	trapezius	weakness,	the	jutting	of	the	inferior	angle	lessens	when
the	 arm	 is	 raised	 anteriorly;	 in	 winging	 due	 to	 serratus	 anterior	 weakness,	 it

worsens.	 Scapular	 winging	 is	 discussed	 further	 in	 Chapter	 27.	 For	 videos	 of
scapular	winging,	see	Video	Links	19.1	and	19.2.

When	the	trapezius	is	weak,	the	arm	hangs	lower	on	the	affected	side,	and	the
fingertips	touch	the	 thigh	at	a	lower	 level	than	on	the	 normal	side.	 Placing	the
palms	together	with	the	arms	extended	anteriorly	and	slightly	below	horizontal
shows	 the	 fingers	 on	 the	 affected	 side	 extending	 beyond	 those	 of	 the	 normal
side.	The	drooping	of	the	arm	and	shoulder	caused	by	trapezius	weakness	may
lead	 to	 pain	 and	 subjective	 sensory	 complaints	 in	 the	 extremity	 because	 of
traction	on	musculoligamentous	structures	and	possibly	sensory	nerves.	Loss	of
shoulder	 mobility	 may	 result	 in	 a	 secondary	 adhesive	 capsulitis,	 which	 further
restricts	motion.

The	 two	 trapezius	 muscles	 can	 be	 examined	 simultaneously	 by	 having	 the
patient	extend	his	neck	against	resistance.	Bilateral	paralysis	causes	weakness	of
neck	extension.	The	patient	cannot	raise	his	chin,	and	the	head	may	tend	to	fall
forward	 (Dropped	 Head	 Syndrome,	 see	 below).	 The	 shoulders	 look	 square	 or
have	 a	 drooping,	 sagging	 appearance	 because	 of	 atrophy	 of	 both	 muscles.	 The
relationship	of	the	trapezius	muscle	to	the	movements	of	the	shoulder	girdle	and
the	examination	of	the	functions	of	its	lower	fibers	are	discussed	in	Chapter	27.

DISORDERS	OF	FUNCTION

Weakness	 of	 the	 muscles	 supplied	 by	 CN	 XI	 may	 be	 caused	 by	 supranuclear,
nuclear,	 or	 infranuclear	 lesions.	 Supranuclear	 involvement	 usually	 causes	 at
worst	moderate	loss	of	function	because	innervation	is	at	least	partially	bilateral
in	 most	 patients.	 In	 hemiplegia,	 there	 is	 usually	 no	 head	 deviation,	 but	 testing
may	reveal	slight,	rarely	marked,	weakness	of	the	SCM,	with	difficulty	turning
the	face	toward	the	involved	limbs.	When	significant	SCM	paresis	is	present,	the
head	may	be	turned	away	from	the	weak	limbs,	indicating	weakness	of	the	SCM
ipsilateral	 to	 the	 lesion	 with	 the	 preserved	 SCM	 turning	 the	 head	 toward	 the
lesion.	 This	 occurs	 with	 lesions	 involving	 the	 corticobulbar	 fibers	 at	 any	 level
from	 the	 cortex	 to	 the	 brainstem.	 There	 may	 be	 depression	 of	 the	 shoulder
resulting	from	trapezius	weakness	on	the	affected	side.

Irritative	 supranuclear	 lesions	 may	 cause	 head	 turning	 away	 from	 the
discharging	hemisphere.	This	turning	of	the	head	(or	head	and	eyes)	may	occur
as	part	of	a	contraversive,	ipsiversive,	or	jacksonian	seizure	and	is	often	the	first
manifestation	of	the	seizure.	Extrapyramidal	lesions	may	also	involve	the	SCM

and	 trapezius	 muscles,	 causing	 rigidity,	 akinesia,	 or	 hyperkinesis	 (Chapter	 30).
Abnormal	 involuntary	 movements	 of	 the	 head	 and	 neck	 are	 seen	 in	 chorea,
athetosis,	dystonia	musculorum	deformans,	and	other	dyskinesias.	The	SCM	and
trapezius	are	frequently	involved	in	cervical	dystonia,	a	common	focal	dystonia
causing	 torticollis,	 anterocollis,	 or	 retrocollis	 (Chapter	 30).	 Cervical	 dystonia
occasionally	causes	hypertrophy	of	the	SCM	(Figure	19.5).

Lesions	 of	 the	 lower	 brainstem	 or	 upper	 cervical	 spinal	 cord	 may	 cause
dissociated	weakness	of	the	SCM	and	trapezius	muscles	depending	on	the	exact
location.	 Nuclear	 involvement	 of	 the	 SA	 nerve	 may	 occur	 in	 motor	 neuron
disease,	 syringobulbia,	 and	 syringomyelia.	 In	 nuclear	 lesions,	 the	 weakness	 is
frequently	accompanied	by	atrophy	and	fasciculations.

Infranuclear	or	peripheral	lesions—either	extramedullary	but	within	the	skull,
in	 the	 jugular	 foramen,	 or	 in	 the	 neck—are	 the	 most	 common	 causes	 of
impairment	 of	 function	 of	 the	 SA	 nerve.	 Tumors	 in	 the	 foramen	 magnum	 or
along	the	clivus	can	compress	CN	XI,	usually	with	concomitant	CNs	IX	and	X
involvement.	 Lesions	 of	 the	 cerebellopontine	 angle	 occasionally	 extend	 caudal
toward	 the	 foramen	 magnum	 and	 involve	 CN	 XI.	 Tumors	 more	 caudal	 may
extend	 upward;	 most	 common	 are	 neurinomas	 of	 the	 hypoglossal	 nerve.
Neurinomas	 involving	 CN	 IX	 or	 X	 may	 extend	 to	 involve	 CN	 XI.	 Other
intracranial,	extramedullary	neoplasms	include	meningiomas	and	neurofibromas,
which	may	extend	through	the	jugular	foramen	in	dumbbell	fashion.	Basal	skull
fractures,	meningitis,	or	processes	at	or	just	distal	to	the	skull	base	give	rise	to	a
number	 of	 syndromes	 reflecting	 involvement	 of	 the	 lower	 CNs	 (Chapter	 21).
The	 most	 common	 is	 the	 jugular	 foramen	 syndrome,	 in	 which	 the	 SA	 nerve	 is
involved	along	with	CNs	IX	and	X	(Chapter	21).	Such	conditions	affect	both	the
SCM	and	the	trapezius.

FIGURE	19.5	Marked	hypertrophy	of	the	left	sternocleidomastoid	because	of	cervical
dystonia.	 (Modified	 from	 Jankovic	 J,	 Tolosa	 E.	 Parkinson’s	 Disease	 &	 Movement
Disorders.	6th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2015,	with	permission.)

In	the	posterior	triangle	of	the	neck,	the	SA	nerve	is	very	vulnerable,	because
it	 lies	 superficially,	 covered	 only	 by	 skin	 and	 subcutaneous	 tissue.	 The	 nerve
may	be	affected	by	severe	cervical	adenopathy,	neoplasms,	trauma,	or	abscesses.
These	lesions	are	generally	distal	to	the	SCM	and	affect	only	trapezius	function.
The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 SA	 neuropathy	 in	 the	 posterior	 triangle	 is	 trauma,
often	 iatrogenic.	 Surgical	 trauma	 may	 be	 unavoidable,	 as	 in	 radical	 neck
dissection,	 or	 inadvertent,	 as	 in	 lymph	 node	 biopsy.	 The	 procedures	 most
commonly	 implicated	 are	 lymph	 node	 biopsy	 and	 carotid	 endarterectomy.
Intraoperative	 traction	 on	 the	 SCM	 may	 stretch	 the	 branch	 to	 the	 trapezius.

Intraoperative	monitoring	may	decrease	the	likelihood	of	injury.	In	one	series	of
111	patients	with	SA	injury,	93%	were	iatrogenic	and	80%	of	those	injuries	were
from	lymph	node	biopsy.

Traction	 injury	 may	 occur	 when	 the	 shoulder	 is	 pulled	 down	 and	 the	 head
turned	in	the	opposite	direction.	Carrying	heavy	loads	on	the	shoulder	may	cause
SA	 injury	 because	 of	 local	 trauma	 or	 stretch.	 Other	 causes	 of	 SA	 neuropathy
include	 jugular	 vein	 cannulation,	 upper	 cervical	 spine	 hyperextension	 injury,
cervical	 internal	 carotid	 artery	 dissection,	 neuralgic	 amyotrophy	 (Parsonage-
Turner	syndrome),	radiotherapy,	coronary	artery	bypass	surgery,	human	bites	to
the	 neck,	 shoulder	 dislocation,	 attempted	 hanging,	 mononeuritis	 multiplex,	 and
nerve	tumors	such	as	schwannoma	or	neurinoma.

Spontaneous,	 idiopathic	 cases	 of	 isolated	 SA	 palsy,	 often	 benign	 and	 self-
limited,	are	likely	comparable	to	similar	focal	neuropathies,	such	as	Bell’s	palsy
or	 long	 thoracic	 nerve	 palsy,	 or	 may	 represent	 a	 restricted	 type	 of	 neuralgic
amyotrophy.	 In	 these	 cases,	 the	 onset	 is	 typically	 sudden	 with	 pain	 in	 the
posterior	triangle,	which	resolves	and	is	followed	by	SA	palsy.

Neuromuscular	disorders	that	 affect	the	SCM	and	trapezius	muscles	include
anterior	 horn	 cell	 disease,	 myasthenia	 gravis,	 inflammatory	 myopathies,	 and
facioscapulohumeral	dystrophy.	Atrophy	and	weakness	of	both	SCM	muscles	is
a	 prominent	 feature	 of	 myotonic	 dystrophy	 (Figure	 19.6).	 The	 “dropped	 head
syndrome,”	characterized	by	severe	neck	extensor	weakness	and	an	inability	to
hold	 the	 head	 up,	 occurs	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 neuromuscular	 disorders	 (Box	 19.2,
Figure	19.7).

Patients	 with	 traumatic	 SA	 neuropathies	 generally	 have	 poorer	 long-term
outcomes	 than	 those	 with	 neuropathies	 of	 other	 etiologies.	 Dominant	 limb
involvement,	 impaired	 arm	 abduction,	 and	 scapular	 winging	 are	 all	 associated
with	a	poor	outcome.	Trapezius	weakness	may	lead	to	drooping	of	the	shoulder
with	resultant	compression	of	the	neurovascular	bundle	at	the	thoracic	outlet.

FIGURE	 19.6	 A	 patient	 with	 myotonic	 dystrophy.	 There	 is	 atrophy	 of	 the	 SCM
muscles.

BOX	19.2

Dropped	Head	Syndrome

Severe	weakness	of	the	neck	extensors	leads	to	an	inability	to	hold	the	head
up.	 The	 most	 common	 causes	 of	 the	 dropped	 head	 syndrome	 (head	 ptosis,
inflammatory	 myopathy,	 ALS,	 and
floppy	 head,	 camptocormia)	 are	
myasthenia	gravis.	In	these	conditions,	posterior	paraspinal	muscle	weakness
can	 occur	 early	 and	 selectively,	 and	 head	 drop	 may	 be	 the	 presenting
manifestation	 of	 the	 disease.	 It	 is	 common	 in	 the	 later	 stages	 of
facioscapulohumeral	dystrophy	and	some	forms	of	spinal	muscular	atrophy.
Some	cases	are	due	to	a	relatively	benign	isolated	neck	extensor	myopathy,
an	 idiopathic	 restricted	 noninflammatory	 myopathy.	 The	 “bent	 spine
syndrome,”	 related	 to	 thoracic	 paraspinal	 weakness,	 may	 cause	 a	 similar
head	posture.

Rare	 causes	

include	 adult-onset	 acid	 maltase	 deficiency,	 chronic
inflammatory	 demyelinating	 polyneuropathy,	 desmin	 myopathy,	 nemaline

myopathy,	

hypothyroid	

mitochondrial	

myopathy,
myopathy,	
hyperparathyroidism,	 Lambert-Eaton	 syndrome,	 myasthenia	 gravis,	 and
myotonic	dystrophy.	Dropped	head	syndrome	from	neck	extensor	weakness
may	be	confused	with	anterocollis	because	of	cervical	dystonia.	This	flexed
neck	 posture	 is	 also	 common	 in	 Parkinson’s	 disease,	 but	 neck	 extension
strength	 is	 unimpaired.	 Dropped	 head	 syndrome	 has	 also	 been	 reported	 in
syringomyelia.

FIGURE	 19.7	 Dropped	 head	 syndrome	 due	 to	 isolated	 neck	 extensor	 myopathy.
(From	 Katz	 JS,	 Wolfe	 GI,	 Burns	 DK,	 et	 al.	 Isolated	 neck	 extensor	 myopathy:	 a
common	cause	of	dropped	head	syndrome.	Neurology	1996;46[4]:917–921.)

Video	Links

Video	Link	19.1.	Scapular	winging.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=dfTe0nPclDE

Video	Link	19.2.	Scapular	winging.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Scapular_winging

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Al-Shekhlee	 A,	 Katirji	 B.	 Spinal	 accessory	 neuropathy,	 droopy	 shoulder,	 and

thoracic	outlet	syndrome.	Muscle	Nerve	2003;28:383–385.

Askmark	 H,	 Olsson	 Y,	 Rossitti	 S.	 Treatable	 dropped	 head	 syndrome	 in

hypothyroidism.	Neurology	2000;55:896–897.

Barbagallo	G,	Arabia	G,	Valentino	P,	et	al.	Anti-GAD-associated	inflammatory
myopathy	presenting	with	dropped	head	syndrome.	Neurol	Sci	2015;36:1517–
1519.

Berardelli	 A,	 Priori	 A.	 Corticobulbar	 and	 corticospinal	 projections	 to	 neck
muscle	 motoneurons	 in	 man.	 A	 functional	 study	 with	 magnetic	 and	 electric
transcranial	brain	stimulation.	Exp	Brain	Res	1991;87:402–406.

Berry	H,	Ea	M,	Mrazek	AC.	Accessory	nerve	palsy:	a	review	of	23	cases.	Can	J

Neurol	Sci	1991;18:337.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

D’Amelio	 M,	 Di	 Benedetto	 N,	 Ragonese	 P,	 et	 al.	 Dropped	 head	 as	 an	 unusual

presenting	sign	of	myasthenia	gravis.	Neurol	Sci	2007;28:104–106.

DeToledo	 JC,	 David	 NJ.	 Innervation	 of	 the	 sternocleidomastoid	 and	 trapezius

muscles	by	the	accessory	nucleus.	J	Neuroophthalmol	2001;21:214–216.

DeToledo	 JC,	 Dow	 R.	 Sternomastoid	 function	 during	 hemispheric	 suppression
by	amytal:	insights	into	the	inputs	to	the	spinal	accessory	nerve	nucleus.	Mov
Disord	1998;13:809–812.

Dominick	 J,	 Sheean	 G,	 Schleimer	 J,	 et	 al.	 Response	 of	 the	 dropped	 head/bent
spine	syndrome	to	treatment	with	intravenous	immunoglobulin.	Muscle	Nerve
2006;33:824–826.

Fitzgerald	T.	Sternomastoid	paradox.	Clin	Anat	2001;14:330–331.
Friedenberg	 SM,	 Zimprich	 T,	 Harper	 CM.	 The	 natural	 history	 of	 long	 thoracic

and	spinal	accessory	neuropathies.	Muscle	Nerve	2002;25:535–539.

Gandevia	SC,	Applegate	C.	Activation	of	neck	muscles	from	the	human	motor

cortex.	Brain	1988;111:801–813.

Goh	KJ,	Wong	KT,	Tan	CT.	Myopathic	dropped	head	syndrome:	a	syndrome	of

mixed	aetiology.	J	Clin	Neurosci	2000;7:334–336.

Hayward	 R.	 Observations	 on	 the	 innervation	 of	 the	 sternomastoid	 muscle.	 J

Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1986;49:951–953.

Kastrup	A,	Gdynia	HJ,	Nagele	T,	et	al.	Dropped-head	syndrome	due	to	steroid
responsive	focal	myositis:	a	case	report	and	review	of	the	literature.	J	Neurol
Sci	2008;267:162–165.

Katz	JS,	Wolfe	GI,	Burns	DK,	et	al.	Isolated	neck	extensor	myopathy:	a	common

cause	of	dropped	head	syndrome.	Neurology	1996;46:917–921.

Kierner	AC,	Zelenka	I,	Heller	S,	et	al.	Surgical	anatomy	of	the	spinal	accessory
nerve	 and	 the	 trapezius	 branches	 of	 the	 cervical	 plexus.	 Arch	 Surg
2000;135:1428–1431.

Kim	 DH,	 Cho	 YJ,	 Tiel	 RL,	 et	 al.	 Surgical	 outcomes	 of	 111	 spinal	 accessory

nerve	injuries.	Neurosurgery	2003;53:1106–1112.

Lachman	 N,	 Acland	 RD,	 Rosse	 C.	 Anatomical	 evidence	 for	 the	 absence	 of	 a
morphologically	distinct	cranial	root	of	the	accessory	nerve	in	man.	Clin	Anat
2002;15:4–10.

London	 J,	 London	 NJ,	 Kay	 SP.	 Iatrogenic	 accessory	 nerve	 injury.	 Ann	 R	 Coll

Surg	Engl	1996;78:146–150.

Lu	L,	Haman	SP,	Ebraheim	NA.	Vulnerability	of	the	spinal	accessory	nerve	in
the	posterior	triangle	of	the	neck:	a	cadaveric	study.	Orthopedics	2002;25:71–
74.

Manon-Espaillat	R,	Ruff	RL.	Dissociated	weakness	of	sternocleidomastoid	and

trapezius	muscles	with	lesions	in	the	CNS.	Neurology	1988;38:796–797.
Massey	EW.	Spinal	accessory	nerve	lesions.	Semin	Neurol	2009;29:82–84.
Matz	 PE,	 Barbaro	 NM.	 Diagnosis	 and	 treatment	 of	 iatrogenic	 spinal	 accessory

nerve	injury.	Am	Surg	1996;62:682–685.

Midwinter	 K,	 Willatt	 D.	 Accessory	 nerve	 monitoring	 and	 stimulation	 during

neck	surgery.	J	Laryngol	Otol	2002;116:272–274.

Mokri	 B,	 Silvert	 PL,	 Schievink	 WI,	 et	 al.	 Cranial	 nerve	 palsy	 in	 spontaneous
dissection	of	the	extracranial	internal	carotid	artery.	Neurology	1996;46:356–
359.

Nalini	A,	Ravishankar	S.	“Dropped	head	syndrome”	in	syringomyelia:	report	of

two	cases.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2005;76:290–291.
Nori	 S,	 Soo	 KC,	 Green	 RF,	 et	 al.	 Utilization	 of	

intraoperative
electroneurography	 to	 understand	 the	 innervation	 of	 the	 trapezius	 muscle.
Muscle	Nerve	1997;20:279–285.

Ortiz	 O,	 Reed	 L.	 Spinal	 accessory	 nerve	 schwannoma	 involving	 the	 jugular

foramen.	AJNR	Am	J	Neuroradiol	1995;16:986–989.

Parent	 A.	 Carpenter’s	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 9th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &

Wilkins,	1996.

Patten	 C,	 Hillel	 AD.	 The	 11th	 nerve	 syndrome.	 Accessory	 nerve	 palsy	 or
adhesive	capsulitis?	Arch	Otolaryngol	Head	Neck	Surg	1993;119:215–220.
Pierre	 PA,	 Laterre	 CE,	 Van	 den	 Bergh	 PY.	 Neuralgic	 amyotrophy	 with
involvement	of	cranial	nerves	IX,	X,	XI	and	XII.	Muscle	Nerve	1990;13:704–
707.

Rescigno	 JA,	 Felice	 KJ.	 Spinal	 accessory	 mononeuropathy	 following	 posterior

fossa	decompression	surgery.	Acta	Neurol	Scand	2002;105:326–329.

Rymanowski	 JV,	 Twydell	 PT.	 Treatable	 dropped	 head	 syndrome	

in

hyperparathyroidism.	Muscle	Nerve	2009;39:409–410.

Sweeney	 PJ,	 Wilbourn	 AJ.	 Spinal	 accessory	 (11th)	 nerve	 palsy	 following

endarterectomy.	Neurology	1992;42:674–675.

Takeshi	Y,	Mai	Y,	Kinjo	M,	et	al.	Dropped	head	syndrome	and	the	presence	of
rimmed	 vacuoles	 in	 a	 muscle	 biopsy	 in	 scleroderma-polymyositis	 overlap
syndrome	associated	with	anti-Ku	antibody.	Intern	Med	2018;57(6):887–891.
Ueda	 T,	 Kanda	 F,	 Kobessho	 H,	 et	 al.	 “Dropped	 head	 syndrome”	 caused	 by

Lambert-Eaton	myasthenic	syndrome.	Muscle	Nerve	2009;40:134–136.

Uemura	 M,	 Kosaka	 T,	 Shimohata	 T,	 et	 al.	 Dropped	 head	 syndrome	 in
amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis.	 Amyotroph	 Lateral	 Scler	 Frontotemporal
Degener	2013;14:232–233.

Umapathi	 T,	 Chaudhry	 V,	 Cornblath	 D,	 et	 al.	 Head	 drop	 and	 camptocormia.	 J

Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2002;73:1–7.

Vengalil	S,	Preethish-Kumar	V,	Polavarapu	K,	et	al.	Fatty	acid	oxidation	defects
presenting	 as	 primary	 myopathy	 and	 prominent	 dropped	 head	 syndrome.
Neuromuscul	Disord	2017;27:986–996.

Willoughby	EW,	Anderson	NE.	Lower	cranial	nerve	motor	function	in	unilateral
vascular	lesions	of	the	cerebral	hemisphere.	Br	Med	J	1984;289:791–794.
Wills	AJ,	Sawle	GV.	Accessory	nerve	palsies.	Pract	Neurol	2010;10:191–194.
Wilson-Pauwels	L,	Akesson	EJ,	Stewart	PA,	et	al.	Cranial	Nerves	in	Health	and

Disease.	2nd	ed.	Toronto:	BC	Decker,	2002.

Pestronk	

A.	

Neuromuscular	

home	

page.	

Available	

at:

http://neuromuscular.wustl.edu

CHAPTER	20

The	Hypoglossal	Nerve

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

The	hypoglossal	nerve	(CN	XII)	is	a	purely	motor	nerve,	supplying	the	tongue.
Its	cells	of	origin	are	in	the	hypoglossal	nuclei,	which	are	upward	extensions	of
the	 anterior	 gray	 columns	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord;	 they	 consist	 of	 large,	 multipolar
cells,	similar	to	the	anterior	horn	motoneurons.	The	paired	nuclei	extend	almost
the	 entire	 length	 of	 the	 medulla	 just	 beneath	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle,
close	to	the	midline,	under	the	medial	aspect	of	the	hypoglossal	trigone	(Figure
20.1).	 The	 nucleus	 is	 somatotopically	 organized,	 with	 different	 cell	 groups
innervating	 different	 tongue	muscles.	From	rostral	to	caudal,	the	innervation	is
intrinsic	 tongue	 muscles,	 then	 genioglossus,	 hyoglossus,	 and	 styloglossus.
Numerous	 fibers	 connect	 the	 nuclei	 of	 the	 two	 sides.	 The	 axons	 stream
ventrolaterally	 through	 the	 reticular	 formation,	 just	 lateral	 to	 the	 medial
longitudinal	fasciculus	and	medial	lemniscuses,	and	the	nerve	emerges	from	the
medulla	 in	 the	 sulcus	 between	 the	 pyramid	 and	 inferior	 olive	 (preolivary	 or
ventrolateral	sulcus)	as	a	series	of	10	to	15	rootlets	on	each	side,	anterior	to	the
rootlets	of	CNs	IX,	X,	and	XI	(see	Figures	11.3	and	11.11).

The	 hypoglossal	 fibers	 gather	 into	 two	 bundles,	 which	 perforate	 the	 dura
mater	separately,	pass	through	the	hypoglossal	canal,	and	then	unite.	The	nerve
descends	 through	 the	 neck	 to	 the	 level	 of	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 mandible	 and	 then
passes	 forward	 under	 the	 tongue	 (hence	 its	 name)	 to	 supply	 its	 extrinsic	 and
intrinsic	muscles	(Figure	20.2).	In	the	upper	portion	of	its	course,	the	nerve	lies
beneath	 the	 internal	carotid	artery	and	internal	jugular	vein	and	near	the	vagus
nerve.	It	passes	between	the	artery	and	vein,	runs	forward	above	the	hyoid	bone,
between	the	mylohyoid	and	hypoglossus	muscles,	and	breaks	up	into	a	number
of	fibers	to	supply	the	various	tongue	muscles.	The	nerve	sends	communicating
branches	to	the	inferior	vagal	ganglion	and	to	the	pharyngeal	plexus.	At	the	base

of	 the	 tongue,	 it	 lies	 near	 the	 lingual	 branch	 of	 the	 mandibular	 nerve,	 which
provides	touch	sensation	to	the	anterior	two-thirds	of	the	tongue.

The	 branches	 of	 the	 hypoglossal	 nerve	 are	 the	 meningeal,	 descending,
thyrohyoid,	and	muscular.	The	meningeal	branches	send	filaments	derived	from
communicating	branches	with	C1	and	C2	to	the	dura	of	the	posterior	fossa.	The
descending	 ramus	 joins	 with	 fibers	 from	 C1,	 sends	 a	 branch	 to	 the	 omohyoid,
and	then	joins	a	descending	communicating	branch	from	C2	to	C3	to	form	the
ansa	 cervicalis	 (Figure	 20.2),	 which	 supplies	 the	 omohyoid,	 sternohyoid,	 and
sternothyroid	 muscles.	 The	 thyrohyoid	 branch	 supplies	 the	 thyrohyoid	 muscle.
The	 descending	 and	 thyrohyoid	 branches	 carry	 hypoglossal	 fibers	 but	 are
derived	mainly	from	the	cervical	plexus.

The	 muscular,	 or	 lingual,	 branches	 constitute	 the	 real	 distribution	 of	 the
hypoglossal	 nerve.	 The	 tongue	 has	 extrinsic	 and	 intrinsic	 muscles.	 CN	 XII
supplies	 the	 intrinsic	 muscles,	 and	 all	 of	 the	 extrinsic	 muscles	 of	 the	 tongue
except	 the	 palatoglossus,	 and	 possibly	 the	 geniohyoid	 muscle.	 The	 paired
extrinsic	 muscles	 (genioglossus,	 styloglossus,	 hyoglossus,	 and	 chondroglossus)
pass	from	the	skull	or	hyoid	bone	to	the	tongue.	The	genioglossus	is	the	largest
and	most	important	of	the	extrinsic	tongue	muscles.	It	originates	from	the	chin
(Gr.	geneion	“chin”)	and	inserts	into	the	tongue.	The	intrinsic	muscles	(superior
and	inferior	longitudinales,	transversus,	and	verticalis)	arise	and	end	within	the
tongue.	The	extrinsic	muscles	protrude	and	retract	the	tongue	and	move	the	root
up	 and	 down.	 The	 intrinsic	 muscles	 change	 the	 length,	 the	 width,	 and	 the
curvature	of	the	dorsal	surface	and	turn	the	nonprotruded	tip	from	side	to	side.
The	actions	of	the	tongue	muscles	are	summarized	in	Table	20.1.

The	cerebral	center	regulating	tongue	movements	lies	in	the	lower	portion	of
the	 precentral	 gyrus	 near	 and	 within	 the	 sylvian	 fissure.	 The	 cortical
representation	 of	 the	 tongue	 in	 humans	 is	 huge	 compared	 with	 other	 mammals
and	even	other	primates.	In	a	patient	with	a	small	cortical	lesion	causing	obvious
tongue	deviation,	the	lesion	by	magnetic	resonance	imaging	(MRI)	was	located
lateral	to	the	precentral	knob,	a	reliable	anatomical	landmark	for	the	motor	hand
area.	Therefore,	the	lesion	involved	the	most	lateral	part	of	the	precentral	gyrus,
lateral	to	the	precentral	knob.

FIGURE	 20.1	 Section	 through	 the	 medulla	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 decussation	 of	 the
medial	lemniscus.

The	supranuclear	fibers	run	in	the	corticobulbar	tract	through	the	genu	of	the
internal	 capsule	 and	 through	 the	 cerebral	 peduncle.	 Some	 corticolingual	 fibers
shift	 to	 the	 medial	 lemniscus	 in	 the	 pons.	 Other	 fibers	 leave	 the	 main	 ventral
pyramidal	tract	and	cross	the	midline	at	the	pontomedullary	junction	to	enter	the
hypoglossal	 nucleus	 from	 the	 lateral	 aspect.	 Supranuclear	 control	 to	 the
genioglossus	muscle	is	primarily	crossed;	supply	to	the	other	muscles	is	bilateral
but	 predominantly	 crossed.	 Some	 authorities	 feel	 the	 entire	 supranuclear
pathway	is	crossed.

The	 suprahyoid	 muscles	 also	 influence	 tongue	 movement	 by	 changing	 the
position	of	the	hyoid	bone.	The	geniohyoid	is	supplied	by	C1	fibers	traveling	in
the	 hypoglossal	 nerve.	 The	 other	 suprahyoid	 muscles	 are	 the	 mylohyoid	 and
anterior	 belly	 of	 the	 digastric,	 innervated	 by	 CN	 V,	 and	 the	 stylohyoid	 and
posterior	belly	of	the	digastric,	innervated	by	CN	VII.

Afferents	in	the	hypoglossal	nerve	are	primarily	proprioceptive,	but	there	may

be	 some	 lingual	 somatic	 afferents	 present	 as	 well.	 The	 neck-tongue	 syndrome,
consisting	of	pain	in	the	neck	and	numbness	or	tingling	in	the	ipsilateral	half	of
the	tongue	on	sharp	rotation	of	the	head,	has	been	attributed	to	damage	to	lingual
afferent	fibers	traveling	in	the	hypoglossal	nerve	to	the	C2	spinal	roots	through
the	atlantoaxial	space.

FIGURE	20.2	Ansa	cervicalis	(hypoglossi)	and	muscles	supplied	by	the	hypoglossal
nerve.

CLINICAL	EXAMINATION

The	clinical	examination	of	hypoglossal	nerve	function	consists	of	evaluating	the

strength,	 bulk,	 and	 dexterity	 of	 the	 tongue—looking	 especially	 for	 weakness,
atrophy,	 abnormal	 movements	 (particularly	 fasciculations),	 and	 impairment	 of
rapid	 movements.	 For	 a	 video	 of	 tongue	 fasciculations	 from	 the	 NEJM,	 see
Video	Link	20.1.	After	noting	the	position	and	appearance	of	the	tongue	at	rest
in	the	mouth,	the	patient	is	asked	to	protrude	it,	move	it	in	and	out,	from	side	to
side,	and	upward	and	downward,	both	slowly	and	rapidly.	Tongue	dexterity	can
be	tested	by	having	repeat	lingual	sounds,	as	in	la-la-la,	or	use	words	with	the	t
or	 d	 phoneme.	 For	 a	 demonstration	 of	 slow	 tongue	 movements	 and	 difficulty
with	labials	in	a	case	of	pseudobulbar	palsy,	see	Video	Link	20.2.	Motor	power
can	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 press	 the	 tip	 against	 each	 cheek	 as	 the
examiner	tries	to	dislodge	it	with	finger	pressure.	The	normal	tongue	is	powerful
and	cannot	be	moved.	For	more	precise	testing,	press	firmly	with	a	tongue	blade
against	 the	 side	 of	 the	 protruded	 tongue,	 comparing	 the	 strength	 on	 the	 two
sides.

TABLE
20.1

Muscle

Genioglossi

Actions	of	the	Extrinsic	and	Intrinsic	Tongue
Muscles

Action

Posterior	fibers	draw	root	of	the	tongue	forward	and
protrude	the	tip;	anterior	fibers	depress	and	retract
the	tongue	and	draw	it	back	into	the	mouth;	anterior
and	posterior	fibers	together	draw	the	tongue
downward	and	make	its	superior	surface	concave
from	side	to	side;	posterior	fibers	on	one	side	push
the	tongue	toward	the	opposite	side

Hypoglossi

Retract	the	tongue	and	depress	its	sides;	make	the

superior	surface	convex

Chondroglossi

Depressor	and	retractor,	sometimes	described	as	part

of	hypoglossi

Styloglossi

Aids	in	drawing	root	of	the	tongue	upward;	may	be

classified	as	an	extrinsic	tongue	muscle	but	is	more
closely	related	to	the	muscles	of	the	soft	palate;
innervated	by	the	vagus	nerve

Intrinsic	muscles
(superior	and
inferior
longitudinales,
transversus,
verticalis)

Mainly	concerned	with	altering	the	tongue’s	shape;
causing	it	to	shorten,	narrow,	or	curve	in	different
directions.	Both	longitudinales	shorten	the	tongue;
superior	longitudinalis	turns	the	tip,	pulls	the	tip	up,
and	makes	the	dorsum	concave;	inferior
longitudinalis	pulls	the	tip	down	and	makes	the
dorsum	convex;	transversus	narrows	and	elongates
the	tongue;	verticalis	flattens	and	broadens	it

When	 unilateral	 weakness	 is	 present,	 the	 tongue	 deviates	 toward	 the	 weak
side	 on	 protrusion	 because	 of	 the	 action	 of	 the	 normal	 genioglossus,	 which
protrudes	 the	 tongue	 by	 drawing	 the	 root	 forward	 (Figure	 20.3).	 The	 tongue
always	deviates	toward	the	weak	side	(see	Video	Link	20.3).	Whether	this	is
toward	or	away	from	the	side	of	the	lesion	depends	on	the	specifics	of	the	lesion.
There	 is	 impairment	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 deviate	 the	 protruded	 tongue	 toward	 the
opposite	 side.	 The	 patient	 cannot	 push	 the	 tongue	 against	 the	 cheek	 on	 the
normal	side	but	is	able	to	push	it	against	the	cheek	on	the	side	toward	which	it
deviates.	At	rest,	it	may	deviate	or	curl	slightly	toward	the	healthy	side	because
of	 unopposed	 action	 of	 the	 styloglossus,	 which	 draws	 the	 tongue	 upward	 and
backward.	 There	 is	 impairment	 of	 the	 ability	 to	 deviate	 the	 protruded	 tongue
toward	the	nonparetic	side	and	of	the	ability	to	push	it	against	the	cheek	on	the
sound	side,	but	the	patient	is	able	to	push	it	against	the	cheek	on	the	paralyzed
side.	Lateral	movements	of	the	tip	of	the	nonprotruded	tongue,	controlled	by	the
intrinsic	tongue	muscles,	may	be	preserved.	Because	of	the	extensive	interlacing
of	 muscle	 fibers	 from	 side	 to	 side,	 the	 functional	 deficit	 with	 unilateral	 tongue
weakness	may	be	minimal	except	for	difficulty	manipulating	food	in	the	mouth
and	an	inability	to	remove	food	from	between	the	teeth	and	the	cheeks	on	either
side.	Either	weakness	or	incoordination	may	impair	rapid	tongue	movements.

FIGURE	 20.3	 Infranuclear	 paralysis	 of	 muscles	 supplied	 by	 the	 hypoglossal	 nerve:
unilateral	 atrophy	 and	 deviation	 of	 the	 tongue	 following	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 right
hypoglossal	
from:
https://library.med.utah.edu/neurologicexam/html/cranialnerve_abnormal.html#25,	 by
Dr.	Paul	D.	Larsen.)

(Modified	

nerve.	

Facial	 muscle	 weakness	 or	 jaw	 deviation	 makes	 it	 difficult	 to	 evaluate
deviation	 of	 the	 tongue.	 Patients	 with	 significant	 lower	 facial	 weakness	 often
have	distortion	of	the	normal	facial	appearance	that	can	produce	the	appearance
of	tongue	deviation	when	none	is	present.	Protruding	the	tongue	may	cause	an
appearance	of	deviation	toward	the	side	of	the	facial	weakness.	Because	of	the

lack	of	facial	mobility,	the	corner	of	the	mouth	does	not	move	out	of	the	way	and
the	protruded	tongue	lies	tight	against	it,	making	it	look	as	though	the	tongue	has
deviated.	 Manually	 pulling	 up	 the	 weak	 side	 of	 the	 face	 eliminates	 the
“deviation.”	 It	 may	 help	 to	 gauge	 tongue	 position	 in	 relation	 to	 the	 tip	 of	 the
nose	or	the	notch	between	the	upper	incisors.

If	 the	 paralysis	 is	 not	 accompanied	 by	 atrophy,	 the	 tongue	 may	 appear	 to
bulge	 slightly	 and	 to	 be	 higher	 and	 more	 voluminous	 on	 the	 paralyzed	 side.
When	atrophy	supervenes,	the	loss	of	bulk	is	first	apparent	along	the	borders	or
at	the	tip,	and	the	tongue	may	take	on	a	scalloped	appearance	(Figure	20.4).	The
normal	slight	midline	groove	may	become	accentuated.	With	advanced	atrophy,
the	 tongue	 is	 wrinkled,	 furrowed,	 and	 obviously	 smaller.	 The	 epithelium	 and
mucous	membrane	on	the	affected	side	are	thrown	into	folds.	As	the	paralyzed
side	 becomes	 wasted,	 the	 protruded	 tongue	 may	 curve	 strikingly	 toward	 the
atrophic	 side,	 assuming	 a	 sickle	 shape.	 In	 bilateral	 paralysis,	 the	 patient	 can
protrude	 the	 tongue	 only	 slightly	 or	 not	 at	 all.	 Unilateral	 tongue	 atrophy	 can
sometimes	be	confirmed	by	palpation.

Progressive	 bulbar	 palsy	 and	 advanced	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 (ALS)
may	cause	atrophy	so	severe	the	tongue	cannot	be	protruded	and	lies	inert	on	the
floor	 of	
the	 mouth	 (glossoplegia).	 Atrophy	 may	 be	 accompanied	 by
fasciculations,	especially	in	motor	neuron	disease.	In	long-standing	myasthenia
gravis	 (MG),	 tongue	 atrophy	 may	 develop	 and	 lead	 to	 a	 triple	 furrowed
appearance	 with	 grooves	 paralleling	 the	 median	 sulcus	 on	 each	 side	 (trident
tongue,	 see	 Video	 Link	 20.4).	 With	 bilateral	 suprasegmental	 lesions,	 for
example,	primary	lateral	sclerosis,	the	tongue	may	be	of	normal	bulk	but	move
slowly.	 In	 some	 patients,	 the	 tongue	 is	 tremulous,	 and	 it	 may	 be	 difficult	 to
distinguish	 these	 fine,	 rapid	 tremors	 from	 fasciculations,	 especially	 when	 the
tongue	is	protruded.	Tremors	will	usually	disappear	when	the	tongue	is	lying	at
rest	 in	 the	 mouth,	 whereas	 fasciculations	 persist.	 Profuse	 fasciculations	 may
cause	the	tongue	to	have	a	“bag	of	worms”	appearance.

FIGURE	20.4	Tongue	atrophy	in	ALS.	(Reprinted	from	Louis	ED,	Mayer	SA,	Rowland
LP.	Merritt’s	Neurology.	13th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2016,	with	permission.)

In	 addition	 to	 fasciculations,	 other	 abnormal	 movements	 of	 the	 tongue
sometimes	occur.	Tremors	are	usually	accentuated	by	protrusion	of	the	tongue	or
by	talking.	Coarse	tremors	of	the	tongue	can	occur	in	parkinsonism,	alcoholism,
and	general	paresis;	a	fine	tremor	can	occur	in	thyrotoxicosis.	Chorea	may	cause
irregular,	jerky	movements	of	the	tongue,	and	often	the	patient	is	unable	to	keep
the	 tongue	 protruded	 (snake,	 trombone,	 or	 fly-catcher	 tongue).	 Athetosis,
dystonia,	habit	spasms,	and	tics	may	involve	the	tongue;	lingual	spasm	has	been
described	 in	 tetanus.	 The	 tongue	 is	 often	 prominently	 involved	 in	 orofacial	 or
buccolingual	 dyskinesias,	 which	 usually	 occur	 as	 a	 type	 of	 tardive	 dyskinesia
following	 the	 use	 of	 phenothiazines	 and	 other	 psychotropic	 drugs.	 Similar
dyskinesias	may	also	occur	in	patients	with	Parkinson’s	disease	related	to	the	use
of	levodopa	and	dopamine	agonists	and	in	Meige’s	syndrome.	The	bonbon	sign
is	a	dystonic	or	dyskinetic	movement	of	the	tongue	characterized	by	protrusion
or	lateral	tongue	movements	within	the	mouth	producing	a	bulge	in	the	cheek	as
if	 the	 patient	 were	 storing	 a	 piece	 of	 candy	 there.	 It	 is	 reportedly	 helpful	 in
distinguishing	tardive	dyskinesias,	where	it	is	present,	from	chorea,	where	it	is
not.

Morphologic	 changes	 in	 the	 tongue	 may	 be	 of	 diagnostic	 significance	 in
many	 medical	 conditions.	 Some	 disorders	 of	 neurologic	 interest	 include	 the
following.	 Ankyloglossia	 (tongue-tie)	 may	 simulate	 paresis.	 A	 neoplasm
involving	 one	 side	 of	 the	 tongue	 may	 hinder	 muscle	 contraction	 and	 cause	 the

tongue	 to	 deviate.	 Macroglossia	 may	 occur	 in	 hypothyroidism,	 Down’s
syndrome,	 amyloidosis,	 acromegaly,	 neurofibromatosis,	 sarcoidosis,	 GM1
gangliosidosis,	glycogen	storage	diseases,	Duchenne’s	muscular	dystrophy,	some
forms	of	limb	girdle	muscular	dystrophy,	polymyositis,	mucopolysaccharidosis,
and	 with	 local	 conditions	 involving	 the	 tongue,	 such	 as	 angioma,	 hamartomas,
and	lymphoma.	Macroglossia	can	also	occur	in	posterior	fossa	disease	and	after
posterior	 fossa	 surgery.	 Rarely,	 ALS	 may	 cause	 macroglossia	 because	 of	 fatty
infiltration.	 Tongue	 hypertrophy	 can	 result	 from	 conditions	 causing	 excessive
movement,	 such	 as	 lingual	 dyskinesias.	 Tongue	 pseudohypertrophy	 because	 of
denervation	has	been	reported.

The	 term	 atrophic	 glossitis	 refers	 to	 atrophy	 of	 the	 epithelium	 and	 papillae,
causing	 a	 smooth,	 glistening,	 often	 reddened	 tongue.	 There	 may	 be	 punctate,
erythematous	lesions	from	atrophic,	hyperemic	papillae.	There	is	no	neurogenic
atrophy	 of	 the	 musculature.	 When	 advanced,	 atrophic	 glossitis	 may	 cause	 pain
and	 swelling.	 Atrophic	 glossitis	 occurs	 in	 certain	 deficiency	 states,	 especially
vitamin	B12,	folate,	other	B	vitamins,	and	iron.	In	pernicious	anemia,	the	tongue
is	 smooth,	 slick,	 and	 translucent,	 with	 atrophy	 of	 the	 fungiform	 and	 filiform
papillae.	In	some	stages,	the	tongue	is	pale;	in	others,	it	is	red.	In	pellagra	and
niacin	deficiency,	the	tongue	is	smooth	and	atrophic;	acutely,	it	is	scarlet	red	and
swollen	and	may	have	ulcerations.	In	riboflavin	deficiency,	the	tongue	may	be	a
purplish	 or	 magenta	 hue,	 with	 prominent,	 edematous	 fungiform	 and	 filiform
papillae	that	resemble	cobblestones.

Fusion	and	atrophy	of	the	papillae	and	fissuring	may	cause	a	geographic,	or
scrotal,	 tongue.	 Melkersson-Rosenthal	 syndrome	 causes	 facial	 nerve	 palsy	 and
scrotal	tongue.	Geographic	tongue	also	occurs	as	a	benign	curiosity	of	unknown
etiology.	 Burning	 tongue	 (glossodynia,	 glossalgia)	 with	 no	 visible	 lesions	 may
occur	 from	 early	 glossitis,	 tobacco	 abuse,	 heavy	 metal	 intoxication,	 as	 a
menopausal	 symptom,	 and	 in	 pellagra.	 Xerostomia	 and	 local	 irradiation	 may
make	the	tongue	dry	and	sore.	Longitudinal	lingual	fissuring	occurs	in	syphilitic
glossitis.	 Ulcerations	 of	 the	 tongue	 may	 be	 seen	 in	 primary	 syphilis	 (lingual
chancre)	and	in	Behçet’s	disease.	The	tongue	is	often	bitten	during	generalized
tonic-clonic	seizures.

DISORDERS	OF	FUNCTION

Lesions	of	CN	XII	or	its	central	connections	may	cause	weakness	of	the	tongue.

There	 are	 no	 sensory	 changes.	 Unilateral	 weakness	 may	 cause	 few	 symptoms;
speech	 and	 swallowing	 are	 little	 affected.	 With	 severe	 bilateral	 weakness,	 the
tongue	cannot	be	protruded	or	moved	laterally;	the	first	stage	of	swallowing	is
impaired;	and	there	is	difficulty	with	articulation,	especially	for	linguals.	Rarely,
the	tongue	tending	to	slip	back	into	the	throat	may	cause	respiratory	difficulty.

Tongue	 weakness	 may	 result	 from	 a	 supranuclear,	 nuclear,	 or	 infranuclear
lesion.	Supranuclear	lesions	cause	weakness	but	no	atrophy,	and	the	weakness	is
rarely	severe.	Because	the	genioglossus—the	principal	protractor	of	the	tongue
—has	mainly	crossed	supranuclear	innervation,	the	tongue	protrudes	toward	the
weak	side	but	to	the	side	opposite	the	supranuclear	lesion.	Supranuclear	tongue
weakness	 may	 occur	 with	 a	 destructive	 lesion	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex	 or	 the
corticobulbar	 tract	 in	 the	 internal	 capsule,	 cerebral	 peduncle,	 or	 pons.	 Pontine
lesions	may	cause	supranuclear	tongue	weakness	depending	on	the	relationship
to	 the	 decussating	 corticolingual	 fibers.	 Medial	 pontine	 lesions	 tend	 to	 cause
contralateral	 tongue	 weakness,	 whereas	 lateral	 pontine	 lesions	 cause	 ipsilateral
tongue	 weakness.	 Medullary	 lesions	 may	 interrupt	 ipsilateral	 corticolingual
fibers.	In	a	large	series	of	patients	with	acute	unilateral	ischemic	strokes	above
the	lower	brainstem,	tongue	deviation	occurred	in	29%,	always	toward	the	side
of	limb	weakness;	it	occurred	most	commonly	in	patients	with	cortical	or	large
subcortical	 infarctions	 who	 also	 had	 facial	 and	 prominent	 upper	 extremity
weakness.

involving	

infarction	

Supranuclear	 lesions	 may	 cause	 dysarthria	 because	 of	 tongue	 weakness	 and
incoordination	(spastic	tongue).	The	dysarthria	is	spastic	and	tongue	movements
are	slow	and	irregular.	Isolated	dysarthria	has	been	reported	as	a	manifestation	of
lacunar	
the	 supranuclear	 corticolingual	 pathways.
Pseudobulbar	palsy	because	of	bilateral	upper	motor	neuron	disease	may	cause
bilateral	tongue	weakness;	the	tongue	may	appear	small	and	the	patient	may	be
unable	 to	 protrude	 it	 beyond	 the	 teeth.	 Patients	 with	 hemispheric	 lesions	 may
have	 apraxia	 of	 tongue	 movements	 and	 are	 often	 unable	 to	 protrude	 it	 on
command.	 Extrapyramidal	 disorders	 may	 cause	 slowing	 of	 tongue	 movements,
with	thickness	of	speech	and	difficulty	in	protrusion.

In	addition	to	weakness,	nuclear	and	infranuclear	lesions	cause	atrophy	of	the
involved	side.	The	tongue	protrudes	toward	the	weak	side,	which	is	also	the	side
of	 the	 lesion.	 Progressive	 nuclear	 lesions,	 such	 as	 motor	 neuron	 disease,	 often
cause	 fasciculations	 in	 addition	 to	 weakness.	 Any	 accompanying	 dysarthria	 is
flaccid	with	particular	difficulty	with	lingual	consonants.	Common	disorders	that
may	 involve	 the	 hypoglossal	 nucleus	 include	 neoplasms,	 vascular	 lesions,	 and

motor	neuron	disease.	Rare	disorders	include	syringobulbia,	abscess,	granuloma,
syphilis,	polioencephalitis	or	postpolio	syndrome,	and	infectious	mononucleosis.
Nuclear	 lesions	 may	 involve	 contiguous	 structures,	 such	 as	 the	 ascending
sensory	 or	 descending	 motor	 pathways.	 Progressive	 bulbar	 palsy	 is	 a	 form	 of
motor	 neuron	 disease	 where	 the	 disease	 begins	 in	 the	 bulbar	 motor	 nuclei;
hypoglossal	involvement	is	common.	In	X-linked	bulbospinal	muscular	atrophy
(Kennedy’s	disease),	the	bulbar	muscles	are	prominently	affected.	There	are	rare
forms	of	bulbar	motor	neuron	disease	in	childhood	(e.g.,	Fazio-Londe	disease).

Infranuclear	 lesions	 may	 involve	 the	 intramedullary	 fibers	 between	 the
nucleus	 and	 the	 point	 of	 exit.	 Except	 for	 motor	 neuron	 disease	 and	 similar
conditions,	 causes	 are	 generally	 the	 same	 as	 for	 nuclear	 lesions.	 In	 the	 medial
medullary	 (Dejerine’s,	 anterior	 bulbar)	 syndrome,	 or	 inferior	 alternating
hemiplegia,	 the	 lesion	 involves	 the	 exiting	 hypoglossal	 fibers	 and	 the
neighboring	 medullary	 pyramid,	 causing	 tongue	 weakness	 and	 contralateral
hemiparesis	 (Chapter	 21,	 Box	 21.1).	 A	 patient	 has	 been	 reported	 with
contralateral	 glossoplegia	 due	 to	 a	 ventromedial	 lesion	 of	 the	 upper	 medulla.
Lesions	of	the	medullary	tegmentum	may	involve	CNs	X,	XI,	and	XII	(Jackson’s
syndrome	 [Chapter	 21]).	 In	 Keane’s	 series	 of	 578	 cases	 with	 bilateral
involvement	of	a	single	CN,	hypoglossal	palsy	accounted	for	only	5	(0.9%);	of
these,	2	were	due	to	tumor,	1	was	vascular,	and	1	was	due	to	infection.	But	in	a
series	 of	 100	 cases	 of	 hypoglossal	 palsy,	 the	 nerve	 was	 involved	 bilaterally	 in
one-third;	tumor	and	trauma	accounted	for	the	majority.

Processes	 involving	 the	 extramedullary,	 intracranial	 course	 of	 the	 nerve
include	 disorders	 involving	 the	 meninges,	 such	 as	 infectious	 and	 neoplastic
meningitis,	 subarachnoid	 hemorrhage,	 neoplasms	 and	 other	 mass	 lesions	 (e.g.,
schwannoma),	 inflammation,	 and	 trauma.	 Processes	 involving	 the	 skull	 base—
such	as	basal	skull	fractures,	basilar	impression,	platybasia,	Chiari	malformation,
impaction	 of	 the	 medulla	 into	 the	 foramen	 magnum	 by	 increased	 intracranial
pressure,	 or	 dislocation	 of	 the	 upper	 cervical	 vertebrae—may	 affect	 the	 nerve
before	 it	 leaves	 the	 skull.	 Lesions	 along	 the	 clivus	 may	 cause	 bilateral
hypoglossal	palsies.	Combined	CN	VI	and	XII	palsies	are	usually	due	to	a	lesion
of	 the	 clivus,	 typically	 malignant,	 or	 to	 nasopharyngeal	 carcinoma.	 Lesions
within	 the	 hypoglossal	 canal	 are	 rare.	 Inflammatory,	 neoplastic	 or	 traumatic
lesions	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 occipital	 condyle	 may	 cause	 isolated	 hypoglossal
palsy	 and	 a	 characteristic	 pain	 pattern	 (occipital	 condyle	 syndrome);	 it	 is	 most
often	 due	 to	 metastatic	 disease	 to	 the	 skull	 base.	 Bilateral	 hypoglossal	 nerve
injury	may	occur	with	occipital	condylar	fracture.

Processes	 involving	 the	 extracranial	 course	 of	 the	 nerve	 include	 trauma	 of
various	 types,	 especially	 penetrating	 wounds	 (including	 surgery	 on	 the	 neck,
mouth,	 or	
tongue),	 carotid	 aneurysms	 (especially	 dissections),	 vascular
entrapment	 by	 the	 vertebral	 artery,	 tumors	 or	 infections	 in	 the	 retroparotid	 or
retropharyngeal	spaces,	deep	cervical	adenopathy,	cranial	irradiation,	and	tumors
involving	the	neck,	tongue	base,	or	salivary	glands.	Hypoglossal	nerve	palsy	can
also	 occur	 as	 an	 idiopathic,	 benign	 syndrome	 that	 resolves	 spontaneously.
Mechanical	
in	 aberrant	 regeneration,	 which	 causes
progressive	 difficulty	 with	 coordinated	 tongue	 movements.	 Rarely,	 primary
neural	tumors	involve	CN	XII	extracranially.	CN	XII	may	be	involved	with	other
lower	 CNs	 and	 the	 cervical	 sympathetics	 in	 lesions	 in	 the	 retroparotid	 space
(Collet-Sicard	 or	 Villaret	 syndromes,	 Chapter	 21).	 CN	 XII	 may	 be	 involved
unilaterally	 or	 bilaterally	 in	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome,	 hereditary	 neuropathy
with	 liability	 to	 pressure	 palsies,	 and	 related	 polyneuropathies.	 Tongue
involvement	 can	 occur	 in	 Lewis-Sumner	 syndrome	 and	 multifocal	 motor
neuropathy,	causing	confusion	with	ALS.

lesions	 may	 result	

Except	 for	 MG,	 neuromuscular	 junction	 disorders	 and	 myopathies	 rarely
involve	 the	 tongue	 to	 any	 clinically	 significant	 degree.	 Tongue	 weakness	 and
fatigability	may	occur	in	MG	but	generally	only	with	severe	involvement.	The
triple	 furrowed	 appearance	 is	 characteristic	 (see	 above).	 It	 is	 often	 difficult	 to
separate	 bulbar	 weakness	 because	 of	 MG	 from	 that	 due	 to	 early	 motor	 neuron
disease.

The	tongue	may	be	involved	in	myotonic	disorders,	although	it	rarely	causes
any	 symptoms.	 One	 way	 to	 test	 for	 myotonia	 is	 to	 place	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 tongue
blade	 across	 the	 tongue	 and	 then	 percuss	 it	 sharply.	 Myotonia	 may	 cause	 a
temporary	focal	contraction	along	the	line	of	percussion,	causing	the	tongue	to
narrow	 sharply	 at	 that	 point	 (see	 Video	 Link	 20.5).	 The	 appearance	 of	 the
resulting	constriction	has	been	referred	to	as	the	napkin	ring	sign.

Seizures	 may	 involve	 the	 tongue,	 either	 as	 part	 of	 a	 jacksonian	 seizure	 or
rarely	 in	 isolation.	 Paroxysmal,	 rhythmic	 tongue	 movements	 have	 been
described	as	a	manifestation	of	subcortical	seizures.	The	tongue	may	participate
in	 the	 rhythmic	 movements	 of	 palatal	 myoclonus.	 Unusual	 episodic,	 rhythmic
tongue	 movements	 may	 occur	 after	 head	 and	 neck	 trauma	 (galloping	 tongue).
Serpentine	
incessant	 writhing
movements	(see	Sheehy	et	al.	for	video).	Tongue	myokymia	may	follow	cranial
radiotherapy	(see	Rison	and	Beydoun	for	video).

to	 a	 dyskinesia	 producing	

tongue	 refers	

