CONTENTS

SECTION	A

Introduction

1	Introduction

SECTION	B

History,	Physical	Examination,	and	Overview	of	the	Neurologic
Examination

2	Overview	of	the	Nervous	System

3	The	Neurologic	History

4	The	General	Physical	Examination

5	General	Outline	of	the	Neurologic	Examination

SECTION	C

Mental	Status	Examination	and	Higher	Cortical	Functions

6	Gross	and	Microscopic	Anatomy	of	the	Cerebral	Hemispheres

7	Functions	of	the	Cerebral	Cortex	and	Regional	Cerebral	Diagnosis

8	The	Mental	Status	Examination

9	Disorders	of	Speech	and	Language

10	Agnosia,	Apraxia,	and	Related	Disorders	of	Higher	Cortical	Function

SECTION	D

The	Cranial	Nerves

11	An	Overview	of	Brainstem	and	Cranial	Nerve	Anatomy

12	The	Olfactory	Nerve

13	The	Optic	Nerve

14	The	Ocular	Motor	Nerves

15	The	Trigeminal	Nerve

16	The	Facial	Nerve

17	The	Acoustic	(Vestibulocochlear)	Nerve

18	The	Glossopharyngeal	and	Vagus	Nerves

19	The	Spinal	Accessory	Nerve

20	The	Hypoglossal	Nerve

21	Brainstem	and	Multiple	Cranial	Nerve	Syndromes

SECTION	E

The	Motor	System

22	Overview	of	the	Motor	System

23	The	Motor	Unit	Level

24	The	Spinal	Cord	Level

25	The	Corticospinal	(Pyramidal)	Level

26	The	Extrapyramidal	Level

27	Motor	Strength	and	Power

28	Muscle	Tone

29	Muscle	Volume	and	Contour

30	Abnormalities	of	Movement

SECTION	F

The	Sensory	System

31	Overview	of	the	Sensory	System

32	The	Exteroceptive	Sensations

33	The	Proprioceptive	Sensations

34	The	Interoceptive,	or	Visceral,	Sensations

35	Cerebral	Sensory	Functions

36	Sensory	Localization

SECTION	G

The	Reflexes

37	Introduction	to	the	Reflexes

38	The	Deep	Tendon	or	Muscle	Stretch	Reflexes

39	The	Superficial	(Cutaneous)	Reflexes

40	Pathologic	Reflexes

41	Postural	and	Righting	Reflexes

42	Associated	Movements

SECTION	H

Coordination	and	Gait

43	Cerebellar	Function

44	Gait	and	Station

SECTION	I

The	Autonomic	and	Peripheral	Nervous	Systems

45	The	Autonomic	Nervous	System

46	Peripheral	Neuroanatomy	and	Focal	Neuropathies

SECTION	J

Orthopedic	Neurology

47	Neck	and	Back	Pain

48	Other	Musculoskeletal	Disorders

SECTION	K

Circulation	and	Cerebrospinal	Fluid

49	The	Blood	Supply	of	the	Brain

50	The	Ventricular	System	and	the	Cerebrospinal	Fluid

SECTION	L

Special	Methods	of	Examination

51	The	Examination	in	Coma

52	Miscellaneous	Neurologic	Signs

SECTION	M

Diagnosis	and	Localization	of	Neurologic	Disease

53	Diagnostic	Reasoning	and	Neurologic	Differential	Diagnosis

Index

VIDEOS

	The	following	videos,	marked	in	the	book	with	the	video	icon,	can	be	found

in	the	companion	eBook	edition.

Chapter	8
Video	8.1	Demonstration	of	incorporation	of	the	mental	status	examination	into
the	 physical	 examination	 using	 the	 Blessed	 Orientation	 Memory
Concentration	test.	(Courtesy	Nandedkar	Productions,	LLC,	EMG	on
DVD	Series:	Volume	XIII.)

Chapter	9
Video	9.1	A	patient	with	Broca’s	aphasia	due	to	a	middle	cerebral	artery	stroke.

Chapter	16
Video	16.1	Facial	synkinesis	following	Bell’s	palsy	and	after	attempted	surgical

reanimation.

Video	16.2	Hemifacial	spasm.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	Reich.)

Chapter	27
Video	 27.1	 The	 MRC	 scale.	 (Courtesy	 Nandedkar	 Productions,	 LLC,	 EMG	 on

DVD	Series:	Volume	XIII.)

Video	 27.2	 Discussion	 of	 the	 examination	 for	 pronator	 drift	 and	 its	 underlying

pathophysiology.

Video	 27.3	 Other	 subtle	 signs	 of	 hemiparesis,	 including	 forearm	 and	 finger

rolling.

Video	27.4	Abnormal	forearm	rolling	in	a	patient	with	a	left	hemiparesis.

Chapter	28
Video	28.1	Video	demonstrating	grip	and	percussion	myotonia	in	a	patient	with
myotonic	 dystrophy,	 followed	 by	 eyelid,	 grip,	 and	 percussion
myotonia	 with	 paradoxical	 myotonia	
two	 patients	 with
paramyotonia	 congenita.	 Paradoxical	 myotonia	 worsens	 with

in	

successive	contractions.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Richard	Barohn.)

Chapter	30
Video	 30.1	 Examples	 of	 parkinsonian	 and	 essential	 tremor.	 The	 parkinsonian
tremor	 is	 prominent	 at	 rest	 and	 dampens	 with	 the	 arm	 outstretched.
Essential	 tremor	 is	 an	 action	 tremor,	 usually	 not	 evident	 at	 rest	 but
appearing	with	the	hands	outstretched;	it	often	involves	the	head	and
the	voice.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Video	 30.2	 The	 first	 segment	 of	 the	 video	 demonstrates	 typical	 features	 of	 a
parkinsonian	gait	with	a	stooped,	flexed	posture;	short	steps;	en	bloc
turning;	 tremor;	 reduced	 arm	 swing;	 and	 impaired	 postural	 reflexes.
The	 second	 segment	 shows	 two	 patients	 with	 a	 festinating	 gait	 and
the	 third	 shows	 a	 patient	 with	 severe,	 frequent	 freezing	 of	 gait.
(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Video	 30.3	 Evolution	 of	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 over	 12	 years.	 (Courtesy	 Dr.

Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Video	30.4	Chorea	in	a	patient	with	Huntington’s	disease.
Video	30.5	Examples	of	blepharospasm	and	Meige’s	syndrome	(blepharospasm

with	oromandibular	dystonia).	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Video	 30.6	 Hemiballismus.	 The	 movements	 were	 unremitting	 and	 medically
intractable	but	resolved	after	pallidotomy.	(From	Suarez	JI,	Metman
LV,	 Reich	 SG,	 et	 al.	 Pallidotomy	 for	 hemiballismus:	 efficacy	 and
characteristics	 of	 neuronal	 activity.	 Ann	 Neurol	 1997;42:807–811.)
(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Video	30.7	Palatal	myoclonus	(microtremor).	(Courtesy	Dr.	Jason	Hawley.)
Video	30.8	Asterixis.	The	first	segment	shows	asterixis	of	the	hands,	the	second

segment	of	the	feet.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Robert	Laureno.)

Video	 30.9	 Fasciculations	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 end-stage	 amyotrophic	 lateral

sclerosis.

Chapter	32
Video	32.1	Demonstration	of	sensory	testing	with	nylon	monofilaments.

Chapter	38
Video	38.1	The	commonly	elicited	reflexes.
Video	38.2	Some	of	the	occasionally	useful	reflexes.

Chapter	40
Video	40.1	 Extensor	 plantar	 responses,	 including	 the	 Babinski,	 Chaddock,	 and

Oppenheim.	The	first	segment	also	demonstrates	Rossolimo’s	sign.

Video	40.2	Ankle	clonus.

Chapter	42
Video	42.1	Wartenberg’s	thumb	adduction	sign.

Chapter	43
Video	 43.1	 Cerebellar	 ataxia	 with	 titubation	 and	 severe	 appendicular	 ataxia

causing	intention	tremor	on	finger	to	nose	and	heel	to	shin	testing.

Video	43.2	Vestibular	and	cerebellar	past	pointing	and	the	stepping	test.

Chapter	44
Video	44.1	Composite	video	demonstrating	cerebellar	ataxia,	sensory	ataxia	in	a
patient	 with	 sensory	 neuropathy,	 spastic	 gait	 with	 pronounced
scissoring	in	siblings	with	hereditary	spastic	paraplegia,	gait	apraxia
in	a	patient	with	normal	pressure	hydrocephalus,	steppage	gait	due	to
dense	 bilateral	 foot	 drops	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease,	 and	 hemiparetic	 gait	 following	 stroke.	 (Cerebellar	 ataxia
video	 courtesy	 John	 C.	 Pearson,	 PhD,	 and	 Thomas	 Mathews,	 MD,
Neurological	 Teaching	 Videos,	 Wright	 State	 University	 Boonshoft
School	of	Medicine.)

Chapter	47
Video	47.1	Physical	examination	for	cervical	radiculopathy.
Video	47.2	Segment	one,	straight	leg	raising,	segment	two,	Waddell	signs.

SECTION	A	Introduction

CHAPTER	1

Introduction

The	importance	of	the	neurologic	examination	in	the	diagnosis	of	diseases	of	the
nervous	system	cannot	be	overemphasized.	In	no	other	branch	of	medicine	is	it
possible	to	build	up	a	clinical	picture	so	exact—with	regard	to	localization	and
pathologic	 anatomy—as	 it	 is	 in	 neurology.	 This	 requires	 not	 only	 diagnostic
acumen	 but	 also	 a	 thorough	 knowledge	 of	 the	 underlying	 anatomy	 and
physiology	of	the	nervous	system,	vascular	supply,	neuropathology,	psychology,
psychiatry,	 neuropharmacology,	 and	 related	 disciplines.	 In	 addition,	 neurologic
practice	 demands	 knowledge	 of	 neuroradiology,	 electroencephalography,
electromyography,	neurochemistry,	microbiology,	genetics,	neuroendocrinology,
neurotransmitters,	 immunology,	 oncology,	 epidemiology,	 and	 an	 understanding
of	the	neuromuscular	system.

Neurologic	 diagnosis	 is	 a	 correlation	 of	 data	 in	 the	 study	 of	 the	 human
nervous	 system	 in	 health	 and	 disease—a	 synthesis	 of	 all	 the	 details	 obtained
from	 the	 history,	 examination,	 and	 ancillary	 studies.	 Nervous	 tissue	 makes	 up
about	2%	of	the	human	body,	and	yet	it	is	supplied	to	all	portions	of	the	body.
Should	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 body	 tissues	 be	 dissolved,	 there	 remains	 an	 immense
network	 of	 fibers	 in	 addition	 to	 the	 brain,	 brainstem,	 and	 spinal	 cord.	 This
network	is	the	great	receptor,	effector,	and	correlating	mechanism	of	the	body.	It
acts	in	response	to	stimuli,	acclimates	the	individual	to	the	environment,	and	aids
in	 defense	 against	 pathologic	 changes.	 To	 understand	 man,	 one	 must	 first
understand	 the	 nervous	 system.	 Because	 the	 nervous	 system	 governs	 the	 mind
and	 mental	 operations,	 one	 cannot	 study	 psychology	 without	 knowledge	 of	 it.
Because	 the	 nervous	 system	 regulates	 and	 controls	 all	 bodily	 functions,	 one
cannot	 study	 disease	 of	 any	 organ	 or	 system	 of	 the	 body	 without	 a
comprehension	 of	 neural	 function.	 We	 are	 interested,	 however,	 not	 in	 studying
the	nervous	system	and	related	disease	alone	but	in	studying	the	person	whose
nervous	 system	 is	 diseased.	 The	 formulation	 of	 a	 case	 in	 terms	 of	 the

relationship	of	the	individual	to	the	disease	and	the	relationship	of	the	patient	to
his	or	her	associates	and	the	environment	is	as	important	as	providing	a	precise
diagnosis.	If	we	bear	this	in	mind,	we	can	most	effectively	aid	our	patients,	treat
their	 illnesses,	 restore	 them	 to	 health,	 and	 aid	 them	 in	 regaining	 their	 place	 in
society.

Neurologic	diagnosis	is	often	considered	difficult	by	the	physician	who	does
not	 specialize	 in	 clinical	 neurology.	 Most	 parts	 of	 the	 nervous	 system	 are
inaccessible	 to	 direct	 examination.	 Gowers	 observed	 “The	 nervous	 system	 is
almost	 entirely	 inaccessible	 to	 direct	 examination.	 The	 exceptions	 to	 this	 are
trifling.”	Many	practitioners	feel	that	all	neurologic	matters	belong	to	the	realm
of	the	specialist	and	make	little	attempt	at	neurologic	diagnosis.	However,	many
neurologic	disorders	come	within	the	everyday	experience	of	most	practitioners;
they	should	know	how	to	examine	the	nervous	system,	when	additional	studies
might	 be	 helpful,	 and	 how	 to	 use	 the	 data	 collected.	 Furthermore,	 neurologic
dysfunction	 is	 the	 first	 manifestation	 of	 many	 systemic	 diseases.	 Medical
diagnosis	 cannot	 be	 made	 without	 some	 knowledge	 of	 neurologic	 diagnosis.
True,	there	are	certain	rare	conditions	and	diagnostic	problems	that	require	long
experience	in	the	field	of	diseases	of	the	nervous	system	for	adequate	appraisal.
Neurophobia	 has	 been	 prevalent	 among	 medical	 students	 and	 nonneurologists
for	 decades,	 and	 the	 explosion	 of	 knowledge	 in	 neuroscience	 has	 if	 anything
made	it	worse.	However,	the	 majority	of	the	more	common	neurologic	entities
could	and	should	be	diagnosed	and	treated	by	the	primary	care	physician.

The	 neurologic	 examination	 requires	 skill,	 intelligence,	 and	 patience.	 It
requires	 accurate	and	trained	observation,	performed—in	most	 instances—with
the	help	and	cooperation	of	the	patient.	The	examination	should	be	carried	out	in
an	orderly	manner,	and	adequate	time	and	attention	are	necessary	to	appreciate
the	 details.	 Each	 clinician	 eventually	 works	 out	 a	 personal	 method	 based	 on
experience,	but	the	trainee	should	follow	a	fixed	and	systematic	routine	until	he
or	 she	 is	 very	 familiar	 with	 the	 subject.	 Premature	 attempts	 to	 abbreviate	 the
examination	 may	 result	 in	 costly	 errors	 of	 omission.	 A	 systematic	 approach	 is
more	 essential	 in	 neurology	 than	 in	 any	 other	 field	 of	 medicine,	 because	 the
multiplicity	 of	 signs	 and	 variations	 in	 interpretation	 may	 prove	 confusing.	 The
specific	 order	 that	 is	 followed	 in	 the	 examination	 is	 not	 as	 important	 as	 the
persistence	with	which	one	adheres	to	this	order.

It	 may	 be	 necessary	 on	 occasion	 to	 vary	 the	 routine	 or	 to	 modify	 the
examination	 according	 to	 the	 state	 of	 the	 patient	 and	 the	 nature	 of	 his	 or	 her
illness.	O’Brien	emphasized	a	focused	examination	driven	by	the	history.	If	the

investigation	 is	 long,	 the	 patient’s	 interest	 may	 flag.	 Or,	 he	 or	 she	 may	 fail	 to
understand	 the	 significance	 of	 the	 diagnostic	 procedures	 and	 the	 need	 to
cooperate.	 The	 purpose	 of	 the	 procedures	 may	 not	 be	 apparent,	 and	 he	 or	 she
may	view	them	as	unrelated	to	his	or	her	presenting	complaints.	It	may	help	to
explain	 the	 significance	 of	 the	 tests	 or	 their	 results	 or	 to	 use	 other	 means	 to
stimulate	interest	and	cooperation.	If	fatigue	and	lack	of	attention	interfere	with
testing,	 it	 may	 be	 advisable	 to	 change	 the	 order	 of	 the	 examination	 or	 to
complete	it	at	a	later	date.	It	is	important	to	bear	in	mind	that	slight	deviations
from	the	normal	may	be	as	significant	as	more	pronounced	changes	and	that	the
absence	 of	 certain	 signs	 may	 be	 as	 significant	 as	 their	 presence.	 On	 occasion,
clues	may	be	obtained	merely	by	watching	the	patient	perform	normal,	routine,
or	 “casual”	 actions—such	 as	 dressing	 or	 undressing,	 tying	 shoelaces,	 looking
about	the	room,	or	walking	into	the	examining	room.	Abnormalities	in	carrying
out	these	actions	may	point	to	disorders	that	might	be	missed	in	the	more	formal
examination.	 The	 patient’s	 attitude,	 facial	 expression,	 mode	 of	 reaction	 to
questions,	motor	activity,	and	speech	should	all	be	noted.

Interpretation	and	judgment	are	important.	The	ability	to	interpret	neurologic
signs	 can	 be	 gained	 only	 by	 carrying	 out	 repeated,	 thorough,	 and	 detailed
examinations,	 as	 well	 as	 through	 keen	 and	 accurate	 observation.	 In	 the
interpretation	of	a	reflex,	for	instance—or	in	the	appraisal	of	tone	or	of	changes
in	 sensation—there	 may	 be	 differences	 of	 opinion.	 The	 only	 way	 the	 observer
may	 become	 sure	 of	 his	 or	 her	 judgment	 is	 through	 experience.	 However,	 the
personal	equation	may	 enter	into	any	situation,	and	conclusions	 may	vary.	 The
important	factor	is	not	a	seemingly	quantitative	evaluation	of	the	findings	but	an
interpretation	or	appraisal	of	the	situation	as	a	whole.

The	 use	 of	 a	 printed	 outline	 or	 form	 with	 a	 checklist	 for	 recording	 the
essentials	 of	 both	 the	 history	 and	 the	 neurologic	 examination	 is	 advocated	 by
some	authorities	and	in	some	clinics.	With	such	an	outline,	various	items	can	be
underlined,	 circled,	 or	 checked	 as	 being	 either	 positive	 or	 negative.	 Numerical
designations	 can	 be	 used	 to	 record	 such	 factors	 as	 reflex	 activity	 or	 motor
strength.	Such	 forms	may	 serve	as	 teaching	exercises	for	the	student	 or	novice
and	 as	 time-saving	 devices	 for	 the	 clinician,	 but	 they	 cannot	 replace	 a	 careful
narrative	 description	of	 the	results	 of	the	 examination.	An	outline	of	the	major
divisions	of	the	neurologic	examination	is	given	in	Chapter	5.

No	 other	 branch	 of	 medicine	 lends	 itself	 so	 well	 to	 the	 correlation	 of	 signs
and	symptoms	with	diseased	structure	as	neurology	does.	However,	it	is	only	by
means	of	a	systematic	examination	and	an	accurate	appraisal	that	one	can	elicit

and	 properly	 interpret	 the	 findings.	 Some	 individuals	 have	 a	 keen	 intuitive
diagnostic	sense	and	can	reach	correct	conclusions	by	shorter	routes,	but	in	most
instances,	the	recognition	of	disease	states	can	be	accomplished	only	through	a
scientific	 discipline	 based	 on	 repeated	 practical	 examinations.	 Diagnosis	 alone
should	not	be	considered	the	ultimate	objective	of	the	examination,	but	the	first
step	 toward	 treatment	 and	 attempts	 to	 help	 the	 patient.	 The	 old	 saw	 that
neurology	 is	 long	 on	 diagnosis	 and	 short	 on	 therapy	 is	 outdated.	 The	 currently
available	
In
cerebrovascular	 disease,	 for	 example,	 we	 have	 gone	 from	 “if	 he	 can	 swallow,
send	him	home”	to	the	intra-arterial	injection	of	tissue	plasminogen	activator.	So
many	 agents	 are	 now	 available	 for	 the	 treatment	 of	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 and
multiple	 sclerosis	 that	 it	 almost	 requires	 subspecialist	 expertise	 to	 optimally
manage	these	common	disorders.	There	is	now	even	reason	for	optimism	in	such
previously	 hopeless	 situations	 as	 spinal	 muscular	 atrophy	 and	 amyotrophic
lateral	sclerosis.

spectrum	 of	 neurologic	

is	 overwhelming.	

therapeutics	

This	 revision	 of	 Dr.	 DeJong’s	 classic	 text	 begins	 with	 an	 overview	 of
neuroanatomy,	 including	 some	 of	 the	 underlying	 neuroembryology.	 The
overview	provides	broad	perspective	and	an	opportunity	to	cover	certain	topics
that	do	not	conveniently	fit	into	other	sections.	Chapters	3	to	44	are	organized	as
the	 neurologic	 clinical	 encounter	 typically	 evolves:	 history	 and	 the	 general
physical	examination,	followed	by	the	elements	of	the	neurologic	examination	as
commonly	 performed—including	 mental	 status,	 cranial	 nerves,	 motor,	 sensory,
reflexes,	 cerebellar	 function,	 and	 gait.	 Early	 editions	 covered	 the	 sensory
examination	 first,	 Dr.	 DeJong’s	 argument	 being	 that	 it	 required	 the	 most
attentiveness	 and	 cooperation	 from	 the	 patient	 and	 should	 be	 done	 early	 in	 the
encounter.	 The	 countervailing	 argument	 is	 that	 the	 sensory	 examination	 is	 the
most	 subjective	 and	 usually	 the	 least	 helpful	 part	 of	 the	 examination,	 and	 it
should	be	done	last.	We	are	more	inclined	toward	the	latter	view	and	hope	Dr.
DeJong	 would	 forgive	 the	 demotion	 of	 the	 sensory	 examination.	 The
neuroscientific	 underpinnings	 of	 the	 neurologic	 examination	 are	 discussed
before	the	clinical	aspects.	Dr.	DeJong’s	original	concept	for	his	textbook	was	to
incorporate	 the	 fundamentals	 of	 neuroanatomy	 and	 neurophysiology	 and	 to
highlight	pertinent	relationships	to	the	examination.	With	the	explosion	in	basic
neuroscience	 knowledge,	 these	 efforts,	 continued	 in	 this	 edition,	 appear
increasingly	 inadequate.	 The	 bibliography	 lists	 several	 excellent	 textbooks	 that
cover	 basic	 neuroscience	 in	 the	 kind	 of	 exhaustive	 detail	 not	 possible	 here.
Chapter	 53	 consists	 of	 a	 discussion	 of	 neurologic	 epistemology,	 diagnostic

reasoning,	and	differential	diagnosis.

There	are	a	number	of	other	textbooks	on	the	neurologic	examination.	These
range	 from	 the	 very	 brief	 The	 Four-Minute	 Neurologic	 Examination	 to	 more
comprehensive	 works	 intended	 for	 neurologic	 trainees	 and	 practitioners.	 Dr.
William	 DeMyer’s	 textbook	 is	 unfailingly	 entertaining	 and	 informative.	 Mayo
Clinic	Examinations	in	Neurology	continues	to	be	a	standard	in	the	field.	Dr.	Sid
Gilman’s	Clinical	 Examination	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System	 includes	 a	 discussion	 of
the	 underlying	 neuroanatomy.	 Dr.	 Robert	 Laureno’s	 Foundations	 for	 Clinical
Neurology	 provides	 unique	 perspective	 on	 the	 clinical	 encounter.	 Dr.	 Robert
Schwartzman’s	 Neurologic	 Examination	
the	 short
textbooks	by	Ross	and	Fuller.	Bickerstaff’s	Neurological	Examination	in	Clinical
Practice	was	recently	revised.	The	Neurologic	Examination:	Scientific	Basis	for
Clinical	 Diagnosis	 by	 Shibasaki	 and	 Hallett	 examines	
the	 scientific
underpinnings	 of	 the	 examination.	 Dr.	 DeJong’s	 text	 has	 long	 been	 the	 most
encyclopedic;	the	tradition	is	continued	in	this	edition.	In	this	revision,	we	have
included	more	illustrations,	and	now,	there	are	embedded	videos	as	well	as	links
to	relevant	outside	videos.

is	 excellent;	

likewise	

There	 is	 a	 wealth	 of	 online	 information	 about	 the	 neurologic	 examination.
Neurosciences	 on	 the	 Internet	 (Web	 Link	 1.1)	 is	 a	 valuable	 resource	 and
includes	 an	 excellent	 demonstration	 of	 the	 cutaneous	 fields	 of	 the	 peripheral
nerves.	The	site	Neuroexam.com	(Web	Link	1.2)	has	numerous	videos	and	is
by	the	 author	of	the	popular	Neuroanatomy	Through	 Clinical	Cases.	There	are
numerous	links	throughout	the	text	to	Neurosigns	(Web	Link	1.3),	a	collection
of	photos	and	videos	of	neurologic	examination	findings;	there	is	an	associated
youtube	channel,	(Web	Link	1.4).	The	library	at	the	University	of	Utah	houses
a	rich	repository	of	neurologic	examination	videos	(Web	Link	1.5).	The	Neuro-
ophthalmology	 Virtual	 Education	 Library,	 NOVEL,	 also	 at	 the	 University	 of
Utah,	 has	 an	 amazing	 collection	 of	 videos	 (Web	 Link	 1.6).	 NOVEL	 includes
collections	by	such	luminaries	as	David	Cogan,	Robert	Daroff,	William	Hoyt,	J.
Lawton	 Smith,	 and	 Shirley	 Wray.	 The	 Canadian	 Neuro-Ophthalmology	 Group
maintains	 an	 extensive	 collection	 of	 videos,	 fundus	 photos	 and	 other	 resources
(Web	 Link	 1.7).	 A	 series	 of	 examination	 videos	 is	 available	 on	 the	 EMG	 on
DVD	 Series:	 Volume	 XIII,	 Practical	 Neurologic	 Examination,	 by	 Nandedkar
Productions,	LLC	(Web	Link	1.8).

Ancillary	 diagnostic	 techniques	 have,	 through	 the	 years,	 played	 important
roles	 in	 neurologic	 diagnosis.	 The	 original	 electrodiagnostic	 techniques	 of
Duchenne,	Erb,	and	others	were	introduced	in	the	latter	part	of	the	19th	century.

by	

the	

neurologic	

introduction	

diagnosis	 was	

aided	
ventriculography,	

of
Later,	
pneumoencephalography,	
myelography,
electroencephalography,	 ultrasonography,	 angiography,	 electromyography,
evoked	 potential	 studies,	 nerve	 conduction	 studies,	 radioisotope	 scanning,
computed	 tomography,	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 (MRI),	 blood	 flow	 studies
by	 single	 photon	 emission	 computed	 tomography	 and	 inhalation	 methods,
positron	emission	tomography	(PET),	and	others.	In	previous	editions,	space	was
devoted	to	many	of	these	topics.	Some	of	these	techniques	have	been	abandoned.
The	 modern	 neurodiagnostic	 armamentarium	 has	 become	 complex	 and	 highly
specialized.	 We	 have	 moved	 from	 the	 era	 of	 air	 studies	 to	 an	 era	 of	 functional
MRI,	diffusion	weighted	imaging,	and	PET.	There	can	only	be	conjecture	about
what	new	technologies	may	be	in	use	before	this	textbook	is	next	revised.	The
reader	is	referred	to	the	many	excellent	textbooks	and	other	sources	that	cover
ancillary	neurodiagnostic	techniques.	The	focus	of	this	book	is	on	neuroanatomy
and	neurophysiology,	the	clinical	neurologic	examination,	clinical	reasoning,	and
differential	diagnosis.	Current	techniques	of	imaging,	electrodiagnosis,	and	other
laboratory	studies	have	revolutionized	the	practice	of	neurology.	However,	their
use	 must	 be	 integrated	 with	 the	 findings	 of	 the	 history	 and	 neurologic
examination.	 The	 practice	 of	 “shotgunning”	 with	 multiple	 tests	 is	 to	 be
discouraged.	 Such	 studies	 do	 not	 replace	 the	 examination.	 Not	 only	 is	 it	 poor
clinical	practice	but	also	the	resource	consumption	is	enormous.

The	development	of	ever	more	sophisticated	imaging	studies	of	the	nervous
system	 along	 with	 many	 other	 sensitive	 laboratory	 techniques	 has	 raised
questions	about	the	continued	need	and	utility	of	the	neurologic	examination.	In
a	provocative	paper,	I’ve	stopped	examining	patients!,	Hawkes	pointed	out	that
the	 examination	 adds	 little	 in	 some	 common	 conditions,	 such	 as	 migraine	 and
epilepsy.	 A	 flurry	 of	 correspondence	 followed.	 But	 in	 many	 other	 common
conditions,	 the	 examination	 is	 indispensable.	 In	 such	 common	 conditions	 as
Parkinson’s	disease	and	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis,	the	physical	examination
is	essential	to	the	diagnosis.	In	many	other	common	conditions,	the	examination
is	the	key	to	proper	diagnosis	and	management,	such	as	optic	neuropathy,	benign
positional	 vertigo,	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 and	 virtually	 all
neuromuscular	 disorders.	 In	 a	 recent	 case,	 extensive	 evaluations	 for	 gait
difficulties	 by	 a	 family	 physician,	 including	 lumbosacral	 MRI	 and	 CSF
examination,	 were	 unrevealing.	 Only	 when	 examination	 disclosed,	 spasticity
was	the	problem	solved	by	imaging	the	neck.	The	examination	determines	where
to	 point	 the	 scanner.	 Just	 as	 a	 normal	 EKG	 does	 not	 exclude	 myocardial

infarction,	normal	imaging	does	not	necessarily	exclude	neurologic	disease.	The
clinician	relinquishes	examination	skills	at	his/her	peril.

remain	

to	 hold	

The	neurologic	examination	will	not	become	obsolete.	It	will	not	be	replaced
by	mechanical	evaluations;	rather,	a	more	precise	and	more	directed	neurologic
examination	 will	 be	 needed	 in	 the	 future.	 The	 neurologic	 history	 and
in	 clinical	 evaluation.
examination	 will	
Neurodiagnostic	 technology	 should	 supplement	 clinical	 evaluation,	 not	 replace
it.	Nicholl	and	Appleton	recently	reviewed	the	role	of	the	clinical	examination	in
neurologic	 evaluation	 and	 emphasized	 that	 investigation	 should	 follow	 clinical
assessment,	not	precede	it.	Aminoff	reminds	us	that	it	is	important	the	art	of	the
clinical	examination	is	not	lost	in	the	era	of	precision	medicine.	The	neurologist
will	have	to	be	the	final	judge	of	the	significance	of	his	or	her	own	findings	and
those	of	special	studies.

important	

Web	Links

Web	Link	1.1.	Neurosciences	on	the	Internet.	http://www.neuroguide.com
Web	Link	1.2.	Neuroexam.com.	http://www.neuroexam.com/neuroexam/
Web	Link	1.3.	Neurosigns.	www.neurosigns.org
Web	Link	1.4.	Neurosigns	on	YouTube.

https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC7JOrAlJruTYA-
aZdSeK7bQ

Web	Link	1.5.	NeuroLogic	Exam	at	The	University	of	Utah.

https://library.med.utah.edu/neurologicexam/html/home_exam.html

Web	Link	1.6.	The	Neuro-ophthalmology	Virtual	Education	Library,	NOVEL.

https://novel.utah.edu/

Web	Link	1.7.	The	Canadian	Neuro-Ophthalmology	Group.

http://www.neuroophthalmology.ca/

Web	Link	1.8.	EMG	on	DVD	Series:	Volume	XIII,	Practical	Neurologic

Examination,	by	Nandedkar	Productions,	LLC.
https://www.nandedkarproductions.com/productdetail.php?id=21

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aminoff	 MJ.	 The	 future	 of	 the	 neurologic	 examination.	 JAMA	 Neurol

2017;74:1291–1292.

Benarroch	 EE,	 Cutsforth-Gregory	 JK,	 Flemming	 KD.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Medical
Neurosciences:	 Organized	 by	 Neurologic	 Systems	 and	 Levels.	 6th	 ed.

Rochester/New	 York:	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Scientific	 Press/Oxford	 University	 Press,
2017.

Biller	 J,	 Gruener	 G,	 Brazis	 PW.	 DeMyer’s	 The	 Neurologic	 Examination:	 A

Programmed	Text.	7th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education,	2017.

Blumenfeld	 H.	 Neuroanatomy	 Through	 Clinical	 Cases.	 2nd	 ed.	 Sunderland:

Sinauer	Associates,	2010.

Brazis	 PW,	 Masdeu	 JC,	 Biller	 J.	 Localization	 in	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2017.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Campbell	WW.	Pocket	Guide	and	Toolkit	to	DeJong’s	Neurologic	Examination.

Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2008.

Caplan	 LC,	 Hollander	 J.	 The	 Effective	 Clinical	 Neurologist.	 3rd	 ed.	 Shelton:

People’s	Medical	Publishing	House,	2010.

DeMyer	 W.	 Pointers	 and	 pitfalls	 in	 the	 neurologic	 examination.	 Semin	 Neurol

1998;18:161–168.

Fuller	 G.	 Neurological	 Examination	 Made	 Easy.	 5th	 ed.	 New	 York:	 Churchill

Livingstone,	2013.

Gilman	 S.	 Clinical	 Examination	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-

Hill,	2000.

Goldberg	 S.	 The	 Four-Minute	 Neurologic	 Exam.	 2nd	 ed.	 Miami:	 MedMaster,

Inc.,	2017.

Hawkes	CH.	I’ve	stopped	examining	patients!	Pract	Neurol	2009;9:192–194.
Hirtz	D,	Thurman	DJ,	Gwinn-Hardy	K,	et	al.	How	common	are	the	“common”

neurologic	disorders?	Neurology	2007;68:326–337.

Johnston	 SC,	 Hauser	 SL.	 The	 beautiful	 and	 ethereal	 neurological	 exam:	 an

appeal	for	research.	Ann	Neurol	2011;70:A9–A10.

Kandel	 ER.	 Principles	 of	 Neural	 Science.	 5th	 ed.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-Hill

Medical,	2013.

Lim	 EC,	 Ong	 BK,	 Seet	 RC.	 Using	 videotaped	 vignettes	 to	 teach	 medical
students	 to	 perform	 the	 neurologic	 examination.	 J	 Gen	 Intern	 Med
2006;21:101.

Louis	ED,	Pascuzzi	RM,	Roos	KL,	eds.	The	neurological	examination	(with	an
emphasis	on	its	historical	underpinnings).	Semin	Neurol	2002;22:335–418.
Massey	 EW,	 Pleet	 AB,	 Scherokman	 BJ.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A
Photographic	 Guide	 to	 Bedside	 Techniques.	 Chicago:	 Year	 Book	 Medical
Publishers,	Inc.,	1985.

Nicholl	 DJ,	 Appleton	 JP.	 Clinical	 neurology:	 why	 this	 still	 matters	 in	 the	 21st

century.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2015;86:229–233.

O’Brien	 MD.	 Use	 and	 abuse	 of	 physical	 signs	 in	 neurology.	 J	 R	 Soc	 Med

2014;107:416–421.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Ross	RT.	How	to	Examine	the	Nervous	System.	4th	ed.	Totowa:	Humana	Press,

2006.

Sanders	 RD,	 Keshavan	 MS.	 The	 neurologic	 examination	 in	 adult	 psychiatry:
to	 hard	 science.	 J	 Neuropsychiatry	 Clin	 Neurosci

from	 soft	 signs	
1998;10:395–404.

Schwartzman	RJ.	Neurologic	Examination.	Malden:	Blackwell	Publishing,	2006.
Warlow	 C.	 Why	 I	 have	 not	 stopped	 examining	 patients.	 Pract	 Neurol

2010;10:126–128.

Wartenberg	 R.	 The	 Examination	 of	 Reflexes:	 A	 Simplification.	 Chicago:	 Year

Book	Medical	Publishers,	1945.

Wartenberg	 R.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Selection	 for	 Office	 Use.

Chicago:	Year	Book	Medical	Publishers,	1953.

Weibers	 DO,	 Dale	 AJD,	 Kokmen	 E,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Examinations	 in

Neurology.	7th	ed.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	1998.

Ziegler	 DK.	 Is	 the	 neurologic	 examination	 becoming	 obsolete?	 Neurology

1985;35:559.

SECTION	B	History,	Physical
Examination,	and	Overview	of	the
Neurologic	Examination

CHAPTER	2

Overview	of	the	Nervous	System

The	 nervous	 system	 consists	 of	 the	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)	 and	 the
peripheral	nervous	system	(PNS).	The	nerve	roots	of	the	spinal	cord	connect	the
CNS	 to	 the	 PNS.	 The	 CNS	 is	 made	 up	 of	 the	 brain	 (encephalon),	 which	 lies
rostral	to	the	foramen	magnum,	and	the	spinal	cord	(myelon),	which	lies	caudal.
The	brain	is	made	up	of	the	cerebrum,	diencephalon,	brainstem,	and	cerebellum
(Figure	2.1).	The	cerebrum	(telencephalon)	is	the	largest	component	of	the	CNS.
It	consists	of	two	cerebral	hemispheres	connected	by	the	corpus	callosum.	The
diencephalon	 (L.	 “between	 brain,”	 “interbrain”)	 lies	 between	 the	 telencephalon
and	the	midbrain.	The	brainstem	connects	the	diencephalon	with	the	spinal	cord.
It	consists,	from	rostral	to	caudal,	of	the	midbrain,	pons,	and	medulla	oblongata.
The	cerebellum	(Latin	diminutive	of	cerebrum)	is	a	large,	fissured	structure	that
lies	posterior	to	the	brainstem.	It	is	composed	of	a	narrow	midline	strip	(vermis)
and	paired	lateral	hemispheres	and	is	connected	to	the	brainstem	by	the	superior,
middle,	 and	 inferior	 cerebellar	 peduncles.	 The	 spinal	 cord	 extends	 from	 the
cervicomedullary	junction	to	the	conus	medullaris.

NEUROEMBRYOLOGY

In	the	embryo,	development	of	the	nervous	system	begins	when	ectodermal	cells
start	to	form	the	neural	tube.	The	sonic	hedgehog	gene	is	vital	for	normal	CNS
development.	 It	 mediates	 a	 number	 of	 processes	 in	 development,	 including
differentiation	of	the	neuroectoderm.	The	neural	tube	begins	to	form	in	the	3rd
week	 and	 is	 completed	 by	 the	 4th	 week	 of	 embryonic	 life.	 The	 first	 stage	 in
neural	tube	development	is	a	thickening	of	ectoderm,	forming	the	neural	plate.	A
longitudinal	 fissure	 develops	 in	 the	 neural	 plate	 and	 progressively	 enlarges	 to
form	 the	 neural	 groove.	 Differentiation	 of	 the	 cephalic	 from	 the	 caudal	 end	 of
the	 neural	 groove	 is	 controlled	 by	 a	 signaling	 molecule	 called	 noggin.	 As	 the

groove	deepens,	its	edges	become	more	prominent	and	become	the	neural	folds.
The	folds	eventually	meet,	fuse,	and	complete	the	transformation	into	a	tubular
structure.	 The	 neural	 tube	 lies	 between	 the	 ectoderm	 on	 the	 surface	 and	 the
notochord	below.	The	cranial	part	of	the	neural	tube	evolves	into	the	brain,	and
the	 caudal	 part	 becomes	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 With	 closure	 of	 the	 neural	 tube,	 the
neural	crest—neuroectoderm	not	incorporated	into	the	neural	tube—lies	between
the	neural	tube	and	the	surface.	Neural	crest	cells	give	rise	to	the	PNS.	Cells	that
lie	ventral	in	the	neural	tube	develop	into	motor	cells,	and	those	that	lie	dorsal
develop	 into	 sensory	 cells.	 Sonic	 hedgehog	 is	 involved	 in	 this	 differentiation.
Retinoic	 acid	 is	 also	 important	 at	 this	 stage,	 and	 the	 use	 of	 retinoic	 acid
derivatives	for	acne	treatment	in	early	pregnancy	may	have	catastrophic	effects
on	the	developing	nervous	system.

Neuroepithelial	 cells	 in	 the	 wall	 of	 the	 neural	 tube	 form	 neuroblasts,	 which
develop	 into	 neurons,	 and	 glioblasts,	 which	 develop	 into	 macroglial	 and
ependymal	 cells.	 With	 further	 maturation,	 the	 neural	 tube	 wall	 develops	 three
layers:	 an	 innermost	 ventricular	 layer	 composed	 of	 ependymal	 cells,	 a	 mantle
(intermediate)	layer	consisting	of	neurons	and	macroglia,	and	an	outer	marginal
layer,	which	contains	the	nerve	fibers	of	the	neuroblasts	in	the	mantle	layer.	The
ventricular	layer	eventually	forms	the	lining	of	the	ventricles	and	central	canal	of
the	 spinal	 cord,	 the	 mantle	 layer	 becomes	 the	 central	 gray	 matter,	 and	 the
marginal	 layer	 becomes	 the	 white	 matter.	 Closure	 of	 the	 tube	 (neurulation)
separates	the	developing	nervous	system	from	the	surface	ectoderm,	forming	the
neurula	(the	embryo	at	19	to	26	days	after	fertilization).	Neurulation	begins	near
the	midpoint	of	the	neural	tube	and	advances	toward	the	anterior	(cephalic)	and
posterior	(caudal)	neuropores	at	either	end;	the	anterior	and	posterior	neuropores
are	 the	 last	 sites	 to	 close.	 Neurulation	 is	 complete	 by	 4	 weeks;	 afterward,	 the
CNS	 is	 a	 long,	 fluid-filled,	 tubular	 structure,	 and	 this	 basic	 configuration	 is
maintained	 throughout	 life.	 Defective	 neurulation	 is	 common.	 Neural	 tube
defects	(NTDs)	are	common	congenital	malformations	that	result	from	failure	of
normal	 neural	 tube	 closure	 during	 early	 embryogenesis	 (Box	2.1).	 Neural	 tube
closure	is	complete	by	the	end	of	the	first	month;	NTDs	happen	before	a	mother
knows	she	is	pregnant.

FIGURE	 2.1	 A.	 Gross	 brain.	 B.	 T1-weighted	 MR	 image.	 Approximately	 matched
midline	 sagittal	 sections.	 Sagittal	 T1-weighted	 MRI	 of	 the	 brain	 and	 upper	 cervical
spinal	 cord.	 Labels:	 1,	 septum	 pellucidum;	 2,	 corpus	 callosum	 (a,	 genu;	 b,	 body;	 c,
splenium;	 d,	 rostrum);	 3,	 cingulate	 gyrus;	 4,	 central	 sulcus;	 5,	 column	 of	 fornix;	 6,
quadrigeminal	 plate;	 7,	 quadrigeminal	 cistern;	 8,	 thalamus;	 9,	 cerebellum;	 10,
aqueduct	of	Sylvius;	11,	fourth	ventricle;	12,	medulla;	13,	pons;	14,	mammillary	body;
15,	 optic	 tract;	 16,	 olfactory	 area;	 17,	 gyrus	 rectus;	 20,	 parietal-occipital	 fissure;	 21,
calcarine	 fissure;	 49,	 midbrain;	 51,	 pineal	 gland.	 (Reprinted	 with	 permission	 from
Barboriak	 DP,	 Taveras	 JM.	 Normal	 cerebral	 anatomy	 with	 magnetic	 resonance
imaging.	 In:	 Ferrucci	 JT,	 ed.	 Taveras	 and	 Ferrucci’s	 Radiology	 on	 CD-ROM.
Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2003.)

the	 diencephalon.	 The	 hindbrain	 divides	

The	brain	develops	from	the	region	of	the	anterior	neuropore,	forming	three
and	 then	 five	 vesicles.	 First,	 there	 is	 segmentation	 into	 three	 parts:	 forebrain
(prosencephalon),	midbrain	(mesencephalon),	and	hindbrain	(rhombencephalon)
(Table	2.1).	 The	 forebrain	 then	 divides	 into	 the	 telencephalon,	 which	 becomes
the
the	 cerebrum,	 and	
metencephalon,	 which	 becomes	
the
myelencephalon,	which	becomes	the	medulla.	The	five-vesicle	stage	is	complete
by	 6	 weeks	 of	 embryonic	 life.	 The	 telencephalon	 then	 undergoes	 midline
cleavage	into	a	pair	of	 side-by-side	vesicles—primordial	hemispheres.	 Regions
of	 the	 telencephalon	 expand	 (evaginate)	 to	 form	 the	 cerebral	 hemispheres.	 The
neural	 tube	 lumen	 continues	 into	 the	 evaginations,	 forming	 the	 ventricular
system.

into	
the	 pons	 and	 cerebellum,	 and	

Failure	 of	 normal	 cleavage	 into	 two	 hemispheres	 results	 in	 distinctive
anomalies.	 Milder	 forms	 include	 arrhinencephaly,	 in	 which	 there	 is	 absence	 of
the	 olfactory	 bulbs	 and	 tracts,	 and	 agenesis	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum.	 Severe
cleavage	 failure	 results	 in	 holoprosencephaly,	 in	 which	 there	 is	 only	 a	 single
“hemisphere”	(alobar	prosencephaly),	or	a	partial	attempt	at	division	(lobar	and
semilobar	prosencephaly).	Prenatal	diagnosis	is	possible	using	sonography.	The

genes	 that	 control	 segmentation	 are	 also	 important	 in	 development	 of	 the	 face,
and	 some	 anomalies	 involve	 both	 the	 face	 and	 the	 brain,	 particularly
holoprosencephaly.	 Certain	 patterns	 of	 midline	 facial	 abnormality	 predict	 a
severe	brain	malformation.

Following	the	segmentation	and	cleavage	stages	of	neuroembryogenesis,	the
developing	nervous	system	enters	a	stage	of	cellular	proliferation	and	migration
that	is	not	complete	until	after	birth.	Neurons	in	the	germinal	matrix	proliferate
intensely	 and	 then	 migrate	 to	 different	 parts	 of	 the	 nervous	 system.	 Cells
destined	 to	 populate	 a	 specific	 brain	 region	 arise	 from	 a	 specific	 part	 of	 the
germinal	matrix.	Processes	that	interfere	with	normal	proliferation	and	migration
cause	 another	 set	 of	 congenital	 malformations	 that	 includes	 microcephaly,
megalencephaly,	cortical	heterotopia	(band	heterotopia,	double	cortex),	agenesis
of	the	corpus	callosum,	and	schizencephaly.	Three	major	callosal	abnormalities
have	 been	 identified:	 hypoplasia,	 hypoplasia	 with	 dysplasia,	 and	 complete
agenesis.	Finally,	the	brain	develops	its	pattern	of	gyri	and	sulci.	Defects	at	this
stage	of	neocortical	formation	produce	lissencephaly,	in	which	the	sulci	and	gyri
fail	 to	 develop	 (smooth	 brain);	 pachygyria,	 in	 which	 the	 gyri	 are	 thicker	 than
normal;	 and	 polymicrogyria,	 in	 which	 there	 are	 an	 excessive	 number	 of	 small
gyri.	 These	 abnormalities	 may	 affect	 all	 or	 only	 part	 of	 the	 brain.	 Typically,
children	with	these	malformations	have	developmental	delay	and	seizures.	Other
systems	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 these	 neuronal	 migration	 disorders,	 including	 eye
and	 muscle	
(muscle-eye-brain	 disease,	 Walker-Warburg	 syndrome,	 and
Fukuyama	congenital	muscular	dystrophy).	Modern	imaging,	including	prenatal
magnetic	resonance	imaging	(MRI),	may	identify	some	of	these	disorders.

BOX	2.1

Neural	Tube	Defects

type	 (anencephaly,	 encephalocele)	 and	 a	

Neural	tube	defects	(NTDs)	are	very	common.	They	may	be	divided	into	an
upper	
type	 (spinal
dysraphism).	Anencephaly	is	a	lethal	malformation	that	results	from	failure
of	 closure	 of	 the	 anterior	 neuropore.	 The	 brain	 fails	 to	 develop.	 The	 face
develops,	but	the	cranial	vault	does	not,	and	the	brain	may	consist	of	only	a
tangled	 knot	 of	 primordial	 central	 nervous	 system	 tissue.	 Anencephaly	 is	 a
common	 cause	 of	 stillbirth.	 There	 may	 be	 enough	 brainstem	 present	 to
support	vegetative	life	for	a	brief	period.	Failure	of	the	posterior	neuropore

lower	

to	close	normally	causes	congenital	malformations	affecting	the	lumbosacral
region.	 The	 most	 severe	 of	 these	 is	 myelomeningocele,	 essentially	 the
posterior	neuropore	equivalent	of	anencephaly.	The	posterior	elements	of	the
lumbosacral	vertebra	fail	to	develop,	the	spinal	canal	is	open	posteriorly,	and
the	 spinal	 cord	 and	 cauda	 equina	 are	 herniated	 dorsally	 into	 a	 sac	 that	 lies
over	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 lower	 back.	 The	 patients	 have	 severe	 neurologic
deficits	involving	the	lower	extremities,	bowel,	and	bladder.	When	the	defect
is	less	severe,	the	sac	contains	only	meninges	(meningocele).	A	mild	defect
of	posterior	neuropore	closure	results	only	in	failure	of	normal	fusion	of	the
posterior	 arches	 of	 the	 lumbosacral	 vertebra.	 Patients	 are	 neurologically
normal,	and	the	defect	is	seen	only	on	imaging	studies	(spina	bifida	occulta).
Spina	bifida	occulta	is	quite	common,	affecting	up	to	10%	of	the	population.
Incomplete	 defects	 of	 anterior	 neuropore	 closure	 cause	 similar	 defects
affecting	 the	 head	 and	 neck.	 An	 encephalocele	 is	 herniation	 of	 brain	 tissue
through	a	bony	defect	in	the	skull.	Encephaloceles	most	commonly	occur	in
the	occipitocervical	region	and	are	clinically	obvious.	When	they	involve	the
base	 of	 the	 skull	 (basal	 encephalocele),	 they	 may	 not	 be	 obvious.	 Cranium
bifidum	is	dysraphism	limited	to	the	bony	elements	of	the	skull,	most	often
the	occipital	bone;	it	is	the	cephalic	analogue	of	spina	bifida	occulta.	Arnold-
Chiari	malformations	may	involve	defects	in	closure	of	both	the	anterior	and
posterior	 neuropore;	 these	 complex	 anomalies	 are	 discussed	 further	 in
Chapter	21.

The	 pathogenesis	 of	 NTDs	

is	 multifactorial;	 both	 genetic	 and
environmental	factors	are	important,	and	the	pattern	of	occurrence	suggests	a
multifactorial	 polygenic	 or	 oligogenic	 etiology.	 Overactivation	 of	 sonic
hedgehog	 signaling	 has	 been	 implicated.	 There	 are	 significant	 geographic
differences,	for	example,	NTDs	are	very	common	in	Ireland.	Folic	acid	plays
a	 pivotal	 role	 in	 neuroembryogenesis.	 Genetic	 defects	 of	 the	 folate	 and
homocysteine	 pathways	 have	 been	 implicated	 in	 the	 etiology	 of	 NTDs;
periconceptional	 folate	 supplementation	 reduces	 the	 risk,	 and	 mothers	 of
affected	children	may	have	elevated	plasma	homocysteine	levels.	A	group	at
particular	 risk	 for	 having	 children	 with	 NTDs	 is	 women	 receiving	 certain
antiepileptic	medications	during	pregnancy.

Even	 after	 normal	 formation,	 the	 nervous	 system	 may	 be	 affected	 by
intrauterine	 processes.	 In	 hydranencephaly,	 the	 hemispheres	 are	 destroyed	 and

the	

ventricles	

expanded.	

are	 markedly	

the	 remnants	 lie	 in	 a	 sac	 of	 meninges.	 This	 is	 to	 be	 distinguished	 from
hydrocephalus,	 where	
In
hydranencephaly,	 the	 skull	 is	 normal	 but	 devoid	 of	 meaningful	 contents,	 in
contrast	to	anencephaly,	in	which	the	skull	is	malformed	along	with	the	brain.	In
porencephaly,	 a	 cyst	 forms	 in	 a	 region	 where	 developing	 brain	 has	 been
destroyed	 or	 has	 developed	 abnormally.	 Transillumination	 of	 the	 skull	 with	 a
strong	 light	 may	 help	 detect	 these	 disorders	 early.	 The	 diagnosis	 may	 be
confirmed	by	computed	tomography,	MRI,	or	sonography,	and	the	diagnosis	can
be	 made	 with	 sonography	 in	 the	 prenatal	 period.	 Numerous	 conditions	 may
affect	 the	 neonatal	 brain,	 including	 germinal	 matrix	 hemorrhage,	 hypoxic-
ischemic	 encephalopathy,	 cerebral	 infarction,	 and	 infection.	 Many	 of	 these
disorders	 produce	 “cerebral	 palsy,”	 an	 umbrella	 term	 with	 little	 neurologic
meaning.

TABLE	2.1

The	Derivatives	of	the	Anterior	Neuropore

Prosencephalon	(forebrain)

Telencephalon	(cerebral	hemispheres)

Pallium	(cortical	mantle)

Neopallium
Rhinencephalon

Paleopallium	(piriform	lobe)
Archipallium	(hippocampal	formation)

Hemispheric	white	matter

Association	fibers
Commissural	fibers
Projection	fibers

Basal	ganglia
Caudate
Putamen
Globus	pallidus

Diencephalon
Thalamus
Metathalamus
Epithalamus
Subthalamus
Hypothalamus

Mesencephalon	(midbrain)
Rhombencephalon	(hindbrain)

Metencephalon

Pons
Cerebellum

Myelencephalon	(medulla)

BOX	2.2

Craniosynostosis

that	

skull	

is	 abnormally	 elongated	

The	 primary	 clinical	 manifestation	 of	 craniosynostosis	 is	 an	 abnormally
shaped	 skull;	 the	 configuration	 depends	 on	 which	 suture(s)	 have	 fused
prematurely.	The	skull	is	unable	to	expand	in	a	direction	perpendicular	to	the
fused	suture	line.	With	synostosis	of	a	major	suture,	the	skull	compensates	by
expanding	in	a	direction	perpendicular	to	the	uninvolved	sutures.	Premature
closure	 of	 the	 sagittal	 suture,	 the	 most	 common	 form	 of	 craniosynostosis,
(scaphocephaly,
produces	 a	
dolichocephaly).	 Synostosis	 of	 both	 coronal	 sutures	 causes	 a	 skull	 that	 is
abnormally	 wide	 (brachycephaly).	 When	 the	 coronal	 and	 lambdoid	 sutures
are	 involved,	 the	 skull	 is	 tall	 and	 narrow	 (turricephaly,	 tower	 skull).
Synostosis	 of	 the	 sagittal	 and	 both	 coronal	 sutures	 causes	 oxycephaly
(acrocephaly),	 a	 pointed,	 conical	 skull.	 Plagiocephaly	 refers	 to	 a	 flattened
spot	on	one	side	of	the	head;	it	is	due	to	premature	unilateral	fusion	of	one
coronal	or	lambdoid	suture.	Synostosis	involving	the	metopic	suture	causes
trigonocephaly,	a	narrow,	triangular	forehead	with	lateral	constriction	of	the
temples.	 Synostosis	 of	 the	 posterior	 sagittal	 and	 both	 lambdoidal	 sutures
produces	 the	 “Mercedes	 Benz	 pattern.”	 Severe	 craniosynostosis	 involving
multiple	sutures	may	cause	increased	intracranial	pressure.	Craniosynostosis
usually	occurs	as	an	isolated	condition,	but	there	are	numerous	syndromes	in
which	 craniosynostosis	 occurs	
in	 conjunction	 with	 other	 anomalies,
particularly	malformations	of	the	face	and	the	digits,	for	example,	Crouzon’s,
Apert’s,	 and	 Carpenter’s	 syndromes.	 Several	 genetic	 mutations	 may	 cause
craniosynostosis.	 There	 are	 many	 potential	 causes	 of	 nonsyndromic
craniosynostosis,	 including	 environmental,	 hormonal,	 and	 biomechanical
factors.

BONY	ANATOMY

The	skull	is	fashioned	of	several	large	bones	and	myriad	complexly	articulated
smaller	bones.	The	major	bones	are	the	frontal,	temporal,	parietal,	occipital,	and
sphenoid;	 all	 are	 joined	 by	 suture	 lines.	 The	 major	 sutures	 are	 the	 sagittal	 and
coronal,	 but	 there	 are	 numerous	 others.	 Sometimes	 sutures	 close	 prematurely
(craniostenosis,	 craniosynostosis),	 before	 the	 skull	 has	 completed	 growth,
producing	malformed	and	misshapen	skulls	(Box	2.2;	Figure	2.2).	Noggin	plays
a	role	in	the	regulation	of	cranial	suture	fusion,	and	craniosynostosis	may	be	the
result	of	inappropriate	down-regulation	of	noggin	expression.

FIGURE	2.2	Craniosynostosis	involving	the	cranial	sutures:	(A)	sagittal,	(B)	coronal,
and	 (C)	 both	 sagittal	 and	 coronal.	 (With	 author’s	 permission	 from	 Reeves	 AG,
Swenson	 RS.	 Disorders	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System:	 A	 Primer.	 New	 Haven:	 Dartmouth
Medical	
from
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~dons/figures/chapt_1/Fig_1_2.htm.	 Copyright	 ©	 2008
Reeves.)

Retrieved	

School,	

August	

2004.	

2018	

28,	

on	

The	interior	of	the	skull	is	divided	into	compartments,	or	fossae.	The	anterior
fossa	contains	the	frontal	lobes,	which	rest	on	the	orbital	plates.	The	cribriform

plate	 lies	 far	 anteriorly,	 between	 the	 orbital	 roofs;	 when	 fractured	 during	 head
injury,	 cerebrospinal	 fluid	 (CSF)	 rhinorrhea	 may	 ensue.	 The	 middle	 fossa
primarily	 contains	 the	 temporal	 lobes,	 and	 several	 major	 cranial	 nerves	 (CNs)
run	through	the	area.	The	posterior	fossa	contains	the	brainstem,	cerebellum,	and
vertebrobasilar	vessels.	Except	for	CNs	I	and	II,	all	the	CNs	run	through	or	exit
from	the	posterior	fossa.

The	 frontal	 bone	 contains	 the	 frontal	 sinuses.	 The	 temporal	 bone	 has	 two
parts:	the	thin	squamous	portion	forms	the	temple;	the	thick	petrous	part	forms
the	 floor	 of	 the	 middle	 fossa.	 The	 squamous	 part	 contains	 the	 groove	 of	 the
middle	 meningeal	 artery	 and	 may	 be	 easily	 fractured,	 sometimes	 producing
epidural	 hematoma.	 The	 petrous	 pyramids	 have	 their	 apices	 pointed	 medially
and	their	thick	bases	pointed	laterally;	deep	within	are	the	middle	and	inner	ear
structures,	the	internal	auditory	meatus,	the	facial	canal	with	its	genu,	and	the	air
cells	 of	 the	 mastoid	 sinus.	 Fractures	 through	 the	 petrous	 bone	 may	 cause
hemotympanum	 (blood	 in	 the	 middle	 ear	 cavity),	 hearing	 loss,	 or	 facial	 nerve
palsy.

The	sphenoid	bone	has	greater	and	lesser	wings	and	contains	the	sella	turcica.
The	 greater	 wings	 form	 the	 anterior	 wall	 of	 the	 middle	 fossa;	 the	 lesser	 wings
form	part	of	the	floor	of	the	anterior	fossa.	The	greater	and	lesser	wings	attach	to
the	body	of	the	sphenoid,	buried	within	which	is	the	sphenoid	sinus	cavity.	The
best	 way	 to	 appreciate	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the	 sphenoid	 bone	 is	 to	 look	 at	 it	 in
disarticulated	 isolation,	 when	 the	 “wings”	 become	 obvious.	 The	 sella	 turcica
makes	up	a	saddle-shaped	depression	in	the	body	of	the	sphenoid;	alongside	the
sella	 lie	 the	 cavernous	 sinuses.	 The	 pituitary	 gland	 lies	 within	 the	 sella,	 and
neoplasms	of	the	pituitary	may	enlarge	the	sella	and	push	upward	out	of	the	sella
onto	 the	 optic	 chiasm.	 Enlargement	 of	 the	 sella	 is	 a	 nonspecific	 finding	 in
increased	intracranial	pressure.

The	occipital	bone	makes	up	the	posterior	fossa.	The	clivus	forms	the	anterior
wall	of	the	posterior	fossa;	it	ends	superiorly	in	the	dorsum	sellae	and	posterior
clinoid	processes.	The	basilar	artery	and	brainstem	lie	along	the	clivus.	Tumors,
most	 often	 chordomas,	 may	 erode	 the	 clivus	 and	 produce	 multiple	 CN	 palsies.
Various	 structures	 pass	 into	 or	 out	 of	 the	 skull	 through	 the	 numerous	 foramina
that	 pierce	 its	 base	 (Table	 2.2).	 Pathologic	 processes	 may	 involve	 different
foramina;	 the	 resultant	 combination	 of	 CN	 abnormalities	 permits	 localization
(see	Chapter	21).

TABLE	2.2

Major	Skull	Base	Foramina	and	Their	Contents

Foramen

Contents

Cribriform	plate

Olfactory	nerves

Optic	canal

Optic	nerve,	ophthalmic	artery

Superior	orbital	fissure III,	IV,	VI,	ophthalmic	V,	superior	ophthalmic

vein

Foramen	rotundum

Maxillary	V

Foramen	spinosum

Middle	meningeal	artery

Foramen	ovale

Mandibular	V

Internal	auditory

VII,	VIII,	internal	auditory	artery

meatus

Jugular	foramen

IX,	X,	XI,	internal	jugular	vein

Hypoglossal	foramen

XII

Carotid	canal

Carotid	artery

Roman	numerals	refer	to	cranial	nerves	III	through	XII.

MENINGES

The	meninges	are	composed	of	the	dura	mater,	pia	mater,	and	arachnoid	(Figure
2.2).	 The	 pia	 is	 thin,	 filmy,	 and	 closely	 adherent	 to	 the	 brain	 and	 its	 blood
vessels,	extending	down	into	the	sulci	and	perivascular	spaces.	The	dura	mater	is
thick	 and	 tough	 (the	 pachymeninges;	 Gr.	 pachys	 “thick”)	 and	 provides	 the
substantive	protective	covering	for	the	CNS.	The	dura	has	an	inner,	meningeal
layer	and	an	outer	periosteal	layer	that	is	continuous	with	the	periosteum	of	the
inner	calvarium.	The	two	leaves	of	dura	separate	to	enclose	the	cerebral	venous
sinuses.	The	dura	closely	adheres	to	the	bone	at	the	suture	lines	and	around	the
foramen	 magnum.	 Sheaths	 of	 dura	 cover	 the	 cranial	 and	 spinal	 nerves	 as	 they
exit	and	then	fuse	with	the	epineurium.	The	vaginal	sheath	of	the	optic	nerve	is	a
layer	of	meninges	that	follows	the	optic	nerve;	ultimately	the	dura	fuses	with	the

sclera	 of	 the	 eyeball.	 Folds	 of	 dura	 separate	 the	 two	 hemispheres	 (the	 falx
cerebri)	and	the	middle	fossa	from	the	posterior	fossa	structures	(the	tentorium
cerebelli).	 A	 diminutive	 fold	 (the	 falx	 cerebelli)	 separates	 the	 cerebellar
hemispheres.	The	cranial	dura	is,	for	the	most	part,	a	single	layer,	distinguishable
as	two	sheets	only	at	the	venous	sinuses	and	in	the	orbit.	In	contrast,	the	layers	of
the	spinal	dura	are	separate.	The	outer,	periosteal	layer	forms	the	periosteum	of
the	vertebral	canal,	and	the	meningeal	layer	closely	covers	the	spinal	cord.	This
separation	creates	a	wide	epidural	space	in	the	spinal	canal	that	is	not	present	in
the	head.	The	spinal	epidural	space	is	a	frequent	site	for	metastatic	disease.	The
cranial	and	spinal	dura	fuse	at	the	foramen	magnum.

The	 arachnoid	 abuts	 the	 inner	 surface	 of	 the	 dura,	 and	 a	 web	 of	 fine,
diaphanous	trabeculae	crosses	the	subarachnoid	space	to	connect	the	arachnoid
to	the	pia	(Figure	2.3).	Over	the	surface	of	the	brain	and	spinal	cord,	the	pia	and
the	arachnoid	are	closely	adherent	and	virtually	inseparable,	forming	essentially
one	membrane:	the	pia-arachnoid,	or	leptomeninges	(Gr.	leptos	“slender”).	The
subdural	 space	 is	 the	 space	 between	 the	 dura	 and	 the	 arachnoid.	 Normally,	 the
space	 is	 more	 potential	 than	 real,	 but	 under	 some	 circumstances,	 fluid	 may
accumulate	 in	 the	 subdural	 space.	 The	 subarachnoid	 space	 lies	 beneath	 the
arachnoid	 membrane.	 Bleeding	 into	 the	 subarachnoid	 space	 is	 a	 common
complication	of	craniocerebral	trauma	and	the	rupture	of	aneurysms	or	vascular
the	 subarachnoid	 space.	 Focal
through	
malformations.	 The	 CSF	 flows	
enlargements	 of	 the	 subarachnoid	 space	 (cisterns)	 develop	 in	 areas	 where	 the
dura	 and	 arachnoid	 do	 not	 closely	 follow	 the	 contour	 of	 the	 brain,	 creating	 a
the	 pia.	 The	 cisterna	 magna
wide	 space	 between	
(cerebellomedullary	 cistern)	 is	 a	 CSF	 reservoir	 posterior	 to	 the	 medulla	 and
beneath	the	inferior	part	of	the	cerebellum	(Figure	2.4).	Other	important	cisterns
include	 the	 perimesencephalic	 (ambient),	 interpeduncular	 (basal),	 prepontine,
and	 chiasmatic.	 The	 term	 basal	 cisterns	 is	 sometimes	 used	 to	 include	 all	 the
subarachnoid	 cisterns	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 brain.	 Focal	 enlargements	 of	 the
subarachnoid	 space	 produce	 arachnoid	 cysts,	 which	 may	 rarely	 compress	 the
brain	or	spinal	cord.

the	 arachnoid	 and	

The	lateral	ventricles	are	made	up	of	a	body	and	an	atrium	(common	space),
from	 which	 extend	 the	 horns	 (Figure	2.4).	 The	 temporal	 horn	 extends	 forward
into	 the	 temporal	 lobe;	 the	 occipital	 horn	 extends	 backward	 into	 the	 occipital
lobe.	Within	the	atrium	of	each	ventricle	lies	CSF-forming	choroid	plexus.	The
two	 lateral	 ventricles	 come	 together	 in	 the	 midline,	 where	 they	 join	 the	 third
ventricle.	The	foramen	of	Monro	is	the	passageway	between	the	lateral	and	third

ventricles.	The	third	ventricle	is	a	thin	slit	lying	in	the	midline	between	and	just
below	 the	 lateral	 ventricles.	 Anteriorly	 it	 forms	 spaces,	 or	 recesses,	 above	 and
below	 the	 pituitary;	 posteriorly	 it	 creates	 a	 recess	 above	 the	 pineal	 gland.	 The
third	 ventricle	 ends	 at	 the	 cerebral	 aqueduct	 (of	 Sylvius),	 which	 conveys	 CSF
down	to	the	fourth	ventricle.	The	fourth	ventricle	is	also	a	midline	structure	that
has	superior,	inferior,	and	lateral	extensions	like	narrow	cul-de-sacs.	The	inferior
extension	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle	 ends	 at	 the	 cervicomedullary	 junction;	 at	 the
obex,	it	becomes	continuous	with	the	central	canal	of	the	spinal	cord.	The	lateral
recesses	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle	 contain	 small	 apertures—the	 foramina	 of
Luschka—through	which	CSF	empties	into	the	subarachnoid	space	surrounding
the	 brainstem.	 A	 midline	 aperture	 in	 the	 roof	 of	 the	 fourth	 ventricle—the
foramen	 of	 Magendie—joins	 the	 fourth	 ventricle	 with	 the	 cisterna	 magna.
Choroid	plexus	lies	in	the	roof	of	the	fourth	ventricle.	Obstruction	to	the	flow	of
CSF	through	this	system	may	cause	hydrocephalus	(see	Chapter	50).

FIGURE	2.3	 Schematic	 diagram	 of	 a	 coronal	 section	 of	 the	 meninges	 and	 cerebral
cortex,	showing	the	relationship	of	the	arachnoid	villus	to	the	subarachnoid	space	and
superior	sagittal	sinus.	(Modified	from	Weed	LH.	The	absorption	of	cerebrospinal	fluid
into	the	venous	system.	Am	J	Anat	1923;31:191–207.)

Arachnoid  trabecula-- - - -

Cerebral  vein - - __ _ 

~~~ 

•  I 

Perivascular space- -

- r-------,,--
,. 

I 

Cerebra l cortex----, 

i 

' 

Lining  cells  of___  4 

perivascular space 

------,1.!11' 

-./ 

.  , . 
,  , 
.·· 
,  .r  . 

I 

,r-----,-.  --/J• 
, 
· :  . 

• 

I 

Capillary  within ___ -

-

pericapillary  space 

FIGURE  2.4  Schematic  diagram  of  the  leptomeninges  and  nervous  tissue,  showing 
the  relationship  of  the  subarachnoid  space,  perivascular  channels,  and  nerve  cells. 
(Modified  from  Weed  LH.  The  absorption  of  cerebrospinal  fluid  into  the  venous 
system. Am J Anat 1923;31:191-207.) 

THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES 

The  cerebrum  is  composed  of  two  hemispheres  that  are  covered  by  a  layer  of 
gray matter, the cerebral cortex. Underneath the cortex is the white matter, which 
consists  of projection,  commissural,  and  association  fibers.  Deep  in  the  midline 
of  each  hemisphere  are  masses  of  gray  matter:  the  basal  ganglia  and  the 
diencephalon.  The  diencephalon  is  made  up  of  the  thalamus,  metathalamus, 
epithalamus, subthalamus, and hypothalamus. 

The  cerebral  cortex  along  with  its  underlying white  matter is  the  pallium,  or 
cerebral mantle. The pallium consists of the phylogenetically recent neopallium, 

which	 makes	 up	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 hemispheres,	 and	 the	 paleopallium	 and
archipallium,	more	primitive	areas	that	are	small	in	humans.	The	paleopallium	is
the	 piriform	 lobe,	 and	 the	 archipallium	 is	 the	 hippocampal	 formation.	 The
paleopallium	and	archipallium	constitute	the	rhinencephalon,	which	is	connected
structurally	and	functionally	with	the	limbic	lobe.

The	 cerebral	 mantle	 is	 intricately	 folded	 and	 traversed	 by	 fissures	 and	 sulci
(Figures	 6.1	 and	 6.2).	 The	 cortex	 is	 arranged	 in	 layers	 of	 cells	 and	 fibers.
Differences	 in	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the	 layers	 form	 the	 basis	 for	 cytoarchitectonic
maps	 of	 the	 brain.	 The	 best-known	 and	 most	 widely	 used	 map	 is	 that	 of
Brodmann,	which	divides	the	brain	into	52	identifiable	areas	(Figures	6.3,	25.1,
and	25.2).	In	primates,	especially	humans,	a	huge	number	of	neurons	are	able	to
occupy	the	relatively	small	intracranial	space	because	of	layering	of	the	cortex
and	 the	 folding	 that	 vastly	 increases	 the	 surface	 area	 of	 the	 brain.	 The	 more
important	 fissures	 divide	 the	 hemispheres	 into	 lobes,	 and	 these	 in	 turn	 are
subdivided	 by	 the	 sulci	 into	 gyri,	 or	 convolutions.	 A	 fissure	 and	 a	 sulcus	 are
different,	but	the	terms	are	not	used	consistently.	Lissencephaly	is	a	congenital
malformation	in	which	the	normal	pattern	of	sulci	fails	to	develop.	A	normally
sulcated	 brain	 is	 gyrencephalic.	 Separation	 of	 the	 parts	 of	 the	 brain	 by	 surface
landmarks	 is	 practical	 anatomically,	 but	 the	 divisions	 are	 morphologic;	 the
individual	lobes	are	not	necessarily	functional	units.

The	 hemispheres	 are	 incompletely	 separated	 by	 the	 median	 longitudinal
(interhemispheric)	fissure,	within	which	lies	the	falx	cerebri	(Figure	6.4).	Deep
in	 the	 fissure	 run	 branches	 of	 the	 anterior	 cerebral	 artery.	 Two	 major	 surface
landmarks	 are	 visible	 on	 the	 lateral	 hemispheric	 surface:	 the	 lateral	 (sylvian)
fissure	and	the	central	(rolandic)	sulcus	(Figure	6.1).	The	sylvian	fissure	begins
at	the	vallecula	on	the	basal	surface	between	the	frontal	and	temporal	lobes	and
runs	laterally,	posteriorly,	and	superiorly.	It	divides	the	frontal	and	parietal	lobes
above	from	the	temporal	lobe	below.	In	the	depths	of	the	sylvian	fissure	lies	the
insula	 (island	 of	 Reil),	 surrounded	 by	 the	 limiting,	 or	 circular,	 sulcus.	 The
frontal,	parietal,	and	temporal	opercula	are	overhanging	aprons	of	cerebrum	that
cover	 the	 insula.	 More	 superficially	 in	 the	 sylvian	 fissure	 run	 branches	 of	 the
middle	 cerebral	 artery.	 The	 central	 sulcus	 runs	 obliquely	 from	 posterior	 to
anterior,	at	an	angle	of	about	70	degrees,	from	about	the	midpoint	of	the	dorsal
surface	 of	 the	 hemisphere	 nearly	 to	 the	 sylvian	 fissure,	 separating	 the	 frontal
lobe	 from	 the	 parietal.	 The	 anatomy	 of	 the	 cerebral	 hemispheres	 is	 discussed
further	in	Chapter	6.

BASAL	GANGLIA

Basal	 ganglia	 terminology	 can	 be	 confusing,	 and	 usage	 is	 inconsistent.	 The
caudate,	 putamen,	 and	 globus	 pallidus	 (GP)	 are	 all	 intimately	 related	 from	 an
anatomical	and	functional	standpoint.	The	term	basal	ganglia	includes	these	plus
other	related	structures	such	as	the	subthalamic	nucleus	and	substantia	nigra.	The
caudate	 and	 putamen	 are	 actually	 two	 parts	 of	 a	 single	 nucleus	 connected	 by
gray	matter	strands	and	separated	from	each	other	by	fibers	of	the	anterior	limb
of	the	internal	capsule.	The	heavily	myelinated	capsular	fibers	passing	between
and	 intermingling	 with	 the	 gray	 matter	 bridges	 cause	 the	 caudate-putamen
junction	to	look	striped,	hence	the	term	corpus	striatum	or	striatum	(L.	“striped
body”)	 to	 refer	 to	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen.	 The	 term	 corpus	 striatum	 is
sometimes	 used	 to	 include	 the	 GP	 as	 well.	 The	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 are	 the
neostriatum;	the	GP	is	the	archi-	or	paleostriatum.	The	putamen	and	GP	together
are	 shaped	 like	 a	 lens,	 hence	 the	 term	 lenticular	 or	 lentiform	 nuclei.	 The
claustrum,	amygdala,	and	substantia	innominata	are	sometimes	included	as	basal
ganglia;	they	are	indeed	gray	matter	masses	lying	at	the	base	of	the	hemispheres
but	bear	little	functional	relationship	to	the	other	basal	ganglia.

The	 caudate	 (L.	 “tail”)	 nucleus	 is	 composed	 of	 a	 head,	 body,	 and	 tail.	 The
body	 and	 progressively	 thinner	 tail	 extend	 backward	 from	 the	 head	 and	 arch
along	just	outside	the	wall	of	the	lateral	ventricle,	ultimately	following	the	curve
of	 the	 temporal	 horn	 and	 ending	 in	 the	 medial	 temporal	 lobe	 in	 close
approximation	to	the	amygdala.	The	caudate	 is	thus	a	long,	C-shaped	structure
with	bulbous	ends.	The	putamen	lies	just	lateral	to	the	GP.	The	GP	lies	medial	to
the	putamen	and	just	lateral	to	the	third	ventricle,	separated	from	the	caudate	by
the	 anterior	 limb	 and	 from	 the	 thalamus	 by	 the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal
capsule.	The	GP	(L.	“pale	body”)	or	pallidum	is	traversed	by	myelinated	fibers,
making	 it	 look	 lighter	 than	 the	 putamen,	 hence	 the	 name.	 The	 substantia	 nigra
lies	in	the	midbrain	just	posterior	to	the	cerebral	peduncle.	It	is	divided	into	pars
compacta	 and	 pars	 reticulata	 portions.	 In	 the	 pars	 compacta	 lie	 the	 prominent
melanin-containing	neurons	that	give	the	region	its	dark	color	and	its	name.

The	basal	ganglia	are	part	of	the	extrapyramidal	motor	system.	The	caudate
and	putamen	serve	as	the	central	receiving	area	of	the	basal	ganglia;	they	send
efferent	 fibers	 primarily	 to	 the	 GP.	 The	 GP	 is	 then	 responsible	 for	 most	 of	 the
output	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia.	 Fahr’s	 disease	 is	 a	 rare	 inherited	 disorder	 causing
calcification	and	cell	loss	in	the	basal	ganglia.

The	 basal	 ganglia	 generally	 serve	 to	 suppress	 activity	 in	 thalamocortical

motor	 neurons.	 Hypokinetic	 movement	 disorders	 are	 characterized	 by	 reduced
motor	function	because	of	higher	than	normal	basal	ganglia	output,	for	example,
Parkinson’s	 disease.	 Hyperkinetic	 movement	 disorders	 are	 characterized	 by
excessive	motor	activity	because	of	lower	than	normal	basal	ganglia	output,	for
example,	 Huntington’s	 disease.	 Dysfunction	 of	 nonmotor	 circuits	 of	 the	 basal
ganglia	 has	 been	 implicated	 in	 Tourette’s	 syndrome	 and	 obsessive-compulsive
disorder.	The	basal	ganglia	are	discussed	further	in	Chapters	26	and	30.

THALAMUS

The	thalamus	is	a	large,	paired,	ovoid	structure	that	lies	deep	in	the	midline	of
each	 cerebral	 hemisphere,	 sitting	 atop	 the	 brainstem.	 The	 third	 ventricle	 lies
between	the	two	thalami,	which	are	joined	together	by	the	massa	intermedia.	The
dorsal	 aspect	 of	 the	 thalamus	 forms	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle,	 and	 its
medial	aspect	forms	the	wall	of	the	third	ventricle.	It	is	bounded	laterally	by	the
internal	 capsule	 and	 basal	 ganglia;	 ventrally	 it	 is	 continuous	 with	 the
subthalamus.	The	thalamus	is	connected	with	the	cerebral	cortex	by	the	thalamic
thalamic	 peduncle	 consists	 of	 frontothalamic,
peduncles.	 The	 anterior	
thalamofrontal,	 striothalamic,	 and	 thalamostriatal	 fibers	 that	 run	 in	 the	 anterior
limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule.	 The	 superior	 thalamic	 peduncle	 consists	 of
thalamoparietal	sensory	fibers	from	the	thalamus	to	the	cortex;	these	fibers	run
in	 the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule.	 The	 posterior	 thalamic	 peduncle
contains	 the	 optic	 radiations	 from	 the	 lateral	 geniculate	 body	 to	 the	 occipital
cortex,	 and	 the	 inferior	 thalamic	 peduncle	 carries	 auditory	 radiations	 from	 the
medial	 geniculate	 body	 to	 the	 temporal	 cortex.	 The	 thalamic	 syndrome
(Dejerine-Roussy)	is	characterized	by	contralateral	hemianesthesia	and	pain	due
to	infarction	of	the	thalamus.	The	thalamus	is	discussed	further	in	Chapter	6.

BRAINSTEM

The	 brainstem	 extends	 caudally	 from	 the	 diencephalon	 to	 the	 spinal	 cord.
Rostrally,	 the	 midbrain	 is	 continuous	 with	 the	 subthalamus	 and	 thalamus;
caudally,	the	medulla	is	continuous	with	the	spinal	cord.	The	rostral	limit	of	the
the	 posterior	 commissure	 and
midbrain	
mammillary	 bodies;	 the	 caudal	 limit	 is	 defined	 by	 a	 line	 between	 the
pontomesencephalic	sulcus	and	the	inferior	colliculi.	The	pons	extends	from	this

line	 between	

imaginary	

is	 an	

point	caudally	to	the	pontomedullary	sulcus	and	the	medulla	from	that	point	to
the	cervicomedullary	junction	at	the	foramen	magnum.

is	

the	 dominant	 feature	

the	 cerebral	 peduncles.	 Dorsally,	

The	dominant	feature	of	the	ventral	midbrain	is	the	paired	crus	cerebri,	which
the
contain	
quadrigeminal	plate,	made	up	of	the	superior	and	inferior	colliculi.	The	superior
colliculus	 is	 connected	 to	 the	 lateral	 geniculate	 body	 by	 the	 brachium	 of	 the
superior	colliculus;	the	inferior	colliculus	is	connected	to	the	medial	geniculate
body	in	similar	fashion.	The	pulvinar,	the	most	caudal	portion	of	the	thalamus,
overlies	 the	 rostral	 midbrain	 laterally.	 The	 cerebral	 peduncles	 connect	 the
midbrain	 to	 the	 cerebrum	 above.	 The	 superior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 (brachium
conjunctivum)	connects	the	midbrain	to	the	cerebellum	behind.	The	ventral	pons
transverse
is	 a	 massive,	 bulging	 structure	 because	 of	
pontocerebellar	 fibers.	 Of	 the	 brainstem	 segments,	 the	 pons	 lies	 closest	 to	 the
clivus	and	dorsum	sellae.	The	pons	is	connected	to	the	cerebellum	posteriorly	by
the	 middle	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 (brachium	 pontis).	 Posteriorly,	 the	 cerebellum
overlies	the	pons,	separated	from	it	by	the	fourth	ventricle.	The	cerebellopontine
angle	 is	 the	 space	 formed	 by	 the	 junction	 of	 the	 pons,	 medulla,	 and	 overlying
cerebellar	hemisphere.	Neoplasms	may	form	in	the	cerebellopontine	angle,	most
often	acoustic	neuromas.	The	dorsal	aspect	of	the	pons	consists	of	the	structures
that	make	up	the	floor	of	the	ventricular	cavity.

the	 underlying	

The	medulla	oblongata	is	the	most	caudal	segment	of	the	brainstem,	lying	just
above	 the	 foramen	 magnum,	 continuous	 with	 the	 pons	 above	 and	 spinal	 cord
below.	 The	 transition	 to	 spinal	 cord	 is	 marked	 by	 three	 features:	 the	 foramen
magnum,	 the	 decussation	 of	 the	 pyramids,	 and	 the	 appearance	 of	 the	 anterior
rootlets	 of	 C1.	 The	 inferior	 olives	 form	 a	 prominent	 anterolateral	 bulge	 on	 the
ventral	 medulla.	 Between	 the	 two	 olives	 lie	 the	 midline	 medullary	 pyramids.
Posteriorly,	the	cerebellum	overlies	the	medulla,	connected	to	it	by	the	inferior
cerebellar	 peduncle	 (restiform	 body).	 The	 gracile	 and	 cuneate	 tubercles	 are
prominences	 on	 the	 posterior	 aspect	 of	 the	 medulla	 at	 the	 cervicomedullary
junction.

CNs	III	through	XII	emerge	from	the	brainstem.	The	third	nerve	exits	through
the	 interpeduncular	 fossa,	 the	 fourth	 nerve	 through	 the	 tectal	 plate	 posteriorly.
CN	 V	 enters	 the	 pons	 laterally,	 and	 CNs	 VI,	 VII,	 and	 VIII	 all	 emerge	 at	 the
pontomedullary	 junction	 (VI	 anteriorly,	 VII	 and	 VIII	 laterally	 through	 the
cerebellopontine	angle).	CNs	IX,	X,	and	XI	emerge	from	the	groove	posterior	to
the	inferior	olive.	CN	XII	exits	anterolaterally	in	the	sulcus	between	the	inferior
olive	and	the	medullary	pyramid.

The	 brainstem	 is	 a	 conduit	 for	 conduction	 of	 information.	 All	 signaling
between	the	body	and	the	cerebrum	traverses	the	brainstem.	Information	to	and
from	 the	 cerebellum	 also	 traverses	 the	 brainstem.	 The	 brainstem	 is	 also	 the
location	 of	 CN	 nuclei	 III	 through	 XII.	 In	 addition,	 the	 brainstem	 reticular
formation	 controls	 vital	 visceral	 functions,	 such	 as	 cardiovascular	 and
respiratory	function	and	consciousness.

Many	 disorders	 may	 affect	 the	 brainstem.	 These	 characteristically	 produce
CN	 abnormalities	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 lesion	 and	 long	 tract	 motor	 or	 sensory
abnormalities	contralaterally,	that	is,	crossed	syndromes.	A	mnemonic	called	the
“rule	of	4”	helps	recall	the	anatomy	and	the	brainstem	syndromes.	The	anatomy
of	the	brainstem	is	discussed	further	in	Chapter	11.

CEREBELLUM

The	cerebellum	is	the	largest	portion	of	the	rhombencephalon,	about	one-tenth	as
large	 as	 the	 cerebrum.	 The	 cerebellum	 is	 deeply	 fissured;	 its	 surface	 is	 broken
into	a	number	of	folia.	If	unfolded,	the	surface	area	would	be	about	half	that	of
the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 The	 cerebellar	 cortex	 overlies	 a	 medullary	 core	 of	 white
matter.	 The	 cortex	 is	 densely	 packed	 with	 neurons,	 primarily	 granule	 cells;	 in
fact,	 the	 cerebellum	 contains	 more	 neurons	 than	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 The
branching	 of	 the	 white	 matter	 into	 the	 cortical	 mantle	 and	 the	 structure	 of	 the
folia	 lends	 a	 treelike	 appearance	 (arbor	 vitae).	 The	 cerebellum	 lies	 in	 the
posterior	part	of	the	posterior	fossa,	behind	the	brainstem	and	connected	to	it	by
the	 three	 cerebellar	 peduncles	 (Figure	 2.5).	 It	 forms	 the	 roof	 of	 the	 fourth
ventricle	 and	 is	 separated	 from	 the	 occipital	 lobe	 above	 by	 the	 tentorium
cerebelli.	The	cerebellar	tonsils	are	small,	rounded	masses	of	tissue	on	the	most
inferior	 part	 of	 each	 cerebellar	 hemisphere,	 just	 above	 the	 foramen	 magnum.
Increased	 intracranial	pressure	 may	cause	 tonsillar	herniation:	 the	 tonsils	 move
through	 the	 foramen	 magnum	 into	 the	 upper	 cervical	 spinal	 canal.	 In	 Arnold-
Chiari	malformation,	the	tonsils	are	also	herniated	below	the	foramen	magnum,
but	this	is	a	congenital	anomaly	and	is	not	due	to	increased	intracranial	pressure.

FIGURE	 2.5	 Diagram	 of	 the	 cerebrospinal	 fluid	 spaces,	 showing	 lateral,	 third,	 and
fourth	ventricles;	foraminal	connections	with	the	subarachnoid	space;	and	some	of	the
major	 subarachnoid	 cisterns.	 I	 and	 II,	 lateral	 ventricles;	 III,	 third	 ventricle;	 IV,	 fourth
ventricle.	(Modified	from	Dandy	WE.	Bull	Johns	Hopkins	Hosp	1921;32:67–123.)

The	 cerebellum	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 three	 lobes:	 anterior,	 posterior,	 and
flocculonodular,	each	of	which	has	a	vermis	and	hemisphere	portion.	There	are
three	 major	 fissures:	 primary,	 horizontal,	 and	 posterolateral.	 The	 anterior	 lobe
lies	 anterior	 to	 the	 primary	 fissure;	 the	 posterior	 lobe,	 by	 far	 the	 largest,	 lies
between	
the
flocculonodular	lobe	lies	posterior	to	the	posterolateral	fissure.	Anatomists	have
further	divided	the	cerebellum	into	a	number	of	lobules	and	given	them	arcane
names	that	are	not	clinically	useful.	From	a	physiologic	and	clinical	standpoint,
the	cerebellum	can	be	viewed	as	having	three	components:	the	flocculonodular
is
lobe,	

the	 hemispheres.	 The	 flocculonodular	

the	 posterolateral	

the	 vermis,	 and	

fissure;	 and	

the	 primary	

fissure	 and	

lobe	

phylogenetically	 the	 oldest	 and	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 archicerebellum.	 It	 has
extensive	connections	with	the	vestibular	nuclei	and	is	concerned	primarily	with
eye	 movement	 and	 gross	 balance.	 The	 vermis	 is	 the	 paleocerebellum,	 or
spinocerebellum.	It	has	extensive	connections	with	spinal	cord	pathways	and	is
concerned	primarily	with	gait	and	locomotion.	The	most	phylogenetically	recent
part	 of	 the	 cerebellum	 is	 the	 neocerebellum,	 or	 the	 cerebellar	 hemispheres,
which	 make	 up	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 cerebellum.	 These	 are	 concerned	 with
coordinating	movement	and	providing	fine	motor	control	and	precise	movement
to	 the	 extremities	 (Figure	2.6).	 Numerous	 disorders	 may	 affect	 the	 cerebellum
(see	Chapter	43).

FIGURE	 2.6	 Midline	 sagittal	 section	 of	 the	 brainstem	 and	 cerebellum	 with	 the	 third
ventricle	retouched.

SPINAL	CORD

The	spinal	cord	is	elongated	and	nearly	cylindrical,	continuous	with	the	medulla
above	 and	 ending	 in	 a	 conical	 tip,	 the	 conus	 medullaris	 (Figures	2.7	 and	 2.8).
The	 spinal	 cord	 occupies	 approximately	 the	 upper	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 vertebral

canal,	 extending	from	 the	foramen	 magnum	 to	a	level	that	varies	 slightly	from
individual	to	individual	but	in	adults	lies	between	the	lower	border	of	L1	and	the
upper	 border	 of	 L2.	 The	 filum	 terminale	 is	 a	 delicate	 filament	 of	 connective
tissue	that	descends	from	the	apex	of	the	conus	medullaris	to	the	periosteum	of
the	posterior	surface	of	the	first	segment	of	the	coccyx	(Figure	2.8).	The	dentate
ligaments	 extend	 along	 the	 lateral	 surface	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 between	 the
anterior	and	posterior	nerve	roots,	from	the	pia	to	the	dura	mater.	They	suspend
the	 spinal	 cord	 in	 the	 vertebral	 canal.	 The	 general	 organization	 is	 the	 same
throughout,	 but	 there	 is	 some	 variability	 in	 detail	 at	 different	 segmental	 levels.
The	cord	and	vertebral	column	are	of	different	lengths	because	of	different	fetal
growth	 rates,	 so	 there	 is	 not	 absolute	 concordance	 between	 cord	 levels	 and
vertebral	levels;	this	discrepancy	grows	more	significant	at	more	caudal	levels.
Each	 spinal	 cord	 segment	 has	 anterior	 and	 posterior	 roots.	 The	 anterior	 roots
convey	 motor	 and	 autonomic	 fibers	 into	 the	 peripheral	 nerve.	 Posterior	 roots
bear	 ganglia	 composed	 of	 unipolar	 neurons,	 and	 the	 roots	 are	 made	 up	 of	 the
central	 processes	 of	 these	 neurons.	 The	 ganglion	 lies	 in	 the	 intervertebral
foramen	in	close	proximity	to	the	anterior	root.	The	anterior	and	posterior	roots
join	just	distal	to	the	dorsal	root	ganglion	to	form	the	mixed	spinal	nerve.	In	the
thoracolumbar	 region,	 white	 and	 gray	 rami	 connect	 the	 spinal	 nerve	 to	 the
paravertebral	 sympathetic	 chain.	 The	 spinal	 cord	 ends	 in	 the	 conus	 medullaris.
Roots	from	the	lower	cord	segments	descend	to	their	exit	foramina,	forming	the
cauda	equina	(Figure	2.9).

FIGURE	2.7	 Drawings	 of	 dissections	 of	 the	 left	 dentate	 nucleus	 with	 portions	 of	 the
cerebellar	 cortex	 and	 vermis	 intact.	 A.	 Dissection	 of	 the	 posterior	 surface	 of	 the
cerebellum	exposing	the	dentate	nucleus.	B.	Dissection	of	the	superior	surface	of	the
cerebellum	from	above	showing	the	left	dentate	nucleus	in	relationship	to	the	isthmus
of	the	pons.	(From	Mettler	FA.	Neuroanatomy.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	1948.)

FIGURE	2.8	The	spinal	cord.	A.	Section	of	the	spinal	cord	with	anterior	and	posterior
nerve	 roots	 attached.	 B.	 Anterior	 view	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 C.	 Posterior	 view	 of	 the
spinal	cord.

FIGURE	 2.9	 Sagittal	 section	 of	 the	 vertebral	 canal,	 showing	 the	 lower	 end	 of	 the

spinal	 cord,	 filum	 terminale,	 and	 subarachnoid	 space.	 (Modified	 from	 Larsell	 O.
Anatomy	of	the	Nervous	System.	New	York:	D	Appleton-Century,	1939.)

CENTRAL	NERVOUS	SYSTEM	BLOOD	SUPPLY

The	 brain	 receives	 its	 blood	 supply	 from	 the	 internal	 carotid	 arteries	 (anterior
circulation)	 and	 the	 vertebrobasilar	 system	 (posterior	 circulation).	 The	 anterior
circulation	 supplies	 the	 frontal,	 parietal,	 and	 most	 of	 the	 temporal	 lobes.	 The
posterior	 circulation	 supplies	 the	 occipital	 lobes,	 brainstem,	 and	 cerebellum.
Vascular	anatomy	is	discussed	in	more	detail	in	Chapter	49.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bekdache	 GN,	 Begam	 M,	 Al	 Safi	 W,	 et	 al.	 Prenatal	 diagnosis	 of	 triploidy
associated	with	holoprosencephaly:	a	case	report	and	review	of	the	literature.
Am	J	Perinatol	2009;26:479–483.

Biller	 J,	 Gruener	 G,	 Brazis	 PW.	 DeMyer’s	 The	 Neurologic	 Examination:	 A

Programmed	Text.	7th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education,	2017.

Copp	AJ,	Greene	ND.	Genetics	and	development	of	neural	tube	defects.	J	Pathol

2010;220:217–230.

Dávila-Gutiérrez	 G.	 Agenesis	 and	 dysgenesis	 of	 the	 corpus	 callosum.	 Semin

Pediatr	Neurol	2002;9:292–301.

DeMyer	W.	The	median	cleft	face	syndrome.	Differential	diagnosis	of	cranium
bifidum	 occultum,	 hypertelorism,	 and	 median	 cleft	 nose,	 lip,	 and	 palate.
Neurology	1967;17:961–971.

DeMyer	 W.	 Median	 facial	 malformations	 and	 their	 implications	 for	 brain

malformations.	Birth	Defects	Orig	Artic	Ser	1975;11:155–181.

DeMyer	 WE.	 Technique	 of	 the	 Neurological	 Examination.	 6th	 ed.	 New	 York:

McGraw-Hill,	2011.

Finnell	RH,	Gould	A,	Spiegelstein	O.	Pathobiology	and	genetics	of	neural	tube

defects.	Epilepsia	2003;44(Suppl	3):14–23.

Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 4th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer/Lippincott

Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009.

Garabedian	 BH,	 Fraser	 FC.	 Upper	 and	 lower	 neural	 tube	 defects:	 an	 alternate

hypothesis.	J	Med	Genet	1993;30:849–851.

Gates	P.	The	rule	of	4	of	the	brainstem:	a	simplified	method	for	understanding
brainstem	anatomy	and	brainstem	vascular	syndromes	for	the	non-neurologist.

Intern	Med	J	2005;35:263–266.

Hanna	 RM,	 Marsh	 SE,	 Swistun	 D,	 et	 al.	 Distinguishing	 3	 classes	 of	 corpus
callosal	 abnormalities	 in	 consanguineous	 families.	 Neurology	 2011;76:373–
382.

Kaaja	 E,	 Kaaja	 R,	 Hiilesmaa	 V.	 Major	 malformations	 in	 offspring	 of	 women

with	epilepsy.	Neurology	2003;60:575–579.

Kopell	 BH,	 Greenberg	 BD.	 Anatomy	 and	 physiology	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia:
implications	for	DBS	in	psychiatry.	Neurosci	Biobehav	Rev	2008;32:408–422.
Mahalik	 SK,	 Vaze	 D,	 Lyngdoh	 TS,	 et	 al.	 Embryogenesis	 of	 triple	 neural	 tube

defects:	sonic	hedgehog—a	key?	J	Pediatr	Surg	2011;46:e5–e8.

Millichap	 JJ,	 Nguyen	 T,	 Ryan	 ME.	 Teaching	 neuroimages:	 prenatal	 MRI	 of

muscle-eye-brain	disease.	Neurology	2010;74:e101.

Northrup	H,	Volcik	KA.	Spina	bifida	and	other	neural	tube	defects.	Curr	Probl

Pediatr	2000;30:313–332.

Pradilla	 G,	 Jallo	 G.	 Arachnoid	 cysts:	 case	 series	 and	 review	 of	 the	 literature.

Neurosurg	Focus	2007;22:E7.

Raghavan	 N,	 Barkovich	 AJ,	 Edwards	 M,	 et	 al.	 MR	 imaging	 in	 the	 tethered

spinal	cord	syndrome.	AJR	Am	J	Roentgenol	1989;152:843–852.

Richter	B,	Stegmann	K,	Roper	B,	et	al.	Interaction	of	folate	and	homocysteine
pathway	genotypes	evaluated	in	susceptibility	to	neural	tube	defects	(NTD)	in
a	German	population.	J	Hum	Genet	2001;46:105–109.

Simpson	 JL,	 Mills	 J,	 Rhoads	 GG,	 et	 al.	 Genetic	 heterogeneity	 in	 neural	 tube

defects.	Ann	Genet	1991;34:279–286.

Slater	 BJ,	 Lenton	 KA,	 Kwan	 MD,	 et	 al.	 Cranial	 sutures:	 a	 brief	 review.	 Plast

Reconstr	Surg	2008;121:170e–178e.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Wilson	 DA,	 Prince	 JR.	 John	 Caffey	 award.	 MR	 imaging	 determination	 of	 the
location	 of	 the	 normal	 conus	 medullaris	 throughout	 childhood.	 AJR	 Am	 J
Roentgenol	1989;152:1029–1032.

CHAPTER	3

The	Neurologic	History

Introductory	textbooks	of	physical	diagnosis	cover	the	basic	aspects	of	medical
interviewing.	This	chapter	addresses	some	aspects	of	history	taking	of	particular
relevance	 to	 neurologic	 patients.	 Important	 historical	 points	 to	 be	 explored	 as
they	relate	to	some	common	neurologic	conditions	are	summarized	in	the	tables.
The	 history	 is	 the	 cornerstone	 of	 medical	 diagnosis;	 neurologic	 diagnosis	 is
no	 exception.	 In	 many	 instances,	 the	 physician	 can	 learn	 more	 from	 what	 the
patient	 says	 and	 how	 he	 says	 it	 than	 from	 any	 other	 avenue	 of	 inquiry.	 A
skillfully	 taken	 history	 will	 frequently	 indicate	 the	 probable	 diagnosis,	 even
before	 physical,	 neurologic,	 and	 neurodiagnostic	 examinations	 are	 carried	 out.
Conversely,	 many	 errors	 in	 diagnosis	 are	 due	 to	 incomplete	 or	 inaccurate
histories.	 In	 many	 common	 neurologic	 disorders,	 the	 diagnosis	 rests	 almost
entirely	 on	 the	 history.	 Most	 patients	 with	 recurring	 headaches	 fall	 into	 this
category,	as	do	some	patients	with	dizziness,	sleep	disorders,	and	episodic	loss
of	consciousness.	Often	 the	 only	disease	manifestations	are	subjective,	without
demonstrable	physical	signs	of	disease;	we	can	learn	of	their	nature	and	course
only	by	description.

The	most	important	aspect	of	history	taking	is	attentive	listening.	Ask	open-
ended	questions	and	avoid	suggesting	possible	responses.	Although	patients	are
frequently	 accused	 of	 being	 “poor	 historians,”	 there	 are	 in	 fact	 as	 many	 poor
history	takers	as	there	are	poor	history	givers.	Although	the	principal	objective
of	taking	the	history	is	to	acquire	pertinent	clinical	data	that	will	lead	to	correct
diagnosis,	 the	 information	 obtained	 in	 the	 history	 is	 also	 valuable	 in
understanding	 the	 patient	 as	 an	 individual,	 his	 relationship	 to	 others,	 and	 his
reactions	to	his	disease.

Taking	a	good	history	is	not	simple.	It	may	require	more	skill	and	experience
than	 performing	 a	 good	 neurologic	 examination.	 Time,	 diplomacy,	 kindness,
patience,	 reserve,	 and	 a	 manner	 that	 conveys	 interest,	 understanding,	 and

sympathy	are	all	essential.	The	physician	should	present	a	friendly	and	courteous
attitude,	 center	 all	 his	 attention	 on	 the	 patient,	 appear	 anxious	 to	 help,	 word
questions	 tactfully,	 and	 ask	 them	 in	 a	 conversational	 tone.	 At	 the	 beginning	 of
the	 interview,	 it	 is	 worthwhile	 to	 attempt	 to	 put	 the	 patient	 at	 ease.	 Avoid	 any
appearance	of	haste.	Engage	in	some	small	talk.	Inquiring	as	to	where	the	patient
is	 from	 and	 what	 he	 does	 for	 a	 living	 not	 only	 helps	 make	 the	 encounter	 less
rigid	and	formal,	but	it	often	reveals	very	interesting	things	about	the	patient	as	a
person.	 History	 taking	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to	 establish	 a	 favorable	 patient-
physician	 relationship;	 the	 physician	 may	 acquire	 empathy	 for	 the	 patient,
establish	rapport,	and	instill	confidence.	The	patient’s	manner	of	presenting	his
history	reflects	intelligence,	powers	of	observation,	attention,	and	memory.	The
examiner	 should	 avoid	 forming	 a	 judgment	 about	 the	 patient’s	 illness	 too
quickly;	 some	 individuals	 easily	 sense	 and	 resent	 a	 physician’s	 preconceived
ideas	 about	 their	 symptoms.	 Repeating	 key	 points	 of	 the	 history	 back	 to	 the
patient	 helps	 ensure	 accuracy,	 and	 it	 assures	 the	 patient	 that	 the	 physician	 has
heard	 and	 assimilated	 the	 story.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 history,	 the	 patient	 should
always	feel	as	if	he	has	been	listened	to.	The	importance	of	the	clinical	history
cannot	 be	 overemphasized.	 History	 taking	 is	 an	 art.	 It	 can	 be	 learned	 partly
through	reading	and	study,	but	it	is	honed	only	through	experience	and	practice.

The	 mode	 of	 questioning	 may	 vary	 with	 the	 patient’s	 age,	 education,	 and
cultural	background.	The	physician	should	meet	the	patient	on	a	common	ground
of	 language	 and	 vocabulary—resorting	 to	 the	 vernacular	 if	 necessary—but
without	talking	down	to	the	patient.	This	is	sometimes	a	fine	line.	The	history	is
best	taken	in	private,	with	the	patient	comfortable	and	at	ease.

The	 history	 should	 be	 recorded	 clearly	 and	 concisely,	 in	 a	 logical,	 well-
organized	 manner.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 focus	 on	 the	 more	 important	 aspects	 and
keep	irrelevancies	to	a	minimum;	the	essential	factual	material	must	be	separated
from	the	extraneous.	Diagnosis	involves	the	careful	sifting	of	evidence;	the	art	of
selecting	and	emphasizing	the	pertinent	data	may	make	it	possible	to	arrive	at	a
correct	conclusion	in	a	seemingly	complicated	case.	Recording	negative	as	well
as	positive	statements	assures	later	examiners	that	the	historian	inquired	into	and
did	not	overlook	certain	aspects	of	the	disease.

Several	 different	 types	 of	 information	 may	 be	 obtained	 during	 the	 initial
encounter.	 There	 is	 direct	 information	 from	 the	 patient	 describing	 symptoms,
information	 from	 the	 patient	 regarding	 what	 previous	 physicians	 may	 have
thought,	 and	 information	 from	 medical	 records	 or	 previous	 caregivers.	 All	 of
these	are	potentially	important.	Usually,	the	most	essential	is	the	patient’s	direct

description	of	the	symptoms.	Always	work	from	information	obtained	firsthand
from	the	patient	when	possible,	as	forming	one’s	own	opinion	from	primary	data
is	 critical.	 Steer	 the	 patient	 away	 from	 a	 description	 of	 what	 previous	 doctors
have	thought,	at	least	initially.	Many	patients	tend	to	jump	quickly	to	describing
encounters	 with	 caregivers,	 glossing	 over	 the	 details	 of	 the	 present	 illness.
Patients	 often	 misunderstand	 much	 or	 most	 of	 what	 they	 have	 been	 told	 in	 the
past,	so	information	from	the	patient	about	past	evaluations	and	treatment	must
be	 analyzed	 cautiously.	 Patient	 recollections	 may	 be	 flawed	 because	 of	 faulty
memory,	 misunderstanding,	 or	 other	 factors.	 Sir	 William	 Jenner	 declared,
“Never	believe	what	a	patient	tells	you	his	doctor	said.”	Encourage	the	patient	to
focus	on	symptoms	instead,	giving	a	detailed	account	of	 the	illness	in	his	 own
words.

In	general,	the	interviewer	should	intervene	as	little	as	possible.	However,	it	is
often	 necessary	 to	 lead	 the	 conversation	 away	 from	 obviously	 irrelevant
material,	 to	 obtain	 amplification	 on	 vague	 or	 incomplete	 statements,	 or	 to	 lead
the	story	in	directions	likely	to	yield	useful	information.	Allow	the	patient	to	use
his	own	words	as	much	as	possible,	but	it	is	important	to	determine	the	precise
meaning	 of	 words	 the	 patient	 uses.	 Clarify	 any	 ambiguity	 that	 could	 lead	 to
misinterpretation.	 Have	 the	 patient	 clarify	 what	 he	 means	 by	 lay	 terms	 like
kidney	trouble	or	dizziness.

Deciding	 whether	 the	 physician	 or	 the	 patient	 should	 control	 the	 pace	 and
content	 of	 the	 interview	 is	 a	 frequent	 problem.	 Patients	 do	 not	 practice	 history
giving.	Some	are	naturally	much	better	at	relating	the	pertinent	information	than
others.	 Many	 patients	 frequently	 digress	 into	 extraneous	 detail.	 The	 physician
adopting	 an	 overly	 passive	 role	 under	 such	 circumstances	 often	 prolongs	 the
interview	unnecessarily.	When	possible,	let	the	patient	give	the	initial	part	of	the
history	 without	 interruption.	 In	 a	 primary	 care	 setting,	 the	 average	 patient	 tells
his	 story	 in	 about	 5	 minutes.	 The	 average	 doctor	 interrupts	 the	 average	 patient
after	only	about	18	seconds.	In	44%	of	interviews	done	by	medical	interns,	the
patient	was	not	allowed	to	complete	the	opening	statement	of	concerns.	Female
physicians	 allowed	 fewer	 patients	 to	 finish	 their	 opening	 statement.	 Avoid
interrogation,	but	keeping	the	patient	on	track	with	focused	questions	is	entirely
appropriate.	 If	 the	 patient	 pauses	 to	 remember	 some	 irrelevancy,	 gently
encourage	him	not	to	dwell	on	it.	A	reasonable	method	is	to	let	the	patient	run	as
long	 as	 he	 is	 giving	 a	 decent	 account,	 and	 then	 take	 more	 control	 to	 clarify
necessary	 details.	 Some	 patients	 may	 need	 to	 relinquish	 more	 control	 than
others.	Experienced	clinicians	generally	make	a	diagnosis	through	a	process	of

hypothesis	testing	(see	Chapter	53).	At	some	point	in	the	interview,	the	physician
must	 assume	 greater	 control	 and	 query	 the	 patient	 regarding	 specific	 details	 of
his	 symptomatology—in	 order	 to	 test	 hypotheses	 and	 to	 help	 rule	 in	 or	 to	 rule
out	diagnostic	possibilities.

History	taking	in	certain	types	of	patients	may	require	special	techniques.	The
timid,	 inarticulate,	 or	 worried	 patient	 may	 require	 prompting	 with	 sympathetic
questions	or	reassuring	comments.	The	garrulous	person	may	need	to	be	stopped
before	 getting	 lost	 in	 a	 mass	 of	 irrelevant	 detail.	 The	 evasive	 or	 undependable
patient	may	have	to	be	queried	more	searchingly,	and	the	fearful,	antagonistic,	or
paranoid	patient	questioned	guardedly	to	avoid	arousing	fears	or	suspicions.	In
the	patient	with	multiple	or	vague	complaints,	insist	on	specifics.	The	euphoric
patient	may	minimize	or	neglect	his	symptoms;	the	depressed	or	anxious	patient
may	 exaggerate,	 and	 the	 excitable	 or	 hypochondriacal	 patient	 may	 be	 overly
concerned	 and	 recount	 his	 complaints	 at	 length.	 The	 range	 of	 individual
variations	is	wide,	and	this	must	be	taken	into	account	in	appraising	symptoms.
What	is	pain	to	the	anxious	or	depressed	patient	may	be	but	a	minor	discomfort
to	 another.	 A	 blasé	 attitude	 or	 seeming	 indifference	 may	 indicate	 pathologic
euphoria	 in	 one	 individual,	 but	 it	 could	 be	 a	 defense	 reaction	 in	 another.	 One
person	may	take	offense	at	questions	that	another	would	consider	commonplace.
Even	in	a	single	individual	such	factors	as	fatigue,	pain,	emotional	conflicts,	or
diurnal	 fluctuations	 in	 mood	 or	 temperament	 may	 cause	 a	 wide	 range	 of
variation	in	response	to	questions.	Patients	may	occasionally	conceal	important
information.	In	some	cases,	they	may	not	realize	the	information	is	important;	in
other	cases,	they	may	be	too	embarrassed	to	reveal	certain	details.

The	interview	provides	an	opportunity	to	study	the	patient’s	manner,	attitude,
behavior,	and	emotional	reactions.	The	tone	of	voice,	bearing,	expression	of	the
eyes,	swift	play	of	facial	muscles,	and	the	appearance	of	weeping	or	smiling—or
the	 presence	 of	 pallor,	 blushing,	 sweating,	 patches	 of	 erythema	 on	 the	 neck,
furrowing	 of	 the	 brows,	 drawing	 of	 the	 lips,	 clenching	 of	 the	 teeth,	 pupillary
dilation,	 or	 muscle	 rigidity—may	 give	 important	 information.	 Gesticulations,
restlessness,	 delay,	 hesitancy,	 and	 the	 relation	 of	 demeanor	 and	 emotional
responses	 to	 descriptions	 of	 symptoms	 or	 to	 details	 in	 the	 family	 or	 marital
history	 should	 be	 noted	 and	 recorded.	 These	 and	 the	 mode	 of	 response	 to	 the
questions	are	valuable	in	judging	character,	personality,	and	emotional	state.

The	 patient’s	 story	 may	 not	 be	 entirely	 correct	 or	 complete.	 He	 may	 not
possess	full	or	detailed	information	regarding	his	illness;	he	may	misinterpret	his
symptoms	or	give	someone	else’s	interpretation	of	them;	he	may	wishfully	alter

or	 withhold	 information;	 or	 he	 may	 even	 deliberately	 prevaricate	 for	 some
purpose.	The	patient	may	be	a	phlegmatic,	insensitive	individual	who	 does	not
comprehend	 the	 significance	 of	 his	 symptoms,	 a	 garrulous	 person	 who	 cannot
give	a	relevant	or	coherent	story,	or	someone	with	multiple	or	vague	complaints
that	cannot	be	readily	articulated.	Infants,	young	children,	comatose,	or	confused
patients	may	be	unable	to	give	any	history.	Patients	who	are	in	pain	or	distress,
have	 difficulty	 with	 speech	 or	 expression,	 are	 of	 low	 intelligence,	 or	 do	 not
speak	the	examiner’s	language	are	often	unable	to	give	a	satisfactory	history	for
themselves.	Patients	with	nondominant	parietal	lesions	are	often	not	fully	aware
of	 the	extent	of	 their	deficit.	It	may	 be	necessary	to	corroborate	or	supplement
the	history	given	by	the	patient	by	talking	with	an	observer,	relative,	or	friend,	or
even	 to	 obtain	 the	 entire	 history	 from	 someone	 else.	 Family	 members	 may	 be
able	to	give	important	information	about	changes	in	behavior,	memory,	hearing,
vision,	 speech,	 or	 coordination	 of	 which	 the	 patient	 may	 not	 be	 aware.	 It	 is
frequently	necessary	to	question	both	the	patient	and	others	in	order	to	obtain	a
complete	 account	 of	 the	 illness.	 Family	 members	 and	 significant	 others
sometimes	 accompany	 the	 patient	 during	 the	 interview.	 They	 can	 frequently
provide	 important	 supplementary	 information.	 However,	 the	 family	 member
must	not	be	permitted	to	dominate	the	patient’s	account	of	the	illness	unless	the
patient	is	incapable	of	giving	a	history.

It	is	usually	best	to	see	the	patient	de	novo	with	minimal	prior	review	of	the
medical	records.	Too	much	information	in	advance	of	the	patient	encounter	may
bias	 one’s	 opinion.	 If	 it	 later	 turns	 out	 that	 previous	 caregivers	 reached	 similar
conclusions	 based	 on	 primary	 information,	 this	 reinforces	 the	 likelihood	 of	 a
correct	diagnosis.	So,	see	the	patient	first,	and	review	old	records	later.

There	 are	 three	 approaches	 to	 utilizing	 information	 from	 past	 caregivers,
whether	from	medical	records	or	as	relayed	by	the	patient.	In	the	first	instance,
the	physician	takes	too	much	at	face	value	and	assumes	that	previous	diagnoses
must	be	correct.	An	opposite	approach,	actually	used	by	some,	is	to	assume	all
previous	caregivers	were	incompetent,	and	their	conclusions	could	not	possibly
be	correct.	This	approach	sometimes	forces	the	extreme	skeptic	into	a	position	of
having	 to	 make	 some	 other	 diagnosis,	 even	 when	 the	 preponderance	 of	 the
evidence	 indicates	 that	 previous	 physicians	 were	 correct.	 The	 logical	 middle
ground	is	to	make	no	assumptions	regarding	the	opinions	of	previous	caregivers.
Use	 the	 information	 appropriately,	 matching	 it	 against	 what	 the	 patient	 relates
and	 whatever	 other	 information	 is	 available.	 Do	 not	 unquestioningly	 believe	 it
all,	but	do	not	perfunctorily	dismiss	it	either.	Discourage	patients	from	grousing

about	 their	 past	 medical	 care	 and	 avoid	 disparaging	 remarks	 about	 other
physicians	the	patient	may	have	seen.	An	accurate	and	detailed	record	of	events
in	 cases	 involving	 compensation	 and	 medicolegal	 problems	 is	 particularly
important.

One	 efficient	 way	 to	 work	 is	 to	 combine	 reviewing	 past	 notes	 with	 talking
directly	 with	 the	 patient.	 If	 the	 records	 contain	 a	 reasonably	 complete	 history,
review	it	with	the	patient	for	accuracy.	For	instance,	read	from	the	records	and
say	to	the	patient,	“Dr.	Payne	says	here	that	you	have	been	having	pain	in	the	left
leg	 for	 the	 past	 6	 months.	 Is	 that	 correct?”	 The	 patient	 might	 verify	 that
information,	 or	 he	 may	 say,	 “No,	 it’s	 the	 right	 leg	 and	 it’s	 more	 like	 6	 years.”
Such	an	approach	can	save	considerable	time	when	dealing	with	a	patient	who
carries	extensive	previous	records.	A	very	useful	method	for	summarizing	a	past
workup	is	to	make	a	table	with	two	vertical	columns,	listing	all	tests	that	were
done—with	those	that	were	normal	in	one	column	and	those	that	were	abnormal
in	the	other	column.

Many	 physicians	 find	 it	 useful	 to	 take	 notes	 during	 the	 interview.
Contemporaneous	note	taking	helps	ensure	accuracy	of	the	final	report.	A	useful
approach	is	simply	to	take	dictation	as	the	patient	talks,	particularly	in	the	early
stages	 of	 the	 encounter.	 A	 note	 sprinkled	 with	 patient	 quotations	 is	 often	 very
illuminating.	 However,	 one	 must	 not	 be	 fixated	 on	 note	 taking.	 The	 trick	 is	 to
interact	 with	 the	 patient	 and	 take	 notes	 unobtrusively.	 The	 patient	 must	 not	 be
left	with	the	impression	that	the	physician	is	paying	attention	to	the	note	taking
and	 not	 to	 him.	 Such	 notes	 are	 typically	 used	 for	 later	 transcription	 into	 some
final	 format.	 Sometimes	 the	 patient	 comes	 armed	 with	 notes.	 The	 patient	 who
has	multiple	complaints	written	on	a	scrap	of	paper	is	said	to	have	la	maladie	du
petit	 papier;	 tech-savvy	 patients	 may	 come	 with	 computer	 printouts	 detailing
their	medical	histories.

THE	PRESENTING	COMPLAINT	AND	THE
PRESENT	ILLNESS

The	neurologic	history	usually	starts	with	obtaining	the	usual	demographic	data,
but	 it	 must	 also	 include	 handedness.	 The	 traditional	 approach	 to	 history	 taking
begins	 with	 the	 chief	 complaint	 and	 present	 illness.	 In	 fact,	 many	 experienced
clinicians	begin	with	the	pertinent	past	history,	identifying	major	underlying	past
or	chronic	medical	illnesses	at	the	outset.	This	does	not	mean	going	into	detail

about	 unrelated	 past	 surgical	 procedures	 and	 the	 like.	 It	 does	 mean	 identifying
major	comorbidities	that	 might	have	a	 direct	or	indirect	bearing	on	the	present
illness.	This	technique	helps	to	put	the	present	illness	in	context	and	to	prompt
early	 consideration	 about	 whether	 the	 neurologic	 problem	 is	 a	 complication	 of
some	 underlying	 condition	 or	 whether	 it	 is	 an	 independent	 process.	 It	 is
inefficient	to	go	through	a	long	and	laborious	history	in	a	patient	with	peripheral
neuropathy,	only	to	subsequently	find	out	in	the	past	history	that	the	patient	has
known,	long-standing	diabetes.

Although	 a	 complete	 database	 is	 important,	 it	 is	 counterproductive	 to	 give
short	shrift	to	the	details	of	the	present	illness.	History	taking	should	concentrate
on	the	details	of	the	presenting	complaint.	The	majority	of	the	time	spent	with	a
new	 patient	 should	 be	 devoted	 to	 the	 history,	 and	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 history-
taking	 time	 should	 be	 devoted	 to	 the	 symptoms	 of	 the	 present	 illness.	 The
answer	 most	 often	 lies	 in	 the	 details	 of	 the	 presenting	 problem.	 Begin	 with	 an
open-ended	question,	such	as,	“What	sort	of	problems	are	you	having?”	Asking,
“What	brought	you	here	today?”	often	produces	responses	regarding	a	mode	of
transportation.	And	asking,	“What	is	wrong	with	you?”	only	invites	wisecracks.
After	establishing	the	chief	complaint	or	reason	for	the	referral,	make	the	patient
start	at	the	beginning	of	the	story	and	go	through	it	more	or	less	chronologically.
Many	patients	will	not	do	this	unless	so	directed.	The	period	of	time	leading	up
to	 the	 onset	 of	 symptoms	 should	 be	 dissected	 to	 uncover	 such	 things	 as	 the
immunization	that	precipitated	an	episode	of	neuralgic	amyotrophy,	the	diarrheal
illness	prior	to	an	episode	of	Guillain-Barré	syndrome,	or	the	camping	trip	that
led	 to	 the	 tick	 bite.	 Patients	 are	 quick	 to	 assume	 that	 some	 recent	 event	 is	 the
cause	for	their	current	difficulty.	The	physician	must	avoid	the	trap	of	assuming
that	 temporal	 relationships	 prove	 etiologic	 relationships	 (the	 post	 hoc	 ergo
propter	hoc	fallacy).

Record	 the	 chief	 complaint	 in	 the	 patient’s	 own	 words.	 Sir	 William	 Osler
said,	“Give	the	patient’s	own	words	in	the	complaint.”	It	is	important	to	clarify
important	 elements	 of	 the	 history	 that	 the	 patient	 is	 unlikely	 to	 spontaneously
describe.	Each	symptom	of	the	present	illness	should	be	analyzed	systematically
by	asking	the	patient	a	series	of	questions	to	clear	up	any	ambiguities.	Determine
exactly	 when	 the	 symptoms	 began,	 whether	 they	 are	 present	 constantly	 or
intermittently;	 if	 intermittently,	 determine	 the	 character,	 duration,	 frequency,
severity,	 and	 relationship	 to	 external	 factors.	 Determine	 the	 progression	 or
regression	 of	 each	 symptom—whether	 there	 is	 any	 seasonal,	 diurnal,	 or
nocturnal	variability—and	the	response	to	treatment.	In	patients	whose	primary

complaint	 is	 pain,	 determine	 the	 location;	 character	 or	 quality;	 severity;
associated	 symptoms;	 and,	 if	 episodic,	 frequency,	 duration,	 and	 any	 specific
precipitating	or	relieving	factors.	Some	patients	have	difficulty	describing	such
things	as	the	character	of	a	pain.	Although	spontaneous	descriptions	have	more
value—and	 leading	 questions	 should	 in	 general	 be	 avoided—it	 is	 perfectly
permissible	 when	 necessary	 to	 offer	 possible	 choices,	 such	 as	 “dull	 like	 a
toothache”	or	“sharp	like	a	knife.”

In	neurologic	patients,	particular	attention	should	be	paid	to	determining	the
time	 course	 of	 the	 illness,	 as	 this	 is	 often	 instrumental	 in	 determining	 the
etiology.	 An	 illness	 might	 be	 static,	 remittent,	 intermittent,	 progressive,	 or
improving.	 Abrupt	 onset	 followed	 by	 improvement	 with	 variable	 degrees	 of
recovery	 is	 characteristic	 of	 trauma	 and	 vascular	 events.	 Degenerative	 diseases
have	 a	 gradual	 onset	 of	 symptoms	 and	 a	 variable	 rate	 of	 progression.	 Tumors
have	 a	 gradual	 onset	 and	 steady	 progression	 of	 symptoms,	 with	 the	 rate	 of
progression	depending	on	the	tumor	type.	With	some	neoplasms,	hemorrhage	or
spontaneous	necrosis	may	cause	sudden	onset	or	worsening.	Multiple	sclerosis	is
most	 often	 characterized	 by	 remissions	 and	 exacerbations,	 with	 a	 progressive
increase	 in	 the	 severity	 of	 symptoms.	 Stationary,	 intermittent,	 and	 chronic
progressive	forms	also	occur.	Infections	usually	have	a	relatively	sudden,	but	not
precipitous,	 onset.	 They	 are	 generally	 followed	 by	 gradual	 improvement	 and
either	 complete	 or	 incomplete	 recovery.	 In	 many	 conditions,	 symptoms	 appear
sometime	 before	 striking	 physical	 signs	 of	 disease	 are	 evident—and	 before
neurodiagnostic	testing	detects	significant	abnormalities.	It	is	important	to	know
the	major	milestones	of	an	illness:	when	the	patient	last	considered	himself	to	be
well,	when	he	had	to	stop	work,	when	he	began	to	use	an	assistive	device,	when
he	was	forced	to	take	to	his	bed.	It	is	often	useful	to	ascertain	exactly	how	and
how	severely	the	patient	considers	himself	disabled,	as	well	as	what	crystallized
the	decision	to	seek	medical	care.

A	 careful	 history	 may	 uncover	 previous	 events,	 which	 the	 patient	 may	 have
forgotten	 or	 may	 not	 attach	 significance	 to.	 A	 history	 consistent	 with	 past
vascular	 events,	 trauma,	 or	 episodes	 of	 demyelination	 may	 shed	 entirely	 new
light	on	the	current	symptoms.	In	the	patient	with	symptoms	of	myelopathy,	the
episode	 of	 visual	 loss	 that	 occurred	 5	 years	 previously	 suddenly	 takes	 on	 a
different	meaning.

It	 is	 useful	 at	 some	 point	 to	 ask	 the	 patient	 what	 is	 worrying	 him.	 It
occasionally	turns	out	that	the	patient	is	very	concerned	over	the	possibility	of
some	 disorder	 that	 has	 not	 even	 occurred	 to	 the	 physician	 to	 consider.	 Patients

with	neurologic	complaints	are	often	apprehensive	about	having	some	dreadful
disease,	such	as	a	brain	tumor,	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis,	multiple	sclerosis,
or	 muscular	 dystrophy.	 All	 these	 conditions	 are	 well	 known	 to	 the	 lay	 public,
and	 patients	 or	 family	 members	 occasionally	 jump	 to	 outlandish	 conclusions
about	the	cause	of	some	symptom.	Simple	reassurance	is	occasionally	all	that	is
necessary.

RETAKING	THE	HISTORY

The	history	may	need	to	be	taken	more	than	once.	A	good	general	working	rule
is	that	whenever	the	diagnosis	is	in	doubt,	take	the	history	again.	The	attending
effect	is	when	an	attending	takes	the	history	from	a	patient	after	the	history	has
been	 taken	 by	 one	 or	 more	 trainees.	 History	 taking	 improves	 with	 experience
because	the	clinician	is	able	to	generate	more	hypotheses	to	explain	the	patient’s
complaint	 and	 has	 more	 questions	 available	 to	 verify	 or	 exclude	 candidate
conditions.	 It	 is	 not	 uncommon	 for	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 relevant	 information	 to
suddenly	come	out	under	the	attending’s	questioning,	sometimes	to	the	chagrin
of	 students	 and	 house	 staff.	 Although	 the	 attending	 effect	 may	 be	 due	 to	 the
more	highly	evolved	history-taking	skills	of	an	experienced	clinician,	there	are
other	potential	explanations.	Patients	sometimes	forget	important	details	of	their
history	 during	 the	 initial	 encounter.	 They	 may	 also	 be	 sick,	 in	 pain,	 or
inattentive.	Many	initial	histories	are	taken	by	trainees	at	a	very	late	hour.	After
some	sleep,	a	little	breakfast,	and	some	time	to	ponder,	the	history	has	evolved
by	 the	 time	 of	 attending	 rounds	 as	 the	 patient	 recalls	 information	 prompted	 by
the	 earlier	 questioning.	 The	 previous	 history	 serves	 as	 a	 “warm-up.”	 When
working	 alone,	 take	 advantage	 of	 the	 attending	 effect	 by	 simply	 repeating	 and
verifying	the	key	portions	of	the	history	over	again	after	some	time	has	elapsed.

THE	PAST	MEDICAL	HISTORY

The	 past	 history	 is	 important	 because	 neurologic	 symptoms	 may	 be	 related	 to
systemic	 diseases.	 Relevant	 information	 includes	 a	 statement	 about	 general
health;	 history	 of	 current,	 chronic,	 and	 past	
illnesses;	 hospitalizations;
operations;	 accidents	 or	 injuries,	 particularly	 head	 trauma;	 infectious	 diseases;
venereal	diseases;	congenital	defects;	diet;	and	sleeping	patterns.	It	is	surprising
what	major	past	medical	and	surgical	history	patients	sometimes	forget	to	relate.

Inquiry	 should	 be	 made	 about	 allergies	 and	 other	 drug	 reactions.	 Certain
situations	and	comorbid	conditions	are	of	particular	concern	in	the	patient	with
neurologic	 symptomatology.	 The	 vegetarian	 or	 person	 with	 a	 history	 of	 gastric
surgery	 or	 inflammatory	 bowel	 disease	 is	 at	 risk	 of	 developing	 vitamin	 B12
deficiency,	 and	 the	 neurologic	 complications	 of	 connective	 tissue	 disorders,
diabetes,	thyroid	disease,	and	sarcoidosis	are	protean.	A	history	of	cancer	raises
concern	about	metastatic	disease	as	well	as	paraneoplastic	syndromes.	A	history
of	valvular	heart	disease	or	recent	myocardial	infarction	may	be	relevant	in	the
patient	 with	 cerebrovascular	 disease.	 In	 some	 instances,	 even	 in	 an	 adult,	 a
history	 of	 the	 patient’s	 birth	 and	 early	 development	 is	 pertinent,	 including	 any
complications	 of	 pregnancy,	 labor	 and	 delivery,	 birth	 trauma,	 birth	 weight,
postnatal	 illness,	 health	 and	 development	 during	 childhood,	 convulsions	 with
fever,	learning	ability,	and	school	performance.

A	 survey	 of	 current	 medications,	 both	 prescribed	 and	 over	 the	 counter,	 is
always	 important.	 Many	 drugs	 have	 significant	 neurologic	 side	 effects.	 For
example,	 confusion	 may	 develop	 in	 an	 elderly	 patient	 simply	 from	 the	 use	 of
beta-blocker	 ophthalmic	 solution;	 nonsteroidal	 anti-inflammatory	 drugs	 can
cause	aseptic	meningitis;	many	drugs	may	cause	dizziness,	cramps,	paresthesias,
headache,	weakness,	and	other	side	effects;	and	headaches	are	the	most	common
side	effect	of	proton	pump	inhibitors.	Going	over	the	details	of	the	drug	regimen
may	 reveal	 that	 the	 patient	 is	 not	 taking	 a	 medication	 as	 intended.	 Pointed
questions	 are	 often	 necessary	 to	 get	 at	 the	 issue	 of	 over-the-counter	 drugs,	 as
many	 patients	 do	 not	 consider	 these	 as	 medicines.	 Occasional	 patients	 develop
significant	 neurologic	 side	 effects	 from	 their	 well-intended	 vitamin	 regimen.
Patients	will	take	medicines	from	alternative	health	care	practitioners	or	from	a
health-food	 store,	 assuming	 these	 agents	 are	 safe	 because	 they	 are	 “natural,”
which	is	not	always	the	case.	Having	the	patient	bring	in	all	medication	bottles,
prescribed	 and	 over	 the	 counter,	 is	 occasionally	 fruitful.	 One	 patient	 was
shocked	to	find	she	had	been	taking	extract	of	bovine	testicle.

THE	FAMILY	HISTORY

The	 family	 history	 (FH)	 is	 essentially	 an	 inquiry	 into	 the	 possibility	 of
heredofamilial	 disorders	 and	 focuses	 on	 the	 patient’s	 lineage;	 it	 is	 occasionally
quite	 important	 in	 neurologic	 patients.	 Information	 about	 the	 nuclear	 family	 is
also	often	relevant	to	the	social	history	(as	noted	in	this	section).	In	addition	to

the	 usual	 questions	 about	 cancer,	 diabetes,	 hypertension,	 and	 cardiovascular
disease,	 the	 FH	 is	 particularly	 relevant	 in	 patients	 with	 migraine,	 epilepsy,
cerebrovascular	disease,	movement	disorders,	myopathy,	and	cerebellar	disease,
to	list	a	few.	In	some	patients,	it	is	pertinent	to	inquire	about	an	FH	of	alcoholism
or	 other	 types	 of	 substance	 abuse.	 Family	 size	 is	 important.	 A	 negative	 FH	 is
more	 reassuring	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 several	 siblings	 and	 a	 large	 extended	 family
than	in	a	patient	with	no	siblings	and	few	known	relatives.	It	is	not	uncommon	to
encounter	 patients	 who	 were	 adopted	 and	 have	 no	 knowledge	 of	 their	 biologic
family.

There	 are	 traps,	 and	 a	 negative	 FH	 is	 not	 always	 really	 negative.	 Some
diseases	may	be	rampant	in	a	kindred	without	any	awareness	of	it	by	the	affected
individuals.	 With	 Charcot-Marie-Tooth	 disease,	 for	 example,	 so	 many	 family
members	may	have	the	condition	that	the	pes	cavus	and	stork	leg	deformities	are
not	recognized	as	abnormal.	Chronic,	disabling	neurologic	conditions	in	a	family
member	 may	 be	 attributed	 to	 another	 cause,	 such	 as	 “arthritis.”	 Sometimes,
family	 members	 deliberately	 withhold	 information	 about	 a	 known	 familial
condition.

It	 is	 sometimes	 necessary	 to	 inquire	 about	 the	 relationship	 between	 the
parents,	 exploring	 the	 possibility	 of	 consanguinity.	 In	 some	 situations,	 it	 is
important	to	probe	the	patient’s	ethnic	background,	given	the	tendency	of	some
neurologic	 disorders	 to	 occur	 in	 particular	 ethnic	 groups	 or	 in	 patients	 from
certain	geographic	regions.

SOCIAL	HISTORY

The	social	history	includes	such	things	as	the	patient’s	marital	status,	educational
level,	 occupation,	 and	 personal	 habits.	 The	 marital	 history	 should	 include	 the
number	of	marriages,	duration	of	present	marriage,	and	health	of	the	partner	and
children.	 At	 times,	 it	 may	 be	 necessary	 to	 delve	 into	 marital	 adjustment	 and
health	of	the	relationship	as	well	as	the	circumstances	leading	to	any	changes	in
marital	status.

A	 question	 about	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 patient’s	 work	 is	 routine.	 A	 detailed
occupational	history,	occasionally	necessary,	should	delve	into	both	present	and
past	 occupations—with	 special	 reference	 to	 contact	 with	 neurotoxins,	 use	 of
personal	 protective	 equipment,	 working	 environment,	 levels	 of	 exertion	 and
repetitive	 motion	 activities,	 and	 coworker	 illnesses.	 A	 record	 of	 frequent	 job

changes	 or	 a	 poor	 work	 history	 may	 be	 important.	 If	 the	 patient	 is	 no	 longer
working,	determine	when	and	why	he	stopped.	In	some	situations,	it	is	relevant
to	inquire	about	hobbies	and	avocations,	particularly	when	toxin	exposure	or	a
repetitive	 motion	 injury	 is	 a	 diagnostic	 consideration.	 Previous	 residences,
especially	in	the	tropics	or	in	areas	where	certain	diseases	are	endemic,	may	be
relevant.

A	history	of	personal	habits	is	important,	with	special	reference	to	the	use	of
alcohol,	 tobacco,	 drugs,	 coffee,	 tea,	 soft	 drinks,	 and	 similar	 substances,	 or	 the
reasons	 for	 abstinence.	 Patients	 are	 often	 not	 forthcoming	 about	 the	 use	 of
alcohol	and	street	drugs,	especially	those	with	something	to	hide.	Answers	may
range	 from	 mildly	 disingenuous	 to	 bald-faced	 lies.	 Drugs	 and	 alcohol	 are
sometimes	 a	 factor	 in	 the	 most	 seemingly	 unlikely	 circumstances.	 Patients
notoriously	underreport	the	amount	of	alcohol	they	consume;	a	commonly	used
heuristic	is	to	double	the	admitted	amount.	To	get	a	more	realistic	idea	about	the
impact	of	alcohol	on	the	patient’s	life,	the	CAGE	questionnaire	is	useful	(Table
3.1).	Even	one	positive	response	is	suspicious,	and	four	are	diagnostic	of	alcohol
abuse.	 The	 HALT	 and	 BUMP	 are	 other	 similar	 question	 sets	 (Table	 3.1).	 The
Alcohol	 Use	 Disorders	 Identification	 Test	 (AUDIT)	 is	 a	 similar	 questionnaire;
the	abbreviated	AUDIT-C,	focused	on	the	consumption	items,	is	about	equal	in
accuracy	 to	 the	 full	 AUDIT.	 Some	 patients	 will	 not	 admit	 to	 drinking	 alcohol
and	 will	 only	 confess	 when	 the	 examiner	 hits	 on	 their	 specific	 beverage	 of
choice,	for	example,	gin.	Always	ask	the	patient	who	denies	drinking	at	all	some
follow-up	question:	why	he	doesn’t	drink,	if	he	ever	drank,	or	when	he	quit.	This
may	uncover	a	past	or	FH	of	substance	abuse,	or	the	patient	may	admit	he	quit
only	 the	 week	 before.	 In	 the	 patient	 suspected	 of	 alcohol	 abuse,	 take	 a	 dietary
history.

Patients	are	even	more	secretive	about	drug	habits.	Tactful	opening	questions
might	be	to	ask	whether	the	patient	has	ever	used	drugs	for	other	than	medicinal
purposes,	 ever	 abused	 prescription	 drugs,	 or	 ever	 ingested	 drugs	 other	 than	 by
mouth.	The	vernacular	is	often	necessary.	Patients	understand	smoke	crack	better
than	inhale	cocaine.	It	is	useful	to	know	the	street	names	of	commonly	abused
drugs,	 but	 these	 change	 frequently	 as	 both	 slang	 and	 drugs	 go	 in	 and	 out	 of
fashion.	 In	 addition	 to	 such	 notorious	 illicit	 drugs	 as	 cocaine,	 heroin,	 PCP,
methamphetamine,	 psychedelic	 mushrooms,	 and	 LSD,	 newer	 agents	 constantly
appear,	such	as	bath	salts	and	synthetic	marijuana.	The	drugscape	evolves.	The
marijuana	 now	 legal	 in	 several	 U.S.	 states	 is	 much	 more	 potent	 than	 the
marijuana	 of	 decades	 ago,	 and	 its	 toxicity	 is	 underappreciated.	 A	 less	 refined

type	 of	 substance	 abuse	 is	 to	 inhale	 common	 substances,	 such	 as	 spray	 paint,
airplane	 glue,	 paint	 thinner,	 gasoline,	 and	 nitrous	 oxide.	 It	 is	 astounding	 what
some	 individuals	 will	 do.	 One	 patient	 was	 fond	 of	 smoking	 marijuana	 and
inhaling	gasoline—specifically,	leaded	gasoline—so	that	he	could	hallucinate	in
color.	The	abuse	of	prescription	drugs	has	become	a	major	public	health	problem
and	is	far	more	prevalent	than	the	abuse	of	illicit	drugs.	As	much	as	20%	of	the
U.S.	population	is	estimated	to	have	abused	prescription	drugs,	including	opiate
painkillers,	sedatives,	tranquilizers,	dextromethorphan,	ketamine,	and	stimulants.
Abuse	 of	 such	 drugs	 as	 hydrocodone,	 oxycodone,	 Adderall,	 alprazolam,	 and
clonazepam	is	common.

TABLE
3.1

Questions	to	Explore	the	Possibility	of	Alcohol	Abuse

CAGE	Questions

Have	you	ever	felt	the	need	to	Cut	down	on	your	drinking?
Have	people	Annoyed	you	by	criticizing	your	drinking?
Have	you	ever	felt	Guilty	about	your	drinking?
Have	you	ever	had	a	morning	“Eye-opener”	to	steady	your	nerves	or	get

rid	of	a	hangover?

HALT	Questions

Do	you	usually	drink	to	get	High?
Do	you	drink	Alone?
Do	you	ever	find	yourself	Looking	forward	to	drinking?
Have	you	noticed	that	you	are	becoming	Tolerant	to	alcohol?

BUMP	Questions

Have	you	ever	had	Blackouts?
Have	you	ever	used	alcohol	in	an	Unplanned	way	(drank	more	than

intended	or	continued	to	drink	after	having	enough)?

Do	you	ever	drink	for	Medicinal	reasons	(to	control	anxiety,	depression,

or	the	shakes)?

Do	you	find	yourself	Protecting	your	supply	of	alcohol	(hoarding,	buying

extra)?

Determining	 if	 the	 patient	 has	 ever	 engaged	 in	 risky	 sexual	 behavior	 is
sometimes	 important,	 but	 the	 subject	 is	 always	 difficult	 to	 broach.	 Patients	 are
often	 less	 reluctant	 to	 discuss	 the	 topic	 than	 the	 examiner.	 Useful	 opening
gambits	might	include	how	often	and	with	whom	the	patient	has	sex,	whether	the
patient	 engages	 in	 unprotected	 sex,	 or	 whether	 the	 patient	 has	 ever	 had	 a
sexually	transmitted	disease	(STD).

REVIEW	OF	SYSTEMS

In	 primary	 care	 medicine,	 the	 review	 of	 systems	 (ROS)	 is	 designed	 in	 part	 to
detect	 health	 problems	 of	 which	 the	 patient	 may	 not	 complain,	 but	 which
nevertheless	 require	 attention.	 In	 specialty	 practice,	 the	 ROS	 is	 done	 more	 to
detect	 symptoms	 involving	 other	 systems	 of	 that	 the	 patient	 may	 not
spontaneously	complain	but	that	provide	clues	to	the	diagnosis	of	the	presenting
complaint.	Neurologic	disease	may	cause	dysfunction	involving	many	different
systems.	In	patients	presenting	with	neurologic	symptoms,	a	neurologic	ROS	is
useful	 after	 exploring	 the	 present	 illness	 to	 uncover	 relevant	 neurologic
complaints.	 Some	 question	 areas	 worth	 probing	 into	 are	 summarized	 in	 Table
3.2.	Symptoms	of	depression	are	often	particularly	relevant	and	are	summarized
in	 Table	 3.3.	 A	 more	 general	 ROS	 may	 also	 reveal	 important	 information
relevant	to	the	present	illness	(Table	3.4).	Occasionally,	patients	have	a	generally
positive	 ROS,	 with	 complaints	 in	 multiple	 systems	 out	 of	 proportion	 to	 any
evidence	 of	 organic	 disease.	 Patients	 with	 Briquet’s	 syndrome	 have	 a
somatization	 disorder	 with	 multiple	 somatic	 complaints,	 which	 they	 often
describe	in	colorful,	exaggerated	terms.

The	 ROS	 is	 often	 done	 by	 questionnaire	 in	 outpatients.	 Another	 efficient
method	 is	 to	 do	 the	 ROS	 during	 the	 physical	 examination,	 asking	 about
symptoms	related	to	each	organ	system	as	it	is	examined.

TABLE
3.2

A	Neurologic	System	Review:	Symptoms	Worth	Inquiring
About	in	Patients	Presenting	with	Neurologic	Complaints

Any	history	of	seizures	or	unexplained	loss	of	consciousness

Headache
Vertigo	or	dizziness
Loss	of	vision
Diplopia
Difficulty	hearing
Tinnitus
Difficulty	with	speech	or	swallowing
Weakness,	difficulty	moving,	abnormal	movements
Numbness,	tingling
Tremor
Problems	with	gait,	balance,	or	coordination
Difficulty	with	sphincter	control	or	sexual	function
Difficulty	with	thinking	or	memory
Problems	sleeping	or	excessive	sleepiness
Depressive	symptoms	(Table	3.3)

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

HISTORY	IN	SOME	COMMON	CONDITIONS

Some	 of	 the	 important	 historical	 features	 to	 explore	 in	 patients	 with	 some
common	 neurologic	 complaints	 are	 summarized	 in	 Tables	 3.5	 through	 3.13.
There	are	too	many	potential	neurologic	presenting	complaints	to	cover	them	all,
so	these	tables	should	be	regarded	only	as	a	starting	point	and	an	illustration	of
the	process.	Space	does	not	permit	an	explanation	of	the	differential	diagnostic
relevance	of	each	of	these	elements	of	the	history.	Suffice	it	to	say	that	each	of
these	 elements	 in	 the	 history	 has	 significance	 in	 ruling	 in	 or	 ruling	 out	 some
diagnostic	possibility.	Such	a	“list”	exists	for	every	complaint	in	every	patient.
Learning	and	refining	these	lists	is	the	challenge	of	medicine.

TABLE	3.3

Some	Symptoms	Suggesting	Depression

Depressed	mood,	sadness
Unexplained	weight	gain	or	loss

Increased	or	decreased	appetite
Sleep	disturbance
Lack	of	energy,	tiredness,	fatigue
Loss	of	interest	in	activities
Anhedonia
Feelings	of	guilt	or	worthlessness
Suicidal	ideation
Psychomotor	agitation	or	retardation
Sexual	dysfunction
Difficulty	concentrating	or	making	decisions
Difficulty	with	memory

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

For	example,	Table	3.5	lists	some	of	the	specific	important	historical	points
helpful	 in	 evaluating	 the	 chronic	 headache	 patient.	 The	 following	 features	 are
general	rules	and	guidelines,	not	absolutes.	Patients	with	migraine	tend	to	have
unilateral	 hemicranial	 or	 orbitofrontal	
throbbing	 pain	 associated	 with
gastrointestinal	 (GI)	 upset.	 Those	 suffering	 from	 migraine	 with	 aura	 (classical
migraine)	have	visual	or	neurologic	accompaniments.	Patients	usually	seek	relief
by	lying	quietly	in	a	dark,	quiet	environment.	Patients	with	cluster	headache	tend
to	 have	 unilateral	 nonpulsatile	 orbitofrontal	 pain	 with	 no	 visual,	 GI,	 or
neurologic	 accompaniments;	 they	 tend	 to	 get	 some	 relief	 by	 moving	 about.
Patients	 with	 tension-type	 headaches	 tend	 to	 have	 nonpulsatile	 pain,	 which	 is
band-like	 or	 occipitonuchal	 in	 distribution	 and	 unaccompanied	 by	 visual,
neurologic,	or	GI	upset.

Table	3.6	lists	some	of	the	important	elements	in	the	history	in	patients	with
neck	 and	 arm	 pain.	 The	 primary	 differential	 diagnosis	 is	 usually	 between
cervical	 radiculopathy	 and	 musculoskeletal	 conditions	 such	 as	 bursitis,
tendinitis,	impingement	syndrome,	and	myofascial	pain.	Patients	with	a	cervical
disc	usually	have	pain	primarily	in	the	neck,	trapezius	ridge,	and	upper	shoulder
region.	 Patients	 with	 cervical	 myofascial	 pain	 have	 pain	 in	 the	 same	 general
distribution.	 Radiculopathy	 patients	 may	 have	 pain	 referred	 to	 the	 pectoral	 or
periscapular	 regions,	 which	 is	 unusual	 in	 myofascial	 pain.	 Radiculopathy
patients	may	have	pain	radiating	in	a	radicular	distribution	down	the	arm.	Pain
the	 elbow	 usually	 means	 radiculopathy.	 Patients	 with
radiating	 below	

radiculopathy	 have	 pain	 on	 movement	 of	 the	 neck;	 those	 with	 shoulder
pathology	have	pain	on	movement	of	the	shoulder.	Patients	with	radiculopathy
may	have	weakness	or	sensory	symptoms	in	the	involved	extremity.

Tables	3.7	 through	 3.13	 summarize	 some	 important	 historical	 particulars	 to
consider	in	some	of	the	other	complaints	frequently	encountered	in	an	outpatient
setting.

TABLE
3.4

Items	in	the	Review	of	Systems	of	Possible	Neurologic
Relevance,	with	Examples	of	Potentially	Related
Neurologic	Conditions	in	Parentheses

General

Weight	loss	(depression,	neoplasia)
Decreased	energy	level	(depression)
Chills/fever	(occult	infection)

Head

Headaches	(many)
Trauma	(subdural	hematoma)

Eyes

Refractive	status;	lenses,	refractive	surgery
Episodic	visual	loss	(amaurosis	fugax)
Progressive	visual	loss	(optic	neuropathy)
Diplopia	(numerous)
Ptosis	(myasthenia	gravis)
Dry	eyes	(Sjögren’s	syndrome)
Photosensitivity	(migraine)
Eye	pain	(optic	neuritis)

Ears

Hearing	loss	(acoustic	neuroma)
Discharge	(cholesteatoma)

Tinnitus	(Ménière’s	disease)
Vertigo	(vestibulopathy)
Vesicles	(H.	zoster)

Nose

Anosmia	(olfactory	groove	meningioma)
Discharge	(CSF	rhinorrhea)

Mouth

Sore	tongue	(nutritional	deficiency)

Neck

Pain	(radiculopathy)
Stiffness	(meningitis)

Cardiovascular

Heart	disease	(many)
Claudication	(neurogenic	vs.	vascular)
Hypertension	(cerebrovascular	disease)
Cardiac	arrhythmia	(cerebral	embolism)

Respiratory

Dyspnea	(neuromuscular	disease)
Asthma	(systemic	vasculitis)
Tuberculosis	(meningitis)

Gastrointestinal

Appetite	change	(hypothalamic	lesion)
Excessive	thirst	(diabetes	mellitus	or	insipidus)
Dysphagia	(myasthenia)
Constipation	(dysautonomia,	mitochondrial	neurogastrointestinal

encephalomyopathy	[MNGIE])

Vomiting	(increased	intracranial	pressure)
Hepatitis	(vasculitis,	cryoglobulinemia)

Genitourinary

Urinary	incontinence	(neurogenic	bladder)
Urinary	retention	(neurogenic	bladder)
Impotence	(dysautonomia)
Polyuria	(diabetes	mellitus	or	insipidus)
Spontaneous	abortion	(anticardiolipin	syndrome)
Sexually	transmitted	disease	(neurosyphilis)
Pigmenturia	(porphyria,	rhabdomyolysis)

Menstrual	history

Last	menstrual	period	and	contraception
Oral	contraceptive	use	(stroke)
Hormone	replacement	therapy	(migraine)

Endocrine

Galactorrhea	(pituitary	tumor)
Amenorrhea	(pituitary	insufficiency)
Enlarging	hands/feet	(acromegaly)
Thyroid	disease	(many)

Musculoskeletal

Arthritis	(connective	tissue	disease)
Muscle	cramps	(ALS)
Myalgias	(myopathy)

Hematopoietic

Anemia	(B12	deficiency)

Deep	venous	thrombosis	(anticardiolipin	syndrome)

Skin

Rashes	(Lyme	disease,	drug	reactions)
Insect	bites	(Lyme	disease,	rickettsial	infection,	tick	paralysis)
Birthmarks	(phakomatoses)

Psychiatric

Depression	(many)
Psychosis	(Creutzfeldt-Jakob	disease)
Hallucination	(Lewy	body	disease)
Grandiosity	(neurosyphilis)

TABLE
3.5

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Chronic	Headache
Patient

If	the	patient	has	more	than	one	kind	of	headache,	obtain	the

information	for	each	type.

Location	of	the	pain	(e.g.,	hemicranial,	holocranial,	occipitonuchal,

band-like)
Pain	intensity
Pain	quality	(e.g.,	steady,	throbbing,	stabbing)
Severity
Timing,	duration,	and	frequency
Average	daily	caffeine	intake
Average	daily	analgesic	intake	(including	over-the-counter	medications)
Precipitating	factors	(e.g.,	alcohol,	sleep	deprivation,	oversleeping,

foods,	bright	light)

Relieving	factors	(e.g.,	rest/quiet,	dark	room,	activity,	medications)
Response	to	treatment
Neurologic	accompaniments	(e.g.,	numbness,	paresthesias,	weakness,

speech	disturbance)

Visual	accompaniments	(e.g.,	scintillating	scotoma,	transient	blindness)

Gastrointestinal	accompaniments	(e.g.,	nausea,	vomiting,	anorexia)
Associated	symptoms	(e.g.,	photophobia,	phonophobia/sonophobia,

tearing,	nasal	stuffiness)
Any	history	of	head	trauma

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.6

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with	Neck	and
Arm	Pain

Note:	The	differential	diagnosis	is	most	often	between	radiculopathy

and	musculoskeletal	pain.

Onset	and	duration	(acute,	subacute,	chronic)
Pain	intensity
Any	history	of	injury
Any	history	of	preceding	viral	infection	or	immunization
Any	past	history	of	disc	herniation,	disc	surgery,	or	previous	episodes	of

neck	or	arm	pain

Location	of	the	worst	pain	(e.g.,	neck,	arm,	shoulder)
Pain	radiation	pattern,	if	any	(e.g.,	to	shoulder,	arm,	pectoral	region,

periscapular	region)

Relation	of	pain	to	neck	movement
Relation	of	pain	to	arm	and	shoulder	movement
Relieving	factors
Any	exacerbation	with	coughing,	sneezing,	straining	at	stool
Any	weakness	of	the	arm	or	hand
Any	numbness,	paresthesias,	or	dysesthesias	of	the	arm	or	hand
Any	associated	leg	weakness	or	bowel,	bladder,	or	sexual	dysfunction

suggesting	spinal	cord	compression

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.7

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with	Back	and
Leg	Pain

Note:	The	differential	diagnosis	is	most	often,	as	with	neck	and	arm

pain,	between	radiculopathy	and	musculoskeletal	pain.

Onset	and	duration	(acute,	subacute,	chronic)
Pain	intensity
Any	history	of	injury
Any	past	history	of	disc	herniation,	disc	surgery,	or	previous	episodes	of

back/leg	pain

Location	of	the	worst	pain	(e.g.,	back,	buttock,	hip,	leg)
Pain	radiation	pattern,	if	any	(e.g.,	to	buttock,	thigh,	leg,	or	foot)
Relation	of	pain	to	body	position	(e.g.,	standing,	sitting,	lying	down)
Relation	of	pain	to	activity	and	movement	(bending,	stooping,	leg

motion)

Any	exacerbation	with	coughing,	sneezing,	straining	at	stool
Any	weakness	of	the	leg,	foot,	or	toes
Any	numbness,	paresthesias,	or	dysesthesias	of	the	leg	or	foot
Relieving	factors
Any	associated	bowel,	bladder,	or	sexual	dysfunction	suggesting	cauda

equina	compression

Any	associated	fever,	weight	loss,	or	morning	stiffness

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE	3.8

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Dizzy	Patient

Patient’s	precise	definition	of	dizziness
Nature	of	onset
Severity
Presence	or	absence	of	an	illusion	of	motion
Symptoms	present	persistently	or	intermittently
If	intermittently,	frequency,	duration,	and	timing	of	attacks
Relation	of	dizziness	to	body	position	(e.g.,	standing,	sitting,	lying)
Any	precipitation	of	dizziness	by	head	movement
Associated	symptoms	(e.g.,	nausea,	vomiting,	tinnitus,	hearing	loss,

weakness,	numbness,	diplopia,	dysarthria,	dysphagia,	difficulty	with
gait	or	balance,	palpitations,	shortness	of	breath,	dry	mouth,*	chest
pain)

Medications,	especially	antihypertensives	or	ototoxic	drugs

*Can	be	a	clue	to	hyperventilation.
Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.9

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with	Hand
Numbness

Note:	The	primary	considerations	in	the	differential	diagnosis	are	carpal

tunnel	syndrome	and	cervical	radiculopathy.

Symptoms	constant	or	intermittent
If	intermittent,	timing,	especially	any	relationship	to	time	of	day,

especially	any	tendency	for	nocturnal	symptoms,	duration	and
frequency

Relationship	to	activities	(e.g.,	driving)
What	part	of	hand	most	involved
Any	involvement	of	the	arm,	face,	leg
Any	problems	with	speech	or	vision	associated	with	the	hand	numbness
Neck	pain
Hand/arm	pain
Hand/arm	weakness
Any	history	of	injury,	especially	old	wrist	injury
Any	involvement	of	the	opposite	hand

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.10

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with	a
Suspected	Transient	Ischemic	Attack

Note:	This	arises	in	patients	who	have	had	one	or	more	spells	of

weakness	or	numbness	involving	one	side	of	the	body,	transient	loss
of	vision,	symptoms	of	vertebrobasilar	insufficiency,	and	similar

problems.

Date	of	first	spell	and	number	of	attacks
Frequency	of	attacks
Duration	of	attacks
Specific	body	parts	and	functions	involved
Any	associated	difficulty	with	speech,	vision,	swallowing,	etc.
Other	associated	symptoms	(chest	pain,	shortness	of	breath,	nausea

and	vomiting,	headache)

Any	history	of	hypertension,	diabetes	mellitus,	hypercholesterolemia,
coronary	artery	disease,	peripheral	vascular	disease,	drug	abuse
Any	past	episodes	suggestive	of	retinal,	hemispheric,	or	vertebrobasilar

transient	ischemic	attack

Current	medications	especially	aspirin,	oral	contraceptives,

antihypertensives

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.11

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with	Episodic
Loss	of	Consciousness:	The	Differential	Diagnosis	of
Syncope	versus	Seizure

Timing	of	attack	(e.g.,	frequency,	duration)
Patient’s	recollection	of	events
Circumstances	of	attack	(e.g.,	in	church,	in	the	shower,	after

phlebotomy)

Events	just	prior	to	attack
Body	position	just	prior	to	attack	(e.g.,	supine,	sitting,	standing)
Presence	of	prodrome	or	aura
Any	tonic	or	clonic	activity
Any	suggestion	of	focal	onset
Any	incontinence	or	tongue	biting
Symptoms	following	the	spell	(e.g.,	sleeping,	focal	neurologic	deficit)
Time	to	complete	recovery
Witness	description	of	attacks

Drug,	alcohol,	and	medication	exposure
Family	history	(FH)

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.12

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	with
Numbness	of	the	Feet

Note:	The	differential	diagnosis	is	usually	between	peripheral

neuropathy	and	lumbosacral	radiculopathy.	There	is	a	further
extensive	differential	diagnosis	of	the	causes	of	peripheral
neuropathy.

Whether	symptoms	are	constant	or	intermittent
If	intermittent,	any	relation	to	posture,	activity,	or	movement
Any	associated	pain	in	the	back,	legs,	or	feet
Any	weakness	of	the	legs	or	feet
Any	history	of	back	injury,	disc	herniation,	back	surgery
Symmetry	of	symptoms
Any	bowel,	bladder,	or	sexual	dysfunction
Any	history	of	underlying	systemic	disease	(e.g.,	diabetes	mellitus,

thyroid	disease,	anemia,	low	vitamin	B12	level)

Any	weight	loss
Drinking	habits
Smoking	history
Any	history	to	suggest	toxin	exposure,	vocational	or	recreational
Dietary	history
Medication	history,	including	vitamins
Family	history	(FH)	of	similar	symptoms
FH	of	diabetes,	pernicious	anemia,	or	peripheral	neuropathy

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

TABLE
3.13

Important	Historical	Points	in	the	Patient	Complaining
of	Memory	Loss

Note:	The	primary	consideration	is	to	distinguish	Alzheimer’s	disease
from	conditions—especially	treatable	ones—that	may	mimic	it.

Duration	of	the	problem
Getting	worse,	better,	or	staying	the	same
Examples	of	what	is	forgotten	(minor	things	such	as	dates,

anniversaries,	etc.,	as	compared	to	major	things)

Does	the	patient	still	control	the	checkbook
Any	tendency	to	get	lost
Medication	history,	including	over-the-counter	drugs
Drinking	habits
Any	headache
Any	difficulty	with	the	senses	of	smell	or	taste
Any	difficulty	with	balance,	walking,	or	bladder	control
Any	depressive	symptoms	(see	Table	3.3)
Any	recent	head	trauma
Past	history	of	stroke	or	other	vascular	disease
Past	history	of	thyroid	disease,	anemia,	low	vitamin	B12,	any	STDs
Any	risk	factors	for	HIV
FH	of	dementia	or	Alzheimer’s	disease

Modified	from	Campbell	WW,	Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:
Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Caplan	 LC,	 Hollander	 J.	 The	 Effective	 Clinical	 Neurologist.	 3rd	 ed.	 Shelton:

People’s	Medical	Publishing	House,	2010.

DeGowin	 RL,	 Brown	 DD.	 DeGowin’s	 Diagnostic	 Examination.	 9th	 ed.	 New

York:	McGraw-Hill,	2009.

Duffy	DL,	Hamerman	D,	Cohen	MA.	Communication	skills	of	house	officers.	A

study	in	a	medical	clinic.	Ann	Intern	Med	1980;93:354–357.

Griffith	 CH,	 Rich	 EC,	 Wilson	 JF.	 House	 staff’s	 knowledge	 of	 their	 patients’

social	histories.	Acad	Med	1995;70:64–66.

Haponik	 EF,	 Frye	 AW,	 Richards	 B,	 et	 al.	 Sleep	 history	 is	 neglected	 diagnostic
information.	 Challenges	 for	 primary	 care	 physicians.	 J	 Gen	 Intern	 Med

1996;11:759–761.

Marvel	 K,	 Major	 G,	 Jones	 K,	 et	 al.	 Dialogues	 in	 the	 exam	 room:	 medical

interviewing	by	resident	family	physicians.	Fam	Med	2000;32:628–632.

Meuleman	JR,	Caranasos	GJ.	 Evaluating	 the	interview	performance	of	internal

medicine	interns.	Acad	Med	1989;64:277–279.

Meuleman	JR,	Harward	MP.	Assessing	medical	interview	performance.	Effect	of
interns’	gender	and	month	of	training.	Arch	Intern	Med	1992;152:1677–1680.
Platt	FW,	McMath	JC.	Clinical	hypocompetence:	the	interview.	Ann	Intern	Med

1979;91:898–902.

Rich	EC,	Crowson	TW,	Harris	IB.	The	diagnostic	value	of	the	medical	history.
Perceptions	of	internal	medicine	physicians.	Arch	Intern	Med	1987;147:1957–
1960.

Robbins	 AS,	 Kauss	 DR,	 Heinrich	 R,	 et	 al.	 Interpersonal	 skills	 training:
evaluation	in	an	internal	medicine	residency.	J	Med	Educ	1979;54:885–894.
Sapira	 JD.	 The	 Art	 and	 Science	 of	 Bedside	 Diagnosis.	 Baltimore:	 Urban	 &

Schwarzenberg,	1990.

Sideris	 DA,	 Tsouna-Hadjis	 P,	 Toumanidis	 S,	 et	 al.	 A	 self-learning	 approach	 to

history-taking.	Med	Educ	1990;24:46–51.

Swartz	MH.	Textbook	of	Physical	Diagnosis:	History	and	Examination.	6th	ed.

Philadelphia:	W.	B.	Saunders,	2010.

Woolliscroft	 JO,	 Calhoun	 JG,	 Billiu	 GA,	 et	 al.	 House	 officer	 interviewing
techniques:	 impact	 on	 data	 elicitation	 and	 patient	 perceptions.	 J	 Gen	 Intern
Med	1989;4:108–114.

CHAPTER	4

The	General	Physical	Examination

A	 general	 physical	 examination	 (PE)	 usually	 accompanies	 a	 neurologic
examination	 (NE).	 The	 extent	 of	 the	 general	 PE	 done	 depends	 on	 the
circumstances;	 it	 may	 range	 from	 minimal	 to	 extensive.	 The	 general	 PE	 in	 a
neurologic	 patient	 need	 not	 be	 so	 detailed	 or	 painstaking	 as	 in	 a	 complicated
internal	medicine	patient,	but	it	must	be	complete	enough	to	reveal	any	relevant
abnormalities.	 There	 are	 many	 excellent	 textbooks	 on	 physical	 diagnosis	 that
provide	an	extensive	discussion	of	general	PE	techniques.

Even	the	most	compulsive	internist	doing	a	“complete	physical”	performs	an
NE	 that	 the	 average	 neurologist	 would	 consider	 cursory.	 In	 contrast,	 the
neurologist	 performs	 a	 more	 complete	 NE	 but	 only	 as	 much	 general	 PE	 as	 the
circumstances	 dictate.	 Both	 are	 concerned	 about	 achieving	 the	 proper	 balance
between	 efficiency	 and	 thoroughness.	 The	 internist	 or	 other	 primary	 care
practitioner	would	like	to	learn	how	to	incorporate	the	NE	into	the	general	PE,
whereas	the	neurologist	would	like	to	incorporate	as	much	of	the	general	PE	as
possible	 into	 the	 NE.	 In	 fact,	 any	 NE,	 even	 a	 cursory	 one,	 provides	 an
opportunity	to	accomplish	much	of	the	general	PE	simply	by	observation	and	a
few	additional	maneuvers.

The	 general	 examination	 begins	 with	 observation	 of	 the	 patient	 during	 the
interview.	 Even	 the	 patient’s	 voice	 may	 be	 relevant	 because	 hoarseness,
dysphonia,	 aphasia,	 dysarthria,	 confusion,	 and	 other	 things	 of	 neurologic
significance	 may	 be	 apparent	 even	 at	 that	 early	 stage.	 An	 exam	 of	 head,	 eyes,
ears,	 nose,	 and	 throat	 is	 a	 natural	 by-product	 of	 an	 evaluation	 of	 the	 cranial
nerves.	 When	 examining	 the	 pupils	 and	 extraocular	 movements,	 take	 the
opportunity	 to	 note	 any	 abnormalities	 of	 the	 external	 eye	 and	 ocular	 adnexa,
such	 as	 conjunctivitis,	 exophthalmos,	 lid	 retraction,	 lid	 lag,	 xanthelasma,	 or
jaundice.	When	examining	the	mouth,	as	an	extension	of	the	general	PE,	search
for	 any	 intraoral	 lesions,	 leukoplakia,	 or	 other	 abnormalities.	 When	 examining

the	 optic	 disc,	 also	 examine	 the	 retina	 for	 any	 evidence	 of	 diabetic	 or
hypertensive	 retinopathy.	 While	 examining	 neurologic	 function	 in	 the	 upper
extremities,	there	is	ample	opportunity	to	observe	for	the	presence	of	clubbing,
cyanosis,	nail	changes,	hand	deformity,	arthropathy,	and	so	forth	to	complete	the
upper-extremity	examination	portion	of	the	general	PE.	Examining	the	legs	and
feet	 for	 strength,	 reflexes,	 sensation,	 and	 plantar	 responses	 provides	 an
opportunity	 to	 coincidentally	 look	 at	 the	 skin	 and	 nails.	 Check	 for	 pretibial
edema,	 leg	 length	 discrepancy,	 swollen	 or	 deformed	 knee	 or	 ankle	 joints,	 pes
cavus,	hammer	toes,	or	any	other	abnormalities.	Note	the	pattern	of	hair	growth,
any	dystrophic	changes	in	the	nails,	and	feel	the	pulses	in	the	feet.	Do	anything
else	necessary	for	the	lower	extremity	portion	of	the	general	PE.	An	evaluation
of	gait	and	station	provides	a	great	deal	of	information	about	the	musculoskeletal
system.	Note	whether	the	patient	has	any	orthopedic	limitations,	such	as	a	varus
deformity	of	the	knee,	genu	recurvatum,	or	pelvic	tilt.	Gait	testing	also	provides
a	 convenient	 opportunity	 to	 examine	 the	 lumbosacral	 spine	 for	 tenderness	 and
range	 of	 motion.	 After	 listening	 for	 carotid	 bruits,	 it	 requires	 little	 additional
effort	to	palpate	the	neck	for	masses	and	thyromegaly.

The	NE	can	thus	serve	as	a	core	around	which	a	general	PE	can	be	built.	At
the	end	of	a	good	NE,	one	has	only	to	listen	to	the	heart	and	lungs	and	palpate
the	abdomen	to	have	also	done	a	fairly	complete	general	PE.	Sometimes,	it	is	not
so	 important	 to	 do	 a	 skillful	 general	 PE	 as	 it	 is	 to	 be	 willing	 to	 do	 one	 at	 all.
Some	findings	are	obvious	if	one	merely	takes	the	trouble	to	look.

William	Osler	said,	“There	are,	in	truth,	no	specialties	in	medicine,	since	to
know	 fully	 many	 of	 the	 most	 important	 diseases	 a	 man	 must	 be	 familiar	 with
their	manifestations	in	many	organs.”	Although	there	is	virtually	no	part	of	the
general	PE	that	may	not	occasionally	be	noteworthy	in	a	particular	circumstance,
some	parts	of	the	general	PE	are	more	often	relevant	and	important	in	patients
presenting	 with	 neurologic	 complaints.	 The	 general	 PE,	 as	 it	 is	 particularly
relevant	for	neurologic	patients,	follows.

VITAL	SIGNS

Determining	 the	 blood	 pressure	 (BP)	 in	 both	 arms	 is	 useful	 in	 patients	 with
suspected	 cerebrovascular	 disease.	 Significant	 asymmetries	 may	 reflect
extracranial	cardiovascular	occlusive	disease.	Measuring	the	BP	with	the	patient
supine,	seated,	and	upright	may	be	necessary	in	some	circumstances.	Orthostatic

hypotension	 is	 a	 frequent	 cause	 of	 syncope.	 It	 may	 occur	 in	 patients	 with
autonomic	 insufficiency	 due	 to	 peripheral	 causes,	 as	 in	 diabetic	 neuropathy,	 or
due	to	failure	of	central	regulation,	as	in	multisystem	atrophy.	The	most	frequent
cause	of	orthostasis	is	as	a	side	effect	of	antihypertensive	therapy.	Increased	BP
occurs	with	increased	intracranial	pressure	(Cushing	reflex)	and	in	some	patients
acutely	with	stroke	or	subarachnoid	hemorrhage	before	intracranial	pressure	has
risen.	 Increased	 BP	 due	 to	 stroke	 is	 often	 because	 of	 peripheral	 attempts	 to
compensate	for	cerebral	ischemia	and	usually	resolves	without	treatment;	overly
aggressive	 treatment	 in	 the	 acute	 phase	 may	 be	 deleterious.	 Severe	 systemic
hypotension	is	seldom	because	of	a	neurologic	cause,	except	as	a	terminal	event,
and	is	much	more	suggestive	of	a	hemodynamic	disturbance.

The	pulse	rate	and	character	are	important,	especially	if	increased	intracranial
pressure	is	suspected.	When	intracranial	pressure	is	increased,	the	pulse	usually
slows	 but	 may	 occasionally	 accelerate.	 A	 bounding	 pulse	 occurs	 in	 aortic
regurgitation	 or	 hyperthyroidism	 and	 a	 small,	 slow	 pulse	 in	 aortic	 stenosis.
Either	of	these	may	have	neurologic	complications.	Detecting	the	irregular	pulse
of	 atrial	 fibrillation	 is	 important	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 stroke	 patients.	 Both
bradyarrhythmias	 and	 tachyarrhythmias	 may	 produce	 cerebral	 hypoperfusion.
Abnormalities	 of	 respiration	 may	 be	 very	 important	 in	 neurologic	 patients	 (see
below).

GENERAL	APPEARANCE

loss	 and	 evidence	 of	 malnutrition	 may	

The	general	appearance	of	the	patient	 may	reveal	evidence	of	acute	or	chronic
illness;	fever,	pain,	or	distress;	evidence	of	weight	loss;	abnormal	posture	of	the
trunk,	 head,	 or	 extremities;	 the	 general	 level	 of	 motor	 activity;	 unusual
restlessness;	 or
mannerisms;	 abnormal	 movements,	 bizarre	 activities;	
immobility.	 Weight	
indicate
hyperthyroidism,	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 Whipple’s	 disease,	 celiac	 disease,	 or
amyloidosis.	 The	 body	 fat	 level	 and	 distribution,	 together	 with	 the	 hair
distribution	and	the	secondary	sexual	development	are	important	in	the	diagnosis
of	 endocrinopathies	 and	 disorders	 of	 the	 hypothalamus.	 Note	 any	 outstanding
deviations	 from	 normal	 development	 such	 as	 gigantism,	 dwarfism,	 gross
deformities,	 amputations,	 contractures,	 and	 disproportion	 or	 asymmetries
between	 body	 parts.	 Short	 stature	 can	 occur	 in	 mitochondrial	 disorders,
Schwartz-Jampel	 syndrome,	 Refsum’s	 disease,	 Andersen-Tawil	 syndrome,

Niemann-Pick	 disease,	 Turner	 and	 Noonan	 syndromes,	 and	 in	 CADASIL.
Excessive	height	may	suggest	Marfan’s	syndrome,	homocystinuria,	Klinefelter’s
syndrome,	or	Sotos	syndrome.

Specific	 abnormal	 postures	 may	 occur	 in	 diseases	 of	 the	 nervous	 system.
Spastic	 hemiparesis	 causes	 flexion	 of	 the	 upper	 extremity	 with	 flexion	 and
adduction	 at	 the	 shoulder,	 flexion	 at	 the	 elbow	 and	 wrist,	 and	 flexion	 and
adduction	 of	 the	 fingers;	 in	 the	 lower	 extremity,	 there	 is	 extension	 at	 the	 hip,
knee,	 and	 ankle,	 with	 an	 equinus	 deformity	 of	 the	 foot.	 In	 Parkinson’s	 disease
and	 related	 syndromes,	 there	 is	 flexion	 of	 the	 neck,	 trunk,	 elbows,	 wrists,	 and
knees,	with	stooping,	rigidity,	masking,	slowness	of	movement,	and	tremors.	In
myopathies,	there	may	be	lordosis,	protrusion	of	the	abdomen,	a	waddling	gait,
and	hypertrophy	of	the	calves.	Peripheral	nerve	disease	may	cause	wrist	or	foot
drop	 or	 a	 claw	 hand	 or	 pes	 cavus.	 These	 neurogenic	 abnormalities	 may	 be
confused	 with	 deformities	 due	 to	 such	 things	 as	 Dupuytren’s	 contracture,
congenital	 pes	 cavus,	 changes	 due	 to	 trauma	 or	 arthritis,	 developmental
abnormalities,	habitual	postures,	and	occupational	factors.

Occasionally,	 the	 general	 appearance	 of	 the	 patient	 is	 so	 characteristic	 of	 a
particular	process	that	“diagnosis	in	a	blink	of	the	eye”	(augenblickdiagnose)	is
possible.	Familiarity	with	many	clinical	conditions	underlies	this	ability	to	make
spot	diagnoses	simply	based	on	inspection.	Goethe	said,	“Was	man	weiss,	man
sieht”	(what	man	knows,	man	sees).	This	is	the	process	of	pattern	recognition,	or
gestalt,	 and	 occurs	 on	 many	 levels	 in	 medicine.	 Examples	 include	 the
characteristic	 appearance	 of	 the	 patient	 with	 acromegaly,	 hypothyroidism,
syndromes,	 Down’s
hyperthyroidism,	
syndrome,	and	Parkinson’s	disease,	to	name	just	a	few.	Similarly,	key	fragments
of	history	often	permit	very	rapid	diagnosis.

craniosynostosis	

hydrocephalus,	

HEAD

The	skull	houses	the	brain;	abnormalities	of	the	head	are	common	and	often	very
important.	Inspect	the	shape,	symmetry,	and	size	of	the	head;	note	any	apparent
abnormalities	or	irregularities.	An	abnormal	turn	or	tilt	of	the	head	may	indicate
cervical	dystonia,	a	fourth	nerve	palsy,	or	ocular	tilt	reaction.	Premature	closure
of	 cranial	sutures	 can	 produce	a	wide	variety	of	abnormally	shaped	skulls	(see
Chapter	2).	Other	deformities	or	developmental	anomalies	include	hydrocephaly,
macrocephaly,	 microcephaly,	 asymmetries	 or	 abnormalities	 of	 contour,

disproportion	 between	 the	 facial	 and	 the	 cerebral	 portions,	 scars,	 and	 signs	 of
recent	trauma.	In	children,	it	is	informative	to	measure	the	head	circumference.
Dilated	 veins,	 telangiectatic	 areas,	 or	 port-wine	 angiomas	 on	 the	 scalp	 or	 face
may	overlie	a	cerebral	hemangioma,	especially	when	such	nevi	are	present	in	the
trigeminal	nerve	distribution.	In	unconscious	patients	or	those	with	head	trauma,
ecchymosis	over	 the	 mastoid	(Battle’s	sign,	Figure	4.1)	 or	 around	 the	 eyes	 but
not	 extending	 beyond	 the	 orbital	 rim	 (“raccoon	 eyes”)	 suggests	 basilar	 skull
fracture.

Palpation	of	the	skull	may	disclose	deformities	due	to	old	trauma,	burr	hole,
or	 craniotomy	 defects,	 tenderness,	 or	 scars.	 If	 there	 is	 a	 postoperative	 skull
defect,	note	any	bulging	or	tumefaction.	The	size	and	patency	of	the	fontanelles
is	 important	 in	 infants.	 Bulging	 of	 the	 fontanelles	 and	 suture	 separation	 can
occur	 with	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 in	 children.	 Meningoceles	 and
encephaloceles	may	cause	palpable	skull	defects.	Tumors	may	involve	the	scalp
and	 skull.	 Palpable	 masses	 involving	 the	 scalp	 or	 skull	 may	 be	 metastatic
carcinoma,	lymphoma,	leukemia,	dermoid,	or	multiple	myeloma.	A	turban	tumor
is	 an	 often	 disfiguring	 type	 of	 dermal	 cylindroma	 that	 may	 involve	 the	 scalp.
Neurofibromas	 of	 the	 scalp	 occur	 in	 von	 Recklinghausen’s	 disease.	 Localized
swelling	of	the	scalp	may	occur	with	osteomyelitis	of	the	skull.	Exostoses	may
indicate	an	underlying	meningioma.	Hydrocephalus	that	develops	prior	to	suture
closure	often	results	in	an	enlarged,	sometimes	massive,	head.	Frontal	bossing	is
another	 sign	 of	 hydrocephalus.	 Giant	 cell	 arteritis	 may	 cause	 induration	 and
tenderness	of	the	superficial	temporal	arteries.	Transillumination	may	be	useful
in	the	diagnosis	of	hydrocephalus	and	hydranencephaly.

FIGURE	 4.1	 Battle’s	 sign:	 superficial	 ecchymosis	 over	 the	 mastoid	 process	 due	 to
basilar	 skull	 fracture.	 (Reproduced	 from	 van	 Dijk	 GW.	 The	 bare	 essentials:	 head
injury.	 Pract	 Neurol	 2011;11[1]:50–55,	 with	 permission	 from	 BMJ	 Publishing	 Group
Ltd.)

Percussion	 of	 the	 skull	 may	 disclose	 dullness	 on	 the	 side	 of	 a	 tumor	 or
subdural	 hematoma	 or	 a	 tympanitic	 percussion	 note	 in	 hydrocephalus	 and
increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 in	 infants	 and	 children	 (Macewen’s	 sign,	 or
“cracked	 pot”	 resonance).	 Auscultatory	 percussion	 (percussion	 over	 the
midfrontal	 area	 while	 listening	 over	 various	 parts	 of	 the	 head	 with	 the
stethoscope)	may	reveal	relative	dullness	on	the	side	of	a	mass	lesion	or	subdural
hematoma.

Auscultation	of	the	head	is	sometimes	useful.	Bruits	may	be	heard	best	over
the	temporal	regions	of	the	skull,	the	eyeballs,	and	the	mastoids.	Cephalic	bruits
may	occur	with	angiomas,	aneurysms,	arteriovenous	malformations,	neoplasms
that	compress	large	arteries,	and	in	the	presence	of	atherosclerotic	plaques	that
partially	occlude	cerebral	or	carotid	arteries.	They	may	also	occur	in	the	absence
of	 disease.	 Ocular	 bruits	 usually	 signify	 occlusive	 intracranial	 cerebrovascular
disease.	A	carotid	bruit	may	be	transmitted	to	the	mastoid.	An	ocular	bruit	in	a
patient	with	an	arteriovenous	aneurysm	may	disappear	on	carotid	compression.
Murmurs	may	be	transmitted	 from	the	heart	or	large	vessels;	systolic	murmurs
heard	 over	 the	 entire	 cranium	 in	 children	 are	 not	 always	 of	 pathologic
significance.

An	 evaluation	 of	 the	 facies	 (the	 facial	 expression)	 may	 aid	 in	 neurologic
diagnosis.	Gross	facial	abnormalities	are	found	in	such	conditions	as	acromegaly

hyperthyroidism,	 Down’s	

and
(Figure	 4.2),	 myxedema,	
mucopolysaccharidosis.	 In	 some	 neurologic	 disorders,	 there	 are	 characteristic
changes	in	facial	expression	and	mobility	such	as	the	fixed	(“masked”)	face	of
parkinsonism	(Figure	30.1),	the	procerus	sign	in	progressive	supranuclear	palsy
(Chapter	 30),	 the	 immobile	 face	 with	 precipitate	 laughter	 and	 crying	 seen	 in
pseudobulbar	palsy,	the	grimacing	of	athetosis	and	dystonia,	and	the	ptosis	and
weakness	of	the	facial	muscles	seen	in	some	myopathies	and	myasthenia	gravis.
The	facies	of	the	patient	with	myotonic	dystrophy	I	are	characteristic.

syndrome,	

FIGURE	4.2	Acromegaly.	A.	Note	coarse	facial	features.	B.	Patient’s	large	hands	at
left;	single	normal	hand	at	right.	(Reprinted	from	McConnell	TH,	Paulson	VA,	Valasek
MA.	The	Nature	of	Disease:	Pathology	for	the	Health	Professions.	2nd	ed.	Baltimore:
Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014,	with	permission.)

EYES

Ophthalmologic	 abnormalities	 can	 provide	 clues	 to	 the	 etiology	 of	 neurologic
disease	 as	 well	 as	 to	 the	 presence	 of	 underlying	 systemic	 disease	 causing
neurologic	symptomatology	(see	Chapter	13).	Examples	of	findings	of	possible
neurologic	relevance	include	bilateral	exophthalmos	due	to	thyroid	eye	disease
in	a	patient	with	muscle	weakness,	unilateral	arcus	senilis	from	carotid	stenosis,
lens	 dislocation	 in	 Marfan’s	 syndrome,	 or	 Brushfield	 spots	 on	 the	 iris	 due	 to
Down’s	 syndrome.	 Vesicular	 lesions	 on	 the	 forehead	 suggest	 herpes	 zoster
ophthalmicus	 (Figure	 15.4).	 Fundoscopic	 examination	 is	 discussed	 in	 Chapter
13.

EARS

Examination	 of	 the	 ears	 is	 particularly	 important	 in	 patients	 with	 hearing	 loss,
vertigo,	or	a	facial	nerve	palsy.	It	is	important	to	exclude	a	perforated	tympanic
membrane.	Examination	of	the	ear	canal	may	reveal	a	glomus	tumor	in	a	patient
with	 jugular	 foramen	 syndrome	 (Figure	 21.5),	 vesicles	 due	 to	 herpes	 zoster
infection	 (Figure	 16.9),	 or	 evidence	 of	 a	 posterior	 fossa	 cholesteatoma.
Cerebrospinal	 fluid	 (CSF)	 otorrhea	 may	 cause	 a	 clear	 or	 bloody	 ear	 discharge.
Before	performing	a	caloric	examination	in	a	comatose	patient,	it	is	important	to
be	 certain	 that	 the	 ear	 canals	 are	 clear	 and	 that	 the	 tympanic	 membranes	 are
intact.	Hemorrhage	into	the	middle	ear	may	cause	a	bulging,	blue-red	tympanic
membrane	in	patients	with	basilar	skull	fracture	(Figure	16.10).

NOSE,	MOUTH,	AND	THROAT

Perforation	of	the	nasal	septum	may	be	a	clue	to	cocaine	abuse.	A	saddle	nose
may	be	a	sign	of	congenital	syphilis	(Figure	4.3).	Evidence	of	bacterial	infection
may	be	a	sign	of	cavernous	sinus	thrombosis,	and	watery	drainage	may	be	due	to
CSF	rhinorrhea	(Video	Link	4.1).	 In	pernicious	anemia,	the	tongue	is	smooth

and	translucent	with	atrophy	of	the	fungiform	and	filiform	papillae,	along	with
the	 associated	 redness	 and	 lack	 of	 coating	 (atrophic	 glossitis).	 In	 thiamine
deficiency,	 the	 tongue	 is	 smooth,	 shiny,	 atrophic,	 and	 reddened.	 A	 trident	 or
triple-furrowed	tongue	is	seen	in	myasthenia	gravis	 (Video	Link	4.2).	Lingua
plicata	 occurs	 in	 Melkersson-Rosenthal	 syndrome.	 Macroglossia	 occurs	 in
amyloid,	 myxedema,	 and	 Down’s	 syndrome	 (Figure	 4.4)	 and	 rarely	 in
amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 (ALS)	 (Figure	 20.5).	 Tongue	 bite	 marks	 may
indicate	a	recent	seizure	and	can	also	occur	in	neuroacanthocytosis	 and	Lesch-
Nyhan	 syndrome.	 Other	 potential	 findings	 include	 xerostomia	 in	 Sjögren’s
syndrome;	 a	 lead	 line	 along	 the	 gums	 in	 lead	 toxicity;	 trismus	 in	 tetanus	 or
polymyositis;	 and	 mucosal	 ulceration	 in	 Behçet’s	 disease.	 Notched	 teeth	 are	 a
sign	of	congenital	syphilis	(Hutchinson	teeth).

FIGURE	4.3	Saddle	nose	deformity	in	a	patient	with	congenital	syphilis.

NECK

Note	 any	 adenopathy,	 thyroid	 masses	 or	 enlargement,	 deformities,	 tenderness,
rigidity,	 tilting	 or	 other	 abnormalities	 of	 posture,	 asymmetries,	 changes	 in
contour,	or	pain	on	movement.	Normally,	the	neck	can	be	flexed	so	that	the	chin
rests	 on	 the	 chest,	 and	 it	 can	 be	 rotated	 from	 side	 to	 side	 without	 difficulty.
Meningeal	irritation	may	cause	nuchal	rigidity,	head	retraction,	and	opisthotonos
(Figure	52.1).	Neck	movement	may	also	be	restricted	with	cervical	spondylosis,
cervical	 radiculopathy,	 and	 dystonias.	 In	 meningeal	 irritation,	 the	 primary
limitation	 is	 in	 neck	 flexion;	 in	 spondylosis,	 the	 limitation	 is	 either	 global	 or
primarily	 in	 rotation	 and	 lateral	 bending.	 In	 the	 Klippel-Feil	 syndrome,
syringomyelia,	 and	 platybasia,	 the	 neck	 may	 be	 short	 and	 broad,	 movement
limited,	 and	 the	 hairline	 low.	 A	 short	 neck	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 Chiari
malformation,	Turner’s	syndrome,	and	skull	base	anomalies.	Lhermitte’s	sign	is
a	 sensation	 of	 tingling	 or	 electric	 shocks	 running	 down	 the	 back	 and	 legs	 on
flexion	of	the	neck.	It	is	common	in	multiple	sclerosis	but	can	occur	with	other
conditions	 involving	 the	 cervical	 spinal	 cord.	 Two	 forms	 of	 “reverse”
Lhermitte’s	 sign	 have	 been	 described.	 Paresthesias	 induced	 by	 neck	 extension
have	been	described	in	extrinsic	compression	of	the	cervical	spinal	cord.	Upward
moving	paresthesias	with	neck	flexion	have	been	described	in	myelopathy	from
nitrous	 oxide	 inhalation.	 The	 carotid	 arteries	 should	 be	 cautiously	 and	 lightly
palpated	 bilaterally,	 one	 at	 a	 time,	 and	 any	 abnormality	 or	 inequality	 noted,
followed	by	auscultation	for	carotid	bruits.

FIGURE	4.4	Massive	macroglossia	in	a	patient	with	systemic	AL	amyloidosis.	(From
Sattianayagam	 P,	 Gibbs	 S,	 Hawkins	 P,	 et	 al.	 Systemic	 AL	 (light-chain)	 amyloidosis
and	 the	 gastrointestinal	 tract.	 Scand	 J	 Gastroenterol	 2009;44[11]:1384–1385.
Reprinted	by	permission	of	Taylor	&	Francis	Ltd.	http://www.tandfonline.com.)

RESPIRATORY	SYSTEM	AND	THORAX

the	 hypothalamus.	 In	

Neurologic	 complications	 of	 pulmonary	 disease	 are	 common.	 Note	 the
respiratory	rate,	rhythm,	depth,	and	character	of	respirations.	Pain	on	breathing,
dyspnea,	orthopnea,	or	shortness	of	breath	on	slight	activity	may	be	significant.
Abnormalities	 of	 respiration,	 such	 as	 Cheyne-Stokes,	 Biot,	 or	 Kussmaul
breathing	may	be	seen	in	coma	and	other	neurologic	disorders.	Either	hyperpnea
or	 periods	 of	 apnea	 may	 occur	 in	 increased	 intracranial	 pressure	 and	 in
disturbances	 of	
there	 are
characteristic	patterns	of	respiration	that	reflect	damage	at	different	levels	of	the
nervous	
neurogenic
hyperventilation,	 Cheyne-Stokes,	 and	 ataxic	 breathing).	 These	 are	 discussed
further	 in	 Chapter	 51.	 Use	 of	 accessory	 muscles	 of	 respiration	 may	 signal
impending	 ventilatory	 failure	 in	 patients	 with	 many	 neuromuscular	 disorders,
particularly	 Guillain-Barre	 syndrome	 and	 ALS.	 Following	 respiratory	 function
with	formal	measures	of	vital	capacity	and	inspiratory	and	expiratory	pressure	is
often	 necessary.	 Evidence	 of	 chronic	 obstructive	 pulmonary	 disease	 (COPD)
may	 be	 a	 clue	 to	 the	 etiology	 of	 headaches	 or	 metabolic	 encephalopathy	 or

the	 comatose	 patient,	

(posthyperventilation	

system	

central	

apnea,	

suggest	neurologic	complications	of	lung	cancer.

CARDIOVASCULAR	SYSTEM

The	 cardiovascular	 examination	 is	 important	 because	 of	 the	 frequency	 of
neurologic	 complications	 of	 hypertension,	 atherosclerosis,	 endocarditis,
arrhythmias,	 and	 valvular	 disease.	 Evidence	 of	 atherosclerosis	 involving	 the
peripheral	blood	vessels	often	correlates	with	cerebrovascular	disease.

ABDOMEN

Examination	 of	 the	 abdomen	 may	 reveal	 abnormal	 masses,	 enlarged	 viscera,
abnormal	 pulsations	 or	 respiratory	 movements,	 or	 the	 presence	 of	 fluid.
Hepatomegaly	 is	 common	 in	 cirrhosis,	 hepatitis,	 carcinoma,	 and	 amyloidosis;
splenomegaly	 is	 common	 in	 mononucleosis,	 amyloidosis,	 and	 lymphoma.
Ecchymosis	of	the	flank	(Grey	Turner	sign)	may	be	evidence	that	a	lumbosacral
plexopathy	is	due	to	retroperitoneal	hematoma.	Ascites	may	be	a	clue	to	hepatic
encephalopathy	in	a	patient	in	coma.

GENITALIA	AND	RECTUM

Examination	 of	 the	 genitalia,	 not	 often	 called	 for	 in	 neurologic	 patients,	 could
reveal	a	chancre	or	the	ulcerations	of	Behçet’s	disease.	The	angiomas	in	Fabry’s
disease	are	often	found	on	the	scrotum.	A	rectal	examination	to	assess	sphincter
tone	 and	 the	 anal	 wink	 reflex	 is	 often	 necessary	 in	 patients	 with	 evidence	 of
myelopathy	or	a	cauda	equina	or	conus	medullaris	syndrome.

SPINE

Examination	 of	 the	 spine	 is	 often	 important	 in	 neurologic	 patients.	 Note	 any
deformity,	 abnormality	 of	 posture	 or	 motility,	 localized	 tenderness,	 or	 muscle
spasm.	Tuberculosis	and	 neoplasms	of	the	spine	may	cause	a	marked	kyphosis
(gibbus);	 muscular	 dystrophy	 often	 results	 in	 an	 increased	 lumbar	 lordosis
(Figure	4.5);	and	scoliosis	is	common	in	syringomyelia	and	Friedreich’s	ataxia.
Localized	 rigidity	 with	 a	 slight	 list	 or	 scoliosis	 and	 absence	 of	 the	 normal

lordosis	 are	 frequent	 symptoms	 of	 lumbosacral	 radiculopathy.	 Tenderness	 to
percussion	over	the	spinous	processes,	using	either	the	fist	or	a	reflex	hammer,
can	occur	with	localized	processes	such	as	spinal	epidural	hematoma	or	abscess.
Dimpling	of	the	skin,	a	skin	tag,	or	unusual	hair	growth	over	the	sacrum	suggests
a	spinal	dysraphic	state	such	as	tethered	cord	or	diastematomyelia	(Figure	4.6).

FIGURE	 4.5	 Marked	 lumbar	 lordosis	 in	 a	 15-year-old	 girl	 with	 FSH	 dystrophy.
(Reprinted	 from	 Weinstein	 SL,	 Flynn	 JM,	 eds.	 Lovell	 and	 Winter’s	 Pediatric
Orthopaedics.	 7th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer	 Health/Lippincott	 Williams	 &
Wilkins,	2014,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	 4.6	 Giant	 hairy	 patch	 over	 the	 lower	 back	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 occult	 spinal
in	 Neurology:	 A
dysraphism.	 (Reprinted	
Compendium.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016,	with	permission.)

from	 Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	

EXTREMITIES

Note	any	limb	deformities,	contractures,	edema,	or	color	changes.	Any	variation
from	 the	 normal	 in	 the	 size	 or	 shape	 of	 the	 hands,	 feet,	 or	 digits,	 as	 well	 as
deformities,	 joint	 changes,	 contractures,	 pain	 or	 limitation	 of	 movement,
localized	tenderness,	wasting,	clubbed	fingers,	or	ulcerations	may	be	significant.
Hypermobile	joints	occur	in	Marfan’s	and	Ehlers-Danlos	syndrome.	Edema	may
be	evidence	of	congestive	heart	failure	or	cardiomyopathy.	Arthropathy	may	be	a
sign	 of	 connective	 tissue	 disease,	 sarcoidosis,	 or	 Whipple’s	 disease.	 Painless
arthropathy	 (Charcot	 joint)	 occurs	 when	 a	 joint	 is	 deafferented;	 painless
enlargement	of	the	shoulder	has	been	reported	as	the	presenting	manifestation	of
syringomyelia.	 An	 elbow	 deformity	 may	 signal	 ulnar	 neuropathy.	 Decreased
peripheral	 pulses	 occur	 in	 Takayasu’s	 disease	 as	 well	 as	 atherosclerosis.
Acrocyanosis	 occurs	 in	 ergotism.	 Palmar	 erythema	 may	 be	 a	 clue	 to	 alcohol
abuse.	Diseases	of	the	nervous	system	are	found	in	association	with	such	skeletal
and	developmental	anomalies	as	syndactyly,	polydactyly,	and	arachnodactyly.

SKIN

livedo	

A	careful	examination	of	the	skin	can	provide	important	evidence	regarding	the
nature	 of	 a	 neurologic	 condition.	 Findings	 of	 possible	 neurologic	 relevance
include	 the	 following:	 spider	 angiomas	 in	 alcohol	 abuse;	 erythema	 chronicum
migrans	in	Lyme	disease;	purpura	and	petechiae	in	thrombotic	thrombocytopenic
purpura,	 meningococcemia,	 and	 Rocky	 Mountain	 spotted	 fever	 (all	 of	 which
in
reticularis	
may	 have	 prominent	 neurologic	 manifestations);	
antiphospholipid	 syndrome	 and	 cryoglobulinemia;	 hyperpigmentation	
in
Nelson’s	 syndrome,	 carotenemia,	 hemochromatosis,	 pernicious	 anemia,	 or
Addison’s	 disease;	 angiokeratomas	 in	 Fabry’s	 disease;	 and	 the	 numerous
dermatologic	manifestations	of	the	neurocutaneous	syndromes	(see	Chapter	53).
Other	important	findings	include	signs	of	scleroderma;	ichthyosis;	xanthelasma,
scars,	needle	marks,	or	other	evidence	of	intravenous	substance	abuse;	bruises;
and	
trophic	 change.	 The	 degree	 of	 moisture	 or	 perspiration	 may	 be
neurologically	pertinent,	and	any	localized	or	generalized	increase	or	decrease	in
perspiration	should	be	recorded.	Skin	changes	may	be	of	diagnostic	significance
in	 the	 endocrinopathies,	 diseases	 of	 the	 hypothalamus,	 and	 dysautonomia.	 In
parkinsonism,	 the	 skin	 may	 be	 greasy	 and	 seborrheic.	 Herpes	 zoster	 causes	 a
vesicular	 eruption	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 involved	 root	 (Figure	 4.7).
Hemangiomas	of	the	spinal	cord	may	be	accompanied	by	skin	nevi	in	the	same
metamere.	 Symmetrically	 placed,	 painless,	 recurring,	 poorly	 healing	 lesions	 of
the	extremities	may	occur	in	syringomyelia	and	hereditary	 sensory	neuropathy.
Dermatomyositis	 causes	 characteristic	 skin	 lesions.	 Peripheral	 nerve	 disease,
tabes	 dorsalis,	 and	 myelopathy	 may	 produce	 trophic	 changes	 in	 the	 skin.	 Skin
changes	 may	 also	 be	 a	 manifestation	 of	 vitamin	 deficiency.	 Some	 of	 the	 other
conditions	 of	 neurologic	 importance	 that	 cause	 skin	 abnormalities	 include
pseudoxanthoma	 elasticum,	 Refsum’s	 disease,	 Sweet’s	 syndrome,	 Degos
disease,	and	xeroderma	pigmentosum.

FIGURE	4.7	Healing	herpes	zoster	rash	outlining	the	C5	dermatome	in	a	patient	who
presented	 with	 a	 severe	 C5	 radiculopathy.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical
Signs	in	Neurology:	A	Compendium.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016,	with
permission.)

HAIR	AND	NAILS

Hair	texture	and	distribution	are	important	in	the	evaluation	of	endocrinopathies.
Premature	graying	of	the	hair	may	be	familial	and	of	no	clinical	significance,	but
is	frequently	observed	in	pernicious	anemia,	and	may	occur	in	hypothalamic	and
other	disorders.	Alopecia,	or	balding,	occurs	in	several	disorders	with	neurologic

features	 or	 complications,	 including	 myotonic	 dystrophy,	 hypothyroidism,
Leigh’s	 disease,	 sarcoidosis,	 secondary	 syphilis,	 and	 SLE.	 Hypertrichosis	 can
occur	in	POEMS	syndrome,	porphyria,	and	other	conditions.

FIGURE	4.8	Poliosis	in	a	patient	with	Waardenburg	syndrome.	(Reprinted	from	Gold
DH,	Weingeist	TA.	Color	Atlas	of	the	Eye	in	Systemic	Disease.	Baltimore:	Lippincott
Williams	&	Wilkins,	2001,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	4.9	Mees’	lines.	These	are	transverse	lines,	usually	one	per	nail,	with	curves
similar	 to	 the	 lunula,	 not	 the	 cuticle.	 The	 line	 often	 disappears	 if	 pressure	 is	 placed
over	the	line.	They	emerge	from	under	the	proximal	nail	folds	and	grow	out	with	the
nails.	 Mees’	 lines	 occur	 with	 arsenic	 poisoning,	 thallium	 poisoning,	 and	 to	 a	 lesser
extent	other	heavy	metal	poisoning.	They	may	also	follow	any	acute	or	severe	illness.
(Reprinted	 from	 Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.
Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer,	2016,	with	permission.)

Poliosis	occurs	with	Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada	disease	(Figure	4.8).	Kinky	 hair
occurs	in	Menkes	disease	and	giant	axonal	neuropathy.	Transverse	discoloration
of	the	nails	(Mees’	lines)	may	occur	with	arsenic	poisoning	and	debilitated	states
(Figure	4.9).	Clubbing	of	the	nails	occurs	with	bronchogenic	carcinoma	or	heart
disease.	Abnormal	nail	bed	capillary	loops	may	be	a	sign	of	dermatomyositis.

NODES

Lymphadenopathy	may	occur	in	lymphoma,	mononucleosis,	HIV,	Lyme	disease,
Niemann-Pick	 disease,	 Gaucher’s	 disease,	 phenytoin	 pseudolymphoma,
sarcoidosis,	Whipple’s	disease,	and	in	many	other	conditions	that	may	also	have
neurologic	manifestations.

Video	Links

Video	Link	4.1.	CSF	rhinorrhea.

http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMicm0708178#t=article

Video	Link	4.2.	Triple-furrowed	tongue	in	myasthenia	gravis.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Triple_furrow_tongue_in_myasthenia_gravis

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boulet	JR,	McKinley	DW,	Whelan	GP,	et	al.	Clinical	skills	deficiencies	among
first-year	residents:	utility	of	the	ECFMG	clinical	skills	assessment.	Acad	Med
2002;77:S33–S35.

Campbell	WW.	Augenblickdiagnose.	Semin	Neurol	1998;18:169–176.
Drago	F,	Ciccarese	G,	Agnoletti	AF,	et	al.	Neuro	sweet	syndrome:	a	systematic
review.	 A	 rare	 complication	 of	 Sweet	 syndrome.	 Acta	 Neurol	 Belg
2017;117:33–42.

Dyken	 PR,	 Miller	 M.	 Facial	 Features	 of	 Neurologic	 Syndromes.	 St.	 Louis:

Mosby,	1980.

Edelstein	 DR,	 Ruder	 HJ.	 Assessment	 of	 clinical	 skills	 using	 videotapes	 of	 the
interview	 and	 physical	 examination.	 Med	 Teach

complete	 medical	
1990;12:155–162.

Fagan	MJ,	Griffith	RA,	Obbard	L,	et	al.	Improving	the	physical	diagnosis	skills
of	 third-year	 medical	 students:	 a	 controlled	 trial	 of	 a	 literature-based
curriculum.	J	Gen	Intern	Med	2003;18:652–655.

Goldstein	 LB,	 Matchar	 DB.	 The	 rational	 clinical	 examination.	 Clinical

assessment	of	stroke.	JAMA	1994;271:1114–1120.

Haring	 CM,	 van	 der	 Meer	 JW,	 Postma	 CT.	 A	 core	 physical	 examination	 in
internal	medicine:	what	should	students	do	and	how	about	their	supervisors?
Med	Teach	2013;35:e1472–e1477.

Hatala	R,	Smieja	M,	Kane	SL,	et	al.	An	evidence-based	approach	to	the	clinical

examination.	J	Gen	Intern	Med	1997;12:182–187.

Kempster	 PA,	 Rollinson	 RD.	 The	 Lhermitte	 phenomenon:	 variant	 forms	 and

their	significance.	J	Clin	Neurosci	2008;15:379–381.

LeBlond	RF,	DeGowin	RL,	Brown	DD.	DeGowin’s	Diagnostic	Examination.	9th

ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill,	2009.

Mangione	 S,	 Peitzman	 SJ.	 Revisiting	 physical	 diagnosis	 during	 the	 medical
residency:	it	is	time	for	a	logbook—and	more.	Acad	Med	1999;74:467–469.
Reeves	 AG,	 Swenson	 RS.	 Disorders	 of	 the	 Nervous	 System:	 A	 Primer.	 Online
2008.

Dartmouth,	

Hanover:	

Version.	
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~dons/index.html

Tham	 WY,	 Oh	 CC,	 Koh	 HY.	 Pernicious	 anaemia	 presenting	 as

hyperpigmentation.	Clin	Exp	Dermatol	2015;40:626–628.

Wiener	 S,	 Nathanson	 M.	 Physical	 examination.	 Frequently	 observed	 errors.

JAMA	1976;236:852–855.

Wray	NP,	Friedland	JA.	Detection	and	correction	of	house	staff	error	in	physical

diagnosis.	JAMA	1983;249:1035–1037.

