CHAPTER	22

Overview	of	the	Motor	System

Examination	 of	 motor	 functions	 includes	 the	 determination	 of	 muscle	 power,
evaluation	 of	 muscle	 tone	 and	 bulk,	 and	 observation	 for	 abnormal	 movements.
Examination	of	coordination	and	gait	is	closely	related	to	the	motor	examination.
Coordination	is	often	viewed	as	a	cerebellar	function,	but	integrity	of	the	entire
motor	 system	 is	 essential	 for	 normal	 coordination	 and	 control	 of	 fine	 motor
movements.	 Examination	 of	 cerebellar	 function	 is	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 43.
Station	(standing)	and	gait	(walking)	are	complex	and	involve	much	more	than
motor	function;	they	are	usually	assessed	separately	from	the	motor	examination
(Chapter	44).

Both	the	peripheral	and	central	nervous	systems	participate	in	motor	activity,
and	various	functional	components	have	to	be	evaluated	individually.	Our	motor
systems	 move	 our	 bodies	 in	 space,	 move	 parts	 of	 the	 body	 in	 relation	 to	 one
another,	 and	 maintain	 postures	 and	 attitudes	 in	 opposition	 to	 gravity	 and	 other
external	 forces.	 All	 movements,	 except	 those	 mediated	 by	 the	 autonomic
nervous	 system,	 are	 effected	 by	 contractions	 of	 striated	 muscles	 through	 the
control	of	the	nervous	system.

LEVELS	OF	MOTOR	ACTIVITY

The	intricate	organization	of	the	motor	system	and	its	evolutionary	development
from	the	simple	responses	of	unicellular	organisms	to	the	patterns	of	behavior	of
animals	and	man	account	for	the	complexity	of	motor	function.	From	anatomic
and	functional	standpoints,	there	are	certain	phylogenetic	motor	levels,	or	stages
of	 development,	 which	 increase	 in	 complexity	 with	 evolution.	 In	 lower
vertebrates,	motor	activities	are	effected	through	subcortical	centers,	but	with	the
greater	 development	 of	 the	 cerebral	 cortex	 in	 higher	 mammals,	 some	 of	 these
functions	 are	 significantly	 altered.	 The	 more	 primitive	 centers	 retain	 some	 of

their	 original	 functions,	 although	 modified	 by	 cortical	 control.	 They	 are	 not
replaced	but	are	incorporated	into	an	elaborate	motor	system,	subordinate	to	the
cortex.	 The	 phylogenetically	 old	 and	 new	 systems	 work	 together,	 and	 the
efficiency	of	each	depends	upon	collaboration	with	the	other.

The	 evolutionary	 development	 of	 motor	 function	 from	 simple	 to	 complex
movements	is	duplicated	to	a	certain	extent	in	the	maturation	of	motor	skills	in
man.	 At	 the	 time	 of	 birth,	 simple	 spinal	 and	 brainstem	 reflexes	 are	 already
present.	A	newborn	held	supported	will	take	rudimentary	steps	(walking	reflex).
More	complex	postural	and	righting	reflexes	appear	during	the	first	few	weeks
of	life.	With	maturation	of	the	cortex	and	commissural	pathways,	acts	requiring
associated	 sensory	 functions	 (grasping	 and	 groping)	 are	 possible,	 followed	 by
volitional	control	of	movement.	Finally,	the	ability	to	perform	skilled	acts	with	a
high	degree	of	precision	emerges.

Complex	 mechanisms	 underlie	 even	

the	 simplest	 discrete	 voluntary
movement.	 All	 of	 the	 levels	 of	 motor	 integration	 contribute	 to	 the	 precision	 of
movement.	 Initiation	 of	 contraction	 of	 the	 agonist	 (prime	 mover)	 must	 be
accompanied	 by	 graded	 relaxation	 or	 contraction	 of	 the	 antagonists	 and
synergists.	Smooth,	accurate	movement	requires	the	ability	for	the	movement	to
be	 stopped	 at	 any	 point,	 reversed,	 and	 started	 again	 at	 a	 different	 degree	 of
contraction	 or	 in	 a	 different	 direction.	 Stereotyped	 and	 patterned	 movements,
integrated	at	lower	levels,	may	be	part	of	the	act.	Postures	must	be	assumed	that
can	 be	 modified	 or	 shifted	 easily	 and	 instantly	 for	 adjustment	 to	 the	 next
movement.	Throughout	all	of	this,	the	volitional	elements	and	purposeful	aspects
of	the	act	are	of	paramount	importance.

Knowing	 the	 structure	 and	 function	 of	 the	 different	 levels	 of	 motor	 control,
the	relationships	between	the	motor	systems,	and	the	changes	in	motor	activity
that	occur	in	disease	helps	in	understanding	disorders	of	the	motor	system.	Many
neuroscientists	over	the	years	have	envisioned	various	hierarchical	schemes	with
different	 levels	 of	 complexity	 of	 motor	 activity.	 In	 this	 text,	 we	 consider	 the
following	 levels:	 the	 motor	 unit	 (lower	 motor	 neuron,	 final	 common	 pathway)
and	 the	 segmental	 (spinal	 cord),	 brainstem,	 cerebellar,	 extrapyramidal,	 and
pyramidal	levels.

The	lowest	echelon	of	motor	activity	is	the	motor	unit,	which	consists	of	an
alpha	 motor	 neuron	 in	 the	 spinal	 cord	 or	 brainstem,	 its	 axon,	 and	 all	 of	 the
muscle	fibers	it	innervates.	The	segmental	or	spinal	cord	level	mediates	simple
segmental	 reflexes,	 such	 as	 the	 withdrawal	 reflex,	 and	 includes	 the	 activity	 of
many	 motor	 units	 and	 elements	 of	 both	 excitation	 and	 inhibition	 involving

is	

agonists,	synergists,	and	antagonists.	Various	descending	suprasegmental	motor
systems	 modulate	 the	 activity	 that	 occurs	 at	 the	 segmental	 level	 (Figure	22.1).
The	pyramidal	(corticospinal)	system	arises	from	the	primary	motor	cortex	in	the
the	 primary,	 overarching
precentral	 gyrus.	 The	 corticospinal	 system	
suprasegmental	 motor	 control	 mechanism.	 The	 function	 of	 the	 corticospinal
system	 is	 modulated	 and	 adjusted	 by	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 and
cerebellar	 systems.	 The	 extrapyramidal	 system	 arises	 primarily	 in	 the	 basal
ganglia.	 Centers	 in	 the	 brainstem	 that	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 vestibulospinal,
rubrospinal,	and	related	pathways	are	of	importance	in	postural	mechanisms	and
standing	 and	 righting	 reflexes.	 The	 psychomotor,	 or	 cortical	 associative,	 level
has	 to	 do	 with	 memory,	 initiative,	 and	 conscious	 and	 unconscious	 control	 of
motor	activity	that	arises	primarily	from	the	motor	association	cortex	anterior	to
the	motor	strip.

These	 levels	 are	 not	 individual	 motor	 systems	 and	 do	 not	 normally	 act
individually	 or	 separately.	 Anatomists	 continue	 to	 have	 difficulty	 in	 even
defining	 the	 constituents	 of	 some	 of	 these	 levels	 (e.g.,	 the	 corticospinal	 or
pyramidal	 vs.	 the	 basal	 ganglion	 or	 extrapyramidal).	 These	 levels	 are
components	of	the	motor	system	as	a	whole;	each	is	part	of	the	complex	motor
apparatus.	 Each	 contributes	 its	 share	 to	 control	 of	 the	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 on
which,	 as	 the	 final	 common	 pathway,	 all	 motor	 control	 systems	 converge.
Disease	at	each	of	these	levels	causes	characteristic	signs	and	symptoms	(Table
22.1).	Some	disorders	of	the	motor	system	may	involve	more	than	one	level.	In
addition,	all	purposeful	movements	are	guided	by	a	constant	stream	of	afferent
impulses	that	impinge	on	various	levels	of	the	motor	system.	Sensory	and	motor
functions	are	interdependent	in	the	performance	of	volitional	movement,	and	it	is
not	 possible	 to	 consider	 the	 motor	 system	 apart	 from	 the	 sensory	 system.
Impairment	 of	 sensation	 may	 affect	 all	 aspects	 of	 motion—volitional,	 reflex,
postural,	tonic,	and	phasic.

A	 brief	 sketch	 of	 the	 organization	 of	 the	 motor	 system	 may	 help	 to	 lay	 a
foundation	 before	 discussing	 each	 level	 in	 detail	 (Figures	22.1	 and	 22.2).	 The
premotor	 and	 supplementary	 cortices	 control	 the	 planning	 and	 preliminary
preparation	 for	 movements,	 which	 the	 primary	 motor	 cortex	 in	 the	 precentral
gyrus	then	executes.	The	primary	motor	cortex	also	receives	input	from	the	basal
ganglia	 and	 the	 cerebellum	 (Figure	 22.2).	 The	 corticospinal	 (pyramidal)	 and
corticobulbar	tracts	arise	from	the	precentral	gyrus,	descend	through	the	corona
radiata,	and	enter	the	posterior	limb	of	the	internal	capsule.	The	internal	capsules
merge	in	their	descent	with	the	cerebral	peduncles,	which	form	the	base	of	the

midbrain.	Corticobulbar	fibers	terminate	in	the	lower	brainstem	on	cranial	nerve
nuclei	and	other	structures.	Corticospinal	fibers	aggregate	into	compact	bundles,
the	 pyramids,	 in	 the	 medulla.	 At	 the	 level	 of	 the	 caudal	 medulla,	 90%	 of	 the
pyramidal	 fibers	 decussate	 to	 the	 opposite	 side	 and	 descend	 throughout	 the
spinal	 cord	 as	 the	 lateral	 corticospinal	 tract.	 About	 10%	 of	 the	 corticospinal
fibers	descend	ipsilaterally	in	the	anterior	corticospinal	tract	and	decussate	at	the
level	of	the	local	spinal	synapse.	Pyramidal	fibers	preferentially	innervate	certain
lower	motor	neuron	groups.

Descending	 motor	 system	 fibers	 send	 collaterals	 to	 other	 structures	 to	 help
control	 and	 coordinate	 movement.	 These	 structures	 in	 turn	 project	 back	 to	 the
cortex	to	form	feedback	loops	that	ensure	coordinated	interactions	between	the
suprasegmental	 motor	 systems	 (Figure	 22.2).	 The	 thalamus,	 especially	 the
ventral	 lateral	 (VL)	 and	 the	 ventral	 anterior	 (VA)	 nuclei,	 serves	 as	 the	 relay
station	for	projections	from	the	other	centers	back	to	the	cortex.	The	VL	projects
predominantly	to	the	primary	motor	cortex	and	the	VA	to	the	premotor	regions.

FIGURE	 22.1	 The	 most	 important	 descending	 pathways	 that	 act	 upon	 the	 anterior
horn	cell	of	the	spinal	cord	(final	common	pathway).

TABLE	22.1

Changes	in	Motor	Function

FIGURE	22.2	Major	connections	of	the	motor	system.	Note	feedback	loops	between
cortex	 and	 cerebellum	 and	 cortex	 and	 basal	 ganglia.	 (Modified	 from	 Campbell	 WW,
Pridgeon	RP.	Practical	Primer	of	Clinical	Neurology.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2002,	with	permission.)

As	fibers	from	the	motor	cortex	run	downward	through	the	internal	capsule,
they	send	collaterals	to	the	basal	ganglia.	Fibers	from	the	basal	ganglia	project	to
VA	 and	 VL,	 which	 in	 turn	 project	 to	 the	 cortex,	 creating	 a	 feedback	 loop.	 The
substantia	 nigra	 also	 projects	 to	 the	 striatum	 and	 influences	 its	 activity.	 The

motor	 cortex	 and	 cerebellum	 are	 also	 part	 of	 a	 circuit.	 The	 pontine	 nuclei	 lie
scattered	among	the	descending	motor	and	crossing	pontocerebellar	fibers	in	the
basis	 pontis.	 Corticopontine	 fibers	 synapse	 on	 pontine	 nuclei,	 which	 then	 give
rise	to	pontocerebellar	fibers	that	project	across	the	midline	to	the	contralateral
cerebellar	hemisphere	through	the	middle	cerebellar	peduncle.	The	cerebellum	in
turn	projects	to	the	contralateral	VL	via	the	superior	cerebellar	peduncle,	which
decussates	in	the	midbrain.	The	VL	nucleus	in	turn	projects	to	the	motor	cortex
to	complete	the	circuit.	The	cerebellum	also	receives	unconscious	proprioception
from	 muscle	 spindles	 and	 Golgi	 tendon	 organs	 via	 the	 spinocerebellar	 and
cuneocerebellar	tracts.	The	cerebellum	also	projects	to	the	ipsilateral	vestibular
nuclei,	 which	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 vestibulospinal	 tracts.	 The	 lateral	 vestibulospinal
tract	 descends	 from	 the	 lateral	 vestibular	 nucleus	 to	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 where	 it
facilitates	ipsilateral	extensor	muscle	tone	of	the	trunk	and	extremities.	As	they
descend,	 corticospinal	 fibers	 send	 collaterals	 to	 the	 ipsilateral	 red	 nucleus.	 The
rubrospinal	 tract	 arises	 from	 the	 red	 nucleus	 and	 then	 immediately	 decussates
and	descends	to	facilitate	flexor	muscle	tone,	primarily	in	the	upper	extremities.
The	 tectospinal	 tract	 arises	 from	 the	 superior	 colliculus,	 crosses	 in	 the	 dorsal
tegmental	decussation,	and	descends	to	influence	muscles	of	the	neck	and	upper
back.	 It	 functions	 to	 move	 the	 head	 in	 response	 to	 external	 stimuli	 and	 to
maintain	 head	 position	 in	 relation	 to	 the	 body	 position.	 The	 uncrossed	 pontine
(medial)	 reticulospinal	 tract	 arises	 from	 the	 oral	 and	 caudal	 pontine	 reticular
nuclei	 and	 facilitates	 extensor	 muscles,	 especially	 of	 the	 trunk	 and	 proximal
extremities.	 The	 medullary	 (lateral)	 reticulospinal	 tract	 arises	 from	 the
gigantocellular	 reticular	 nucleus	 and	 is	 primarily	 uncrossed	 but	 with	 a	 small
crossed	 component.	 It	 travels	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 rubrospinal	 tract.	 It	 inhibits
antigravity	muscles	and	is	involved	with	autonomic	functions.

impulse	 originated.	 The	 vestibulospinal	 system	 remains	

The	 cerebellar	 hemispheres	 influence	 muscles	 on	 the	 ipsilateral	 side	 of	 the
body.	 The	 cerebellum	 projects	 to	 the	 contralateral	 red	 nucleus,	 and	 the
rubrospinal	 tract	 then	 crosses	 back.	 Because	 of	 the	 “double	 decussation,”	 the
rubrospinal	tract	controls	muscles	ipsilateral	to	the	cerebellar	hemisphere	where
the	
ipsilateral
throughout.	The	cerebral	motor	cortex	on	one	side	and	the	cerebellar	hemisphere
on	the	opposite	side	act	in	concert	to	control	the	arm	and	leg	on	a	particular	side
of	the	body.	Their	actions	are	coordinated	by	projections	from	the	cerebrum	to
the	 pontine	 nuclei,	 which	 send	 fibers	 to	 the	 contralateral	 cerebellum,	 which	 in
turn	 projects	 back	 to	 the	 thalamus	 and	 cerebrum	 on	 the	 original	 side	 via	 the
the	 right	 cerebellar
decussation	 of	

the	 dentatothalamic	

tract.	 Consider	

hemisphere,	 it	 receives	 input	 from	 the	 left	 cerebral	 cortex	 via	 the	 middle
cerebellar	peduncle	and	projects	back	to	the	left	thalamus	and	motor	cortex	via
the	 superior	 cerebellar	 peduncle.	 So,	 both	 the	 left	 cerebral	 hemisphere	 and	 the
right	cerebellar	hemisphere	control	movements	on	the	right	side	of	the	body.

OVERVIEW	OF	CLINICAL	MANIFESTATIONS	OF
DISEASE	OF	THE	MOTOR	SYSTEM

The	 most	 common	 manifestation	 of	 motor	 system	 disease	 is	 weakness.	 Other
abnormalities	 include	 alterations	 in	 muscle	 tone,	 changes	 in	 muscle	 size	 and
involuntary	 movements,	 and	 defective	 coordination.
shape,	 abnormal	
Subsequent	chapters	deal	with	abnormal	motor	functions	in	more	detail.

Motor	Strength	and	Power

Weakness	is	a	common	abnormality	and	can	follow	many	patterns.	Terminology
may	 become	 problematic.	 For	 instance,	 weakness	 may	 be	 generalized	 or
localized,	symmetric	or	asymmetric,	proximal	or	distal,	or	upper	motor	neuron
or	 lower	 motor	 neuron.	 The	 term	 focal	 is	 often	 used	 to	 imply	 asymmetry;	 a
patient	 with	 a	 hemiparesis	 is	 said	 to	 have	 a	 focal	 examination.	 The	 term
generalized	is	often	used	to	imply	symmetry,	even	though	the	weakness	may	not
truly	be	generalized.	A	disease	may	cause	weakness	in	a	particular	distribution
that	is	bilaterally	symmetric	(e.g.,	the	scapuloperoneal	syndromes),	but	these	are
not	generally	regarded	as	focal	even	though	the	involvement	is	very	localized.	A
patient	with	bilateral	carpal	tunnel	syndrome	or	bilateral	peroneal	nerve	palsies
would	 most	 properly	 be	 described	 as	 having	 a	 multifocal	 pattern	 of	 weakness,
even	though	the	weakness	is	bilateral	and	symmetric.	The	term	nonfocal	is	often
used	
to	 describe	 a	 patient’s	 neurologic	 examination,	 particularly	 by
nonneurologists.	The	implication	is	usually	that	the	examination	is	normal	or	at
least	that	there	is	no	asymmetry.	It	is	a	poor	and	not	very	helpful	term.	A	patient
with	 Guillain-Barré	 syndrome	 causing	 generalized	 weakness	 and	 impending
respiratory	failure	would	have	a	nonfocal	examination,	yet	be	critically	ill.

Focal	 weakness	 may	 follow	 the	 distribution	 of	 some	 structure	 in	 the
peripheral	 nervous	 system,	 such	 as	 a	 peripheral	 nerve	 or	 spinal	 root.	 It	 may
affect	one	side	of	the	body	in	a	hemidistribution.	A	hemidistribution	may	affect
the	arm,	leg,	and	face	equally	on	one	side	of	the	body,	or	one	or	more	areas	may

be	 more	 involved	 than	 others.	 Muscle	 groups	 preferentially	 innervated	 by	 the
corticospinal	tract	are	often	selectively	impaired.	When	weakness	is	nonfocal,	it
may	 be	 generalized,	 predominantly	 proximal,	 or	 predominantly	 distal.	 These
various	 patterns	 have	 differential	 diagnostic	 and	 localizing	 significance.
Identification	of	the	process	causing	weakness	is	further	aided	by	accompanying
signs,	such	as	reflex	alterations	and	sensory	loss	(Table	21.1).

Generalized	Weakness

Weakness	may	involve	both	sides	of	the	body,	more	or	less	symmetrically.	With
truly	generalized	weakness,	bulbar	motor	functions	are	also	impaired.	When	the
bulbar	functions	are	intact	and	there	is	weakness	of	both	arms	and	both	legs,	the
patient	 is	 said	 to	 have	 quadriparesis—if	 only	 the	 legs,	 then	 paraparesis.	 When
weakness	 affects	 all	 four	 extremities,	 the	 likely	 causes	 include	 myelopathy,
peripheral	neuropathy,	a	neuromuscular	junction	disorder,	or	a	myopathy.

When	 myelopathy	 is	 the	 culprit	 and	 the	 deficit	 is	 incomplete,	 more	 severe
involvement	of	those	muscles	preferentially	innervated	by	the	corticospinal	tract
can	frequently	be	discerned.	Reflexes	are	usually	increased	(though	in	the	acute
stages,	 they	 may	 be	 decreased	 or	 absent);	 there	 is	 usually	 some	 alteration	 of
sensation,	 sometimes	 a	 discrete	 spinal	 sensory	 “level”;	 superficial	 reflexes
disappear;	 and	 there	 may	 be	 bowel	 and	 bladder	 dysfunction.	 Generalized
peripheral	nerve	disease	tends	to	predominantly	involve	distal	muscles.	There	is
no	 preferential	 involvement	 of	 corticospinal	 innervated	 muscles,	 reflexes	 are
usually	 decreased,	 sensory	 loss	 is	 frequently	 present,	 and	 bowel	 and	 bladder
functions	 are	 not	 disturbed.	 With	 a	 neuromuscular	 junction	 disorder,	 the
extremity	weakness	is	likely	to	be	worse	proximally,	sensation	is	spared,	reflexes
are	normal,	and	there	is	usually	involvement	of	bulbar	muscles.	With	myopathy,
weakness	 is	 usually	 more	 severe	 proximally,	 reflexes	 are	 normal,	 sensation	 is
normal,	 and,	 with	 a	 few	 exceptions,	 bulbar	 function	 is	 spared	 except	 for
occasional	dysphagia.	These	are	generalizations.	Some	neuropathies	may	cause
proximal	 weakness,	 and	 some	 myopathies	 may	 affect	 distal	 muscles;	 not	 all
patients	with	a	neuromuscular	transmission	disorder	have	bulbar	involvement.

Localized	Weakness

When	the	arm	and	leg	on	one	side	of	the	body	are	weak,	the	patient	is	said	to
have	a	hemiparesis.	This	may	range	in	severity	from	very	mild,	manifest	only	as

pronator	 drift	 and	 impairment	 of	 fine	 motor	 control,	 to	 total	 paralysis.
Monoparesis	is	weakness	of	only	one	extremity,	such	as	the	leg	contralateral	to
an	 anterior	 cerebral	 artery	 stroke.	 Reflexes—typically	 increased	 unless	 the
process	 is	 acute—and	 accompanying	 sensory	 loss	 help	 identify	 such	 focal
weakness	as	central	in	origin.

A	mononeuropathy,	such	as	a	radial	nerve	palsy,	or	a	spinal	root	lesion,	such
as	 from	 a	 herniated	 disc,	 causes	 weakness	 limited	 to	 the	 distribution	 of	 the
involved	nerve	or	root.	A	plexopathy	may	cause	weakness	of	the	entire	limb	or
weakness	only	in	the	distribution	of	certain	plexus	components.	With	such	lower
motor	 neuron	 pathology,	 reflexes	 are	 typically	 decreased,	 and	 there	 is	 often
accompanying	sensory	loss.	Localization	of	focal	weakness	due	to	root,	plexus,
and	 peripheral	 nerve	 pathology	 requires	 intimate	 familiarity	 with	 peripheral
neuroanatomy.

Motor	neuron	disease	is	a	special	case.	Amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	(ALS)
characteristically	involves	both	the	upper	and	lower	motor	neurons.	It	produces	a
clinical	picture	of	weakness	and	wasting	due	to	involvement	of	the	lower	motor
neurons	 in	 the	 anterior	 horn	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 combined	 with	 weakness	 and
hyperreflexia	 due	 to	 involvement	 of	 the	 upper	 motor	 neurons	 in	 the	 cerebral
cortex	 that	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 corticospinal	 tract.	 There	 is	 upper	 motor	 neuron
weakness	 (cerebral	 cortex	 pathology)	 superimposed	 on	 lower	 motor	 neuron
weakness	 (spinal	 cord	 pathology).	 ALS	 usually	 begins	 with	 focal	 weakness,
often	involving	one	hand	or	one	foot.

A	 multinerve,	 multiroot	 distribution	 of	 weakness,	 normal	 or	 increased
reflexes,	and	a	lack	of	sensory	loss	are	usually	the	earliest	suggestions	as	to	the
nature	of	the	problem.	In	ALS,	the	weakness	early	tends	to	be	asymmetric	and
associated	 with	 hyperreflexia.	 An	 extremity	
is	 both	 atrophic	 and
hyperreflexic	 is	 characteristic.	 As	 the	 condition	 progresses,	 the	 clinical	 picture
evolves	into	one	of	generalized	weakness.

that	

It	 is	 very	 rare	 for	 a	 myopathy	 or	 neuromuscular	 junction	 disorder	 to	 cause
focal	 weakness,	 although	 these	 disorders	 may	 have	 a	 predilection	 for	 certain
muscles,	 such	 as	 the	 extraocular	 muscles	 in	 myasthenia	 gravis	 or	 the	 thigh
muscles	in	quadriceps	myopathy.

Other	Motor	System	Abnormalities

Muscle	tone	may	be	increased	(hypertonia)	or	decreased	(hypotonia).	Hypertonia
comes	in	two	common	variants:	rigidity	and	spasticity.	When	the	increased	tone

occurs	to	more	or	less	the	same	degree	throughout	the	range	of	passive	motion	of
a	 limb,	 and	 is	 independent	 of	 the	 speed	 of	 the	 movement,	 it	 is	 referred	 to	 as
rigidity.	 When	 the	 hypertonia	 is	 most	 marked	 near	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 range	 of
motion	 and	 is	 more	 apparent	 with	 fast	 than	 with	 slow	 passive	 movement,	 it	 is
referred	 to	 as	 spasticity.	 One	 of	 the	 key	 characteristics	 of	 spasticity	 is	 that	 the
hypertonus	 is	 velocity	 dependent,	 most	 evident	 with	 rapid	 movements.	 In	 lead
pipe	 (plastic)	 rigidity,	 there	 is	 smooth	 resistance	 throughout	 the	 range
independent	of	the	rate	of	movement.	Gegenhalten	(paratonia)	is	an	increase	in
tone	in	a	limb	more	or	less	proportional	to	the	examiner’s	attempt	to	move	it.	In
cogwheel	rigidity,	there	is	ratchety,	jerky,	tremulous	variation	in	the	hypertonia,
due	primarily	to	superimposed	tremor.	Spastic	hypertonia	is	typically	associated
with	 increased	 deep	 tendon	 reflexes,	 loss	 of	 superficial	 reflexes,	 and	 Babinski
signs.	 Cogwheel	 rigidity	 occurs	 in	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 and	 related	 conditions.
Gegenhalten	 is	 usually	 associated	 with	 other	 abnormal	 neurologic	 signs
depending	 on	 the	 etiology.	 The	 term	 dystonia	 refers	 to	 transient	 or	 sustained
hypertonic	conditions	that	do	not	fit	into	the	other	categories.	Hypotonia	occurs
in	two	primary	settings	in	the	adult:	myopathies	and	cerebellar	disease.	Infantile
hypotonia	 (floppy	 baby)	 is	 a	 common	 clinical	 problem.	 The	 differential
diagnosis	of	infantile	hypotonia	is	extensive,	and	the	workup	of	a	floppy	baby	is
a	frequent	exercise	in	pediatric	neurology.

Muscle	Volume	and	Contour

Muscle	mass	or	volume	may	be	decreased	(atrophy)	or	increased	(hypertrophy).
Neurogenic	atrophy	results	from	a	lesion	involving	the	anterior	horn	cells,	nerve
root,	or	peripheral	nerve	innervating	a	muscle;	it	may	be	severe.	Muscle	diseases
usually	 cause	 only	 mild	 to	 moderate	 atrophy	 of	 the	 involved	 muscles.	 Disuse
atrophy	occurs	after	immobilization,	as	when	a	limb	is	in	a	cast,	and	is	usually
mild	to	moderate	in	severity	and	recovers	quickly	with	resumption	of	use.

True	muscle	hypertrophy	results	from	an	increase	in	the	size	of	the	muscle.	It
is	most	often	physiologic	hypertrophy	from	heavy	use,	but	it	can	occur	in	certain
to	 apparent	 muscle
neuromuscular	 disorders.	 Pseudohypertrophy	
enlargement	 due	 to	 replacement	 of	 diseased	 muscle	 by	 fat	 and	 fibrous	 tissue.
Enlarged	 calf	 muscles	 in	 patients	 with	 Duchenne	 muscular	 dystrophy	 are	 a
classic	example	of	muscle	pseudohypertrophy.

refers	

Abnormal	Movements

Abnormal	involuntary	movements	occur	in	a	host	of	neurologic	conditions.	They
come	in	many	forms,	ranging	from	tremor	to	chorea	to	muscle	fasciculations	to
myoclonic	 jerks.	 The	 only	 common	 characteristic	 is	 that	 the	 movements	 are
spontaneous	 and	 not	 under	 volitional	 control.	 Involuntary	 movements	 may	 be
rhythmic	 or	 random,	 fleeting	 or	 sustained,	 and	 predictable	 or	 unpredictable.
They	 may	 occur	 in	 isolation	 or	 be	 accompanied	 by	 other	 neurologic	 signs.
Common	types	include	tremor,	chorea,	athetosis,	hemiballismus,	dystonia,	tics,
and	dyskinesias.

Coordination

Coordination	 and	 control	 of	 fine	 motor	 movements	 are	 delicate	 functions	 that
require	 smooth	 interactions	 between	 the	 different	 components	 of	 the	 motor
system	 as	 well	 as	 normal	 sensory	 function.	 The	 cerebellum	 is	 a	 critical
component,	 and	 disease	 of	
impaired
coordination	in	the	absence	of	weakness	or	other	motor	abnormalities.	But	poor
coordination	may	also	be	a	manifestation	of	corticospinal	tract	or	extrapyramidal
disorders.

the	 cerebellum	 frequently	 causes	

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon	 RP.	 Practical	 Primer	 of	 Clinical	 Neurology.

Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Parent	 A.	 Carpenter’s	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 9th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Williams	 &

Wilkins,	1996.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

CHAPTER	23

The	Motor	Unit	Level

The	 motor	 unit	 consists	 of	 an	 alpha	 motor	 neuron	 (lower	 motor	 neuron),	 its
axon,	 and	 all	 its	 subject	 muscle	 fibers;	 it	 is	 the	 final	 common	 pathway	 for	 all
motor	activity,	 both	voluntary	and	involuntary	(Figure	23.1).	Clinical	disorders
may	 affect	 any	 portion	 of	 the	 motor	 unit	 (cell	 body,	 nerve	 root,	 plexus,
peripheral	 nerve,	 neuromuscular	 junction	 [NMJ],	 or	 muscle),	 and	 diseases	 at
different	sites	have	different	clinical	features.	Sensory	dysfunction—such	as	pain
and	paresthesias—may	accompany	lesions	involving	the	nerve	root,	plexus,	and
peripheral	nerve	portions	of	the	motor	unit.	Nevertheless,	the	motor	unit	remains
a	 useful	 conceptual	 framework	 for	 understanding	 disorders	 involving	 the
peripheral	neuromuscular	apparatus.

THE	MOTOR	UNIT

Alpha	 motor	 neurons	 reside	 in	 the	 anterior	 horn	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 and	 the
brainstem	motor	nuclei.	The	axon	traverses	the	anterior	root	and	the	peripheral
nerve	en	route	to	the	muscle.	The	peripheral	nerve	enters	the	muscle	at	the	motor
point	 and	 divides	 into	 intramuscular	 branches.	 These	 arborize	 within	 a	 muscle
fascicle	 and	 terminate	 as	 fine	 twigs,	 which	 end	 as	 axon	 boutons.	 Terminal
boutons	abut	the	motor	end	plates	of	individual	muscle	fibers	across	a	synaptic
cleft,	forming	NMJs.	Each	muscle	fiber	has	only	a	single	end	plate.

Terminal	 axonal	 twigs	 ramify	 in	 the	 muscle	 and	 innervate	 widely	 dispersed
muscle	fibers.	A	motor	unit	may	have	anywhere	from	a	handful	of	muscle	fibers
to	 more	 than	 a	 thousand.	 The	 innervation	 ratio	 refers	 to	 the	 number	 of	 muscle
fibers	 in	 a	 motor	 unit.	 A	 low	 innervation	 ratio	 means	 few	 muscle	 fibers	 are
innervated	 by	 a	 single	 axon	 and	 is	 characteristic	 of	 muscles	 under	 precise	 and
finely	 graded	 voluntary	 control,	 such	 as	 extraocular	 or	 laryngeal	 muscles.	 A
muscle	performing	a	gross	motor	movement	may	have	several	hundred	muscle

fibers	per	motor	unit.	The	gastrocnemius	has	about	2,000.	The	innervation	ratios
for	the	brachial	biceps,	tibialis	anterior,	and	deltoid	are	209,	329,	and	239	fibers,
respectively.	The	anatomical	scatter	of	fibers	belonging	to	the	same	motor	unit
may	 vary	 from	 muscle	 to	 muscle.	 Electrophysiologic	 motor	 unit	 counting
techniques	 estimate	 that	 an	 intrinsic	 hand	 muscle	 has	 about	 100	 motor	 units.
Beyond	 the	 age	 of	 60	 years,	 there	 is	 a	 decline	 in	 the	 number	 of	 functioning
motor	units.

Motor	units	vary	by	size	within	a	muscle.	Smaller	motoneurons	have	smaller
motor	unit	territories.	To	produce	a	smoothly	graded	muscle	contraction,	motor
units	are	recruited,	more	or	less,	in	order	of	increasing	size.	Small	motoneurons
are	 first	 recruited,	 and	 increasing	 force	 of	 contraction	 calls	 forth	 activity	 from
increasingly	larger	motoneurons:	the	size	principle.

Motor	units	are	classified	as	type	1	or	type	2.	Muscles	were	broadly	divided
into	 red	 muscle	 and	 white	 muscle,	 dark	 meat	 and	 light	 meat,	 long	 before	 the
basis	for	the	difference	was	understood.	The	red	or	dark	color	is	now	known	to
result	 from	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 instruments	 for	 oxidative	 metabolism:
myoglobin,	mitochondria,	and	a	vascular	network	for	delivery	of	oxygen	to	the
metabolizing	muscle	cells.	Histochemical	stains	help	separate	the	different	types
of	 muscle	 fibers	 and	 often	 allow	 the	 appreciation	 of	 structural	 detail	 and
abnormalities	 not	 seen	 with	 routine	 hematoxylin	 and	 eosin	 stains.	 The	 myosin
ATPase	 (adenosine	 triphosphatase)	 histochemical	 stain	 identifies	 two	 distinct
populations	of	muscle	fibers,	referred	to	as	type	1	and	type	2,	which	correspond
to	type	1	and	2	motor	units.	Further	adjustment	of	pH	allows	separation	of	type	2
muscle	 fibers	 into	 types	 2A	 and	 2B	 (Box	 23.1).	 An	 average	 muscle	 contains
about	40%	type	1	fibers	and	60%	type	2	fibers.	However,	this	ratio	varies	with
the	 anatomical	 location	 and	 function	 of	 the	 muscle,	 and	 similar	 muscles	 may
vary	 among	 individuals.	 All	 fibers	 in	 a	 particular	 motor	 unit	 are	 of	 the	 same
type,	and	there	is	good	correlation	between	the	mechanical	properties	and	other
attributes	 of	 a	 motor	 unit	 and	 the	 histochemical	 reactions	 of	 its	 muscle	 fibers.
The	fiber	type	mix	of	a	muscle	is	determined	by	its	innervation	and	ultimately	by
its	function.	In	needle	electromyography,	the	summated	electrical	activity	of	all
the	muscle	fibers	of	a	motor	unit—a	motor	unit	action	potential—is	recorded	by
a	needle	electrode	inserted	into	the	muscle.

FIGURE	23.1	The	motor	unit.	An	alpha	motor	neuron	in	the	anterior	horn	gives	rise	to
an	axon,	which	branches	and	arborizes	in	the	periphery	to	innervate	scattered	muscle
fibers	within	a	muscle	fascicle.

BOX	23.1

Type	1	and	Type	2	Muscle	Fibers

The	 myosin	 ATPase	 (adenosine	 triphosphatase)	 stain	 identifies	 the	 two
distinct	 populations	 of	 type	 1	 and	 type	 2	 muscle	 fibers;	 the	 differences	 are
summarized	in	Table	23.1.	Cross	sections	reveal	a	random	admixture	of	the
two	 fiber	 types	 creating	 a	 checkerboard	 pattern.	 The	 type	 2	 fibers	 stain
darkly	 and	 the	 type	 1	 fibers	 lightly	 at	 pH	 9.4;	 the	 staining	 characteristics
reverse	 at	 pH	 4.3.	 Preincubation	 at	 pH	 4.6	 identifies	 two	 kinds	 of	 type	 2
fibers:	type	2A	and	type	2B.	The	2B	fibers	are	the	classic	fast	twitch,	fatigue-
sensitive	 glycolytic	
fibers	 have	 characteristics
intermediate	 between	 type	 1	 and	 type	 2B,	 with	 some	 oxidative	 capability,
slower	 twitch,	 and	 more	 fatigue	 resistance	 than	 the	 2B	 fibers.	 Pathologic
processes	may	cause	characteristic	abnormalities	of	fiber	type	distribution	or
proportion	or	produce	changes	primarily	in	one	particular	fiber	type.

fibers,	 whereas	 2A	

Type	 1	 muscle	 fibers	 are	 rich	 in	 oxidative	 enzymes	 and	 mitochondria	 but
sparse	 in	 glycogen;	 they	 are	 designed	 for	 sustained,	 long-duration	 contraction
under	 aerobic	 conditions.	 Red,	 or	 dark,	 meat	 is	 high	 in	 type	 1	 fibers.	 Type	 2

fibers	 are	 rich	 in	 glycogen	 and	 glycolytic	 enzymes	 but	 sparse	 in	 oxidative
enzymes,	mitochondria,	and	lipid.	They	are	designed	for	brief,	intense	bursts	of
activity	 under	 anaerobic	 conditions.	 White	 meat	 is	 high	 in	 type	 2	 fibers.	 The
mnemonic	 “one,	 slow,	 red	 ox”	 helps	 recall	 the	 essentials:	 type	 1	 fibers,	 slow
muscle,	red	meat,	oxidative	metabolism.

TABLE
23.1

Attributes	and	Characteristics	of	Type	1	and	Type	2
Muscle	Fibers

Attribute

Type	1

Type	2

ATPase	stain	at	pH	4.6

Dark

ATPase	stain	at	pH	9.4

Light

Oxidative	enzymes

Lipid

Mitochondria

Glycogen

Glycolytic	enzymes

High

High

High

Low

Low

Light

Dark

Low

Low

Low

High

High

Function

Sustained	contraction

Brief	contraction

Twitch	speed

Metabolism

Fatigue

Slow

Aerobic

Resistant

ATPase,	adenosine	triphosphatase.

Fast

Anaerobic

Sensitive

In	another	functional	and	physiologic	scheme,	motor	units	are	classified	into
three	 different	 types:	 fast	 twitch,	 fatigue	 sensitive,	 or	 fast	 fatigable	 (FF);	 slow
twitch,	fatigue	resistant	(S);	and	intermediate	or	fast	fatigue	resistant	(FR).	Type
FF	 units	 are	 fast	 twitch	 and	 fatigue	 sensitive,	 type	 2B	 histochemically,	 rich	 in
glycogen	but	poor	in	oxidative	enzymes,	and	designed	for	brief,	phasic	activity.
Type	 S	 units	 are	 slow	 twitch,	 fatigue	 resistant,	 type	 1	 histochemically,	 low	 in

glycolytic	 but	 high	 in	 oxidative	 enzymes,	 and	 designed	 for	 sustained,	 tonic
activity.	Type	FR	is	intermediate,	fast	twitch	but	more	fatigue	resistant	than	type
FF,	 type	 2A	 histochemically,	 high	 in	 glycolytic,	 and	 intermediate	 in	 oxidative
enzyme	activity.

Myotomes

A	myotome	consists	of	all	the	muscles	innervated	by	a	specific	nerve	root.	Most
skeletal	 muscles	 receive	 innervation	 from	 two	 or	 more	 roots,	 and	 there	 is
inherent	 variability	 in	 the	 myotomal	 patterns	 among	 individuals.	 Early
anatomists	 reported	 myotome	 innervation	 from	 detailed	 dissections,	 and	 some
errors	 have	 been	 perpetuated	 through	 the	 years.	 Many	 different	 innervation
charts	 are	 available,	 and	 most	 vary	 in	 some	 details.	 Some	 misinformation
remains,	such	as	the	inclusion	of	C6-C7	innervation	to	the	thenar	muscles,	which
does	 not	 fit	 clinical	 reality.	 The	 issue	 has	 been	 compounded	 by	 observations
during	 intraoperative	 recordings	 that	 indicate	 contributions	 from	 unexpected
sources	to	leg	muscles	and	anomalous	innervation	so	frequent	as	to	be	the	rule
rather	 than	 the	 exception.	 Liveson	 and	 Ma	 present	 charts	 derived	 from	 seven
different	 sources,	 separating	 “new	 myotomes”	 derived	 from	 electromyographic
data.

FIGURE	 23.2	 The	 normal	 peripheral	 nerve	 is	 composed	 of	 connective	 tissue	 and
neural	 tissue	 components.	 The	 nerve	 fibers	 may	 be	 myelinated	 or	 unmyelinated.
(Modified	 with	 permission	 of	 Georg	 Thieme	 Verlag	 KG	 from	 Mackinnon	 SE,	 Dellon
AL.	 Surgery	 of	 the	 Peripheral	 Nerve.	 1st	 ed.	 New	 York:	 Thieme,	 1988;	 permission
conveyed	through	Copyright	Clearance	Center,	Inc.)

Microanatomy	of	the	Peripheral	Nerve

into	 discrete	

tissue.	 Nerves	 are	 divided	

Peripheral	 nerves	 are	 composed	 of	 myriad	 axons,	 ensheathed	 by	 myelin	 of
varying	thickness	and	supported	by	Schwann	cells,	all	imbedded	in	a	matrix	of
connective	
internal	 fascicular
compartments	 by	 perineurium.	 The	 blood-nerve	 barrier	 is	 a	 physiologic
partition,	 created	 by	 the	 perineurium	 and	 the	 endothelium	 of	 intrafascicular
capillaries.	 It	 regulates	 the	 nerve	 microenvironment	 and	 acts	 as	 a	 diffusion
barrier.	 The	 extreme	 terminal	 ends	 of	 nerve	 fibers	 are	 not	 protected	 by
perineurium	 and	 have	 no	 effective	 blood-nerve	 barrier,	 a	 detail	 of	 probable
importance	 in	 the	 pathogenesis	 of	 some	 peripheral	 neuropathies.	 Within	 each
fascicle,	 endoneurium	 separates	 individual	 axons	 and	 their	 Schwann	 cells
(Figure	23.2).	Fascicles	are	bound	together	into	nerve	trunks	by	the	epineurium,
loose	areolar	connective	tissue	that	also	contains	blood	vessels,	lymphatics,	and
the	 nervi	 nervorum.	 The	 epineurium	 also	 serves	 an	 important	 cushioning	 role.
The	interfascicular	(internal)	epineurium	lies	between	fascicles;	the	epifascicular
(external)	epineurium	circumferentially	envelops	the	entire	nerve.

Fascicles	 bifurcate,	 join	 with	 adjacent	 fascicles,	 redivide,	 and	 recombine	 to
create	 a	 complex	 internal	 fascicular	 network	 (Figure	 23.3).	 Yoon	 et	 al.	 have
imaged	 the	 individual	 fascicles	 beautifully	 with	 7T	 MRI	 (Figure	23.4).	 Nerves
can	 be	 classified	 into	 monofascicular,	 oligofascicular,	 and	 polyfascicular	 types.
A	polyfascicular	pattern	is	common	in	regions	subject	to	mechanical	stress	and
where	 there	 is	 heavy	 fiber	 exchange,	 such	 as	 the	 brachial	 plexus.	 Plexiform
fascicular	 exchange	 is	 most	 prominent	 proximally,	 and	 a	 constant	 fascicular
pattern	 is	 present	 for	 only	 a	 short	 distance	 in	 proximal	 regions	 of	 a	 nerve.
Fascicles	innervating	a	particular	muscle	or	sensory	zone	become	more	discrete
and	 constant	 in	 position	 as	 they	 approach	 the	 target	 organ.	 This	 complex
intraneural	 topography	 has	 important	 clinical,	 surgical,	 and	 electrophysiologic
implications.

FIGURE	23.3	An	illustration	of	the	internal	topography	of	the	median	nerve	at	different
levels.	The	complexity	of	the	internal	fascicular	anatomy	is	apparent.	The	degree	of
plexus	formation	between	fascicles	decreases	in	the	distal	portion	of	the	nerve	as	the
bundles	 approach	 their	 target	 muscles.	 (Modified	 with	 permission	 of	 Georg	 Thieme
Verlag	 KG	 from	 Mackinnon	 SE,	 Dellon	 AL.	 Surgery	of	the	Peripheral	Nerve.	 1st	 ed.
New	York:	Thieme,	1988;	permission	conveyed	through	Copyright	Clearance	Center,
Inc.)

Axons	 are	 divided	 into	 three	 major	 size	 groups:	 large	 myelinated,	 small
myelinated,	and	unmyelinated.	Large	myelinated	axons	have	diameters	in	the	6-

to	12-μm	range,	small	myelinated	axons	are	2	to	6	μm,	and	unmyelinated	axons
are	0.2	to	2.0	μm.	Small	myelinated	fibers	are	about	three	times	more	numerous
than	 large	 myelinated	 axons.	 The	 myelin	 sheath	 adds	 additional	 thickness.
Conduction	 is	 most	 efficient	 when	 the	 ratio	 of	 the	 axon	 diameter	 to	 total	 fiber
diameter	is	0.5	to	0.7.

FIGURE	 23.4	 Individual	 fascicles	 of	 the	 tibial	 nerve	 are	 clearly	 identified	 at	 high
resolution	on	7T	MRI,	marked	by	the	yellow	arrow.	Posterior	tibial	artery	is	marked	by
the	red	arrow	and	posterior	tibial	veins	are	marked	by	the	blue	arrows.	(Modified	from
Yoon	D,	Biswal	S,	Rutt	B,	et	al.	Feasibility	of	7T	MRI	for	imaging	fascicular	structures
of	 peripheral	 nerves.	 Muscle	 Nerve.	 2018;57(3):494-498.	 Copyright	 ©	 2017	 Wiley
Periodicals,	Inc.	Reprinted	by	permission	of	John	Wiley	&	Sons,	Inc.)

Ultrastructurally,	 axons	 contain	 cytoskeletal	 elements,	 neurofilaments,	 and
neurotubules,	which	are	synthesized	in	the	cell	body	and	move	slowly	down	the
axon	at	a	rate	of	3	mm/d.	Neurotubules	consist	of	polymerized	dimers	of	tubulin
protein	 forming	 longitudinally	 oriented	 hollow	 tubes	 about	 20	 nm	 in	 diameter
and	1	mm	long,	linked	by	crossbridges	to	the	neurofilaments.	Neurofilaments	are

smaller	 organelles	 that	 maintain	 axonal	 structure.	 Neurotubules	 are	 responsible
for	 fast	 antegrade	 and	 retrograde	 axonal	 transport	 (see	 Physiology	 of	 the
Peripheral	Nerve	below).

In	myelinated	axons,	a	single	Schwann	cell	wraps	a	single	internodal	segment
in	 concentric	 layers	 of	 myelin	 (Figure	 23.5).	 Schmidt-Lanterman	 incisures	 are
bits	 of	 Schwann	 cell	 cytoplasm	 sequestered	 between	 layers	 of	 myelin.	 The
external	plasma	membrane	of	the	Schwann	cell	is	continuous	with	the	outermost
layer	 of	 myelin;	 the	 inner	 membrane	 of	 the	 Schwann	 cell	 is	 immediately
adjacent	 to	 the	 outer	 surface	 of	 the	 axolemma.	 The	 external	 lamina	 is	 a
condensation	 of	 extracellular	 matrix	 surrounding	 the	 entire	 external	 surface	 of
the	Schwann	cell.	The	nodes	of	Ranvier	are	gaps	in	the	myelin	coverage	between
the	territories	of	adjacent	Schwann	cells.	Internodal	length	varies	with	fiber	size;
it	 is	 about	 1	 mm	 for	 large-diameter	 fibers.	 For	 unmyelinated	 axons,	 a	 single
Schwann	 cell,	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 a	 Remak	 cell,	 sends	 out	 processes	 to
support	several	adjacent	axons,	lending	to	each	primarily	a	cytoplasmic	coat	and
only	a	minimal	investment	of	myelin.	A	complex	of	several	unmyelinated	axons
and	their	supporting	Remak	cell	is	encased	by	an	external	lamina.

FIGURE	 23.5	 Illustration	 of	 a	 single	 myelinated	 nerve	 fiber	 demonstrates	 the
relationships	between	the	axon,	the	Schwann	cell,	and	the	myelin	sheath	at	different
points.	 (Modified	 with	 permission	 of	 Georg	 Thieme	 Verlag	 KG	 from	 Mackinnon	 SE,
Dellon	 AL.	 Surgery	 of	 the	 Peripheral	 Nerve.	 1st	 ed.	 New	 York:	 Thieme,	 1988;
permission	conveyed	through	Copyright	Clearance	Center,	Inc.)

Peripheral	 nerves	 receive	 blood	 supply	 from	 penetrating	 segmental	 arteries
usually	 derived	 from	 adjacent	 vessels.	 Penetrating	 arterioles	 then	 form	 an

extensive	 longitudinal	 anastomotic	 network	 that	 runs	 within	 the	 nerve.
Watershed	zones	of	precarious	perfusion	within	the	nerve	may	explain	some	of
the	 clinical	 manifestations	 seen	 in	 ischemic	 neuropathies,	 especially	 in
vasculitis.

Physiology	of	the	Peripheral	Nerve

Peripheral	nerve	fibers	are	classified	according	to	two	schemes:	the	ABC	and	the
I/II/III/IV	systems	(Chapter	31),	both	ranging	from	largest	(A,	I)	to	smallest	(C,
IV).	The	conduction	velocity	(CV)	of	a	fiber	depends	on	its	diameter	and	degree
of	myelination;	it	ranges	from	less	than	1	m/s	for	small,	unmyelinated	fibers	to
greater	 than	 100	 m/s	 for	 large,	 myelinated	 fibers.	 The	 compound	 nerve	 action
potential—recorded	 in	 vitro	 from	 a	 mixed	 peripheral	 nerve—separates	 fibers
into	groups	based	on	their	CV.	Aa	and	Ag	fibers	are	efferent	fibers	from	alpha
and	gamma	motoneurons,	respectively.	Ab	and	Ad	fibers	are	primarily	cutaneous
afferents.	 Group	 B	 fibers	 are	 preganglionic	 autonomics.	 Group	 C	 fibers	 are
postganglionic	 autonomics,	 visceral	 afferents,	 and	 pain	 and	 temperature	 fibers.
The	 Roman	 numeral	 system	 applies	 only	 to	 afferent	 fibers.	 The	 Ia	 fibers	 arise
from	 nuclear	 bag	 muscle	 spindle	 fibers	 and	 joint	 receptors,	 the	 Ib	 fibers	 from
Golgi	tendon	organs,	and	the	II	fibers	from	nuclear	chain	muscle	spindle	fibers.
Class	 III	 fibers	 are	 cutaneous	 axons	 that	 correspond	 more	 or	 less	 to	 Ad	 fibers,
and	type	IV	fibers	correspond	to	C	fibers.	Some	neuropathies	have	a	predilection
for	 certain	 types	 and	 sizes	 of	 fibers.	 Large-fiber	 neuropathies	 affect	 strength,
reflexes,	 and	 proprioception	 with	 relative	 sparing	 of	 pain	 and	 temperature
sensation,	 whereas	 small-fiber	 neuropathies	 primarily	 affect	 pain,	 temperature,
and	autonomic	function.	Differential	involvement	of	large	versus	small	sensory
fibers	can	sometimes	be	discerned	clinically.	The	immunologic	and	biochemical
differences	 between	 fibers,	 which	 might	 explain	 differential	 involvement,	 are
just	 beginning	 to	 be	 understood.	 For	 example,	 the	 L2	 membrane	 protein	 is
expressed	only	on	motor	axon	Schwann	cells,	and	the	nerves	to	the	extraocular
muscles	 are	 especially	 rich	 in	 ganglioside	 GQ1b,	 which	 may	 relate	 to	 their
involvement	in	Miller-Fisher	syndrome.

The	 axoplasm	 is	 in	 constant	 flux,	 containing	 elements	 that	 flow	 to	 and	 fro
along	its	length	between	the	cell	body	and	the	periphery.	Antegrade	axoplasmic
flow	 moves	 from	 the	 cell	 body	 distally;	 retrograde	 flow	 moves	 centripetally.
Antegrade	flow	has	multiple	components.	Slow	axonal	transport,	1	 to	3	mm/d,
conveys	 cytoskeletal	 proteins	 to	 the	 periphery	 for	 maintenance	 and	 renewal	 of

axoplasm,	 along	 with	 neurotransmitters,	 enzymes,	 and	 other	 components.	 Fast
axonal	transport,	400	mm/d,	largely	transports	membrane-bound	vesicles	that	are
propelled	by	kinesin,	a	microtubule-associated	ATPase.	Abnormalities	of	axonal
transport	 are	 likely	 important	 in	 the	 mechanism	 of	 dying	 back	 or	 length-
dependent	 neuropathies.	 Several	 substances	 produce	 neuropathy	 by	 disrupting
the	 cytoskeletal	 elements:	 vinca	 alkaloids,	 taxoids,	 and	 hexacarbons,	 for
example.	 Retrograde	 flow	 moves	 materials	 from	 the	 periphery	 back	 to	 the	 cell
body;	 it	 is	 the	 mechanism	 through	 which	 some	 neurotrophic	 viruses	 reach	 the
central	nervous	system.

Anatomy	and	Physiology	of	the	Neuromuscular
Junction

the	 synapse	 and	 are	 converted	 again	

In	 the	 nervous	 system,	 presynaptic	 electrical	 events	 are	 converted	 to	 chemical
into	 electrical	 events
events	 at	
postsynaptically.	 The	 NMJ	 is	 a	 specialized	 synapse	 through	 which	 electrical
events	 in	 the	 peripheral	 nerve	 are	 transduced	 into	 chemical	 events	 that	 then
induce	 depolarization	 of	 the	 postsynaptic	 muscle	 membrane,	 which	 in	 turn
induces	 muscle	 contraction.	 Disturbed	 neuromuscular	 transmission	 (NMT)
results	 in	 several	 different	 clinical	 disorders,	 which	 are	 characterized	 primarily
by	weakness	and	fatigability.

FIGURE	23.6	A.	A	normal	neuromuscular	junction	(NMJ).	B.	An	NMJ	in	myasthenia,
degraded	 by	 immunologic	 attack,	 simplified,	 and	 depopulated	 of	 acetylcholine
receptor.	 C.	 An	 NMJ	 in	 Lambert-Eaton’s	 syndrome,	 highly	 complex	 and	 convoluted
with	 increased	 surface	 area.	 (From	 Campbell	 WW.	 Essentials	 of	 Electrodiagnostic
Medicine.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	1999.	Modified	with	permission
of	Dr.	William	W.	Campbell.)

An	 intramuscular	 nerve	 branch	 ends	 by	 forming	 a	 bulbous	 swelling—the
terminal	bouton.	The	primary	synaptic	cleft	separates	the	terminal	bouton	from
the	 postsynaptic	 muscle	 membrane,	 which	 is	 in	 turn	 divided	 into	 a	 number	 of
secondary	 synaptic	 clefts,	 or	 junctional	 folds.	 The	 postsynaptic	 muscle

membrane	 is	 blanketed	 by	 a	 dense	 array	 of	 nicotinic	 acetylcholine	 receptor
(AChR)	molecules.	Freeze-fracture	techniques	show	the	AChR	as	large	particles
concentrated	on	the	tips	of	junctional	folds,	extending	about	halfway	down	into
the	 secondary	 synaptic	 clefts.	 The	 AChR	 is	 a	 complex	 structure,	 consisting	 of
two	 alpha	 subunits	 and	 beta,	 gamma,	 and	 delta	 subunits,	 plus	 an	 ion	 channel.
The	 main	 immunogenic	 region	 of	 the	 AChR	 is	 the	 site	 that	 is	 attacked	 by
autoantibodies	 in	 the	 majority	 of	 cases	 of	 myasthenia	 gravis.	 In	 addition,	 there
are	 acetylcholine	 esterase	 molecules	 on	 both	 presynaptic	 and	 postsynaptic
membranes	(Figure	23.6).

The	 terminal	 bouton	 is	 a	 beehive	 of	 metabolic	 activity.	 It	 is	 packed	 with
cytoskeletal	proteins,	mitochondria,	and	numerous	chemicals.	Most	importantly,
it	 contains	 vesicles,	 which	 are	 membrane-bound	 collections	 of	 acetylcholine
(ACh).	In	the	cytoplasm	of	the	terminal	bouton,	ACh	is	packaged	into	vesicles,
which	then	migrate	to	and	collect	at	primary	release	sites,	or	active	zones.	The
active	zones	of	the	presynaptic	membrane	tend	to	line	up	opposite	the	secondary
synaptic	 clefts	of	the	postsynaptic	 membrane.	The	active	zones	are	the	sites	of
both	exocytosis	of	ACh	vesicles	and	ingress	of	calcium.

FIGURE	23.7	 Schematic	 of	 the	 events	 of	 normal	 neuromuscular	 transmission.	 Ach,
acetylcholine;	 AchE,	 acetylcholinesterase;	 AchR,	 acetylcholine	 receptor;	 EPP,	 end
plate	 potential.	 (From	 Campbell	 WW.	 Essentials	 of	 Electrodiagnostic	 Medicine.
Philadelphia:	 Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,	 1999.	 Modified	 with	 permission	 of	 Dr.

William	W.	Campbell.)

the	 presynaptic	

terminal,	 which	 greatly	 facilitates	

The	 presynaptic	 membrane	 contains	 voltage-gated	 calcium	 channels.	 In
response	 to	 nerve	 depolarization,	 these	 channels	 permit	 the	 influx	 of	 calcium
into	
the	 release	 of
neurotransmitter	with	the	next	nerve	impulse.	Magnesium	has	the	opposite	effect
and	 inhibits	 the	 release	 of	 transmitter.	 After	 a	 nerve	 impulse,	 calcium	 diffuses
out	 of	 the	 nerve	 terminal	 and	 is	 largely	 gone	 within	 100	 to	 200	 ms.	 Repetitive
nerve	impulses	also	increase	the	mobilization	of	ACh	vesicles	toward	the	active
zones.	 As	 a	 result,	 sustained	 voluntary	 muscle	 contraction	 has	 a	 transient
facilitatory	effect	on	transmitter	release.	Repetitive	nerve	stimulation	(RNS)	is	a
clinical	 neurophysiologic	 technique	 used	 to	 investigate	 NMT	 disorders.	 The
timing	of	the	calcium	fluxes	is	extremely	important	in	determining	the	response
to	different	rates	of	RNS.

Vesicles	of	ACh	are	released	sporadically	and	irregularly	while	the	membrane
is	at	rest	and	in	flurries	after	nerve	depolarization.	Each	vesicle	contains	about
5,000	to	10,000	molecules	of	ACh.	Upon	activation,	the	vesicles	fuse	with	the
presynaptic	 membrane	 and	 pour	 their	 ACh	 contents	 into	 the	 primary	 synaptic
cleft.	The	molecules	of	ACh	diffuse	rapidly	across	the	primary	synaptic	cleft	and
into	the	secondary	clefts.	Anywhere	two	molecules	of	ACh	encounter	an	AChR,
a	 chemical	 interaction	 takes	 place.	 This	 causes	 opening	 of	 sodium	 channels	 in
the	 postsynaptic	 membrane,	 producing	 a	 brief	 nonpropagated	
localized
depolarization.	 The	 depolarization	 produced	 by	 the	 contents	 of	 one	 vesicle	 is
referred	to	as	a	miniature	end-plate	potential	(MEPP).	The	summation	of	many
MEPPs	produces	a	localized,	nonpropagated	depolarization	in	the	region	of	the
end	plate,	referred	to	as	an	end-plate	potential	(EPP).	The	EPPs	in	turn	summate,
and	 if	 above	 threshold	 spawn	 a	 propagated,	 all-or-none	 muscle	 fiber	 action
potential.	The	summated	electrical	activity	of	hundreds	to	thousands	of	muscle
fiber	 action	 potentials	 produces	 the	 motor	 unit	 action	 potential,	 which	 can	 be
recorded	by	needle	electromyography.

The	events	of	normal	NMT	are	summarized	in	Figure	23.7.	Defects	in	NMT

may	develop	at	a	number	of	points	in	the	process.

Anatomy	and	Physiology	of	Muscle

A	 muscle	 is	 composed	 of	 hundreds	 to	 thousands	 of	 individual	 muscle	 fibers
(Figure	23.8).	 Each	 fiber	 is	 a	 multinucleated	 syncytium,	 roughly	 cylindrical	 in

shape	 and	 encased	 in	 a	 connective	 tissue	 covering	 of	 endomysium,	 which
extends	 over	 a	 long	 distance	 within	 a	 muscle	 fascicle.	 Fibers	 are	 polygonal	 in
cross	 section;	 the	 diameter	 may	 vary	 depending	 on	 a	 number	 of	 factors	 but	 is
relatively	constant	within	a	given	muscle.	A	muscle	fascicle	is	a	group	of	fibers
lying	 together	 within	 a	 sheath	 of	 perimysium.	 Intramuscular	 nerve	 twigs,
capillaries,	and	muscle	spindles	also	occupy	the	perimysium.

FIGURE	23.8	Cross	section	of	muscle	showing	several	fascicles,	with	muscle	fibers,
connective	 tissue	 septa,	 and	 blood	 vessels.	 Note	 the	 endomysium	 surrounding
individual	 muscle	 fibers,	 the	 perimysium	 surrounding	 and	 separating	 fascicles,	 and
the	 epimysium	 surrounding	 the	 entire	 muscle.	 Myonuclei	 and	 satellite	 cells	 lie
fibers
peripherally	 and	 cannot	 be	 distinguished	 histologically.	 Longitudinal	
demonstrate	 cross	 striations.	 (From	 Campbell	 WW.	 Essentials	 of	 Electrodiagnostic
Medicine.	Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	1999.	Modified	with	permission
of	Dr.	William	W.	Campbell.)

Epimysium	separates	groups	of	fascicles	and	also	provides	a	covering	for	the
entire	 muscle.	 The	 surface	 epimysium,	 which	 encases	 the	 muscle	 proper,	 is
continuous	 with	 the	 fascia,	 which	 covers	 the	 muscle,	 and	 in	 turn	 with	 the
tendons,	which	anchor	it	at	the	origin	and	insertion.	The	nuclei	supporting	a	fiber
lie	 peripherally	 just	 under	 the	 sarcolemmal	 membrane.	 Just	 external	 to	 the
sarcolemma	 is	 the	 dense	 basement	 membrane.	 Satellite	 cells	 lie	 between	 the
basement	 membrane	 and	 the	 sarcolemma.	 These	 dormant,	 omnipotential	 stem
cells,	whose	nuclei	resemble	the	sarcolemmal	nuclei,	can	serve	as	the	source	of
regeneration	 of	 muscle	 fibers	 following	 injury.	 Cellular	 organelles,	 glycogen
granules,	 and	 lipids	 lie	 interspersed	 between	 the	 myofibrils	 and	 near	 the

sarcolemmal	nuclei.

Each	muscle	fiber	is	composed	of	thousands	of	myofibrils,	which	are	in	turn
made	 up	 of	 myriad	 myofilaments,	 the	 contractile	 elements	 (Figure	 23.8).	 The
myofibril	 is	 composed	 of	 repeating	 identical	 segments	 called	 sarcomeres.	 A
sarcomere	is	anchored	at	each	end	by	a	condensation	of	protein	referred	to	as	a	Z
disk.	From	each	Z	disk	arise	thin	filaments,	made	up	of	a	long	double	helix	of
two	 chains	 of	 actin,	 which	 project	 toward	 the	 center	 of	 the	 sarcomere.	 From	 a
condensation	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 sarcomere—the	 M	 line—thick	 filaments	 of
myosin	 project	 outward	 toward	 the	 Z	 lines.	 Where	 the	 myosin	 and	 actin
filaments	 overlap,	 the	 sarcomere	 appears	 denser	 and	 transmits	 less	 light—the
anisotropic	or	A	band.	At	the	sarcomere’s	ends,	where	thin	actin	filaments	exist
alone,	the	appearance	is	lighter—the	isotropic	or	I	band.	In	the	paramedian	zone,
where	myosin	filaments	exist	alone,	the	appearance	is	intermediate—the	H	zone.
There	 are	 twice	 as	 many	 actin	 filaments	 as	 myosin	 filaments.	 During	 muscle
contraction,	 the	 filaments	 slide	 past	 each	 other	 as	 side	 arms	 on	 the	 myosin
molecule	ratchet	the	actin	molecule	and	draw	it	past.	At	maximal	shortening,	the
Z	disks	are	drawn	together	and	the	I	bands	are	obliterated	as	the	overall	length	of
the	sarcomere	decreases	(Figure	23.9).

Myosin	 is	 composed	 of	 two	 fragments:	 heavy	 meromyosin,	 which	 has
ATPase	 activity,	 and	 light	 meromyosin,	 which	 does	 not.	 Actin	 is	 composed	 of
three	fragments:	actin,	troponin,	and	tropomyosin.	Lying	in	the	groove	between
the	 two	 chains	 in	 the	 actin	 are	 long	 filaments	 of	 tropomyosin	 molecules.
Troponin	 molecules	 are	 small	 globular	 units	 located	 at	 intervals	 along	 the
tropomyosin	 molecules.	 Troponin	 is	 made	 up	 of	 three	 subunits:	 troponin	 T,
troponin	 I,	 and	 troponin	 C.	 Troponin	 T	 binds	 the	 troponin	 components	 to
tropomyosin,	 troponin	 I	 inhibits	 the	 interaction	 of	 myosin	 with	 actin,	 and
troponin	 C	 contains	 the	 binding	 sites	 for	 the	 Ca2+	 that	 helps	 to	 initiate
contraction.	Troponin	can	reversibly	bind	with	calcium.	A	troponin-tropomyosin
complex	inhibits	the	interaction	of	myosin	and	actin	while	the	muscle	is	at	rest.
The	 binding	 of	 calcium	 to	 troponin	 disinhibits	 the	 interaction	 and	 allows
reactions	to	occur	between	the	cross	bridges	on	the	myosin	molecule	and	active
sites	on	the	actin	molecule.	Other	important	skeletal	muscle	proteins	are	actinin,
titin,	and	desmin.	Actinin	binds	actin	to	the	Z	lines.	Titin	connects	the	Z	lines	to
the	M	lines	and	provides	a	scaffold	for	the	sarcomere.	Desmin	adds	structure	to
the	Z	lines.

FIGURE	 23.9	 Myofibrils	 are	 composed	 of	 repeating	 sarcomeres.	 The	 sarcomere
extends	from	Z	line	to	Z	line	and	consists	of	the	I	band	(actin	filaments	only),	the	A
band	 (actin	 and	 myosin	 filaments	 overlapping),	 the	 H	 zone	 (myosin	 filaments	 only),
and	 the	 M	 line	 (a	 central	 condensation	 of	 the	 myosin	 filaments).	 The	 myosin
molecules	have	cross	bridges	that	interact	with	the	actin	molecules.	When	the	muscle
shortens,	 the	 overlapping	 of	 the	 myosin	 and	 actin	 molecules	 increases	 as	 the
filaments	 slide,	 drawing	 the	 Z	 lines	 together	 and	 obliterating	 the	 I	 band.	 Dystrophin
lies	 beneath	 the	 sarcolemma	 and	 helps	 reinforce	 it	 against	 stretching	 and	 buckling.
(From	 Campbell	 WW.	 Essentials	 of	 Electrodiagnostic	 Medicine.	 Philadelphia:
Lippincott	 Williams	 &	 Wilkins,	 1999.	 Modified	 with	 permission	 of	 Dr.	 William	 W.
Campbell.)

At	the	junction	of	the	A	and	I	bands,	the	transverse	(T)	tubular	systems	arise

as	invaginations	of	the	plasmalemma	and	ramify	as	an	intricate	network	within
the	sarcomere.	The	T	tubules	allow	communication	between	the	muscle	interior
and	the	extracellular	space	and	are	the	conduits	along	which	the	action	potential
is	transmitted	to	the	depths	of	the	sarcomere.	The	sarcoplasmic	reticulum	(SR)	is
a	closed	internal	labyrinth	of	vesicles	that	surrounds	the	myofibrils.	The	SR	ends
as	 focal	 dilatations,	 the	 terminal	 cisterns,	 which	 contain	 calcium.	 A	 pair	 of
terminal	cisterns	abuts	a	T	tubule	to	form	a	triad.	The	action	potential	conducted
into	 the	 fiber	 along	 the	 T	 tubule	 causes	 calcium	 release	 from	 the	 terminal
cisterns,	 which	 in	 turn	 activates	 myosin	 ATPase	 and	 initiates	 sliding	 of	 the
filaments.	 This	 sequence	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 excitation	 contraction	 coupling.
Following	 contraction,	 calcium	 ions	 are	 sequestered	 back	 into	 the	 terminal
cisterns	of	the	SR.

In	 addition	 to	 the	 contractile	 elements,	 skeletal	 muscle	 contains	 important
cytoskeletal	proteins,	which	help	provide	it	structure.	Elastic	elements	are	vital
to	 allow	 for	 contraction	 and	 relaxation.	 One	 of	 the	 key	 cytoskeletal	 proteins	 is
dystrophin,	a	large	molecule	that	forms	a	reinforcing	meshwork	just	beneath	the
sarcolemma,	 and	 links	 the	 sarcomere	 to	 the	 sarcolemma	 and	 the	 extracellular
matrix.	Dystrophin	is	not	directly	connected	to	the	membrane,	but	anchored	to	it
at	 each	 end	 by	 a	 glycoprotein	 complex	 (dystrophin-associated	 glycoprotein),
which	 spans	 the	 membrane	 and	 binds	 externally	 to	 laminin	 in	 the	 extracellular
matrix.	 Dystrophin	 appears	 to	 lend	 mechanical	 support	 to	 the	 sarcolemma	 to
help	 stabilize	 and	 brace	 it	 against	 the	 forces	 of	 muscle	 contraction.	 Genetic
derangements	 of	 these	 cytoskeletal	 proteins	 underlie	 many	 of	 the	 muscular
dystrophies.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anthony	 DC,	 Vogel	 FS.	 Peripheral	 nervous	 system.	 In:	 Damjanov	 I,	 Linder	 J,

eds.	Anderson’s	Pathology.	10th	ed.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	1996:2799–2831.

Barrett	 KE,	 Barman	 SM,	 Boitano	 S,	 et	 al.	 Ganong’s	 Review	 of	 Medical

Physiology.	23rd	ed.	Los	Altos:	Lange,	2010.

Brown	 RH,	 Al-Chalabi	 A.	 Amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med

2017;377:162–172.

Campbell	 WW.	 Diagnosis	 and	 management	 of	 common	 compression	 and

entrapment	neuropathies.	Neurol	Clin	1997;15:549–567.

Campbell	 WW.	 Essentials	 of	 Electrodiagnostic	 Medicine.	 2nd	 ed.	 New	 York:

Demos	Medical,	2014.

Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon	 RP.	 Practical	 Primer	 of	 Clinical	 Neurology.

Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

Donofrio	 PD,	 Albers	 JW.	 AAEM	 minimonograph	 #34:	 polyneuropathy:
classification	 by	 nerve	 conduction	 studies	 and	 electromyography.	 Muscle
Nerve	1990;13:889–903.

Drachman	DB.	Myasthenia	gravis.	N	Engl	J	Med	1994;330:1797–1810.
Eisen	A.	Amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis.	Intern	Med	1995;34:824–832.
Ernste	 FC,	 Reed	 AM.	 Idiopathic	 inflammatory	 myopathies:	 current	 trends	 in
pathogenesis,	 clinical	 features,	 and	 up-to-date	 treatment	 recommendations.
Mayo	Clin	Proc	2013;88:83–105.

Gath	I,	Stalberg	E.	In	situ	measurement	of	the	innervation	ratio	of	motor	units	in

human	muscles.	Exp	Brain	Res	1981;43:377–382.

Gilhus	NE.	Myasthenia	gravis.	N	Engl	J	Med	2016;375:2570–2581.
Jabaley	ME,	Wallace	WH,	Heckler	FR.	Internal	topography	of	major	nerves	of

the	forearm	and	hand:	a	current	view.	J	Hand	Surg	[Am]	1980;5:1–18.

Keesey	J.	Myasthenia	gravis.	Arch	Neurol	1998;55:745–746.
Levin	 KH.	Common	 focal	mononeuropathies	and	their	electrodiagnosis.	J	Clin

Neurophysiol	1993;10:181–189.

Liveson	 JA,	 Ma	 DM.	 Laboratory	 Reference	 for	 Clinical	 Neurophysiology.

Philadelphia:	FA	Davis	Co.,	1992:408–414.

Matloub	HS,	Yousif	NJ.	Peripheral	nerve	anatomy	and	innervation	pattern.	Hand

Clin	1992;8:201–214.

McComas	 AJ.	 Invited	 review:	 motor	 unit	 estimation:	 methods,	 results,	 and

present	status.	Muscle	Nerve	1991;14:585–597.

Myers	 RR.	 Anatomy	 and	 microanatomy	 of	 peripheral	 nerve.	 Neurol	 Clin

1991;2:1–20.

Nicolle	 MW.	 Myasthenia	 gravis	 and	 Lambert-Eaton	 myasthenic	 syndrome.
Continuum	(Minneap	Minn)	 2016;22(6,	 Muscle	and	Neuromuscular	 Junction
Disorders):1978–2005.

Pham	M,	 Bäumer	P,	Meinck	 HM,	et	al.	Anterior	 interosseous	nerve	syndrome:
fascicular	motor	lesions	of	median	nerve	trunk.	Neurology	2014;82:598–606.
Plotz	 PH,	 Dalakas	 M,	 Leff	 RL,	 et	 al.	 Current	 concepts	 in	 the	 idiopathic
related

inflammatory	 myopathies:	 polymyositis,	 dermatomyositis,	 and	
disorders.	Ann	Intern	Med	1989;111(2):143–157.

Ruff	 RL.	 Neurophysiology	 of	 the	 neuromuscular	 junction:	 overview.	 Ann	 N	 Y

Acad	Sci	2003;998:1–10.

Sanders	 DB.	 Clinical	 neurophysiology	 of	 disorders	 of	 the	 neuromuscular

junction.	J	Clin	Neurophysiol	1993;10:167–180.

Stewart	 JD.	 Peripheral	 nerve	 fascicles:	 anatomy	 and	 clinical	 relevance.	 Muscle

Nerve	2003;28:525–541.

Stewart	 JD.	 Magnificent	 MRI	 and	 fascinating	 selective	 nerve	 fascicle	 damage.

Neurology	2014;82:554–555.

Tzartos	SJ,	Cung	MT,	Demange	P,	et	al.	The	main	immunogenic	region	(MIR)	of
the	 nicotinic	 acetylcholine	 receptor	 and	 the	 anti-MIR	 antibodies.	 Mol
Neurobiol	1991;5:1–29.

Verschuuren	J,	Strijbos	E,	Vincent	A.	Neuromuscular	junction	disorders.	Handb

Clin	Neurol	2016;133:447–466.

Vincent	A,	Palace	J,	Hilton-Jones	D.	Myasthenia	gravis.	Lancet	2001;357:2122–

2128.

Wertsch	 JJ,	 Oswald	 TA,	 Roberts	 MM.	 Role	 of	 intraneural	 topography	 in
diagnosis	 and	 localization	 in	 electrodiagnostic	 medicine.	 PMR	Clinics	North
Am	1994;5:465–475.

CHAPTER	24

The	Spinal	Cord	Level

Above	 the	 motor	 unit,	 the	 next	 level	 of	 motor	 system	 integration	 is	 the	 spinal
cord.	 The	 spinal	 cord	 begins	 at	 the	 cervicomedullary	 junction	 and	 ends	 at	 the
conus	medullaris.	It	is	slightly	flattened	in	an	anteroposterior	direction.	Fissures
and	sulci	mark	the	external	surface	of	the	spinal	cord;	most	are	of	little	clinical
importance.	 A	 deep	 anterior	 median	 fissure	 and	 a	 posterior	 median	 sulcus
partially	divide	it	into	two	symmetrical	halves.	The	anterior	and	posterior	roots
form	the	spinal	nerves,	which	are	segmentally	arranged	in	31	pairs.	There	are	8
pairs	of	cervical	nerves,	12	thoracic,	5	lumbar,	5	sacral,	and	1	coccygeal	(Figure
24.1).	Situated	on	each	dorsal	root	is	a	dorsal	root	ganglion	(DRG).

In	 newborns,	 the	 spinal	 cord	 may	 extend	 as	 far	 caudally	 as	 L3.	 During
maturation,	 the	 vertebral	 column	 elongates	 more	 than	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 and	 the
adult	 spinal	 cord	 is	 about	 25	 cm	 shorter	 than	 the	 vertebral	 column.	 The
variability	of	the	lower	level	has	some	correlation	with	the	length	of	the	trunk,
especially	 in	 females.	 Radiographically,	 the	 conus	 is	 usually	 seen	 at	 the	 L1-L2
interspace	 in	 adults;	 if	 the	 level	 of	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 conus	 is	 below	 the	 mid-L2
vertebral	 body,	 the	 conus	 is	 considered	 low-lying.	 Because	 the	 spinal	 cord
normally	 ends	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 L1-L2	 interspace,	 lumbar	 punctures	 are	 done
well	below	this	level.

The	 length	 discrepancy	 between	 the	 spine	 and	 the	 spinal	 cord	 creates	 a
difference	 between	 the	 segments	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 and	 the	 vertebral	 level	 that
progressively	 increases	 from	 rostral	 to	 caudal.	 In	 the	 upper	 cervical	 area,	 the
numerical	 cord	 level	 is	 about	 one	 segment	 greater	 than	 the	 corresponding
vertebral	spinous	process	(e.g.,	the	C5	spinous	process	lies	at	the	C6	segment	of
the	spinal	cord).	In	the	lower	cervical	and	thoracic	areas,	there	is	a	difference	of
about	two	segments;	in	the	lumbar	region,	there	is	a	difference	of	almost	three
segments	 (Figure	 24.1).	 Because	 of	 the	 offset,	 the	 spinal	 nerves	 below	 the
cervical	 region	 course	 downward	 before	 exiting	 through	 the	 intervertebral

foramina.	 Nerve	 roots	 exit	 through	 the	 foramen	 above	 the	 vertebra	 of	 like
number	from	C1	to	C7.	The	C8	root	exits	below	C7	and	sets	the	pattern	of	root
exit	 below	 like-numbered	 vertebra	 followed	 down	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 vertebral
column.	 The	 lumbar	 and	 sacral	 roots	 descend	 almost	 vertically	 to	 reach	 their
points	of	exit.	These	long	trailing	roots	from	the	lower	cord	segments	make	up
the	cauda	equina.

The	 spinal	 cord	 is	 greater	 in	 width	 and	 diameter	 in	 the	 cervical	 and
lumbosacral	regions,	forming	the	 cervical	and	lumbar	enlargements,	the	site	of
nuclear	 centers	 that	 supply	 the	 extremities.	 The	 cervical	 enlargement	 extends
from	 the	 C3-T2	 spinal	 cord	 segments;	 it	 innervates	 muscles	 of	 the	 upper	 limb
(Figure	 24.2).	 The	 lumbar	 enlargement	 extends	 from	 the	 L1-S3	 spinal	 cord
segments;	it	innervates	muscles	of	the	lower	limb.	The	segments	of	the	cervical
enlargement	 match	 fairly	 well	 with	 the	 corresponding	 vertebral	 levels.	 The
lumbar	enlargement	extends	over	vertebral	levels	T9-T12.	Below	T12,	the	spinal
cord	tapers	to	form	the	conus	medullaris.

Each	 segment	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 gives	 rise	 to	 a	 mixed	 spinal	 nerve	 that
contains	motor,	sensory,	and	autonomic	fibers	(Figure	24.3).	Motor	axons	arising
from	the	anterior	horn	cells	of	the	spinal	cord	travel	in	the	converging	filaments
of	 the	 anterior	 spinal	 root.	 On	 each	 posterior	 root,	 within	 the	 intervertebral
foramen	and	just	proximal	to	the	junction	with	the	anterior	root,	lies	a	DRG.	The
DRG	is	made	up	of	unipolar	neurons,	and	the	posterior	roots	are	made	up	of	the
central	processes	of	these	neurons.	Acetylcholine	is	the	only	neurotransmitter	in
the	 anterior	 roots;	 the	 posterior	 roots	 contain	 several,	 including	 substance	 P,
glutamate,	 calcitonin	 gene–related	 peptide,	 vasoactive	 intestinal	 polypeptide,
cholecystokinin,	 somatostatin,	 and	 dynorphin.	 The	 anterior	 roots	 convey	 motor
and	 autonomic	 fibers	 into	 the	 peripheral	 nerve;	 they	 join	 the	 posterior	 root	 to
form	the	mixed	spinal	nerve.	In	the	thoracolumbar	region,	white	and	gray	rami
communicantes	connect	the	spinal	nerve	to	the	paravertebral	sympathetic	chain
(Figure	24.3).

FIGURE	24.1	The	relationship	of	the	spinal	cord	segments	and	spinal	nerves	to	the
vertebral	bodies	and	spinous	processes.

FIGURE	24.2	Posterior	view	of	the	spinal	cord	showing	attached	dorsal	root	filaments
and	 spinal	 ganglia.	 Letters	 and	 numbers	 indicate	 corresponding	 spinal	 nerves.
(Modified	 from	 Carpenter	 MB,	 Sutin	 J.	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 8th	 ed.	 Baltimore:
Williams	&	Wilkins,	1983,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	 24.3	 Segmental	 spinal	 nerve	 showing	 the	 course	 of	 motor,	 sensory,	 and
preganglionic	and	postganglionic	sympathetic	fibers.

The	Bell-Magendie	law	(for	Sir	Charles	Bell	and	Francois	Magendie)	states
that	the	anterior	roots	are	motor	and	the	posterior	roots	sensory;	this	discovery
was	 one	 of	 the	 seminal	 developments	 in	 early	 neurobiology.	 However,	 it	 now
appears	there	may	be	some	afferent	nerve	fibers	in	the	anterior	roots,	and	up	to
3%	of	the	fibers	in	the	posterior	root	may	be	efferent.	The	roots	pass	through	the
dura	 separately	 and	 then	 unite	 in	 the	 intervertebral	 foramina	 just	 distal	 to	 the
DRG	 to	 form	 the	 mixed	 spinal	 nerve.	 After	 the	 mixed	 spinal	 nerve	 exits	 the

intervertebral	 foramen,	 it	 divides	 into	 anterior	 and	 posterior	 primary	 rami.	 The
smaller	 posterior	 primary	 rami	 supply	 the	 skin	 of	 the	 back	 and	 the	 paraspinal
muscles.	The	anterior	primary	rami	are	continuations	of	the	mixed	spinal	nerves
and	supply	motor	and	sensory	innervation	to	all	other	structures	of	the	body.	The
anterior	 primary	 rami	 from	 the	 cervical	 and	 lumbar	 enlargements	 form	 the
brachial	and	lumbosacral	plexuses	that	innervate	the	limbs.	The	anterior	primary
rami	 of	 the	 thoracic	 segments	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 continue	 as	 the	 intercostal
nerves.	 The	 anterior	 primary	 ramus	 of	 the	 mixed	 spinal	 nerve	 is	 sometimes
referred	to	as	a	root,	especially	by	surgeons	and	especially	regarding	the	brachial
plexus.	 When	 anatomy	 sources	 say	 that	 the	 C5	 and	 C6	 roots	 join	 to	 form	 the
upper	trunk,	they	are	actually	referring	to	the	anterior	primary	rami	of	the	spinal
nerve.	Similarly,	when	the	dorsal	scapular	nerve	is	said	to	arise	from	the	C5	root.
The	delicate	pia-arachnoid	closely	invests	the	spinal	cord.	The	tough,	fibrous
membrane	 of	 the	 dura	 mater	 forms	 a	 firm,	 tubular	 sheath	 around	 the	 exiting
nerve	roots.	The	spinal	cord	is	separated	from	the	walls	of	the	vertebral	canal	by
the	 epidural	 space,	 which	 contains	 areolar	 tissue	 and	 a	 plexus	 of	 veins.	 The
subdural	 space	 is	 a	 potential	 space	 containing	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 fluid.	 The
subarachnoid	 space	 is	 a	 well-defined	 cavity	 containing	 cerebrospinal	 fluid	 that
extends	 to	 about	 the	 level	 of	 the	 second	 sacral	 vertebra,	 forming	 the	 lumbar
thecal	sac.	Systemic	malignancies	frequently	metastasize	to	the	capacious	spinal
epidural	space.	Spinal	hematomas	may	accumulate	in	the	epidural,	subdural,	or
subarachnoid	space.	Subarachnoid	hematomas	can	extend	along	the	entire	length
of	the	subarachnoid	space.	Epidural	and	subdural	spinal	hematoma	present	with
intense,	 knifelike	 pain	 at	 the	 location	 of	 the	 hemorrhage	 (“coup	 de	 poignard”)
followed	 by	 progressive	 paralysis	 below	 the	 affected	 level.	 Spinal	 epidural
abscess	classically	causes	a	triad	of	fever,	back	pain,	and	a	neurologic	deficit.

A	section	of	spinal	cord	where	the	rootlets	of	a	pair	of	spinal	nerves	attach	is
referred	 to	 as	 a	 segment,	 although	 there	 is	 no	 internal	 demarcation	 to	 separate
one	 segment	 from	 another.	 Each	 spinal	 cord	 segment	 can	 function	 as	 an
independent	 entity	 for	 purposes	 of	 some	 very	 basic	 functions,	 such	 as	 the
segmental	muscle	stretch	reflex.	Each	segment	controls	the	resting	muscle	tone
of	 the	 muscles	 it	 innervates.	 The	 motor	 units	 supplying	 the	 myotomal	 muscles
innervated	 by	 a	 segment	 carry	 out	 voluntary	 activity.	 The	 motor	 function	 of	 a
spinal	 cord	 segment	 is	 modulated	 and	 influenced	 by	 suprasegmental	 impulses
from	several	descending	motor	tracts.

The	 spinal	 cord	 parenchyma	 consists	 of	 an	 H-	 or	 butterfly-shaped	 core	 of
gray	 matter	 that	 contains	 nerve	 cells,	 surrounded	 by	 white	 matter	 made	 up	 of

longitudinally	 arranged	 ascending	 and	 descending	 nerve	 fibers,	 mainly
myelinated.	The	relative	proportion	of	white	to	gray	matter	varies	depending	on
the	 cord	 level.	 In	 the	 center	 of	 the	 gray	 matter,	 running	 throughout	 the	 entire
length	of	the	cord	and	for	a	short	distance	into	the	filum	terminale,	is	a	minute
central	canal	consisting	of	a	single	layer	of	ependymal	cells.	The	two	halves	of
the	 spinal	 cord	 are	 joined	 by	 a	 commissure	 made	 up	 of	 a	 core	 of	 gray	 matter
surrounded	 by	 anterior	 and	 posterior	 white	 commissures.	 Internally,	 the	 white
matter	of	the	spinal	cord	is	divided	into	posterior,	lateral,	and	anterior	funiculi.
The	 posterior	 funiculus	 extends	 from	 the	 posterior	 median	 sulcus	 to	 the
attachment	 of	 the	 posterior	 rootlets	 at	 the	 posterolateral	 sulcus.	 Rostral	 to	 the
upper	 thoracic	 segments,	 a	 posterior	 intermediate	 sulcus	 separates	 the	 medial
fasciculus	gracilis	from	the	lateral	fasciculus	cuneatus.	The	lateral	funiculus	lies
between	 the	 attachments	 of	 the	 posterior	 and	 anterior	 spinal	 rootlets.	 The
anterior	 funiculus	 extends	 from	 the	 anterior	 rootlets	 to	 the	 anterior	 median
fissure.

The	 spinal	 cord	 gray	 matter	 consists	 of	 anterior	 and	 posterior	 horns	 with	 a
lateral	concavity.	In	the	thoracic	and	upper	lumbar	regions,	an	intermediolateral
column	of	autonomic	neurons	forms	a	small	projecting	lateral	horn	between	the
anterior	and	posterior	horns.	The	sympathetic	axons	project	through	the	anterior
horn	 and	 anterior	 root	 and	 then	 through	 the	 gray	 rami	 communicantes	 to	 enter
the	 sympathetic	 chain	 ganglia.	 The	 gray	 matter	 contains	 neurons,	 nerve	 fibers,
supporting	 neuroglia,	 and	 blood	 vessels.	 Neurons	 are	 not	 distributed	 uniformly
but	 are	 collected	 into	 functional	 groups	 that	 consist	 of	 columns	 of	 cells
extending	 over	 many	 segments	 (Figure	24.4).	 The	 most	 elementary	 division	 is
into	posterior	horns	that	contain	sensory	neurons	and	anterior	horns	that	contain
motor	 neurons.	 The	 posterior	 horn	 is	 relatively	 narrow	 and	 capped	 by	 a	 thin
crescent	of	tissue,	the	substantia	gelatinosa	(of	Rolando).	The	tip	of	the	posterior
horn	is	separated	from	the	surface	by	a	thin	white	matter	tract,	the	dorsolateral
tract	(of	Lissauer).

Within	 the	 anterior	 horn,	 there	 are	 alpha	 motor	 (skeletomotor)	 neurons,
gamma	 motor	 (fusimotor)	 neurons,	 beta	 motor	 neurons,	 and	 interneurons.	 The
alpha	 motoneurons	 innervate	 common,	 extrafusal	 striated	 skeletal	 muscle;	 the
gamma	 motoneurons	 innervate	 intrafusal,	 muscle	 spindle	 fibers	 (L.	 fusus
“spindle”).	 Beta	 motor	 neurons	 innervate	 both	 intrafusal	 and	 extrafusal	 fibers.
All	of	these	fibers	are	classified	as	general	somatic	efferent.	At	any	given	level,
there	 is	a	somatotopic	arrangement	of	 motor	neurons.	A	 medial	cell	group	that
extends	 throughout	 the	 length	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 innervates	 the	 trunk	 and

proximal	 muscles.	 A	 lateral	 cell	 group	 found	 only	 in	 the	 cervical	 and	 lumbar
enlargements	innervates	limb	muscles.	The	expansion	of	the	anterior	horns	in	the
cervical	and	lumbar	enlargements	reflects	the	presence	of	this	lateral	cell	column
that	 supplies	 limb	 muscles.	 In	 both	 the	 cervical	 and	 lumbar	 enlargements,
neurons	 innervating	 proximal	 muscles	 are	 located	 more	 rostrally	 and	 those
innervating	 distal	 muscles	 more	 caudally;	 cells	 supplying	 extensors	 are	 more
ventral	 than	 cells	 innervating	 flexors.	 Some	 motor	 neurons	 are	 aggregated	 into
well-defined	nuclear	groups.	The	phrenic	nucleus	is	a	central	collection	of	cells
from	C3	to	C7	that	innervates	the	diaphragm.	Onuf’s	nucleus	is	a	ventrolateral
cell	group	at	S1	and	S2	that	supplies	the	striated	muscles	of	the	perineum.	For
unknown	 reasons,	 the	 cells	 of	 Onuf’s	 nucleus	 are	 relatively	 spared	 in	 motor
neuron	disease	but	disproportionately	involved	in	multiple	system	atrophy.

FIGURE	 24.4	 Cross	 section	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 showing	 the	 arrangement	 of	 cellular
groups	in	the	gray	matter	and	fiber	pathways	in	the	white	matter.

The	collections	of	neurons	in	the	gray	matter	of	the	spinal	cord	are	not	as	well
defined	as	nuclei	in	other	parts	of	the	nervous	system.	In	experimental	animals,
Rexed	 identified	 10	 regions,	 or	 laminae,	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 gray	 matter.	 Rexed
laminae	 are	 more	 commonly	 used	 in	 the	 study	 of	 spinal	 cord	 neurons	 than	 the
named	nuclei	(Figure	24.5,	Box	24.1).	There	is	evidence	supporting	the	laminar
scheme	in	humans	as	well.	Laminae	I	to	IV	make	up	most	of	the	posterior	horn

and	receive	cutaneous	primary	afferents.	Lamina	IX	contains	the	motor	neurons
that	supply	striated	muscles.	Small	motor	neurons	tend	to	innervate	type	S	(slow
twitch,	 fatigue	 resistant)	 motor	 units,	 and	 larger	 neurons	 type	 FF	 (fast	 twitch,
fatigue	 sensitive)	 and	 FR	 (intermediate,	 fast	 twitch	 but	 more	 fatigue	 resistant
than	FF)	motor	units.

The	white	matter	of	the	spinal	cord	consists	of	ascending	and	descending	long
fiber	tracts	and	short	intersegmental	and	intrasegmental	tracts	(Figure	24.4).	The
ascending	 pathways	 carry	 sensory	 impulses	 of	 various	 types	 from	 the
extremities,	trunk,	or	neck	to	higher	centers.	The	major	ascending	tracts	are	the
posterior	
the
columns,	
spinocerebellar	tracts.

spinothalamic/anterolateral	

system,	

and	

the	

FIGURE	24.5	Positions	of	the	Rexed	cytoarchitectonic	laminae	at	three	levels	of	the
spinal	 cord	 gray	 matter.	 (Modified	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human	 Nervous
System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 9th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer
Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2009,	with	permission.)

BOX	24.1

The	Rexed	Laminae

Lamina	I	consists	of	scattered	large	neurons	in	the	superficial	region	of	the
posterior	horn	that	receive	afferents	from	Lissauer’s	tract;	these	neurons	are
primarily	involved	with	pain	impulses.	Lamina	II,	with	overlap	into	lamina
III,	 is	 approximately	 coterminous	 with	 the	 substantia	 gelatinosa.	 These
regions	contain	interneurons	that	receive	pain	and	temperature	afferents	from
Lissauer’s	 tract	 but	 make	 no	 contribution	 to	 the	 long	 ascending	 sensory
pathways.	 Lamina	 IV	 contains	 polymodal,	 or	 wide	 dynamic	 range,	 sensory
neurons	that	are	activated	by	many	different	stimuli.	Cells	in	lamina	IV	give
rise	 to	 the	 contralateral	 spinothalamic	 tract.	 Laminae	 V	 and	 VI	 are
indistinguishable	 in	 humans.	 Cells	 in	 laminae	 IV	 and	 V	 to	 VI	 make	 up	 the
nucleus	 proprius.	 Laminae	 V	 to	 VI	 receive	 many	 descending	 fibers,
particularly	those	of	the	corticospinal	tract.	Lamina	VII	is	the	most	extensive
cytoarchitectonic	 layer.	 Between	 C8	 and	 L3,	 the	 medial	 portion	 of	 lamina
VII	 contains	 the	 nucleus	 dorsalis	 (of	 Clarke),	 which	 is	 the	 origin	 of	 the
posterior	
the
tract.	 Laterally	
intermediolateral	 gray	 column	 that	 contains	 preganglionic	 sympathetic
neurons	 between	 T1	 and	 L2	 and	 preganglionic	 parasympathetic	 neurons
between	 S2	 and	 S4.	 Lamina	 VIII	 contains	 interneurons	 involved	 in	 motor
control,	including	Renshaw	cells	that	receive	collaterals	from	nearby	lamina
IX	motor	neurons.	Lamina	IX	contains	the	motor	neurons.	There	is	a	medial
nuclear	group	at	all	levels	that	innervates	axial	and	proximal	muscles	and	a
lateral	nuclear	group	in	the	cervical	and	lumbar	enlargements	that	innervates
distal	extremity	muscles.	Lamina	X	surrounds	the	central	canal	and	contains
small	 neurons	 that	 receive	 dorsal	 root	 afferents	 involved	 with	 pain,
temperature,	and	visceral	sensation.

spinocerebellar	

lamina	 VII	

in	

is	

The	descending	pathways	carry	impulses	from	higher	centers;	these	terminate
in	spinal	cord	nuclei	on	which	they	have	regulatory	and	inhibitory	functions.	The
major	 descending	 pathway	 is	 the	 pyramidal	 tract,	 which	 includes	 the	 lateral
(uncrossed
corticospinal	
pyramidal)	 tracts.	 The	 lateral	 corticospinal	 tract	 is	 a	 massive	 bundle	 taking	 up

(crossed	 pyramidal)	 and	 ventral	 corticospinal	

most	of	the	lateral	funiculus	of	the	cord.	It	contains	descending	pyramidal	tract
fibers	 from	 the	 giant	 pyramidal	 Betz	 cells	 in	 the	 motor	 cortex,	 but	 these
comprise	 only	 3%	 of	 the	 bundle;	 fibers	 making	 up	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 tract	 come
from	 other	 cortical	 areas.	 Lateral	 corticospinal	 axons	 drop	 off	 to	 innervate
segmental	motor	neurons	all	along	the	cord,	so	the	tract	becomes	progressively
smaller	as	it	descends.

In	humans,	corticospinal	tract	fibers	originating	in	areas	4	and	6	synapse	not
only	 with	 interneurons	 but	 directly	 with	 the	 large,	 multipolar,	 spinal	 motor
neurons	 in	 lamina	 IX.	 The	 direct	 synapse	 with	 anterior	 horn	 motor	 neurons	 is
one	 of	 the	 defining	 characteristics	 of	 the	 corticospinal	 system.	 The	 direct
projections	from	the	precentral	gyrus	to	spinal	motor	neurons	are	concerned	with
discrete,	 fractionated	 limb	 movements	 and	 fine	 motor	 control,	 and	 the
distribution	of	precentral	corticospinal	fibers	is	primarily	to	motor	neurons	that
supply	 distal	 extremity	 muscles.	 Other	 descending	 tracts	 that	 influence
segmental	 spinal	 cord	 motor	 activity	 include	 the	 rubrospinal,	 vestibulospinal,
medial	 and	 lateral	 reticulospinal,	 olivospinal,	 and	 the	 tectospinal	 tract.
Fractionated,	 fine	 movements	 of	 distal	 extremity	 muscles	 are	 controlled
primarily	 by	 the	 corticospinal	 and	 rubrospinal	 tracts;	 control	 of	 proximal	 and
postural	 muscles	 is	 primarily	 by	 extrapyramidal	 pathways,	 particularly	 the
reticulospinal	and	vestibulospinal	tracts.	There	are	other	less	well-defined	tracts,
as	 well	 as	 intersegmental,	 intrasegmental,	 and	 association	 pathways.	 There	 is
some	intermingling	of	fibers	within	the	various	tracts,	and	individual	pathways
are	not	as	distinctly	delineated	as	diagrams	would	indicate.

BLOOD	SUPPLY

There	is	some	individual	variation	in	the	blood	supply	of	the	spinal	cord	(Figure
24.6).	The	anterior	spinal	artery	is	formed	by	the	union	of	the	arterial	branches
that	 pass	 caudally	 from	 each	 vertebral	 artery	 and	 unite	 in	 the	 midline	 near	 the
foramen	 magnum.	 It	 descends	 the	 entire	 length	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord,	 taking	 a
somewhat	 undulating	 course,	 and	 lies	 in	 or	 near	 the	 anterior	 median	 fissure.
Below	 the	 fourth	 or	 fifth	 cervical	 segment,	 the	 anterior	 spinal	 artery	 is	 fed	 or
reinforced	 by	 unpaired	 anterior	 medullary	 arteries	 that	 arise	 from	 the	 lateral
spinal	 arteries.	 These	 latter	 vessels	 enter	 the	 vertebral	 canal	 through	 the
intervertebral	foramina,	and	in	the	cervical	region	are	branches	of	the	ascending
cervical	 artery;	 in	 the	 thorax,	 of	 the	 intercostals;	 and	 in	 the	 abdomen,	 of	 the

lumbar,	 iliolumbar,	 and	 lateral	 sacral	 arteries.	 They	 pierce	 the	 dural	 sheaths	 of
the	 spinal	 roots	 and	 split	 into	 anterior	 and	 posterior	 radicular	 branches.	 The
radicular	 arteries	 are	 asymmetric	 and	 sometimes	 absent.	 The	 largest	 medullary
artery,	the	great	anterior	radicular	artery	of	Adamkiewicz,	arises	between	T9	and
L2,	 usually	 on	 the	 left	 side,	 and	 supplies	 the	 lumbar	 enlargement.	 The	 blood
supply	to	any	given	level	of	the	spinal	cord	is	proportional	to	its	cross-sectional
area	of	gray	matter,	and	the	caliber	of	the	anterior	spinal	artery	is	largest	at	the
level	of	the	lumbar	and	cervical	enlargements.

FIGURE	24.6	Arterial	supply	of	the	spinal	cord.

The	posterior	spinal	arteries	are	really	plexiform	channels	rather	than	distinct
single	vessels	that	lie	near	the	posterolateral	sulci	and	the	entrance	of	the	rootlets
of	 the	 posterior	 spinal	 nerves.	 They	 also	 arise	 from	 the	 vertebral	 arteries,	 and
posterior	 medullary	 arteries	 join	 them	 at	 irregular	 intervals.	 Central	 arteries,
branches	 of	 the	 anterior	 spinal,	 are	 given	 off	 alternately	 to	 the	 right	 and	 left
halves	 of	 the	 spinal	 cord	 at	 different	 levels	 to	 supply	 the	 anterior	 and	 central
portions	of	the	cord.	Branches	of	the	anterior	and	posterior	spinal	arteries	form	a
peripheral	anastomosis,	the	arterial	vasocorona,	which	supplies	the	periphery	of
the	 cord,	 including	 the	 lateral	 and	 ventral	 funiculi.	 This	 anastomosis	 is	 least

efficient	in	the	region	of	the	lateral	columns.	Within	the	substance	of	the	cord,
the	 posterior	 spinal	 arteries	 supply	 the	 posterior	 horns	 and	 most	 of	 the	 dorsal
funiculi;	 the	 anterior	 spinal	 artery	 supplies	 most	 of	 the	 remainder	 of	 the	 cord.
Certain	boundary	zones	between	ascending	and	descending	sources	of	the	blood
supply	are	sites	of	least	adequate	circulation	in	the	spinal	cord.	The	cervical	and
lumbosacral	spinal	cord	are	more	richly	vascularized	than	the	thoracic	cord.	The
upper	 thoracic	 segments	 near	 T4	 have	 been	 traditionally	 thought	 particularly
vulnerable	to	ischemia.	More	recent	evidence	finds	the	lower	thoracic	or	upper
lumbar	 cord	 more	 vulnerable.	 Patients	 with	 myelopathy	 after	 cardiac	 arrest	 or
severe	 hypotension	 were	 found	 to	 have	 predominant	 involvement	 of	 the
lumbosacral	 level	 with	 relative	 sparing	 of	 the	 thoracic	 region;	 none	 of	 the
patients	 had	 damage	 isolated	 to	 the	 thoracic	 region.	 In	 a	 series	 of	 44	 cases	 of
spinal	cord	infarction,	the	mean	level	of	deficit	in	cases	of	global	ischemia	was
at	T9.

The	venous	drainage	of	the	spinal	cord	courses	from	the	capillary	plexuses	to
peripheral	venous	plexuses	that	correspond	somewhat	to	the	arterial	supply.	The
major	 portion	 of	 the	 venous	 drainage	 takes	 place	 through	 the	 intervertebral
foramina	 into	 veins	 in	 the	 thoracic,	 abdominal,	 and	 pelvic	 cavities,	 but	 the
valveless	spinovertebral	venous	plexus	(Batson’s	plexus)	also	continues	upward
into	the	intracranial	cavity	and	venous	sinuses	and	may	be	a	means	of	transport
of	 tumor	 cells.	 Abnormalities	 of	 the	 cerebrospinal	 venous	 system	 have	 been
implicated	in	the	pathogenesis	of	multiple	sclerosis	(MS).

PHYSIOLOGY	AND	PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Spinal	reflexes	are	responses	to	stimuli	that	are	mediated	at	the	spinal	cord	level.
A	 spinal	 reflex	 may	 be	 monosynaptic,	 with	 an	 afferent	 and	 efferent	 limb
mediated	by	only	two	neurons	joined	by	a	single	synapse,	or	polysynaptic	when
one	 or	 more	 interneurons	 are	 involved.	 A	 spinal	 reflex	 may	 be	 segmental
(intrasegmental),	 mediated	 at	 only	 one	 level,	 or	 intersegmental,	 with	 several
levels	participating.	Long-loop	reflexes	involve	circuits	that	reach	as	far	as	the
cerebral	 cortex,	 allowing	 modulation	 of	 spinal	 reflexes	 by	 suprasegmental
mechanisms.

The	motor	unit	consists	of	an	alpha	motor	neuron	and	all	its	subject	muscle
fibers	(Chapter	23).	A	parallel	system	of	innervation	arises	from	gamma	motor
neurons	 that	 innervate	 muscle	 spindles.	 Muscle	 spindles,	 or	 neuromuscular

spindles,	are	small	structures	(1	to	3	mm	long	in	small	muscles,	7	to	10	mm	long
in	 large	 muscles),	 composed	 of	 specialized	 muscle	 fibers.	 Spindles	 lie	 widely
interspersed	in	the	muscle,	affixed	with	connective	tissue	 parallel	to	the	larger,
extrafusal	muscle	fibers.	Muscles	that	require	finely	graded	contractile	control,
such	 as	 small	 hand	 muscles,	 have	 a	 greater	 density	 of	 spindles.	 The	 extrafusal
fibers	 provide	 the	 force	 for	 muscle	 contraction;	 the	 muscle	 spindles	 provide
modulation	and	control	of	that	force.	They	also	help	regulate	the	underlying	tone
in	 the	 muscle.	 Muscle	 contraction	 always	 occurs	 against	 some	 setting	 of
background	 tone.	 When	 the	 underlying,	 background	 level	 of	 muscle	 tone	 is
either	 too	 high	 or	 too	 low,	 voluntary	 activity	 cannot	 occur	 with	 normal
effectiveness.	Thus,	the	gamma	efferent	system	is	a	critical	component	of	motor
the
control.	 The	 descending	 extrapyramidal	 motor	 pathways,	 such	 as	
reticulospinal	 and	 vestibulospinal	 tracts,	 have	 an	 important	 influence	 on	 the
gamma	efferent	system.	Pathways	from	the	motor	cortex	and	cerebellum	tend	to
influence	 both	 the	 alpha	 and	 gamma	 motor	 neurons	 simultaneously,	 an	 effect
referred	to	as	alpha-gamma	coactivation.

Muscle	 spindles	 consist	 of	 a	 small	 group	 of	 intrafusal	 muscle	 fibers
surrounded	 by	 a	 connective	 tissue	 capsule.	 Tonic	 firing	 of	 the	 gamma	 motor
neuron	 produces	 slight	 contraction	 of	 the	 intrafusal	 fibers,	 leaving	 them	 under
tension.	 The	 spindles	 send	 information	 regarding	 the	 level	 of	 tension	 to	 the
spinal	cord.	There	are	two	primary	types	of	intrafusal	fibers,	nuclear	chain	and
nuclear	 bag,	 in	 a	 ratio	 of	 3	 to	 4:1.	 In	 nuclear	 bag	 fibers,	 a	 collection	 of
myonuclei	 creates	 a	 bulge	 in	 the	 fiber’s	 center;	 in	 nuclear	 chain	 fibers,	 the
myonuclei	are	linear.	There	are	two	types	of	nuclear	bag	fibers:	bag	1	and	bag	2.
The	bag	2	fibers	are	smaller	than	the	bag1	fibers,	intermediate	in	size	between
the	bag	1	fibers	and	the	nuclear	chain	fibers.	Muscle	spindles	supply	the	nervous
system	 with	 information	 about	 the	 length	 of	 a	 muscle	 and,	 if	 the	 length	 is
changing,	 about	 the	 rate	 of	 change.	 The	 bag	 1	 fibers	 convey	 dynamic
information	 about	 changes	 in	 length;	 the	 bag	 2	 fibers	 relay	 data	 about	 static
muscle	length.	Nuclear	chain	fibers	respond	only	to	static	muscle	length.

The	efferent	nerve	supply	to	the	muscle	spindles	arises	from	gamma	or	beta
motor	 neurons.	 There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 efferent	 nerve	 ending	 configurations:
plate	endings	occur	primarily	on	nuclear	bag	fibers;	trail	endings	are	common	on
both	 bag	 and	 chain	 fibers.	 Afferent	 nerve	 fibers	 from	 the	 muscle	 spindles	 are
group	Ia	(primary	spindle	afferents)	and	group	II	(secondary	spindle	afferents).
The	group	Ia	afferents	arise	from	primary	annulospiral	endings	that	form	spirals
around	 the	 equatorial	 region	 of	 nuclear	 bag	 fibers;	 the	 group	 II	 afferents	 arise

from	 both	 annulospiral	 and	 flower	 spray	 endings,	 primarily	 on	 nuclear	 chain
fibers.	 Primary	 spindle	 afferents	 are	
large,	 heavily	 myelinated,	 rapidly
conducting	fibers;	they	are	the	fastest	conducting	fibers	in	the	peripheral	nervous
system.	 Centrally,	 they	 make	 monosynaptic	 contact	 with	 alpha	 motor	 neurons
innervating	 agonist	 and	 synergist	 muscles.	 They	 also	 send	 collaterals	 to	 the
gamma	 motor	 neurons	 innervating	 the	 same	 muscle,	 as	 well	 as	 inhibitory
collaterals	 to	 alpha	 motor	 neurons	 innervating	 antagonist	 muscles	 (reciprocal
inhibition).	 Secondary	 spindle	 afferents	 make	 monosynaptic	 contact	 only	 with
agonist	muscle	motor	neurons.	Spindle	afferents	are	classified	as	general	somatic
afferent	type	fibers.

Renshaw	described	the	effect	of	the	discharge	of	motoneurons	on	neighboring
motoneurons.	 Alpha	 motor	 neurons	 give	 off	 collateral	 fibers	 that	 synapse	 on
nearby	inhibitory	interneurons,	which	then	modulate	the	discharge	of	the	alpha
motor	 neuron	 (recurrent	 inhibitory	 Renshaw	 loop,	 lateral	 inhibition).	 Renshaw
cells	 are	 present	 in	 laminae	 VII	 and	 VIII,	 immediately	 medial	 to	 the	 motor
neurons	in	lamina	IX.	The	synapse	of	the	alpha	motor	neuron	on	the	Renshaw
cell	 is	 cholinergic.	 Both	 glycine	 and	 gamma-amino	 butyric	 acid	 (GABA)—
inhibitory	 amino	 acids—appear	 to	 play	 a	 role	 in	 the	 recurrent	 inhibition
mechanism	of	Renshaw	cells	on	motor	neurons.	Autoantibodies	to	glutamic	acid
decarboxylase—a	 key	 enzyme	
in	 GABA	 synthesis—cause	 stiff-person
syndrome,	 a	 condition	 of	 generalized	 stiffness	 and	 increased	 tone	 because	 of
impaired	inhibitory	mechanisms.

Another	 important	 component	 in	 this	 system	 is	 the	 Golgi	 tendon	 organ
(GTO).	 The	 GTO,	 from	 its	 position	 in	 the	 tendon,	 further	 helps	 to	 regulate
muscle	 tone.	 In	 contrast	 to	 the	 parallel	 arrangement	 of	 the	 muscle	 spindles,
GTOs	 are	 connected	 in	 series	 with	 the	 muscle.	 The	 GTO	 is	 a	 mechanism	 for
force	 feedback	 to	 the	 contracting	 muscle.	 It	 may	 also	 serve	 as	 a	 protective
mechanism	 against	 overstretch	 of	 the	 muscle	 tendon,	 either	 from	 active
contraction	 of	 the	 muscle	 or	 from	 passive	 stretch.	 When	 tension	 in	 the	 tendon
increases	 beyond	 a	 certain	 level,	 afferent	 traffic	 travels	 centrally	 via	 group	 Ib
fibers	from	the	GTO	to	inhibit	contraction	of	the	agonist	and	to	cause	contraction
of	the	antagonist.	The	inhibition	of	the	agonist	(autogenic	inhibition)	is	mediated
by	 glycinergic	 interneurons.	 For	 force	 generated	 by	 active	 muscle	 contraction,
autogenic	 inhibition	 helps	 to	 unload	 the	 tension	 on	 the	 tendon	 by	 causing	 the
muscle	to	relax.	The	effects	of	the	GTO/Ib	fiber	system	are	opposite	(inhibition
of	 the	 agonist)	 those	 of	 the	 muscle	 spindle/Ia	 fiber	 system	 (facilitation	 of	 the
agonist).	Further	modulation	of	the	motor	system	at	the	local	segmental	level	is

provided	 by	 afferents	 coming	 from	 the	 skin	 and	 joints	 that	 help	 to	 convey
additional	information	regarding	the	position	of	the	limb	in	space.

The	 simplest	 example	 of	 spinal	 cord	 segmental	 modulation	 of	 motor	 unit
activity	is	the	monosynaptic	stretch	reflex.	If	a	muscle	is	suddenly	stretched,	as
by	 percussion	 of	 its	 tendon	 with	 a	 reflex	 hammer,	 the	 passive	 stretch	 of	 the
tendon	 stretches	 the	 muscle	 belly,	 which	 in	 turn	 leads	 to	 passive	 stretch	 of	 the
muscle	 spindles.	 This	 lengthening	 of	 the	 intrafusal	 fibers	 triggers	 a	 volley	 of
impulses	 in	 the	 primary	 spindle	 afferents.	 These	 synapse	 with	 alpha	 motor
neurons	 innervating	 the	 muscle.	 The	 alpha	 motor	 neurons	 fire,	 producing	 a
contraction	 of	 the	 muscle,	 which	 then,	 because	 of	 the	 parallel	 configuration	 of
intrafusal	 and	 extrafusal	 fibers,	 unloads	 or	 takes	 the	 stretch	 off	 the	 muscle
spindles.	 The	 muscle	 then	 returns	 to	 a	 state	 of	 relaxation.	 The	 sequence	 of
percussion,	contraction,	and	then	relaxation	is	a	muscle	stretch	or	myotatic	reflex
(myo	 +	 Gr.	 teinein	 “to	 stretch”).	 Because	 the	 muscle	 stretch	 is	 produced	 by
percussion	of	the	tendon,	the	terms	tendon	reflex	and	deep	tendon	reflex	are	also
commonly	 used.	 The	 contraction	 of	 the	 agonist	 may	 be	 accompanied	 by
relaxation	 of	 the	 antagonist	 mediated	 by	 inhibitory	 interneurons	 (inverse
myotatic	reflex).	If	the	resting	tone	of	the	muscle	spindles	is	increased,	and	the
tension	of	the	intrafusal	fibers	at	a	higher	than	normal	level,	then	the	additional
passive	stretch	due	to	percussion	of	the	tendon	produces	a	markedly	exaggerated
response.	This	is	hyperreflexia,	which	is	seen	with	upper	motor	neuron	lesions.

In	 addition	 to	 the	 monosynaptic	 reflex	 arc,	 there	 are	 complex	 polysynaptic
spinal	 reflexes	 that	 involve	 excitation	 or	 inhibition	 of	 agonists,	 synergists,	 and
antagonist	 muscles	 and	 even	 contralateral	 muscles.	 The	 withdrawal	 reflex
consists	 of	 a	 movement	 to	 escape	 from	 a	 cutaneous	 stimulus,	 usually	 noxious
(e.g.,	flexion	of	the	lower	extremity	in	response	to	a	painful	stimulus	on	the	sole
of	 the	 foot).	 Afferent	 cutaneous	 nociceptive	 fibers	 synapse	 on	 both	 excitatory
and	 inhibitory	 interneurons,	 which	 cause	 flexion	 of	 the	 hip	 and	 thigh,	 and
dorsiflexion	 of	 the	 foot,	 with	 appropriate	 inhibition	 of	 their	 antagonists.	 The
reflex	 activity	 is	 intersegmental,	 spread	 over	 several	 cord	 segments.	 More
complex	yet	is	the	crossed	extensor	(Phillipson)	reflex,	in	which	withdrawal	of
the	 ipsilateral	 limb	 is	 accompanied	 by	 extension	 of	 the	 contralateral	 limb	 to
provide	body	support	whereas	the	stimulated	limb	escapes	the	provoking	trigger.
The	 crossed	 extensor	 reflex	 is	 not	 merely	 polysynaptic	 and	 intersegmental;	 the
contralateral	side	of	the	spinal	cord	also	participates.	The	crossed	flexor	reflex	is
when	the	contralateral	leg	flexes	rather	than	extends.

CLINICAL	MANIFESTATIONS	OF	DISINHIBITED
SPINAL	CORD	SEGMENTS

The	activity	of	the	motor	neurons	in	the	spinal	cord	is	regulated	and	modulated
by	the	descending	motor	pathways.	When	the	influence	of	the	descending	motor
pathways	is	removed,	as	in	a	spinal	cord	injury,	the	result	is	a	disinhibition	of	the
segmental	motor	neuron	pools	below	the	level	of	the	lesion,	resulting	in	a	higher
level	 of	 gamma	 efferent	 resting	 traffic.	 This	 increases	 the	 gain	 on	 the	 muscle
spindles,	 leaving	 them	 under	 an	 increased	 level	 of	 resting	 tone,	 which	 leads	 to
spasticity	and	hyperreflexia.

to	 being	 scratched	

Segmental	spinal	cord	reflexes	can	be	responsible	for	fairly	elaborate	motor
phenomena.	 A	 dog	 making	 vigorous	 kicking	 movements	 with	 one	 leg	 in
response	
is	 exhibiting	 a	 complex,	 polysynaptic,
intersegmental	 spinal	 reflex.	 The	 descending	 motor	 pathways—particularly	 the
pyramidal	tract—in	general	inhibit	segmental	reflexes	and	act	to	suppress	excess
activity.	 Because	 descending	 motor	 pathways	 normally	 suppress	 segmental
activity,	 the	 eloquence	 of	 spinal	 reflexes	 is	 seen	 to	 best	 advantage	 when
suprasegmental	 control	 is	 defective.	 In	 the	 immature	 nervous	 system	 of	 the
neonate,	 suprasegmental	 pathways	 are	 not	 fully	 developed;	 a	 variety	 of	 spinal
reflexes	occur	normally,	such	as	stepping	and	placing	reactions,	crossed	extensor
reflex,	and	the	tonic	neck	reflex.	In	the	normal	neonate,	the	crossed	extensor	and
placing/stepping	 reactions	 disappear	 by	 1	 to	 2	 months	 of	 age,	 the	 tonic	 neck
reflex	by	3	months,	and	the	extensor	plantar	response	by	12	months.	In	patients
with	 severe	 myelopathy	 that	 has	 interrupted	 the	 suprasegmental	 pathways
rostrally,	 spinal	 reflex	 activity	 may	 be	 prominent,	 including	 withdrawal	 and
crossed	 extensor	 reflexes.	 The	 Babinski’s	 sign	 and	 related	 extensor	 plantar
responses	are	fragments	of	the	withdrawal	reflex	that	occur	with	damage	to	the
descending	 motor	 pathways.	 A	 more	 fully	 developed	 variation	 is	 the	 triple
flexion	 response,	 in	 which	 extension	 of	 the	 great	 toe	 is	 accompanied	 by
dorsiflexion	of	the	foot	and	flexion	of	the	knee	and	hip,	essentially	a	withdrawal
reflex.	 Brain-dead	 patients	 can	 display	 impressive	 spinal	 reflex	 movements,
including	the	dramatic	“Lazarus	sign”	(bilateral	arm	flexion,	shoulder	adduction,
raising	of	the	arms,	and	crossing	of	 the	hands).	These	are	 all	 ostensibly	 due	 to
local	 spinal	 cord	 reflexes,	 which	 have	 become	 autonomous	 and	 are	 under	 no
suprasegmental	control.

SPINAL	CORD	SYNDROMES	AND	DISORDERS

Common	 or	 classic	 spinal	 cord	 syndromes	 include	 transverse	 myelopathy,
Brown-Séquard	 syndrome,	 central	 cord	 syndrome,	 syringomyelic	 syndrome,
anterior	 cord	 syndrome,	 posterior	 column	 syndrome,	 posterolateral	 column
syndrome,	 anterior	 horn	 syndrome,	 and	 anterior	 horn-corticospinal	 tract
syndrome.

Complete	transverse	myelopathy	causes	total	loss	of	function	below	the	level
of	the	lesion;	with	incomplete	myelopathy,	there	is	some	preservation	of	function
(see	 Chapter	 53).	 Common	 etiologies	 include	 trauma,	 cord	 compression,	 and
myelitis,	due	to	MS,	neuromyelitis	optica,	a	parainfectious	event,	or	an	isolated
clinical	 syndrome.	 Patients	 present	 with	 acute	 transverse	 myelopathy	 if
compression	involves	the	spinal	cord	proper.	If	compression	involves	the	cauda
equina,	 the	 patient	 presents	 with	 a	 cauda	 equina	 syndrome	 rather	 than	 a
transverse	 myelopathy	 (see	 Chapter	 47).	 Longitudinally	 extensive	 transverse
myelitis	refers	to	florid	and	widespread	inflammation	of	the	spinal	cord	causing
T2	 hyperintensity	 on	 spinal	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging	 that	 is	 seen	 to	 extend
over	 three	 or	 more	 vertebral	 segments.	 It	 is	 classically	 associated	 with
neuromyelitis	 optica,	 but	 there	 are	 many	 other	 causes,	 including	 other
inflammatory	etiologies,	infection,	malignancy,	and	metabolic	disturbances.

the	 clinical	 picture	

Brown-Séquard	 described	

that	 follows	 functional
hemisection	of	the	spinal	cord.	It	is	actually	more	often	seen	with	extramedullary
tumor	 compression	 than	 with	 trauma.	 Patients	 with	 Brown-Séquard	 syndrome
have	corticospinal	tract	and	posterior	column	dysfunction	ipsilateral	to	the	lesion
and	spinothalamic	tract–mediated	pain	and	temperature	loss	contralateral	to	the
lesion.	 There	 may	 be	 evidence	 of	 root	 dysfunction	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 lesion.
Brown-Séquard-plus	syndrome	is	associated	with	additional	neurologic	findings
involving	the	eyes,	bowel,	or	bladder.

Central	 cord	 syndrome	 is	 one	 of	 the	 regularly	 recurrent	 variants	 seen	 with
incomplete	cervical	spinal	cord	injury;	it	involves	necrosis	with	softening	of	the
central	aspect	of	the	spinal	cord,	with	relative	sparing	of	the	periphery.	Patients
have	 segmental	 weakness	 at	 the	 involved	 level	 because	 of	 anterior	 horn	 gray
matter	 necrosis,	 with	 only	 minor	 long	 tract	 findings,	 that	 is,	 they	 are	 not
paraplegic	or	quadriplegic.	The	segmental	weakness	typically	involves	the	hands
and	 distal	 upper	 extremities.	 Hand	 weakness	 may	 also	 occur	 with	 a	 lesion
several	segments	higher.

FIGURE	 24.7	 Nitrous	 oxide	 abuse	 myelopathy.	 Sagittal	 short	 T1	 inversion	 recovery
MRI	showing	hyperintensity	in	the	posterior	cervical	and	thoracic	spinal	cord	(A);	axial
T2	 hyperintensity	 (B).	 (Reprinted	 from	 Probasco	 JC,	 Felling	 RJ,	 Carson	 JT,	 et	 al.
Teaching	 NeuroImages:	 myelopathy	 due	 to	 B12	 deficiency	 in	 long-term	 colchicine
treatment	and	nitrous	oxide	misuse.	Neurology.	2011;77[9]:e51,	with	permission.)

Anterior	cord	syndrome	is	due	to	ischemia	in	the	distribution	of	the	anterior
spinal	artery	(anterior	spinal	artery	syndrome).	There	is	dysfunction	of	the	entire
spinal	cord,	except	for	the	posterior	columns.	Patients	are	typically	paraplegic	or
quadriplegic	with	loss	of	pain	and	temperature	sensation	below	the	level	of	the
lesion	 but	 with	 retained	sensation	 to	 light	touch,	 position,	 and	 vibration.	 In	the
posterolateral	 column	 syndrome	 (subacute	 combined	 degeneration),	 most	 often
because	 of	 vitamin	 B12	 deficiency,	 there	 is	 demyelination	 and	 gliosis	 of	 the
posterior	 and	 lateral	 columns.	 Clinically,	 affected	 patients	 have	 weakness,
spasticity,	 and	 prominent	 loss	 of	 vibratory	 and	 position	 sense	 with	 relative
preservation	of	pain	and	temperature.	A	similar	syndrome	may	occur	in	nitrous
oxide	 exposure,	 HIV	 myelopathy,	 copper	 deficiency,	 or	 zinc	 toxicity	 (Figure
24.7).	 Syringomyelia,	 often	 associated	 with	 Chiari	 malformations,	 produces
suspended,	dissociated	sensory	loss	(see	Chapter	36).

In	 the	 posterior	 column	 syndrome,	 dysfunction	 is	 limited	 to	 the	 posterior
columns.	 The	 primary	 cause	 is	 syphilitic	 myelopathy,	 now	 rarely	 seen	 (tabes
dorsalis;	tabes,	L.	consumption).	Isolated	degeneration	of	the	posterior	column,
without	 demonstrable	 etiology,	 occurs	 as	 a	 clinically	 benign	 rare	 condition,
without	 progression	 to	 other	 systems.	 The	 etiology	 is	 most	 likely	 a	 sporadic
degenerative	disease	of	the	cord.	The	anterior	horn	syndrome	is	characterized	by

loss	 of	 anterior	 horn	 cells	 and	 occurs	 in	 such	 conditions	 as	 spinal	 muscular
atrophy	 (hereditary	 or	 acquired)	 and	 poliomyelitis.	 The	 anterior	 horn-
corticospinal	tract	syndrome	causes	a	combination	of	spasticity	and	anterior	horn
cell	dysfunction	and	occurs	in	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Brown	 RH,	 Al-Chalabi	 A.	 Amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med

2017;377:162–172.

Bueri	JA,	Saposnik	G,	Maurino	J,	et	al.	Lazarus’	sign	in	brain	death.	Mov	Disord

2000;15:583–586.

Byrne	 TN.	 Metastatic	 epidural	 cord	 compression.	 Curr	 Neurol	 Neurosci	 Rep

2004;4:191–195.

Byrne	TN,	Borges	LF,	Loeffler	JS.	Metastatic	epidural	spinal	cord	compression:

update	on	management.	Semin	Oncol	2006;	33:307–311.

Cikes	N,	Bosnic	D,	Sentic	M.	Non-MS	autoimmune	demyelination.	Clin	Neurol

Neurosurg	2008;110:905–912.

Duggal	 N,	 Lach	 B.	 Selective	 vulnerability	 of	 the	 lumbosacral	 spinal	 cord	 after

cardiac	arrest	and	hypotension.	Stroke	2002;33:116–121.

Fox	 RJ,	 Diaconu	 C,	 Baus	 L,	 et	 al.	 No	 association	 of	 chronic	 cerebrospinal
venous	insufficiency	with	multiple	sclerosis.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2016;43:195–
197.

Frohman	EM,	Wingerchuk	DM.	Clinical	practice.	Transverse	myelitis.	N	Engl	J

Med	2010;363:564–572.

Geiman	 EJ,	 Zheng	 W,	 Fritschy	 JM,	 et	 al.	 Glycine	 and	 GABA(A)	 receptor
subunits	 on	 Renshaw	 cells:	 relationship	 with	 presynaptic	 neurotransmitters
and	postsynaptic	gephyrin	clusters.	J	Comp	Neurol	2002;444:275–289.

Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Gruener	 G,	 Biller	 J.	 Spinal	 cord	 anatomy,	 localization,	 and	 overview	 of	 spinal
cord	syndromes.	CONTINUUM	Lifelong	Learning	in	Neurology.	Spinal	Cord
Root	Plexus	Disord	2008;14:11–35.

Hohl	 JB,	 Lee	 JY,	 Horton	 JA,	 et	 al.	 A	 novel	 classification	 system	 for	 traumatic
central	cord	syndrome:	the	central	cord	injury	scale	(CCIS).	Spine	(Phila	Pa
1976)	2010;35:E238–E243.

Issaivanan	 M,	 Nhlane	 NM,	 Rizvi	 F,	 et	 al.	 Brown-Sequard-plus	 syndrome
because	of	penetrating	trauma	in	children.	Pediatr	Neurol	2010;43:57–60.
Jaiser	SR,	Winston	GP.	Copper	deficiency	myelopathy.	J	Neurol	2010;257:869–

881.

Jeffery	DR,	Mandler	RN,	Davis	LE.	Transverse	myelitis.	Retrospective	analysis
of	33	cases,	with	differentiation	of	cases	associated	with	multiple	sclerosis	and
parainfectious	events.	Arch	Neurol	1993;50:532–535.

Kastrup	O,	Timman	D,	Diener	HC.	Isolated	degeneration	of	the	posterior	column
as	 a	 distinct	 entity—a	 clinical	 and	 electrophysiologic	 follow-up	 study.	 Clin
Neurol	Neurosurg	2010;	112:209–212.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kitley	 J,	 Leite	 M,	 George	 J,	 et	 al.	 The	 differential	 diagnosis	 of	 longitudinally

extensive	transverse	myelitis.	Mult	Scler	2012;	18:271–285.

Kreppel	D,	Antoniadis	G,	Seeling	W.	Spinal	hematoma:	a	literature	survey	with

meta-analysis	of	613	patients.	Neurosurg	Rev	2003;26:1–49.

Kumar	N.	Pearls:	myelopathy.	Semin	Neurol	2010;30:38–43.
Lin	RJ,	Chen	HF,	Chang	YC,	et	al.	Subacute	combined	degeneration	caused	by
nitrous	 oxide	 intoxication:	 case	 reports.	 Acta	 Neurol	 Taiwan	 2011;20:129–
137.

Mannen	 T.	 Neuropathological	 findings	 of	 Onuf’s	 nucleus	 and	 its	 significance.

Neuropathology	2000;20(Suppl):S30–S33.

Marignier	R,	Cobo	Calvo	A,	Vukusic	S.	Neuromyelitis	optica	and	neuromyelitis

optica	spectrum	disorders.	Curr	Opin	Neurol	2017;30:208–215.

Meinck	 HM,	 Thompson	 PD.	 Stiff	 man	 syndrome	 and	 related	 conditions.	 Mov

Disord	2002;17:853–866.

Parent	 A.	 Carpenter’s	 Human	 Neuroanatomy.	 9th	 ed.	 Baltimore:	 Lippincott

Williams	&	Wilkins,	1996.

Pawate	S,	Sriram	S.	Isolated	longitudinal	myelitis:	a	report	of	six	cases.	Spinal

Cord	2009;47:257–261.

Pearce	JM.	The	craniospinal	venous	system.	Eur	Neurol	2006;	56:136–138.
Pittock	SJ,	Payne	TA,	Harper	CM.	Reversible	myelopathy	in	a	34-year-old	man

with	vitamin	B12	deficiency.	Mayo	Clin	Proc	2002;77:291–294.

Pouw	 MH,	 van	 Middendorp	 JJ,	 van	 Kampen	 A,	 et	 al.	 Diagnostic	 criteria	 of
traumatic	central	cord	syndrome.	Part	3:	descriptive	analyses	of	neurological
and	 functional	 outcomes	 in	 a	 prospective	 cohort	 of	 traumatic	 motor

incomplete	tetraplegics.	Spinal	Cord	2011;49:614–622.

Probasco	 JC,	 Felling	 RJ,	 Carson	 JT,	 et	 al.	 Teaching	 NeuroImages:	 myelopathy
due	 to	 B12	 deficiency	 in	 long-term	 colchicine	 treatment	 and	 nitrous	 oxide
misuse.	Neurology	2011;77:e51.

Prodan	CI,	Holland	NR,	Wisdom	PJ,	et	al.	Myelopathy	due	to	copper	deficiency.

Neurology	2004;62:1655–1656.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Renard	 D,	 Dutray	 A,	 Remy	 A,	 et	 al.	 Subacute	 combined	 degeneration	 of	 the
spinal	cord	caused	by	nitrous	oxide	anaesthesia.	Neurol	Sci	2009;30:75–76.
Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Ruet	A,	Deloire	MS,	Ouallet	JC,	et	al.	Predictive	factors	for	multiple	sclerosis	in
isolated	 spinal	 cord	 syndrome.	 Mult	 Scler

patients	 with	 clinically	
2011;17:312–318.

Saposnik	G,	Bueri	JA,	 Maurino	 J,	 et	 al.	 Spontaneous	 and	 reflex	movements	in

brain	death.	Neurology	2000;54:221–223.

Schneider	 SP,	 Fyffe	 RE.	 Involvement	 of	 GABA	 and	 glycine	 in	 recurrent

inhibition	of	spinal	motoneurons.	J	Neurophysiol	1992;68:397–406.

Sonstein	 WJ,	 LaSala	 PA,	 Michelsen	 WJ,	 et	 al.	 False	 localizing	 signs	 in	 upper

cervical	spinal	cord	compression.	Neurosurgery	1996;38:445–448.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Traynor	 BJ,	 Codd	 MB,	 Corr	 B,	 et	 al.	 Clinical	 features	 of	 amyotrophic	 lateral
sclerosis	 according	 to	 the	 El	 Escorial	 and	 Airlie	 House	 diagnostic	 criteria:	 a
population-based	study.	Arch	Neurol	2000;57:1171–1176.

Weidauer	 S,	 Nichtweiss	 M,	 Lanfermann	 H,	 et	 al.	 Spinal	 cord	 infarction:	 MR
imaging	and	clinical	features	in	16	cases.	Neuroradiology	2002;44:851–857.
Yazbeck	PG,	Al	Rouhban	RB,	Slaba	SG,	et	al.	Anterior	spinal	artery	syndrome

after	percutaneous	vertebroplasty.	Spine	J	2011;11:e5–e8.

Young	J,	Quinn	S,	Hurrell	M,	et	al.	Clinically	isolated	acute	transverse	myelitis:

prognostic	features	and	incidence.	Mult	Scler	2009;15:1295–1302.

Zhao	B,	He	L,	Lai	XH.	A	case	of	neuro-Behcet’s	disease	presenting	with	lumbar

spinal	cord	involvement.	Spinal	Cord	2010;48:172–173.

CHAPTER	25

The	Corticospinal	(Pyramidal)
Level

In	common	parlance,	the	corticospinal	level	of	motor	integration	is	also	referred
to	 as	 the	 pyramidal	 level,	 cortical	 level,	 or	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 level.	 From	 a
strict	anatomical	perspective,	these	terms	are	not	synonymous.	Objections	can	be
raised	 to	 the	 terminology	 because	 neither	 corticospinal,	 pyramidal,	 nor	 upper
motor	 neuron	 precisely	 and	 unambiguously	 describes	 the	 voluntary,	 direct
descending	 motor	 pathway,	 but	 a	 better	 term	 has	 not	 come	 into	 use.	 The
pyramidal	tract	is	only	one	of	the	descending	motor	systems	that	converge	on	the
anterior	horn	cell,	so	there	are	other	“upper	motor	neurons.”	The	corticobulbar
tract	supplies	brainstem	structures	in	the	same	way	the	corticospinal	tract	(CST)
innervates	the	spinal	cord	but	does	not	pass	through	the	medullary	pyramids	and
is	not	therefore	“pyramidal.”	Neurons	that	are	not	part	of	the	pyramidal	system
project	 from	 the	 cortex	 to	 the	 spinal	 cord.	 The	 terms	 pyramidal	 and
extrapyramidal	have	become	blurred	anatomically;	some	anatomists	suggest	that
they	 be	 abandoned.	 Clinicians,	 however,	 continue	 to	 find	 them	 useful	 because
the	 clinical	 manifestations	 of	 lesions	 of	 the	 direct	 (pyramidal)	 motor	 pathways
differ	from	those	of	the	indirect	(extrapyramidal)	system.

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

For	 clinical	 purposes,	 the	 CST	 is	 the	 principal	 efferent	 system	 through	 which
purposive	movements	are	initiated	and	performed.	The	CST	is	by	no	means	the
sole	 cortical	 mechanism	 for	 movement;	 it	 acts	 primarily	 to	 integrate	 highly
skilled,	 fine,	 discrete	 movements	 of	 the	 distal	 extremities.	 It	 is	 responsible	 for
the	contraction	of	agonist	muscles	as	well	as	the	inhibition,	or	graded	relaxation,
of	 antagonist	 muscles	 necessary	 to	 perform	 skilled	 acts.	 By	 its	 integration	 and

control,	 individual	 muscle	 contractions	 are	 coalesced	 into	 complex	 motor	 acts.
The	 corticospinal	 level	 does	 not	 function	 independently.	 Normally,	 and	 in	 the
presence	of	disease,	it	is	closely	integrated	with	other	levels	of	motor	activity,	as
well	 as	 with	 a	 constant	 stream	 of	 incoming	 sensory	 impulses.	 The	 CST,	 along
with	 other	 cortical	 and	 brainstem	 pathways,	 constantly	 supplies	 lower	 centers
with	 impulses	 that	 have	 a	 generally	 inhibitory	 effect.	 Disease	 involving	 the
pyramidal	 pathways	 results	 in	 a	 release	 of	 this	 inhibiting	 effect,	 resulting	 in
hyperactive	 and	 autonomous	 function	 of	 the	 affected	 spinal	 cord	 segmental
levels.	 This	 results	 in	 excessive	 activity	 of	 the	 lower	 centers	 that	 are	 normally
suppressed	by	cortical	control	mechanisms.

Area	4	(area	gigantopyramidalis)	of	the	precentral	gyrus	is	the	primary	motor
cortex	(M-I);	it	is	the	region	having	the	lowest	threshold	for	stimulation	to	cause
contraction	 of	 muscles	 of	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the	 body.	 The	 cortex	 of	 M-I	 is
agranular	 and	 heterotypical;	 its	 most	 characteristic	 feature	 is	 the	 presence	 of
giant	 pyramidal	 neurons	 (Betz	 cells)	 in	 lamina	 V.	 The	 localization	 of	 function
within	 the	 precentral	 gyrus	 is	 depicted	 by	 the	 motor	 homunculus	 (Figure	6.5).
The	corticospinal	system	is	phylogenetically	relatively	new.	It	is	fully	developed
only	 in	 mammals	 and	 reaches	 its	 highest	 development	 in	 apes	 and	 man.	 The
phylogenetic	 acquisition	 of	 speech	 and	 complex	 hand	 function	 resulted	 in
expansion	 of	 cortical	 areas	 representing	 the	 tongue,	 mouth,	 lips,	 thumb,	 and
fingers,	displacing	the	cortical	representation	for	the	lower	extremities	and	sacral
regions	 upward	 and	 onto	 the	 medial	 surface	 of	 the	 hemisphere.	 Areas	 for	 the
tongue,	face,	and	digits	are	exceptionally	large	and	out	of	proportion	to	those	of
the	proximal	musculature.	The	extension	of	the	precentral	gyrus	onto	the	medial
aspect	 of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 forms	 the	 anterior	 portion	 of	 the	 paracentral	 lobule.
Neurons	 controlling	 the	 lower	 extremities	 and	 perineal	 musculature	 are	 in	 the
paracentral	lobule,	which	plays	an	important	role	in	bowel	and	bladder	sphincter
control.

There	 are	 reciprocal	 connections	 between	 the	 primary	 motor	 cortex	 and	 the
primary	somatosensory	cortex	in	the	postcentral	gyrus.	M-I	receives	association
fibers	 from	 the	 premotor	 and	 supplementary	 motor	 areas	 and	 from	 the	 insula.
These	 connections	 are	 involved	 in	 the	 preparation	 and	 planning	 for	 voluntary
movements	that	are	 then	 executed	by	the	primary	motor	 cortex.	There	are	also
connections	 between	 the	 primary	 motor	 cortices	 in	 the	 two	 hemispheres.	 The
posterior	 division	 of	 the	 ventral	 lateral	 nucleus	 of	 the	 thalamus	 receives	 input
from	the	cerebellum	and	projects	to	area	4.

The	 term	 pyramidal	 tract	 arose	 because	 these	 fibers	 make	 up	 most	 of	 the

medullary	 pyramids.	 It	 was	 once	 thought	 that	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 consisted
mainly	of	the	axons	of	the	Betz	cells	in	the	primary	motor	cortex.	However,	of
the	approximately	1	million	fibers	in	the	CST	at	the	level	of	the	pyramids,	only
20%	to	30%	arise	from	M-I	and	only	3%	arise	from	the	Betz	cells.	These	fibers
are	large,	heavily	myelinated	and	conduct	rapidly.	In	addition	to	the	contribution
from	 M-I,	 the	 CST	 contains	 fibers	 from	 the	 premotor	 cortex	 (area	 6),	 the
supplementary	motor	area	and	adjacent	regions,	and	the	postcentral	gyrus	(areas
3,	1,	and	2).	The	majority	of	the	CST	arises	in	approximately	equal	thirds	from
area	4,	area	6,	and	the	postcentral	gyrus,	with	an	additional	contribution	from	the
adjoining	 parietal	 cortex	 (area	 5)	 and	 other	 portions	 of	 the	 brain,	 including	 the
temporal	 and	 occipital	 lobes,	 cingulate	 gyrus,	 and	 certain	 subcortical	 centers
(Figures	25.1	and	25.2).

FIGURE	25.1	A	lateral	view	of	some	of	the	clinically	relevant	cortical	areas	from	the
Brodmann	 cytoarchitectonic	 map.	 (Modified	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human
Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 7th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Lippincott-Raven,
1998,	with	permission.)

The	premotor	region	(area	6),	located	just	rostral	to	area	4,	is	closely	related
to	the	motor	cortex,	both	anatomically	and	functionally.	The	premotor	cortex	is

similar	 histologically	 to	 the	 motor	 cortex	 but	 lacks	 the	 giant	 pyramidal	 cells.
Some	fibers	from	area	6	pass	to	area	4	and	then	downward	with	the	CST;	others
descend	with	the	pyramidal	fibers.	There	is	probably	less	complete	crossing	of
the	 fibers	 from	 the	 premotor	 cortex	 than	 of	 those	 from	 the	 motor	 cortex.	 In
addition,	 the	 premotor	 region	 communicates	 with	 the	 basal	 ganglia	 and	 other
portions	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 system,	 including	 the	 subthalamic	 nucleus,	 red
nucleus,	 superior	 colliculus,	 vestibular	 nuclei,	 inferior	 olive,	 and	 brainstem
reticular	formation	(Figure	25.3).

The	 CST	 is	 important	 in	 controlling	 discrete,	 isolated	 motor	 responses,
especially	 fine	 voluntary	 movement	 of	 individual	 digits.	 The	 CST	 provides
speed	 and	 agility	 of	 distal	 extremity	 movements.	 The	 premotor	 cortex	 and	 its
larger	 coordinated	 responses,	 with	 more
pathways	 are	 concerned	 with	
stereotyped	movements	that	are	partly	automatic	and	involve	the	trunk	and	the
proximal	 limbs,	 and	 with	 postural	 mechanisms.	 It	 is	 the	 principal	 cortical
component	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 system.	 Stimulation	 of	 area	 6	 causes
contraversive	movements	of	the	head	and	trunk.	The	premotor	region	is	involved
in	 movements	 guided	 by	 visual,	 auditory,	 and	 somatosensory	 stimuli.	 The
supplementary	motor	area	(M-II)	is	part	of	area	6	that	lies	on	the	medial	aspect
of	 the	 frontal	 lobe	 just	 anterior	 to	 the	 paracentral	 lobule	 (area	 6ab).	 It
communicates	with	the	primary	motor	cortex	as	well	as	with	the	supplementary
motor	cortex	in	the	opposite	hemisphere.	M-II	seems	to	be	involved	particularly
in	 planning	 and	
is	 also
somatotopically	organized,	but	the	homunculus	is	cruder	and	less	detailed	than
the	 one	 in	 M-I.	 The	 cingulate	 motor	 area	 in	 the	 anterior	 half	 of	 the	 cingulate
gyrus	projects	to	the	primary	motor	cortex	and	also	contributes	descending	fibers
to	the	corticobulbar	and	CSTs.	There	is	also	a	secondary	motor	area	in	the	depths
of	the	central	sulcus	where	the	precentral	and	postcentral	gyri	merge.

integrating	 bilateral	 body	 movements.	 M-II	

FIGURE	25.2	A	medial	view	of	some	of	the	clinically	relevant	cortical	areas	from	the
Brodmann	 cytoarchitectonic	 map.	 (Modified	 from	 Kiernan	 JA.	 Barr’s	 The	 Human
Nervous	 System:	 An	 Anatomical	 Viewpoint.	 7th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Lippincott-Raven,
1998,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	25.3	 Degeneration	 of	 the	 corticospinal	 tracts	 in	 primary	 lateral	 sclerosis.	 In
(A),	there	are	streaks	of	high	signal	on	the	coronal	view.	In	(B),	the	transverse	view
demonstrates	 ovoid	 areas	 of	 high	 signal	 intensity	 in	 the	 posterior	 portions	 of	 the
internal	capsules.

Axons	 from	 the	 motor	 neurons	 of	 the	 precentral	 gyrus	 descend	 through	 the
corona	radiata	and	the	posterior	limb	of	the	internal	capsule	where	corticobulbar
fibers	 are	 anterior,	 followed	 posteriorly	 by	 those	 to	 the	 upper	 extremity,	 trunk,
and	lower	extremity.	About	90%	of	the	CST	fibers	are	small	myelinated	axons
with	a	diameter	of	1	to	4	μm,	and	most	of	the	remaining	fibers	are	5	to	10	μm	in
diameter.	The	small	numbers	of	fibers	that	arise	from	Betz	cells	are	very	large,
with	diameters	of	10	to	22	μm.	The	posterior	limb	of	the	internal	capsule	is	that
portion	 of	 the	 capsule	 between	 the	 lenticular	 nucleus	 and	 the	 thalamus.	 The
retrolenticular	 part	 lies	 posterior	 to	 the	 lenticular	 nucleus.	 In	 the	 rostral	 part	 of
the	 internal	 capsule,	 the	 corticospinal	 fibers	 lie	 in	 the	 anterior	 portion	 of	 the
posterior	 limb.	 As	 the	 capsules	 descend,	 the	 corticospinal	 fibers	 move
posteriorly	 and	 come	 to	 occupy	 a	 position	 in	 the	 posterior	 third	 to	 posterior
quarter	 of	 the	 posterior	 limb.	 In	 normal	 individuals,	 the	 CST	 can	 often	 be
visualized	as	a	subtle	hyperintensity	in	the	posterior	portion	of	the	posterior	limb
of	the	internal	capsule	on	T2-weighted	axial	magnetic	resonance	images.	These
areas	of	hyperintensity	are	found	near	the	junction	of	the	posterior	limb	and	the
retrolenticular	portion	of	the	capsule.	The	signal	change	is	thought	to	mark	the
very	large	heavily	myelinated,	rapidly	conducting	fibers	that	constitute	the	Betz
cell	 component	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 tract.	 Degeneration	 of	 the	 CST,	 as	 occurs	 in
amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	or	primary	lateral	sclerosis,	accentuates	this	signal
change	and	may	be	useful	diagnostically	(Figure	25.4).

At	the	midbrain	level,	pyramidal	fibers	traverse	the	middle	three-fifths	of	the
cerebral	 peduncle,	 with	 corticobulbar	 fibers	 most	 medial	 (Figure	 25.5).	 The
majority	 of	 corticobulbar	 fibers	 decussate	 before	 synapsing	 with	 the	 specific
cranial	nerve	nuclei,	but	most	of	the	cortical	innervation	of	brainstem	centers	is
both	crossed	and	uncrossed.	The	descending	fibers	then	pass	through	the	basilar
portion	 of	 the	 pons	 as	 disjointed	 fascicles	 and	 enter	 the	 medulla.	 In	 the	 caudal
medulla,	 the	 CSTs	 gather	 into	 the	 discrete	 twin	 columns	 of	 the	 medullary
pyramids	 that	 make	 up	 the	 base	 of	 the	 medulla	 (Figure	11.11).	 Approximately
85%	 to	 90%	 of	 the	 fibers	 cross	 in	 the	 decussation	 of	 the	 pyramids,	 with	 those
destined	 for	 the	 upper	 extremity	 decussating	 more	 rostrally	 than	 those	 for	 the
lower	extremity	(Figure	11.12).	There	is	considerable	variation	in	the	proportion
of	crossed	and	uncrossed	CST	fibers	in	man.	Instances	of	ipsilateral	hemiplegia
because	 of	 an	 uncrossed	 pyramidal	 tract	 have	 been	 reported.	 Terakama	 et	 al.
used	 functional	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging,	 motor-evoked	 potentials,	 and
somatosensory-evoked	 potentials	 to	 investigate	 a	 patient	 with	 an	 ipsilateral

hemiplegia	following	a	cerebral	hemorrhage.	They	were	able	to	demonstrate	that
the	 affected	 limbs	 were	 controlled	 by	 the	 ipsilateral	 cerebral	 cortex.	 In	 some
instances,	an	uncrossed	CST	is	associated	with	congenital	anomalies	of	various
sorts.

The	fibers	that	decussate	descend	in	the	lateral	funiculus	of	the	spinal	cord	in
the	 lateral	 CST,	 lying	 anterolateral	 to	 the	 posterior	 gray	 horn,	 medial	 to	 the
posterior	 spinocerebellar	 tract,	 and	 posterior	 to	 the	 plane	 of	 the	 denticulate
ligaments,	 to	 supply	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the	 body.	 In	 the
lumbosacral	 cord,	 where	 there	 is	 no	 posterior	 spinocerebellar	 tract,	 the	 lateral
CST	 abuts	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 cord.	 The	 lateral	 CSTs	 may	 also	 contain	 other
corticofugal	fibers	as	well	as	some	ascending	ones.	About	50%	of	the	fibers	of
the	 lateral	 CST	 terminate	 in	 the	 cervical	 region,	 20%	 in	 the	 thoracic	 area,	 and
30%	in	the	lumbosacral	portion	of	the	cord.	The	tract	ends	at	about	the	S4	level.
The	 smaller	 anterior	 CST	 usually	 contains	 about	 10%	 to	 15%	 of	 the
corticospinal	 fibers;	 it	 descends	 uncrossed	 in	 the	 ipsilateral	 anterior	 funiculus
and	usually	does	not	extend	below	the	midthoracic	region.	These	fibers	cross	in
the	 anterior	 white	 commissure	 at	 the	 segmental	 spinal	 cord	 level	 before
terminating;	they	primarily	supply	axial	muscles.

The	 axons	 of	 the	 corticobulbar	 and	 CSTs	 terminate	 on	 motor	 nuclei	 of	 the
cranial	nerves	and	the	anterior	horn	cells	of	the	spinal	cord.	Those	traveling	to
the	cord	terminate	primarily	in	laminae	IV	to	VI,	lamina	VII,	lamina	VIII,	and
lamina	IX	on	the	side	opposite	the	hemisphere	of	origin.	Fibers	from	areas	4	and
6	 end	 more	 ventrally,	 mainly	 in	 laminae	 VII	 and	 VIII,	 and	 are	 concentrated	 in
the	cervical	and	lumbosacral	enlargements.	The	majority	of	CST	fibers	synapse
on	an	interneuron,	but	about	10%	end	directly	on	alpha	motor	neurons	in	lamina
IX.	 Those	 fibers	 that	 project	 directly	 from	 the	 cortex	 to	 anterior	 horn	 cells
mediate	 discrete,	 skilled,	 fine	 motor	 movements	 of	 the	 distal	 extremities.
Impulses	then	travel	from	the	brainstem	motor	nuclei	and	anterior	horn	cells	to
the	 neuromuscular	 junctions	 of	 striated	 muscles	 (final	 common	 pathway).	 A
single	corticospinal	fiber	innervates	more	than	one	neuron	in	the	spinal	cord,	and
some	probably	innervate	many.	 The	 pyramidal	tract	affects	the	activity	of	both
alpha	and	gamma	motor	neurons.	Alpha	gamma	coactivation	serves	to	maintain
a	 consistent	 level	 of	 stretch	 on	 the	 intrafusal	 muscle	 fibers	 during	 contraction
and	relaxation	of	the	extrafusal	fibers.

FIGURE	25.4	The	corticobulbar	and	corticospinal	pathways.

FIGURE	25.5	 This	 patient	 suffered	 a	 major	 intracranial	 injury	 at	 age	 3	 and	 was	 left
with	refractory	seizures	and	a	spastic	right	hemiplegia	with	hemiatrophy.

The	 CST	 preferentially	 innervates	 certain	 muscles,	 and	 this	 “pyramidal
distribution”	 is	 important	 clinically.	 Lateral	 vestibulospinal	 tract	 effects	 are
largely	the	opposite	of	CST	effects.	Glutamate	or	aspartate	may	be	the	excitatory
neurotransmitters	 in	 some	 corticospinal	 neurons.	 The	 fibers	 from	 the	 parietal

lobe	 that	 descend	 in	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 terminate	 on	 sensory	 neurons	 in	 the
dorsal	 horn	 and	 play	 a	 role	 in	 modulating	 sensory	 impulses	 in	 the	 long,
ascending	sensory	pathways.

Neuronal	 discharge	 of	 the	 primary	 motor	 cortex,	 as	 from	 electrical
stimulation	or	seizure	activity,	causes	muscular	contractions	on	the	opposite	side
of	 the	 body.	 The	 response	 is	 one	 of	 groups	 of	 muscles	 rather	 than	 simple
contraction	 of	 isolated	 muscles,	 but	 individual	 muscles	 as	 well	 as	 movements
may	be	finely	represented	in	the	motor	cortex.	Stimulation	of	area	4	can	cause
discrete	movements	of	the	digits	and	the	muscles	supplied	by	the	cranial	nerves.
With	 some	 overlap,	 areas	 controlling	 movements	 of	 the	 thumb,	 index	 finger,
hallux,	 and	 face	 have	 the	 widest	 distribution	 and	 the	 lowest	 threshold.
Stimulation	of	area	6	also	causes	a	contralateral	motor	response,	but	a	stronger
stimulus	is	necessary	than	when	area	4	is	stimulated.	The	resulting	movements
are	 more	 complex	 and	 consist	 of	 slow,	 synergistic,	 postural,	 or	 patterned
contractions	of	a	generalized	type	that	involve	large	muscle	groups.

The	 CST	 lesions	 induced	 by	 ablation	 experiments	 in	 animals	 cause	 various
deficits,	 depending	 on	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 area	 ablated.	 From	 a	 phylogenetic
standpoint,	voluntary	motor	control	is	extrapyramidal	in	submammalian	species,
mixed	 pyramidal/extrapyramidal	 in	 nonhuman	 mammals,	 and	 essentially
pyramidal	
transection
in	 humans.	 The	 effects	 of	 medullary	 pyramid	
(pyramidotomy)	illustrate	the	differences	in	the	function	of	the	CST	in	different
species.	In	the	chimpanzee,	it	causes	paralysis	of	the	whole	limb.	In	the	rhesus
monkey,	 the	 same	 lesion	 causes	 paralysis	 of	 distal	 extremity	 muscles	 with
permanent	loss	of	independent	hand	and	finger	movements.	In	the	cat,	it	causes
minimal	 deficits.	 Because	 of	 differences	 between	 the	 effects	 of	 lesions	 in	 man
and	those	in	experimental	animals,	such	experiments	have	been	of	only	limited
usefulness	in	understanding	human	CST	pathophysiology.

Questions	 remain	 about	 the	 relationship	 of	 the	 CST	 to	 spasticity.	 Primarily
because	of	animal	experimentation,	it	has	been	thought	that	lesions	restricted	to
the	pyramidal	tract	may	cause	weakness	but	not	spasticity	or	hyperreflexia.	The
increase	 in	 tone	 that	 follows	 CST	 lesions	 may	 be	 related	 more	 closely	 to
dysfunction	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 rather	 than	 the	 pyramidal	 system	 or	 to
interruption	 of	 corticofugal	 fibers	 other	 than	 pyramidal	 in	 the	 corticospinal
pathway.	 Although	 experimental	 pyramidotomies	 in	 animals	 may	 not	 lead	 to
spasticity,	 in	 humans	 the	 evidence	 is	 that	 spasticity	 does	 eventually	 develop	 in
the	majority	of	cases.	This	is	true	even	after	very	restricted	lesions	involving	the
medullary	 pyramids,	 although	 after	 a	 longer	 interval	 than	 is	 typical	 of	 other

pyramidal	lesions.	It	is	likely	that	early	flaccidity	followed	by	the	development
of	 spasticity	 occurs	 with	 infarction	 of	 the	 CST	 at	 any	 level.	 More	 slowly
developing	 lesions	 are	 likely	 to	 manifest	 spasticity	 at	 the	 time	 of	 initial
presentation.	 Spasticity	 probably	 results	 from	 imbalance	 of	 the	 facilitatory	 and
inhibitory	centers	in	the	midbrain	and	brainstem	reticular	formations,	as	well	as
altered	balance	between	the	alpha	and	gamma	motor	systems	in	the	spinal	cord.
The	 reduction	 in	 the	 threshold	 and	 exaggeration	 of	 the	 stretch	 reflexes,	 an
essential	 aspect	 of	 spasticity,	 may	 be	 mediated	 by	 the	 reticulospinal	 and
vestibulospinal	rather	than	the	CSTs.

Hemiplegia	in	man	is	often	produced	by	combined	lesions	of	the	motor	and
premotor	components	of	the	upper	motor	neuron.	Various	pathologic	responses
—such	 as	 the	 Babinski,	 Chaddock,	 and	 Hoffmann	 signs—appear.	 The	 affected
extremities	 may	 at	 first	 be	 flaccid	 with	 depressed	 reflexes,	 but	 spasticity	 and
reflex	exaggeration	typically	develop	within	a	few	days.	The	pathologic	reflexes
may	remain	permanently.

CLINICAL	MANIFESTATIONS	OF	DISEASE	OF
THE	CORTICOSPINAL	LEVEL

The	 corticospinal	 pathways	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 diverse	 disease	 processes,
including	 vascular	 disease,	 neoplasm,	 degeneration,	 trauma,	 and	 others.	 The
essential	 manifestations	 of	 a	 CST	 lesion	 consist	 of	 loss	 of	 skilled	 voluntary
movements,	 or	 impairment	 of	 integration	 of	 movements,	 along	 with	 an
overactivity	 of	 lower	 segmental	 centers	 because	 of	 disinhibition.	 The	 loss	 of
voluntary	movement	is	accompanied	by	increased	tone	in	the	involved	muscles.
The	 paresis	 from	 a	 lesion	 involving	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 tends	 to	 involve	 entire
extremities	or	certain	muscle	groups.	Pyramidal	lesions	disrupt	movements;	any
muscle	 that	 participates	 in	 the	 movement	 will	 be	 weakened,	 regardless	 of	 its
specific	lower	motor	neuron	innervation.	In	contrast,	lower	motor	neuron	lesions
involve	 muscles	 innervated	 by	 a	 specific	 structure,	 such	 as	 a	 nerve	 root	 or
peripheral	nerve.	For	instance,	a	CST	lesion	causes	weakness	of	external	rotation
of	the	shoulder.	This	movement	is	carried	out	by	both	the	infraspinatus	and	teres
minor	 muscles.	 The	 teres	 minor	 is	 innervated	 by	 the	 axillary	 nerve	 and	 the
infraspinatus	 by	 the	 suprascapular	 nerve;	 both	 are	 weakened	 despite	 their
different	segmental	innervations.

Pyramidal	 tract	 lesions	 do	 not	 cause	 the	 sort	 of	 severe,	 early	 focal	 muscle

atrophy	 seen	 in	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 lesions,	 but	 there	 may	 be	 some	 mild,	 late
atrophy	of	the	involved	part	because	of	disuse	(see	Chapter	29).	With	lesions	that
are	 congenital	 or	 occur	 early	 in	 life,	 the	 involved	 limbs	 may	 fail	 to	 grow
normally,	 resulting	 in	 hemiatrophy	 to	 varying	 degrees	 in	 adulthood	 (Figure
25.5).	 Such	 hemiatrophy	 may	 be	 difficult	 to	 detect;	 comparing	 the	 size	 of	 the
thumbnails	 is	 a	 traditional	 technique	 for	 detecting	 subtle	 hemiatrophy.	 When
atrophy	 does	 occur	 with	 CST	 disorders,	 it	 usually	 affects	 the	 small	 muscles	 of
the	hand.	There	are	no	fasciculations.

Deep	tendon	(muscle	stretch)	reflexes—rather	than	being	lost	as	is	the	usual
case	 with	 neurogenic	 atrophy	 because	 of	 a	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 lesion—are
increased,	and	clonus	may	be	elicited	(see	Chapter	38).	The	superficial	reflexes
are	diminished	or	absent	(see	Chapter	39).	Various	pathologic	reflexes,	such	as
the	Babinski	sign,	often	termed	pyramidal	reflexes	or	upper	motor	neuron	signs,
often	appear	(see	 Chapter	40).	Normal	associated	movements	may	be	 lost,	and
abnormal	associated	movements	may	appear	(see	Chapter	42).	Trophic	changes
are	 uncommon,	 but	 occasionally,	 there	 is	 edema,	 desquamation,	 pigmentary
changes,	or	glossy	skin.

A	 pyramidal	 tract	 lesion	 causes	 weakness	 in	 a	 characteristic	 distribution.
Facial	 weakness	 is	 limited	 to	 the	 lower	 face,	 although	 occasionally	 eyelid
closure	 may	 be	 slightly	 weak.	 Voluntary	 facial	 movements	 are	 affected	 more
than	 emotional	 ones,	 and	 movement	 in	 response	 to	 emotional	 stimuli	 may	 be
normal	(dissociated	facial	palsy;	Chapter	16).	There	is	slight,	if	any,	detectable
involvement	of	the	muscles	innervated	by	the	spinal	accessory	nerve.	There	may
be	 slight	 weakness	 of	 the	 affected	 side	 of	 the	 tongue,	 but	 the	 throat	 and	 jaw
muscles	 function	 normally.	 Deglutition,	 articulation,	 movements	 of	 the	 trunk,
and	 other	 functions	 with	 bilateral	 supranuclear	 innervation	 are	 little	 affected.
Voluntary,	skilled,	and	learned	actions	are	most	impaired,	and	there	is	loss	of	the
ability	 to	 carry	 out	 fine,	 independent,	 fractionated	 movements,	 especially	 with
the	 distal	 portions	 of	 the	 extremities,	 with	 precision	 and	 delicacy.	 Gross
movements	 and	 those	 that	 are	 habitual	 or	 have	 little	 voluntary	 control	 are
relatively	spared.

The	 extremity	 weakness	 reflects	 the	 preferential	 CST	 innervation	 of	 certain
muscle	 groups	 and	 has	 a	 characteristic	 pattern:	 the	 pyramidal	 or	 corticospinal
distribution.	 When	 weakness	 is	 mild,	 it	 may	 be	 detectable	 only	 in	 the
corticospinal	distribution.	Distal	muscles,	especially	hand	muscles,	receive	more
pyramidal	innervation	than	proximal	muscles	and	are	particularly	affected.	In	the
upper	 extremity,	 weakness	 preferentially	 involves	 the	 wrist,	 finger	 and	 elbow

extensors,	supinators,	and	external	rotators	and	abductors	of	the	shoulder;	there
is	 relative	 sparing	 of	 the	 flexor,	 pronator,	 and	 internal	 rotation	 muscles.	 In	 the
lower	extremity,	weakness	is	most	marked	in	the	foot	and	toe	dorsiflexors,	knee
flexors,	and	flexors	and	internal	rotators	of	the	hip,	with	relative	sparing	of	the
extensors,	 external	 rotators,	 and	 plantar	 flexors.	 When	 weakness	 is	 severe,	 the
stronger,	 non–CST-innervated	 muscles	 overcome	 the	 weak	 muscles,	 producing
the	characteristic	posture	of	a	spastic	hemiplegia.	The	arm	is	held	in	adduction,
with	 internal	 rotation	 at	 the	 shoulder,	 flexion	 and	 pronation	 at	 the	 elbow,	 and
flexion	of	the	wrist	and	fingers.	Additional	flexion	may	still	be	carried	out,	but
there	is	marked	weakness	of	extension.	There	is	loss	of	isolated	movements	of
the	wrist	and	fingers;	movements	at	the	elbow	and	shoulder	are	less	affected.	In
the	lower	extremity,	there	is	weakness	of	flexion	at	the	hip	and	knee;	the	hip	is
extended,	adducted,	and	often	externally	rotated,	and	the	knee	is	extended.	There
is	 weakness	 of	 the	 dorsiflexors	 and	 everters	 of	 the	 foot,	 often	 with	 a	 pes
equinovarus	deformity	causing	plantar	flexion	and	inversion	of	the	foot	and	toes.
The	spasticity,	or	increase	in	tone,	is	most	marked	in	the	flexor	and	pronator
muscles	of	the	upper	limb	and	the	extensors	of	the	lower,	more	apparent	with	an
attempt	to	extend	or	supinate	the	muscles	of	the	upper	extremity	or	flex	those	of
the	lower.	Passive	motion	may	be	carried	out	with	little	difficulty	if	done	through
a	 small	 range	 of	 movement,	 but	 resistance	 increases	 if	 an	 attempt	 is	 made	 to
move	the	extremities	through	a	greater	range.	Slow,	passive	movement	may	be
carried	out	with	relative	 ease,	but	on	rapid	movement,	there	is	a	“blocking”	or
“catching,”	 often	 with	 a	 waxing	 followed	 by	 a	 sudden	 waning	 of	 tone	 at	 the
extremes	 of	 the	 range	 of	 motion	 (clasp-knife	 phenomenon).	 Abnormalities	 of
muscle	tone	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	28.

The	paralysis	that	follows	a	vascular	lesion	of	the	internal	capsule	provides	a
common	 example	 of	 the	 effects	 of	 a	 CST	 lesion.	 Examination	 soon	 after	 the
event	typically	reveals	flaccid	paralysis	and	areflexia	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
body	 (“cerebral	 shock”)	 but	 is	 soon	 followed	 by	 spasticity	 and	 hyperreflexia.
When	the	corticospinal	pathways	are	affected	by	a	spinal	cord	lesion	of	sudden
onset,	 especially	 if	 bilateral,	 there	 may	 also	 be	 a	 period	 of	 flaccidity	 and
areflexia	 accompanying	 the	 paralysis	 below	 the	 level	 of	 the	 lesion.	 This	 is	 the
period	of	“spinal	shock,”	which	sooner	or	later	gives	way,	in	most	instances,	to
the	corticospinal	syndrome.	During	the	neural	shock	phase,	the	plantar	responses
may	be	mute	and	the	superficial	reflexes	absent.	The	pyramidal,	or	upper	motor
neuron,	 syndrome	 gradually	 emerges	 over	 hours	 to	 weeks	 with	 spasticity,
hyperactive	 tendon	 reflexes,	 extensor	 plantar	 responses,	 and	 continued	 absence

of	 superficial	 reflexes.	 With	 spinal	 cord	 lesions,	 there	 is	 also	 impairment	 of
bowel,	bladder,	and	sexual	function.

The	motor	deficit	with	CST	lesions	is	only	occasionally	complete.	This	may
be	the	result	of	the	same,	largely	unknown,	factors	and	mechanisms	responsible
for	the	recovery	of	function	that	follows	many	such	lesions.	Some	muscles	may
have	 bilateral	 innervation,	 or	 there	 may	 be	 incomplete	 decussation	 in	 the
medulla.	The	CST	receives	fibers	from	regions	of	the	cortex	other	than	the	motor
strip,	 and	 many	 of	 the	 motor	 centers	 in	 the	 cortex	 occupy	 a	 large	 area	 with
overlap	of	the	foci	of	localization.	The	primary	motor	cortex	is	only	one	portion
of	 the	 motor	 system;	 other	 cortical	 and	 subcortical	 centers,	 such	 as	 the
supplementary	and	secondary	motor	cortices,	may	assume	function	in	the	face	of
disease	 of	 the	 corticospinal	 system.	 Sensory	 factors	 influence	 the	 type	 and
degree	of	paralysis	and	the	degree	of	motor	recovery;	the	prognosis	for	return	of
function	 is	 less	 optimistic	 if	 there	 is	 significant	 sensory	 loss.	 In	 patients	 with
infantile	hemiplegia,	hemispherectomy	done	for	seizure	control	may	not	increase
the	 motor	 deficit.	 Removal	 of	 normally	 developed	 cortex	 in	 an	 adult	 (e.g.,
surgical	 extirpation	 of	 a	 neoplasm)	 causes	 a	 spastic	 hemiplegia.	 Yet	 similar
removal	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 had	 a	 spastic	 hemiparesis	 since	 birth	 or	 early
childhood	 causes	 a	 transient	 flaccid	 deficit	 that	 later	 becomes	 spastic,	 and	 the
residual	weakness	after	surgery	is	no	more	than	before,	sometimes	less.	In	such
patients,	 it	 is	 likely	 that	 either	 the	 other	 hemisphere	 or	 some	 subcortical	 or
cortical	 structures	 have	 previously	 assumed	 a	 portion	 of	 the	 function	 of	 the
diseased	cortex.

With	 cerebral	 neoplasms	 or	 other	 pathologic	 processes	 affecting	 the	 motor
cortex,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 corticospinal	 type	 of	 paresis,	 together	 with	 recurrent
jacksonian	 convulsions	 of	 the	 involved	 extremities.	 A	 lesion	 of	 the	 pyramidal
pathway	 after	 it	 has	 left	 the	 cortex,	 however,	 produces	 only	 paresis,	 and
convulsions	do	not	occur.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Davidoff	RA.	The	pyramidal	tract.	Neurology	1990;40:332–339.
Dol	 JA,	 Louwerse	 ES.	 Images	 in	 clinical	 medicine.	 Wallerian	 degeneration	 of
the	 pyramidal	 tract	 on	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging.	 N	 Engl	 J	 Med
1994;331:88.

Hardy	 TA,	 Wang	 C,	 Beadnall	 HN,	 et	 al.	 Wallerian	 degeneration	 in	 the
corticospinal	 tract	 following	 tumefactive	 demyelination:	 conventional	 and

advanced	magnetic	resonance	imaging.	Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2016;43:726–727.
Hosokawa	 S,	 Tsuji	 S,	 Uozumi	 T,	 et	 al.	 Ipsilateral	 hemiplegia	 caused	 by	 right
internal	 capsule	 and	 thalamic	 hemorrhage:	 demonstration	 of	 predominant
ipsilateral	innervation	of	motor	and	sensory	systems	by	MRI,	MEP,	and	SEP.
Neurology	1996;46:1146–1149.

Jagiella	 WM,	 Sung	 JH.	 Bilateral	 infarction	 of	 the	 medullary	 pyramids	 in

humans.	Neurology	1989;39:21–24.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Marti-Fabregas	 J,	 Pujol	 J.	 Selective	 involvement	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 tract	 on
lateral	 sclerosis.	 Neurology

in	 primary	

imaging	

magnetic	 resonance	
1990;40:1799–1800.

Paulson	 GW,	 Yates	 AJ,	 Paltan-Ortiz	 JD.	 Does	 infarction	 of	 the	 medullary

pyramid	lead	to	spasticity?	Arch	Neurol	1986;43:93–95.

Penfield	 W,	 Rasmussen	 T.	 The	 Cerebral	 Cortex	 of	 Man:	 A	 Clinical	 Study	 of

Localization	of	Function.	New	York:	Macmillan,	1950.

Powers	 RK,	 Marder-Meyer	 J,	 Rymer	 WZ.	 Quantitative	 relations	 between
hypertonia	 and	 stretch	 reflex	 threshold	 in	 spastic	 quadriparesis.	 Ann	 Neurol
1988;23:115–124.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Ropper	AH,	Fisher	CM,	Kleinman	GM.	Pyramidal	infarction	in	the	medulla:	a
cause	of	pure	motor	hemiplegia	sparing	the	face.	Neurology	1979;26:91–95.
Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Terakawa	H,	Abe	K,	Nakamura	M,	et	al.	Ipsilateral	hemiparesis	after	putaminal
hemorrhage	due	to	uncrossed	pyramidal	tract.	Neurology	2000;54:1801–1805.
Welniarz	 Q,	 Dusart	 I,	 Roze	 E.	 The	 corticospinal	 tract:	 evolution,	 development,

and	human	disorders.	Dev	Neurobiol	2017;77:810–829.

Wiesendanger	 M.	 Pyramidal	 tract	 function	 and	 the	 clinical	 “pyramidal

syndrome.”	Human	Neurobiol	1984;2:227.

Yagishita	A,	Nakano	I,	Oda	M.	Location	of	the	corticospinal	tract	in	the	internal

capsule	at	MR	imaging.	Radiology	1994;191:455–460.

CHAPTER	26

The	Extrapyramidal	Level

The	 extrapyramidal	 system	 is	 more	 of	 a	 functional	 concept—derived	 primarily
from	 the	 study	 of	 patients	 with	 neurologic	 disease—than	 an	 anatomic	 or
physiologic	 entity.	 Patients	 with	 disease	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 system	 have
disorders	 that	 involve	 the	 motor	 system,	 but	 the	 clinical	 phenomenology	 is
distinctly	different	from	the	weakness,	spasticity,	and	hyperreflexia	that	mark	the
pyramidal	 syndrome.	 The	 term	 extrapyramidal	 was	 first	 used	 by	 Wilson	 in
describing	 hepatolenticular	 degeneration	 (Wilson’s	 disease).	 Wilson’s	 patients
had	a	type	of	motor	disturbance	with	different	clinical	characteristics	than	seen
with	 pyramidal	 system	 disease,	 which	 was	 associated	 with	 lesions	 in	 the	 basal
ganglia	 (BG).	 Because	 the	 principal	 component	 of	 the	 extrapyramidal	 motor
system	 is	 the	 BG,	 the	 term	 extrapyramidal	 came	 to	 be	 used	 to	 refer	 to	 the	 BG
and	their	connections.	Extrapyramidal	disorders	cause	a	category	of	neurologic
illness	now	more	often	referred	to	as	movement	disorders.	Such	conditions	may
produce	 excessive	 movement	 (e.g.,	 Huntington’s	 chorea),	 a	 poverty	 of
movement	(e.g.,	Parkinson’s	disease),	or	a	disturbance	of	posture,	tone,	righting
reflexes,	or	other	manifestations.

The	 extrapyramidal	 system	 is	 phylogenetically	 old.	 Much	 of	 its	 function
arises	 through	 modulation	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 system	 rather	 than	 by	 direct
projections	to	the	spinal	cord.	The	extrapyramidal	system	can	be	looked	at	as	a
neural	 network	 that	 influences	 motor	 control.	 It	 is	 not	 directly	 concerned	 with
the	production	of	voluntary	movement	but	is	closely	integrated	with	other	levels
of	the	motor	system	to	modulate	and	 regulate	the	motor	activity	that	is	carried
out	by	way	of	the	pyramidal	system.

ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY

Anatomists	 disagree	 as	

to	 what	 should	 be	 properly	

included	

in	

the

extrapyramidal	 system	 and	 even	 whether	 it	 should	 be	 recognized	 as	 an	 entity.
They	speak	of	“nonpyramidal	corticofugal	systems”	but	are	loath	to	discuss	the
“extrapyramidal	system.”	Many	decry	the	continued	use	of	the	expression,	and
the	term	does	not	even	appear	in	many	major	neuroanatomy	textbooks.	There	are
other	 important	 nonpyramidal	 motor	 systems	 that	 are	 not	 related	 to	 the	 BG.
Other	 nonpyramidal,	 nonbasal	 ganglia	 pathways	 include	 the	 rubrospinal,
vestibulospinal,	 olivospinal,	 and	 reticulospinal	 tracts.	 The	 pyramidal	 system	 is
the	 final	 effector	 because	 the	 extrapyramidal	 system	 serves	 to	 modulate	 the
activity	 of	 the	 pyramidal	 system	 and	 does	 not	 itself	 project	 to	 the	 spinal	 cord.
Despite	these	limitations,	the	concept	of	an	extrapyramidal	level	continues	to	be
clinically	useful.	Although	the	cerebellum	is	a	nonpyramidal	motor	system,	it	is
not	considered	part	of	the	extrapyramidal	system.

As	 mentioned	 in	 Chapter	 2,	 BG	 nomenclature	 is	 not	 used	 consistently.	 The
BG	that	contribute	most	extensively	to	the	extrapyramidal	system	and	are	most
important	 for	 clinical	 purposes	 include	 the	 caudate,	 putamen,	 globus	 pallidus
(GP),	substantia	nigra	(SN),	and	subthalamic	nucleus	(STN).	In	addition	to	the
motor	circuits	controlling	voluntary	movement,	the	BG	have	limbic	connections
involved	 with	the	emotional	aspects	of	 movement,	as	 well	 as	 connections	with
the	oculomotor	system.	They	also	play	a	role	in	cognition.

The	caudate	and	putamen	are	frequently	referred	to	as	the	striatum,	in	contrast
to	the	GP,	or	pallidum.	Sometimes,	all	three	are	included	as	parts	of	the	striatum,
with	 the	 caudate-	 and	 putamen-labeled	 neostriatum	 and	 the	 GP-labeled	 paleo-
(less	 often	 archi-)	 striatum.	 The	 terms	 striatum	 and	 corpus	 striatum	 are
sometimes	 used	 synonymously;	 at	 other	 times,	 a	 distinction	 is	 drawn	 between
the	 striatum	 as	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 (or	 caudatoputamen)	 and	 the	 corpus
striatum	as	caudate,	putamen,	and	GP.	For	purposes	of	this	discussion,	striatum
refers	 to	 the	 neostriatum,	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen.	 Some	 authorities	 include
other	 gray	 matter	 masses	 that	 lie	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 brain	 as	 part	 of	 the	 BG,
including	 the	 substantia	 innominata,	 nucleus	 accumbens,	 claustrum,	 amygdala,
anterior	 perforated	 substance,	 and	 olfactory	 tubercle.	 Most	 of	 these	 are	 not
functionally	related	to	the	BG	motor	system	and	are	usually	not	considered	parts
of	the	extrapyramidal	system	for	clinical	purposes.	There	is	a	dorsal	striatum,	or
dorsal	division	of	the	striatum,	and	a	smaller	ventral	striatum,	or	ventral	division.
The	dorsal	striatum	is	the	caudate	and	putamen;	the	ventral	striatum	consists	of
the	 nucleus	 accumbens	 and	 the	 anterior	 portion	 of	 the	 anterior	 perforated
substance	 and	 olfactory	 tubercle.	 The	 connections	 of	 the	 ventral	 striatum	 are
predominantly	with	the	limbic	system.	Similarly,	there	is	a	dorsal	pallidum	(the

GP	 proper)	 and	 a	 ventral	 pallidum	 (the	 posterior	 portion	 of	 the	 anterior
perforated	substance).	For	clinical	purposes,	neither	the	ventral	striatum	nor	the
ventral	pallidum	plays	a	significant	role	in	voluntary	motor	function.

FIGURE	26.1	 Drawing	 of	 the	 superior	 surface	 of	 an	 unstained	 horizontal	 section	 of
the	 adult	 human	 brain,	 through	 the	 internal	 capsule,	 basal	 ganglia	 (BG),	 and
thalamus.

The	 caudate	 nucleus	 lies	 deep	 in	 the	 substance	 of	 the	 cerebral	 hemisphere
between	 the	 lateral	 ventricle	 and	 the	 insula	 (Figure	 26.1).	 The	 head	 of	 the
caudate	nucleus	is	a	pear-shaped	mass	of	gray	matter	that	bulges	into	the	lateral
aspect	 of	 the	 frontal	 horn	 of	 the	 lateral	 ventricle;	 its	 tail	 runs	 backward	 in	 the
floor	of	the	ventricle	and	then	downward	and	forward	in	the	roof	of	the	temporal
horn.	The	tail	of	the	caudate	abuts	but	remains	separate	from	the	amygdala.	The
sulcus	 terminalis	 is	 a	 groove	 that	 separates	 the	 caudate	 nucleus	 from	 the
thalamus;	 it	 contains	 the	 stria	 terminalis	 and	 the	 thalamostriate	 vein.	 The
lenticular,	 or	 lentiform,	 nucleus	 is	 composed	 of	 the	 putamen	 and	 GP,	 with	 the

putamen	forming	the	most	lateral	part	of	the	lentiform	complex	and	the	GP	the
medial	 part.	 The	 claustrum	 is	 an	 island	 of	 gray	 matter	 in	 the	 subcortical	 white
matter	of	the	insula.	The	putamen	is	separated	from	the	insula	by,	in	order,	the
external	capsule,	claustrum,	and	extreme	capsule.

The	 internal	 capsule	 thrusts	 itself	 squarely	 through	 the	 region	 of	 the	 BG,
vastly	 complicating	 its	 anatomy	 and	 connections.	 Important	 components	 of	 the
BG	 and	 extrapyramidal	 system	 lie	 separated	 on	 opposite	 sides	 of	 the	 capsule.
The	 putamen	 and	 GP	 are	 lateral	 to	 it;	 the	 caudate,	 thalamus,	 STN,	 and	 SN	 lie
medial.	All	efferent	and	many	afferent	connections	of	the	BG	are	made	with	the
diencephalon	 and	 midbrain,	 which	 are	 separated	 from	 the	 BG	 by	 the	 internal
capsule	 and	 crus	 cerebri.	 The	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 are	 cytologically	 and
functionally	 nearly	 identical,	 but	 the	 anterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule
separates	one	from	the	other.	Fibers	of	the	internal	capsule	and	crus	cerebri	also
separate	the	SN	from	the	GP,	which	are	functionally	closely	related.

The	 caudate	 nucleus	 and	 putamen	 are	 semicontinuous,	 separated	 by	 the
streaming	 fibers	 of	 the	 anterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 (Figure	26.1).	 The
alternating	gray	and	white	strands	led	to	the	name	striatum	(striped).	Bundles	of
finely	 myelinated,	 small-diameter	 fibers	 (“Wilson’s	 pencils”)	 crossing	 the
striatum	toward	the	GP	also	contribute	to	the	marbled	appearance.	Inferiorly,	just
above	 the	 anterior	 perforated	 substance,	 the	 head	 of	 the	 caudate	 fuses	 with	 the
inferior	 part	 of	 the	 putamen	 and	 is	 continuous	 medially	 with	 the	 nucleus
accumbens.	 Histologically,	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 are	 identical;	 they	 have	 a
common	embryologic	origin.	They	contain	a	few	large	and	many	small	neurons,
with	 the	 small	 cells	 predominating	 by	 20:1.	 Dendrites	 may	 be	 spiny	 or	 aspiny.
The	 most	 common	 cell	 type	 in	 the	 striatum	 is	 small	 and	 spiny	 and	 contains
gamma-amino	 butyric	 acid	 (GABA),	 plus	 enkephalin	 (ENK),	 dynorphin,	 or
substance	 P	 (SP).	 The	 small,	 spiny	 neurons	 are	 the	 primary	 source	 of	 striatal
efferents.	The	small,	aspiny	neurons	are	cholinergic.

The	 microstructure	 of	 the	 striatum	 consists	 of	 a	 matrix	 of	 cells	 that	 stain
histochemically	 for	 acetylcholine	 (ACh),	 with	 patches	 or	 islands	 of	 cells	 that
contain	 other	 neurotransmitters.	 The	 islands	 are	 referred	 to	 as	 striosomes,	 and
the	striatum	is	a	mosaic	arrangement	of	islands	or	patches	of	striosomes	lying	in
the	 matrix	 of	 cholinergic	 cells.	 The	 striosomes	 primarily	 contain	 SP	 and	 ENK.
The	 ENKergic	 neurons	 have	 D2	 dopamine	 receptors;	 SP	 neurons	 have	 D1
receptors.	 In	 the	 caudate,	 striosomes	 have	 a	 higher	 concentration	 of	 dopamine
compared	 to	 the	 matrix.	 The	 striosome-matrix	 pattern	 is	 not	 as	 evident	 in	 the
putamen,	 which	 consists	 mostly	 of	 matrix,	 or	 in	 the	 ventral	 striatum,	 which

consists	 mostly	 of	 striosomes.	 The	 cholinergic	 neurons	 of	 the	 matrix	 are
facilitatory	to	the	projection	neurons	and	are	inhibited	by	dopamine.

The	 GP	 is	 medial	 to	 the	 putamen,	 just	 lateral	 to	 the	 third	 ventricle.	 An
external	medullary	lamina	separates	the	GP	from	the	putamen.	Internally,	the	GP
is	 divided	by	an	internal	 medullary	lamina	into	a	lateral,	or	external,	zone	(the
globus	 pallidus	 externa,	 GPe);	 and	 a	 medial,	 or	 internal,	 zone	 (the	 globus
pallidus	 interna,	 GPi).	 The	 GP	 contains	 only	 about	 5%	 as	 many	 cells	 as	 the
striatum,	 and	 all	 are	 large	 neurons.	 Neurons	 throughout	 the	 GP	 use	 primarily
GABA	as	a	neurotransmitter,	less	often	ACh.	The	associated	neuropeptide	is	SP
in	the	GPi	and	ENK	in	the	GPe.

The	 SN	 is	 a	 gray	 mass	 that	 lies	 in	 the	 cerebral	 peduncle	 between	 the	 crus
cerebri	and	the	tegmentum	of	the	midbrain	at	the	level	of	the	superior	colliculi.
The	SN	is	composed	of	two	parts:	the	deep	pars	or	zona	compacta	(SNc),	which
contains	 the	 large,	 melanin-containing,	 dopaminergic	 neurons	 that	 give	 the
structure	its	name;	and	the	more	superficial	zona	reticulata	(SNr),	which	contains
large,	multipolar,	nonpigmented,	GABAergic	neurons	similar	to	those	in	the	GP.
The	SNr	is	closely	related	functionally	to—essentially	a	midbrain	extension	of—
the	 GPi;	 they	 are	 separated	 only	 by	 fibers	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule	 and	 crus
cerebri,	 and	 both	 are	 involved	 in	 BG	 efferent	 functions.	 The	 SNr	 receives
afferents	through	the	striatonigral	comb	system	or	comb	bundle,	which	crosses
through	 the	 crus	 cerebri	 obliquely.	 The	 STN	 (corpus	 Luysii)	 is	 a	 small,	 lens-
shaped	gray	mass	situated	in	the	ventral	thalamic	region	just	dorsal	and	medial
to	the	cerebral	peduncle	(Figure	26.2).

Other	 important	 structures	 involved	 in	 the	 extrapyramidal	 motor	 control
system	include	the	thalamus,	red	nucleus	(RN),	the	brainstem	reticular	formation
(RF),	 the	 inferior	 olivary	 nucleus	 in	 the	 medulla,	 the	 zona	 incerta	 (ZI),	 the
vestibular	 nuclei,	 the	 pedunculopontine	 nucleus	 (PPN),	 and	 the	 gray	 matter	 of
the	 quadrigeminal	 plate.	 Several	 thalamic	 nuclei	 are	 involved,	 and	 these	 are
sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 the	 motor	 thalamus,	 including	 the	 nucleus	 ventralis
lateralis	 (VL),	 pars	 oralis	 (VLo);	 ventralis	 lateralis,	 pars	 caudalis	 (VLc);
ventralis	posterior	lateralis,	pars	oralis	(VPLo);	and	portions	of	ventralis	anterior
(VA).	 The	 RN	 is	 located	 in	 the	 tegmentum	 of	 the	 midbrain	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the
superior	 colliculi.	 It	 has	 magnocellular	 (large-celled)	 and	 parvocellular	 (small-
celled)	portions.	The	caudal	magnocellular	part	gives	rise	to	the	rubrospinal	tract
and	the	parvocellular	part	to	the	central	tegmental	tract.	The	lateral	and	medial
nuclear	 groups	 of	 the	 RF	 are	 situated	 in	 the	 tegmentum	 of	 the	 midbrain,	 and
other	constituents	of	the	RF	that	either	inhibit	or	facilitate	motor	responses	are

placed	 caudally	 in	 the	 brainstem.	 The	 PPN	 is	 a	 cholinergic	 nucleus	 that	 lies
caudal	 to	 the	 SN	 in	 the	 brainstem	 tegmentum,	 partially	 buried	 in	 the	 superior
cerebellar	 peduncle.	 It	 receives	 afferents	 primarily	 from	 GPi/SNr	 and	 sends
cholinergic	 projections	 to	 the	 dopaminergic	 neurons	 in	 the	 SNc.	 It	 may	 be
involved	 in	 locomotion.	 Patients	 with	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 have	 significant	 loss
of	 PPN	 neurons,	 and	 dysfunction	 of	 the	 PPN	 may	 be	 important	 in	 the
pathophysiology	of	the	locomotor	and	postural	disturbances	of	parkinsonism.

FIGURE	26.2	Drawing	of	the	posterior	surface	of	an	unstained	coronal	section	of	the
adult	 human	 brain,	 through	 the	 posterior	 limb	 of	 the	 internal	 capsule,	 BG,	 and
mammillary	bodies.

The	 BG	 have	 rich	 connections	 with	 one	 another	 and	 with	 brainstem
structures,	 as	 well	 as	 with	 the	 cerebral	 cortex	 and	 with	 lower	 centers	 (Figure
26.3).	 The	 area	 of	 the	 cortex	 involved	 is	 the	 motor	 cortex,	 which	 includes	 the
precentral	 motor	 regions	 including	 the	 supplementary	 and	 premotor	 areas.	 In
essence,	the	cerebral	cortex	projects	to	the	striatum,	which	in	turn	projects	to	the
GP	and	SNr;	efferents	go	to	the	thalamus,	which	then	projects	back	to	cerebral

cortex,	primarily	to	the	motor	areas.	Table	26.1	 summarizes	some	of	the	major
connections.

Striatal	Afferents

The	 striatum	 receives	 topographically	 organized	 glutaminergic	 axons	 that
originate	from	small	pyramidal	cells	in	layers	V	and	VI	of	the	entire	ipsilateral
neocortex.	 The	 striatum	 also	 receives	 afferents	 from	 the	 thalamus.	 These
connections	provide	the	striatum	with	sensory	and	cognitive	inputs.	The	head	of
the	caudate	receives	projections	from	the	frontal	lobe,	the	body	from	the	parietal
and	occipital	lobes,	and	the	tail	from	the	temporal	lobe.	The	massive	input	from
the	frontal	lobe	to	the	head	is	the	reason	it	is	so	much	larger	than	the	remainder
of	the	nucleus.	These	connections	form	the	anatomical	substrate	for	the	role	of
the	caudate	in	cognition.	The	caudate	also	receives	fibers	from	the	dorsomedial
(DM)	 and	 VA	 nuclei	 of	 the	 thalamus	 (thalamostriate	 fibers)	 and	 from	 the
putamen.

FIGURE	26.3	A.	Principal	connections	of	the	BG.	The	thalamocortical	portions	of	the
loops	(cortex-BG-thalamus-cortex)	are	omitted.	B.	Detail	giving	connections	between
the	BG	and	thalamus.

TABLE	26.1

Major	Basal	Ganglia	Pathways

Tract

Origin

Termination

Neurotransmitter

Corticostriate

Cerebral
cortex

Striatum*

Glutamate

Striatopallidal

Striatum

GP

Pallidothalamic†

GP

Thalamus

Pallidosubthalamic‡ GPe

Subthalamic
nucleus

Striatonigral

Striatum

SN

GABA

GABA

GABA

GABA

Nigrostriatal

Nigrotectal

SNc

SNr

Striatum

Dopamine

Superior

colliculus

GABA

Nigrothalamic

SNr

Thalamus

GABA

*The	dorsal	striatum,	the	caudate,	and	putamen.
†Via	the	fasciculus	and	ansa	lenticularis.
‡Via	the	subthalamic	fasciculus.
GABA,	gamma-amino	butyric	acid;	GP,	globus	pallidus;	SN,	substantia	nigra;	SNc,	pars
compacta;	SNr,	pars	reticulata.

The	 connections	 of	 the	 putamen	 are	 more	 focused;	 it	 receives	 fibers	 from
cortical	areas	4	and	6	and	from	the	parietal	lobe,	the	perirolandic	motor	centers,
which	 are	 essentially	 the	 same	 areas	 that	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 corticospinal	 tract.	 It
has	a	large	connection	with	the	caudate.	It	also	receives	fibers	from	the	SN	by
the	comb	bundle.

Striatal	Efferents

The	 caudate	 sends	 fibers	 to	 the	 thalamus	 (striothalamic	 fibers)	 and	 to	 the
putamen	and	GP.	The	primary	efferent	fibers	from	the	striatum	project	to	the	GP
and	 SN.	 The	 striatopallidal	 fibers	 from	 the	 caudate	 run	 directly	 through	 the
anterior	 limb	 of	 internal	 capsule,	 and	 those	 from	 the	 putamen	 project	 medially

through	the	external	medullary	lamina	into	the	GP.

Pallidal	Afferents

The	 principal	 afferents	 to	 the	 GP	 are	 from	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen.	 The	 STN
also	sends	fibers	to	the	GP	in	the	subthalamic	fasciculus;	some	pass	through	the
internal	capsule	into	the	medial	segment	of	the	GP;	some	cross	in	the	supraoptic
commissure	(of	Gudden).	There	are	also	fibers	from	the	SNc	to	the	GP.	The	GP
also	 receives	 impulses	 from	 DM	 and	 VA,	 through	 thalamostriate	 fibers	 in	 the
inferior	 thalamic	 peduncle,	 and	 from	 area	 6	 and	 possibly	 area	 4	 through
corticospinal	collaterals.

Pallidal	Efferents

the	 ansa	

the	 fasciculus	

lenticularis;	 (b)	

The	pallidal	efferents	are	the	principal	outflow	of	the	BG.	There	are	four	major
bundles:	 (a)	
lenticularis;	 (c)
pallidotegmental	fibers,	which	arise	from	GPi;	and	(d)	pallidosubthalamic	fibers,
which	 arise	 from	 GPe.	 Pallidofugal	 fibers	 are	 often	 discussed	 in	 terms	 of	 their
relationships	to	the	“fields	of	Forel.”	August	Forel	performed	some	of	the	early
anatomical	 studies	 of	 the	 BG	 and	 subthalamic	 region	 using	 degeneration
techniques.	(Although	his	name	is	inextricably	linked	to	the	neuroanatomy	of	the
subthalamic	 region,	 his	 principal	 reputation	 arises	 from	 seminal	 studies	 of	 the
social	behavior	of	ants.)

Forel	identified	fields	or	regions	in	the	subthalamic	and	BG	area	and	labeled
them	 “H”	 for	 “Haubenregionen”	 because	 of	 their	 resemblance	 to	 a	 hat	 plume.
There	are	Forel	fields	H,	H1,	and	H2;	these	refer	to	different	fiber	bundles	that
course	 in	 the	 region	 of	 the	 RN,	 STN,	 and	 ZI.	 The	 prerubral	 or	 tegmental	 field
(Forel	field	H)	lies	just	rostral	to	the	RN	and	primarily	contains	dentatothalamic
fibers	 from	 the	 contralateral	 superior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 and	 rubrothalamic
fibers	 from	 the	 ipsilateral	 RN	 ascending	 toward	 the	 thalamus	 through	 the
subthalamic	 region.	 The	 dentatothalamic	 and	 rubrothalamic	 fibers	 form	 a
capsule	around	the	RN;	the	portion	of	this	capsule	just	rostral	to	the	RN	is	the
prerubral	field.	Pallidofugal	fibers	stream	into	the	prerubral	field	and	then	turn
upward.	As	these	fibers	ascend	toward	the	thalamus,	the	prerubral	field	divides
into	 dorsal	 and	 ventral	 lamina;	 the	 dorsal	 division	 consists	 of	 the	 lenticular
fasciculus	 (Forel	 field	 H2),	 and	 the	 ventral	 division	 is	 the	 thalamic	 fasciculus

(Forel	field	H1).

Both	the	ansa	and	 fasciculus	lenticularis	have	the	same	origin,	GPi,	and	the
same	 destination,	 the	 thalamus;	 the	 difference	 is	 that	 the	 fasciculus	 penetrates
through,	 and	 the	 ansa	 curves	 around,	 the	 internal	 capsule.	 Both	 pass	 through
field	 H,	 and	 both	 join	 with	 the	 thalamic	 fasciculus.	 The	 fasciculus	 lenticularis
emerges	from	the	dorsal	surface	of	GPi	and	then	pierces	the	internal	capsule	to
lie	just	above	the	STN	and	below	the	ZI.	The	ansa	lenticularis	emerges	from	the
ventral	surface	of	GPi,	runs	ventromedially	to	loop	around	the	posterior	limb	of
the	 internal	 capsule,	 and	 then	 enters	 the	 prerubral	 field.	 After	 traversing	 the
internal	 capsule,	 the	 fasciculus	 lenticularis	 joins	 the	 ansa	 lenticularis	 at	 the
medial	 border	 of	 the	 ZI;	 both	 then	 enter	 the	 thalamic	 fasciculus	 just	 above	 the
ZI.

The	 thalamic	 fasciculus	 (Forel	 field	 H1)	 is	 a	 complex	 bundle	 that	 lies	 just
dorsal	 to	 the	 ZI.	 It	 carries	 pallidofugal	 fibers	 as	 well	 as	 rubrothalamic	 and
dentatothalamic	fibers.	The	thalamic	fasciculus	 enters	the	rostral	ventral	tier	of
thalamic	 nuclei,	 primarily	 VL	 and	 VA.	 Some	 pallidofugal	 fibers	 separate	 from
the	 thalamic	 fasciculus	 and	 enter	 the	 centromedian	 thalamic	 nucleus.	 The
dentatothalamic	fibers	in	the	thalamic	fasciculus	are	destined	primarily	for	VL,
but	 some	 enter	 the	 intralaminar	 nuclei.	 The	 VL	 is	 involved	 in	 integration	 and
coordination	of	BG	and	cerebellar	function.	The	VL	in	turn	projects	to	area	4	of
the	motor	cortex.	The	point	where	the	thalamic	fasciculus	converges	on	VL	is	of
singular	strategic	importance	in	the	function	of	the	motor	system.

Subthalamic	Nucleus

The	STN	is	reciprocally	connected	with	the	GP	via	the	subthalamic	fasciculus,	a
bundle	that	runs	directly	through	the	internal	capsule.	The	connection	to	the	STN
is	 the	 only	 pallidal	 efferent	 to	 arise	 from	 GPe;	 all	 others	 come	 from	 GPi.	 The
STN	 sends	 fibers	 back	 to	 GPe,	 as	 well	 as	 to	 GPi,	 through	 the	 subthalamic
fasciculus.

Substantia	Nigra

The	 SN	 extends	 from	 the	 pons	 to	 the	 subthalamic	 region	 and	 makes	 up	 the
primary	dopaminergic	cell	population	of	the	midbrain;	cholinergic	cells	are	also
present.	The	SNc	of	one	side	is	continuous	across	the	midline	with	the	SNc	of

the	 opposite	 side.	 Cells	 of	 the	 SNc	 contain	 neuromelanin,	 a	 by-product	 of
dopamine	synthesis.	The	striatonigral	afferents	from	the	striatum	use	GABA	and
either	 SP	 or	 ENK	 as	 transmitters.	 The	 SNr	 receives	 strionigral	 fibers	 from	 the
striatum,	GP,	and	STN.	The	primary	efferents	from	the	SN	are	to	the	striatum,
midbrain	tectum,	and	thalamus	(Table	26.1).	The	SNr	is	functionally	related	to
the	 GPi;	 its	 efferents	 are	 GABAergic.	 Dopaminergic	 nigrostriatal	 fibers	 from
SNc	 project	 to	 the	 striatum.	 The	 nigrothalamic	 tract	 runs	 to	 VA	 and	 DM.	 The
nigrotectal	tract	connects	the	SN	with	the	ipsilateral	superior	colliculus	and	may
be	 involved	 in	 the	 control	 of	 eye	 movements.	 There	 are	 also	 connections
between	the	SN	and	the	PPN	and	RF.

BASAL	GANGLIA	PHYSIOLOGY

The	connections	of	the	motor	system	are	complex	(Figure	22.2).	There	are	two
major	loops:	the	BG	and	the	cerebellar.	The	essential	connections	in	the	BG	loop
are	cortex	→	striatum	→	globus	pallidus	→	thalamus	→	cortex.	The	projections
of	the	thalamus,	cortex,	and	STN	are	excitatory;	the	outputs	of	the	striatum	and
pallidum	are	primarily	inhibitory.	The	projections	from	the	cortex	to	the	striatum
and	 from	 the	 thalamus	 to	 the	 cortex	 are	 both	 excitatory	 (glutaminergic).	 The
pathway	from	the	striatum	to	the	thalamus	may	be	either	excitatory	or	inhibitory
depending	on	the	route.	Current	models	of	BG	function	include	a	direct	and	an
indirect	loop	or	pathway	for	the	connection	between	the	striatum	and	thalamus
(Box	 26.1).	 In	 brief,	 the	 direct	 loop	 is	 excitatory	 and	 the	 indirect	 loop	 is
inhibitory.	The	indirect	loop	brings	in	GPe	and	STN,	which	are	not	involved	in
the	direct	pathway	(Figure	26.4).	The	caudate,	putamen,	and	STN	make	up	the
BG	 input	 nuclei;	 the	 GPi	 and	 SNr	 are	 the	 output	 nuclei.	 The	 input	 and	 output
nuclei	 are	 connected	 by	 the	 direct	 and	 indirect	 loops.	 In	 essence,	 the	 output
nuclei,	GPi	and	SNr,	tonically	inhibit	the	motor	thalamus;	the	input	nuclei	either
facilitate	 cortical	 motor	 activity	 by	 disinhibiting	 the	 thalamus	 or	 inhibit	 motor
activity	by	increasing	thalamic	inhibition.	The	direct	pathway	serves	to	facilitate
cortical	 excitation	 and	 carry	 out	 voluntary	 movement.	 The	 indirect	 pathway
serves	to	inhibit	cortical	excitation	and	prevent	unwanted	movement.	Disease	of
the	direct	pathway	produces	hypokinesia,	for	example,	parkinsonism;	disease	of
the	
indirect	 pathway	 produces	 hyperkinesias,	 for	 example,	 chorea	 or
hemiballismus.

BOX	26.1

Direct	and	Indirect	Pathways

As	 an	 overview,	 the	 direct	 pathway	 is	 mediated	 by	 D1	 dopamine	 receptors
and	results	in	a	facilitation	of	movement;	the	indirect	pathway	is	mediated	by
D2	receptors	and	results	in	an	inhibition	of	movement.	In	the	direct	pathway,
the	 motor	 cortex	 sends	 glutaminergic-activating	 signals	 to	 the	 caudate	 and
putamen	and	excites	D1	receptors.	Striopallidal	fibers	to	the	globus	pallidus
interna	 (GPi)	 and	 superficial	 zona	 reticulata	 (SNr)	 are	
inhibitory
(GABAergic);	 fibers	 from	 the	 GPi	 to	 the	 thalamus	 are	 also	 inhibitory
(GABAergic).	At	rest,	GPi/SNr	exert	in	inhibitory	influence	on	the	thalamus,
which	 decreases	 the	 excitatory	 influence	 of	 the	 thalamus	 on	 the	 cortex.
Activation	of	the	direct	pathway	inhibits	the	activity	of	GPi/SNr.	The	direct
inhibitory
loop	 projections	 from	
pallidothalamic	pathway	and	result	in	net	cortical	excitation	and	facilitation.
The	 direct	 loop	 excites	 the	 thalamic	 projections	 to	 the	 cortex	 by	 inhibiting
the	pallidothalamic	pathway.

the	 striatum	

to	 GPi	

inhibit	

the	

In	 the	 indirect	 pathway,	 the	 motor	 cortex	 sends	 glutaminergic-activating
signals	 to	 the	 caudate	 and	 putamen	 and	 excites	 D2	 receptors.	 Striopallidal
fibers	 then	 project	 to	 the	 globus	 pallidus	 externa	 (GPe),	 causing	 inhibition
(GABAergic).	 The	 resting	 activity	 of	 GPe	 decreases.	 The	 GPe	 projects
inhibitory	 GABAergic	 fibers	 to	 the	 subthalamic	 nucleus	 (STN)	 by	 the
subthalamic	fasciculus.	The	STN	then	projects	to	the	GPi,	but	its	fibers	are
excitatory	(glutaminergic).	Indirect	pathway	activity	reduces	the	inhibition	of
the	STN.	The	STN	then	facilitates	the	inhibitory	projection	of	the	GPi	to	the
thalamus,	 resulting	 in	 a	 net	 decrease	 in	 activity	 in	 the	 thalamocortical
pathways.	The	indirect	loop	inhibits	the	thalamic	projections	to	the	cortex	by
increasing	the	inhibition	mediated	by	the	pallidothalamic	projection.	Activity
in	 the	 indirect	 loop	 prevents	 activation	 of	 motor	 cortical	 areas	 that	 might
interfere	with	the	voluntary	movement	executed	by	the	direct	pathway.

Activity	in	the	direct	loop	results	in	a	net	increase	in	cortical	excitation;
activity	in	the	indirect	loop	results	in	a	net	decrease.	When	cortical	excitation
is	 at	 a	 normal	 level,	 voluntary	 movements	 are	 normal.	 When	 there	 is	 a
pathologic	 net	 decrease	 in	 cortical	 activation	 because	 of	 disease	 involving
the	 direct	 pathway,	 voluntary	 movements	 are	 inhibited;	 this	 causes
hypokinetic	movement	disorders,	such	as	Parkinson’s	disease.	When	there	is

a	pathologic	net	increase	in	cortical	activation	because	of	disease	involving
the	 indirect	 pathway,	 movements	 are	 augmented;	 this	 causes	 hyperkinetic
movement	disorders,	such	as	chorea.	The	final	common	result	in	Parkinson’s
disease	is	an	increase	in	the	firing	rate	of	the	GPi,	resulting	in	a	suppression
of	activity	in	the	thalamocortical	circuits	(the	GPi	rate	theory).

The	direct	and	indirect	pathway	model	and	GPi	rate	theory	fail	to	explain
some	 features	 of	 movement	 disorders,	 for	 example,	 the	 hyperkinetic
component,	tremor,	in	a	disease	primarily	producing	hypokinesia.	It	fails	to
explain	some	of	the	effects	of	deep	brain	stimulation	in	Parkinson’s	disease
or	 the	 efficacy	 of	 anticholinergic	 agents.	 Various	 authors	 have	 proposed
refinements,	 modifications,	 and	 alternatives,	 including	 the	 bursting	 neurons
theory,	 synchronization	 theory,	 prokinetic/antikinetic	 oscillators	 theory,	 and
the	 systems	 oscillators	 theory.	 Changes	 in	 GPi	 firing	 patterns	 rather	 than
simply	the	overall	firing	rate	as	emphasized	in	traditional	wiring	diagrams	of
the	basal	ganglia	may	explain	many	disease	features	not	well	accounted	for
by	the	GPi	rate	theory.

The	 SNc	 projects	 dopaminergic	 fibers	 to	 the	 striatum,	 causing	 excitation	 or
inhibition	 depending	 on	 the	 receptor.	 There	 are	 five	 subtypes	 of	 dopamine
receptor,	 D1	 through	 D5.	 The	 D1	 and	 D2	 receptors	 are	 the	 primary	 ones
involved	 in	 regulating	 movement.	 The	 dopamine	 effect	 on	 the	 D1	 family	 of
receptors	is	excitatory;	the	effect	on	D2	receptors	is	inhibitory.	The	direct	loop	is
routed	through	the	D1	receptors	and	the	indirect	loop	through	the	D2	receptors.
Dopamine	 excitation	 of	 D1	 receptors	 increases	 the	 inhibitory	 effect	 of	 the
striatum	on	the	GPi/SNr	through	the	direct	pathway,	which	results	in	a	decrease
of	 the	 inhibitory	 effect	 of	 GPi/SNr	 on	 the	 thalamus	 and	 a	 net	 increase	 in
thalamocortical	excitation.	The	net	effect	of	dopamine	on	the	D1	receptor	is	to
facilitate	 the	 direct	 loop	 and	 increase	 thalamocortical	 excitation.	 Dopamine
inhibition	of	D2	receptors	decreases	the	inhibitory	effect	of	the	striatum	on	the
GPe	through	the	indirect	pathway,	which	results	in	a	decrease	of	the	inhibitory
effect	of	GPe	on	STN.	The	disinhibition	of	STN	causes	an	increase	in	its	ability
to	excite	GPi/SNr,	increasing	the	inhibitory	output	of	GPi/SNr	and	causing	a	net
decrease	 in	 thalamocortical	 excitation.	 The	 net	 result	 is	 that	 the	 nigrostriatal
system	 facilitates	 activity	 in	 the	 direct	 loop,	 which	 increases	 thalamocortical
excitation	 and	 inhibits	 activity	 in	 the	 inhibitory	 indirect	 loop,	 which	 also
increases	thalamocortical	excitation.	When	there	is	dopamine	deficiency,	cortical

activation	 is	 decreased	 both	 because	 of	 decreased	 facilitation	 through	 the
excitatory	direct	loop	and	lack	of	inhibition	of	the	inhibitory	indirect	loop.

FIGURE	26.4	 The	 direct	 and	 indirect	 BG	 loops.	 The	 indirect	 loop	 includes	 the	 GPe
and	 subthalamic	 nucleus.	 The	 direct	 loop	 results	 in	 excitation	 of	 the	 thalamus	 and
cortex,	 the	 indirect	 loop	 in	 inhibition.	 +,	 excitatory;	 −,	 inhibitory;	 CM,	 centromedian
thalamic	 nucleus;	 D1,	 D1	 dopamine	 receptor;	 D2,	 D2	 dopamine	 receptor;	 DA,
dopamine;	GABA,	gamma-amino	butyric	acid;	glu,	glutamic	acid;	GPe,	globus	pallidus
externa;	 GPi,	 globus	 pallidus	 interna;	 MEA,	 midbrain	 extrapyramidal	 area;	 PPN,
pedunculopontine	 nucleus;	 SNc,	 substantia	 nigra,	 compacta;	 SNr,	 substantia	 nigra,
reticulata;	 STN,	 subthalamic	 nucleus;	 VA,	 ventral	 anterior	 thalamic	 nucleus;	 VL,
ventral-lateral	thalamic	nucleus.

The	 inhibitory	 effect	 of	 the	 BG	 output	 neurons	 affects	 not	 only	 the	 motor
thalamus	 but	 the	 midbrain	 extrapyramidal	 areas	 as	 well.	 The	 effects	 have	 been
likened	 to	 a	 brake.	 Increased	 braking	 through	 increased	 activity	 from	 GPi/SNr
inhibits	motor	pattern	generators	in	the	cerebral	cortex	and	brainstem;	decreased
GPi/SNr	activity	decreases	the	braking	and	results	in	a	net	facilitation	of	cortical

and	 brainstem	 motor	 activity.	 The	 STN	 increases	 the	 braking,	 whereas	 the
striatum	 decreases	 it.	 The	 striatal	 input	 to	 GPi/SNr	 is	 organized	 to	 provide	 a
specific,	focused	inhibition	(unbraking)	in	order	to	selectively	facilitate	desired
movements,	whereas	the	input	from	the	STN	causes	a	more	global	excitation	of
GPi/SNr	(braking),	perhaps	to	inhibit	potentially	competing	movements.

BASAL	GANGLIA	PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Hypokinetic	 movement	 disorders,	 such	 as	 parkinsonism,	 are	 thought	 to	 result
from	 an	 increase	 of	 the	 normal	 inhibitory	 effects	 of	 the	 BG	 output	 neurons.
Hyperkinetic	movement	disorders—such	as	chorea,	hemiballismus,	and	dystonia
—presumably	result	from	a	reduction	in	the	normal	inhibition.

The	 most	 common	 hypokinetic	 movement	 disorder	 is	 Parkinson’s	 disease.
Pathologically,	there	is	loss	of	the	pigmented	cells	in	the	SNc,	as	well	as	loss	of
other	pigmented	cells	in	the	central	nervous	system,	such	as	the	locus	coeruleus.
The	SNc	cells	are	the	origin	of	the	nigrostriatal	dopaminergic	pathway.	Loss	of
dopamine	 input	 to	 the	 striatum	 decreases	 thalamocortical	 activation	 by	 effects
mediated	by	both	D1	and	D2	receptors.	There	is	decreased	activity	in	the	direct
loop,	mediated	by	the	D1	receptor,	causing	loss	of	striatal	inhibition	of	GPi/SNr
and	 increased	 inhibition	 of	 the	 motor	 thalamus,	 resulting	 in	 decreased	 cortical
activation.	 There	 is	 also	 decreased	 inhibition	 of	 the	 indirect	 loop,	 mediated	 by
the	D2	receptor.	The	STN	is	released	from	the	inhibitory	control	of	GPe,	which
causes	increased	activity	of	the	STN;	this	in	turn	increases	the	inhibitory	effects
of	GPi/SNr.	Both	of	these	effects	decrease	the	thalamic	drive	to	the	motor	cortex,
causing	hypokinesia	and	bradykinesia.	There	is	a	net	increase	in	activity	through
the	indirect	over	the	direct	pathway,	resulting	in	a	net	hyperactivity	of	GPi/SNr
and	subsequent	inhibition	or	braking	of	the	thalamocortical	circuits.

In	hyperkinetic	movement	disorders,	the	inhibition	of	the	motor	thalamus	by
the	GPi/SNr	is	impaired.	Hemiballismus	results	from	a	lesion	of	the	contralateral
STN,	usually	infarction.	The	damage	to	the	STN	removes	its	normal	facilitation
of	 the	 inhibitory	 effects	 of	 GPi/SNr.	 The	 loss	 of	 facilitation	 of	 GPi/SNr	 output
(less	 braking)	 disinhibits	 the	 motor	 thalamus	 and	 the	 cortex,	 resulting	 in
hyperkinetic	 movements	 of	 the	 involved	 extremities.	 In	 Huntington’s	 disease,
there	is	loss	of	ENKergic	spiny	neurons	in	the	striatum,	which	project	primarily
to	GPe.	Loss	of	these	neurons	removes	inhibition	from	GPe,	the	effect	of	which
is	to	profoundly	inhibit	STN,	incapacitating	it.	As	with	hemiballismus,	without

STN	 input,	 GPi/SNr	 inhibition	 of	 the	 motor	 thalamus	 decreases,	 releasing	 the
brake,	 disinhibiting	 VL,	 and	 causing	 increased	 thalamocortical	 activity	 and
hyperkinesis.	 Experimentally,	 chorea	 can	 be	 produced	 by	 lesioning	 STN,
disinhibition	of	GPe,	or	the	administration	of	dopaminergic	agents.

OTHER	BASAL	GANGLIA	FUNCTIONS

In	addition	to	its	functions	in	the	regulation	of	voluntary	movement,	the	BG	also
have	 connections	 involved	 in	 cognition,	 emotion,	 and	 oculomotor	 control.	 The
BG	have	links	to	parts	of	the	brain	involved	in	behavior,	memory,	attention,	and
reward	processes.	In	the	motor	loop,	cortical	projections	are	to	the	putamen;	in
the	 other	 loops,	 cortical	 projections	 are	 to	 the	 caudate.	 In	 the	 cognitive	 loop,
projections	from	the	frontal	lobe	to	the	caudate	travel	via	the	GP	to	the	VA	and
DM	 thalamic	 nuclei,	 which	 then	 send	 fibers	 back	 to	 the	 frontal	 lobe.	 The
cognitive	connections	of	the	BG	are	important	in	learning	new	motor	tasks.	The
limbic	 loop	 originates	 in	 the	 orbitofrontal	 and	 anterior	 cingulate	 cortex	 and
travels	 via	 the	 ventral	 striatum,	 particularly	 the	 nucleus	 accumbens,	 to	 the
ventral	pallidum,	and	then	to	DM,	which	projects	back	to	the	cortex.	The	limbic
loop	may	be	involved	in	the	motor	expressions	of	emotion.	The	oculomotor	loop
originates	in	the	cortical	eye	movement	control	areas,	including	the	frontal	eye
fields	and	posterior	parietal	cortex,	and	projects	to	the	caudate	and	then	to	both
the	 SNr	 and	 the	 superior	 colliculus.	 Impulses	 from	 SNr	 are	 routed	 via	 VA	 and
DM	 back	 to	 the	 cortex.	 The	 oculomotor	 loop	 is	 involved	 in	 the	 control	 of
saccadic	eye	movements.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Afifi	 AK.	 Basal	 ganglia:	 functional	 anatomy	 and	 physiology.	 Part	 1.	 J	 Child

Neurol	1994a;9:249–260.

Afifi	 AK.	 Basal	 ganglia:	 functional	 anatomy	 and	 physiology.	 Part	 2.	 J	 Child

Neurol	1994b;9:352–361.

Afifi	 AK.	 The	 basal	 ganglia:	 a	 neural	 network	 with	 more	 than	 motor	 function.

Semin	Pediatr	Neurol	2003;10:3–10.

Albin	 RL,	 Young	 AB,	 Penney	 JB.	 The	 functional	 anatomy	 of	 basal	 ganglia

disorders.	Trends	Neurosci	1989;12:366–375.

Bronstein	 JM,	 Tagliati	 M,	 Alterman	 RL,	 et	 al.	 Deep	 brain	 stimulation	 for
Parkinson	disease:	an	expert	consensus	and	review	of	key	issues.	Arch	Neurol

2011;68:165.

DeLong	 MR,	 Wichmann	 T.	 Circuits	 and	 circuit	 disorders	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia.

Arch	Neurol	2007;64:20–24.

DeLong	 M,	 Wichmann	 T.	 Update	 on	 models	 of	 basal	 ganglia	 function	 and

dysfunction.	Parkinsonism	Relat	Disord	2009;	15(Suppl	3):S237–S240.

FitzGerald	 MJT,	 Folan-Curran	 J.	 Clinical	 Neuroanatomy	 and	 Related

Neuroscience.	4th	ed.	Edinburgh:	W.	B.	Saunders,	2002.

Gilman	S,	Newman	SW.	Manter	and	Gatz’s	Essentials	of	Clinical	Neuroanatomy

and	Neurophysiology.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	FA	Davis,	2003.

Gould	 DJ,	 Fix	 JD.	 Neuroanatomy.	 5th	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer

Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2014.

Herrero	MT,	Barcia	C,	Navarro	JM.	Functional	anatomy	of	thalamus	and	basal

ganglia.	Childs	Nerv	Syst	2002;18:386–404.

Holt	 DJ,	 Graybiel	 AM,	 Saper	 CB.	 Neurochemical	 architecture	 of	 the	 human

striatum.	J	Comp	Neurol	1997;384:1–25.

Kiernan	JA,	Rajakumar	N.	Barr’s	The	Human	Nervous	System:	An	Anatomical
Viewpoint.	10th	ed.	Philadelphia:	Wolters	Kluwer	Health/Lippincott	Williams
&	Wilkins,	2014.

Kingsley	 RE.	 Concise	 Text	 of	 Neuroscience.	 2nd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Lippincott

Williams	&	Wilkins,	2000.

Kopell	 BH,	 Rezai	 AR,	 Chang	 JW,	 et	 al.	 Anatomy	 and	 physiology	 of	 the	 basal
ganglia:	implications	for	deep	brain	stimulation	for	Parkinson’s	disease.	Mov
Disord	2006;21(Suppl	14):S238–S246.

Koprich	JB,	Johnston	TH,	Huot	P,	et	al.	New	insights	into	the	organization	of	the

basal	ganglia.	Curr	Neurol	Neurosci	Rep	2009;9:298–304.

Lozano	 AM,	 Snyder	 BJ,	 Hamani	 C,	 et	 al.	 Basal	 ganglia	 physiology	 and	 deep

brain	stimulation.	Mov	Disord	2010;25	Suppl	1:S71–S75.

Mink	JW.	The	basal	ganglia	and	involuntary	movements:	impaired	inhibition	of

competing	motor	patterns.	Arch	Neurol	2003;60:1365–1368.

Montgomery	 EB	 Jr.	 Basal	 ganglia	 physiology	 and	 pathophysiology:	 a

reappraisal.	Parkinsonism	Relat	Disord	2007;13:455–465.

Obeso	 JA,	 Rodriguez-Oroz	 MC,	 Benitez-Temino	 B,	 et	 al.	 Functional
organization	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia:	 therapeutic	 implications	 for	 Parkinson’s
disease.	Mov	Disord	2008;23(Suppl	3):S548–S559.

Pahapill	 PA,	 Lozano	 AM.	 The	 pedunculopontine	 nucleus	 and	 Parkinson’s

disease.	Brain	2000;123(Pt	9):1767–1783.

Parent	A,	Hazrati	LN.	Functional	anatomy	of	the	basal	ganglia.	I.	The	cortico-

basal	 ganglia-thalamo-cortical	 loop.	 Brain	 Res	 Brain	 Res	 Rev	 1995a;20:91–
127.

Parent	A,	Hazrati	LN.	Functional	anatomy	of	the	basal	ganglia.	II.	The	place	of
subthalamic	 nucleus	 and	 external	 pallidum	 in	 basal	 ganglia	 circuitry.	 Brain
Res	Brain	Res	Rev	1995b;20:128–154.

Pollack	 AE.	 Anatomy,	 physiology,	 and	 pharmacology	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia.

Neurol	Clin	2001;19:523–534.

Postuma	RB,	Land	AE.	Hemiballism:	revisiting	a	classic	disorder.	Lancet	Neurol

2003;2:661–668.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Ring	 HA,	 Serra-Mestres	 J.	 Neuropsychiatry	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia.	 J	 Neurol

Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2002;72:12–21.

Ropper	AH,	Samuels	MA,	Klein	J.	Adams	and	Victor’s	Principles	of	Neurology.

10th	ed.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill	Education	Medical,	2014.

Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Welniarz	 Q,	 Dusart	 I,	 Roze	 E.	 The	 corticospinal	 tract:	 evolution,	 development,

and	human	disorders.	Dev	Neurobiol	2017;77:810–829.

Wilson	 SAK.	 Progressive	 lenticular	 degeneration.	 A	 familial	 nervous	 disease

associated	with	cirrhosis	of	the	liver.	Brain	1912;	34:295.

CHAPTER	27

Motor	Strength	and	Power

Motor	 strength	 and	 power	 indicate	 the	 capacity	 of	 muscles	 to	 exert	 force	 and
expend	 energy.	 Decreased	 strength	 is	 weakness,	 or	 paresis;	 absence	 of	 muscle
contraction	 is	 paralysis,	 or	 plegia.	 Weakness	 may	 cause	 loss	 of	 the	 speed,
rapidity,	 or	 agility	 of	 movement	 and	 a	 decrease	 in	 the	 range,	 or	 amplitude,	 of
movement	 before	 there	 is	 loss	 of	 power	 to	 formal	 strength	 testing.	 Other
manifestations	 of	 impaired	 motor	 function	 include	 fatigability,	 variation	 in
strength	 on	 repeated	 tests,	 diminished	 range	 and	 rate	 of	 movement,	 loss	 of
coordination,	 irregularity	 and	 clumsiness	 of	 motion,	 tremulousness,	 loss	 of
associated	movements,	and	lack	of	ability	to	carry	out	skilled	acts.

Although	 judgment	 of	 the	 force	 exerted	 in	 either	 initiating	 or	 resisting
movement	 is	 the	 major	 criterion	 in	 the	 evaluation	 of	 strength,	 observation	 and
palpation	 of	 either	 the	 contraction	 of	 the	 muscle	 belly	 or	 its	 movement	 of	 its
tendon	 may	 be	 helpful	 adjuncts.	 The	 contraction	 of	 an	 extremely	 weak	 muscle
may	 sometimes	 be	 felt	 when	 it	 cannot	 be	 seen.	 In	 nonorganic	 weakness,
contraction	of	the	apparently	weak	muscle	may	be	felt	when	the	patient	is	asked
to	 carry	 out	 movements	 with	 synergistic	 muscles	 (cocontraction	 sign),	 or	 the
antagonists	may	be	felt	to	contract	when	the	patient	is	asked	to	contract	the	weak
muscle.	 Weakness	 may	 be	 masked	 when	 attempts	 to	 contract	 individual	 weak
muscles	 are	accompanied	by	activation	of	other	muscles	to	compensate	for	the
loss	of	power.	In	these	substitution,	or	“trick,”	movements,	the	patient	exploits	a
strong	 muscle	 with	 similar	 function	 to	 compensate	 for	 the	 loss	 of	 action	 of	 a
weak	 muscle.	 Careful	 observation	 for	 alterations	 in	 normal	 movement	 patterns
and	 substitution	 movements	 may	 indicate	 loss	 of	 function.	 Endurance	 is	 the
ability	 to	 perform	 the	 same	 act	 repeatedly.	 Loss	 of	 endurance,	 or	 abnormal
fatigability,	may	occur	in	myasthenia	gravis.	Conversely,	a	patient	with	Lambert-
Eaton	 myasthenic	 syndrome	 may	 grow	 transiently	 stronger	 with	 successive
contractions.

For	 clinical	 purposes,	 it	 is	 usually	 possible	 to	 evaluate	 muscle	 strength
adequately	 without	 resorting	 to	 special	 equipment.	 Although	 the	 subjective
impression	of	the	examiner	is	usually	adequate,	it	is	at	best	semiquantitative	and
varies	 with	 the	 experience	 and	 ability	 of	 the	 examiner.	 There	 is	 a	 subjective
element,	 with	 significant	 interexaminer	 and	 intraexaminer	 variability.	 When
more	 quantitative	 determinations	 are	 necessary,	 various	 dynamometers,
myometers,	and	ergometers	are	available.

The	 strength	 examination	 assesses	 primarily	 voluntary,	 or	 active,	 muscle
contraction	rather	than	reflex	contraction.	Strength	may	be	classified	as	kinetic
(the	force	exerted	in	changing	position)	and	static	(the	force	exerted	in	resisting
movement	 from	 a	 fixed	 position).	 Strength	 may	 be	 tested	 in	 two	 ways.	 The
patient	 may	 place	 a	 joint	 in	 a	 certain	 position,	 and	 then	 the	 examiner	 tries	 to
move	 it.	 Alternately,	 the	 patient	 may	 try	 to	 move	 a	 joint	 or	 contract	 a	 muscle
against	the	fixed	resistance	of	the	examiner.	In	most	disease	processes,	both	are
equally	 affected,	 and	 the	 two	 methods	 can	 be	 used	 interchangeably.	 Some
patients	may	comprehend	and	cooperate	better	with	the	first	method,	but	having
the	 patient	 initiate	 movement	 may	 better	 detect	 mild	 weakness.	 There	 is
disagreement	 about	 how	 the	 examiner	 should	 apply	 force.	 Some	 authorities
recommend	 a	 slow	 application	 of	 resistance	 in	 which	 the	 patient	 and	 examiner
match	effort;	others	contend	that	a	rapid	movement	by	the	examiner	will	better
detect	mild	weakness.	With	very	weak	muscles,	strength	may	have	to	be	judged
without	resistance	or	only	against	the	resistance	offered	by	gravity.

Many	factors	may	complicate	the	strength	examination	and	make	assessment
more	 difficult.	 The	 experience	 gained	 from	 examining	 many	 patients	 helps	 in
buttressing	 an	 examiner’s	 impression	 of	 loss	 of	 strength,	 especially	 when	 the
impairment	is	mild.	Fatigue,	systemic	illness,	failure	to	understand	or	cooperate
with	 strength	 testing,	 and	 many	 other	 factors	 may	 result	 in	 a	 false	 or	 distorted
impression	 of	 weakness.	 In	 extrapyramidal	 disease,	 rigidity	 may	 interfere	 with
apparent	muscle	power,	and	bradykinesia	delays	the	onset	of	muscle	contraction
and	causes	retardation	of	movement.	Hyperkinesias	of	various	types	and	ataxia
may	make	motor	activity	difficult.	Loss	or	impairment	of	motion	may	also	occur
with	 pain,	 swelling,	 spasm,	 fractures,	 dislocations,	 adhesions	 or	 ankylosis	 of
joints,	 contractures	 of	 either	 agonists	 or	 antagonists,	 loss	 of	 position	 sense,
hysteria,	malingering,	and	catatonia.

There	is	wide	individual	variation	in	the	speed	of	voluntary	movement.	It	may
be	 increased	 in	 hyperthyroidism	 and	 mania	 and	 decreased	 in	 hypothyroidism,
depression,	 parkinsonism,	 fatigue,	 and	 various	 myopathies.	 Slowness	 of

movement	 (bradykinesia)	 may	 be	 the	 first	 manifestation	 of	 extrapyramidal
disease.	 Abnormalities	 in	 the	 smoothness	 and	 regularity	 of	 movement	 may	 be
due	 to	 ataxia,	 tremor,	 or	 chorea,	 but	 incoordination	 may	 also	 be	 caused	 by
weakness.	 Motor	 impersistence	 is	 the	 inability	 to	 sustain	 voluntary	 motor	 acts
that	have	been	initiated	on	verbal	command.	The	patient	is	unable	to	sustain	an
activity,	such	as	keeping	the	eyes	closed	or	the	hand	raised.	It	may	be	a	form	of
apraxia	and	has	been	said	to	occur	most	often	with	left	hemisphere	lesions.

Weakness	of	a	muscle	must	be	distinguished	from	loss	of	range	of	motion	for
other	reasons	and	from	contracture	of	antagonists.	Passive	movements	to	assess
range	of	motion	are	sometimes	necessary	to	help	distinguish	whether	limitation
of	 movement	 is	 due	 to	 weakness,	 pain,	 muscle	 spasm,	 or	 fibrous	 or	 bony
changes.	Limitation	of	movement	due	to	severe	weakness	may	ultimately	result
in	contracture	and	deformity.	With	contracture,	a	muscle	cannot	be	stretched	to
its	 normal	 limits	 without	 considerable	 resistance	 and	 the	 production	 of	 pain.
Patients	 with	 spasticity	 are	 at	 particular	 risk	 for	 contractures,	 especially	 if	 the
muscles	 are	 not	 passively	 stretched	 at	 regular	 intervals.	 Contractures	 are
particularly	 common	in	the	calf	muscles,	drawing	the	 foot	downward.	There	is
lack	 of	 full	 range	 of	 motion	 on	 attempted	 passive	 dorsiflexion	 (“tight	 heel
cords”).	 Contractures	 may	 ultimately	 result	 in	 periarthritic	 changes,	 joint
ankylosis,	and	fixed	deformities.

In	 evaluating	 contractures	 and	 deformities,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 differentiate
between	 those	 of	 neurogenic	 origin	 and	 those	 due	 to	 orthopedic	 disease,
congenital	abnormalities,	habitual	postures,	occupational	factors,	or	other	factors
that	 cause	 mechanical	 difficulty	 with	 movement.	 An	 equinus	 or	 equinovarus
deformity	 of	 the	 foot	 may	 result	 from	 any	 of	 the	 following:	 footdrop	 due	 to
peroneal	 (fibular)	 nerve	 palsy;	 spasm	 of	 the	 calf	 muscles	 in	 foot	 dystonia;
spasticity	 due	 to	 a	 corticospinal	 tract	 (CST)	 lesion;	 a	 developmental	 anomaly,
such	 as	 a	 congenital	 clubfoot;	 or	 trauma	 or	 arthritis	 of	 the	 ankle	 joints.	 The
limitation	of	movement	in	the	shoulder	that	often	complicates	hemiplegia	must
be	differentiated	from	shoulder	joint	or	rotator	cuff	disease.	Flexion	contracture
of	the	wrist	joint	associated	with	a	long-standing	wrist	drop	due	to	a	radial	nerve
palsy,	and	the	claw	hand	due	to	ulnar	neuropathy,	must	be	differentiated	from	the
deformities	 seen	 in	 such	 conditions	 as	 arthritis,	 Volkmann’s	 contracture,	 and
Dupuytren’s	contracture.

The	 motor	 examination	 may	 have	 to	 be	 modified,	 often	 with	 only	 a	 rough
estimation	 of	 function,	 in	 various	 disease	 states,	 in	 confused	 or	 stuporous
patients,	and	in	infants	and	young	children.	Detection	of	weakness	in	the	patient

with	 altered	 consciousness	 or	 coma	 requires	 special	 techniques.	 In	 coma,
assessment	of	motor	function	depends	on	spontaneous	movements,	the	position
of	an	extremity,	or	withdrawal	of	an	extremity	in	response	to	painful	stimulation,
noting	 particularly	 any	 asymmetry	 of	 spontaneous	 or	 reflex	 movements	 on	 the
two	sides.	The	only	manifestations	of	hemiplegia	in	the	comatose	patient	may	be
the	absence	of	contraction	of	the	facial	muscles	on	one	side	following	pressure
on	 the	 supraorbital	 ridge,	 the	 flail	 dropping	 of	 the	 wrist	 and	 forearm	 when
released	while	the	flexed	elbow	is	resting	on	the	bed,	and	extension	and	external
rotation	of	the	thigh	and	leg	when	released	after	having	been	placed	in	flexion
with	 the	 heel	 resting	 on	 the	 bed.	 These	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	51.	 In	 infants
and	young	children,	the	motor	examination	may	be	largely	limited	to	observing
spontaneous	 activity	 and	 noting	 the	 general	 posture	 and	 the	 positions	 of	 the
extremities	when	the	patient	is	prone,	supine,	seated,	and	upright.	Resistance	to
passive	 movement,	 reflex	 motor	 responses,	 and	 palpation	 may	 provide	 indirect
evidence	of	muscle	strength.

Strength	may	be	assessed	in	absolute	terms	(e.g.,	the	examiner	comparing	the
patient’s	power	to	a	belief	of	what	normal	should	be),	or	it	may	be	assessed	in
comparison	with	the	patient’s	other	muscles.	The	comparison	is	most	often	to	a
homologous	muscle	on	the	other	side,	as	in	comparing	the	two	biceps	muscles.
But	proximal	strength	should	be	commensurate	with	distal	strength	in	the	same
patient.	A	patient	with	polymyositis	may	have	weakness	of	the	deltoids	on	both
sides,	so	one	deltoid	cannot	be	judged	against	the	other.	But	the	deltoids	may	be
obviously	 weaker	 than	 the	 wrist	 extensors,	 so	 there	 is	 a	 proximal	 to	 distal
gradient	 of	 increasing	 strength	 that	 is	 clearly	 abnormal.	 The	 muscles	 on	 the
dominant	side	are	usually	slightly	stronger.

STRENGTH	SCALES

Quantitative	 measurements	 and	 permanent	 records	 help	 in	 diagnosis	 and	 in
evaluating	 disease	 progression	 or	 recovery.	 In	 manual	 muscle	 testing,	 the
strength	 of	 individual	 muscles	 is	 tested	 and	 graded	 quantitatively	 using	 some
scale.	 Strength	 is	 most	 commonly	 graded	 using	 the	 five-level	 MRC	 (Medical
Research	 Council)	 scale,	 which	 was	 developed	 in	 Britain	 in	 World	 War	 II	 to
evaluate	patients	with	peripheral	nerve	injuries	(Table	27.1).	The	MRC	scale	has
been	widely	applied	to	the	evaluation	of	strength	in	general.	However,	the	scale
is	heavily	weighted	toward	the	evaluation	of	very	weak	muscles	(Video	27.1).

In	a	severe	peripheral	nerve	injury,	improvement	from	grade	0	(no	contraction)
to	 grade	 1	 (a	 flicker)	 is	 highly	 significant,	 as	 it	 signals	 the	 beginning	 of
reinnervation.	A	patient	with	a	nerve	injury	who	eventually	recovers	to	grade	4
has	 had	 an	 excellent	 outcome.	 In	 contrast,	 a	 patient	 with	 polymyositis	 who	 is
diffusely	grade	4	has	severe	disease	and	is	doing	poorly.	So,	the	most	commonly
used	strength	grading	scale	has	significant	limitations	when	dealing	with	many
patients.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	27.1	The	MRC	scale.	(Courtesy	Nandedkar	Productions,	LLC,	EMG	on
DVD	Series:	Volume	XIII.)

The	 levels	 of	 the	 MRC	 scale	 are	 precisely	 defined,	 but	 not	 linear.	 It	 is	 a
common	error	to	believe	the	MRC	grades	are	evenly	spaced	and	that	grade	5	is
normal,	 grade	 4	 is	 minimal	 or	 mild	 weakness,	 grade	 3	 is	 moderate	 weakness,
grade	 2	 is	 severe,	 and	 so	 forth.	 In	 fact,	 anything	 less	 than	 grade	 5	 denotes
significant	weakness.	Grade	4	is	moderate	weakness,	and	anything	less	is	severe
weakness.	 A	 patient	 who	 is	 diffusely	 4/5	 does	 not	 have	 mild	 or	 equivocal
weakness	but	major	and	serious	involvement.	One	must	not	confuse	poor	effort
with	weakness.	A	muscle	is	graded	by	the	maximal	power	demonstrated,	even	if
it	is	only	briefly.

TABLE
27.1

The	Medical	Research	Council	Scale	of	Muscle
Strength

0 No	contraction

1

A	flicker	or	trace	of	contraction

2

3

Active	movement	with	gravity	eliminated

Active	movement	against	gravity

4− Active	movement	against	gravity	and	slight	resistance

4

Active	movement	against	gravity	and	moderate	resistance

4+ Active	movement	against	gravity	and	strong	resistance

5 Normal	power

The	muscle	strength	scale	used	by	physical	therapists	grades	muscles	on	a	6-
point	scale	from	0	(no	motion)	through	trace,	poor,	fair,	and	good	to	normal.	The
scale	used	at	the	Mayo	Clinic	grades	muscle	strength	on	a	5-point	scale	that	is
more	linear.	Normal	is	designated	as	0,	mild	weakness	is	−1,	and	total	paralysis
is	−4.

The	 different	 levels	 of	 the	 MRC	 scale	 are	 so	 precisely	 defined	 that	 there	 is
good	 interexaminer	 consistency	 once	 the	 fine	 points	 of	 proper	 positioning	 and
other	details	are	mastered.	In	clinical	practice,	the	MRC	scale	is	often	expanded
to	include	subgrades	(e.g.,	5−,	4+).	The	MRC	eventually	saw	the	need	to	include
grades	 4−	 and	 4+.	 Mendell	 and	 Florence	 developed	 a	 formal	 modified	 MRC
scale.	 In	 general	 use,	 the	 subgrades	 are	 not	 so	 precisely	 defined,	 and	 there	 is
much	less	inter-	and	even	intraexaminer	consistency.	Approximate	guidelines	are
all	that	is	possible.	Before	attempting	to	describe	these	guidelines,	the	important
issue	of	examiner-patient	mismatch	should	be	recognized.

There	 is	 obviously	 considerable	 individual	 variation	 in	 muscle	 power,
dependent	 in	 part	 upon	 size,	 gender,	 body	 build,	 age,	 and	 activity	 level.	 This
variability	affects	examiners	as	well	as	patients.	Patients	come	large	and	small,
young	and	old,	male	and	female,	and	physically	strong	and	relatively	weak.	So
do	physicians.	A	large,	young,	powerful,	male	physician	examining	a	small,	old,
sick,	female	patient	has	an	unfair	advantage.	He	may	tend	to	think	she	is	weak
when	 she	 is	 in	 fact	 normal	 for	 her	 age,	 sex,	 and	 circumstances.	 Conversely,	 a
small,	 relatively	 weak	 female	 physician	 examining	 a	 large,	 powerful	 man	 may
miss	significant	weakness	because	of	strength	mismatch.

As	 a	 general	 principle,	 reliable	 strength	 testing	 should	 attempt	 to	 break	 a
given	 muscle.	 Muscles	 are	 most	 powerful	 when	 maximally	 shortened.	 Another
consideration	 is	 the	 lever	 effect.	 Attempting	 to	 overpower	 a	 muscle,	 such	 as	 a

deltoid,	using	a	very	short	lever	(examiner’s	hand	at	the	mid-upper	arm)	is	much
less	likely	to	meet	with	success	than	using	a	long	lever	(patient’s	elbow	extended
and	 examiner	 pressing	 down	 on	 the	 wrist).	 A	 small,	 weak	 examiner	 can
overcome	the	deltoid	of	the	most	powerful	man	by	keeping	the	patient’s	elbow
extended	and	using	both	hands	to	pull	down	the	wrist.	Technique	matters.

By	varying	the	length	of	lever	and	the	shortening	of	the	muscle	permitted,	the
examiner	may	give	or	take	mechanical	advantage	as	necessary	to	compensate	for
strength	 mismatch.	 Many	 patients	 of	 different	 ages,	 sizes,	 and	 strength	 levels
must	 be	 examined	 in	 this	 fashion	 in	 order	 to	 develop	 an	 appreciation	 of	 the
expected	strength	of	a	muscle	for	a	given	set	of	circumstances.

So,	 for	 an	 examiner	 of	 average	 size	 and	 strength	 examining	 a	 patient	 of
average	size	and	presumed	normal	strength,	the	following	is	a	useful	guideline
for	 assessing	 power	 in	 the	 major	 muscle	 groups.	 If	 it	 requires	 the	 whole	 hand
and	a	firm	push	to	break	the	muscle,	the	power	is	grade	4+.	If	the	muscle	can	be
broken	using	three	fingers,	it	is	grade	4.	If	it	can	be	broken	using	one	finger,	it	is
grade	4−.	Some	clinicians	use	the	grades	of	3−	and	2−	to	describe	muscles	that
can	move	against	gravity	or	with	gravity	eliminated,	but	not	through	a	full	range,
and	the	grade	of	5−	to	indicate	borderline	or	equivocal	weakness.

Some	muscles	are	“special	cases.”	The	small	hand	muscles	are	best	examined
by	 matching	 them	 against	 the	 examiner’s	 like	 muscle	 (e.g.,	 abductor	 pollicis
brevis	 [APB]	 to	 abductor	 pollicis	 brevis).	 This	 method	 is	 beautifully	 described
and	 illustrated	 in	 Segmental	 Neurology	 by	 John	 K.	 Wolf.	 The	 gastrocnemius
muscles	are	normally	so	powerful	it	is	virtually	useless	to	examine	them	using
hand	 and	 arm	 strength,	 unless	 they	 are	 very	 weak.	 Having	 the	 patient	 walk	 on
tiptoe,	hop,	support	the	entire	body	weight	on	one	tiptoe,	or	do	one-legged	toe
raises	are	usually	better	methods.

TABLE
27.2

Features	of	Upper	Motor	Neuron	versus	Lower	Motor
Neuron	Weakness

Feature

Upper	Motor	Neuron Lower	Motor	Neuron

Weakness

distribution

Corticospinal
distribution;
hemiparesis,
quadriparesis,
paraparesis,

Generalized,	predominantly

proximal,	predominantly	distal
or	focal.	No	preferential
involvement	of	corticospinal
innervated	muscles

monoparesis,
faciobrachial

Central	pattern

None,	stocking	glove	or

peripheral	nerve	or	root
distribution

Increased	unless	very

Normal	or	decreased

acute

Decreased

Normal

Yes

No

Sometimes	impaired

Normal	(except	for	cauda	equina

lesion)

Sensory	loss
distribution

Deep	tendon
reflexes

Superficial
reflexes

Pathologic
reflexes

Sphincter
function

Muscle	tone Increased

Normal	or	decreased

Pain

No

Sometimes

Other	CNS
signs

Possibly

No

CNS,	central	nervous	system.

PATTERNS	OF	WEAKNESS

There	 are	 common	 patterns	 of	 weakness.	 Recognition	 of	 a	 pattern	 may	 help
greatly	 in	 lesion	 localization	 and	 differential	 diagnosis.	 Identification	 of	 the
process	causing	weakness	is	further	aided	by	accompanying	signs,	such	as	reflex
alterations	 and	 sensory	 loss.	 Table	 27.2	 reviews	 the	 features	 of	 upper	 motor
neuron	 versus	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 weakness.	 Table	 27.3	 summarizes	 some
common	patterns	of	weakness	and	their	localization.

Weakness	 may	 be	 focal	 or	 generalized.	 When	 focal,	 it	 may	 follow	 the
distribution	 of	 some	 structure	 in	 the	 peripheral	 nervous	 system,	 such	 as	 a
peripheral	 nerve	 or	 spinal	 root.	 It	 may	 affect	 one	 side	 of	 the	 body	 in	 a	 “hemi”

distribution.	A	hemi	distribution	may	affect	the	arm,	leg,	and	face	equally	on	one
side	of	the	body,	or	one	or	more	areas	may	be	more	involved	than	others.	The
CST	 preferentially	 innervates	 certain	 muscle	 groups,	 and	 these	 are	 often
selectively	 impaired	 (see	 Chapter	 25).	 When	 weakness	 is	 nonfocal,	 it	 may	 be
generalized,	predominantly	proximal,	or	predominantly	distal.

Generalized	Weakness

The	term	generalized	weakness	implies	that	the	weakness	involves	both	sides	of
the	 body,	 more	 or	 less	 symmetrically.	 When	 a	 patient	 has	 truly	 generalized
weakness,	bulbar	motor	functions—such	as	facial	movements,	speech,	chewing,
and	 swallowing—are	 involved	 as	 well.	 Weakness	 of	 both	 arms	 and	 both	 legs
with	 normal	 bulbar	 function	 is	 quadriparesis	 or	 tetraparesis.	 Weakness	 of	 both
legs	is	paraparesis.	When	weakness	affects	all	four	extremities,	the	likely	causes
include	 spinal	 cord	 disease,	 peripheral	 neuropathy,	 a	 neuromuscular	 junction
disorder,	or	a	myopathy.

TABLE
27.3

Common	Patterns	of	Weakness	with	Lesions	at	Different
Locations	in	the	Neuraxis

When	 spinal	 cord	 disease	 is	 the	 culprit	 and	 the	 deficit	 is	 incomplete,	 more
severe	 involvement	 of	 those	 muscles	 preferentially	 innervated	 by	 the	 CST	 can
frequently	 be	 discerned.	 Reflexes	 are	 usually	 increased	 (though	 in	 the	 acute
stages	 they	 may	 be	 decreased	 or	 absent);	 there	 is	 usually	 some	 alteration	 of
sensation,	sometimes	a	discrete	spinal	“level”;	superficial	reflexes	disappear;	and
there	 is	 often	 bowel	 and	 bladder	 dysfunction.	 Generalized	 peripheral	 nerve
disease	 tends	 to	 predominantly	 involve	 distal	 muscles,	 although	 there	 are
exceptions.	 There	 is	 no	 preferential	 involvement	 of	 CST	 innervated	 muscles;
reflexes	are	usually	decreased;	sensory	loss	is	frequently	present;	and	bowel	and
bladder	functions	are	not	disturbed.	With	a	neuromuscular	junction	disorder,	the
weakness	 is	 likely	 to	 be	 worse	 proximally;	 sensation	 is	 spared;	 reflexes	 are
normal;	 and	 there	 is	 usually	 involvement	 of	 bulbar	 muscles,	 especially	 with
ptosis	 and	 ophthalmoplegia.	 When	 the	 problem	 is	 a	 primary	 muscle	 disorder,
weakness	 is	 usually	 more	 severe	 proximally;	 reflexes	 are	 normal;	 sensation	 is
normal;	 and	 with	 only	 a	 few	 exceptions,	 bulbar	 function	 is	 spared	 except	 for
occasional	dysphagia.

Amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis	 (ALS)	 causes	 a	 characteristic	 pattern	 of

weakness.	 The	 weakness	 and	 wasting	 due	 to	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 involvement
are	 accompanied	 by	 weakness	 and	 hyperreflexia	 due	 to	 upper	 motor	 neuron
involvement.

Focal	Weakness

Weakness	 of	 the	 arm	 and	 leg	 on	 one	 side	 of	 the	 body	 is	 hemiparesis.
Monoparesis	is	weakness	limited	to	one	extremity.	Diplegia	is	weakness	of	like
parts	on	the	two	sides	of	the	body;	the	term	spastic	diplegia	refers	to	weakness	of
both	 legs	 that	 occurs	 in	 cerebral	 palsy;	 and	 facial	 diplegia	 is	 weakness	 of	 both
sides	of	the	face.	Spastic	weakness	of	one	arm	and	the	opposite	leg	is	referred	to
as	cruciate	or	crossed	paralysis,	or	hemiplegia	alternans.

Certain	 patterns	 of	 muscle	 weakness	 point	 to	 a	 peripheral	 nerve,	 plexus,	 or
root	 lesion.	 With	 a	 peripheral	 nerve	 lesion,	 all	 muscles	 below	 the	 level	 of	 the
lesion	 are	 at	 risk.	 It	 is	 increasingly	 recognized,	 however,	 that	 not	 all	 muscles
distal	 to	 a	 peripheral	 nerve	 lesion	 are	 necessarily	 equally	 affected.	 When
multiple	muscles	of	an	extremity	are	weak,	localization	depends	on	recognizing
the	 common	 innervating	 structure.	 In	 cervical	 radiculopathy,	 the	 muscles
involved	 are	 innervated	 by	 different	 peripheral	 nerves	 and	 different	 brachial
plexus	components,	but	all	by	the	same	root.	For	instance,	lesions	of	the	middle
trunk	 of	 the	 brachial	 plexus	 are	 exceedingly	 rare,	 so	 weakness	 of	 the	 triceps
(radial	nerve)	and	the	pronator	teres	(PT)	(median	nerve)	usually	means	a	lesion
of	the	C7	root.

A	focal	neuropathy,	such	as	a	radial	nerve	palsy,	or	a	spinal	root	lesion,	such
as	 from	 a	 herniated	 disc,	 causes	 weakness	 limited	 to	 the	 distribution	 of	 the
involved	 nerve	 or	 root.	 A	 complete	 plexopathy,	 such	 as	 a	 traumatic	 brachial
plexopathy,	 may	 cause	 weakness	 of	 the	 entire	 limb.	 Partial	 lesions	 may	 cause
weakness	only	in	the	distribution	of	certain	plexus	components.	With	such	lower
motor	 neuron	 pathology,	 reflexes	 are	 typically	 decreased,	 and	 there	 is	 often
accompanying	sensory	loss.	Localization	of	focal	weakness	due	to	root,	plexus,
and	 peripheral	 nerve	 pathology	 requires	 intimate	 familiarity	 with	 peripheral
neuroanatomy.	Anterior	horn	cell	disease	often	begins	with	focal	weakness	that
may	simulate	mononeuropathy,	but	it	evolves	into	a	more	widespread	pattern	as
the	 disease	 progresses,	 culminating	 in	 generalized	 weakness.	 Except	 for
extraocular	muscle	involvement	in	myasthenia	gravis,	it	is	rare	for	a	myopathy
or	neuromuscular	junction	disorder	to	cause	focal	weakness.

NONORGANIC	(FUNCTIONAL)	WEAKNESS

Nonorganic	weakness	due	to	psychiatric	disorders—such	as	hysteria,	conversion
disorder,	 malingering,	 or	 depression—is	 common.	 The	 first	 step	 in	 evaluating
weakness	is	often	deciding	whether	it	is	organic	or	nonorganic.	This	distinction
is	not	always	easy.	Patients	with	nonorganic	weakness	are	commonly	thought	to
have	neurologic	disease,	but	it	seems	nearly	as	often	patients	with	real	weakness
are	thought	to	be	hysterical	or	malingering.	Organic	and	functional	deficits	may
coexist—the	 problem	 of	 functional	 or	 psychogenic	 overlay.	 Some	 patients
embellish	by	nature;	others	may	exaggerate	a	real	deficit	for	fear	the	physician
may	not	take	them	seriously.	A	patient	may	have	real	weakness	in	one	area	and
functional	weakness	in	another	area.	Some	patients	with	organic	weakness	may
allow	resistance	to	collapse	when	the	examiner	begins	to	defeat	a	muscle	so	that
real	weakness	may	appear	to	be	related	to	poor	effort.	When	a	movement	causes
pain,	resistance	may	be	less	than	full	and	the	effort	may	be	erratic.

Coaching	is	often	helpful.	The	examiner	exhorts	the	patient	not	to	give	up,	to
keep	 pushing	 or	 pulling	 no	 matter	 what.	 Simple	 encouragement	 to	 keep	 trying
even	if	the	patient	is	losing	may	suffice	to	improve	effort.	Some	patients,	in	spite
of	all,	will	simply	not	give	full	effort.	Their	efforts	are	erratic	and	variable.	Some
things	 are	 often	 useful	 in	 distinguishing	 organic	 from	 psychogenic	 weakness.
Patients	 with	 bona	 fide	 organic	 muscle	 weakness	 will	 yield	 smoothly	 as	 the
examiner	 defeats	 the	 weak	 muscle.	 The	 patient	 gives	 uniform	 resistance
throughout	 the	 movement.	 If	 the	 examiner	 decreases	 his	 resistance,	 the	 patient
will	begin	to	win	the	battle.	If	the	examiner	drops	the	resistance	level,	the	patient
with	nonorganic	weakness	will	not	continue	to	push	or	pull.	Instead,	the	patient
will	 also	 stop	 resisting	 so	 that	 no	 matter	 how	 little	 force	 the	 examiner	 applies,
there	 is	 an	 absence	 of	 follow-through	 and	 the	 patient	 never	 overcomes	 the
examiner.	 When	 there	 is	 nonorganic	 weakness,	 resistance	 is	 erratic	 and	 often
collapses	abruptly.	The	muscular	contractions	are	poorly	sustained	and	may	give
way	suddenly,	rather	than	gradually,	as	the	patient	resists	the	force	exerted	by	the
examiner.	 Some	 patients	 will	 give	 up	 entirely	 and	 allow	 the	 muscle	 or	 limb	 to
flop;	others	will	provide	variable	resistance	throughout	the	range	of	motion	with
alternating	moments	of	effort	and	no	effort.	At	the	peaks	of	contraction,	strength
is	normal;	in	the	valleys,	there	is	little	or	no	resistance.	This	pattern	of	variable
strength	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 “collapsing,”	 “ratchety,”	 “give	 way,”	 “breakaway,”	 or
“catch	 and	 give.”	 It	 is	 characteristic	 of	 nonorganic	 weakness.	 With	 nonorganic
weakness,	 there	 may	 be	 an	 increase	 or	 a	 decrease	 in	 strength	 with	 repeated

testing.	Contraction	of	the	apparently	weak	muscle	may	be	felt	when	the	patient
is	asked	to	carry	out	movements	with	synergistic	muscles,	or	the	antagonists	may
be	 felt	 to	 contract	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 asked	 to	 contract	 the	 agonist	 (e.g.,	 the
triceps	 muscle	 twitches	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 told	 to	 flex	 the	 elbow).	 Functional
testing	 may	 fail	 to	 confirm	 weakness	 suspected	 during	 strength	 testing.	 For
example,	 there	 may	 be	 apparent	 foot	 dorsiflexion	 weakness,	 yet	 the	 patient	 is
able	to	stand	on	the	heel	without	difficulty.

The	patient	with	nonorganic	weakness	may	make	little	effort	to	contract	the
muscles	 necessary	 to	 execute	 a	 particular	 movement.	 He	 may	 be	 calm	 and
indifferent	while	demonstrating	the	lack	of	strength,	showing	little	sign	of	alarm
at	 the	 presence	 of	 complete	 paralysis,	 and	 smile	 cheerfully	 during	 the
examination.	 If	 the	 examiner	 raises	 and	 drops	 an	 extremity,	 a	 limb	 with
psychogenic	 paralysis	 may	 drop	 slowly	 to	 avoid	 injury,	 whereas	 an	 extremity
with	real	weakness	would	drop	rapidly,	especially	if	the	paralysis	is	flaccid.	In
psychogenic	paralysis	of	the	arm,	the	latissimus	dorsi	may	appear	paretic	when
tested	by	having	the	patient	adduct	the	arm	but	contract	normally	on	coughing.
In	simulated	hemiplegia,	the	patient	may	be	unable	to	adduct	either	the	affected
arm	or	leg	against	resistance,	yet	if	asked	to	keep	both	arms	against	the	body	or
both	legs	close	together,	the	adductors	contract	strongly	on	both	sides	because	it
is	 difficult	 to	 adduct	 one	 extremity	 without	 adducting	 its	 apparently	 paralyzed
fellow.	 In	 testing	 paralysis	 of	 the	 finger	 muscles,	 the	 patient	 may	 be	 asked	 to
pronate	the	forearms	and	interlock	the	fingers	so	that	the	left	fingers	are	on	the
right	 and	 vice	 versa	 (Figure	 36.6);	 the	 examiner	 then	 points	 to	 the	 individual
fingers	 and	 tells	 the	 patient	 to	 move	 them.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 one	 to	 determine
immediately	whether	the	indicated	finger	is	on	the	right	side	or	on	the	left;	if	the
patient	 attempts	 to	 respond	 promptly,	 he	 or	 she	 makes	 many	 mistakes.	 Similar
tests	may	be	carried	out	by	asking	the	patient	to	perform	individual	movements
with	the	hands	behind	the	back.

The	 patient	 with	 functional	 weakness	 cannot	 control	 associated	 movements,
which	forms	the	basis	of	the	Hoover	and	abductor	signs.	The	Hoover	(automatic
walking)	sign	is	useful	for	evaluating	suspected	nonorganic	leg	weakness.	When
a	 normal	 supine	 patient	 flexes	 the	 hip	 to	 lift	 one	 leg,	 there	 is	 an	 involuntary
downward	 movement	 of	 the	 other	 leg.	 The	 extension	 countermovement	 of	 the
opposite	 leg	 is	 a	 normal	 associated	 movement	 (see	 Chapter	42).	 An	 extension
movement	 of	 one	 leg	 normally	 accompanies	 flexion	 of	 the	 other	 leg,	 as	 in
walking.	 In	 organic	 leg	 weakness,	 the	 downward	 pressure	 of	 the	 contralateral
heel	 occurs	 when	 the	 patient	 tries	 to	 raise	 the	 weak	 leg,	 and	 the	 examiner	 can

feel	 the	 extension	 pressure	 by	 placing	 a	 hand	 beneath	 the	 heel	 that	 remains	 on
the	 bed.	 In	 nonorganic	 leg	 weakness,	 there	 is	 no	 downward	 pressure	 of	 the
contralateral	 heel	 as	 the	 patient	 tries	 to	 raise	 the	 weak	 leg,	 but	 an	 extension
movement	of	the	“paralyzed”	leg	may	be	felt	as	the	good	leg	is	raised.	Hoover’s
sign	 is	 the	 absence	 of	 the	 expected	 extension	 movement	 of	 the	 good	 leg	 on
attempting	to	raise	the	bad	leg	and	normal	involuntary	extension	of	the	bad	leg
on	raising	the	good	leg.

In	the	quest	for	ways	to	distinguish	real	from	hysterical	weakness	at	the	turn
of	 the	 20th	 century,	 Hoover	 thought	 this	 maneuver	 was	 more	 useful	 than	 the
Babinski	 sign	 (Chapter	 40).	 The	 abductor	 sign	 is	 similar	 and	 seeks	 to	 elicit
synergistic	movement	of	the	nonparetic	leg	when	the	patient	is	asked	to	abduct
the	 paretic	 leg.	 In	 nonorganic	 paresis,	 the	 paretic	 leg	 demonstrates	 synergistic
abduction	when	the	sound	leg	is	tested,	and	the	sound	leg	does	not	exert	normal
abduction	 power	 and	 can	 be	 moved	 into	 a	 hyperadducted	 position	 when	 the
paretic	 limb	 is	 tested.	 It	 may	 be	 useful	 when	 relatively	 preserved	 hip	 extensor
strength	 limits	 the	 utility	 of	 Hoover’s	 test.	 In	 the	 Spinal	 Injuries	 Center	 (SIC)
test,	 patients	 unable	 to	 raise	 their	 knees	 spontaneously	 have	 a	 positive	 test,
indicating	 nonorganic	 weakness,	 when	 their	 knees	 remain	 up	 after	 being	 lifted
by	the	examiner.	See	LaFrance	for	video	of	the	Hoover,	abduction,	and	SIC	tests.
Dynamometers	have	been	used	in	various	ways	in	an	attempt	to	prove	weakness
is	 nonorganic,	 and	 investigators	 have	 developed	 computerized,	 quantitative
methods	for	detecting	functional	weakness	based	on	these	principles.

Patients	with	nonorganic	hemiparesis	are	more	likely	to	have	weakness	of	the
sternomastoid,	usually	ipsilateral,	but	this	muscle	is	rarely	involved	in	bona	fide
hemiparesis	 because	 of	 its	 bilateral	 innervation	 (Chapter	 19).	 With	 the	 arm-
dropping	test,	transient	voluntary	contraction	in	functional	weakness	may	cause
a	brief	hang-up	before	the	arm	collapses.	On	the	Babinski	trunk-thigh	test,	a	leg
with	nonorganic	weakness	fails	to	flex	as	expected.	Looking	for	the	presence	or
absence	 of	 other	 associated	 movements	 may	 sometimes	 help	
the
differentiation	 between	 organic	 and	 psychogenic	 weakness	 (Chapter	 42).	 The
patient	 with	 functional	 weakness	 may	 have	 a	 dramatic	 display	 of	 effort,
grimacing	and	grunting	when	trying	to	contract	the	weak	muscle.	A	movement
such	 as	 a	 squat	 may	 be	 executed	 in	 a	 slow	 and	 laborious	 manner	 that	 actually
requires	greater	than	normal	strength.	The	onset	of	functional	weakness	is	often
sudden.

in	

In	psychogenic	weakness,	muscle	tone	may	be	normal,	decreased,	or	variable,
but	 it	 is	 often	 increased	 with	 pseudorigidity	 or	 pseudospasticity.	 Rigidity,	 if

present,	resembles	voluntary	resistance.	The	part	may	be	held	firmly	in	a	bizarre
position.	Abnormalities	in	tone	usually	vary	from	time	to	time,	especially	under
the	influence	of	suggestion.

Normal	tone,	normal	deep	tendon	reflexes	(DTRs),	normal	facial	movements
in	 the	 face	 of	 hemiparesis,	 an	 absence	 of	 trophic	 changes,	 normal	 sphincter
function	 despite	 paraparesis	 or	 quadriparesis,	 aphonia,	 and	 a	 monoplegic
dragging	gait	all	may	suggest	that	weakness	is	nonorganic.	It	is	very	unusual	for
functional	weakness	to	present	in	a	peripheral	nerve,	plexus,	or	root	distribution
or	 to	 display	 a	 proximal/distal	 gradient.	 Evidence	 does	 not	 support	 the	 notion
that	functional	weakness	is	more	common	on	the	left.

DSM-V	 emphasizes	 the	 importance	 of	 “positive	 signs”	 of	 nonorganicity	 to
support	a	diagnosis	of	conversion	disorder.	Many	such	positive	signs	have	been
reported,	but	only	a	minority	have	been	validated.	The	positive	signs	that	have
been	 carefully	 studied	 generally	 have	 low	 sensitivity	 but	 high	 specificity.	 In	 a
carefully	 done	 pilot	 study,	 Daum	 et	 al.	 concluded	 that	 four	 positive	 signs	 were
highly	reliable	in	the	diagnosis	of	functional	weakness:	Hoover’s	sign,	giveaway
weakness,	cocontraction,	and	drift	without	pronation.

EXAMINATION	OF	MOTOR	STRENGTH	AND
POWER

Evaluation	of	the	strength	of	various	muscle	groups	and	movements	can	become
complex,	depending	upon	the	degree	of	detail	necessary.	Isolated	contraction	of
a	 single	 muscle	 is	 rarely	 possible	 because	 muscles	 with	 similar	 functions
participate	 in	 almost	 every	 movement.	 Normal	 contraction	 of	 synergists	 and
fixating	 muscles	 and	 relaxation	 of	 antagonists	 are	 also	 necessary.	 Still,	 the
predominant	 action	 of	 a	 single	 muscle	 can	 usually	 be	 determined	 and	 tested.
Some	 functions	 are	 carried	 out	 by	 many	 muscles	 acting	 synergistically	 (e.g.,
flexion	and	extension	of	the	trunk),	and	the	muscles	must	be	tested	as	a	group	by
assessing	the	movement	rather	than	individual	muscles.	It	is	helpful	to	be	fluent
with	the	primary	actions	of	the	major	muscles	and	their	peripheral	nerve,	plexus,
and	root	innervations.	The	strength	of	each	major	pertinent	muscle	group	should
be	determined	individually	and	its	strength	grade	recorded.

Reliable	strength	testing	requires	proper	patient	positioning	and	avoidance	of
unwanted	movements.	Testing	may	be	done	in	various	positions,	depending	on
the	 muscle	 to	 be	 tested	 and	 its	 power.	 Testing	 in	 the	 seated	 position	 suffices

under	most	circumstances.	It	is	important	to	fix	the	proximal	portion	of	a	limb
when	 the	 movements	 of	 the	 distal	 portion	 are	 being	 tested.	 For	 instance,	 when
testing	forearm	pronation	strength,	the	patient	must	not	be	allowed	to	internally
rotate	the	shoulder	to	compensate	for	lack	of	pronation	power.	When	evaluating
very	weak	muscles,	gravity	must	be	eliminated	to	detect	residual	power.	A	very
weak	 biceps	 muscle	 (MRC	 grade	 2/5),	 even	 when	 it	 cannot	 succeed	 against
gravity,	may	be	able	to	flex	the	elbow	if	the	arm	is	raised	to	shoulder	height	so
that	the	forearm	can	be	moved	horizontally.	The	wrist	and	finger	drop	of	radial
nerve	 palsy	 creates	 such	 a	 mechanical	 disadvantage	 for	 contraction	 that	 the
patient	 may	 appear	 to	 have	 weakness	 of	 grip	 and	 finger	 abduction,	 but	 these
functions	are	intact	when	the	wrist	and	fingers	are	passively	extended.

EXAMINATION	OF	SPECIFIC	MOVEMENTS	AND
MUSCLES

The	motor	examination	of	the	muscles	supplied	by	those	cranial	nerves	that	have
motor	 functions	 is	 discussed	 separately.	 For	 the	 trunk	 and	 extremities,	 the
strength	and	power	of	the	individual	muscles	and	of	movements	are	assessed	as
appropriate	for	the	clinical	circumstances.	Many	reference	sources	are	available
to	 assist	 in	 learning	 muscle	 examination	 techniques.	 There	 is	 some	 difference
regarding	the	exact	innervation	of	individual	muscles	among	different	reference
sources,	 and	 occasionally,	 there	 is	 variable	 or	 anomalous	 innervation.	 Tables
27.4	to	27.7	give	the	most	generally	accepted	spinal	cord	segment	and	peripheral
nerve	innervation	of	the	more	important	muscles.	Tables	27.8	and	27.9	give	the
innervation	by	root.

The	action	of	a	muscle	about	a	joint	may	vary	depending	on	the	part	of	the
muscle	activated	and	the	position	of	the	joint.	Parts	of	some	large	muscles,	such
as	the	gluteus	maximus,	may	have	secondary	actions	that	are	different	from	other
parts.	 For	 instance,	 the	 upper	 part	 of	 the	 gluteus	 maximus	 abducts	 the	 hip,
whereas	 the	 lower	 part	 adducts	 it.	 Still,	 each	 muscle	 has	 a	 primary	 action	 in
which	all	parts	participate,	and	in	this	instance,	it	is	hip	extension.	The	angle	of
the	joint	about	which	a	muscle	acts	may	influence	its	leverage	and	angle	of	pull.
In	extreme	cases,	a	muscle	may	move	to	the	opposite	side	of	the	axis	of	rotation
and	have	an	action	in	one	joint	position	that	is	different	from	its	action	in	another
joint	 position	 (inversion	 of	 action).	 For	 instance,	 the	 hip	 adductors	 act
secondarily	as	hip	flexors	when	the	hip	is	extended	but	as	extensors	when	the	hip

is	flexed;	the	piriformis	externally	rotates	the	extended	hip	but	internally	rotates
the	flexed	hip.

TABLE
27.4

Innervation	of	Muscles	Responsible	for	Movements	of
the	Head	and	Neck

Parentheses	signify	minor	contribution

Muscle

Segmental
Innervation

Peripheral	Nerve

Sternocleidomastoid

Cranial	XI;	C(1)2-C3

Spinal	accessory

nerve

Trapezius

Cranial	XI;	C(2)3-C4

Spinal	accessory

nerve

Scalenus	anterior

Scalenus	medius

C4-C7

C4-C8

Scalenus	posterior

C6-C8

Longus	capitis

Longus	colli

C1-C4

C2-C6

Rectus	capitis	anterior C1-C2

Suboccipital	nerve

Rectus	capitis	lateralis C1

Rectus	capitis	posterior C1

Obliquus	capitis	inferior C1

Obliquus	capitis

C1

superior

Splenius	capitis

C2-C4	(C1-C6)

Splenius	cervicis

C2-C4	(C1-C6)

Suboccipital	nerve

Suboccipital	nerve

Suboccipital	nerve

Suboccipital	nerve

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Semispinalis	capitis

C1-C4

Semispinalis	cervicis

C3-C6

Spinalis	cervicis

Sacrospinalis

C5-C8

C1-C8

Iliocostalis	cervicis

C1-C8

Longissimus	capitis

C1-C8

Longissimus	cervicis

C1-C8

Intertransversarii

Rotatores

Multifidi

C1-C8

C1-C8

C1-C8

Examination	of	Movements	and	Muscles	of	the
Neck

The	 principal	 neck	 movements	 are	 flexion,	 extension	 (retraction),	 rotation
(turning),	and	lateral	bending	(tilting,	abduction).	Many	different	muscle	groups
contribute	 to	 the	 various	 neck	 movements.	 Except	 for	 the	 sternocleidomastoid
(SCM)	 and	 trapezius,	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 examine	 them	 individually,	 and	 the
assessment	 is	 made	 of	 movement	 (e.g.,	 neck	 flexion)	 rather	 than	 particular
muscles.	 The	 spinal	 accessory	 nerve,	 along	 with	 the	 second,	 third,	 and	 fourth
cervical	segments,	supplies	the	SCM	and	trapezius	muscles.	The	SCM	is	a	flexor
and	rotator	of	the	head	and	neck;	the	trapezius	retracts	the	neck	and	draws	it	to
one	 side.	 Other	 muscles	 that	 contribute	 to	 neck	 flexion	 include	 the	 platysma,
suprahyoid,	infrahyoid,	scalenes,	and	prevertebral	group	of	muscles	(longus	colli
and	capitis,	rectus	capitis).

Many	 muscles	 contribute	 to	 neck	 extension,	 including	 the	 trapezius	 and	 the
paravertebral	 muscles.	 Many	 of	 these	 muscles	 when	 contracting	 unilaterally
rotate	the	spine.	The	paravertebral	musculature	is	a	massive,	complex	amalgam
of	 individual	 muscle	 groups	 that	 primarily	 serve	 to	 extend	 and	 rotate	 the	 neck

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
for	

transversospinalis,	 and	

the	 vertebral	 segment	

the	 splenii,	 erector	 spinae,	

and	 trunk.	 Four	 principal	 muscle	 subgroups	 combine	 to	 form	 the	 paravertebral
muscles:	
interspinal-
intertransverse.	 All	 of	 these	 muscles	 lie	 deep	 and	 medial	 in	 the	 groove	 formed
between	the	transverse	and	spinous	processes	of	the	vertebral	bodies.	They	are
further	 named	
(e.g.,
transversospinalis	cervicis).	The	splenius	capitis	is	a	powerful	ipsilateral	rotator
of	 the	 head;	 the	 splenii	 contracting	 bilaterally	 extend	 the	 neck.	 Muscles
commonly	 injected	 with	 botulinum	 toxin	 to	 treat	 cervical	 dystonia	 include	 the
SCM,	trapezius,	splenius	capitis,	scalenes,	longissimus,	and	levator	scapula.	The
paraspinal	 muscle	 complex	 generally	 receives	 its	 innervation	 from	 multiple
levels.	These	muscles	arise	from	a	common	embryologic	precursor	muscle	mass,
and	their	innervation	shows	extensive	longitudinal	overlap	(Table	27.4).

in	 which	

they	

lie	

Neck	flexors	are	tested	by	having	the	patient	try	to	place	the	chin	on	the	chest
as	the	examiner	applies	extension	force	to	the	forehead	(Figure	27.1).	Extensors
are	tested	by	having	the	patient	extend	against	the	examiner’s	resistance	applied
to	the	occiput	(Figure	27.2).	Neck	rotation	is	accomplished	by	the	contralateral
SCM	and	ipsilateral	splenius	capitis	and	trapezius;	examination	of	the	SCM	and
trapezius	muscles	is	discussed	in	Chapter	19.	Neck	flexor	strength	may	be	tested
with	the	patient	sitting	or	supine	and	neck	extension	sitting	or	prone.	The	neck
flexion	test	consists	of	measuring	the	time	the	supine	patient	can	keep	the	head
raised	 with	 the	 chin	 on	 the	 chest;	 most	 patients	 can	 keep	 their	 head	 in	 this
position	for	at	least	1	minute.	This	test	is	sometimes	useful	in	the	evaluation	of
myopathies	 and	 neuromuscular	 junction	 disorders,	 the	 principal	 conditions	 that
cause	 neck	 flexor	 or	 extensor	 weakness.	 Abnormalities	 of	 neck	 position	 may
occur	 in	 conditions	 in	 which	 there	 is	 no	 muscle	 weakness,	 and	 these	 can
sometimes	 be	 confused	 with	 the	 effects	 of	 a	 weak	 muscle.	 The	 patient	 with
meningismus	 may	 have	 the	 head	 retracted,	 whereas	 the	 patient	 with	 Parkinson
disease	 may	 have	 it	 flexed.	 Cervical	 dystonia	 can	 cause	 an	 almost	 infinite
number	of	abnormal	head	positions,	including	torticollis	(head	turned	or	tilted),
anterocollis	 (head	 flexed),	 and	 retrocollis	 (head	 extended).	 Examination	 of	 the
neck	 muscles	 must	 be	 done	 carefully	 in	 any	 patient	 at	 risk	 for	 cervical	 spine
disease.

TABLE
27.5

Innervation	of	Muscles	Responsible	for	Movements	of
the	Shoulder	Girdle	and	Upper	Extremity

TABLE
27.6

Innervation	of	Muscles	Responsible	for	Movements	of
the	Thorax	and	Abdomen

Parentheses	signify	minor	contribution

Muscle

Segmental
Innervation

Peripheral	Nerve

Diaphragm

C3-C5

Phrenic	nerve

Intercostal	muscles

T1-T12

Intercostal	nerves

(internal	and	external)

Levatores	costarum

C8-T11

Intercostal	nerves

Transversus	thoracis

T2-T7

Intercostal	nerves

Serratus	posterior

T1-T4

Intercostal	nerves

superior

Serratus	posterior

T9-T12

Intercostal	nerves

inferior

Rectus	abdominis

T5-T12

Intercostal	nerves

Pyramidalis

T11-T12

Intercostal	nerves

Transversus	abdominis

T7-L1

Intercostal,	ilioinguinal,	and
iliohypogastric	nerves

Obliquus	internus

T7-L1

abdominis

Intercostal,	ilioinguinal,	and
iliohypogastric	nerves

Obliquus	externus

T7-L1

abdominis

Intercostal,	ilioinguinal,	and
iliohypogastric	nerves

Examination	of	Movements	and	Muscles	of	the
Upper	Extremities

The	responsible	muscles	and	their	innervation	are	given	in	Table	27.5.

The	Shoulder

Movements	of	the	shoulder	take	place	at	the	sternoclavicular,	acromioclavicular,
and	glenohumeral	joints.	Because	the	scapula	is	firmly	connected	to	the	clavicle
at	 the	 acromioclavicular	 joint,	 the	 two	 bones	 tend	 to	 move	 as	 a	 unit	 with	 the
motion	 taking	 place	 primarily	 at	 the	 sternoclavicular	 joint.	 Movements	 of	 the
scapula	 are	 elevation,	 depression,	 retraction	 (movement	 away	 from	 the	 chest
wall),	 protraction	 (movement	 toward	 the	 chest	 wall),	 and	 rotation.	 The	 ventral
surface	of	the	scapula	is	a	concavity	known	as	the	subscapular	fossa	that	is	filled
mostly	 with	 the	 subscapularis	 muscle.	 The	 serratus	 anterior	 lies	 between	 the
subscapularis	and	the	chest	wall	and	inserts	into	a	thin	rim	of	the	scapula	along
the	 vertebral	 border	 and	 slightly	 expanded	 triangular	 areas	 at	 the	 superior	 and
inferior	 angles	 (Figure	 27.3).	 The	 serratus	 runs	 obliquely	 from	 its	 origination
from	 the	 upper	 eight	 ribs	 along	 the	 lateral	 chest	 wall	 to	 its	 attachment	 to	 the
scapula.	 The	 trapezius	 is	 a	 diamond-shaped	 muscle	 that	 attaches	 widely	 to	 the
shoulder	 girdle.	 The	 superior	 fibers	 insert	 along	 the	 posterior	 border	 of	 the
clavicle	and	scapular	spine,	the	middle	and	lower	fibers	along	the	scapular	spine.
The	 upper	 and	 middle	 fibers	 insert	 laterally	 along	 the	 scapular	 spine	 and	 the
lower	 fibers	 more	 medially.	 The	 rhomboids	 (major	 and	 minor)	 arise	 from	 the
spinous	 process	 of	 the	 upper	 thoracic	 vertebrae	 and	 insert	 along	 the	 medial
border	 of	 the	 scapula.	 The	 levator	 scapulae	 originates	 from	 the	 upper	 cervical
vertebra	 and	 drops	 diagonally	 to	 insert	 along	 the	 upper	 medial	 border	 of	 the
scapula.

The	upper	fibers	of	the	trapezius,	assisted	by	the	levator	scapulae,	elevate	the
scapula	and	the	point	of	the	shoulder	and	rotate	the	scapula	upward.	The	middle
fibers	 rotate	 the	 scapula	 upward	 and	 assist	 the	 rhomboids	 in	 retraction.	 The
lower	fibers	rotate	and	depress	the	scapula	and	draw	it	toward	the	midline.	The
rhomboids	 act	 primarily	 to	 retract	 the	 scapula,	 bracing	 the	 shoulder	 backward.
The	levator	scapulae	acts	with	the	trapezius	to	elevate	the	scapula.	The	serratus
anterior,	 assisted	 by	 the	 pectoralis	 minor,	 protracts	 the	 scapula,	 pulling	 it
anteriorly.	It	is	critical	in	all	functions	that	involve	reaching	or	pushing	forward.
The	 expanded	 insertion	 at	 the	 inferior	 angle	 helps	 to	 pull	 the	 inferior	 scapular
angle	forward	around	the	chest	wall.	It	also,	along	with	the	trapezius,	rotates	the
scapula	and	raises	the	point	of	the	shoulder	to	abduct	the	arm	above	horizontal.
It	helps	to	fix	the	scapula	while	other	muscles	abduct	or	flex	the	arm.

Elevation	 of	 the	 scapula,	 as	 in	 shrugging	 the	 shoulder,	 is	 carried	 out	 by	 the
upper	trapezius	and	levator	scapulae	muscles,	assisted	by	the	SCM.	The	levator
scapulae	 is	 innervated	 by	 direct	 branches	 from	 C3	 and	 C4	 with	 a	 contribution
from	 C5	 via	 the	 dorsal	 scapular	 nerve.	 The	 levator	 scapulae	 draws	 the	 scapula

upward	 and	 rotates	 it	 so	 that	 the	 inferior	 angle	 approaches	 the	 spinal	 column.
Depression	 of	 the	 scapula	 is	 carried	 out	 primarily	 by	 the	 lower	 trapezius,
pectoralis	minor,	and	subclavius	muscles.

TABLE
27.7

Innervation	of	Muscles	Responsible	for	Movements	of
the	Lower	Extremities

Retraction	 of	 the	 scapula	 is	 carried	 out	 primarily	 by	 the	 rhomboids	 and	 the
middle	trapezius.	The	rhomboids	also	draw	the	scapulae	together,	as	in	standing
at	attention.	The	rhomboids	are	innervated	by	a	twig	directly	from	the	C5	nerve

root,	and	not	via	the	brachial	plexus.	Examination	of	the	rhomboids	is	important
in	the	differentiation	of	C5	radiculopathy	from	upper	trunk	brachial	plexopathy.
In	protraction	of	the	scapula,	the	scapula	moves	forward	as	in	throwing	a	punch.
This	 movement	 is	 carried	 out	 primarily	 by	 the	 serratus	 anterior	 (long	 thoracic
nerve,	C5-C7).	The	serratus	keeps	the	vertebral	border	of	the	scapula	applied	to
the	thorax	and	pulls	the	scapula	forward	and	laterally.	Rotation	of	the	scapula	is
accomplished	 by	 the	 trapezius,	 serratus	 anterior,	 pectorals,	 rhomboids,	 and
latissimus	 dorsi.	 Normal	 scapular	 rotation	 is	 essential	 to	 efficient	 shoulder
abduction.

TABLE
27.8

Major	Upper-Extremity	Muscles	Innervated	by
Different	Roots

Parentheses	signify	minor	contribution

Root Muscles	Supplied

C4

C5

Levator	scapulae,	rhomboids

Levator	scapulae,	rhomboids,	supraspinatus,	infraspinatus,	teres

major	and	minor,	deltoid,	biceps,	brachialis,	BR,	serratus
anterior,	pectoralis

C6

Supraspinatus,	infraspinatus,	teres	major	and	minor,	deltoid,

biceps,	brachialis,	BR,	supinator,	serratus	anterior,	pectoralis,
FCR,	pronator	teres,	latissimus	dorsi,	ECRL	(triceps)

C7

C8

Serratus	anterior,	pectoralis,	teres	major,	latissimus	dorsi,	triceps,
anconeus,	pronator	teres,	FCR,	ECRL,	EDC,	ECU,	supinator
(EIP,	FCU,	FDS,	FPL,	extensor	pollicis	longus/brevis)

Latissimus	dorsi,	pectoralis,	triceps,	anconeus,	EDC,	ECU,	EIP,
extensor	pollicis	longus/brevis,	FCU,	FDS,	FDP,	FPL,	PQ,
APB,	APL,	OP,	AP,	ADM,	lumbricals,	interossei

T1

T1	Pectoralis,	FCU,	FDS,	FDP,	FPL,	APB,	OP,	AP,	ADM,

lumbricals,	interossei

ADM,	abductor	digiti	minimi;	AP,	adductor	pollicis;	APB,	abductor	pollicis	brevis;	APL,	abductor
pollicis	longus;	BR,	brachioradialis;	ECRL,	extensor	carpi	radialis	longus;	ECU,	extensor	carpi

ulnaris;	EDC,	extensor	digitorum	communis;	EIP,	extensor	indicis	proprius;	FCR,	flexor	carpi
radialis;	FCU,	flexor	carpi	ulnaris;	FDP,	flexor	digitorum	profundus;	FDS,	flexor	digitorum
superficialis;	FPL,	flexor	pollicis	longus;	OP,	opponens	pollicis;	PQ,	pronator	quadratus.

Scapulohumeral	Rhythm

There	 are	 two	 motions	 involved	 in	 abducting	 the	 arm:	 scapulothoracic	 and
glenohumeral.	 The	 scapulothoracic	 motion	 is	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 scapula	 in
relation	 to	 the	 chest	 wall;	 the	 glenohumeral	 is	 the	 movement	 at	 the	 shoulder
joint.	 These	 two	 motions	 normally	 occur	 in	 harmony	 to	 effect	 smooth	 arm
movements.	 When	 the	 scapula	 does	 not	 move	 normally,	 the	 arm	 cannot	 raise
normally.	 As	 abduction	 begins,	 the	 scapular	 muscles—especially	 serratus
anterior—fix	the	scapula,	so	the	pull	of	the	deltoid	is	on	the	humerus	and	not	the
scapula.	 As	 the	 deltoid	 abducts	 the	 shoulder	 toward	 90	 degrees,	 the	 serratus
anterior	and	trapezius	rotate	the	scapula.	The	serratus	pulls	forward	and	laterally
on	the	inferior	angle,	holding	the	scapula	close	to	the	chest	wall,	while	the	upper
fibers	 of	 the	 trapezius	 pull	 up	 on	 the	 lateral	 end	 of	 the	 clavicle	 and	 the	 lower
fibers	 pull	 down	 on	 the	 medial	 part	 of	 the	 scapular	 spine	 (Figure	 27.4).	 The
smooth	interaction	of	scapula	and	shoulder	joint	movements	is	referred	to	as	the
scapulohumeral	 rhythm.	 For	 every	 2	 degrees	 of	 motion	 at	 the	 glenohumeral
joint,	there	is	1	degree	of	scapular	rotation.	After	the	deltoid	abducts	the	arm	to
the	 horizontal,	 further	 action	 by	 the	 upper	 trapezius	 elevates	 and	 rotates	 the
scapula	further	to	allow	the	arm	to	be	raised	overhead.

TABLE
27.9

Major	Lower-Extremity	Muscles	Innervated	by
Different	Roots

Parentheses	signify	minor	contribution

Root Muscles	Supplied

L2

L3

L4

Iliopsoas,	sartorius,	quadriceps	(adductors,	gracilis)

Iliopsoas,	sartorius,	adductors,	gracilis,	quadriceps

Gracilis,	gluteus	medius,	TFL,	quadriceps,	adductor	magnus,	TA

(iliopsoas,	adductor	longus)

L5

Gluteus	maximus,	internal	hamstring,	biceps	femoris,	gluteus

medius,	TFL,	peronei,	TA,	EHL,	EDL,	EDB,	TP,	FDL,	FHL
(adductor	magnus)

S1

Internal	hamstring,	biceps	femoris,	gluteus	maximus,

gastrocnemius,	soleus,	FDL,	FHL,	ADMP,	AH,	EDB,	lumbricals
(gluteus	medius,	TFL,	peronei,	EDL,	TP)

S2

Gluteus	maximus,	gastrocnemius,	soleus,	AH,	ADMP,	interossei,
lumbricals	(internal	hamstring,	short	head	of	biceps	femoris)

S3

Interossei,	lumbricals,	ADMP

ADMP,	abductor	digiti	minimi	pedis;	AH,	abductor	hallucis;	EDB,	extensor	digitorum	brevis;	EDL,
extensor	digitorum	longus;	EHL,	extensor	hallucis	longus;	FDL,	flexor	digitorum	longus;	FHL,
flexor	hallucis	longus;	TA,	tibialis	anterior;	TFL,	tensor	fascia	lata;	TP,	tibialis	posterior.

FIGURE	27.1	Examination	of	flexion	of	the	neck.	The	patient	attempts	to	flex	his	neck
against	 resistance;	 the	 sternocleidomastoid,	 platysma,	 and	 other	 flexor	 muscles	 can
be	seen	and	palpated.

The	Scapular	Muscles

The	rhomboids	can	be	tested	by	having	the	patient,	with	hand	on	hip,	retract	the
shoulder	against	the	examiner’s	attempt	to	push	the	elbow	forward	(Figure	27.5).
If	the	patient	braces	the	shoulders	backward	as	if	standing	at	attention,	the	bulge
of	 the	 rhomboids	 can	 be	 seen	 and	 palpated	 along	 the	 medial	 border	 of	 the

scapula.	Another	test	of	rhomboid	function	is	to	have	the	patient	place	the	back
of	 the	 hand	 against	 the	 small	 of	 the	 back	 and	 to	 push	 backward	 with	 the	 palm
against	the	examiner’s	resistance.	The	rhomboid	major	contracts	vigorously	as	a
downward	 rotator	 of	 the	 scapula.	 Lifting	 the	 hand	 off	 the	 small	 of	 the	 back	 is
also	 used	 to	 test	 the	 subscapularis.	 The	 levator	 scapulae	 is	 tested	 by	 observing
elevation	 of	 the	 scapula;	 it	 is	 rarely	 possible	 to	 detect	 weakness	 of	 the	 levator
scapulae	on	clinical	examination.

FIGURE	27.2	 Examination	 of	 extension	 of	 the	 neck.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to	 extend
his	neck	against	resistance;	contraction	of	the	trapezius	and	other	extensor	muscles
can	be	seen	and	felt,	and	strength	of	movement	can	be	judged.

The	different	parts	of	the	trapezius	must	be	tested	separately.	One	test	of	the
upper	fibers	is	to	have	the	patient	shrug	the	shoulders	against	resistance	(Figure
19.4).	 A	 better	 test	 is	 resisting	 the	 patient’s	 attempt	 to	 touch	 the	 occiput	 to	 the
acromion.	 The	 middle	 fibers	 may	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 retract	 the
scapula	 against	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.6)	 or	 having	 the	 patient	 hold	 the	 arm
horizontally	abducted,	palm	up,	and	attempting	to	push	the	elbow	forward.

FIGURE	27.3	The	muscles	of	the	scapula.

With	 unilateral	 trapezius	 paralysis,	the	 patient	 cannot	retract	the	shoulder	or
abduct	 the	 arm	 above	 horizontal.	 Because	 of	 the	 weight	 of	 the	 arm,	 the	 upper
portion	of	the	scapula	falls	laterally,	the	inferior	angle	moves	medially,	and	the
vertebral	border	is	flared.	The	sagging	of	the	shoulder	causes	a	drooping	of	the

entire	arm,	and	the	fingertips	on	the	involved	side	are	at	a	lower	level	than	on	the
normal	side.	With	trapezius	atrophy,	the	superior	angle	of	the	scapula	may	bulge
beneath	the	skin.	There	is	little	loss	of	shoulder-shrug	ability	because	the	levator
scapulae	 and	 rhomboids	 are	 able	 to	 elevate	 the	 scapula,	 but	 the	 normal	 slant
from	the	base	of	the	neck	to	the	shoulder	becomes	squared	off	because	of	loss	of
trapezius	bulk.	The	patient	may	be	able	to	elevate	the	arms	forward	with	little	or
no	 difficulty	 because	 the	 serratus	 anterior	 is	 primarily	 responsible	 for	 scapular
fixation	and	rotation	in	that	plane.

The	 serratus	 anterior	 can	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 make	 movements
that	involve	forward	reaching	or	pushing	and	observing	for	evidence	of	scapular
winging	 (see	 next	 section).	 When	 there	 is	 significant	 weakness,	 abnormalities
may	appear	when	the	patient	simply	tries	to	raise	the	arm	overhead.	More	subtle
degrees	 of	 weakness	 may	 be	 brought	 out	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 push	 forward
against	 resistance.	 The	 classical	 test	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 push	 against	 a	 wall,
comparing	how	well	the	scapulae	remain	against	the	chest	wall	on	the	two	sides
(Figure	27.7).

Winging	of	the	Scapula

Normally,	the	medial	border	of	the	scapula	remains	close	to	the	chest	wall	when
the	arms	are	raised.	However,	with	weakness	of	either	the	serratus	anterior	or	the
trapezius,	the	 vertebral	 border	 or	the	 entire	scapula	protrudes	 posteriorly,	 away
from	 the	 thoracic	 wall.	 This	 causes	 the	 deformity	 known	 as	 “winging”	 (Figure
27.8).	 The	 trapezius	 is	 a	 rotator	 and	 retractor	 of	 the	 scapula	 and	 functions
primarily	 during	 abduction	 of	 the	 arm	 to	 the	 side	 in	 the	 coronal	 plane	 of	 the
body.	 When	 the	 trapezius	 is	 weak,	 scapular	 winging	 is	 more	 apparent	 on
attempted	 abduction	 of	 the	 arm	 than	 on	 forward	 elevation.	 Trapezius	 winging
may	be	made	more	conspicuous	by	having	the	patient	bend	forward	at	the	waist
so	the	upper	body	is	parallel	to	the	ground	and	then	raise	the	arms	to	the	sides,	as
if	beginning	a	swan	dive.	This	requires	strong	action	by	the	trapezius	to	retract
the	scapula	and	accentuates	the	posterior	displacement	of	the	shoulder	girdle.

The	 serratus	 anterior	 is	 primarily	 a	 protractor	 of	 the	 scapula	 and	 functions
during	 forward	 arm	 elevation.	 When	 the	 serratus	 is	 weak,	 the	 inferior	 angle	 is
shifted	 medially	 and	 the	 entire	 vertebral	 border	 rides	 up	 from	 the	 chest	 wall.
Serratus	anterior	weakness	causes	winging	that	is	more	obvious	when	trying	to
elevate	the	arm	in	front,	in	the	sagittal	plane	of	the	body;	it	is	less	obvious	when
the	arms	are	abducted	to	the	sides.	This	difference	aids	in	differentiating	serratus

anterior	 winging	 (as	 from	 a	 long	 thoracic	 nerve	 palsy)	 from	 the	 flaring	 of	 the
scapula	 that	 occurs	 with	 trapezius	 weakness	 (as	 from	 a	 spinal	 accessory	 nerve
palsy).	 Serratus	 winging	 may	 be	accentuated	 by	having	 the	 patient	protract	 the
scapula	 against	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.7).	 Another	 method	 to	 bring	 out	 mild
serratus	winging	is	to	have	the	patient	slowly	lower	the	outstretched	arms.	This
downward	movement	may	exacerbate	the	winging,	and	at	a	certain	point	as	the
arms	descend	the	scapula	will	suddenly	snap	backward.	Scapular	winging	is	also
discussed	in	Chapter	19.	For	a	video	of	scapular	winging,	see	Video	Link	27.1.

FIGURE	27.4	Upward	rotators	of	the	scapula.	(Modified	from	Weibers	DO,	Dale	AJD,
Kokmen	 E,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Examinations	 in	 Neurology.	 7th	 ed.	 St.	 Louis:
Mosby,	1998.	Copyright	©	1998	Elsevier.	With	permission.)

FIGURE	 27.5	 Examination	 of	 the	 rhomboids.	 With	 hand	 on	 hip,	 the	 patient	 retracts
the	shoulder	against	the	examiner’s	effort	to	push	the	elbow	forward;	the	contracting
muscles	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

FIGURE	 27.6	 Examination	 of	 the	 trapezius.	 On	 retraction	 of	 the	 shoulder	 against
resistance,	the	middle	fibers	of	the	muscle	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

FIGURE	27.7	Examination	of	the	serratus	anterior.	The	patient	pushes	against	a	wall
with	his	arms	extended	horizontally	in	front	of	him;	normally,	the	medial	border	of	the
scapula	remains	close	to	the	thoracic	wall.

In	

the	 muscular	 dystrophies,	 particularly	 facioscapulohumeral	 (FSH)
dystrophy,	 there	 is	 often	 weakness	 of	 all	 the	 shoulder	 girdle	 muscles,	 with
prominent	scapular	winging,	typically	bilateral	(Figures	27.8	and	29.6).	Another
manifestation	 of	 shoulder	 girdle	 weakness,	 seen	 most	 often	 in	 patients	 with
myopathy,	is	a	change	in	the	position	of	the	arms.	Normally,	as	the	arms	hang	at
the	 sides,	 the	 thumb	 faces	 to	 the	 front.	 With	 shoulder	 girdle	 weakness,	 the
scapula	 tends	 to	 slip	 laterally	 so	 that	 even	 at	 rest	 the	 shoulders	 tend	 to	 turn
slightly	 anteriorly.	 This	 causes	 the	 entire	 arm	 to	 rotate	 internally,	 making	 the
back	of	the	hand	rather	than	the	thumb	face	anteriorly.	Another	effect,	especially
if	 there	 is	 also	 pectoral	 muscle	 atrophy,	 may	 be	 to	 produce	 a	 crease	 running

diagonally	from	the	anterior	axillary	fold	toward	the	neck	(Video	Link	27.2).

The	Glenohumeral	Joint

The	 principal	 movements	 at	 the	 glenohumeral	 joint	 are	 abduction,	 adduction,
external	and	internal	rotation,	flexion,	extension,	and	elevation	of	the	arm.	These
movements	are	best	appreciated	as	taking	place	in	the	plane	of	the	body	of	the
scapula	rather	than	in	the	body	as	a	whole.

FIGURE	 27.8	 Scapular	 winging	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 facioscapulohumeral	 muscular
dystrophy.	A.	With	the	arms	at	rest.	B.	With	the	arms	raised.

The	deltoid	is	the	most	prominent	muscle	in	the	shoulder	region.	It	is	supplied
by	C5	 and	 C6	 through	 the	 axillary	 nerve,	a	 branch	of	 the	posterior	cord	of	 the
brachial	 plexus.	 The	 deltoid	 has	 three	 portions:	 anterior,	 middle,	 and	 posterior.
The	 middle	 deltoid	 and	 supraspinatus	 muscles,	 aided	 by	 the	 subscapularis	 and
the	upper	part	of	the	infraspinatus,	abduct	the	shoulder.	With	deltoid	contraction,
the	arm	is	abducted	(raised	laterally)	to	the	horizontal	plane.	Further	abduction,
or	elevation	above	the	horizontal	plane,	is	carried	out	by	the	associated	action	of
the	trapezius	and	the	serratus	anterior,	which	rotate	the	scapula	and	tilt	the	angle
of	the	glenoid	fossa	upward.	In	the	first	15	degrees,	the	abduction	motion	by	the
deltoid	 is	 aided	 by	 the	 supraspinatus,	 and	 the	 synergistic	 actions	 of	 the
subscapularis,	 infraspinatus,	 and	 teres	 minor	 prevent	 the	 humeral	 head	 from
translating	 upward.	 The	 posterior	 fibers	 of	 the	 deltoid	 also	 assist	 in	 extension

and	 external	 rotation	 of	 the	 arm	 and	 the	 anterior	 fibers	 in	 flexion	 and	 internal
rotation;	 but	 electromyography	 shows	 the	 deltoid	 is	 not	 very	 active	 in	 these
movements.

The	major	function	of	the	deltoid	is	tested	by	noting	the	ability	of	the	patient
either	 to	 abduct	 the	 arm	 through	 the	 range	 up	 to	 90	 degrees	 against	 resistance
(Figure	 27.9)	 or	 to	 hold	 the	 arm	 in	 abduction	 to	 the	 horizontal	 level,	 either
laterally	 or	 forward	 (the	 elbow	 may	 be	 either	 flexed	 or	 extended)	 and	 to	 resist
the	examiner’s	attempt	to	push	it	down.	Testing	both	sides	simultaneously	helps
the	patient	maintain	balance	and	also	helps	in	the	comparison	of	strength	on	the
two	sides.	With	MRC	grade	3/5	weakness,	the	patient	can	abduct	the	arm	against
gravity	 but	 not	 against	 significant	 resistance.	 With	 more	 severe	 weakness,	 the
patient	may	lean	in	the	opposite	direction	and	raise	the	tip	of	the	shoulder	to	aid
in	the	attempt	(trick	movement).	When	active	elevation	to	the	horizontal	plane	is
impossible,	 the	 passively	 abducted	 arm	 may	 be	 held	 up	 against	 gravity.	 With
grade	2/5	weakness,	the	patient	may	be	able	to	abduct	the	arm	when	lying	flat
but	 not	 when	 erect.	 In	 complete	 paralysis,	 no	 contraction	 of	 the	 muscle	 is
possible.	 When	 weakness	 of	 the	 deltoid	 is	 due	 to	 a	 lesion	 of	 the	 anterior	 horn
cells,	 brachial	 plexus,	 or	 axillary	 nerve,	 atrophy	 appears	 promptly	 and	 may	 be
severe.	This	leaves	the	bulge	of	the	acromion	visible	through	the	atrophic	muscle
belly,	 which	 simulates	 the	 appearance	 of	 shoulder	 dislocation.	 Because	 of
myotomal	overlap,	isolated	cervical	root	lesions	do	not	cause	the	same	degree	of
atrophy.	In	ALS	or	cervical	spondylosis,	fasciculations	are	often	noted.

FIGURE	 27.9	 Examination	 of	 the	 deltoid.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to	 abduct	 his	 arm
against	resistance;	the	contracting	deltoid	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

The	supraspinatus	helps	abduct	the	shoulder	through	the	first	15	degrees.	The
muscle	belly	lies	in	the	supraspinous	fossa	of	the	scapula;	its	contraction	can	be
palpated	 and	 sometimes	 seen	 when	 the	 arm	 is	 abducted	 less	 than	 15	 degrees
against	resistance	 (Figure	27.10).	 The	 supraspinatus	 is	 innervated	 primarily	 by
C5	and	C6	and	by	the	suprascapular	nerve,	which	arises	directly	from	the	upper
trunk	of	the	brachial	plexus.	Its	tendon	crosses	over	the	shoulder	joint	to	attach
to	the	greater	tuberosity	of	the	humerus,	forming	one	component	of	the	rotator
cuff	(Chapter	47).

FIGURE	 27.10	 Examination	 of	 the	 supraspinatus.	 Contraction	 of	 the	 muscle	 fibers
can	be	felt	during	early	stages	of	abduction	of	the	arm.

FIGURE	27.11	Examination	of	the	pectoralis	major.	Contraction	of	the	muscle	can	be
seen	and	felt	during	attempts	to	adduct	the	arm	against	resistance.

The	primary	adductors	of	the	shoulder	are	the	pectoralis	major	and	latissimus
dorsi.	 Their	 adduction	 actions	 are	 difficult	 to	 separate.	 The	 pectoralis	 major
receives	 innervation	 from	 all	 levels	 of	 the	 brachial	 plexus,	 C5-T1,	 through	 the
medial	 and	 lateral	 pectoral	 nerves.	 It	 is	 the	 principal	 shoulder	 adductor	 and	 is
also	 a	 flexor	 and	 internal	rotator.	 When	 the	 arm	 is	fixed,	 the	muscle	 draws	 the
chest	 upward,	 as	 in	 climbing.	 On	 attempts	 to	 adduct	 the	 horizontally	 abducted
arm	against	resistance,	the	contraction	of	the	sternocostal	and	clavicular	portions
of	the	muscle	can	be	seen	and	felt	(Figure	27.11).	The	muscle	can	also	be	tested
and	palpated	by	having	the	patient	move	the	horizontally	abducted	arm	forward,
try	to	press	the	hands	together	with	the	arms	in	front,	or	try	to	internally	rotate
the	forearms	with	the	elbows	at	the	side	and	flexed,	in	a	position	as	if	holding	a
book.

The	latissimus	dorsi	is	supplied	by	C6-C8	through	the	thoracodorsal	nerve	off

the	 posterior	 cord	 of	 the	 brachial	 plexus.	 It	 adducts,	 extends,	 and	 medially
rotates	 the	 shoulder	 and	 may	 be	 tested	 in	 various	 ways.	 The	 muscle	 acts	 when
the	patient	tries	to	adduct	the	raised	arm	against	resistance	(Figure	27.12).	Along
with	 the	 teres	 major,	 the	 latissimus	 forms	 the	 posterior	 axillary	 fold.	 The	 fold
becomes	prominent	when	the	arm	is	adducted	against	resistance	and	the	muscle
belly	can	be	easily	seen	and	palpated.	The	muscle	belly	can	also	be	felt	when	the
patient	coughs	or	pushes	the	arm	downward	and	backward.	When	the	humerus	is
fixed,	the	latissimus	draws	the	pelvis	and	the	lower	part	of	the	trunk	forward	and
upward.	When	the	arm	is	hanging	by	the	side,	it	depresses,	retracts,	and	rotates
the	scapula.

External	rotation	of	the	shoulder	is	carried	out	principally	by	the	infraspinatus
with	 a	 minor	 contribution	 by	 the	 teres	 minor	 (axillary	 nerve,	 C5-C6).	 The
infraspinatus	 is	 innervated	 by	 the	 suprascapular	 nerve,	 C5	 and	 C6,	 which	 also
innervates	 the	 supraspinatus.	 To	 test	 these	 muscles,	 the	 patient	 attempts	 to
externally	 rotate	 the	 shoulder	 by	 turning	 the	 forearm	 laterally	 and	 backward
against	resistance	while	the	elbow	is	flexed	at	an	angle	of	90	degrees	and	held	at
the	side	(Figure	27.13).

Internal	 rotation	 at	 the	 shoulder	 chiefly	 results	 from	 contraction	 of	 the
subscapularis	 and	teres	 major	 muscles.	 These	 muscles	 are	 tested	 by	having	 the
patient	move	the	forearm	medially	against	resistance	with	the	elbow	flexed	and
at	the	side—the	opposite	motion	from	external	rotation.	Internal	rotation	can	also
be	tested	by	having	the	patient	lift	the	back	of	the	hand	off	the	small	of	the	back
against	 resistance,	 as	 is	 done	 when	 testing	 the	 rhomboids	 (see	 “The	 Scapular
Muscles”	above).

Flexion	of	the	shoulder	(forward	elevation	of	the	arm	in	the	sagittal	plane	of
the	 body)	 is	 carried	 out	 by	 the	 anterior	 fibers	 of	 the	 deltoid	 and	 the	 pectoralis
major,	 subscapularis,	 coracobrachialis,	 and	 biceps	 muscles.	 The	 muscles,
especially	 the	 deltoid	 and	 pectoralis,	 may	 be	 palpated	 when	 raising	 the	 arm
forward	against	resistance.	Extension	of	the	shoulder	(backward	elevation	of	the
arm)	 is	 carried	 out	 by	 the	 posterior	 fibers	 of	 the	 deltoid	 together	 with	 the
latissimus	dorsi,	triceps,	subscapularis,	and	teres	major	muscles.	This	action	can
be	tested	by	having	the	patient	attempt	to	extend	the	arm	against	resistance.	The
individual	 muscles	 concerned	 are	 better	 examined	 by	 the	 tests	 discussed	 in	 the
preceding	paragraphs.

FIGURE	27.12	 Examination	 of	 the	 latissimus	 dorsi.	 On	 adduction	 of	 the	 horizontally
and	 laterally	 abducted	 arm	 against	 resistance,	 the	 contracting	 muscle	 fibers	 can	 be
seen	 and	 palpated.	 An	 effective	 way	 to	 compare	 the	 latissimus	 contraction	 strength
on	the	two	sides	is	to	firmly	grasp	the	muscle	bellies	from	behind	and	have	the	patient
cough.

FIGURE	27.13	Examination	of	the	external	rotators	of	the	arm.	On	external	rotation	of
the	 arm	 while	 the	 elbow	 is	 flexed	 and	 kept	 close	 to	 the	 body,	 the	 contracting
infraspinatus	muscle	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

The	Rotator	Cuff

The	subscapularis,	supraspinatus,	infraspinatus,	and	teres	minor	form	the	rotator
cuff.	 The	 infraspinatus	 and	 teres	 minor	 rotate	 the	 humerus	 externally	 and	 the
subscapularis	 internally.	 The	 subscapularis,	 infraspinatus,	 and	 teres	 minor	 help
keep	 the	 humeral	 head	 from	 sliding	 upward	 when	 the	 deltoid	 contracts	 during
the	 initial	 stages	 of	 abduction.	 The	 supraspinatus,	 more	 than	 the	 deltoid,	 keeps
the	 humeral	 head	 from	 migrating	 downward	 when	 the	 arm	 is	 hanging	 down.
Rotator	cuff	tears	are	a	common	clinical	problem.	Rotator	cuff	pathology	often
enters	the	differential	diagnosis	in	patients	with	arm	pain	and	weakness.	A	torn

rotator	cuff,	especially	impaired	arm	abduction	due	to	a	ruptured	supraspinatus
muscle	 or	 tendon	 (the	 most	 common	 component	 of	 the	 rotator	 cuff	 to	 suffer	 a
tear),	can	be	confused	with	a	neurologic	process	(Chapter	47).

The	Elbow

The	principal	movements	at	the	elbow	are	flexion	and	extension	of	the	forearm
at	the	elbow	joint	and	pronation	and	supination	at	the	radioulnar	joint.

Many	 muscles	 contribute	 to	 elbow	 flexion;	 the	 primary	 ones	 are	 the	 biceps
brachii,	 brachialis,	 and	 brachioradialis.	 Which	 muscle	 is	 the	 prime	 mover
depends	on	the	position	of	the	forearm.	The	biceps	muscle	is	innervated	by	C5-
C6	 through	 the	 musculocutaneous	 nerve,	 a	 branch	 of	 the	 lateral	 cord	 of	 the
brachial	plexus.	It	is	an	elbow	flexor	and	also	a	strong	supinator	of	the	forearm.
Its	 supination	 power	 is	 greatest	 when	 the	 forearm	 is	 flexed	 and	 pronated.	 Its
flexion	power	is	greatest	when	the	forearm	is	supinated.	The	brachialis	has	the
same	 innervation;	 it	 flexes	 the	 elbow	 regardless	 of	 forearm	 position.	 The
musculocutaneous	 nerve	 passes	 through	 the	 coracobrachialis	 and	 may	 be
compressed	 there,	 causing	 weakness	 of	 the	 biceps	 and	 brachialis	 muscles.	 The
brachioradialis	 is	 innervated	 by	 C5-C6	 through	 the	 radial	 nerve.	 It	 acts	 as	 an
elbow	 flexor	 when	 the	 forearm	 is	 held	 midway	 between	 pronation	 and
supination	(thumb	up).	The	brachioradialis	acts	as	a	supinator	when	the	forearm
is	 extended	 and	 pronated	 but	 as	 a	 pronator	 when	 the	 forearm	 is	 flexed	 and
supinated.

FIGURE	 27.14	 Examination	 of	 the	 biceps	 brachii.	 On	 attempts	 to	 flex	 the	 forearm
against	resistance,	the	contracting	biceps	muscle	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Biceps	 and	 brachialis	 functions	 are	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 attempt	 to
flex	 the	 elbow	 against	 resistance.	 The	 biceps	 contraction	 can	 be	 seen	 and	 felt,
but	 the	 brachialis	 is	 buried	 (Figure	 27.14).	 The	 brachioradialis	 is	 tested	 by
attempts	to	flex	the	semipronated	forearm	(Figure	27.15).	Even	when	the	biceps
and	 brachialis	 are	 completely	 paralyzed,	 the	 brachioradialis	 is	 still	 capable	 of
flexing	the	elbow	to	some	degree.	When	the	biceps	muscle	is	weak,	the	patient
may	 employ	 trick	 movements	 by	 putting	 the	 forearm	 into	 midpronation	 and
bringing	 in	 the	 brachioradialis	 or	 pulling	 the	 elbow	 backwards.	 The	 latter
resembles	 the	 movement	 bartenders	 make	 when	 drawing	 a	 draft	 beer	 and	 has
been	called	the	“bartender’s	sign.”

The	triceps	brachii	is	the	principal	elbow	extensor.	It	is	innervated	by	C6,	C7,
and	 C8	 through	 the	 radial	 nerve,	 a	 branch	 of	 the	 posterior	 cord	 of	 the	 brachial

plexus.	 The	 branches	 to	 the	 triceps	 come	 off	 before	 the	 nerve	 enters	 the	 spiral
groove.	The	anconeus	aids	the	triceps	in	extension.	To	test	these	muscles,	place
the	 elbow	 in	 a	 position	 midway	 between	 flexion	 and	 extension	 and	 have	 the
patient	 attempt	 to	 either	 extend	 the	 elbow	 or	 to	 hold	 position	 against	 the
examiner’s	resistance	(Figure	27.16).	The	triceps	muscle	is	less	powerful	when
the	elbow	is	fully	flexed,	and	slight	weakness	may	be	more	easily	detected	with
testing	in	this	position.	With	mild	triceps	weakness,	the	examiner	may	be	able	to
pin	the	triceps	in	extreme	flexion	on	the	involved	but	not	the	normal	side.

FIGURE	 27.15	 Examination	 of	 the	 brachioradialis.	 On	 flexion	 of	 the	 semipronated
forearm	 (thumb	 up)	 against	 resistance,	 the	 contracting	 muscle	 can	 be	 seen	 and
palpated.

FIGURE	27.16	 Extension	 of	 the	 forearm.	 On	 attempts	 to	 extend	 the	 partially	 flexed
forearm	against	resistance,	contraction	of	the	triceps	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Supination	of	the	forearm	is	done	primarily	by	the	supinator	muscle,	assisted

by	stronger	muscles,	especially	the	biceps,	for	movements	requiring	power.

The	 supinator	 has	 superficial	 and	 deep	 layers;	 the	 proximal	 edge	 of	 the
superficial	head	is	the	arcade	of	Frohse.	The	posterior	interosseous	nerve	passes
beneath	the	arcade	and	may	be	compressed	there.	The	supinator	is	innervated	by
C6	 and	 C7,	 either	 by	 the	 posterior	 interosseous	 nerve	 or	 the	 radial	 in	 different
individuals.	The	biceps	muscle	is	the	most	powerful	forearm	supinator;	its	action
is	 strongest	 when	 the	 forearm	 is	 flexed	 and	 pronated.	 The	 supinator	 is	 less
powerful,	but	it	acts	through	all	degrees	of	flexion	and	supination.	Supination	is
tested	by	having	the	patient	supinate	against	the	examiner’s	resistance.	With	the
forearm	 in	 extension,	 the	 brachioradialis	 also	 participates;	 with	 the	 forearm	 in
flexion,	the	biceps	also	participates	(Figure	27.17).

Pronation	is	brought	about	primarily	by	the	pronator	quadratus	(PQ),	which	is
assisted	by	the	much	stronger	PT	for	movements	requiring	power.	Other	muscles
may	play	a	minor	role.	The	PT	originates	from	the	common	flexor	tendon	(CFT)
that	arises	from	the	medial	epicondyle.	Like	the	other	muscles	that	arise	from	the
CFT	 (flexor	 carpi	 radialis	 [FCR],	 palmaris	 longus,	 flexor	 carpi	 ulnaris	 [FCU],
and	flexor	digitorum	superficialis	[FDS]),	the	PT	is	also	an	elbow	flexor.	To	test
the	PT	and	PQ,	the	patient	attempts	to	pronate	against	resistance	(Figure	27.18).

The	 PT	 has	 a	 humeral	 and	 an	 ulnar	 head.	 The	 median	 nerve	 usually	 enters	 the
forearm	between	the	two	heads	and	supplies	the	muscle	(C6	and	C7).	The	PQ	is
innervated	by	the	anterior	interosseous	branch	of	the	median	nerve	(C7-C8).	The
anterior	interosseous	nerve	comes	off	the	median	nerve	between	the	two	heads
of	 the	 PT.	 The	 anterior	 interosseous	 nerve,	 less	 often	 the	 main	 trunk	 of	 the
median	 nerve,	 may	 be	 compressed	 between	 the	 two	 heads	 of	 the	 PT	 (pronator
syndrome).	To	isolate	the	action	of	the	PQ,	pronation	should	be	tested	with	the
elbow	 extended,	 when	 the	 PT	 is	 maximally	 lengthened	 and	 exerts	 its	 weakest
pull.	Flexion	of	the	elbow	would	signal	that	the	patient	is	trying	to	bring	the	PT
into	play.

FIGURE	27.17	 Supination	 of	 the	 forearm.	 A.	 On	 attempts	 to	 supinate	 the	 extended
forearm	against	resistance,	the	contracting	brachioradialis	can	be	seen	and	palpated.
B.	 On	 attempts	 to	 supinate	 the	 flexed	 forearm	 against	 resistance,	 the	 contracting
biceps	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

The	Wrist

The	principal	movements	at	the	wrist	are	flexion	and	extension;	adduction	(ulnar
flexion)	and	abduction	(radial	flexion)	are	minor	movements.

FIGURE	 27.18	 Pronation	 of	 the	 forearm.	 On	 pronation	 of	 the	 forearm	 against
resistance,	contraction	of	the	pronator	teres	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Flexion	of	the	wrist	is	carried	out	principally	by	the	FCR	and	FCU	muscles.
The	 FCR	 originates	 from	 the	 CFT	 and	 is	 innervated	 by	 the	 lateral	 head	 of	 the
median	nerve	(C6-C7).	When	making	a	fist,	the	wrist	usually	extends	slightly	as
the	fingers	flex;	the	FCR	counteracts	the	wrist	extension	motion.	The	FCR	also
assists	 in	 elbow	 flexion	 and	 in	 forearm	 pronation.	 It	 inserts	 on	 the	 second

metacarpal	and	is	a	weak	abductor	of	the	wrist.	The	FCU	is	supplied	by	the	ulnar
nerve	 (C7-T1).	 It	 has	 two	 heads	 of	 origin:	 from	 the	 CFT	 on	 the	 medial
epicondyle	of	the	humerus	and	from	the	olecranon	process	of	the	ulna.	The	two
heads	 are	 joined	 by	 an	 aponeurosis,	 the	 humeroulnar	 arcade	 (Osborne’s	 band).
After	passing	through	the	retroepicondylar	grove,	the	ulnar	nerve	passes	beneath
the	aponeurosis	and	may	be	compressed	by	it.	The	FCU	attaches	to	the	pisiform
bone	 on	 the	 medial	 aspect	 of	 the	 wrist.	 In	 addition	 to	 flexing	 the	 wrist,	 it	 also
works	with	the	extensor	carpi	ulnaris	(ECU)	to	adduct	(ulnar	deviate)	the	hand.
Other	 muscles	 that	 aid	 in	 wrist	 flexion	 include	 the	 palmaris	 longus,	 flexor
digitorum	 profundus	 (FDP),	 FDS,	 flexor	 pollicis	 longus	 (FPL),	 and	 abductor
pollicis	longus	(APL).

Wrist	flexion	is	tested	by	having	the	patient	resist	the	examiner’s	attempts	to
extend	 the	 wrist	 (Figure	 27.19).	 Both	 the	 FCR	 and	 FCU	 are	 superficial;	 their
contraction	can	be	seen	and	felt.	On	resisted	wrist	flexion,	the	FCR	and	palmaris
longus	 tendons	 stand	 out	 on	 the	 volar	 wrist	 surface;	 the	 median	 nerve	 lies
between	 the	 two	 tendons.	 The	 FCR	 can	 be	 tested	 individually	 by	 having	 the
patient	flex	the	wrist	toward	the	radial	side	against	resistance	directed	toward	the
thumb.	 Function	 of	 the	 FCU	 can	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 flex	 the	 wrist
toward	the	ulnar	side	while	the	examiner	presses	on	the	hypothenar	region.	The
FCU	 also	 acts	 as	a	 synergist	 for	the	 abductor	 digiti	minimi	 (ADM),	 stabilizing
the	 pisiform	 bone;	 its	 contraction	 can	 be	 seen	 and	 felt	 during	 resisted	 small
finger	abduction.

Extension	 (dorsiflexion)	 of	 the	 wrist	 is	 executed	 primarily	 by	 the	 extensor
carpi	radialis	longus	(ECRL),	extensor	carpi	radialis	brevis	(ECRB),	and	ECU.
The	 extensors	 of	 the	 digits	 play	 a	 minor	 supportive	 role.	 The	 ECRL	 (radial
nerve,	C6	and	C7)	is	the	most	powerful	wrist	extensor.	The	ECRB	and	ECU	are
innervated	by	the	posterior	interosseous	branch	of	the	radial	nerve	(C7-C8).	In	a
posterior	 interosseous	 neuropathy,	 the	 wrist	 deviates	 radially	 on	 extension
because	of	the	unbalanced	pull	of	the	ECRL.

FIGURE	 27.19	 Flexion	 at	 the	 wrist.	 On	 flexion	 of	 the	 hand	 at	 the	 wrist	 against
resistance,	 the	 tendon	 of	 the	 flexor	 carpi	 radialis	 can	 be	 seen	 and	 palpated	 on	 the
radial	side	of	the	wrist	and	that	of	the	flexor	carpi	ulnaris	on	the	ulnar	side;	the	tendon
of	the	palmaris	longus	can	also	be	seen	and	palpated.

To	 test	 the	 wrist	 extensors,	 the	 forearm	 is	 held	 in	 pronation	 with	 the	 wrist
partially	 extended.	 The	 patient	 then	 resists	 the	 examiner’s	 attempts	 to	 pull	 the
wrist	into	flexion	(Figure	27.20).	With	mild	weakness,	the	examiner	may	be	able
to	hold	the	wrist	in	extreme	flexion	using	one	or	two	fingers	against	the	patient’s
efforts	to	extend	it	on	the	involved	but	not	the	normal	side.	Moderate	weakness
of	 the	 extensors	 results	 in	 involuntary	 flexion	 at	 the	 wrist	 when	 the	 patient
attempts	to	make	a	fist;	marked	weakness	causes	a	wrist	drop,	the	major	finding
in	a	radial	nerve	palsy.

FIGURE	 27.20	 Extension	 at	 the	 wrist.	 On	 attempts	 to	 extend	 the	 hand	 at	 the	 wrist
against	resistance,	the	bellies	of	the	extensors	carpi	radialis	longus,	carpi	ulnaris,	and
digitorum	communis	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Adduction,	or	ulnar	deviation	or	flexion,	of	the	wrist	is	carried	out	principally
by	the	FCU	and	ECU;	abduction,	or	radial	deviation	or	flexion,	is	carried	out	by
the	 FCR,	 ECRL,	 and	 ECRB.	 Other	 muscles	 may	 make	 minor	 contributions.
These	movements,	too,	may	be	tested	by	carrying	them	out	against	resistance.

The	Hands	and	Fingers

Examination	of	the	hand	and	finger	muscles	is	difficult.	Innervation	is	complex,
and	the	numerous	possible	substitution	movements	can	lead	to	misinterpretation.
Possible	 movements	 include	 flexion,	 extension,	 adduction,	 abduction,	 and
opposition.	The	muscles	that	power	the	hand	can	be	divided	into	extrinsics	and
intrinsics.	 The	 extrinsic	 muscles	 originate	 in	 the	 forearm	 and	 insert	 on	 hand
structures;	the	intrinsics	originate	and	insert	within	the	hand.

Flexion	of	the	Fingers

The	primary	finger	flexors	are	the	FDS	and	the	FDP.	The	FDS	and	FDP	are	both

innervated	by	C8	and	T1.	The	FDS	is	supplied	by	the	main	trunk	of	the	median
nerve.	Its	tendons	pass	through	the	carpal	tunnel	and	then	diverge	to	insert	on	the
palmar	surfaces	of	the	middle	phalanges.	The	FDS	primarily	flexes	the	proximal
interphalangeal	(PIP)	joints	of	the	four	fingers;	a	continuation	of	its	action	flexes
the	 metacarpophalangeal	 (MCP)	 joints	 and	 ultimately	 the	 wrist.	 There	 are
separate	 muscle	 slips	 for	 each	 finger,	 so	 the	 PIP	 joints	 can	 be	 flexed
independently.	 The	 FDP	 has	 two	 parts:	 (a)	 The	 lateral	 or	 radial	 head	 is
innervated	 by	 the	 anterior	interosseous	 branch	 of	the	 median	nerve	 and	 (b)	the
medial	 or	 ulnar	 head	 by	 the	 ulnar	 nerve.	 The	 four	 tendons	 of	 the	 FDP	 pass
through	the	carpal	tunnel	and	then	pierce	the	tendons	of	the	FDS	and	insert	on
bases	of	the	distal	phalanges.	The	main	action	of	the	FDP	is	flexion	of	the	distal
interphalangeal	 (DIP)	 joints	 of	 the	 fingers;	 continuing	 this	 action	 flexes	 the
remaining	phalanges	and	finally	the	wrist.	The	muscle	slip	and	tendon	that	flex
the	 index	 finger	 are	 usually	 distinct;	 the	 remaining	 slips	 of	 the	 FDP	 are	 often
partially	conjoined,	making	it	difficult	to	flex	the	other	DIP	joints	independently.
The	fingers	are	flexed	at	the	MCP	joints	by	the	interossei	and	the	lumbricals.
On	 the	 dorsal	 surface	 of	 the	 proximal	 phalanx	 of	 each	 finger,	 there	 is	 a	 dorsal
extensor	 expansion,	 a	 fibrous	 enlargement	 of	 the	 tendon	 of	 the	 extensor
digitorum.	 The	 finger	 extensor	 tendons	 blend	 into	 the	 expansion.	 The	 dorsal
interossei	 lie	 between	 the	 metacarpal	 bones,	 from	 which	 they	 originate,	 and
insert	 on	 the	 proximal	 phalanges.	 They	 also	 insert	 separately	 into	 the	 extensor
expansions	 and	 are	 therefore	 functionally	 connected	 to	 the	 finger	 extensor
tendons.	Finger	adduction	and	abduction	are	judged	in	relation	to	an	imaginary
line	 down	 the	 center	 of	 the	 middle	 finger.	 From	 the	 insertion	 on	 the	 proximal
phalanx,	 the	 dorsal	 interossei	 flex	 the	 MCP	 joint.	 From	 their	 insertion	 on	 the
extensor	 expansion,	 they	 extend	 the	 PIP	 joint	 and	 also	 abduct	 the	 fingers.	 The
smaller	palmar	interossei	arise	from	the	palmar	surfaces	of	the	metacarpal	bones,
rather	than	between	them,	and	insert	on	the	side	of	the	extensor	expansion	so	as
to	adduct	the	finger;	they	also	flex	the	MCP	joint	and	extend	the	PIP	joint.	The
interossei	are	innervated	by	C8-T1	through	the	deep	palmar	branch	of	the	ulnar
nerve.

The	lumbricals	arise	from	the	tendons	of	the	FDP	and	insert	into	the	extensor
expansions	 on	 the	 dorsal	 surfaces	 of	 the	 phalanges.	 The	 two	 lumbricals	 on	 the
ulnar	 side	 of	 the	 hand	 are	 innervated	 by	 the	 deep	 palmar	 branch	 of	 the	 ulnar
nerve,	the	two	on	the	radial	side	of	the	hand	by	the	median	nerve,	all	C8-T1.	The
lumbricals	are	weak	flexors	of	the	MCP	joints.	Their	more	important	function	is
to	extend	the	PIP	joints.

The	 flexor	 digiti	 minimi	 brevis	 flexes	 and	 slightly	 abducts	 the	 proximal
phalanx	of	the	little	finger.	Two	other	muscles	acting	on	the	little	finger	are	the
ADM,	 which	 abducts	 the	 little	 finger,	 flexes	 its	 proximal	 phalanx,	 and	 extends
the	middle	phalanx,	and	the	opponens	digiti	minimi,	which	flexes,	adducts,	and
slightly	 rotates	 the	 fifth	 metacarpal.	 All	 three	 muscles	 are	 supplied	 by	 C8-T1
through	 the	 ulnar	 nerve	 proximal	 to	 the	 origin	 of	 the	 deep	 palmar	 branch.	 The
palmaris	 brevis	 has	 the	 same	 innervation;	 it	 wrinkles	 the	 skin	 over	 the
hypothenar	eminence	and	deepens	the	hollow	of	the	hand.	The	palmaris	brevis
sign	 is	 wrinkling	 of	 the	 skin	 over	 the	 hypothenar	 eminence	 with	 small	 finger
abduction	 in	 the	 face	 of	 weakness	 of	 the	 ulnar	 hand	 intrinsics;	 it	 proves	 the
lesion	involves	the	deep	palmar	branch.

Function	of	the	FDP	is	tested	by	having	the	patient	flex	the	distal	phalanges
of	the	individual	fingers	against	resistance	while	the	middle	phalanges	are	fixed
(Figure	27.21).	The	FDS	is	tested	by	having	the	patient	flex	the	fingers	at	the	PIP
joints	while	the	proximal	phalanges	are	fixed	(Figure	27.22).	The	patient	should
try	 to	 relax	 the	 distal	 phalanges	 to	 eliminate	 any	 action	 of	 the	 FDP	 on	 the	 PIP
joint.	 The	 interossei	 and	 lumbricals	 flex	 the	 MCP	 joints	 and	 extend	 the
interphalangeal	(IP)	joints.	Weakness	of	these	intrinsic	hand	muscles	causes	loss
of	 MCP	 joint	 flexion	 and	 loss	 of	 PIP	 joint	 extension,	 together	 with	 loss	 of
adduction	and	abduction	of	the	fingers.	The	hand	assumes	a	position	of	rest	in
which	the	MCP	joints	are	held	in	extension	and	the	PIP	and	DIP	joints	are	flexed
(claw	 hand).	 Ulnar	 neuropathy	 is	 the	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 claw	 hand	 (ulnar
griffe).	Ulnar	clawing	primarily	affects	the	ring	and	small	fingers	because	both
lumbrical	and	interosseous	functions	are	lost.

FIGURE	 27.21	 Examination	 of	 the	 flexor	 digitorum	 profundus.	 The	 patient	 resists
attempts	to	extend	the	distal	phalanges	while	the	middle	phalanges	are	fixed.

Making	a	fist	requires	flexion	of	the	fingers	at	all	joints.	The	strength	of	the
grip	depends	on	the	degree	of	flexion	at	the	MCP	and	IP	joints,	on	the	position	of
the	thumb	and	its	ability	to	flex	and	to	brace	the	fingers,	and	on	the	synergistic
actions	 of	 the	 wrist	 extensors	 in	 fixation	 of	 the	 wrist.	 A	 firm	 fist	 can	 be	 made
only	 with	 the	 wrist	 in	 extension.	 Grip	 is	 commonly	 used	 in	 the	 assessment	 of
upper-extremity	 strength.	 An	 examiner	 cannot	 easily	 extricate	 his	 fingers	 from
the	clenched	hand	of	a	person	with	normal	grip	strength.	For	quantitative	testing,
a	 dynamometer	 may	 be	 used.	 In	 fact,	 although	 commonly	 done,	 grip	 power	 is
not	 very	 useful	 in	 assessing	 upper-extremity	 motor	 function	 in	 neurologic
patients	 for	 the	 following	 reasons.	 The	 finger	 and	 wrist	 flexors	 are	 not
corticospinal	innervated	 and	 are	 not	 likely	 to	be	 weak	 with	 a	mild	CST	 lesion.
Grip	 strength	 is	 so	 unaffected	 by	 CST	 pathology	 that	 many	 patients	 with	 a
severe,	 spastic	 hemiparesis	 have	 a	 tightly	 fisted	 hand—enough	 that	 palmar
hygiene	may	become	a	problem.	In	addition,	grip	is	a	complex	movement	with
many	different	muscles	involved,	so	it	is	insensitive	to	peripheral	pathology	as

well.	A	good	rule	is	that	one	can	use	grip	as	a	strength	test	only	if	prepared	to
name	all	the	muscles	involved	along	with	their	peripheral	nerve,	brachial	plexus,
and	 root	 innervations.	 An	 examiner	 sophisticated	 enough	 to	 know	 this
information	will	be	testing	individual	hand	muscles,	not	grip	strength.

FIGURE	 27.22	 Examination	 of	 the	 flexor	 digitorum	 superficialis.	 The	 patient	 resists
attempts	to	straighten	the	fingers	at	the	first	interphalangeal	(IP)	joint.

Extension	of	the	Fingers

The	 long	 extensors	 of	 the	 fingers	 include	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 communis
(EDC),	 extensor	 indicis	 proprius	 (EIP,	 aka	 extensor	 indicis),	 and	 the	 extensor
digiti	minimi	(EDM).	All	the	finger	extensors	are	innervated	by	C7-C8	through
the	posterior	interosseous	branch	of	the	radial	nerve.	The	tendons	insert	on	the
dorsal	 extensor	 expansions	 of	 the	 first	 phalanges	 of	 the	 fingers.	 The	 primary
action	of	the	EDC	is	extension	of	the	MCP	joints.	However,	the	EDC	can	exert
some	force	to	extend	each	joint	it	crosses,	including	the	wrist	and—through	the
extensor	 expansion	 complexes—the	 PIP	 and	 DIP	 joints.	Its	 action	 on	 the	MCP
joints	 causes	 some	 spreading	 of	 the	 fingers,	 and	 patients	 with	 weakness	 of	 the

interossei	 may	 use	 this	 as	 a	 trick	 movement	 to	 abduct	 the	 fingers.	 The	 EIP
extends	 the	 index	 finger	 and	 adducts	 it	 slightly.	 The	 EDM	 extends	 the	 little
finger.	 The	 interossei	 and	 lumbricals	 also	 extend	 the	 PIP	 and	 DIP	 joints	 of	 the
fingers.

To	test	the	action	of	the	EDC,	EIP,	and	EDM,	the	patient	resists	attempts	to
push	the	fingers	down	at	the	MCP	joints	with	the	forearm	pronated	and	the	wrist
stabilized	 (Figure	 27.23).	 A	 useful	 technique	 is	 for	 the	 examiner	 to	 try	 to
overcome	 the	 patient’s	 finger	 extensors	 with	 his	 own.	 Because	 they	 have
separate	muscles,	the	index	and	little	fingers	can	extend	independently,	but	it	is
very	difficult	to	extend	either	the	middle	or	ring	finger	without	moving	the	other.
The	 extensor	 function	 of	 the	 lumbricals	 and	 interossei	 is	 tested	 by	 having	 the
patient	 try	 to	 extend	 the	 PIP	 and	 DIP	 joints	 against	 resistance	 while	 the	 MCP
joints	are	hyperextended	and	fixed	(Figure	27.24).

FIGURE	 27.23	 Examination	 of	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 communis.	 With	 hand
outstretched	and	IP	joints	held	in	extension,	the	patient	resists	the	examiner’s	attempt
to	flex	the	fingers	at	the	metacarpophalangeal	(MCP)	joints.

The	Thumb	and	Its	Muscles

The	 thumb	 is	 a	 complex	 bit	 of	 machinery;	 small	 wonder	 it	 conveyed	 such	 an
evolutionary	 advantage.	 It	 is	 capable	 of	 movement	 in	 many	 directions.	 The
difference	in	some	of	the	motions	is	subtle	(e.g.,	flexion	vs.	adduction),	but	the
muscle	 involved	 and	 the	 clinical	 significance	 may	 be	 marked.	 Two	 sets	 of
muscles	 control	 thumb	 motion:	 those	 in	 the	 forearm	 (extrinsic	 thumb	 muscles)
and	those	that	make	up	the	thenar	eminence	(intrinsic	thumb	muscles).

The	mobility	of	the	opposable	thumb	requires	more	elaborate	muscle	control
compared	to	the	other	digits.	Because	the	classical	anatomical	terms	describing
directions	of	movement	are	not	easily	applied	to	the	thumb,	additional	directions
are	designated:	palmar,	dorsal,	ulnar,	and	radial.

The	 IP	 and	 MCP	 joints	 can	 flex	 and	 extend.	 The	 carpometacarpal	 joint	 can
move	in	many	directions.	In	palmar	abduction,	the	thumb	moves	upward	at	right
angles	 to	 the	 plane	 of	 the	 palm;	 in	 radial	 abduction,	 the	 thumb	 moves	away	 in
the	 plane	 of	 the	 palm.	 Ulnar	 and	 palmar	 adductions	 are	 movements	 that	 touch
the	 first	 and	 second	 metacarpals	 together.	 Opposition	 (anteposition)	 is	 the
motion	 of	 circumduction	 of	 the	 thumb	 with	 extended	 MCP	 and	 IP	 joints;	 this
turns	the	thumb	into	semipronation	and	touches	the	palmar	surface	of	the	tip	of
the	thumb	to	the	palmar	surface	of	the	tip	of	the	small	finger.

The	forearm	muscles	involved	in	controlling	the	thumb	are	the	APL,	extensor
pollicis	longus	(EPL),	extensor	pollicis	brevis	(EPB),	and	FPL.	The	APL	abducts
the	 thumb	 and	 extends	 it	 to	 a	 slight	 degree.	 The	 EPL	 extends	 the	 terminal
phalanx;	 the	 EPB	 extends	 the	 proximal	 phalanx.	 These	 three	 muscles	 are
supplied	 by	 the	 C7-C8	 cervical	 segments	 through	 the	 posterior	 interosseous
branch	 of	 the	 radial	 nerve.	 The	 APL	 is	 the	 only	 muscle	 in	 the	 flexor	 pronator
compartment	 of	 the	 forearm	 supplied	 by	 the	 radial	 nerve.	 The	 FPL	 (anterior
interosseous	branch	of	the	median	nerve,	C8-T1)	flexes	the	distal	phalanx	of	the
thumb.	To	test	the	FPL,	the	patient	flexes	the	distal	phalanx	of	the	thumb	while
the	 proximal	 phalanx	 is	 flexed	 and	 immobilized	 (Figure	 27.25).	 The	 EPL	 is
tested	by	having	the	patient	extend	the	thumb	at	the	IP	joint	while	the	proximal
phalanx	is	immobilized	(Figure	27.26).	The	EPB	is	tested	by	having	the	patient
extend	 the	 thumb	 at	 the	 MCP	 joint	 while	 the	 metacarpal	 bone	 is	 immobilized
(Figure	27.27).	 Hyperextending	 the	 thumb,	 especially	at	 both	 joints,	 causes	 the
tendons	 of	 the	 EPL,	 EPB,	 and	 APL	 to	 stand	 out,	 forming	 the	 “anatomic	 snuff
box.”

FIGURE	27.24	A	and	B.	 Extension	 of	 the	 middle	 and	 distal	 phalanges.	 The	 patient
attempts	to	extend	the	fingers	against	resistance	while	the	MCP	joints	are	fixed.

The	thenar	eminence	is	the	mass	of	muscles	on	the	palmar	surface	overlying
the	first	metacarpal.	The	muscles	that	make	up	the	thenar	eminence	are	the	APB,
opponens	 pollicis	 (OP),	 and	 flexor	 pollicis	 brevis	 (FPB).	 The	 APL	 and	 APB
muscles	 produce	 palmar	 abduction.	 The	 OP	 pronates	 the	 thumb,	 turning	 the
volar	thumb	surface	down,	to	touch	the	tip	of	the	thumb	to	the	small	finger.	The
FPB	flexes	the	MCP	joint	of	the	thumb.	In	testing	the	FPB,	the	patient	is	asked
to	flex	the	MCP	joint	of	the	thumb	while	keeping	the	IP	joint	extended.	The	FPB
has	a	superficial	head	supplied	by	the	median	nerve	and	a	deep	head	by	the	deep
palmar	branch	of	the	ulnar	nerve,	all	C8-T1.	The	rest	of	the	thenar	muscles	are
supplied	by	C8-T1	through	the	median	nerve.

FIGURE	27.25	Examination	of	the	flexor	pollicis	longus.	The	patient	resists	attempts
to	extend	the	distal	phalanx	of	the	thumb	while	the	proximal	phalanx	is	fixed.

FIGURE	 27.26	 Examination	 of	 the	 extensor	 pollicis	 longus.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to
resist	 passive	 flexion	 of	 the	 thumb	 at	 the	 IP	 joint;	 the	 tendon	 can	 be	 seen	 and
palpated.

FIGURE	 27.27	 Examination	 of	 the	 extensor	 pollicis	 brevis.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to
resist	 passive	 flexion	 of	 the	 thumb	 at	 the	 MCP	 joint;	 the	 tendon	 can	 be	 seen	 and
palpated.

FIGURE	 27.28	 Radial	 abduction	 of	 the	 thumb.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to	 abduct	 the
thumb	 in	 the	 same	 plane	 as	 that	 of	 the	 palm;	 the	 tendon	 of	 the	 abductor	 pollicis
longus	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Abduction	of	the	thumb	is	carried	out	in	two	planes:	in	the	same	plane	as	the
palm	 (radial	 abduction)	 and	 at	 right	 angles	 to	 the	 plane	 of	 the	 palm	 (palmar
abduction).	To	test	radial	abduction,	the	thumb	is	moved	outward	if	the	hand	is
horizontal,	and	upward	if	the	hand	is	vertical,	against	resistance.	This	movement
is	 executed	 by	 the	 APL	 and	 EPB	 (Figure	 27.28).	 The	 APB	 is	 a	 thin	 sheet	 of
muscle	lying	just	medial	to	the	first	metacarpal	that	performs	palmar	abduction.
To	test	palmar	abduction,	the	thumb	is	moved	upward	at	right	angles	to	the	palm,
inside	the	radial	margin	of	the	hand,	against	resistance.	It	is	very	easy	for	both

patient	and	physician	to	confuse	abduction	with	extension.	One	trick	is	to	place	a
pencil	or	similar	object	between	the	thumb	and	the	palm,	or	radial	to	the	thumb,
perpendicular	to	the	palm.	The	patient	then	raises	the	thumb	to	a	point	vertically
above	its	original	position,	keeping	it	parallel	to	the	pencil	with	the	thumbnail	at
right	angles	to	the	palm	(Figure	27.29).	In	paralysis	of	abduction,	the	thumb	is
adducted	 and	 rotated,	 thumbnail	 parallel	 rather	 than	 perpendicular	 to	 the
fingernails,	falling	into	the	plane	of	the	palm	(simian	or	ape	hand,	Figure	46.6).

The	 APB	 is	 most	 often	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 place	 the	 thumb	 in	 full
palmar	abduction	and	hold	it	there	as	the	examiner	tries	to	force	the	thumb	down
toward	the	palm.	The	examiner	may	do	this	in	several	ways.	A	commonly	used
technique	is	for	the	examiner	to	hold	the	back	of	the	patient’s	hand	in	his	palm,
touch	 the	 radial	 side	 of	 the	 patient’s	 thumb	 with	 the	 palmar	 aspect	 of	 his	 own
(usually	right	hand	against	right	hand),	and	then	make	a	compound	motion	with
the	long	and	short	flexors	and	opponens	to	pull	the	patient’s	thumb	down.	The
patient,	using	only	his	thumb	abductors,	is	outnumbered	and	outgunned	and	will
usually	lose.	A	better	technique	is	to	use	APB	against	APB.	The	examiner	holds
the	patient’s	hand	as	above.	The	examiner	and	patient	both	hold	their	thumbs	in
full	 abduction,	 radial	 aspect	 to	 radial	 aspect,	 IP	 joint	 to	 IP	 joint;	 then,	 the
examiner,	 using	 only	 his	 thumb	 abductors,	 tries	 to	 press	 the	 patient’s	 thumb
down.	 This	 is	 normally	 a	 match.	 If	 the	 patient’s	 APB	 yields,	 the	 degree	 of
weakness	 may	 be	 semiquantitated	 if	 the	 examiner	 then	 uses	 progressively
weaker	muscles	against	the	patient’s	APB.	This	is	sometimes	useful	for	follow-
up.	Suppose	the	patient’s	APB	could	be	overcome	by	the	examiner’s	APB,	first
dorsal	interosseous	(first	DI),	and	ADM	on	the	first	visit,	but	after	treatment,	the
patient’s	APB	can	stand	up	to	the	examiner’s	ADM.	This	means	that	there	has
been	improvement.	If	the	patient’s	APB	could	stand	up	to	the	examiner’s	ADM
initially	but	fails	later,	then	there	has	been	worsening.

FIGURE	 27.29	 Palmar	 abduction	 of	 the	 thumb.	 The	 patient	 attempts,	 against
resistance,	to	bring	the	thumb	to	a	point	vertically	above	its	original	position.

Side-to-side	 “confrontational	 testing”	 is	 a	 similar	 like-muscle-against-like-
muscle	 method	 for	 testing	 hand	 intrinsic	 strength.	 The	 patient	 pushes	 his	 own
abducted	small	fingers	or	index	fingers	together.	If	one	side	is	weak,	the	finger
on	the	strong	side	will	force	the	finger	on	the	weak	side	into	adduction.	See	Dr.
John	 K.	 Wolf’s	 Segmental	 Neurology	 for	 further	 elaboration	 on	 these	 elegant
muscle-to-muscle	techniques.

Opposition	of	the	thumb	is	tested	by	having	the	patient	touch	the	little	finger
with	 the	 thumb	 (Figure	 27.30).	 With	 the	 thumbnail	 on	 a	 plane	 approximately
parallel	to	the	palm,	the	palmar	surface	of	the	tip	of	the	thumb	should	contact	the
palmar	 surface	 of	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 little	 finger.	 When	 the	 OP	 is	 weak,	 the	 patient
may	be	able	to	oppose	the	thumb	to	the	index	or	middle	finger,	but	not	the	little
finger.	 In	 testing	 opposition	 of	 the	 little	 finger	 by	 the	 opponens	 digiti	 minimi
(ulnar	nerve,	C8-T1),	the	patient	moves	the	extended	little	finger	in	front	of	the
other	fingers	and	toward	the	thumb	(Figure	27.31).	Opposition	of	the	thumb	and
little	 finger	 may	 be	 tested	 in	 one	 maneuver.	 When	 both	 are	 opposed,	 their
extended	tips	meet	and	form	an	arch	over	the	cupped	palm	(Figure	27.32).	 The

strength	 of	 the	 combined	 movement	 may	 be	 gauged	 by	 the	 patient’s	 ability	 to
hold	onto	a	piece	of	paper	held	between	finger	and	thumb	as	the	examiner	tries
to	 pull	 it	 free,	 or	 the	 examiner	 may	 attempt	 to	 pull	 his	 finger	 between	 the
touching	tips	of	the	thumb	and	little	finger.	The	flexors	of	the	thumb	and	little
finger	and	the	short	abductor	of	the	thumb	probably	enter	into	these	movements.

FIGURE	 27.30	 Examination	 of	 the	 opponens	 pollicis.	 The	 patient	 attempts,	 against
resistance,	to	touch	the	tip	of	the	little	finger	with	the	thumb.

The	 adductor	 pollicis	 is	 the	 final	 muscle	 innervated	 by	 the	 deep	 palmar
branch	 of	 the	 ulnar	 nerve	 (C8-T1).	 It	 adducts	 the	 thumb	 and	 flexes	 the	 first
metacarpal.	 Adduction	 of	 the	 thumb	 is	 also	 carried	 out	 in	 two	 planes:	 in	 the
plane	 of	 the	 palm	 (ulnar	 adduction)	 and	 in	 a	 plane	 at	 right	 angles	 to	 the	 palm
(palmar	adduction).	Ulnar	adduction	is	touching	the	ulnar	aspect	of	the	thumb	to
the	 radial	 aspect	 of	 the	 second	 metacarpal,	 the	 thumb	 in	 the	 same	 plane	 as	 the
palm	and	the	thumbnail	as	nearly	as	possible	parallel	with	the	other	fingernails,
as	if	to	put	the	hand	into	salute	position.	In	palmar	adduction,	the	ulnar	aspect	of
the	thumb	touches	the	palmar	aspect	of	the	second	metacarpal	so	that	the	thumb
and	 index	 finger	 lie	 perpendicular	 to	 each	 other,	 with	 the	 thumbnail	 at	 right
angles	 to	 the	 other	 fingernails	 (Figure	 27.33).	 A	 commonly	 used	 test	 of
adduction	power	in	either	of	these	positions	is	to	have	the	patient	try	to	hold	a

piece	of	paper	tightly	between	thumb	and	hand	as	the	examiner	tries	to	extract	it
(Figure	 27.34).	 When	 thumb	 adduction	 is	 weak,	 the	 patient	 may	 make	 a
substitution	movement,	flexing	the	IP	joint	with	the	FPL	and	trying	to	secure	the
paper	 with	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 thumb	 (Froment’s	 sign),	 a	 common	 finding	 in	 ulnar
neuropathy.

FIGURE	 27.31	 Examination	 of	 the	 opponens	 digiti	 minimi.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to
move	the	extended	little	finger	in	front	of	the	other	fingers	and	toward	the	thumb.

FIGURE	27.32	Opposition	of	the	thumb	and	little	finger.

Adduction	 of	 the	 fingers	 is	 the	 movement	 that	 brings	 the	 fingers	 tightly
together;	 abduction	 spreads	 the	 fingers	 apart.	 Adduction	 is	 a	 function	 of	 the
volar	 interossei,	 whereas	 abduction	 is	 a	 function	 of	 the	 dorsal	 interossei.
Abduction	of	the	little	finger	is	done	by	the	ADM.	Adduction	may	be	tested	in
several	 ways.	 With	 the	 fingers	 abducted	 and	 extended,	 the	 patient	 may	 try	 to
adduct	 the	 fingers	 against	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.35).	 The	 patient	 may	 try	 to
clutch	a	piece	of	paper	between	two	fingers	and	resist	the	examiner’s	attempts	to
withdraw	it.	The	examiner	may	interdigitate	his	fingers	between	the	patient’s	and
have	the	patient	squeeze	as	tightly	as	possible.	Another	test	is	to	have	the	patient
make	a	“finger	cone,”	by	holding	the	hand	palm	up,	touching	the	index	and	ring
fingers	 together	 above	 the	 middle	 finger,	 and	 then	 laying	 the	 small	 finger	 atop
the	 ring	 finger.	 This	 movement	 requires	 good	 adduction	 power.	 If	 the	 patient
then	opposes	the	thumb	to	the	small	finger,	all	major	muscle	groups	of	the	hand
have	been	tested	in	one	quick	maneuver.	Yet	another	adduction	test	is	to	have	the
patient,	 palm	 down,	 lay	 the	 middle	 finger	 across	 the	 index	 finger	 as	 far	 as
possible,	trying	to	touch	the	ulnar	aspect	of	the	middle	finger	to	the	radial	aspect
of	the	index	finger.

FIGURE	 27.33	 Palmar	 adduction	 of	 the	 thumb.	 The	 patient,	 against	 resistance,
attempts	 to	 approximate	 the	 thumb	 to	 the	 palmar	 aspect	 of	 the	 index	 finger;	 the
thumbnail	is	kept	at	a	right	angle	to	the	nails	of	the	other	fingers.

FIGURE	27.34	Ulnar	adduction	of	the	thumb.	The	patient	attempts	to	grasp	a	piece	of
paper	between	the	thumb	and	the	radial	border	of	the	index	finger	while	the	thumbnail
is	 parallel	 to	 the	 nails	 of	 the	 other	 fingers.	 In	 ulnar	 neuropathy,	 the	 IP	 joint	 flexes	 to
compensate	for	weakness	of	the	adductor	pollicis	(Froment’s	sign,	Chapter	46).

FIGURE	 27.35	 Adduction	 of	 the	 fingers.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to	 adduct	 the	 fingers
against	resistance.

The	 usual	 test	 of	 abduction	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 keep	 the	 fingers	 fully
extended	 and	 spread	 apart	 and	 resist	 the	 examiner’s	 attempt	 to	 bring	 them
together	(Figure	27.36).	In	most	circumstances,	the	examination	concentrates	on
the	first	DI	and	the	ADM.	A	commonly	used	technique	is	for	the	examiner	to	use
a	 claw-like	 grip	 with	 his	 palm	 against	 the	 back	 of	 the	 patient’s	 fingers,	 patient
and	 examiner	 both	 palm	 down,	 examiner’s	 small	 finger	 hooked	 around	 the
patient’s	 small	 finger,	 and	 thumb	 around	 the	 patient’s	 index	 finger;	 then,	 the
examiner	 pulls	 the	 thumb	 and	 small	 finger	 together	 to	 overpower	 the	 patient’s
finger	 abductors.	 This	 is	 a	 mismatch	 in	 that	 the	 muscles	 the	 examiner	 is	 using
are	more	powerful	than	the	muscles	the	patient	is	using,	so	the	examiner	always
overcomes	the	finger	abductors	and	must	develop	a	feel	for	how	much	resistance

is	normal.	A	better	technique	is	for	the	patient	and	examiner	to	match	muscles.
The	 patient	 and	 examiner	 both	 have	 their	 hands	 palms	 down,	 fingers	 extended
and	abducted.	With	the	radial	aspect	of	his	right	index	finger	against	the	radial
aspect	of	the	patient’s	right	index	finger,	the	fingertip	of	each	about	at	the	level
of	the	PIP	joint	of	the	other,	the	examiner	tries	to	overcome	the	patient’s	first	DI
with	his	own	first	DI,	like	muscle	against	like	muscle	(as	described	for	the	APB
above).	Similarly	for	the	ADM,	but	patient	and	examiner	are	both	palms	up.	If
the	patient	and	examiner	are	both	right	handed	or	both	left	handed,	this	method
has	 the	 advantage	 of	 pitting	 dominant	 hand	 against	 dominant	 hand	 and
nondominant	 against	 nondominant.	 A	 more	 efficient	 if	 less	 ideal	 technique	 for
testing	 finger	 abduction	 of	 the	 patient’s	 right	 hand	 is	 as	 follows.	 The	 patient
holds	his	right	hand	palm	down,	fingers	fully	abducted.	The	examiner	holds	his
right	hand	palm	down,	his	left	palm	up,	right	index	finger	against	the	patient’s
right	 index	 finger,	 and	 left	 small	 finger	 against	 the	 patient’s	 right	 small	 finger.
Using	 these	 like	 muscles,	 the	 examiner	 then	 tries	 to	 force	 the	 patient’s	 fingers
together.

FIGURE	 27.36	 Examination	 of	 the	 abduction	 of	 the	 fingers.	 The	 patient	 resists	 the

examiner’s	attempt	to	bring	the	fingers	together.

Examination	of	Movements	and	Muscles	of	the
Thorax,	Abdomen,	and	Trunk

The	 actions	 of	 the	 large	 muscles	 of	 the	 trunk,	 chest,	 and	 abdomen	 are	 often
combined,	 and	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	evaluate	 them	 individually	 (Table	27.6).	 Except
for	 the	 respiratory	 muscles,	 most	 of	 these	 muscles	 have	 scant	 neurologic
significance.

The	Muscles	of	the	Thorax

The	major	thoracic	muscles	consist	of	the	internal	and	external	intercostals	and
diaphragm.	 Muscles	 attached	 to	 the	 sternum,	 clavicles,	 and	 scapulae	 act	 as
accessory	muscles	of	respiration.	The	intercostal	muscles	are	innervated	by	the
intercostal	 nerves,	 which	 are	 the	 anterior	 divisions	 of	 the	 12	 thoracic	 spinal
nerves.	 The	 diaphragm	 is	 innervated	 by	 C3-C5	 through	 the	 phrenic	 nerves,
which	arise	directly	from	the	nerve	roots.	The	diaphragm	is	the	principal	muscle
of	 respiration.	 During	 quiet	 inspiration,	 intercostal	 contraction	 expands	 the
anteroposterior	and	transverse	diameters	of	the	thorax,	and	the	vertical	diameter
is	 increased	 by	 the	 descent	 of	 the	 diaphragm.	 In	 deep	 inspiration,	 additional
muscles	are	brought	into	action,	including	the	scaleni,	SCMs,	and	other	muscles
that	act	on	the	shoulders,	clavicles,	and	scapulae.	The	diaphragm	also	contracts
during	 various	 expulsive	 acts	 such	 as	 coughing,	 sneezing,	 laughing,	 vomiting,
hiccuping,	urination,	defecation,	and	parturition.

Weakness	 of	 the	 intercostal	 muscles	 causes	 adduction	 of	 the	 costal	 margins
and	 abdominal	 respiration,	 with	 alternate	 bulging	 and	 retraction	 of	 the
epigastrium	 as	 increased	 diaphragmatic	 contraction	 compensates	 for	 the
intercostal	 weakness	 (abdominal	 breathing).	 The	 intercostal	 spaces	 may	 retract
during	inspiration,	and	the	ribs	do	not	rise	and	separate.	When	bilateral	paralysis
of	the	diaphragm	is	present,	the	excursion	of	the	costal	margins	is	increased	and
the	 epigastrium	 does	 not	 bulge	 during	 inspiration.	 The	 moving	 shadow	 caused
by	retraction	of	the	lower	intercostal	spaces	during	inspiration	(Litten’s	sign)	is
absent.	 The	 expulsive	 acts,	 primarily	 coughing,	 are	 carried	 out	 with	 difficulty.
Quick,	 forceful	 diaphragmatic	 contractions	 are	 impaired;	 one	 manifestation	 of
this	may	be	the	inability	to	sniff.	Unilateral	diaphragmatic	weakness	is	difficult

to	detect,	but	the	excursion	of	the	costal	margin	on	the	affected	side	during	quiet
inspiration	 may	 be	 slightly	 increased,	 and	 Litten’s	 sign	 is	 absent.	 Fluoroscopy,
ultrasonography,	 and	 phrenic	 nerve	 conduction	 studies,	 not	 to	 mention
pulmonary	 function	 tests,	 are	 far	 superior	 to	 physical	 examination	 in	 detecting
diaphragmatic	 impairment.	Diaphragm	 function	 should	 be	 particularly	 assessed
in	patients	with	spinal	cord	lesions	that	involve	the	C3-C5	segments.	If	there	is
diaphragmatic	 or	 intercostal	 weakness,	 the	 accessory	 muscles	 that	 act	 in	 deep
inspiration	 are	 brought	 into	 play,	 and	 breathing	 recruits	 the	 scaleni,	 SCMs,
serrati,	and	pectorals.

FIGURE	 27.37	 Examination	 of	 the	 abdominal	 muscles.	 The	 recumbent	 patient
attempts	to	raise	his	head	against	resistance.

The	Muscles	of	the	Abdomen

The	 abdominal	 muscles	 are	 the	 rectus	 abdominis,	 pyramidalis,	 transversus
abdominis,	and	obliqui.	Weakness	of	these	muscle	groups	does	not	often	occur
in	 neurologic	 patients.	 The	 abdominal	 muscles	 are	 innervated	 by	 the	 anterior
divisions	of	the	thoracic	spinal	nerves.	The	rectus	abdominis	flexes	the	vertebral
column,	 compresses	 the	 abdominal	 viscera	 in	 such	 acts	 as	 defecation	 and

parturition,	and	aids	in	forced	expiration.

When	 performing	 a	 sit-up,	 the	 abdominal	 muscles	 contract	 strongly	 during
the	initial	phase	of	the	movement,	when	raising	the	head	and	shoulders.	After	the
shoulders	have	been	raised	about	8	in,	the	hip	flexors	contract	strongly	and	bring
the	trunk	to	an	upright	position.	The	abdominal	muscles	may	be	tested	by	having
the	patient	raise	the	head	against	resistance	(Figure	27.37),	cough,	or	do	a	sit-up.
If	the	abdominal	muscles	are	weak	but	the	hip	flexors	normal,	hyperextension	of
the	 spine	 will	 occur	 during	 an	 attempted	 sit-up.	 If	 the	 abdominal	 muscles
contract	equally	in	all	four	quadrants,	the	umbilicus	will	not	move.	If	the	lower
abdominal	muscles	are	paralyzed,	as	in	a	T10	myelopathy,	the	upper	abdominal
muscles	 will	 pull	 the	 umbilicus	 cephalad	 when	 the	 patient	 raises	 the	 head	 or
attempts	a	sit-up	(Beevor’s	sign,	see	Video	Link	27.3).	More	rarely,	abnormal
movement	of	the	umbilicus	may	occur	with	weakness	of	the	upper	abdominals
or	if	the	weakness	is	unilateral.

The	Muscles	of	the	Pelvis

The	pelvic	muscles,	including	the	urinary	bladder	and	the	perineal	and	external
genital	 muscles,	 are	 not	 accessible	 for	 the	 usual	 clinical	 testing.	 A	 crude
assessment	 can	 be	 obtained	 by	 reflex	 activation,	 for	 example,	 cremasteric,
bulbocavernosus,	and	anal	wink.	These	are	discussed	in	Chapter	39.	The	bladder
and	some	of	the	functions	of	the	genitalia	are	discussed	in	Chapter	45.

The	Muscles	of	the	Spine

The	 muscles	 that	 extend	 and	 rotate	 the	 spine	 were	 introduced	 above	 in	 the
discussion	of	neck	muscles.	Most	of	these	muscle	groups	extend	down	the	entire
spine,	 and	 for	 general	 clinical	 purposes,	 they	 are	 considered	 as	 a	 group:	 the
erector	spinae,	paravertebral,	or	paraspinal	muscles.	Paraspinal	examination	is	an
important	 part	 of	 needle	 electromyography.	 Abnormalities	 in	 the	 paraspinal
muscles	 help	 differentiate	 nerve	 root	 disease	 from	 plexus	 and	 peripheral	 nerve
disease.	 The	 paraspinals	 are	 also	 often	 abnormal	 electromyographically	 in
myopathies.	 The	 movements	 of	 the	 spine	 are	 flexion,	 extension,	 rotation,	 and
lateral	 bending.	 The	 muscles	 that	 produce	 these	 movements	 are	 examined	 en
masse	 by	 examining	 the	 movements	 rather	 than	 individual	 muscles.	 All	 the
paraspinal	 muscles	 are	 innervated	 by	 the	 posterior	 primary	 rami	 of	 the	 spinal
nerves.

FIGURE	27.38	 Examination	 of	 the	 extensors	 of	 the	 spine.	 The	 patient,	 lying	 prone,
attempts	to	raise	the	head	and	upper	part	of	the	trunk.

The	 extensors	 of	 the	 spine	 are	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 prone	 patient	 raise	 the
head	 and	 shoulders	 without	 the	 assistance	 of	 the	 hands	 (Figure	 27.38);	 in	 a
continuation	 of	 this,	 the	 young	 and	 supple	 may	 be	 able	 to	 raise	 the	 legs	 and
balance	on	the	belly.	The	ability	to	perform	these	maneuvers	indicates	normality,
but	further	assessment	may	be	done	by	pressing	downward	against	the	patient’s
extension	 motion.	 The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 paraspinal	 weakness	 is	 primary
muscle	 disease,	 particularly	 muscular	 dystrophies,	 especially	 FSH	 dystrophy.
Patients	 with	 weak	 spine	 extensors	 often	 adopt	 a	 lordotic,	 sometimes
hyperlordotic,	 posture.	 This	 is	 because	 the	 paraspinals	 normally	 function	 like
guy-wires	 on	 a	 tower	 antenna,	 helping	 to	 balance	 the	 spine	 above	 the	 pelvis.
With	 forward	 bending,	 contraction	 of	 the	 paraspinals	 prevents	 tipping	 over.
Patients	 with	 paraspinal	 weakness	 cannot	 rely	 on	 their	 spine	 extensors	 to	 keep
them	 from	 falling	 forward,	 so	 they	 lean	 backward	 to	 compensate	 and	 maintain
balance.	The	result	is	the	lordotic	posture.	In	FSH,	the	hyperlordosis	may	reach
bizarre	 proportions,	 with	 the	 patient	 leaning	 so	 far	 backward	 the	 spine
approaches	 horizontal.	 The	 lordosis	 disappears	 when	 the	 patient	 lies	 down.
When	 patients	 with	 some	 dystrophies,	 particularly	 Duchenne’s,	 become
wheelchair	 bound,	 the	 paraspinal	 weakness	 may	 lead	 to	 scoliosis,	 often	 severe
enough	to	require	surgical	intervention.

FIGURE	 27.39	 Examination	 of	 the	 abdominal	 muscles	 and	 flexor	 muscles	 of	 the
spine.	The	patient	attempts	to	rise	from	a	recumbent	to	a	sitting	position	without	the
use	of	the	hands.

The	flexors	of	the	spine	are	tested	by	having	the	patient	rise	from	recumbent
to	seated	and	then	to	a	standing	position	without	using	the	hands	(Figure	27.39).
The	 flexors	 of	 the	 abdomen	 and	 hips	 are	 also	 involved	 in	 this	 movement.	 The
flexors	and	extensors	of	the	spine	may	both	be	tested	by	having	the	patient	try	to
touch	toes	with	fingertips	and	stand	back	up.

Examination	of	the	Movements	and	Muscles	of
the	Lower	Extremities

The	 movements	 of	 the	 lower	 extremities	 are	 less	 complex	 than	 those	 of	 the
upper	 extremities,	 and	 there	 are	 fewer	 substitution	 movements.	Table	 27.7	 lists
the	pertinent	muscles	and	their	innervation.	Some	muscles	of	the	lower	extremity
have	complicated	actions	that	seem	discordant	(e.g.,	the	hamstrings	flex	the	knee
but	extend	the	hip).	This	is	largely	due	to	the	rotation	of	the	lower	extremity	into
a	new	functional	position	that	occurred	during	the	evolution	to	land	vertebrates.
The	 ventral	 surface	 of	 the	 thigh	 came	 to	 lie	 posterior	 so	 that	 the	 knee	 flexes

backward	even	though	the	hip	flexes	forward.

The	Hip	Joint

The	 movements	 that	 take	 place	 at	 the	 hip	 are	 flexion,	 extension,	 abduction,
adduction,	 and	 internal	 and	 external	 rotation.	 The	 principal	 hip	 flexor	 is	 the
iliopsoas.	 Important	 accessory	 hip	 flexors	 are	 the	 rectus	 femoris,	 sartorius,	 and
tensor	fascia	lata.	The	iliopsoas	has	two	parts,	the	psoas	and	the	iliacus,	which
have	 the	 same	 function.	 The	 psoas	 portion	 is	 innervated	 by	 branches	 from	 the
lumbosacral	plexus	(L1-L4).	The	psoas	arises	from	both	the	transverse	processes
and	the	bodies	of	the	lumbar	vertebra.	The	intervertebral	foramina	of	L1-L4	lie
between	these	two	points	of	origin	so	that	the	roots	that	form	the	lumbar	plexus
exit	into	the	substance	of	the	muscle	and	the	plexus	lies	within	it.	This	anatomy
accounts	for	the	severe	damage	to	the	lumbosacral	plexus	that	commonly	occurs
with	 hemorrhage	 into	 the	 psoas	 muscle.	 The	 iliacus	 portion	 arises	 in	 the	 iliac
fossa	and	is	innervated	by	the	femoral	nerve	(L2-L4).

The	two	iliopsoas	muscles	acting	together	from	each	side	help	to	maintain	an
erect	 posture	 by	 balancing	 the	 spine	 and	 pelvis	 over	 the	 femurs,	 preventing	 a
backward	tilt.	When	the	legs	are	fixed,	they	flex	the	trunk	and	pelvis	forward,	as
in	doing	a	sit-up.	Hip	flexor	strength	is	tested	by	having	the	patient	flex	the	hip
against	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.40).	 This	 may	 be	 done	 in	 the	 sitting	 or	 supine
position.	If	sitting,	the	patient	should	not	be	permitted	to	lean	backward.	When
testing	 in	 the	 sitting	 position,	 normal	 hip	 flexors	 cannot	 be	 overcome	 by	 an
examiner	 using	 hand	 and	 arm	 strength	 from	 an	 arm’s	 length	 away.	 If	 the
examiner	stands	close	and	uses	his	body	weight,	the	hip	flexors	can	usually	be
defeated.	When	testing	supine,	a	patient	with	mild	hip	flexor	weakness	may	still
be	able	to	raise	the	leg	with	the	knee	extended;	with	more	severe	weakness,	the
hip	can	only	be	flexed	with	the	knee	flexed.	Another	hip	flexor	test	is	to	have	the
supine	 patient	 attempt	 to	maintain	 both	 lower	 extremities	 flexed	 at	 the	 hip	 and
extended	at	the	knee,	the	legs	at	about	a	45-degree	angle	off	the	bed,	feet	apart.
This	is	a	difficult	callisthenic	maneuver	that	not	all	patients	can	perform.	If	the
hip	flexors	are	mildly	weak	unilaterally,	as	in	a	CST	lesion,	the	involved	lower
extremity	 will	 drift	 downward	 more	 rapidly	 than	 its	 fellow	 (leg	 drift).	 Another
version	of	this	test	can	be	used	to	look	for	subtle	hamstring	weakness	(see	“The
Knee	Joint”).

FIGURE	27.40	Examination	of	the	flexors	of	the	thigh.	The	patient	attempts	to	flex	the
thigh	against	resistance;	the	knee	is	flexed	and	the	leg	rests	on	the	examiner’s	arm.

The	 major	 hip	 extensor	 is	 the	 gluteus	 maximus	 (inferior	 gluteal	 nerve,	 L5-
S2).	The	gluteus	maximus	is	the	most	powerful	extensor	and	external	rotator	of
the	 thigh.	 Accessory	 hip	 extensors	 are	 the	 glutei	 medius	 and	 minimus,
hamstrings,	 and	 hip	 adductors.	 The	 gluteus	 maximus	 is	 important	 in	 climbing
steps,	jumping,	and	rising	from	a	chair.	Hip	extensor	function	is	best	tested	with
the	 patient	 prone,	 raising	 the	 flexed	 knee	 up	 from	 the	 table	 against	 downward
pressure	 from	 the	 examiner	 (Figure	 27.41).	 Having	 the	 knee	 flexed	 minimizes
any	 contribution	 from	 the	 hamstrings.	 The	 gluteus	 maximus	 can	 also	 be	 tested
with	the	patient	lying	on	the	side	and	extending	the	hip,	or	seated	and	trying	to
press	 the	 raised	 knee	 back	 down	 as	 the	 examiner	 holds	 it	 up,	 or	 by	 testing	 the
ability	 to	 stand	 upright	 from	 a	 stooped	 position.	 With	 hip	 girdle	 weakness,
particularly	 in	 the	 muscular	 dystrophies,	 there	 is	 marked	 weakness	 of	 the	 hip
extensors,	 and	 the	 patient	 arises	 from	 a	 stooped	 position	 by	 using	 his	 hands	 to
“climb	up	the	legs”	(Gowers’	sign	or	maneuver,	see	Video	Link	27.4).

The	 primary	 abductors	 of	 the	 hip	 are	 the	 gluteus	 medius,	 gluteus	 minimus,
and	tensor	fasciae	lata	(TFL).	These	muscles	are	supplied	by	L4-S1	through	the
superior	 gluteal	 nerve.	 They	 also	 function	 as	 internal	 rotators	 of	 the	 hip.	 The
TFL	 also	 tightens	 the	 fascia	 lata	 and	 flexes	 the	 hip.	 The	 hip	 abductors	 may	 be

tested	 either	 supine	 or	 sitting	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 attempt	 to	 hold	 the	 lower
extremities	 outward	 with	 ankles	 spread	 far	 apart	 as	 the	 examiner	 tries	 to	 force
the	ankles	together	(Figure	27.42).	Weakness	of	hip	abduction	is	often	present	in
myopathies	affecting	the	hip	girdle	musculature.

FIGURE	27.41	Examination	of	the	extensors	of	the	thigh	at	the	hip.	The	patient,	lying
prone	with	the	leg	flexed	at	the	knee,	attempts	to	extend	the	thigh	against	resistance;
contraction	of	the	gluteus	maximus	and	other	extensors	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

The	 hip	 abductors	 are	 very	 important	 in	 walking.	 With	 each	 step,	 the
abductors	of	the	stance	leg	must	generate	enough	force	to	balance	all	the	weight
of	the	rest	of	the	body	in	order	to	keep	the	pelvis	level.	Without	contraction	of
the	hip	abductors,	the	hip	would	slide	laterally	toward	the	stance	leg	as	the	pelvis
tilted	and	the	stance	leg	adducted.	When	the	hip	abductors	are	weak,	there	is	an
exaggerated	pelvic	swing	during	the	stance	phase	as	the	pelvis	on	the	side	of	the
swing	leg	drops	downward	(Trendelenburg’s	sign).	When	bilateral,	the	result	is	a
gait	pattern	referred	to	as	a	pelvic	waddle,	which	resembles	the	exaggerated	hip
swing	 of	 a	 fashion	 model.	 The	 waddling	 gait	 is	 particularly	 common	 in
myopathies	
the	 pelvic	 girdle	 musculature.	 A	 unilateral
Trendelenburg	 sign	 can	 occur	 with	 processes	 that	 weaken	 the	 hip	 abductors
unilaterally,	such	as	lumbosacral	radiculopathy	(Chapters	44	and	47).

that	 weaken	

FIGURE	27.42	 Abduction	 of	 the	 thigh	 at	 the	 hip.	 The	 recumbent	 patient	 attempts	 to
move	the	extended	leg	outward	against	resistance;	contraction	of	the	gluteus	medius
and	tensor	fasciae	latae	can	be	palpated.

FIGURE	 27.43	 Examination	 of	 adduction	 of	 the	 thigh	 at	 the	 hip.	 The	 recumbent
patient	 attempts	 to	 adduct	 the	 extended	 leg	 against	 resistance;	 contraction	 of	 the
adductor	muscles	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Adduction	of	the	hip	is	principally	a	function	of	the	three	adductors:	longus,
brevis,	 and	 magnus.	 The	 adductor	 magnus	 is	 the	 longest	 and	 strongest	 hip
adductor.	Other	muscles	may	play	a	minor	role.	The	three	adductors	are	supplied
by	L2-L4	through	the	obturator	nerve.	The	adductor	magnus	also	receives	a	twig
from	the	sciatic	nerve	carrying	innervation	from	L4	to	L5.	The	adductors	can	be
tested	with	the	patient	supine,	sitting,	or	lying	on	one	side.	The	patient	attempts
to	bring	the	legs	together	as	the	examiner	tries	to	keep	them	apart	(Figure	27.43).
As	 with	 the	 abductors,	 the	 adductors	 are	 so	 powerful	 it	 is	 helpful	 to	 keep	 the
patient’s	 knees	 extended	 to	 give	 the	 examiner	 the	 advantage	 of	 a	 longer	 lever.
When	testing	with	the	patient	in	the	decubitus	position,	the	examiner	raises	the
uppermost	leg	with	the	patient	trying	to	keep	the	legs	together;	this	should	raise
the	 entire	 body,	 with	 the	 lowermost	 leg	 remaining	 apposed	 and	 following	 the
upward	 movement.	 When	 the	 uppermost	 adductors	 are	 weak,	 the	 leg	 will
passively	 abduct	 and	 the	 torso	 will	 not	 move	 upward;	 when	 the	 lowermost
adductors	are	weak,	the	lower	leg	will	not	follow	the	upward	motion,	remaining
behind	on	the	bed.

Internal,	 or	 medial,	 rotation	 of	 the	 hip	 is	 carried	 out	 principally	 by	 the	 hip
abductor	muscles	(glutei	medius	and	minimus,	and	TFL),	with	some	contribution
from	the	adductors.	To	test	internal	rotation,	the	patient	lies	supine	with	the	hip
and	knee	flexed	or	prone	with	the	knee	flexed.	He	then	attempts	to	move	the	foot
laterally	against	resistance,	thus	rotating	the	hip	medially	(Figure	27.44).	Internal
rotation	can	also	be	tested	with	the	patient	supine	and	the	leg	extended,	rotating
the	foot	medially	as	if	to	touch	the	big	toe	to	the	bed.	Rotating	the	foot	medially
with	 the	 knee	 extended	 produces	 the	 same	 hip	 motion	 as	 carrying	 the	 foot
laterally	with	the	knee	flexed.	With	a	unilateral	CST	lesion	(e.g.,	acute	stroke),
the	internal	rotators	are	weak.	When	the	patient	lies	supine,	the	involved	leg	lies
externally	rotated	compared	to	its	fellow.	This	asymmetry	of	leg	position	may	be
a	clue	to	the	presence	of	a	hemiparesis	in	an	obtunded	patient.

External,	or	lateral,	rotation	of	the	thigh	at	the	hip	is	carried	out	primarily	by
the	 gluteus	 maximus.	 The	 piriformis	 externally	 rotates	 the	 extended	 thigh	 but
abducts	 the	 flexed	 thigh.	 External	 rotation	 is	 tested	 by	 maneuvers	 similar	 to
those	 for	 testing	 internal	 rotation,	 but	 the	 patient	 rotates	 the	 hip	 externally	 by
attempting	to	carry	the	foot	medially	against	resistance	with	the	knee	flexed.	If
these	muscles	are	paralyzed,	the	entire	leg	is	turned	inward.

An	 array	 of	 short	 muscles	 around	 the	 hip	 (obturators,	 gemelli,	 quadratus
femoris,	 piriformis,	 and	 pectineus)	 probably	 play	 a	 more	 important	 role	 as
postural	 muscles	 maintaining	 hip	 stability	 than	 as	 prime	 movers.	 The	 sartorius

(femoral	 nerve,	 L2-L3),	 the	 longest	 muscle	 in	 the	 body,	 has	 a	 complex	 set	 of
actions.	It	is	an	abductor,	flexor,	and	lateral	rotator	of	the	hip	and	a	flexor	and
medial	rotator	of	the	knee.	The	sartorius	would	be	active	when	trying	to	look	at
the	bottom	of	one’s	foot.

FIGURE	27.44	 Examination	 of	 internal	 rotation	 of	 the	 thigh.	 The	 patient,	 lying	 prone
with	the	leg	flexed	at	the	knee,	attempts	to	carry	the	foot	laterally	against	resistance,
thus	rotating	the	thigh	medially.

The	Knee	Joint

The	major	movements	that	take	place	at	the	knee	joint	are	flexion	and	extension.
Flexion	 of	 the	 knee	 is	 carried	 out	 primarily	 by	 the	 hamstring	 muscles	 (biceps
femoris,	 semimembranosus,	 and	 semitendinosus).	 Other	 muscles	 may	 play	 a
contributory	role.	The	hamstrings	also	act	as	powerful	hip	extensors.	The	biceps
femoris	(external	or	lateral	hamstring)	has	two	heads,	long	and	short.	The	belly
of	 the	 long	 head	 overlies	 the	 short	 head	 except	 just	 above	 the	 popliteal	 fossa.
Both	heads	are	innervated	by	the	sciatic	nerve	(L5,	S1-S2),	but	the	long	head	is
supplied	by	the	tibial	division	and	the	short	head	by	the	peroneal	division.	The
innervation	 of	 the	 short	 head	 by	 the	 peroneal	 division	 is	 important	 in
distinguishing	 lesions	 involving	 the	 peroneal	 (fibular)	 nerve	 at	 the	 knee	 from

those	 involving	 the	 peroneal	 division	 of	 the	 sciatic,	 which	 may	 be	 otherwise
inseparable.	 Involvement	 of	 the	 short	 head	 is	 not	 detectable	 by	 physical
examination	 but	 can	 be	 detected	 electromyographically.	 The	 common	 peroneal
nerve	 at	 the	 knee	 lies	 just	 medial	 to	 the	 biceps	 femoris	 tendon.	 The
semimembranosus	 and	 semitendinosus	 muscles	 (internal	 or	 medial	 hamstrings)
are	supplied	by	branches	of	the	sciatic	nerve	(L5,	S1-S2).

The	knee	flexors	may	be	tested	with	the	patient	prone	(Figure	27.45),	supine,
or	 sitting.	 With	 the	 knee	 in	 partial	 flexion,	 the	 patient	 resists	 the	 examiner’s
attempts	 to	 straighten	 the	 knee.	 The	 knee	 flexors	 are	 powerful	 and	 cannot
normally	 be	 overcome.	 Another	 test	 is	 to	 have	 the	 prone	 patient	 attempt	 to
maintain	 both	 knees	 flexed	 at	 about	 45	 degrees	 from	 horizontal	 with	 the	 feet
slightly	apart.	When	the	knee	flexors	are	weak	on	one	side,	as	in	a	CST	lesion,
the	 involved	 leg	 will	 sink,	 gradually	 or	 rapidly	 (leg	 drift,	 leg	 sign	 of	 Barré).
Examination	 of	 knee	 flexion	 with	 the	 patient	 prone	 makes	 it	 easier	 to	 see	 and
palpate	 the	 muscle	 contractions	 and	 lessens	 the	 likelihood	 of	 misinterpretation
because	 of	 simultaneous	 action	 of	 the	 hip	 flexors.	 The	 sartorius	 may	 be
examined	by	having	the	patient	attempt	to	flex	the	knee	against	resistance	with
the	hip	flexed	and	rotated	laterally	(Figure	27.46).

The	quadriceps	femoris	(femoral	nerve,	L2-L4)	is	the	primary	knee	extensor.
It	 is	 composed	 of	 four	 large	 muscles,	 rectus	 femoris,	 vastus	 lateralis,	 vastus
medialis,	 and	 vastus	 intermedius,	 which	 are	 united	 into	 a	 common	 tendon
inserted	into	the	upper	border	of	the	patella.	The	quadriceps	is	very	powerful.	It
is	capable	of	generating	as	much	as	1,000	lb	of	force—three	times	more	than	the
hamstrings.	The	rectus	femoris	originates	from	the	ilium	and	runs	straight	down
the	middle	of	the	thigh.	The	other	three	muscles	originate	from	the	shaft	of	the
femur	and	only	cross	the	knee	joint.	Because	the	rectus	femoris	also	crosses	the
hip,	it	serves	as	a	hip	flexor	as	well	as	a	knee	extensor.	The	vastus	medialis	is
sometimes	 divided	 into	 two	 parts:	 vastus	 medialis	 longus	 and	 vastus	 medialis
oblique.	Although	the	oblique	head	is	often	examined	electromyographically,	it
in	 fact	 is	 the	 only	 portion	 of	 the	 quadriceps	 that	 is	 incapable	 of	 extending	 the
knee.

FIGURE	 27.45	 Examination	 of	 flexion	 at	 the	 knee.	 The	 prone	 patient	 attempts	 to
maintain	flexion	of	the	leg	while	the	examiner	attempts	to	extend	it;	the	tendon	of	the
biceps	 femoris	 can	 be	 palpated	 laterally	 and	 the	 tendons	 of	 the	 semimembranosus
and	semitendinosus	medially.

FIGURE	27.46	Examination	of	the	sartorius.	With	the	thigh	flexed	and	rotated	laterally
and	 the	 knee	 moderately	 flexed,	 the	 patient	 attempts	 further	 flexion	 of	 the	 knee
against	resistance.

FIGURE	27.47	 Examination	 of	 extension	 of	 the	 leg	 at	 the	 knee.	 The	 supine	 patient
attempts	 to	 extend	 the	 leg	 at	 the	 knee	 against	 resistance;	 contraction	 of	 the

quadriceps	femoris	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

The	quadriceps	may	be	tested	when	the	patient,	sitting	or	supine,	attempts	to
extend	the	knee	against	the	examiner’s	resistance	(Figure	27.47).	The	quadriceps
is	 so	 powerful	 it	 is	 nearly	 impossible	 to	 overcome	 in	 the	 normal	 adolescent	 or
adult	 except	 by	 taking	 extreme	 mechanical	 advantage.	 A	 sometimes	 useful
technique	 for	 testing	 knee	 extension	 is	 the	 “barkeeper’s	 hold,”	 a	 hold	 usually
applied	to	the	elbow	to	control	unruly	patrons.	To	examine	the	right	quadriceps,
the	examiner,	standing	on	the	outer	aspect	of	the	knee	and	reaching	around	from
the	 inner	 aspect,	 places	 his	 left	 elbow,	 forearm	 pronated,	 beneath	 the	 patient’s
flexed	 knee,	 puts	 his	 right	 hand	 as	 far	 down	 on	 the	 shin	 as	 possible,	 and	 then
grips	his	right	forearm	with	his	left	hand,	locking	the	patient’s	leg	in	a	vice	from
front	and	 back.	 The	 examiner	then	 pulls	 upward	 with	 the	 elbow	 while	 pushing
downward	with	the	hand	as	the	patient	tries	to	extend	his	knee	(Figure	27.48).

With	severe	quadriceps	weakness,	the	sitting	patient	may	lean	backward	when
trying	 to	 extend	 the	 knee,	 attempting	 to	 muster	 some	 knee	 extension	 force	 by
allowing	 the	 rectus	 femoris	 to	 contract	 across	 the	 hip.	 The	 patient	 will	 have
marked	 difficulty	 in	 rising	 from	 a	 kneeling	 position	 and	 in	 climbing	 stairs;	 he
can	walk	backward	but	has	difficulty	walking	forward.

The	Ankle	Joint

Movements	about	the	ankle	joint	are	plantar	flexion,	dorsiflexion,	eversion,	and
inversion.	 Plantar	 flexion	 (flexion)	 of	 the	 foot	 is	 carried	 out	 principally	 by	 the
gastrocnemius	 and	 soleus	 muscles	 (gastrosoleus,	 triceps	 surae).	 Other	 muscles
cross	 posterior	 to	 the	 axis	 of	 rotation	 of	 the	 ankle	 but	 because	 of	 mechanical
factors	 are	 not	 very	 effective	 plantar	 flexors.	 The	 gastrocnemius	 also	 assists	 in
flexing	the	knee.	The	gastrosoleus	raises	the	heel,	as	in	walking,	and	inverts	the
foot.	The	calf	muscles	are	innervated	by	the	tibial	nerve	(S1-S2).

The	function	of	these	muscles	is	tested	manually	by	having	the	patient	plantar
flex	 the	 ankle	 as	 the	 examiner	 offers	 resistance	 by	 pressure	 against	 the	 sole	 of
the	 foot	 (Figure	 27.49).	 The	 plantar	 flexors	 of	 the	 ankle	 are	 among	 the	 most
powerful	 muscles	 in	 the	 body.	 They	 cannot	 normally	 be	 defeated	 by	 hand	 and
arm	 strength	 alone,	 even	 when	 the	 examiner	 takes	 maximal	 mechanical
advantage.	A	helpful	technique	is	to	use	the	forearm	as	a	lever	by	grasping	the
patient’s	 heel	 with	 the	 hand	 and	 pushing	 against	 the	 ball	 of	 the	 foot	 with	 the
volar	 forearm.	 Normal	 plantar	 flexors	 will	 hold	 fast	 even	 against	 this	 power

move.	 A	 better	 test	 of	 plantar	 flexor	 strength	 is	 to	 have	 the	 patient	 stand	 on
tiptoe.	 Normally,	 a	 patient	 can	 easily	 support	 the	 entire	 body	 weight	 on	 one
tiptoe,	hop	on	one	foot,	and	even	do	multiple	toe	raises	on	one	foot.	The	number
and	 ease	 of	 toe	 raise	 repetitions	 on	 the	 two	 sides	 may	 be	 compared	 to	 detect
subtle	weakness,	as	in	S1	radiculopathy.

FIGURE	 27.48	 The	 “barkeeper’s	 hold,”	 a	 powerful	 move	 against	 the	 quadriceps.
(From	 Wolf	 JK.	 Segmental	 Neurology.	 Baltimore:	 University	 Park	 Press,	 1981.
Reprinted	with	permission	from	Dr.	John	K.	Wolf.)

FIGURE	 27.49	 Examination	 of	 plantar	 flexion	 of	 the	 foot.	 The	 patient	 attempts	 to
plantar	 flex	 the	 foot	 at	 the	 ankle	 joint	 against	 resistance;	 contraction	 of	 the
gastrocnemius	and	associated	muscles	can	be	seen	and	palpated.

Dorsiflexion	 (extension)	 of	 the	 ankle	 is	 carried	 out	 primarily	 by	 the	 tibialis
anterior	 muscle,	 assisted	 by	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 longus	(EDL)	 and	 extensor
hallucis	 longus	 (EHL).	 The	 tibialis	 anterior	 is	 supplied	 by	 the	 deep	 peroneal
nerve	 (L4-L5).	 It	 also	 functions	 as	 an	 invertor,	 more	 so	 when	 the	 ankle	 is
dorsiflexed.	When	the	foot	is	planted	on	the	ground,	the	tibialis	anterior	tilts	the
lower	leg	forward,	as	in	walking.	The	foot	dorsiflexors	are	tested	by	having	the
patient	 pull	 the	 foot	 up	 against	 the	 examiner’s	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.50).	 The
dorsiflexors	are	powerful	and	cannot	normally	be	overcome,	even	with	maximal
effort	from	the	examiner.	Subtle	weakness	can	sometimes	be	detected	by	placing
the	patient	at	maximal	mechanical	disadvantage	with	the	foot	plantar	flexed	and
trying	 to	 hold	 the	 foot	 in	 that	 position	 as	 the	 patient	 tries	 to	 dorsiflex	 it.	 This
technique	 is	 most	 useful	 with	 unilateral	 weakness	 when	 the	 two	 sides	 can	 be
compared.	 Dorsiflexion	 may	 also	 be	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 stand	 on	 the
heels,	raising	the	toes	as	high	as	possible.	The	toes	on	the	weak	side	cannot	be
lifted	 as	 far.	 The	 tibialis	 anterior	 is	 the	 major	 muscle	 innervated	 by	 the	 L5
myotome;	 L5	 radiculopathy	 and	 peroneal	 neuropathy	 are	 the	 most	 common
causes	of	weakness.

FIGURE	 27.50	 Examination	 of	 dorsiflexion	 (extension)	 of	 the	 foot.	 The	 patient
attempts	to	dorsiflex	the	foot	against	resistance;	contraction	of	the	tibialis	anterior	can
be	seen	and	palpated.

With	severe	weakness	of	dorsiflexion,	there	is	a	footdrop.	The	patient	walks
with	 a	 “steppage	 gait,”	 raising	 the	 affected	 leg	 higher	 off	 the	 ground	 by
exaggerated	 flexion	 at	 the	 hip	 and	 knee,	 to	 permit	 the	 toes	 to	 clear	 during	 the
stride	phase	(see	Video	Link	27.5).	In	normal	walking,	heel	strike	occurs	first.
With	a	footdrop,	there	may	be	an	audible	double	slap	as	the	toes	contact	the	floor
first,	 followed	 by	 the	 heel.	 There	 may	 be	 inability	 to	 raise	 the	 forefoot	 off	 the
ground	while	trying	to	stand	on	the	heel.	The	term	footdrop	is	sometimes	applied
to	any	degree	of	dorsiflexion	weakness,	even	when	too	mild	to	cause	a	steppage
gait.	 The	 term	 steppage	 gait	 is	 also	 used	 to	 refer	 to	 the	 high-stepping,	 drum-
major	gait	of	a	patient	with	sensory	ataxia	as	he	slams	the	feet	to	the	ground	to
reinforce	proprioception	(Chapter	44).

Inversion	at	the	ankle	is	elevation	of	the	inner	border	of	the	foot	to	turn	the
sole	medially.	Several	muscles	can	perform	this	action	with	different	degrees	of
efficiency,	 determined	 in	 part	 by	 whether	 the	 ankle	 is	 dorsi-	 or	 plantar	 flexed.
The	tibialis	posterior	(tibial	nerve,	L5-S1),	the	strongest	invertor,	is	also	a	plantar
flexor	 and	 is	 strongest	 as	 an	 invertor	 when	 the	 ankle	 is	 plantar	 flexed.	 The
tibialis	anterior	functions	as	an	invertor	when	the	ankle	is	dorsiflexed.	Inversion
is	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 attempt	 to	 invert	 the	 ankle	 against	 resistance

(Figure	27.51).	Weakness	of	ankle	inversion	is	a	key	clinical	sign	indicating	that
a	footdrop	is	due	to	L5	radiculopathy	and	not	peroneal	neuropathy	at	the	knee.

Eversion,	 or	 lateral	 deviation,	 is	 elevation	 of	 the	 outer	 border	 of	 the	 foot	 to
turn	 the	 sole	 laterally.	 This	 movement	 is	 carried	 out	 by	 the	 peroneus	 longus,
brevis,	and	tertius	and	the	EDL.	The	peronei	are	supplied	by	spinal	segments	L4-
L5	and	S1,	the	longus	and	brevis	through	the	superficial	peroneal	nerve,	and	the
tertius	 through	 the	 deep	 peroneal	 nerve.	 To	 test	 these	 muscles,	 the	 patient
attempts	to	evert	the	ankle	against	resistance	applied	to	the	lateral	border	of	the
foot	(Figure	27.52).

The	evertors	and	invertors	of	the	ankle	are	very	important	in	ankle	stability.
When	 these	 muscles	 are	 weak,	 the	 patient	 is	 susceptible	 to	 ankle	 sprains;	 an
early	 symptom	 of	 ankle	 instability	 is	 difficulty	 walking	 over	 rough	 or	 uneven
terrain.

FIGURE	27.51	Examination	of	inversion	of	the	foot.	The	patient	attempts	to	raise	the
inner	border	of	the	foot	against	resistance;	the	tendon	of	the	tibialis	posterior	can	be
seen	and	palpated	just	behind	the	medial	malleolus.

Muscles	of	the	Foot	and	Toes

The	function	of	individual	foot	and	toe	muscles	is	not	as	clearly	defined	as	in	the
hand,	and	muscle	testing	cannot	be	carried	out	with	as	much	detail.	The	principal
movements	are	extension	(dorsiflexion)	and	flexion	(plantar	flexion)	of	the	toes.
With	 plantar	 flexion,	 there	 is	 cupping	 of	 the	 sole.	 Abduction	 and	 adduction	 of
the	toes	are	minimal.

FIGURE	27.52	Examination	of	eversion	of	the	foot.	The	patient	attempts	to	raise	the
outer	 border	 of	 the	 foot	 against	 resistance;	 the	 tendons	 of	 the	 peronei	 longus	 and
brevis	can	be	seen	and	palpated	just	above	and	behind	the	lateral	malleolus.

The	 toe	 extensors	 are	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 longus	 (EDL)	 and	 extensor
digitorum	 brevis	 (EDB)	 and	 the	 extensor	 hallucis	 longus	 (EHL)	 and	 extensor
hallucis	brevis	(EHB).	These	muscles	are	all	supplied	by	the	deep	peroneal	nerve
(EHL,	L5;	EDL	and	EDB,	L5-S1).

The	 long	 toe	 extensors	 extend	 the	 metatarsophalangeal	 (MTP)	 and	 IP	 joints

and	dorsiflex	the	ankle	joint.	The	EDL	is	also	an	evertor.	The	EDB	aids	the	EDL
in	extending	the	four	medial	toes.	Dorsiflexion	of	the	toes	against	resistance	may
be	 used	 as	 a	 test	 for	 the	 function	 of	 these	 muscles.	 The	 tendons	 of	 the	 long
extensors	and	the	belly	of	the	EDB	can	be	palpated	during	this	maneuver	(Figure
27.53).	The	EDB	normally	forms	a	prominent	bulge	on	the	dorsolateral	aspect	of
the	 foot.	 Its	 most	 medial	 and	 largest	 belly	 is	 the	 EHB.	 The	 EDB	 is	 the	 muscle
used	 for	 recording	 the	 compound	 muscle	 action	 potential	 when	 performing
peroneal	 nerve	 conduction	 studies.	 The	 EDB	 atrophies	 easily	 in	 neurogenic
processes,	 and	 its	 bulge	 may	 disappear	 in	 patients	 with	 radiculopathy	 or
peripheral	neuropathy.	Preservation	of	EDB	bulk	in	the	face	of	foot	dorsiflexion
weakness	suggests	a	myopathic	process	(e.g.,	distal	myopathy,	scapuloperoneal
dystrophy,	 FSH	 dystrophy).	 Weakness	 of	 the	 EHL	 is	 a	 key	 clinical	 sign	 of	 L5
radiculopathy;	 it	 is	 sometimes	 the	 only	 weak	 muscle.	 In	 testing	 for	 subtle
weakness	 between	 the	 two	 sides,	 a	 useful	 technique	 is	 for	 the	 examiner	 to	 test
the	 muscle	 using	 a	 relatively	 weak	 hand	 muscle,	 such	 as	 the	 first	 DI	 or	 the
ADM.	Either	of	these	muscles	may	be	able	to	overcome	the	EHL	on	the	weak
side	but	not	the	normal	side.	When	the	EHL	is	severely	weak	in	the	absence	of
severe	weakness	of	the	other	foot	and	toe	extensors,	the	patient	may	have	a	“toe
drop”	rather	than	a	“footdrop.”

FIGURE	 27.53	 Examination	 of	 dorsiflexion	 (extension)	 of	 the	 toes.	 On	 attempts	 to
dorsiflex	 the	 toes	 against	 resistance,	 the	 tendons	 of	 the	 extensors	 digitorum	 and
hallucis	 longus	 and	 the	 belly	 of	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 brevis	 can	 be	 seen	 and
palpated.

FIGURE	27.54	Examination	of	flexion	of	the	toes.	The	patient	attempts	to	flex	the	toes
against	resistance.

Flexion	of	the	toes	is	carried	out	by	the	flexors	digitorum	and	hallucis	longus,
flexors	 digitorum	 and	 hallucis	 brevis,	 and	 some	 of	 the	 intrinsic	 muscles	 of	 the
sole	 of	 the	 foot.	 These	 muscles	 are	 tested	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 flex	 the	 toes
against	 resistance	 (Figure	 27.54).	 The	 long	 toe	 flexors	 are	 calf	 muscles,
innervated	by	the	tibial	nerve	(L5,	S1-S2).	These	muscles	flex	the	phalanges	of
all	five	toes,	acting	chiefly	at	the	distal	IP	joints.	They	also	plantar	flex	the	ankle
joint	and	invert	the	foot.	The	short	toe	flexors	(medial	plantar	nerve,	S1-S2)	act
at	the	proximal	IP	and	MTP	joints.	Testing	of	the	intrinsic	muscles	of	the	sole	of
the	 foot	 is	 difficult	 and	 not	 clinically	 useful.	 Abduction	 and	 adduction	 are

extremely	weak	movements,	and	the	short	toe	flexors	are	more	powerful	than	the
other	 intrinsic	 muscles.	 These	 muscles	 may	 be	 tested	 together	 by	 asking	 the
patient	 to	 cup	 the	 sole	 of	 the	 foot	 (Figure	 27.55).	 Most	 of	 the	 intrinsic	 foot
muscles	 are	 more	 important	 in	 maintaining	 the	 longitudinal	 arches	 of	 the	 foot
than	in	moving	the	toes.

FIGURE	27.55	Cupping	of	the	sole	of	the	foot.

EXAMINATION	FOR	SUBTLE	HEMIPARESIS

The	 motor	 examination	 is	 not	 concluded	 just	 with	 the	 formal	 strength
assessment.	Patients	with	mild	CST	lesions	may	have	normal	strength	to	routine
testing,	but	the	neurologic	deficit	may	be	brought	out	using	ancillary	maneuvers.
The	most	important	of	these	is	the	examination	for	pronator	drift	(Barré’s	sign).
With	the	patient’s	upper	extremities	outstretched	to	the	front,	palms	up	and	with
the	 eyes	 closed,	 observe	 the	 position	 of	 each	 extremity	 (Figure	 27.56).	 The

patient	 should	 hold	 this	 position	 for	 at	 least	 20	 to	 30	 seconds.	 In	 normals,	 the
palms	 will	 remain	 flat,	 the	 elbows	 straight,	 and	 the	 limbs	 horizontal.	 Any
deviation	 from	 this	 position	 will	 be	 similar	 on	 the	 two	 sides.	 One	 exception	 to
the	usual	symmetry	is	that	the	dominant	hand	occasionally	may	pronate	slightly
more	than	the	nondominant,	perhaps	because	the	nondominant	extremities	tend
to	 be	 more	 flexible	 than	 the	 dominant	 extremities,	 making	 it	 more	 difficult	 to
stretch	 the	 dominant	 hand	 to	 a	 horizontal	 position.	 Slight	 pronation,	 without
downward	drift,	of	the	dominant	arm	(pseudodrift)	due	to	decreased	flexibility	is
not	 necessarily	 abnormal	 and	 must	 be	 interpreted	 in	 clinical	 context.	 However,
greater	 pronation	 of	 the	 nondominant	 arm	 is	 sometimes	 an	 indication	 of	 subtle
hemiparesis.	 Except	 for	 pseudodrift	 and	 for	 coincidental	 orthopedic	 or
musculoskeletal	 problems,	 there	 should	 be	 no	 difference	 between	 the	 positions
of	the	two	limbs.

The	 patient	 with	 a	 mild	 CST	 deficit	 may	 demonstrate	 “pronator	 drift”	 to
varying	 degrees	(Video	27.2).	 With	 mild	 drift,	 there	 is	 slight	 pronation	 of	 the
hand	 and	 slight	 flexion	 of	 the	 elbow	 on	 the	 abnormal	 side.	 With	 more	 severe
drift,	 there	 is	 more	 prominent	 pronation	 and	 obvious	 flexion	 of	 the	 elbow,	 and
there	 may	 be	 downward	 drift	 of	 the	 entire	 arm	 (Figure	 27.57).	 Because	 of	 the
innervation	pattern	of	the	CST,	the	minimally	weak	CST	innervated	muscles	are
overcome	by	the	non-CST	muscles.	With	a	mild	CST	lesion,	the	minimally	weak
muscles	 in	 the	 upper	 extremity	 are	 the	 extensors,	 supinators,	 and	 abductors.
These	 are	 overcome	 by	 the	 uninvolved	 and	 therefore	 stronger	 muscles:	 the
pronators,	 biceps,	 and	 internal	 rotators	 of	 the	 shoulder.	 As	 these	 overcome	 the
slightly	weakened	CST	innervated	muscles,	the	hand	pronates,	the	elbow	flexes,
and	 the	 arm	 drifts	 downward.	 The	 tendency	 to	 pronation	 and	 flexion	 in	 mild
hemiparesis	has	also	been	attributed	to	subtle	hypertonicity	in	the	pronator	and
flexor	muscle	groups.	Imagine	what	would	occur	if	this	motion	continued	to	the
extreme:	the	hand	would	become	hyperpronated,	the	elbow	fully	flexed,	and	the
shoulder	 internally	 rotated,	 that	 is,	 the	 position	 of	 spastic	 hemiparesis	 (Figure
27.58).	 The	 abnormal	 upper	 limb	 positions	 in	 minimal	 pronator	 drift	 and	 in
severe	spastic	hemiparesis	are	due	to	the	same	underlying	phenomenon:	strong
non-CST	muscles	overcome	variably	weak	CST	muscles	involved	by	the	disease
process.	 Another	 sign	 occasionally	 useful	 is	 the	 digiti	 quinti	 sign	 (see	 Video
Link	27.6).	With	the	hands	outstretched	in	drift	position,	the	small	finger	on	the
hemiparetic	side	may	be	abducted	more	than	on	the	normal	side.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	27.2	Discussion	of	the	examination	for	pronator	drift	and	its	underlying
pathophysiology.

FIGURE	 27.56	 Technique	 for	 testing	 for	 pronator	 drift.	 In	 the	 presence	 of	 a
corticospinal	 tract	 (CST)	 lesion,	 the	 selectively	 weakened	 muscles	 are	 the	 shoulder
abductors	 and	 external	 rotators,	 the	 supinators,	 and	 the	 elbow	 extensors.	 These
muscles	 are	 overcome	 by	 their	 antagonists	 to	 cause	 pronation,	 elbow	 flexion,	 and
downward	drift.	This	is	an	illustration	of	mild	pronator	drift	of	the	right	upper	extremity.
Patients	with	mild	CST	lesions	may	demonstrate	a	pronator	drift	or	have	an	abnormal
arm	 or	 finger	 roll	 test	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 clinically	 detectable	 weakness	 to	 formal
strength	testing.

Hachinski	 recently	 described	 the	 upgoing	 thumb	 sign	 as	 a	 subtle	 clinical

finding	in	minor	stroke.	The	thumb	is	extended	(radially	abducted)	but	with	the
palms	facing	it	is	upgoing.	Souques	described	the	“interosseous	phenomenon”	in
1907,	in	which	elevation	of	a	paretic	arm	caused	abduction	of	all	the	fingers.	The
interosseous	 phenomenon,	 or	 finger	 sign,	 is	 usually	 classified	 as	 an	 associated
movement	 (Chapter	 42).	 Several	 subtle	 upper	 motor	 neuron	 signs	 that	 involve
finger	 abduction	 are	 probably	 all	 related	 to	 the	 interosseous	 phenomenon
originally	 described	 by	 Souques,	 including	 the	 digiti	 quinti	 sign;	 the	 upgoing
thumb	 sign;	 myelopathy	 hand,	 a	 hand	 posture	 seen	 in	 patients	 with	 cervical
spondylotic	myelopathy;	and	the	finger	escape	sign,	widely	cited	in	Orthopedic
and	Neurosurgery	textbooks	as	a	sign	of	cervical	spondylotic	myelopathy.

The	examination	for	pronator	drift	is	a	very	important	part	of	the	neurologic
examination.	 If	 only	 one	 motor	 test	could	 be	 done	 on	 a	 patient,	 the	 best	 single
test	 to	 use	 would	 probably	 be	 examining	 for	 drift.	 While	 waiting	 for	 drift	 to
occur,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 instantaneous,	 the	 examiner	 may	 simply	wait	or	 hasten
the	development	of	drift	by	tapping	on	the	palms	or	having	the	patient	turn	the
head	 back	 and	 forth	 or	 both.	 The	 examination	 for	 drift	 is	 often	 combined	 with
the	Romberg	test	because	both	require	the	patient	to	have	the	eyes	closed.

FIGURE	27.57	Moderate	drift	with	further	development	of	the	posture.

FIGURE	27.58	Further	development	of	pronator	drift,	with	the	evolution	of	severe	drift
to	show	how	marked	weakness	of	the	corticospinal	innervated	muscles	produces	the
posture	 of	 spastic	 hemiparesis.	 The	 pathophysiologic	 basis	 for	 pronator	 drift	 and	 for
the	upper-extremity	posture	of	fully	developed	spastic	hemiparesis	and	for	the	upper-
extremity	 posture	 of	 decorticate	 rigidity	 is	 the	 same;	 it	 is	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 degree.	 A
mild	 CST	 lesion	 results	 in	 mild	 pronator	 drift;	 a	 severe	 lesion	 results	 in	 spastic
hemiparesis.

FIGURE	27.59	Updrift	due	to	a	parietal	lobe	lesion	with	loss	of	position	sense.

Abnormal	drift	can	occasionally	occur	with	lesions	elsewhere	in	the	nervous
system.	Cerebellar	disease	may	cause	drift	to	some	degree,	but	the	movement	is
outward	 and	 usually	 slightly	 upward.	 In	 parietal	 lobe	 lesions,	 there	 may	 be
“updrift,”	with	the	involved	arm	rising	overhead	without	the	patient’s	awareness,
ostensibly	because	of	loss	of	position	sense	(Figure	27.59).	Additional	pronation
phenomena	 have	 been	 described	 by	 Babinski	 and	 Wilson.	 In	 the	 former,	 the
palmar	aspects	of	the	hands	are	held	in	approximation	with	the	thumbs	up	and
are	then	jarred	or	shaken;	the	paretic	hand	falls	into	a	position	of	pronation.	In
the	 latter,	 there	 is	 pronation	 of	 the	 forearm	 along	 with	 internal	 rotation	 at	 the
shoulder	when	the	arms	are	held	overhead,	palms	facing;	as	a	result,	the	affected
palm	turns	outward.	Pronation	may	also	occur	on	the	paretic	side	when	the	arms
are	actively	abducted	with	the	forearm	supinated	or	when	the	arms	are	passively
abducted	 with	 the	 forearm	 supinated	 and	 then	 suddenly	 released.	 Downward
drift	without	pronation	has	been	reported	as	a	sign	of	nonorganic	weakness.

Similar	 procedures	 can	 be	 used	 to	 detect	 lower-extremity	 weakness.
Examination	 for	 leg	 drift	 is	 possible	 (see	 “The	 Hip	 Joint”)	 but	 is	 not	 nearly	 as

useful	 as	 testing	 for	 arm	 drift	 and	 therefore	 seldom	 done.	 Checking	 for	 a
decreased	rate	of	foot	tapping	on	the	involved	side	is	simpler	and	more	useful.	In
the	 leg	 or	 knee-dropping	 test,	 the	 patient	 lies	 supine	 with	 the	 hips	 and	 knees
flexed,	the	knees	forming	an	angle	of	about	45	degrees,	and	heels	resting	on	the
table.	 When	 a	 CST	 lesion	 is	 present,	 the	 affected	 heel	 will	 gradually	 slide
downward	 so	 that	 the	 knee	 slowly	 extends,	 and	 the	 hip	 goes	 into	 extension,
external	rotation,	and	abduction.

Other	 useful	 maneuvers	 include	 examination	 of	 forearm	 roll,	 finger	 roll,
thumb	roll,	and	rapid	alternating	movements	(Video	27.3).	 Abnormal	 forearm
rolling	is	a	sensitive	indicator	of	neurologic	pathology.	To	test	it,	the	patient	is
instructed	 to	 make	 fists,	 to	 hold	 the	 forearms	 horizontally	 so	 that	 the	 fists	 and
distal	 forearms	 overlap	 with	 the	 palms	 pointed	 more	 or	 less	 toward	 the
umbilicus,	and	then	to	rotate	the	fists	around	each	other,	first	in	one	direction	and
then	the	other	(Figure	27.60).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	27.3	Other	subtle	signs	of	hemiparesis,	including	forearm	and	finger
rolling.

Normal	patients	will	have	about	an	equal	excursion	of	both	forearms	so	that
the	 fists	 and	 forearms	 roll	 about	 each	 other	 symmetrically.	 With	 a	 unilateral
corticospinal	 lesion,	 the	 involved	 side	 does	 not	 move	 as	 much	 as	 the	 normal
side,	so	the	patient	will	appear	to	plant,	fix,	or	“post”	one	forearm	and	to	rotate
the	 opposite	 forearm	 around	 it	 (Video	 27.4).	 Finger	 roll	 is	 an	 even	 more
sensitive	 version	 of	 the	 same	 test.	 The	 patient	 is	 asked	 to	 rotate	 the	 extended
forefingers	around	each	other,	moving	just	the	fingers.	Again,	the	finger	on	the
abnormal	side	will	move	less	than	its	fellow.	In	the	thumb	rolling	test,	the	patient
rotates	each	thumb	around	its	fellow.	Forearm	rolling	has	a	sensitivity	of	17%	to

87%,	specificity	of	97%	to	98%,	positive	LR	of	15.6,	and	negative	LR	of	0.6	in
the	 detection	 of	 contralateral	 hemispheric	 disease.	 Index	 finger	 rolling	 has	 a
sensitivity	of	33%	to	42%,	a	specificity	of	92%	to	98%,	positive	LR	of	6.0,	and
negative	 LR	 of	 0.7	 in	 the	 detection	 of	 contralateral	 hemispheric	 disease.	 In	 a
series	of	patients	with	mild	hemiparesis,	thumb	rolling	was	more	sensitive	(88%)
than	pronator	drift	(47%),	forearm	rolling	(65%),	or	index	finger	rolling	(65%).
Patients	 with	 bradykinesia	 or	 rigidity	 from	 extrapyramidal	 disease	 may	 also
show	decreased	excursion	of	the	affected	limbs.

Video	27.4	Abnormal	forearm	rolling	in	a	patient	with	a	left	hemiparesis.

00:00	/	00:00

FIGURE	27.60	Testing	for	a	CST	lesion	using	arm	roll.	The	involved	extremity	tends

to	 have	 a	 lesser	 excursion	 as	 the	 forearms	 roll	 about	 each	 other	 so	 that	 the	 normal
extremity	 tends	 to	 rotate	 around	 the	 abnormal	 extremity,	 which	 tends	 to	 remain
relatively	fixed	(“posted”).	Patients	with	mild	CST	lesions	may	have	an	abnormal	arm
roll	test	in	the	absence	of	clinically	detectable	weakness	to	formal	strength	testing.

Normal	fine	motor	control	requires	functional	integrity	of	both	the	CST	and
the	cerebellum.	Testing	for	rapid	alternating	movements	is	part	of	the	cerebellar
examination,	 but	 the	 primary	 function	 of	 the	 CST	 is	 to	 provide	 discrete,
fractionated	 movements	 to	 the	 distal	 extremities.	 Either	 CST	 or	 cerebellar
disease	 may	 interfere	 with	 fine	 motor	 control	 of	 distal	 muscles.	 Normal	 fine
motor	 control	 also	 requires	 intact	 proprioceptive	 pathways.	 Traditionally,
different	tests	have	been	done	to	look	for	CST	signs	than	for	cerebellar	signs,	but
both	 involve	 rapid	 alternating	 movements.	 This	 test	 is	 also	 referred	 to	 as
assessment	 of	 alternate	 motion	 rate,	 but	 in	 fact	 more	 than	 the	 rate	 of	 motion
provides	useful	information.	Fine	motor	control	can	be	tested	in	numerous	ways,
most	advantageously	by	comparing	the	dexterity	and	precision	of	the	two	hands
while	 performing	 rapid,	 repetitive	 movements,	 making	 allowance	 of	 course	 for
hand	 dominance.	 The	 patient	 may	 be	 asked	 to	 repetitively,	 and	 as	 quickly	 as
possible,	touch	the	tip	of	the	index	finger	to	the	tip	of	the	thumb,	as	in	making
the	 OK	 sign.	 Any	 finger	 can	 be	 used,	 but	 the	 index	 and	 small	 fingers	 are
favorites.	 The	 movements	 will	 be	 slower	 and	 less	 agile	 on	 the	 abnormal	 side.
This	test	is	often	done	by	having	the	patient	touch	the	IP	joint	rather	than	the	tip
of	the	thumb.	Rough	quantitation	can	be	done	by	counting	the	number	of	touches
in	a	set	period	of	time.	Other	tests	requiring	a	high	level	of	coordination	include
quickly	touching	the	tip	of	each	finger	in	turn	to	the	thumb,	flicking	the	fingers
as	 if	 flicking	 off	 water,	 doing	 one-handed	 clapping,	 and	 making	 quick,	 small
finger	movements	as	if	playing	a	piano.	Patients	with	extrapyramidal	disorders,
especially	parkinsonism,	may	show	more	of	a	decrease	in	the	amplitude	than	the
rate	of	motion,	especially	if	the	task	is	continued	for	more	than	a	few	seconds.
Fine	 motor	 control	 of	 the	 foot	 can	 be	 assessed	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 do	 rapid,
repetitive	 foot	 taps	 on	 the	 floor	 if	 standing	 and	 against	 the	 examiner’s	 palm	 if
supine.

Abnormalities	of	associated	movements	may	also	occur	relatively	early	in	a
CST	 lesion.	 These	 may	 include	 the	 absence	 of	 a	 normal	 associated	 movement,
such	 as	 a	 decreased	 arm	 swing	 while	 walking,	 or	 the	 presence	 of	 an	 abnormal
associated	movement,	such	as	Wartenberg’s	thumb	adduction	sign,	the	Babinski
trunk-thigh	sign,	or	the	anterior	tibial	sign	(Chapter	42).

Video	Links

Video	Link	27.1.	Scapular	winging.	http://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=dfTe0nPclDE

Video	Link	27.2.	Pectoral	crease	in	shoulder	girdle	weakness.

http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Pectoral_crease

Video	Link	27.3.	Beevor’s	sign.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Beevor%27s_sign
Video	Link	27.4.	Gowers’	sign.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Gower%27s_sign
Video	Link	27.5.	Steppage	gait.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Steppage_Gait
Video	Link	27.6.	Digiti	quinti	sign.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Digiti_quinti_sign

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anderson	NE.	The	forearm	and	finger	rolling	tests.	Pract	Neurol	2010;10:39–42.
Brendler	 SJ.	 The	 human	 cervical	 myotomes:	 functional	 anatomy	 studied	 at

operation.	J	Neurosurg	1968;28:105–111.

Brooke	MH.	 A	 Clinician’s	 View	 of	 Neuromuscular	 Disease.	 2nd	 ed.	 Baltimore:

Williams	&	Wilkins,	1986.

Buschbacher	R.	Side-to-side	confrontational	strength-testing	for	weakness	of	the

intrinsic	muscles	of	the	hand.	J	Bone	Joint	Surg	Am	1997;79:401–405.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Campbell	 WW,	 Pridgeon	 RP.	 Practical	 Primer	 of	 Clinical	 Neurology.

Philadelphia:	Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2002.

Carter	AB.	The	functional	overlay.	Lancet	1967;2:1196–1200.
Chabrol	H,	Peresson	G,	Clanet	M.	Lack	of	specificity	of	the	traditional	criteria

for	conversion	disorders.	Eur	Psychiatry	1995;10:317–319.

Crimlisk	HL,	Bhatia	K,	Cope	H,	et	al.	Slater	revisited:	6	year	follow	up	study	of
patients	 with	 medically	 unexplained	 motor	 symptoms.	 BMJ	 1998;316:582–
586.

Daum	C,	Aybek	S.	Validity	of	the	“Drift	without	pronation”	sign	in	conversion

disorder.	BMC	Neurol	2013;13:31.

Daum	 C,	 Hubschmid	 M,	 Aybek	 S.	 The	 value	 of	 ‘positive’	 clinical	 signs	 for
weakness,	sensory	and	gait	disorders	in	conversion	disorder:	a	systematic	and
narrative	review.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2014;85:180–190.

Daum	C,	Gheorghita	F,	Spatola	M,	et	al.	Interobserver	agreement	and	validity	of
bedside	‘positive	signs’	for	functional	weakness,	sensory	and	gait	disorders	in
conversion	 disorder:	 a	 pilot	 study.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry

2015;86425–86430.

Espay	AJ,	Aybek	S,	Carson	A,	et	al.	Current	concepts	in	diagnosis	and	treatment
of	functional	neurological	disorders.	JAMA	Neurol	2018;75(9):1132–1141.
Gerscovich	 EO,	 Cronan	 M,	 McGahan	 JP,	 et	 al.	 Ultrasonographic	 evaluation	 of

diaphragmatic	motion.	J	Ultrasound	Med	2001;20:597–604.

Gould	 R,	 Miller	 BL,	 Goldberg	 MA,	 et	 al.	 The	 validity	 of	 hysterical	 signs	 and

symptoms.	J	Nerv	Ment	Dis	1986;174:593–597.

Hachinski	 V,	 Alsubaie	 R,	 Azarpazhooh	 MR.	 Upgoing	 thumb	 sign:	 a	 sensitive

indicator	of	brain	involvement?	Neurology	2017;	89:370–375.

Koehler	 PJ,	 Okun	 MS.	 Important	 observations	 prior	 to	 the	 description	 of	 the

Hoover	sign.	Neurology	2004;63:1693–1697.

LaFrance	WC	Jr.	Video	NeuroImage:	diagnosing	conversion	weakness	with	the
test:	 when	 Hoover	 doesn’t	 help.	 Neurology

Spinal	 Injuries	 Center	
2008;71:e57.

Lanska	DJ.	Functional	weakness	and	sensory	loss.	Semin	 Neurol	 2006;26:297–

309.

Lehmkuhl	 LD,	 Smith	 LK.	 Brunnstrom’s	 Clinical	 Kinesiology.	 4th	 ed.

Philadelphia:	F.A.	Davis	Company,	1983.

Lempert	T,	Dieterich	M,	Huppert	D,	et	al.	Psychogenic	disorders	in	neurology:

frequency	and	clinical	spectrum.	Acta	Neurol	Scand	1990;82:335–340.

Lemyze	M,	Bart	F.	Hoover	sign.	CMAJ	2011;183:E133.
Liguori	R,	Krarup	C,	Trojaborg	W.	Determination	of	the	segmental	sensory	and
motor	 innervation	 of	 the	 lumbosacral	 spinal	 nerves.	 An	 electrophysiological
study.	Brain	1992;115:915–934.

Mace	 CJ,	 Trimble	 MR.	 Ten-year	 prognosis	 of	 conversion	 disorder.	 Br	 J

Psychiatry	1996;169:282–288.

Massey	 EW,	 Pleet	 AB,	 Scherokman	 BJ.	 Diagnostic	 Tests	 in	 Neurology:	 A
Photographic	 Guide	 to	 Bedside	 Techniques.	 Chicago:	 Year	 Book	 Medical
Publishers,	Inc.,	1985.

McGee	 S.	 Evidence	 Based	 Physical	 Diagnosis.	 3rd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:

Elsevier/Saunders,	2012.

McWhirter	 L,	 Stone	 J,	 Sandercock	 P,	 et	 al.	 Hoover’s	 sign	 for	 the	 diagnosis	 of
functional	 weakness:	 a	 prospective	 unblinded	 cohort	 study	 in	 patients	 with
suspected	stroke.	J	Psychosom	Res	2011;	71:384–386.

Mendell	 JR,	 Florence	 J.	 Manual	 muscle	 testing.	 Muscle	 Nerve	 1990;13:S16–

S20.

Nowak	DA.	The	thumb	rolling	test:	a	novel	variant	of	the	forearm	rolling	test.

Can	J	Neurol	Sci	2011;38:129–132.

Ono	K,	Ebara	S,	Fuji	T,	et	al.	Myelopathy	hand.	New	clinical	signs	of	cervical

cord	damage.	J	Bone	Joint	Surg	Br	1987;69:215–219.

Phillips	LH	II,	Park	TS.	Electrophysiologic	mapping	of	the	segmental	anatomy

of	the	muscles	of	the	lower	extremity.	Muscle	Nerve	2011;43:1–2.

Pleet	 AB,	 Massey	 EW.	 Palmaris	 brevis	 sign	 in	 neuropathy	 of	 the	 deep	 palmar

branch	of	the	ulnar	nerve.	Ann	Neurol	1978;3:468–469.

Reuber	 M,	 Mitchell	 AJ,	 Howlett	 SJ,	 et	 al.	 Functional	 symptoms	 in	 neurology:

questions	and	answers.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2005;76:307–314.

Sawyer	RN	Jr,	Hanna	JP,	Ruff	RL,	et	al.	Asymmetry	of	forearm	rolling	as	a	sign

of	unilateral	cerebral	dysfunction.	Neurology	1993;43:1596–1598.

Slater	E.	Diagnosis	of	“hysteria”.	Br	Med	J	1965;1:1395–1399.
Slater	 ET,	 Glithero	 E.	 A	 follow-up	 of	 patients	 diagnosed	 as	 suffering	 from

“hysteria”.	J	Psychosom	Res	1965;9:9–13.

Sonoo	 M.	 Abductor	 sign:	 a	 reliable	 new	 sign	 to	 detect	 unilateral	 non-organic
paresis	of	the	lower	limb.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2004;75:121–125.
Standring	 S,	 ed.	 Gray’s	 Anatomy:	 The	 Anatomical	 Basis	 of	 Clinical	 Practice.

41st	ed.	New	York:	Elsevier	Limited,	2016.

Stone	 J,	 Zeman	 A,	 Sharpe	 M.	 Functional	 weakness	 and	 sensory	 disturbance.	 J

Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2002a;73:241–245.

Stone	J,	Sharpe	M,	Carson	A,	et	al.	Are	functional	motor	and	sensory	symptoms
really	 more	 frequent	 on	 the	 left?	 A	 systematic	 review.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg
Psychiatry	2002b;73:578–581.

Stone	 J,	 Sharpe	 M,	 Rothwell	 PM,	 et	 al.	 The	 12	 year	 prognosis	 of	 unilateral
functional	weakness	and	sensory	disturbance.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry
2003;74:591–596.

Stone	J,	Smyth	R,	Carson	A,	et	al.	La	belle	indifference	in	conversion	symptoms

and	hysteria:	systematic	review.	Br	J	Psychiatry	2006;188:204–209.

Stone	 J,	 Warlow	 C,	 Sharpe	 M.	 The	 symptom	 of	 functional	 weakness:	 a

controlled	study	of	107	patients.	Brain	2010;133(Pt	5):1537–1551.

Stone	 J,	 Warlow	 C,	 Sharpe	 M.	 Functional	 weakness:	 clues	 to	 mechanism	 from

the	nature	of	onset.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2012;83:67–69.

Tinazzi	 M,	 Simonetto	 S,	 Franco	 L,	 et	 al.	 Abduction	 finger	 sign:	 a	 new	 sign	 to
detect	 unilateral	 functional	 paralysis	 of	 the	 upper	 limb.	 Mov	 Disord
2008;23:2415–2419.

Tremolizzo	L,	Susani	E,	Riva	MA,	et	al.	Positive	signs	of	functional	weakness.	J

Neurol	Sci	2014;340:13–18.

Weibers	 DO,	 Dale	 AJD,	 Kokmen	 E,	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Mayo	 Clinic	 Examinations	 in

Neurology.	7th	ed.	St.	Louis:	Mosby,	1998.

Wolf	JK.	Segmental	Neurology.	Baltimore:	University	Park	Press,	1981.
Yamamoto	T.	Forearm-rolling	test.	Neurology	1995;45:2299.
Young	 A,	 Getty	 J,	 Jackson	 A,	 et	 al.	 Variations	 in	 the	 pattern	 of	 muscle

innervation	by	the	L5	and	S1	nerve	roots.	Spine	1983;	8:616–624.

Yugué	 I,	 Shiba	 K,	 Ueta	 T,	 et	 al.	 A	 new	 clinical	 evaluation	 for	 hysterical

paralysis.	Spine	(Phila	Pa	1976)	2004;29:1910–1913.

Ziv	I,	Djaldetti	R,	Zoldan	Y,	et	al.	Diagnosis	of	“non-organic”	limb	paresis	by	a
novel	 objective	 motor	 assessment:	 the	 quantitative	 Hoover’s	 test.	 J	 Neurol
1998;245:797–802.

CHAPTER	28

Muscle	Tone

Muscle	 tone	 has	 been	 defined	 as	 the	 tension	 in	 the	 relaxed	 muscle	 or	 the
resistance	 to	 passive	 movement	 when	 voluntary	 contraction	 is	 absent.	 Because
of	resting	tone,	normal	muscles	have	slight	resistance	to	passive	movement	even
in	the	relaxed	state.	The	inherent	attributes	of	muscle	tissue—such	as	viscosity,
elasticity,	and	extensibility—contribute	to	resting	tone.	Even	apparently	relaxed
muscle	 fibers	 have	 a	 constant	 slight	 fixed	 tension	 by	 which	 they	 hold	 their
resting	 position,	 resist	 changes	 in	 length,	 prevent	 undue	 mobility	 at	 joints,	 and
are	in	position	to	contract	when	necessary.	Resting	muscle	tone	is	greatest	in	the
antigravity	muscles	that	maintain	the	body	in	an	erect	position.

The	 resting	 level	 of	 tone	 in	 a	 muscle	 is	 dependent	 on	 activity	 in	 the	 spinal
cord	 segment	 that	 innervates	 it,	 primarily	 the	 gamma	 motor	 neuron.	 Efferent
impulses	 from	 the	 gamma	 motor	 neuron	 set	 the	 level	 of	 contraction	 of	 the
intrafusal	 fibers	 of	 the	 muscle	 spindles.	 Spindle	 afferents	 in	 turn	 convey
impulses	 to	 the	 spinal	 cord	 segment	 to	 complete	 the	 gamma	 loop.	 Descending
influences	 from	 higher	 motor	 centers	 regulate	 and	 modulate	 the	 activity	 at	 the
local	spinal	cord	segment.	All	of	these	factors	interact	to	determine	the	level	of
resting	 tone.	 When	 a	 muscle	 with	 normal	 segmental	 innervation	 is	 passively
stretched,	reflex	shortening	may	occur;	this	is	the	stretch	reflex.

The	background	level	of	muscle	tone	maintains	normal	resting	limb	positions
and	 attitudes.	 Active	 muscle	 contraction	 takes	 place	 on	 the	 background	 of	 the
resting	level	of	muscle	tone,	and	normal	background	tone	is	important	for	proper
coordination	 of	 movement.	 Activity	 mediated	 by	 the	 reticular	 formation,	 the
otolith	organs,	the	vestibular	apparatus,	and	other	higher	centers	is	important	in
maintaining	the	steady	contraction	of	the	antigravity	muscles	that	is	necessary	to
the	standing	position,	as	well	as	to	other	postural	and	righting	reflexes.

Tone	 may	 be	 affected	 by	 disease	 at	 different	 levels	 of	 the	 nervous	 system.
Interruption	 of	 the	 local	 spinal	 reflex	 arc	 abolishes	 resting	 muscle	 tone.	 Most

types	of	hypertonicity	can	be	abolished	by	interrupting	either	the	gamma	efferent
impulses	 to	 the	 intrafusal	 fibers	 or	 the	 afferent	 impulses	 from	 the	 muscle
spindles.	Denervated	muscle	is	flaccid	and	behaves	as	noncontractile	tissue.	Loss
of	 impulses	 from	 the	 supraspinal	 pathways	 that	 normally	 inhibit	 lower	 reflex
centers	usually	causes	an	increase	in	tone.	Loss	of	the	normal	balance	between
higher	facilitatory	and	inhibitory	centers	may	either	decrease	or	increase	tone.

EXAMINATION	OF	TONE

Tone	is	difficult	to	assess.	The	determination	of	tone	is	subjective	and	prone	to
interexaminer	 variability.	 There	 are	 no	 methods	 that	 can	 measure	 tone
quantitatively.	The	determination	is	based	solely	on	the	clinical	judgment	of	the
examiner;	accurate	assessment	of	tone	requires	clinical	experience.	It	is	difficult
to	 separate	 slightly	 increased	 tone	 from	 poor	 relaxation	 in	 a	 tense	 or
apprehensive	 patient.	 Tone	 is	 especially	 difficult	 to	 evaluate	 in	 infants,	 where
there	 may	 be	 wide	 variations	 in	 apparent	 tone	 on	 different	 examinations,	 in
either	health	or	disease.

The	 examination	 of	 tone	 requires	 a	 relaxed	 and	 cooperative	 patient.	 Small
talk	may	help	the	patient	relax.	Simple	observation	may	reveal	an	abnormality	of
posture	 or	 resting	 position	 that	 indicates	 an	 underlying	 change	 in	 tone.	 Muscle
palpation	 is	 sometimes	 useful,	 but	 well-muscled	 individuals	 may	 have	 firm
muscles	 despite	 normal	 resting	 tone,	 whereas	 in	 other	 individuals,	 the	 muscles
may	 feel	 flabby	 despite	 an	 underlying	 hypertonicity.	 Muscles	 may	 have	 a	 firm
consistency	to	palpation	because	of	edema,	inflammation,	spasm	due	to	pain,	or
pseudohypertrophy.

The	 most	 important	 part	 of	 the	 examination	 of	 tone	 is	 determination	 of	 the
resistance	of	relaxed	muscles	to	passive	manipulation	as	well	as	the	extensibility,
flexibility,	and	range	of	motion.	Abnormalities	of	tone	are	more	easily	detected
in	extremity	than	in	trunk	muscles.	The	limb	is	moved	passively,	first	slowly	and
through	 a	 complete	 range	 of	 motion	 and	 then	 at	 varying	 speeds.	 The	 examiner
may	shake	the	forearm	to	and	fro	and	note	the	excursions	of	the	patient’s	hand,
brace	 a	 limb	 and	 then	 suddenly	 remove	 the	 support,	 or	 note	 the	 range	 of
movement	 of	 a	 part	 in	 response	 to	 a	 slight	 blow.	 Bilateral	 examination	 of
homologous	parts	helps	compare	for	differences	in	tone	on	the	two	sides	of	the
body.

Tone	should	be	assessed	 by	both	 slow	and	rapid	 motion	and	through	partial

and	full	range	of	motion,	documenting	the	distribution,	type,	and	severity	of	any
abnormality.	 Certain	 specific	 maneuvers	 may	 be	 helpful	 in	 evaluation	 of
abnormal	tone.

The	Babinski	Tonus	Test

The	arms	are	abducted	at	the	shoulders,	and	the	forearms	are	passively	flexed	at
the	elbows.	With	hypotonicity,	there	is	increased	flexibility	and	mobility,	and	the
elbows	can	be	bent	to	an	angle	more	acute	than	normal.	With	hypertonicity,	there
is	reduced	flexibility,	and	passive	flexion	cannot	be	carried	out	beyond	an	obtuse
angle.

The	Head-Dropping	Test

The	 patient	 lies	 supine	 without	 a	 pillow,	 completely	 relaxed,	 eyes	 closed,	 and
attention	diverted.	The	examiner	places	one	hand	under	the	patient’s	occiput	and
with	the	other	hand	briskly	raises	the	head	and	then	allows	it	to	drop.	Normally,
the	head	drops	rapidly	into	the	examiner’s	protecting	hand,	but	in	patients	with
extrapyramidal	 rigidity,	 there	 is	 delayed,	 slow,	 gentle	 dropping	 of	 the	 head
because	of	rigidity	affecting	the	flexor	muscles	of	the	neck.	When	meningismus
is	present,	there	is	resistance	to	and	pain	on	flexion	of	the	neck.

Pendulousness	of	the	Legs

The	 patient	 sits	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 table,	 relaxed	 with	 legs	 hanging	 freely.	 The
examiner	either	extends	both	legs	to	the	same	horizontal	level	and	then	releases
them	 (Wartenberg	 pendulum	 test,	 see	 Video	 Link	 28.1)	 or	 gives	 both	 legs	 a
brisk,	equal	backward	push.	If	the	patient	is	completely	relaxed	and	cooperative,
there	 will	 normally	 be	 a	 swinging	 of	 the	 legs	 that	 progressively	 diminishes	 in
range	 and	 usually	 disappears	 after	 six	 or	 seven	 oscillations.	 In	 extrapyramidal
rigidity,	there	is	a	decrease	in	swing	time	but	usually	no	qualitative	change	in	the
response.	In	spasticity,	there	may	be	little	or	no	decrease	in	swing	time,	but	the
movements	 are	 jerky	 and	 irregular,	 the	 forward	 movement	 may	 be	 greater	 and
more	brisk	than	the	backward,	and	the	movement	may	assume	a	zigzag	pattern.
In	 hypotonia,	 the	 response	 is	 increased	 in	 range	 and	 prolonged	 beyond	 the
normal.	 In	 all	 of	 these	 maneuvers,	 a	 unilateral	 abnormality	 will	 be	 more
apparent.

The	Shoulder-Shaking	Test

The	 examiner	 places	 her	 hands	 on	 the	 patient’s	 shoulders	 and	 shakes	 them
briskly	 back	 and	 forth,	 observing	 the	 reciprocal	 motion	 of	 the	 arms.	 With
extrapyramidal	 disease,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 decreased	 range	 of	 arm	 swing	 on	 the
affected	side.	With	hypotonia,	especially	that	associated	with	cerebellar	disease,
the	excursions	of	the	arm	swing	will	be	greater	than	normal.

The	Arm-Dropping	Test

The	 patient’s	 arms	 are	 briskly	 raised	 to	 shoulder	 level	 and	 then	 dropped.	 In
spasticity,	 there	 is	 a	 delay	 in	 the	 downward	 movement	 of	 the	 affected	 arm,
causing	 it	 to	 hang	 up	 briefly	 on	 the	 affected	 side	 (Bechterew’s	 or	 Bekhterew’s
sign);	 with	 hypotonicity,	 the	 dropping	 is	 more	 abrupt	 than	 normal.	 A	 similar
maneuver	may	be	carried	out	by	lifting	and	then	dropping	the	extended	legs	of
the	recumbent	patient.

Hand	Position

Hypotonicity,	 especially	 that	 associated	 with	 cerebellar	 disease	 or	 Sydenham’s
chorea,	 may	 cause	 the	 hands	 to	 assume	 a	 characteristic	 posture.	 With	 the	 arms
and	hands	outstretched,	there	is	flexion	at	the	wrists	and	hyperextension	of	the
fingers	 (“spooning”)	 accompanied	 by	 moderate	 overpronation.	 With	 the	 arms
raised	 overhead,	 the	 overpronation	 is	 exaggerated	 with	 the	 palms	 turned
outward.	This	overpronation	phenomenon	differs	from	the	pronator	drift	sign,	in
which	the	overpronation	is	due	to	weakness	of	corticospinal	innervated	muscles
or	increased	tone	in	the	pronator	muscles.

MYOTATIC	IRRITABILITY,	MYOEDEMA,	AND
TENDERNESS

In	addition	to	the	inspection,	palpation,	and	resistance	to	passive	motion	used	in
the	 assessment	 of	 tone,	 it	 is	 sometimes	 useful	 to	 observe	 the	 reaction	 to	 direct
percussion	 of	 the	 muscle	 belly.	 The	 idiomuscular	 contraction	 is	 the	 brief	 and
feeble	contraction	of	a	muscle	belly	after	it	is	tapped	with	a	percussion	hammer,
causing	a	slight	depression	even	when	the	deep	tendon	reflex	(DTR)	is	absent.

Myotactic	irritability	has	been	defined	as	both	the	response	to	direct	percussion
as	well	as	the	ability	of	a	muscle	to	contract	in	response	to	sudden	stretch.

The	response	to	direct	muscle	percussion	in	normal	muscle	is	very	slight	and,
in	 most	 muscles,	 is	 seen	 or	 felt	 with	 difficulty.	 The	 reaction	 may	 be	 more
pronounced	in	wasting	diseases,	such	as	cachexia	and	emaciation,	and	in	some
diseases	of	the	lower	motor	neuron.	Hyperexcitability	to	such	stimulation	occurs
in	 tetanus,	 tetany,	 and	 certain	 electrolyte	 disturbances.	 Occasionally,	 after	 a
muscle	is	percussed	with	a	reflex	hammer,	a	wave	of	contraction	radiates	along
the	 muscle	 away	 from	 the	 point	 of	 percussion.	 A	 small	 ridge	 or	 temporary
swelling	 may	 persist	 for	 several	 seconds	 at	 the	 point	 of	 stimulation.	 This
stationary	muscle	mounding	is	known	as	myoedema.	There	is	no	accompanying
electrical	 muscle	 activity.	 The	 idiomuscular	 contraction	 causes	 a	 slight
depression,	 myoedema	 a	 rounding	 up.	 The	 mechanism	 of	 myoedema	 is	 poorly
understood,	 but	 it	 is	 probably	 a	 normal	 physiologic	 phenomenon.	 Its	 presence
alone	 does	 not	 indicate	 a	 neuromuscular	 disorder,	 but	 the	 response	 may	 be
exaggerated	 in	 some	 circumstances,	 most	 notably	 hypothyroid	 myopathy	 and
cachexia.	Myoedema	is	electrically	silent	on	electromyography.	Hypothyroidism
may	 also	 cause	 an	 electrically	 active	 muscle	 mounding	 and	 spreading
contraction,	 manifest	 by	 a	 burst	 of	 normal	 motor	 unit	 action	 potentials	 upon
percussion	 (for	 video,	 see	 Loomis	 et	 al.).	 Myotonia	 is	 a	 persisting	 contraction
following	 mechanical	 stimulation	 of	 muscle	 that	 is	 quite	 different	 from
myoedema	(see	below).	In	rippling	muscle	disease,	there	are	wave-like	 muscle
contractions	evoked	by	muscle	stretch	that	move	laterally	along	the	muscle	over
5	 to	 20	 seconds.	 The	 phenomenon	 is	 especially	 prominent	 in	 large	 proximal
muscles	(see	Video	Link	28.2).

During	 muscle	 palpation,	 muscle	 tenderness	 may	 sometimes	 be	 elicited.
Muscle	 tenderness	 on	 squeezing	 the	 muscle	 belly,	 or	 even	 with	 very	 slight
pressure,	may	cause	exquisite	pain.	Widespread	muscle	tenderness	to	palpation
may	 occur	 with	
inflammatory	 myopathy,	 especially	 polymyositis	 and
dermatomyositis,	in	some	neuropathies,	and	in	acute	poliomyelitis.	Focal	muscle
tenderness	occurs	with	trauma	or	overexertion	of	muscles.

ABNORMALITIES	OF	TONE

Pathologic	 conditions	 may	 cause	 an	 increase	 or	 decrease	 in	 tone.	 In	 addition,
there	are	different	varieties	of	hypotonicity	and	hypertonicity.	Hypotonicity	may

develop	from	disease	of	the	motor	unit,	the	proprioceptive	pathways,	cerebellar
lesions	 and	 in	 the	 choreas.	 The	 muscle	 may	 be	 flaccid,	 flabby,	 and	 soft	 to
palpation.	 The	 involved	 joints	 offer	 decreased	 resistance	 to	 passive	 movement.
The	 excursion	 of	 the	 joint	 may	 be	 increased	 with	 an	 absence	 of	 the	 normal
“checking”	action	on	extreme	passive	motion.	If	the	involved	extremity	is	lifted
and	allowed	to	drop,	it	falls	abruptly.	A	slight	blow	causes	it	to	sway	through	an
excessive	excursion.	The	DTRs	are	usually	decreased	or	absent	when	hypotonia
is	due	to	a	lesion	involving	the	motor	unit	or	proprioceptive	pathways.

Hypotonia

When	 hypotonia	 is	 due	 to	 disease	 of	 the	 motor	 unit,	 there	 is	 invariably	 some
degree	 of	 accompanying	 weakness.	 The	 hypotonia	 that	 results	 from	 central
processes	 (e.g.,	 cerebellar	 disease)	 does	 not	 cause	 weakness;	 muscle	 power	 is
preserved	 even	 though	 hypotonia	 is	 demonstrable	 on	 examination.	 Infantile
hypotonia	(floppy	baby	syndrome)	is	a	common	clinical	condition	in	which	there
is	a	generalized	decrease	in	muscle	tone,	typically	affecting	a	neonate.	There	are
numerous	causes,	both	central	and	peripheral.

Tone	may	also	be	decreased	when	disease	affects	the	muscle	spindle	afferent
system.	Tabes	dorsalis	affects	proprioceptive	fibers	in	the	posterior	root	and	may
cause	muscle	hypotonia	with	joint	hyperextensibility.	Hypotonia	may	occur	with
some	lesions	of	the	parietal	lobe,	probably	because	of	disturbances	of	sensation.
Hypotonicity	may	occur	with	various	types	of	cerebellar	disease	but	is	never	as
severe	as	that	which	occurs	with	diseases	of	the	lower	motor	neuron.	Cerebellar
hypotonia	is	not	associated	with	weakness	and	the	reflexes	are	not	lost,	although
they	 may	 be	 pendular;	 there	 are	 no	 pathologic	 reflexes.	 Muscle	 tone	 is,	 of
impaired
course,	 decreased	
consciousness.

in	 deep	 sleep,	 coma,	 and	 other	 states	 of	

Sudden	attacks	of	impaired	muscle	tone	in	an	awake	patient	occur	in	akinetic
epilepsy	and	in	cataplexy.	With	atonic	(akinetic)	seizures,	the	attacks	of	sudden
loss	of	muscle	tone	occur	spontaneously,	and	the	patient	may	fall	to	the	ground
(drop	attack	or	drop	seizure).	Less	severe	attacks	may	cause	only	a	head	drop.	In
cataplexy,	 there	 are	 attacks	 of	 decreased	 tone	 after	 strong	 emotion,	 such	 as
laughter	or	anger.	With	severe	attacks,	the	patient	falls	to	the	ground	but	without
loss	of	consciousness.	With	incomplete	attacks,	there	may	be	slackening	of	facial
muscles,	 jaw	 drop,	 head	 drop,	 slumping	 of	 the	 shoulders,	 or	 knee	 buckling
without	a	fall.	Cataplexy	is	usually	a	component	of	narcolepsy.	Sleep	paralysis	is

a	 state	 common	 in	 narcolepsy,	 in	 which	 a	 patient	 has	 diffusely	 decreased	 tone
and	is	unable	to	move	immediately	after	awakening	from	sleep.	The	hemiparesis
that	 is	 present	 acutely	 following	 hemispheric	 stroke	 may	 be	 associated	 with
hypotonia	(cerebral	or	neural	“shock”),	which	gradually	evolves	into	hypertonia
with	 the	 passage	 of	 time.	 Some	 conditions	 may	 cause	 abnormal	 joint	 laxity,
which	may	be	confused	with	muscle	hypotonia	(e.g.,	Ehlers-Danlos	syndrome).

Hypertonia

Hypertonia	 occurs	 under	 many	 circumstances.	 It	 is	 a	 routine	 feature	 of	 lesions
that	involve	the	corticospinal	tract	after	the	acute	stage.	It	can	occur	with	diffuse
cerebral	 disorders,	 with	 disease	 involving	 the	 extrapyramidal	 system,	 with
disease	of	spinal	cord	interneurons	(e.g.,	stiff-person	syndrome),	and	even	with
muscle	 disorders	 in	 continuous	 muscle	 fiber	 activity	 syndromes.	 The	 most
common	 causes	 of	 hypertonia	 are	 spasticity	 and	 rigidity.	 For	 a	 discussion	 and
demonstration	of	spasticity	versus	rigidity	from	the	2015	Stanford	Medicine	25
Skills	Symposium,	see	Video	Link	28.3.

Extrapyramidal	Rigidity

Extrapyramidal	rigidity	is	a	diffuse	increase	in	muscle	tone	to	passive	movement
that	occurs	primarily	with	lesions	that	involve	the	basal	ganglia.	There	is	a	fairly
constant	 level	 of	 increased	 tone	 that	 affects	 both	 agonist	 and	 antagonist	 and	 is
equally	present	throughout	the	range	of	motion	at	a	given	joint.	Both	flexor	and
extensor	 muscles	 are	 involved,	 with	 resistance	 to	 passive	 movement	 in	 all
directions.	The	increased	tone	is	equally	present	from	the	beginning	to	the	end	of
the	movement	and	does	not	vary	with	the	speed	of	the	movement.	This	type	of
rigidity	 is	 referred	 to	 as	 “lead-pipe.”	 The	 involved	 muscles	 may	 be	 firm	 and
tense	 to	 palpation.	 After	 being	 placed	 in	 a	 new	 position,	 the	 part	 may	 remain
there,	 causing	 the	 limbs	 to	 assume	 awkward	 postures.	 Both	 neural-mediated
excitation	 of	 shortening	 muscles	 (the	 shortening	 reaction)	 and	 inhibition	 of
stretched	 muscles	 contribute	 to	 the	 rigidity;	 which	 mechanism	 predominates	 is
associated	 with	 the	 direction	 of	 movement.	 An	 increase	 in	 spinal	 interneuron
excitability	mediated	through	specific	descending	motor	pathways	may	underlie
parkinsonian	rigidity.

In	cogwheel	rigidity,	there	is	a	jerky	quality	to	the	hypertonicity.	As	the	part	is
manipulated,	it	seems	to	give	way	in	a	series	of	small	steps	as	if	the	limb	were

attached	to	a	heavy	cogwheel	or	ratchet.	The	jerky	quality	of	the	resistance	may
be	due	to	tremor	superimposed	on	lead-pipe	rigidity.	Cogwheel	rigidity	is	most
commonly	 encountered	
in	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 and	 other	 parkinsonian
syndromes.	 It	 appears	 first	 in	 proximal	 muscles	 and	 then	 spreads	 distally.	 Any
muscle	may	be	affected,	but	there	is	predominant	involvement	of	neck	and	trunk
muscles	and	the	flexor	muscles	of	the	extremities.	The	rigidity	of	extrapyramidal
disease	may	be	brought	out	by	the	head-dropping,	shoulder-shaking,	and	similar
tests.	The	rigidity	on	one	side	may	be	exaggerated	by	active	movements	of	the
contralateral	limbs	(see	Chapter	30).

In	 extrapyramidal	 disease,	 there	 is	 usually	 associated	 hypokinesia	 and
bradykinesia,	but	no	real	paralysis.	With	repeated	active	movements,	there	is	a
gradual	decrease	in	speed	and	amplitude.	This	may	be	brought	out	by	having	the
patient	 rapidly	 open	 and	 close	 the	 eyes	 or	 mouth,	 open	 and	 close	 the	 hand,	 or
oppose	 finger	 and	 thumb.	 Patients	 may	 also	 show	 slowness	 of	 starting	 and
limitation	of	the	amplitude	of	movement,	loss	of	pendulousness	of	the	arms	and
legs,	 inability	 to	 carry	 out	 rapid	 repeated	 movements	 or	 to	 maintain	 two
simultaneous	 voluntary	 movements,	 and	 impairment	 of	 associated	 movements,
such	as	swinging	of	the	arms	when	walking.

Paratonia	 is	 an	 alteration	 in	 tone	 to	 passive	 motion	 that	 is	 often	 a
manifestation	of	diffuse	frontal	lobe	disease.	It	has	been	divided	into	inhibitory
paratonia	and	facilitatory	paratonia.	Gegenhalten	(inhibitory	paratonia,	paratonic
rigidity)	is	a	form	of	rigidity	in	which	the	resistance	to	passive	movement	seems
proportional	to	the	vigor	with	which	the	movement	is	attempted.	The	resistance
of	the	patient	increases	in	proportion	to	the	examiner’s	efforts	to	move	the	part;
the	 harder	 the	 examiner	 pushes,	 the	 harder	 the	 patient	 seems	 to	 push	 back.	 It
seems	as	though	the	patient	is	actively	fighting,	but	the	response	is	involuntary.
It	is	said	that	the	severity	of	gegenhalten	can	be	judged	by	the	loudness	of	the
examiner’s	exhortations	to	relax.

In	 the	 limb	 placement	 test,	 the	 examiner	 passively	 lifts	 the	 patient’s	 arm,
instructs	 the	 patient	 to	 relax,	 releases	 the	 arm,	 and	 notes	 whether	 or	 not	 it
remains	 elevated.	 The	 arm	 remaining	 aloft,	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 parkinsonism	 or
spasticity,	 indicates	 paratonia.	 In	 facilatory	 paratonia	 (mitgehen),	 the	 patient
cooperates	 too	 much.	 The	 patient	 actively	 assists	 the	 examiner’s	 passive
movements,	 and	 the	 limb	 may	 continue	 to	 move	 even	 after	 the	 examiner	 has
released	 it.	 In	 the	 modified	 Kral	 procedure,	 the	 examiner	 instructs	 the	 seated
patient	 to	 relax	 and	 then	 passively	 flexes	 and	 extends	 the	 elbow	 several	 times
through	a	full	range	of	motion,	releasing	the	arm	with	the	patient’s	hand	at	the

level	of	the	thigh.	Further	movement	is	scored	on	a	scale	of	0	(no	movement)	to
4	(elbow	flexes	fully	or	cycles	of	flexion	and	extension	continue).

Using	 a	 Delphi	 procedure,	 experts	 agreed	 on	 the	 following	 definition	 of
paratonia:	 paratonia	 is	 a	 form	 of	 hypertonia	 with	 an	 involuntary	 variable
resistance	 during	 passive	 movement;	 the	 nature	 of	 paratonia	 may	 vary	 from
active	 assistance	 to	 active	 resistance;	 the	 degree	 of	 resistance	 depends	 on	 the
speed	 of	 movement	 (e.g.,	 slow	 →	 low	 resistance,	 fast	 →	 high	 resistance);	 the
degree	 of	 paratonia	 is	 proportional	 to	 the	 amount	 of	 force	 applied;	 and	 the
resistance	 to	 passive	 movement	 is	 in	 any	 direction	 and	 there	 is	 no	 clasp-knife
phenomenon.	 The	 Paratonia	 Assessment	 Instrument	 is	 an	 assessment	 tool	 for
paratonia.	 For	 a	 training	 video	 on	 paratonia	 from	 the	 Geriatric	 Medicine
Research	Unit	at	Dalhousie	University,	see	Video	Link	28.4.

Spasticity

Spasticity	 is	 due	 to	 lesions	 involving	 the	 corticospinal	 pathways.	 The
hypertonicity	to	passive	movements	differs	from	that	of	rigidity	because	it	is	not
uniform	 throughout	 the	 range	 of	 movement,	 and	 it	 varies	 with	 the	 speed	 of
movement.	 In	 addition,	 rigidity	 tends	 to	 affect	 all	 muscles	 to	 about	 the	 same
degree,	 whereas	 the	 hypertonia	 of	 spasticity	 varies	 greatly	 from	 muscle	 to
muscle.	In	spasticity,	if	the	passive	movement	is	made	slowly,	there	may	be	little
resistance.	But	if	the	movement	is	made	quickly,	there	will	be	a	sudden	increase
in	tone	partway	through	the	arc,	causing	a	catch	or	a	block	as	though	the	muscle
had	 impacted	 a	 stop.	 The	 relationship	 of	 the	 hypertonus	 to	 the	 speed	 of
movement	 is	 a	 key	 feature	 distinguishing	 spasticity	 from	 rigidity.	 In	 the	 upper
extremity,	it	is	useful	to	look	for	spasticity	involving	the	pronator	muscles.	With
the	 patient’s	 elbow	 flexed	 to	 about	 90	 degrees	 and	 the	 forearm	 fully	 pronated,
the	 examiner	 slowly	 supinates	 the	 patient’s	 hand.	 Unless	 spasticity	 is	 severe,
there	will	be	little	or	no	resistance	to	this	slow	movement.	If,	after	several	slow
repetitions,	the	examiner	supinates	the	patient’s	hand	very	quickly,	there	will	be
sudden	resistance	at	about	the	midrange	of	movement,	referred	to	as	a	“pronator
catch.”	 The	 catch	 will	 then	 relax,	 and	 the	 supination	 movement	 can	 be
completed.	 When	 hypertonus	 is	 severe,	 this	 maneuver	 may	 elicit	 pronator
clonus.

A	 similar	 slow	 then	 rapid	 motion	 technique	 can	 be	 used	 to	 detect	 lower-
extremity	spasticity.	With	hands	behind	the	knee,	the	examiner	slowly	flexes	and
extends	the	knee	of	the	supine	and	relaxed	patient.	With	adequate	relaxation,	the

foot	remains	on	the	bed.	After	several	slow	repetitions,	from	the	position	of	full
extension,	 the	 examiner	 abruptly	 and	 forcefully	 pulls	 the	 knee	 upward.	 When
tone	is	normal,	the	foot	will	scoot	back,	remaining	in	contact	with	the	bed.	When
there	is	spasticity,	the	foot	flies	upward	in	a	kicking	motion	(spastic	kick).	In	the
heel-	 or	 foot-dropping	 test,	 the	 examiner	 holds	 the	 patient’s	 leg	 flexed	 at	 the
knee	and	hip,	one	hand	behind	the	knee	and	the	other	supporting	the	foot.	The
foot	 is	 suddenly	 released.	 Normally,	 its	 descent	 is	 smooth,	 but	 when	 there	 is
spasticity	 in	 the	 quadriceps	 muscle,	 the	 foot	 may	 hang	 up	 and	 drop	 in	 a
succession	of	choppy	movements.

Spastic	muscles	may	or	may	not	feel	firm	and	tense	to	palpation.	The	range	of
movement	 of	 spastic	 extremities,	 and	 the	 degree	 of	 hypertonicity,	 often	 varies
between	examinations.	No	devices	for	quantitating	spasticity	exist,	and	clinical
evaluation	remains	the	most	useful	tool.	The	Ashworth	scale	is	commonly	used
to	 quantitate	 spasticity	 on	 a	 scale	 from	 1	 (no	 increase	 in	 muscle	 tone)	 to	 5
(affected	part	rigid	in	flexion	or	extension).	Its	validity	and	reliability	have	been
questioned.	 In	 the	 presence	 of	 spasticity,	 the	 DTRs	 are	 exaggerated,	 and
pathologic	 reflexes	 such	 as	 the	 Babinski	 and	 Chaddock	 signs	 can	 often	 be
elicited.	Clonus	is	often	present.	There	may	be	abnormal	associated	movements.
Upper	motor	neuron	weakness	is	often	accompanied	by	sustained	contraction
of	specific	groups	of	muscles.	With	hemiparesis	or	hemiplegia,	spasticity	is	most
marked	in	the	flexor	and	pronator	muscles	of	the	upper	and	the	extensor	muscles
of	the	lower	extremity;	this	causes	a	posture	of	flexion	of	the	arm	and	extension
of	 the	 leg,	 the	 characteristic	 distribution	 in	 cerebral	 hemiplegia	 (Figure	 25.6).
The	arm	is	adducted,	flexed	at	the	elbow,	 and	the	wrist	and	fingers	are	flexed;
there	may	be	forced	grasping.	The	lower	extremity	is	extended	at	the	hip,	knee,
and	ankle,	with	inversion	and	plantar	flexion	of	the	foot;	there	may	be	marked
spasm	of	the	hip	adductors.	There	is	more	passive	resistance	to	extension	than	to
flexion	 in	 the	 upper	 extremities	 and	 to	 flexion	 than	 to	 extension	 in	 the	 lower
extremities.	With	bilateral	lesions,	the	increased	tone	of	the	hip	adductors	causes
a	scissors	gait,	in	which	one	leg	is	pulled	toward	the	other	as	each	step	is	taken
(see	Chapter	44).	Although	spasticity	in	the	lower	extremities	usually	affects	the
extensors	 most	 severely,	 in	 some	 patients	 with	 severe	 myelopathy	 or	 extensive
cerebral	lesions,	there	is	marked	hypertonicity	in	the	flexor	muscles,	drawing	the
legs	into	a	position	referred	to	as	paraplegia	in	flexion.

Catatonic	Rigidity

The	 abnormal	 muscle	 tone	 in	 catatonia	 is	 in	 many	 respects	 similar	 to
extrapyramidal	rigidity	and	may	be	physiologically	related.	There	is	a	waxy	or
lead-pipe	 type	 of	 resistance	 to	 passive	 movement	 that	 may	 be	 accompanied	 by
posturing,	bizarre	mannerisms,	and	evidence	of	psychosis.	It	may	be	possible	to
mold	 the	 extremities	 into	 any	 position,	 in	 which	 they	 remain	 indefinitely.
Catatonia	 may	 be	 induced	 by	 neuroleptics	 and	 may	 progress	 to	 neuroleptic
malignant	syndrome.

Decerebrate	and	Decorticate	Rigidity

Decerebrate	 rigidity	
is	 characterized	 by	 marked	 rigidity	 and	 sustained
contraction	of	the	extensor	muscles	of	all	four	extremities;	in	decorticate	rigidity,
there	 is	 flexion	 of	 the	 elbows	 and	 wrists	 with	 extension	 of	 the	 legs	 and	 feet.
These	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	41.

Similar	 generalized	 rigidity	 with	 neck	 extension	 can	 occur	 with	 severe
meningismus	 (opisthotonos),	 as	 well	 as	 in	 the	 tonic	 phase	 of	 a	 generalized
seizure.	 Cerebellar	 or	 posterior	 fossa	 fits	 are	 probably	 attacks	 of	 decerebrate
rigidity	due	to	brainstem	dysfunction	related	to	mass	effect	in	the	posterior	fossa.

Voluntary	Rigidity

Various	 muscle	 groups	 may	 be	 consciously	 tensed	 or	 braced	 to	 protect	 against
injury	or	in	response	to	pain.	It	is	often	difficult	to	differentiate	between	tension
that	 is	 truly	 volitional	 and	 that	 which	 is	 unconscious	 or	 involuntary,	 especially
when	 related	 to	 excitement,	 alarm,	 pain,	 or	 fatigue.	 Tense,	 apprehensive
individuals	 may	 show	 increased	 muscular	 tension	 at	 all	 times	 and	 may	 have
exaggerated	 tendon	 reflexes.	 The	 reflex	 exaggeration	 is	 one	 of	 range	 of
response,	and	the	latent	period	is	not	shortened.	Conversely,	the	reflexes	may	be
suppressed	because	the	semivoluntary	contraction	prevents	normal	movement.

Involuntary	Rigidity

Rigidity	 that	 is	 involuntary,	 reflex,	 or	 nonorganic	 may	 resemble	 voluntary
rigidity.	 Rigidity	 of	 psychogenic	 origin	 may	 be	 bizarre	 and	 may	 simulate	 any
type	 of	 hypertonicity.	 Hysterical	 rigidity	 may	 simulate	 decerebration	 or
catatonia.	 It	 may	 be	 extreme,	 with	 neck	 retraction	 and	 opisthotonos,	 the	 body
resting	with	only	the	head	and	heels	upon	the	bed	(arc	de	cercle,	Chapter	52).

Reflex	Rigidity

Muscles	may	develop	reflex	rigidity,	or	spasm,	in	response	to	afferent	impulses,
particularly	 pain.	 Muscle	 spasm	 is	 a	 state	 of	 sustained	 involuntary	 contraction
accompanied	 by	 muscle	 shortening.	 The	 abnormal	 contraction	 is	 visible	 and
palpable.	Common	examples	of	reflex	muscle	spasm	are	the	board-like	abdomen
of	acute	abdominal	disorders,	rigidity	of	the	neck	and	back	in	meningitis,	and	the
localized	spasm	in	the	extremities	following	trauma.	Reflex	rigidity	may	follow
other	 sensory	 stimuli,	 such	 as	 cold.	 Muscle	 contracture	 may	 follow	 prolonged
spasm.	In	some	metabolic	myopathies	(e.g.,	McArdle’s	disease),	painful	muscle
cramps	 and	 spasms	 are	 brought	 on	 by	 exercise;	 the	 muscle	 cramp	 is	 a
physiologic	 form	 of	 contracture	 due	 to	 abnormal	 metabolism	 and	 is	 not
accompanied	by	electrical	activity.

Myotonia

Myotonia	is	a	disorder	of	the	muscle	membrane	that	can	occur	in	many	different
conditions.	Tone	is	usually	normal	when	the	muscles	are	relaxed,	but	contraction
produces	a	temporary	involuntary	tonic	perseveration	of	muscle	contraction	with
slow	relaxation	(Video	28.1).	Sudden	movements	may	cause	marked	spasm	and
inability	 to	 relax.	 In	 grip	 myotonia,	 the	 patient	 has	 difficulty	 letting	 go	 of	 an
object	after	gripping	it	strongly.	The	myotonia	usually	decreases	with	repetition
of	 the	 movement.	 In	 rare	 instances,	 the	 myotonia	 increases	 with	 repetitive
movement	 (paradoxical	 myotonia).	 Percussion	 myotonia	 is	 elicited	 by	 tapping
on	the	muscle.	Percussion	over	the	thenar	eminence	produces	a	prolonged	tonic
abduction	 and	 opposition	 movement	 lasting	 several	 seconds,	 over	 which	 the
patient	 has	 no	 control.	 Tapping	 over	 the	 extensor	 digitorum	 communis	 to	 the
middle	finger	causes	the	finger	to	snap	into	extension,	after	which	it	slowly	falls
over	a	much	longer	period	of	time	than	normal.	Percussion	myotonia	can	also	be
elicited	 over	 other	 muscles.	 Oblique	 elimination	 with	 a	 penlight	 may	 help	 to
make	the	slowly	disappearing	depression	or	dimple	more	visible.	Percussion	of	a
tongue	 blade	 placed	 transversely	 on	 edge	 across	 the	 tongue	 may	 produce	 a
segmental	 myotonic	 contraction	 that	 constricts	 the	 tongue	 circumferentially
(napkin-ring	sign,	Chapter	20).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	28.1	Video	demonstrating	grip	and	percussion	myotonia	in	a	patient	with
myotonic	dystrophy,	followed	by	eyelid,	grip,	and	percussion	myotonia	with
paradoxical	myotonia	in	two	patients	with	paramyotonia	congenita.	Paradoxical
myotonia	worsens	with	successive	contractions.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Richard	Barohn.)

Other	Types	of	Rigidity

Muscular	 rigidity	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 epilepsy,	 tetany,	 and	 tetanus.	 In	 epilepsy,
there	may	be	generalized	rigidity	during	the	tonic	phase	of	the	fit.	Occasionally,
there	 are	 tonic	 seizures	 with	 no	 clonic	 phase	 (tonic	 fits).	 In	 tetany,	 there	 is
generalized	irritability	of	the	peripheral	and	central	nervous	systems,	with	tonic
muscle	spasms	leading	to	localized	or	generalized	hypertonicity,	hypersensitivity
to	stimuli,	cramps,	and	muscle	twitching	(see	Chapter	52).

In	tetanus,	there	is	usually	generalized	rigidity	with	increased	muscle	tone	in
the	entire	body.	In	most	instances,	it	begins	in	the	face	and	jaw	muscles	and	then
spreads	to	affect	the	abdominal	muscles,	extremities,	and	spinal	muscles,	causing
abdominal	 rigidity,	 extensor	 rigidity,	 and	 opisthotonos.	 In	 cephalic	 tetanus,
disease	manifestations	occur	primarily	in	head	and	neck	muscles	(for	video,	see
You	et	al.).	Both	agonist	and	antagonist	muscles	are	simultaneously	hypertonic.
Spasm	of	the	muscles	of	mastication	causes	trismus	(lockjaw).	Retraction	of	the
angles	 of	 the	 mouth	 causes	 the	 facial	 dystonia	 referred	 to	 as	 risus	 sardonicus.
Paroxysms	of	muscle	spasm	progressively	increase	in	intensity	and	propagate	to
other	muscles.	Spasms	may	occur	spontaneously,	after	voluntary	contraction	or
after	 mechanical,	 tactile,	 auditory,	 visual,	 or	 other	 stimuli.	 Between	 spasms,
there	 is	 usually	 some	 persisting	 muscular	 rigidity.	 The	 reflexes	 are	 grossly
exaggerated,	and	a	light	tap	on	a	tendon	may	throw	the	limb	into	violent	spasms.
The	 clinical	 manifestations	 of	 tetanus	 are	 due	 to	 the	 action	 of	 the	 exotoxin	 of

Clostridium	tetani	 on	 the	 inhibitory	 internuncial	 neurons	 of	 the	 brainstem	 and
spinal	 cord.	 In	 the	 stiff-person	 (stiff-man)	 syndrome,	 there	 are	 painful	 tonic
muscular	 spasms	 and	 progressive	 rigidity	 of	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 trunk,	 neck,
abdomen,	 back,	 and	 proximal	 parts	 of	 the	 extremities.	 Other	 disorders	 causing
increased	muscle	tone	are	discussed	in	Chapter	30.

Video	Links

Video	Link	28.1.	Wartenberg	pendulum	test.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=yYtGjvCcA7o

Video	Link	28.2.	Rippling	muscle	disease.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=bdiwylu3Oro

Video	Link	28.3.	Discussion	and	demonstration	of	spasticity	versus	rigidity	from
the	2015	Stanford	Medicine	25	Skills	Symposium.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=gLZoYLxdXCQ&index=5&list=PL5o6KWShAMajcL3piv2wiiVm0BIDyE9rL

Video	Link	28.4.	Training	video	on	paratonia.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=Z-NjgIPbuEU&t=89s

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Andersson	 PB,	 Rando	 TA.	 Neuromuscular	 disorders	 of	 childhood.	 Curr	 Opin

Pediatr	1999;11:497–503.

Ashby	 P,	 Mailis	 A,	 Hunter	 J.	 The	 evaluation	 of	 “spasticity”.	 Can	 J	 Neurol	 Sci

1987;14(3	Suppl):497–500.

Beversdorf	DQ,	Heilman	KM.	Facilitory	paratonia	and	frontal	lobe	functioning.

Neurology	1998;51:968–971.

Brown	RA,	Lawson	DA,	Leslie	GC,	et	al.	Observations	on	the	applicability	of
the	Wartenberg	pendulum	test	to	healthy,	elderly	subjects.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg
Psychiatry	1988;51:1171–1177.

Brown	RA,	Lawson	DA,	Leslie	GC,	et	al.	Does	the	Wartenberg	pendulum	test
differentiate	quantitatively	between	spasticity	and	rigidity?	A	study	in	elderly
stroke	 and	 Parkinsonian	 patients.	 J	 Neurol	 Neurosurg	 Psychiatry
1988;51:1178–1186.

Campbell	 WW.	 Clinical	 Signs	 in	 Neurology:	 A	 Compendium.	 Philadelphia:

Wolters	Kluwer	Health,	2016.

Chatterjee	A.	Feeling	frontal	dysfunction:	facilitory	paratonia	and	the	regulation

of	motor	behavior.	Neurology	1998;51:937–939.

Fowler	EG,	Nwigwe	AI,	Ho	TW.	Sensitivity	of	the	pendulum	test	for	assessing
spasticity	in	persons	with	cerebral	palsy.	Dev	Med	Child	Neurol	2000;42:182–
189.

Ghiglione	 P,	 Mutani	 R,	 Chiò	 A.	 Cogwheel	 rigidity.	 Arch	Neurol	 2005;62:828–

830.

Harris	 SR.	 Congenital	 hypotonia:	 clinical	 and	 developmental	 assessment.	 Dev

Med	Child	Neurol	2008;50:889–892.

Hobbelen	JS,	Koopmans	RT,	Verhey	FR,	et	al.	Paratonia:	a	Delphi	procedure	for

consensus	definition.	J	Geriatr	Phys	Ther	2006;	29:50–56.

Hobbelen	 JS,	 Koopmans	 RT,	 Verhey	 FR,	 et	 al.	 Diagnosing	 paratonia	 in	 the
demented	 elderly:	 reliability	 and	 validity	 of	 the	 Paratonia	 Assessment
Instrument	(PAI).	Int	Psychogeriatr	2008;20:840–852.

Hornung	K,	Nix	WA.	Myoedema.	A	clinical	and	electrophysiological	evaluation.

Eur	Neurol	1992;32:130–133.

Hughes	 BN,	 Hogue	 JS,	 Hsieh	 DT.	 Grip	 and	 percussion	 myotonia	 in	 myotonic

dystrophy	type	1.	J	Pediatr	2014;164:1234–1234.e1.

Ivanhoe	CB,	Reistetter	TA.	Spasticity:	the	misunderstood	part	of	the	upper	motor

neuron	syndrome.	Am	J	Phys	Med	Rehabil	2004;83(10	Suppl):S3–S9.

Johnston	HM.	The	floppy	weak	infant	revisited.	Brain	Dev	2003;25:155–158.
Lance	 JW.	 The	 control	 of	 muscle	 tone,	 reflexes,	 and	 movement:	 Robert

Wartenberg	Lecture.	Neurology	1980;30:1303.

Lee	HM,	Huang	YZ,	Chen	JJ,	et	al.	Quantitative	analysis	of	the	velocity	related
pathophysiology	 of	 spasticity	 and	 rigidity	 in	 the	 elbow	 flexors.	 J	 Neurol
Neurosurg	Psychiatry	2002;72:621–629.

Lin	 CC,	 Ju	 MS,	 Lin	 CW.	 The	 pendulum	 test	 for	 evaluating	 spasticity	 of	 the

elbow	joint.	Arch	Phys	Med	Rehabil	2003;84:69–74.

Loomis	C,	Bird	SJ,	Levine	JM.	Teaching	video	neuroimages:	involuntary	muscle

contractions	in	Hoffman	syndrome.	Neurology	2010;75:836.

Mayer	NH.	Clinicophysiologic	concepts	of	spasticity	and	motor	dysfunction	in
adults	with	an	upper	motoneuron	lesion.	Muscle	Nerve	Suppl	1997;6:S1–S13.

Messina	C.	Pathophysiology	of	muscle	tone.	Funct	Neurol	1990;5:217–223.
Pandyan	 AD,	 Johnson	 GR,	 Price	 CI,	 et	 al.	 A	 review	 of	 the	 properties	 and
limitations	 of	 the	 Ashworth	 and	 modified	 Ashworth	 Scales	 as	 measures	 of
spasticity.	Clin	Rehabil	1999;13:373–383.

Perlmutter	 JS.	 Assessment	 of	 Parkinson	 disease	 manifestations.	 Curr	 Protoc

Neurosci	2009;Chapter	10:Unit10.1.

Pickett	 JB,	 Tatum	 EJ.	 Pendular	 knee	 reflexes:	 a	 reliable	 sign	 of	 hypotonia?

Lancet	1984;2:236–237.

Powers	 RK,	 Marder-Meyer	 J,	 Rymer	 WZ.	 Quantitative	 relations	 between
hypertonia	 and	 stretch	 reflex	 threshold	 in	 spastic	 hemiparesis.	 Ann	 Neurol
1988;23:115.

Rekand	 T.	 Clinical	 assessment	 and	 management	 of	 spasticity:	 a	 review.	 Acta

Neurol	Scand	Suppl	2010;(190):62–66.

Sadeh	M,	Berg	M,	Sandbank	U.	Familial	myoedema,	muscular	hypertrophy	and

stiffness.	Acta	Neurol	Scand	1990;81:201–204.

Sehgal	N,	McGuire	JR.	Beyond	Ashworth.	Electrophysiologic	quantification	of

spasticity.	Phys	Med	Rehabil	Clin	N	Am	1998;9:949–979.

Tucci	 V,	 Plazzi	 G.	 Cataplexy:	 an	 affair	 of	 pleasure	 or	 an	 unpleasant	 affair?

Neurosci	Lett	2009;450:90–91.

Tyrrell	 P,	 Rossor	 M.	 The	 association	 of	 gegenhalten	 in	 the	 upper	 limbs	 with

dyspraxia.	J	Neurol	Neurosurg	Psychiatry	1988;51:995–997.

van	der	Meché	FG,	van	Gijn	J.	Hypotonia:	an	erroneous	clinical	concept?	Brain

1986;109(Pt	6):1169–1178.

Vendrame	 M,	 Zarowski	 M,	 Alexopoulos	 AV,	 et	 al.	 Localization	 of	 pediatric

seizure	semiology.	Clin	Neurophysiol	2011;122:1924–1928.

Wartenberg	R.	Some	useful	neurological	tests.	JAMA	1951;147:1645.
White	DA.	Catatonia	and	the	neuroleptic	malignant	syndrome—a	single	entity?

Br	J	Psychiatry	1992;161:558–560.

Woodbury	MM,	Woodbury	MA.	Neuroleptic-induced	catatonia	as	a	stage	in	the
progression	 toward	 neuroleptic	 malignant	 syndrome.	 J	 Am	 Acad	 Child
Adolesc	Psychiatry	1992;31:1161–1164.

Xia	R,	Powell	D,	Rymer	WZ,	et	al.	Differentiation	between	the	contributions	of
shortening	 reaction	 and	 stretch-induced	 inhibition	 to	 rigidity	 in	 Parkinson’s
disease.	Exp	Brain	Res	2011;209:609–618.

Xia	 R,	 Rymer	 WZ.	 The	 role	 of	 shortening	 reaction	 in	 mediating	 rigidity	 in

Parkinson’s	disease.	Exp	Brain	Res	2004;156:524–528.

You	S,	Kim	MJ,	Jang	EH,	et	al.	Teaching	Video	NeuroImages:	Cephalic	tetanus

as	a	pseudodystonic	emergency.	Neurology	2011;77:e77–e78.

Zhao	 J,	 Afra	 P,	 Adamolekun	 B.	 Partial	 epilepsy	 presenting	 as	 focal	 atonic

seizure:	a	case	report.	Seizure	2010;19:326–329.

CHAPTER	29

Muscle	Volume	and	Contour

A	search	for	evidence	of	muscle	atrophy	or	hypertrophy	is	an	important	part	of
the	motor	examination.	There	is	normally	an	appreciable	individual	variation	in
muscular	development,	but	noteworthy	changes	in	the	size	or	shape	of	individual
muscles	 or	 muscle	 groups,	 especially	 when	 focal	 or	 asymmetric,	 may	 be
significant.

Muscle	 atrophy	 (amyotrophy)	 causes	 a	 decrease	 in	 muscle	 volume	 or	 bulk
and	 is	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 changes	 in	 shape	 or	 contour.	 Neurologic
conditions	 likely	 to	 cause	 muscle	 atrophy	 are	 primarily	 those	 that	 affect	 the
following	components	of	the	motor	unit:	the	anterior	horn	cell,	the	nerve	root(s),
the	 peripheral	 nerve,	 or	 the	 muscle.	 Neuromuscular	 junction	 disorders	 do	 not
cause	 muscle	 atrophy.	 Atrophy	 may	 also	 result	 from	 such	 things	 as	 disuse	 or
inactivity,	
ischemia,	 malnutrition,
immobilization,	
endocrine	disorders,	and	normal	aging.

tendonotomy,	 muscle	

Muscle	hypertrophy	is	an	increase	in	the	bulk,	or	volume,	of	muscle	tissues.	It
may	result	from	excessive	use	of	the	muscles	(physiologic	hypertrophy)	or	occur
on	 a	 pathologic	 basis.	 Hypertrophied	 muscle	 is	 not	 necessarily	 stronger	 than
normal.	Persistent	abnormal	muscle	contraction	may	cause	hypertrophy.	Patients
with	myotonia	congenita	have	a	diffuse	muscularity	without	significant	increase
in	 strength.	Patients	with	dystonia	may	develop	hypertrophy	of	the	abnormally
active	 muscle.	 In	 cervical	 dystonia	 (spasmodic	 torticollis),	 it	 is	 common	 to	 see
hypertrophy	 of	 one	 sternomastoid	 muscle.	 Muscular	 dystrophies,	 especially
Duchenne’s	 dystrophy,	 often	 cause	 pseudohypertrophy	 of	 muscle,	 with
enlargement	because	of	infiltration	of	the	muscle	with	fat	and	connective	tissue
without	an	actual	increase	in	muscle	fiber	size	or	number.

EXAMINATION	OF	MUSCLE	VOLUME	AND

CONTOUR

There	 is	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 individual	 variation	 in	 muscular	 development,	 in	 part
constitutional	 and	 in	 part	 because	 of	 training,	 activity,	 and	 occupation.	 Certain
individuals	 have	 small	 or	 poorly	 developed	 muscles,	 whereas	 others	 show
outstanding	 muscular	 development.	 The	 sedentary,	 the	 elderly,	 and	 those	 with
chronic	disease	may	have	small	muscles	without	evidence	of	wasting	or	atrophy.
Athletes	 may	 develop	 physiologically	 hypertrophic	 muscles.	 In	 normal
individuals,	the	dominant	side	may	exhibit	an	increase	in	the	size	of	the	muscles,
even	 of	 the	 hand	 and	 foot.	 The	 appraisal	 of	 bulk	 and	 contour	 should	 be
correlated	 with	 the	 other	 parts	 of	 the	 motor	 examination,	 especially	 with	 the
evaluation	of	strength	and	tone.

Muscle	 volume	 and	 contour	 may	 be	 appraised	 by	 inspection,	 palpation,	 and
measurement.	 Inspection	 generally	 compares	 symmetric	 parts	 on	 the	 two	 sides
of	the	body,	noting	any	flattening,	hollowing,	or	bulging	of	the	muscle	masses.
The	 muscles	 of	 the	 face,	 shoulder,	 and	 pelvic	 girdles,	 and	 distal	 parts	 of	 the
extremities—especially	 the	 palmar	 surfaces	 of	 the	 hands,	 the	 thenar	 and
hypothenar	 eminences,	 and	 the	 interosseous	 muscles—should	 be	 examined
specifically.	 A	 useful	 technique	 for	 comparing	 extremities	 is	 to	 look	 down	 the
long	 axis.	 Hold	 the	 patient’s	 arms	 outstretched	 and	 close	 together,	 comparing
“down	the	barrel”	from	fingertips	to	shoulders	for	any	asymmetry.

Palpation	assesses	muscle	bulk,	contour,	and	consistency.	Normal	muscles	are
semielastic	and	regain	their	shape	at	once	when	compressed.	When	hypertrophy
is	 present,	 the	 muscles	 are	 firm	 and	 hard;	 in	 pseudohypertrophy,	 they	 appear
enlarged	 but	 may	 feel	 doughy	 or	 rubbery	 on	 palpation.	 The	 feel	 of
pseudohypertrophy	has	been	likened	to	that	of	a	plastic,	gelatinous	toy	such	as
an	 imitation	 snake.	 Atrophic	 muscles	 are	 often	 soft	 and	 pulpy	 in	 consistency.
When	degenerated	muscles	have	undergone	fibrotic	changes,	they	may	feel	hard
and	firm.	Those	infiltrated	or	replaced	by	fat	may	feel	pliant	and	flabby.

Measurements	 may	 be	 very	 useful	 in	 assessing	 atrophy	 or	 hypertrophy.	 A
pronounced	difference	in	muscle	size	may	be	recognized	at	a	glance,	especially
when	confined	to	one	side	of	the	body,	one	extremity,	or	one	segment	of	a	limb.
Slight	 differences	 are	 more	 difficult	 to	 detect,	 and	 measurements	 with	 a	 tape
measure	or	calipers	may	be	necessary.	Measurements	should	be	made	from	fixed
points	 or	 landmarks	 and	 the	 sites—such	 as	 the	 distance	 above	 or	 below	 the
olecranon,	 anterior	 superior	 iliac	 spine,	 or	 patella—recorded.	 The	 extremities
should	 be	 in	 the	 same	 position	 and	 in	 comparable	 states	 of	 relaxation.	 It	 may

also	be	valuable	to	measure	the	length	of	the	limbs.

Atrophy	 or	 hypertrophy	 may	 be	 limited	 to	 an	 individual	 muscle,	 to	 muscles
supplied	by	a	specific	structure	(e.g.,	a	nerve	or	root),	to	those	muscles	supplied
by	 certain	 spinal	 cord	 segments,	 or	 to	 one-half	 of	 the	 body;	 or	 it	 may	 be
multifocal	or	generalized.	In	atrophy	related	to	arthritis	and	disuse,	there	may	be
a	pronounced	decrease	in	volume	with	little	change	in	strength.	In	myopathies,
on	the	other	hand,	there	is	often	little	atrophy	in	spite	of	a	striking	loss	of	power.
Examination	 of	 the	 skin	 and	 subcutaneous	 tissues	 may	 also	 be	 relevant,
especially	in	such	conditions	as	dermatomyositis.

ABNORMALITIES	OF	VOLUME	AND	CONTOUR

Muscular	Atrophy

Many	 processes	 may	 cause	 muscular	 atrophy.	 Neurogenic	 atrophy	 follows
disease	 of	 the	 anterior	 horn	 cell,	 root,	 or	 peripheral	 nerve.	 Atrophy	 because	 of
other	neurologic	processes,	such	as	the	hemiatrophy	associated	with	congenital
hemiplegia,	 is	 not	 typically	 considered	 neurogenic	 atrophy	 even	 though	 it	 is
related	 to	 nervous	 system	 disease.	 The	 term	 neurogenic	 atrophy	 as	 commonly
used	implies	disease	affecting	some	part	of	the	lower	motor	neuron.	Myogenic
atrophy	 is	 that	 due	 to	 muscle	 disease,	 such	 as	 muscular	 dystrophy.	 As	 a
generalization,	when	weakness	and	wasting	are	comparable,	the	process	is	more
likely	to	be	neurogenic;	when	the	weakness	is	disproportionately	greater	than	the
wasting,	 the	 process	 is	 more	 likely	 to	 be	 myopathic.	 When	 a	 muscle	 appears
wasted	but	is	not	weak,	the	cause	is	likely	to	be	nonneurologic,	such	as	disuse.

Neurogenic	Atrophy

The	anterior	horn	cell	and	its	processes	exert	a	trophic	effect	on	skeletal	muscle.
The	nature	of	the	trophic	effect	remains	poorly	understood,	but	it	is	not	as	simple
as	 the	 effect	 of	 nerve	 impulses.	 Electrical	 stimulation	 of	 the	 peripheral	 nerve,
sometimes	 done	 after	 peripheral	 nerve	 injury	 or	 Bell’s	 palsy,	 does	 not	 help
prevent	or	reverse	neurogenic	atrophy.	Nerves	may	be	involved	in	regulating	the
trophic	actions	of	insulin-like	growth	factor,	calcitonin	gene–related	peptide,	and
other	 neurotrophic	 factors	 that	 have	 an	 influence	 on	 skeletal	 muscle.	 When	 a
lesion	 completely	 disrupts	 the	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 or	 its	 peripheral	 processes,

the	affected	muscle	lies	inert	and	flaccid	and	no	longer	contracts	voluntarily	or
reflexively.	 Muscle	 fibers	 decrease	 in	 size,	 causing	 wasting	 or	 atrophy	 of	 the
entire	 muscle	 mass.	 Without	 timely	 reinnervation,	 the	 muscle	 may	 become
fibrotic,	with	an	increase	in	connective	tissue	and	fatty	infiltration.

The	more	abrupt	or	extreme	the	interruption	of	nerve	supply,	the	more	rapid
the	 wasting.	 The	 atrophy	 may	 either	 precede	 or	 follow	 other	 signs,	 such	 as
weakness.	 In	 rapidly	 progressing	 diseases,	 weakness	 precedes	 atrophy,	 but	 in
slowly	progressive	diseases,	the	atrophy	may	precede	appreciation	of	weakness.
If	the	pathologic	process	is	confined	to	the	anterior	horn	cells	or	the	spinal	cord,
the	neurogenic	atrophy	is	segmental	in	distribution.	Some	conditions	cause	rapid
destruction	 of	 the	 anterior	 horn	 cells	 and	 atrophy	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the
affected	spinal	cord	segments	that	develops	within	a	short	period	of	time	(e.g.,
poliomyelitis).

In	more	slowly	progressive	disorders	of	the	motor	neuron	(e.g.,	amyotrophic
lateral	 sclerosis	 [ALS]),	 there	 is	 a	 gradual	 but	 widespread	 degeneration	 of	 the
brainstem	 motor	 nuclei	 and	 anterior	 horn	 cells,	 causing	 progressive	 muscular
atrophy	 that	 may	 appear	 before	 paralysis	 is	 evident	 (Figure	 29.1).	 The
distribution	 of	 the	 atrophy	 is	 important.	 To	 make	 a	 diagnosis	 of	 motor	 neuron
disease,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 demonstrate	 widespread	 denervation	 in	 a	 multiple
nerve,	 multiple	 root	 distribution.	 Eventually,	 the	 disease	 becomes	 widespread,
but	 it	 often	 begins	 segmentally	 in	 one	 limb.	 Rarely,	 it	 may	 remain	 confined	 to
one	 limb	 (monomelic	 motor	 neuron	 disease,	 Hirayama	 disease,	 O’Sullivan-
McLeod	syndrome).	Particular	groups	of	muscles	are	often	affected.	In	classical
ALS	and	in	progressive	spinal	muscular	atrophy	(SMA)	of	the	Aran-Duchenne
type,	 atrophy	 is	 usually	 first	 seen	 in	 the	 distal	 musculature—the	 thenar,
hypothenar,	and	interosseous	muscles	of	the	hand	and	the	small	muscles	of	the
foot—and	then	spreads	up	the	limbs	to	the	proximal	parts.	In	some	patients,	ALS
seems	to	have	a	tendency	to	preferentially	involve	the	muscles	of	the	lateral	half
of	 the	 hand,	 median-innervated	 thenar,	 and	 ulnar-innervated	 first	 dorsal
interosseous	 muscles	 while	 sparing	 the	 hypothenar	 muscles	 (split	 hand
syndrome).	 Although	 not	 common,	 this	 pattern	 seems	 to	 be	 relatively	 specific
for	anterior	horn	cell	disorders.	In	progressive	bulbar	palsy,	the	atrophy	is	first
noted	 in	 the	 muscles	 supplied	 by	 the	 12th,	 10th,	 and	 7th	 cranial	 nerves.	 In
hereditary	motor	neuron	syndromes,	the	involvement	is	often	proximal.	In	SMA
type	1	(infantile	progressive	SMA,	Werdnig-Hoffmann	disease),	the	atrophy	first
involves	 the	 trunk,	 pelvic,	 and	 shoulder	 muscles	 and	 then	 spreads	 toward	 the
periphery.	 The	 proximal	 distribution	 and	 slow	 progression	 in	 SMA	 type	 3

(juvenile	 proximal	 SMA,	 Kugelberg-Welander	 disease)	 may	 simulate	 muscular
dystrophy.	 Segmental	 atrophy	 may	 also	 follow	 focal	 spinal	 cord	 lesions
involving	 the	 anterior	 horn	 cells	 (e.g.,	 syringomyelia).	 The	 rapidity	 of	 the
progress	depends	upon	the	type	of	pathologic	change.

FIGURE	29.1	A	patient	with	amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis	showing	advanced	atrophy
of	the	muscles	of	the	shoulder	girdle	and	upper	arms	(A)	and	intrinsic	hand	muscles
(B).

Involvement	 of	 nerve	 roots,	 plexus	 elements,	 or	 peripheral	 nerves	 leads	 to
atrophy	 of	 the	 muscles	 supplied	 by	 the	 diseased	 or	 injured	 component	 (Figure
29.2).	With	severe	lesions	involving	a	peripheral	nerve	or	nerve	plexus,	atrophy
may	 develop	 within	 a	 short	 period	 of	 time.	 Within	 1	 month	 after	 denervation,
there	may	be	a	30%	loss	of	weight	in	the	affected	muscle	and	a	50%	loss	within
2	 months;	 thereafter,	 the	 atrophy	 progresses	 more	 slowly	 and	 replacement	 by
connective	tissue	and	infiltration	by	fat	follows.	Lesions	involving	single	nerve
roots	usually	 do	not	cause	 much	atrophy,	because	most	muscles	are	innervated
from	 more	 than	 one	 level.	 Marked	 wasting	 in	 a	 disease	 that	 appears	 consistent

with	radiculopathy	suggests	multiple	root	involvement.	In	generalized	peripheral
neuropathy,	 weakness	 and	 wasting	 are	 usually	 greatest	 in	 the	 distal	 portions	 of
the	extremities.	The	amount	of	atrophy	depends	on	the	severity	and	chronicity	of
the	 neuropathy.	 The	 hereditary	 peripheral	 neuropathy,	 Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease	 (peroneal	 muscular	 atrophy),	 typically	 causes	 marked	 atrophy	 in	 a
characteristic	 distribution	 involving	 the	 lower	 legs	 (inverted	 champagne	 bottle
deformity;	Figure	29.3).

The	 complete	 syndrome	 of	 peripheral	 nerve	 dysfunction,	 with	 paralysis,
atrophy,	sensory	impairment,	areflexia,	and	trophic	changes	in	the	skin	and	other
tissues,	 is	 the	 result	 of	 interruption	 of	 motor,	 sensory,	 and	 autonomic	 fibers.
Interruption	 of	 sensory	 nerve	 fibers	 alone	 does	 not	 lead	 to	 muscular	 atrophy
except	 as	 related	 to	 disuse,	 but	 loss	 of	 pain	 sensation	 may	 predispose	 one	 to
painless	 injuries,	 including	 ulcerations	 following	 minor	 trauma	 and	 burns.	 The
autonomic	system	is	involved	in	trophic	function	by	regulating	the	nutrition	and
metabolism	 of	 muscle	 and	 other	 tissues.	 Because	 of	 interruption	 of	 autonomic
pathways,	 diseases	 of	 the	 lower	 motor	 neuron	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 trophic
changes	 in	 the	 skin	 and	 subcutaneous	 tissues:	 edema,	 cyanosis	 or	 pallor,
coldness,	sweating,	changes	in	the	hair	and	nails,	alterations	in	the	texture	of	the
skin,	osteoporosis,	and	even	ulcerations	and	decubiti.	Autonomic	fibers	may	be	a
factor	in	muscle	atrophy	because	of	“trophic	dysfunction”	and	loss	of	vasomotor
control.

Upper	motor	neuron	lesions	in	adults	are	usually	not	followed	by	atrophy	of
the	 paralyzed	 muscles	 except	 for	 some	 generalized	 loss	 of	 muscle	 volume	 and
secondary	 wasting	 because	 of	 disuse,	 which	 is	 seldom	 severe.	 With	 lesions
dating	 from	 birth	 or	 early	 childhood,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 failure	 of	 growth	 of	 the
contralateral	body	(Figure	25.5).	Such	congenital	hemiatrophy	may	involve	one
side	of	the	face	or	the	face	and	corresponding	half	of	the	body;	it	is	characterized
by	 underdevelopment	 not	 only	 of	 the	 muscles	 but	 also	 of	 the	 skin,	 hair,
subcutaneous	 tissues,	 connective	 tissue,	 cartilage,	 and	 bone.	 Congenital
hemihypertrophy	 is	 rarer	 than	 the	 corresponding	 hemiatrophy,	 and	 there	 are
usually	 other	 anomalies.	 There	 may	 be	 underdevelopment	 of	 one-half	 of	 the
body	because	of	either	lack	of	development	or	atrophy	of	the	opposite	cerebral
hemisphere	(cerebral	hemiatrophy).	Severe	cerebral	insults	in	early	life	may	lead
to	 hemiplegia,	 hemiatrophy,	 partial	 or	 hemiseizures,	 and	 the	 development	 of
delayed	 hemidystonia	 (“4-hemi”	 syndrome).	 Experimentally,	 lesions	 of	 the
motor	 cortex	 and	 the	 descending	 corticospinal	 pathways	 may	 be	 followed	 by
muscular	 atrophy,	 and	 on	 occasion,	 severe	 wasting	 appears	 with	 cerebral

hemiplegias.	Usually,	there	are	associated	trophic	and	sensory	changes,	and	the
wasting	 may	 in	 part	 be	 secondary	 to	 involvement	 of	 the	 postcentral	 gyrus	 or
parietal	lobe,	lesions	of	which	are	known	to	be	followed	by	contralateral	atrophy.
The	loss	of	muscle	bulk	associated	with	lesions	of	the	parietal	lobe	may	appear
promptly;	 the	 degree	 of	 atrophy	 depends	 upon	 the	 size	 and	 character	 of	 the
lesion	 and	 the	 extent	 of	 the	 hypotonia	 and	 sensory	 change.	 The	 distribution	 is
determined	by	the	localization	of	the	process	within	the	parietal	lobe.	It	is	most
severe	if	the	motor	cortex	or	pathways	are	involved	along	with	the	sensory	areas
of	 the	 brain.	 Hemiatrophy	 may	 also	 complicate	 hemiparkinsonism.	 Rarely,
hemiatrophy	is	idiopathic.

FIGURE	 29.2	 Atrophy	 of	 the	 left	 abductor	 pollicis	 brevis	 in	 a	 plumber	 with	 carpal
tunnel	syndrome.

FIGURE	29.3	A	patient	with	type	1	Charcot-Marie-Tooth	disease.	Despite	a	muscular
upper	body,	there	is	marked	atrophy	of	the	lower	extremities	below	the	knees.

Other	Varieties	of	Muscular	Atrophy

Myogenic,	or	myopathic,	atrophy	occurs	as	a	result	of	primary	muscle	disease.
In	some	conditions,	there	may	be	prominent	wasting	without	much	weakness.	In
most	 of	 these,	 the	 primary	 pathologic	 change	 is	 type	 2	 fiber	 atrophy.	 Wasting
with	 little	 weakness	 occurs	 in	 disuse,	 aging,	 cachexia,	 and	 some	 endocrine

myopathies.	 Weakness	 out	 of	 proportion	 to	 wasting	 occurs	 in	 inflammatory
myopathy,	myasthenia	gravis,	and	periodic	paralysis.

Muscle	wasting	is	common	in	muscular	dystrophy,	and	the	distribution	of	the
wasting	parallels	the	weakness.	In	dystrophinopathies,	the	weakness	and	atrophy
primarily	 involve	 the	 pelvic	 and	 shoulder	 girdle	 muscles	 (Figure	 29.4).
Weakness	of	the	hip	and	spine	extensors	causes	difficulty	in	assuming	the	erect
position,	and	the	patient	“climbs	up	his	thighs”	 (Gowers’	sign	or	maneuver)	in
order	to	stand	(Video	Link	29.1).	As	the	disease	progresses,	there	is	increasing
wasting	 of	 all	 muscles	 of	 the	 shoulders,	 upper	 arms,	 pelvis,	 and	 thighs.	 In	 the
face	 of	 all	 of	 the	 atrophy,	 certain	 muscles—particularly	 the	 calf	 muscles—are
paradoxically	 enlarged	 because	 of	 pseudohypertrophy	 (see	 below).	 The	 limb-
girdle	 syndromes	 also	 primarily	 involve	 the	 pelvic	 and	 shoulder	 girdles.	 In
facioscapulohumeral	
the	 atrophy
predominates	 in	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 face,	 shoulder	 girdles	 (especially	 the
trapezius	 and	 periscapular	 muscles),	 and	 upper	 arms,	 especially	 the	 biceps
(Figure	 29.5).	 Involvement	 is	 often	 asymmetric,	 and	 occasionally,	 there	 is
pseudohypertrophy	of	the	deltoid	and	other	shoulder	muscles.

(Landouzy-Dejerine)	 dystrophy,	

(FSH)	

FIGURE	 29.4	 A	 boy	 with	 Duchenne’s	 muscular	 dystrophy,	 showing	 wasting	 of	 the
musculature	 in	 the	 shoulders	 and	 thighs;	 weakness	 and	 atrophy	 of	 the	 glutei	 cause
difficulty	 in	 assuming	 the	 erect	 position,	 and	 the	 patient	 “climbs	 up	 on	 his	 thighs”
(Gowers’	maneuver)	in	order	to	stand	erect.

Distal	 myopathies,	 affecting	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 hands	 and	 feet,	 are
occasionally	seen.	Wasting	involving	the	distal	extremities,	with	relative	sparing
of	the	hands	and	feet,	is	likely	to	be	myopathic.	In	contrast,	denervation	atrophy
involves	the	entire	distal	extremity,	including	the	hand	or	foot.	Some	myopathies

there	

syndromes	

In	 myotonic	 dystrophy,	

is	 prominent	 atrophy	 of	
involve	

cause	 striking	 weakness	 and	 atrophy	 involving	 certain	 muscles	 or	 muscle
the
groups.	
sternocleidomastoid	 muscles.	 Scapuloperoneal	
the
periscapular	 and	 peroneal	 muscles.	 Selective	 involvement	 of	 the	 quadriceps
occurs	 in	 inclusion	 body	 myositis	 and	 type	 2B	 limb-girdle	 muscular	 dystrophy
(dysferlin	 deficiency).	 Some	 myopathies	 have	 a	 curious	 tendency	 to	 affect
certain	 muscles	 while	 sparing	 nearby	 muscle	 groups.	 FSH	 characteristically
causes	wasting	of	the	biceps	and	triceps	with	sparing	of	the	deltoid	and	forearm
musculature	creating	the	“Popeye”	arm	appearance	(Figure	29.6).	The	diamond
on	 quadriceps	 sign	 refers	 to	 asymmetric	 diamond-shaped	 bulges	 seen	 in	 the
anterolateral	 thighs	 of	 patients	 with	 dysferlinopathy	 (LGMD	 2B	 and	 Miyoshi
myopathy)	 when	 standing	 with	 the	 knees	 slightly	 bent.	 Proximal	 and	 distal
atrophy	causes	the	curious	island	of	sparing	to	stand	out.	Other	unusual	muscle
shapes	 have	 been	 described	 as	 a	 manifestation	 of	 dysferlinopathy,	 such	 as
selective	biceps	atrophy	causing	a	“bowl-shaped	biceps.”

FIGURE	 29.5	 A	 patient	 with	 facioscapulohumeral	 muscular	 dystrophy	 showing
atrophy	 of	 the	 muscles	 of	 the	 shoulders	 and	 upper	 arms	 and	 pronounced	 scapular
winging.

Disuse	 atrophy	 follows	 prolonged	 immobilization	 of	 a	 part	 of	 the	 body.	 It
may	 be	 rapid	 in	 onset	 and	 can	 sometimes	 simulate	 neurogenic	 atrophy.	 Disuse
atrophy	may	occur	in	an	extremity	after	immobilization,	such	as	casting,	one	that
cannot	 be	 moved	 normally	 because	 of	 joint	 disease,	 such	 as	 arthritis,	 paresis
following	a	cerebral	lesion,	or	after	prolonged	bed	rest.	The	quadriceps	femoris
is	 particularly	 susceptible	 to	 disuse	 atrophy	 because	 of	 bed	 rest	 or	 because	 of
pain	in	the	knee	or	hip.	The	degree	of	muscle	wasting	is	greater	than	the	degree

of	weakness,	which	may	be	minimal	or	absent.	Muscle	biopsy	shows	atrophy	of
type	2	fibers,	with	the	earliest	changes	in	the	type	2B	fibers.	Disuse	atrophy	can
occasionally	 occur	 in	 extremities	 that	 are	 not	 used	 because	 of	 nonorganic
paralysis.

FIGURE	29.6	The	Popeye	arm	appearance	in	FSH	dystrophy.

Arthrogenic	atrophy	may	appear	in	association	with	joint	disease.	It	is	more
severe	and	develops	more	rapidly	in	acute	arthritis.	Both	rheumatoid	arthritis	and
osteoarthritis	 may	 cause	 periarticular	 atrophy,	 with	 loss	 of	 muscle	 bulk	 around
involved	 joints.	 Periarticular	 muscle	 atrophy	 may	 be	 particularly	 prominent	 in

patients	 with	 HIV-associated	 arthritis.	 Atrophy	 of	 this	 type	 may	 in	 part	 be	 the
result	of	inactivity	or	disuse,	but	other	factors	are	likely	involved.

Muscle	 atrophy	 may	 accompany	 malnutrition,	 weight	 loss,	 cachexia,	 and
other	 wasting	 diseases.	 The	 loss	 of	 muscle	 mass	 is	 typically	 greater	 than	 the
degree	 of	 accompanying	 weakness.	 A	 normal	 blood	 supply	 is	 essential	 to	 the
nutrition	and	oxygenation	of	muscles,	and	ischemia	may	lead	to	muscle	atrophy
as	 well	 as	 to	 alterations	 in	 the	 skin	 and	 other	 trophic	 changes.	 In	 Volkmann
ischemic	contracture,	atrophy	accompanies	the	muscle	shortening.

in	

seen	

Endocrine	 dysfunction	 of	 various	 types	 may	 lead	 to	 atrophy	 and	 other
changes	 in	 muscle.	 In	 thyrotoxic	 myopathy,	 atrophy	 is	 particularly	 prone	 to
involve	 the	 shoulder	 girdle	 and	 may	 lead	 to	 scapular	 winging.	 Coarse
the	 affected	 areas.	 With	 primary
fasciculations	 are	 often	
hyperparathyroidism,	 weakness	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 atrophy,	 hyperreflexia,
and	 fasciculations	 simulating	 ALS	 (Vical’s	 syndrome).	 Myopathy	 because	 of
excess	 corticosteroids,	 exogenous	 or	 endogenous,	 may	 be	 associated	 with
muscle	 wasting.	 Muscular	 weakness	 and	 atrophy	 are	 also	 frequent	 findings	 in
hypopituitarism	 because	 of	 loss	 of	 thyroid	 and	 adrenal	 cortical	 hormones.
Muscle	 wasting	 also	 occurs	 with	 diabetes.	 Distal	 weakness	 and	 atrophy	 are
common	in	diabetic	distal	axonopathy.	Diabetic	amyotrophy	(or	radiculoplexus
neuropathy)	 is	 a	 common	 syndrome	 of	 bilateral	 but	 asymmetric	 weakness	 and
atrophy	that	involves	the	pelvic	and	thigh	muscles	because	of	involvement	of	the
lumbosacral	 plexus	 and	 nerve	 roots.	 It	 is	 usually	 associated	 with	 severe	 pain.
Patients	with	diabetes	may	also	develop	either	localized	lipoatrophy	or	areas	of
focal	 muscular	 atrophy	 because	 of	 repeated	 injections	 of	 insulin	 in	 the	 same
area.	The	loss	of	subcutaneous	tissue	may	simulate	muscle	atrophy.	In	adiposis
dolorosa	(Dercum’s	disease),	the	muscles	may	be	replaced	with	fat.

Congenital	hypoplasia	or	absence	of	a	muscle	may	be	mistaken	for	atrophy.
Almost	any	muscle	may	be	congenitally	absent,	but	some	are	particularly	prone,
including	the	depressor	anguli	oris,	palmaris	longus,	trapezius,	peroneus	tertius,
and	 anterior	 abdominal	 muscles	 (prune-belly	 syndrome).	 In	 the	 Holt-Oram
syndrome,	there	are	absent	or	hypoplastic	thenar	muscles.	Poland	syndrome	is	a
rare	 anomaly	 characterized	 by	 unilateral	 absence	 of	 the	 pectoral	 muscles	 and
ipsilateral	 hand	 abnormalities;	 it	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 a	 variety	 of	 other
congenital	 anomalies.	 Other	 syndromes	 of	 congenital	 muscle	 abnormality
include	Duane	retraction	syndrome,	Möbius’	syndrome,	and	congenital	ptosis.

Muscular	Hypertrophy	and	Pseudohypertrophy

Enlarged	 muscles	 are	 encountered	 less	 frequently	 than	 atrophy.	 In	 true	 muscle
hypertrophy,	 the	 muscle	 is	 enlarged;	 in	 pseudohypertrophy,	 the	 muscle	 appears
enlarged	 because	 it	 is	 replaced	 by	 fat	 and	 fibrous	 tissue.	 Extremely	 muscular
individuals	 may	 show	 pronounced	 development	 of	 certain	 groups	 of	 muscles
because	 of	 functional	 or	 physiologic	 hypertrophy,	 often	 found	 in	 athletes	 and
heavy	 manual	 laborers.	 Microscopic	 examination	 shows	 an	 increase	 in	 the
diameter	of	muscle	fibers,	primarily	the	type	2	fibers,	without	any	increase	in	the
number	 of	 fibers.	 Except	 for	 physiologic	 hypertrophy	 because	 of	 exercise,
pseudohypertrophy	is	encountered	more	commonly	than	true	hypertrophy.

Pseudohypertrophy	is	common	in	some	forms	of	muscular	dystrophy.	Muscle
biopsy	 reveals	 severe	 myopathy,	 with	 fatty	 and	 connective	 tissue	 infiltrations.
Pseudohypertrophy	 is	 common	 in	 Duchenne’s	 and	 Becker’s	 dystrophy;	 an
alternate	 term	 for	 Duchenne’s	 dystrophy	 is	 pseudohypertrophic	 muscular
dystrophy.	 Certain	 muscles,	 particularly	 the	 calf	 muscles	 and	 the	 infraspinatus,
are	 often	 strikingly	 enlarged	 because	 of	 pseudohypertrophy	 (Figure	 29.7).
Comparing	the	circumference	of	the	calf	to	the	knee	is	most	informative.	In	the
early	 stages	 of	 the	 disease,	 the	 enlarged	 muscles	 may	 feel	 firm	 and	 hard	 and
remain	strong,	and	there	may	actually	be	an	element	of	true	hypertrophy.	With
progression,	they	develop	a	soft	doughy	or	rubbery	feeling.

Muscle	 hypertrophy	 is	 common	 in	 myotonia	 congenita,	 especially	 the
dominant	form	(Thomsen’s	disease),	because	of	the	excessive	contraction.	These
patients	 may	 have	 the	 impressive	 muscularity	 of	 a	 bodybuilder;	 although	 they
may	 appear	 strong	 and	 muscular,	 strength	 is	 normal,	 or	 there	 is	 even	 slight
weakness.	 Hypertrophia	 musculorum	 vera	 is	 a	 hereditary	 syndrome	 causing
enlargement	 of	 the	 muscles,	 usually	 those	 of	 the	 limbs,	 but	 any	 area	 may	 be
affected.	Mutations	in	the	myostatin	gene	may	cause	muscle	hypertrophy.

FIGURE	 29.7	 Pseudohypertrophy	 of	 the	 calves	 in	 Duchenne’s	 muscular	 dystrophy.
(Reprinted	 from	 Schaaf	 CP,	 Zschocke	 J,	 Potocki	 L.	 Basiswissen	 Humangenetik.
Heidelberg:	 Springer	 Midizin;	 2008.	 Figure	 31.11.	 Reproduced	 with	 permission	 of
Springer	in	the	format	Book	via	Copyright	Clearance	Center.)

Muscle	enlargement,	either	true	hypertrophy	or	pseudohypertrophy,	occurs	as
an	 occasional	 feature	 in	 other	 neuromuscular	 disorders,	 including	 Kugelberg-
Welander	 disease,	 central	 core	 disease,	 centronuclear	 myopathy,	 autosomal
recessive	limb-girdle	muscular	dystrophy,	acid	maltase	deficiency,	polymyositis,
FSH	 muscular	 dystrophy,	 inclusion	 body	 myositis,	 hyperkalemic	 periodic
paralysis,	 paramyotonia	 congenita,	 proximal	 myotonic	 myopathy,	 Isaac’s
syndrome,	focal	myositis,	and	in	manifesting	dystrophinopathy	carriers.	Chronic
partial	 denervation	 of	 muscle	 occasionally	 leads	 to	 focal	 muscle	 hypertrophy,
presumably	 because	 of	 compensatory	 physiologic	 hypertrophy	 of	 unaffected
fibers	 or	 parts	 of	 the	 muscle.	 Muscle	 hypertrophy	 has	 been	 reported	 as	 a
manifestation	of	radiculopathy	and	rarely	in	other	neurogenic	processes.	Use	or
abuse	 of	 androgenic	 steroids	 or	 beta-2	 adrenergic	 agonists	 may	 lead	 to	 muscle
hypertrophy.

Muscle	 enlargement	 may	 occur	 in	 hypothyroidism.	 The	 enlarged	 muscles
have	 reduced	 strength,	 fatigability,	 and	 slowness	 of	 contraction	 and	 relaxation.

The	 Kocher-Debré-Semelaigne	 (infant	 Hercules)	 syndrome	 is	 diffuse	 muscular
hypertrophy	 because	 of	 hypothyroidism,	 particularly	 early	 in	 life.	 Hoffman
syndrome	 refers	 to	 a	 hypertrophic	 myopathy	 because	 of	 hypothyroidism	 in
adults.	 Early	 acromegaly	 may	 cause	 generalized	 muscular	 hypertrophy	 with
increased	strength,	but	in	later	stages,	there	is	weakness	and	amyotrophy.	Edema
and	 inflammation	 of	 muscles	 may	 simulate	 hypertrophy.	 Muscle	 enlargement
may	 also	 occur	 due	 to	 interstitial	 infiltrates,	 as	 occurs	 in	 cysticercosis,
trichinosis,	 sarcoidosis,	 and	 amyloidosis.	 Focal	 muscle	 enlargement	 may	 occur
with	 benign	 or	 malignant	 neoplasms.	 The	 masseters	 may	 become	 enlarged
because	of	bruxism	or	as	a	familial	condition.

Loss	 of	 body	 fat	 may	 lend	 the	 appearance	 of	 muscle	 enlargement.	 In	 the
lipodystrophies,	 which	 may	 be	 familial	 and	 acquired,	 there	 is	 loss	 of	 adipose
tissue	 that	 may	 be	 focal	 or	 generalized,	 often	 associated	 with	 metabolic
complications,	 such	 as	 diabetes	 mellitus	 and	 hypertriglyceridemia.	 Köbberling-
Dunnigan	 syndrome	 is	 a	 familial	 partial	 lipodystrophy	 that	 may	 result	 in	 an
appearance	of	excessive	muscularity,	particularly	in	females.

Video	Links

Video	Link	29.1.	Gowers’	sign.	http://neurosigns.org/wiki/Gower%27s_sign

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Appell	 HJ.	 Muscular	 atrophy	 following	 immobilisation.	 A	 review.	 Sports	Med

1990;10:42–58.

Brooke	MH.	 A	Clinician’s	View	 of	Neuromuscular	Disease.	2nd	ed.	Baltimore:

Williams	&	Wilkins,	1986.

Buchman	 AS,	 Goetz	 CG,	 Klawans	 HL.	 Hemiparkinsonism	 with	 hemiatrophy.

Neurology	1988;38:527–530.

De	 Beuckeleer	 L,	 Vanhoenacker	 F,	 De	 SA	 Jr,	 et	 al.	 Hypertrophy	 and
pseudohypertrophy	 of	 the	 lower	 leg	 following	 chronic	 radiculopathy	 and
neuropathy:	 imaging	 findings	 in	 two	 patients.	 Skeletal	 Radiol	 1999;28:229–
232.

Delmont	E,	Roth	S,	Heudier	P,	et	al.	Primary	hyperparathyroidism,	a	differential
diagnosis	of	motor	neuron	diseases.	Rev	Med	Interne	2001;22:1253–1255.
Edgerton	VR,	Roy	RR,	Allen	DL,	et	al.	Adaptations	in	skeletal	muscle	disuse	or
decreased-use	 atrophy.	 Am	 J	 Phys	 Med	 Rehabil	 2002;81(11	 Suppl):S127–
S147.

Fokin	 AA,	 Robicsek	 F.	 Poland’s	 syndrome	 revisited.	 Ann	 Thorac	 Surg

2002;74:2218–2225.

Garg	A.	Lipodystrophies.	Am	J	Med	2000;108:143–152.
Harwood	 SC,	 Honet	 JC.	 Calf	 enlargement	 associated	 with	 neurologic	 disease:

two	uncommon	cases.	Arch	Phys	Med	Rehabil	1988;69:48–50.

Kim	 DG,	 Hong	 YH,	 Shin	 JY,	 et	 al.	 Split-hand	 phenomenon	 in	 amyotrophic
index	 study.	 Muscle	 Nerve

lateral	 sclerosis:	 a	 motor	 unit	 number	
2016;53:885–888.

Kugelberg	E,	Welander	L.	Heredofamilial	juvenile	muscular	atrophy	simulating

muscular	dystrophy.	Arch	Neurol	Psychiatry	1956;75:500.

Lang	 AE.	 Hemiatrophy,	 juvenile-onset	 exertional	 alternating	 leg	 paresis,
hypotonia,	and	hemidystonia	and	adult-onset	hemiparkinsonism:	the	spectrum
of	hemiparkinsonism-hemiatrophy	syndrome.	Mov	Disord	1995;10:489–495.
Mastropasqua	 M,	 Spagna	 G,	 Baldini	 V,	 et	 al.	 Hoffman’s	 syndrome:	 muscle
stiffness,	 pseudohypertrophy	 and	 hypothyroidism.	 Horm	 Res	 2003;59:105–
108.

Mehrotra	 P,	 Chandra	 M,	 Mitra	 MK.	 Kocher	 Debre	 Semelaigne	 syndrome:
regression	 of	 pseudohypertrophy	 of	 muscles	 on	 thyroxine.	 Arch	 Dis	 Child
2002;86:224.

Menon	P,	Kiernan	MC,	Vucic	S.	ALS	pathophysiology:	insights	from	the	split-

hand	phenomenon.	Clin	Neurophysiol	2014;125:186–193.

Nair	KS.	Age-related	changes	in	muscle.	Mayo	Clin	Proc	2000;75(Suppl):S14–

S18.

O’Donnell	PP,	Leshner	RT,	Campbell	WW	Jr.	Hypertrophia	musculorum	vera	in

familial	ataxia.	Arch	Neurol	1986;43:146–147.

Pestronk	A.	http://www.neuro.wustl.edu/neuromuscular/
Pradhan	 S,	 Mittal	 B.	 Infraspinatus	 muscle	 hypertrophy	 and	 wasting	 of	 axillary
folds	 as	 the	 important	 signs	 in	 Duchenne	 muscular	 dystrophy.	 Clin	 Neurol
Neurosurg	1995;97:134–138.

Pryse-Phillips	 W.	 Companion	 to	 Clinical	 Neurology.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:	 Oxford

University	Press,	2009.

Reimers	CD,	Schlotter	B,	Eicke	BM,	et	al.	 Calf	enlargement	in	 neuromuscular
diseases:	 a	 quantitative	 ultrasound	 study	 in	 350	 patients	 and	 review	 of	 the
literature.	J	Neurol	Sci	1996;143:46–56.

Ruff	RL,	Weissmann	J.	Endocrine	myopathies.	Neurol	Clin	1988;6:575–592.
Soraru’	 G,	 Negrin	 P,	 Angelini	 C.	 Unilateral	 calf	 hypertrophy	 due	 to	 S1-

radiculopathy.	Neuromuscul	Disord	2000;10:514.

Thajeb	P.	The	syndrome	of	delayed	posthemiplegic	hemidystonia,	hemiatrophy,
and	 partial	 seizure:	 clinical,	 neuroimaging,	 and	 motor-evoked	 potential
studies.	Clin	Neurol	Neurosurg	1996;98:207–212.

Walton	JN,	Karpati	G,	Hilton-Jones	D,	eds.	Disorders	of	Voluntary	Muscle.	 6th

ed.	Edinburgh:	Churchill	Livingstone,	1994.

Wilbourn	AJ.	The	“split	hand	syndrome”.	Muscle	Nerve	2000;23:138.
Wildermuth	S,	Spranger	S,	Spranger	M,	et	al.	Kobberling-Dunnigan	syndrome:	a
rare	cause	of	generalized	muscular	hypertrophy.	Muscle	 Nerve	1996;19:843–
847.

CHAPTER	30

Abnormalities	of	Movement

Movement	 disorders	 may	 involve	 any	 portion	 of	 the	 body.	 They	 usually	 result
from	disease	involving	various	parts	of	the	motor	system,	and	the	etiologies	are
many.	The	character	of	the	movement	depends	on	both	the	site	of	the	lesion	and
the	 underlying	 pathology.	 Lesions	 in	 different	 sites	 sometimes	 cause	 identical
movements,	 but	 different	 etiologic	 processes	 involving	 the	 same	 part	 of	 the
motor	system	may	cause	different	movement	abnormalities.

Movement	disorders	disrupt	motor	function	not	by	causing	weakness	but	by
producing	 either	 abnormal,	 involuntary,	 unwanted	 movements	 (hyperkinetic
movement	 disorders)	 or	 by	 curtailing	 the	 amount	 of	 normal	 free-flowing,	 fluid
movement	 (hypokinetic	 movement	 disorders).	 The	 hypokinetic	 movement
disorders	are	usually	accompanied	by	abnormal	states	of	increased	muscle	tone.
Pathology	in	movement	disorders	primarily	involves	the	basal	ganglia:	caudate,
putamen,	 globus	 pallidus,	 substantia	 nigra,	 or	 subthalamic	 nucleus.	 The	 rich
connections	 between	 the	 subcomponents	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia	 and	 between	 the
basal	 ganglia	 and	 other	 motor	 systems,	 as	 well	 as	
the	 numerous
neurotransmitters	 involved,	 make	 the	 clinical	 manifestations	 of	 basal	 ganglia
disease	 complex	 and	 varied.	 Depending	 on	 the	 precise	 location	 of	 the
abnormality,	the	particular	cell	type	involved,	and	the	neurotransmitter	affected,
the	 clinical	 picture	 may	 range	 from	 abnormally	 decreased	 movement	 (the
akinesia/bradykinesia	 of	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 [PD])	 to	 abnormally	 increased
movement	(chorea,	hemiballismus,	dystonia).

HYPOKINETIC	MOVEMENT	DISORDERS

The	 archetype	 of	 hypokinetic	 movement	 disorders	 is	 PD.	 Other	 disease
processes	 may	 produce	 a	 similar	 clinical	 picture,	 characterized	 by	 decreased
movement	 and	 rigidity;	 these	 have	 been	 grouped	 together	 as	 the	 akinetic-rigid

syndromes.	 About	 80%	 of	 the	 instances	 of	 akinetic-rigid	 syndrome	 are	 due	 to
PD	 (Table	 30.1).	 The	 terms	 Parkinson	 syndrome	 and	 Parkinson	 plus	 are
sometimes	used	to	designate	such	other	disorders,	and	the	features	that	resemble
PD	 are	 referred	to	as	parkinsonism,	or	 parkinsonian.	Parkinsonism	is	 a	clinical
diagnosis	 appropriate	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 resting	 tremor,	 bradykinesia,	 rigidity,
and	impaired	postural	reflexes.	PD	is	but	one	cause	of	parkinsonism,	and	it	must
be	differentiated	from	other	conditions	that	may	have	some	of	its	typical	features
as	a	component	of	another	disorder.

Parkinson’s	Disease

PD	 is	 due	 to	 a	 degeneration	 of	 neurons	 in	 the	 dopaminergic	 nigrostriatal
pathway.	 It	 is	 the	 second	 most	 common	 movement	 disorder	 behind	 essential
tremor	 (ET),	 affecting	 about	 1%	 of	 the	 population	 over	 the	 age	 of	 50.	 The
prevalence	 increases	 exponentially	 between	 the	 ages	 of	 65	 and	 90	 and	 reaches
3%	 of	 the	 population	 over	 65.	 Cardinal	 manifestations	 include	 bradykinesia,
rigidity,	 tremor,	 an	 expressionless	 face,	 and	 postural	 instability.	 Asymmetry	 is
characteristic.	 The	 disease	 often	 begins	 asymmetrically;	 the	 signs	 may	 be	 so
lateralized	 as	 to	 warrant	 the	 designation	 of	 hemi-PD,	 and	 some	 asymmetry
usually	 persists	 even	 when	 the	 disease	 is	 well	 established.	 The	 major
manifestations	 vary	 from	 case	 to	 case.	 In	 some,	 tremor	 is	 the	 outstanding
symptom	 and	 in	 others	 the	 rigidity,	 the	 bradykinesia,	 or	 the	 loss	 of	 associated
movements.	 Akinetic,	 tremor,	 and	 postural	 instability	 subtypes	 have	 been
recognized.	 Asymmetric	 rest	 tremor	 is	 the	 most	 common	 presentation	 of	 PD,
occurring	in	about	75%	of	patients.

PD	causes	marked	hypertonia,	or	rigidity,	which	principally	affects	the	axial
muscles	 and	 the	 proximal	 and	 flexor	 groups	 of	 the	 extremities,	 causing	 an
increased	tone	to	passive	movement.	The	rigidity	has	a	rhythmic	quality	referred
the
to	 as	 cogwheel	
superimposition	of	the	tremor.	Cogwheeling	may	be	brought	out	as	the	examiner
passively	moves	an	elbow	or	wrist	by	having	the	patient	grit	the	teeth,	look	at	the
ceiling,	 use	 the	 opposite	 hand	 to	 make	 a	 fist,	 trace	 circles	 in	 the	 air,	 or	 imitate
throwing	 a	 ball.	 The	 rigidity	 is	 present	 evenly	 throughout	 the	 range	 of
movement,	without	the	ebb	at	the	extremes	of	the	range	that	occurs	in	spasticity.

(Negro’s	 sign),	 presumably	 because	 of	

rigidity	

TABLE
30.1

The	Differential	Diagnosis	of	Parkinson’s	Disease
(PD)

PD
Parkinsonian	syndromes

Progressive	supranuclear	palsy
Multisystem	atrophy	(MSA)

MSA-parkinsonian	(striatonigral	degeneration)
MSA-cerebellar	(olivopontocerebellar	degeneration,	sporadic	form)
MSA-autonomic	(Shy-Drager	syndrome)

Diffuse	Lewy	body	disease
Corticobasal	degeneration
Drug-induced	parkinsonism
Dopa-responsive	dystonia

Other	non-Parkinson’s	akinetic-rigid	syndromes
Huntington’s	disease	(rigid	or	juvenile	form)
Wilson’s	disease
Essential	tremor
Depression
Arthritis,	polymyalgia,	and	fibromyalgia

In	PD,	there	is	a	paucity	of	movement	and	a	slowing	of	movements.	Strictly
speaking,	akinesia	means	an	absence	of	movement;	bradykinesia,	a	slowness	of
movement;	and	hypokinesia,	a	decreased	amount	or	amplitude	of	movement,	but
the	term	bradykinesia	is	often	used	to	encompass	all	three.	Bradykinesia	is	not
due	simply	to	the	rigidity	and	may	have	an	independent	pathophysiologic	basis.
There	is	loss	of	associated	and	automatic	movements,	with	masking	of	the	face,
infrequent	 smiling	 and	 blinking,	 and	 loss	 of	 swinging	 of	 the	 arms	 in	 walking
(Figure	 30.1).	 Normal	 fidgeting	 and	 adventitial	 movements	 are	 decreased	 or
absent.	 Because	 of	 the	 rigidity	 and	 bradykinesia,	 strength	 may	 seem	 to	 be
decreased,	 but	 (although	 an	 alternate	 name	 for	 PD	 is	 paralysis	 agitans	 and
Parkinson	 referred	 to	 the	 disorder	 as	 “shaking	 palsy”)	 there	 is	 no	 true	 loss	 of
power	 such	 as	 is	 seen	 in	 corticospinal	 lesions.	 The	 rigidity	 and	 bradykinesia
involve	movements	and	not	muscles	or	muscle	groups	and	do	make	locomotion
and	 motor	 activity	 slow	 and	 difficult.	 Under	 acute	 emotional	 stress,	 the
extremities	 can	 often	 be	 used	 rapidly	 and	 effectively,	 as	 when	 an	 otherwise
immobile	patient	escapes	from	a	fire	(kinesia	paradoxica).

FIGURE	30.1	A	patient	with	Parkinson’s	disease,	showing	rigidity,	masked	facies,	and
typical	posture.

The	tremor	of	PD	is	a	coarse	“pill-rolling”	movement,	so	named	because	of
its	 resemblance	 to	 the	 motion	 pharmacists	 of	 a	 bygone	 era	 used	 to	 make	 pills
(Video	30.1).	The	tremor	is	fairly	rhythmic	and	gross,	from	2	to	6	Hz,	and	may
involve	 the	 hands,	 feet,	 jaw,	 tongue,	 lips,	 and	 pharynx,	 but	 not	 the	 head.	 It	 is
typically	a	resting	tremor	that	lessens	during	voluntary	movement	and	disappears
in	 sleep.	 Parkinson	 said	 the	 tremor	 was	 present	 “whilst	 the	 limb	 is	 at	 rest	 and
unemployed.”	The	tremor	fluctuates,	increasing	in	amplitude	but	not	rate	when
the	patient	becomes	excited.	The	tremor	often	is	more	apparent	when	the	patient
is	 walking.	 Some	 patients	 may	 also	 have	 a	 low-amplitude	 7-	 to	 8-Hz	 tremor
during	voluntary	movement	that	is	suppressed	by	relaxation.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.1	Examples	of	parkinsonian	and	essential	tremor.	The	parkinsonian
tremor	is	prominent	at	rest	and	dampens	with	the	arm	outstretched.	Essential
tremor	is	an	action	tremor,	usually	not	evident	at	rest	but	appearing	with	the
hands	outstretched;	it	often	involves	the	head	and	the	voice.	(Courtesy	Dr.
Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Patients	with	PD	have	poor	balance,	a	tendency	to	fall,	and	difficulty	walking.
Gait	 and	 balance	 are	 not	 prominently	 affected	 in	 most	 patients	 with	 early	 PD,
and	 significant	 postural	 instability	 early	 in	 the	 course	 suggests	 an	 alternate
diagnosis,	 such	 as	 progressive	 supranuclear	 palsy	 (PSP)	 (see	 below).	 The	 gait
abnormality	 is	 stereotypical:	 slow	 and	 shuffling	 with	 a	 reduced	 stride	 length,
sometimes	 markedly	 so;	 a	 stooped	 flexed	 posture	 of	 the	 body	 and	 extremities
(simian	posture);	a	tendency	to	turn	“en	bloc;”	and	reduced	arm	swing	(Video
30.2).	 Head	 drop	 and	 camptocormia	 may	 occur.	 Lower-half	 (lower-body,

arteriosclerotic)	 parkinsonism	 causes	 gait	 difficulty	 out	 of	 proportion	 to	 other
manifestations	(Chapter	44).	Impaired	postural	reflexes	lead	to	a	tendency	to	fall
forward	(propulsion),	which	the	patient	tries	to	avoid	by	walking	with	increasing
speed	 but	 with	 very	 short	 steps,	 the	 festinating	 gait.	 Falls	 are	 common.	 If	 a
patient,	 standing	 upright,	 is	 gently	 pushed	 either	 backward	 or	 forward,	 she
cannot	 maintain	 balance	 and	 will	 fall	 in	 the	 direction	 pushed.	 When	 a	 patient,
seated	 in	 a	 chair,	 is	 suddenly	 tilted	 backward,	 there	 is	 absence	 of	 the	 normal
reflex	leg	extension	to	counteract	the	loss	of	balance	(Souques’	leg	sign).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.2	The	first	segment	of	the	video	demonstrates	typical	features	of	a
parkinsonian	gait	with	a	stooped,	flexed	posture;	short	steps;	en	bloc	turning;
tremor;	reduced	arm	swing;	and	impaired	postural	reflexes.	The	second	segment
shows	two	patients	with	a	festinating	gait	and	the	third	shows	a	patient	with
severe,	frequent	freezing	of	gait.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Facial	 immobility	 and	 lack	 of	 expressiveness	 are	 common	 features	 of	 PD
(hypomimia,	masked	face;	Video	30.3).	A	decreased	rate	 of	blinking	(5	to	10
per	 minute	 rather	 than	 the	 normal	 12	 to	 20),	 accompanied	 by	 slight	 eyelid
retraction	(Stellwag’s	sign,	also	seen	in	thyroid	eye	 disease),	causes	patients	to
have	a	staring	expression	(reptilian	stare).	Hanes	describes	the	whistle-smile	sign
as	 efficient	 way	 to	 bring	 out	 the	 masked	 facies	 in	 PD.	 When	 the	 normal
individual	is	asked	to	whistle,	he	does	so	and	then	smiles,	probably	as	a	response
to	the	apparent	absurdity	of	the	request.	The	patient	suffering	from	parkinsonism
does	 not	 smile	 after	 whistling	 because	 of	 bradykinesia	 affecting	 the	 facial
muscles.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.3	Evolution	of	Parkinson’s	disease	over	12	years.	(Courtesy	Dr.
Stephen	G.	Reich.)

Abnormalities	 of	 phonation	 and	 articulation	 are	 common	 (bradylalia).	 The
voice	is	typically	soft,	breathy,	monotonous,	and	tremulous.	Lack	of	movement
of	the	lips	and	tongue	causes	articulatory	imprecision.	Temporarily	overcoming
vocal	bradykinesia,	words	pour	out	in	a	short	rush	of	rapid	speech.	Patients	with
PD	tend	to	be	soft,	fast,	mumbly	talkers.	They	are	often	unable	to	speak	loudly
or	shout.	There	is	also	slowness	of	chewing	and	swallowing,	and	the	decreased
swallowing	is	largely	responsible	for	the	drooling	that	sometimes	occurs.

The	freezing	phenomenon	is	common	in	PD.	In	the	midst	of	a	motor	act,	the
patient	will	suddenly	freeze	in	place,	unable	to	move	for	a	short	time	because	of
simultaneous	activation	of	agonists	and	antagonists	(Video	30.2).	Freezing	may
occur	when	first	starting	to	walk	(start	hesitation),	when	turning	(turn	hesitation),
when	 approaching	 an	 obstacle,	 and	 even	 when	 talking	 or	 eating.	 Associated
involvement	 of	 midbrain	 structures	 may	 cause	 changes	 in	 ocular	 movements,
including	 fixation	 instability,	 hypometric	 saccades,	 convergence	 insufficiency,
and	 impaired	 upgaze.	 Oculogyric	 crisis,	 forced	 involuntary	 eye	 deviation,
usually	 upward,	 is	 a	 feature	 of	 postencephalitic	 PD	 and	 can	 occur	 in	 drug-
induced	parkinsonism,	but	it	does	not	happen	in	idiopathic	PD.

In	 PD,	 there	 is	 no	 atrophy,	 fasciculations,	 reflex	 changes,	 or	 pathologic
reflexes	of	the	type	seen	in	corticospinal	tract	disorders	(see	Table	22.1).	Reflex
changes	may	occur	if	there	is	associated	corticospinal	tract	involvement,	but	this
does	 not	 occur	 in	 idiopathic	 PD.	 Even	 when	 the	 extrapyramidal	 signs	 are
asymmetric,	 the	 reflexes	 remain	 normal	 and	 equal.	 Fragments	 of	 dystonia
sometimes	occur.	A	“striatal	toe”	(dystonic	toe)	is	an	apparent	extensor	plantar
response,	without	fanning	of	the	toes	that	occurs	in	isolation,	without	other	signs

suggesting	 corticospinal	 tract	 dysfunction,	 in	 patients	 with	 extrapyramidal
disorders	such	as	PD	(Figure	30.2).	The	extended	toe	may	occur	as	part	of	a	foot
dystonia	 that	 includes	 ankle	 inversion,	 arching	 of	 the	 sole,	 and	 flexion	 of	 the
other	toes	(striatal	foot).	The	parkinsonian	hand	is	slightly	extended	at	the	wrist
and	 flexed	 at	 the	 metacarpophalangeal	 joints	 with	 the	 fingers	 extended	 and
adducted.	There	is	often	exaggeration	of	the	orbicularis	oculi	and	orbicularis	oris
reflexes.	Myerson’s	sign	(glabellar	tap	reflex)	is	blinking	of	the	eyes	on	tapping
over	 the	 glabella.	 In	 PD,	 the	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 inhibit	 the	 response	 and	 will
continue	to	blink	over	and	over;	normals	do	not	continue	to	blink	with	repetitive
tapping	(see	Chapter	16).	 Patients	 with	 PD	 may	 exhibit	 a	 variety	 of	 nonmotor
manifestations,	 such	 as	 anosmia,	 hyperhidrosis,	 greasy	 seborrhea,	 constipation,
somnolence,	 REM	 sleep	 behavior	 disorder,	 difficulty	 turning	 over	 in	 bed,
blepharospasm,	apraxia	of	eyelid	opening,	depression,	and	dementia.	Nonmotor
manifestations	may	occur	before	motor	symptoms	develop.

FIGURE	 30.2	 A	 “striatal	 toe”	 (dystonic	 toe)	 resembles	 the	 great	 toe	 extension	 of
Babinski’s	plantar	sign	but	is	tonic	and	sustained,	not	accompanied	by	fanning	of	the
toes,	 and	 occurs	 without	 plantar	 stimulation;	 it	 occurs	 in	 extrapyramidal	 disease,	 in
this	case	Wilson’s	disease.

In	 the	 early	 stages	 of	 PD,	 typical	 signs	 are	 often	 subtle,	 and	 patients	 may
impaired	 handwriting	 (especially
present	 complaining	 only	 of	 stiffness,	
micrographia),	 or	 difficulty	 getting	 about.	 Stiffness	 and	 myalgic	 pains	 may
suggest	 a	 diagnosis	 of	 arthritis,	 polymyalgia,	 or	 fibromyalgia.	 The	 facial
masking	and	bradykinesia	often	lead	to	a	misdiagnosis	of	depression.	Early	PD
may	also	be	mistaken	for	the	effects	of	aging.	Rest	tremor,	a	flexed	posture,	and
mild	 cogwheel	 rigidity	 provide	 important	 clues	 to	 the	 possibility	 of	 early

parkinsonism	in	such	patients.	The	clinical	diagnosis	of	PD	at	the	time	of	initial
presentation	 is	 occasionally	 wrong.	 The	 pattern	 of	 disease	 progression	 and	 the
response	to	medication	are	important	additional	factors	in	determining	whether
the	patient	suffers	from	PD	or	one	of	the	other	akinetic-rigid	syndromes.

Advancing	disease	is	characterized	by	increasing	gait	difficulty,	worsening	of
tremor	 and	 bradykinesia,	 motor	 fluctuations	 related	 to	 levodopa	 therapy,
behavioral	changes,	dysphagia,	speech	difficulty,	intractable	drooling,	and	sleep
impairment	(Video	30.3).	Some	degree	of	cognitive	blunting	may	occur	in	20%
to	40%	of	patients.	Severe	dementia	is	rare;	when	present,	especially	early	in	the
course,	 the	 possibility	 of	 dementia	 with	 Lewy	 bodies	 should	 be	 considered.
Depression	 occurs	 in	 approximately	 one-third	 of	 patients,	 and	 psychosis	 and
hallucinations	 occur	 in	 about	 one-fourth	 of	 patients.	 Early,	 prominent,	 and
nonvisual	hallucinations	raise	the	possibility	of	dementia	with	Lewy	bodies.	The
absence	 of	 tremor	 in	 the	 early	 stages	 may	 suggest	 a	 possible	 Parkinson-plus
syndrome.	Advanced	age	at	onset,	severe	depression,	dementia,	and	an	akinetic-
rigid	presentation	are	risk	factors	for	rapid	disease	progression.	The	tremor	may
begin	to	abate	in	the	very	late	stages.

PD	 usually	 affects	 older	 patients,	 the	 mean	 age	 at	 onset	 is	 around	 60	 years,
but	 some	 cases	 began	 relatively	 early	 in	 life.	 The	 nosology	 describing	 these
patients	is	inconsistent.	Juvenile	Parkinson’s	disease	(JPD)	 has	its	onset	before
20	 and	 young-onset	 Parkinson’s	 disease	 (YOPD)	 between	 20	 and	 50,	 but	 the
terms	are	sometimes	used	interchangeably.	JPD	was	first	described	by	Ramsay
Hunt	and	is	one	of	the	several	“Ramsay	Hunt	syndromes”	(Box	16.2).	YOPD	is
probably	 the	 same	 entity	 as	 idiopathic	 PD,	 with	 a	 younger	 age	 of	 onset.	 In	 a
series	 of	 953	 individuals	 with	 YOPD,	 17%	 were	 found	 to	 have	 a	 genetic
etiology.	In	contrast,	JPD	is	a	heterogeneous	group	of	disorders.	Many	patients
with	 JPD	 have	 a	 genetic	 disorder	 due	 to	 a	 parkin	 gene	 mutation.	 Patients	 with
parkin	 mutations	 may	 have	 atypical	 clinical	 features	 such	 as	 dystonia	 at	 onset
and	 marked	 diurnal	 symptom	 fluctuation.	 YOPD	 tends	 to	 have	 more	 gradual
progression	 of	 parkinsonian	 signs	 and	 symptoms	 and	 earlier	 treatment-related
complications.	 Susceptibility	 to	 developing	 late-onset	 PD	 has	 been	 associated
with	polymorphisms	or	mutations	in	several	genes.

The	 diagnosis	 of	 PD	 is	 predominantly	 clinical,	 and	 differential	 diagnosis
essentially	 is	 between	 other	 conditions	 causing	 tremor,	 of	 which	 ET	 is	 the
commonest,	and	other	akinetic-rigid	syndromes.	Clinical	features	that	favor	PD
include	 prominent	 rest	 tremor,	 asymmetric	 signs,	 preservation	 of	 balance	 and
postural	 reflexes	 in	 the	 early	 stages	 of	 the	 disease,	 and	 a	 good	 response	 to

replacement	

therapy.	 The	 other	 degenerative	 disorders	 with
levodopa	
parkinsonian	 features	 typically	 produce	 other	 neurologic	 signs,	 such	 as	 gaze
limitation,	cerebellar	signs,	pyramidal	signs,	severe	dementia,	apraxia	and	other
parietal	 lobe	 signs,	 or	 dysautonomia,	 although	 these	 other	 manifestations	 may
not	be	apparent	early	in	the	course.	In	the	past,	a	diagnosis	of	PD	required	two	of
three	 parkinsonian	 features	 (tremor,	 rigidity,	 bradykinesia).	 Using	 these	 criteria
resulted	in	a	24%	error	rate	based	on	pathologic	 studies.	Using	revised	criteria
(the	UK	Brain	Bank	criteria)	of	rest	tremor,	asymmetry,	and	a	good	response	to
levodopa	 improved	 accuracy	 and	 resulted	 in	 pathologic	 confirmation	 of	 the
diagnosis	 in	 99%	 of	 cases	 determined	 by	 clinicopathologic	 correlation	 studies.
The	most	common	condition	confused	with	PD	is	PSP	(see	below).

Certain	 drugs	 can	 induce	 a	 reversible	 condition	 that	 mimics	 PD.	 The	 most
common	 agents	 that	 cause	 drug-induced	 parkinsonism	 are	 antipsychotics,
especially	 the	 high-potency	 piperazine	 compounds	 such	 as	 haloperidol.	 The
atypical	 neuroleptics	 are	 as	 potent	 in	 their	 antipsychotic	 effects	 as	 traditional
compounds	but	less	likely	to	induce	parkinsonism.	Drug-induced	parkinsonism
can	mimic	PD	closely,	even	to	the	point	of	causing	asymmetric	signs.	Although
dopamine	receptor–blocking	agents,	especially	those	that	block	the	D2	receptor,
are	 the	 most	 common	 offenders,	 other	 agents	 can	 induce	 parkinsonism.	 Some
patients	are	much	more	prone	to	develop	extrapyramidal	side	effects	than	others,
but	 most	 individuals	 will	 eventually	 develop	 parkinsonism	 if	 treated	 with	 high
doses.	 Metoclopramide	
for
gastrointestinal	disease;	it	may	have	extrapyramidal	side	effects.

is	 a	 dopamine	 blocker	 most	 often	 used	

In	the	presence	of	typical	clinical	signs	and	symptoms	and	the	typical	age	of
onset,	extensive	workup	is	not	required.	Imaging	studies	are	usually	normal.	A
thorough	 medication	 history,	 complete	 neurologic	 examination	 to	 look	 for
nonextrapyramidal	abnormalities,	and	screening	 for	orthostatic	hypotension	are
useful.	 Certain	 features	 suggest	 an	 alternative	 diagnosis,	 such	 as	 prominent
dementia	 and	 hallucinations	 in	 the	 patient	 suffering	 from	 dementia	 with	 Lewy
bodies,	prominent	dysautonomia	in	the	patient	with	multisystem	atrophy	(MSA),
dysarthria,	 and	 early	 age	 of	 onset	 in	 Wilson’s	 disease.	 Single-photon	 emission
computed	tomography	(SPECT)	imaging	of	the	dopamine	transporter	system	can
confirm	 or	 exclude	 loss	 of	 nigrostriatal	 dopaminergic	 neurons	 and	 help
distinguish	PD	from	some	of	the	conditions	that	may	mimic	it,	such	as	ET.	These
scans	cannot	distinguish	between	PD	and	conditions	such	as	MSA	and	PSP.

Pathologically,	 the	 disease	 is	 characterized	 by	 depigmentation	 and	 cystic
degeneration	of	the	pars	compacta	of	the	substantia	nigra	with	cell	loss	and	the

presence	 of	 intracytoplasmic	 Lewy	 bodies	 in	 surviving	 neurons.	 A	 major
chemical	 constituent	 of	 the	 Lewy	 body	 is	 alpha-synuclein,	 a	 synaptic	 protein.
Abnormal	 aggregation	 of	 alpha-synuclein	 has	 been	 advocated	
the
pathogenesis	of	PD,	dementia	with	Lewy	bodies,	and	multisystem	atrophy,	and
these	conditions	have	been	grouped	together	as	synucleinopathies.	In	PD,	there
is	depletion	of	dopamine;	replacement	by	its	precursor,	levodopa,	has	been	well
recognized	 as	 effective	 therapy	 since	 the	 landmark	 studies	 of	 the	 1960s.	 The
etiology	of	PD	remains	unknown,	but	the	basis	is	likely	multifactorial,	possibly
involving	hereditary	factors,	environmental	influences	that	may	selectively	affect
dopaminergic	nigral	cells,	and	free	radical	toxicity.

in	

The	 pathophysiology	 of	 parkinsonism	 is	 complex.	 Dopamine	 deficiency
ultimately	results	in	an	increased	output	from	the	internal	segment	of	the	globus
pallidus	 and	 subthalamic	 nuclei,	 which	 results	 in	 excessive	 inhibition	 of	 the
thalamus	 and	 suppression	 of	 the	 cortical	 motor	 system	 (see	 Chapter	 26).
Pharmacologic	 treatment	 modalities	 include	 anticholinergic	 drugs,	 dopamine-
releasing	 agents,	 dopamine	 agonists	 that	 directly	 stimulate	 the	 dopamine
receptor	in	the	striatum,	catechol-O-methyl	transferase	inhibitors,	and	levodopa.
Dopamine	and	acetylcholine	are	in	balance	in	the	striatum,	and	anticholinergics
increase	the	effect	of	dopamine	by	influencing	this	balance.	These	agents	were
the	earliest	treatment	available	for	PD.	The	discovery	of	 L-dopa	 as	 a	 treatment
for	 PD	 was	 a	 major	 medical	 advance.	 The	 story	 of	 that	 discovery	 is	 told	 in
British	 neurologist	 Oliver	 Sacks’	 book,	 Awakenings,	 and	 its	 motion	 picture
adaptation.	Over	90%	of	patients	with	PD	respond	very	well	to	the	initiation	of
levodopa	 replacement.	 The	 absence	 of	 a	 good	 initial	 response	 suggests	 the
possibility	 of	 another	 diagnosis,	 although	 some	 of	 the	 mimickers	 of	 PD,
especially	MSA,	may	also	have	a	good	initial	response.

Some	 of	 the	 other	 conditions	 important	 in	 the	 differential	 diagnosis	 of	 PD
include	multisystem	atrophy,	PSP,	corticobasal	degeneration	(CBD),	and	diffuse
Lewy	body	disease.

Multisystem	Atrophy

MSA	 produces	 degeneration	 involving	 the	 basal	 ganglia,	 cerebellum,	 anterior
horn	 cells,	 cerebral	 cortex,	 and	 brainstem	 in	 varying	 combinations	 and	 usually
includes	 parkinsonian	 features.	 Patients	 with	 MSA	 may	 have	 elements	 of
cerebellar	 ataxia,	 dementia,	 amyotrophy,	 parkinsonism,	 corticospinal	 tract
dysfunction,	dysautonomia,	and	urinary	dysfunction.

There	 are	 three	 subtypes:	 MSA-P	 (parkinsonian),	 MSA-C	 (cerebellar),	 and
MSA-A	 (autonomic).	 In	 MSA-P	 (formerly	 striatonigral	 degeneration),	 the
primary	manifestation	is	parkinsonism;	it	accounts	for	about	80%	of	the	cases	of
MSA.	 About	 10%	 of	 patients	 presenting	 with	 parkinsonism	 will	 evolve	 into
MSA-P.	 In	 MSA-C	 (formerly	 the	 sporadic	 form	 of	 olivopontocerebellar
atrophy),	 the	 primary	 manifestations	 are	 cerebellar.	 In	 MSA-A	 (formerly	 Shy-
Drager	 syndrome),	 the	 primary	 manifestation	 is	 dysautonomia,	 particularly
postural	hypotension.	Suspicion	of	MSA	should	arise	in	the	patient	with	atypical
parkinsonism	 in	 conjunction	 with	 cerebellar	 signs	 and/or	 early	 and	 prominent
autonomic	 dysfunction,	 usually	 orthostatic	 hypotension.	 There	 is	 some	 overlap
of	pathologic	findings	in	the	different	forms	of	MSA.	Recently	discovered	glial
cytoplasmic	inclusions	containing	alpha-synuclein	confirm	these	three	disorders
are	different	forms	of	the	same	disease.	The	dysautonomia	is	due	to	degeneration
of	the	neurons	in	the	intermediolateral	gray	column	of	the	thoracic	and	lumbar
spinal	 cord.	 Impaired	 peripheral	 vasomotor	 control	 in	 MSA	 may	 cause	 cold,
dusky,	purplish	discoloration	of	the	digits	(cold	hands	sign;	Figure	30.3).

Parkinsonism	is	the	most	frequent	motor	manifestation	of	MSA.	MSA-P	has
been	 associated	 with	 relative	 symmetry	 of	 findings,	 urinary	 incontinence,
frequent	falls,	an	absence	of	tremor,	and	the	frequent	presence	of	pyramidal	or
cerebellar	 signs.	 MSA-A	 consists	 of	 a	 combination	 of	 parkinsonian	 signs	 and
symptoms	coupled	with	severe	dysautonomia,	most	often	manifest	as	orthostatic
hypotension.	 The	 primary	 manifestations	 of	 MSA-C	 are	 ataxia	 and	 brainstem
dysfunction.	 Approximately	 one-quarter	 of	 patients	 with	 MSA-C	 will	 develop
parkinsonian	features	within	5	years;	such	evolution	carries	a	poor	prognosis	for
survival.

FIGURE	 30.3	 Dusky,	 violaceous	 fingers	 typical	 of	 multisystem	 atrophy.	 (Reprinted
from	 Reich	 SG.	 The	 cold	 hands	 sign	 in	 MSA.	 Neurology	 2003;60[4]:719,	 with
permission.)

Progressive	Supranuclear	Palsy

In	 PSP	 (Steele-Richardson-Olszewski	 syndrome,	 Richardson’s	 syndrome),
degenerative	changes	in	the	rostral	brainstem	and	thalamus	result	in	impairment
first	of	downgaze,	then	of	upgaze,	and	eventually	in	global	gaze	paresis.	Three
subtypes	 are	 currently	 recognized:	 classic	 Richardson’s	 syndrome	 (PSP-RS),
PSP	 parkinsonism	 (PSP-P),	 and	 pure	 akinesia	 with	 gait	 freezing.	 In	 PSP-P,	 the
clinical	 picture	 resembles	 PD	 early	 in	 the	 course.	 In	 PSP-RS,	 the	 gaze
abnormalities	 are	 accompanied	 by	 parkinsonian	 signs,	 frontal	 lobe–type
dementia,	postural	instability,	pseudobulbar	palsy,	and	a	pronounced	tendency	to
extensor	 axial	 rigidity,	 especially	 involving	 the	 neck	 muscles,	 and	 sometimes
causing	frank	retrocollis.	Gait	difficulty	is	prominent,	and	a	tendency	to	fall	is	an
early	 and	 conspicuous	 feature.	 Some	 have	 likened	 the	 hypererect	 gait	 with
abducted	arms	seen	in	PSP	to	that	of	a	gunslinger.	The	falls	are	often	backward
because	 of	 the	 increased	 extensor	 tone	 and	 postural	 instability.	 There	 is
particular	difficulty	walking	downstairs	because	of	the	combination	of	retrocollis
and	impaired	downgaze.	Tremor	is	not	usually	pronounced,	and	the	disease	does
not	 respond	 significantly	 to	 levodopa.	 The	 gaze	 abnormalities	 at	 first	 involve
voluntary,	vertical,	saccadic	gaze,	sparing	reflex	eye	movements;	the	name	of	the

disease	 refers	 to	 this	 supranuclear	 ocular	 motility	 disturbance.	 The	 disordered
motility	may	progress	to	complete	ophthalmoplegia	terminally.

Facial	dystonia	may	contort	the	face,	particularly	the	forehead	muscles,	into	a
characteristic	 expression	 of	 “perpetual	 surprise”	 or	 astonishment	 with	 raised
eyebrows,	lid	retraction,	and	reduced	blinking	(procerus	sign;	Figure	16.4).	The
facial	expression	is	markedly	different	from	the	hypomimia	and	masking	of	PD.
The	 characteristic	 ocular	 motility	 disturbance	 may	 not	 be	 present	 early	 in	 the
course	and,	in	rare	instances,	never	appears.	The	“applause	sign”	is	an	inability
to	stop	clapping	after	being	asked	to	clap	three	times.	It	was	initially	touted	as	a
way	 to	 distinguish	 PSP	 from	 PD	 and	 frontotemporal	 dementia.	 Later	 studies
found	 the	 applause	 sign	 in	 cortical	 dementia	 and	 suggested	 that	 it	 is	 a
nonspecific	 sign	 of	 frontal	 lobe	 dysfunction.	 On	 magnetic	 resonance	 imaging
(MRI),	a	characteristic	atrophy	of	the	midbrain	with	relative	preservation	of	the
pons	 (the	 “hummingbird	 sign”	 on	 midsagittal	 images)	 may	 be	 seen.	 MRI
measurement	 of	 the	 midbrain/pons	 ratio	 and	 combined	 measurements,	 such	 as
midbrain	 area/pons	 area	 and	 especially	 the	 magnetic	 resonance	 parkinsonism
index,	are	very	useful	in	distinguishing	PSP	from	other	parkinsonian	syndromes.

Corticobasal	Syndrome

inclusions,	 and	 nigral	 degeneration.	 Clinically,	

In	CBD	(corticobasal	degeneration),	abnormalities	involve	both	the	basal	ganglia
and	 the	 cerebral	 cortex.	 Pathologically,	 there	 is	 asymmetric	 frontoparietal
neuronal	loss	and	gliosis,	with	swollen,	achromatic	neurons,	tau-immunoreactive
the
neuronal	 and	 glial	
corticobasal	syndrome	(CBS)	is	characteristically	very	asymmetric	initially,	with
rigidity,	 bradykinesia,	 and	 occasionally	 tremor,	 accompanied	 by	 evidence	 of
higher	cortical	dysfunction	such	as	apraxia,	agnosia,	cortical	sensory	loss,	focal
myoclonus,	or	pyramidal	signs.	It	has	been	increasingly	recognized	that	not	all
patients	with	CBS	have	CBD	pathologically.	Many	have	other	pathology,	most
commonly	PSP	or	Alzheimer’s	disease.	Conversely,	some	patients	with	a	clinical
picture	of	PSP,	frontotemporal	dementia,	or	Alzheimer’s	disease	may	have	CBD
pathologically.

CBS	 typically	 begins	 with	 clumsiness,	 stiffness,	 or	 jerking	 of	 an	 arm.	 The
alien	limb	phenomenon	is	common.	There	may	be	dystonic	posturing	as	well	as
spontaneous	 and	 reflex	 myoclonus	 of	 the	 involved	 limbs.	 The	 involved	 limbs
become	 stiff,	 jerky,	 and	 eventually	 useless.	 The	 combination	 of	 unilateral
parkinsonism	 unresponsive	 to	 levodopa,	 accompanied	 by	 ideomotor	 apraxia	 of

the	involved	extremities,	is	very	suggestive.	MRI	frequently	shows	asymmetric
cortical	 atrophy.	 Cognitive	 impairment	 may	 emerge	 as	 the	 disease	 progresses
and	becomes	generalized.	The	disorder	progresses	slowly	and	does	not	respond
to	 levodopa.	 Tau	 protein	 is	 a	 microtubule-associated	 protein,	 which	 when
aggregated	 causes	 neurofibrillary	 tangles.	 Other	 conditions	 are	 associated	 with
abnormalities	 of	 tau	 protein,	 especially	 PSP	 and	 frontotemporal	 dementia,
collectively	referred	to	as	tauopathies.

Diffuse	Lewy	Body	Disease

In	diffuse	Lewy	body	disease,	the	usual	clinical	picture	is	progressive	dementia
with	 added	 parkinsonian	 features	 in	 an	 elderly	 patient.	 It	 is	 the	 second	 most
common	 degenerative	 dementia	 after	 Alzheimer’s	 disease	 (Chapter	 8).
Parkinsonism	 may	 occur	 early	 or	 late	 and	 varies	 in	 severity.	 The	 parkinsonian
features	are	typically	more	symmetric	and	milder	than	in	PD.	Tremor	occurs	but
is	 less	 common	 and	 less	 severe	 than	 in	 PD.	 Another	 characteristic	 feature	 is
psychotic	 behavior	 with	 visual	 hallucinations,	 delirium,	 and	 paranoia.	 Other
common	 clinical	 features	 include	 cognitive	 fluctuations;	 dysautonomia;	 sleep
disorders,	especially	REM	sleep	behavior	disorder;	and	neuroleptic	sensitivity.

Wilson’s	Disease

Wilson’s	 disease	 (hepatolenticular	 degeneration)	 is	 a	 rare,	 autosomal	 recessive
disorder	 due	 to	 abnormal	 copper	 deposition	 in	 the	 brain,	 especially	 the	 basal
ganglia,	 liver,	 eye,	 and	 other	 tissues	 because	 of	 a	 genetic	 defect	 in	 an	 ATPase
involved	 in	 copper	 transport	 (ATP7B),	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 a	 defect	 in	 the
copper	 transport	 protein	 ceruloplasmin.	 The	 genetic	 defect	 leads	 to	 impaired
copper	excretion	and	systemic	copper	accumulation.	A	low	ceruloplasmin	level
is	 found	 in	 the	 serum	 in	 95%	 of	 patients.	 Ceruloplasmin	 is	 involved	 in	 the
transfer	 of	 copper	 to	 copper-containing	 enzymes	 such	 as	 cytochrome	 oxidase,
and	the	dysfunction	of	these	enzymes	may	underlie	the	clinical	manifestations.

tremor,	

include	

The	 usual	 age	 of	 onset	 is	 between	 the	 ages	 of	 10	 and	 20,	 and	 major
manifestations	
involuntary
movements	 of	 various	 types,	 dysarthria,	 dementia,	 parkinsonian	 features,
spasticity,	 cerebellar	 signs,	 and	 psychiatric	 abnormalities	 (anxiety,	 depression,
psychosis).	 The	 tremor	 may	 be	 present	 at	 rest	 and	 increased	 by	 voluntary
movement.	Most	characteristic	is	a	“wing-beating”	tremor	of	the	proximal	upper

rigidity,	 dystonia,	 abnormal	

extremities,	consisting	of	a	slow,	high-amplitude,	up-and-down	movement	of	the
elbow	 when	 the	 arm	 is	 held	 with	 the	 shoulder	 abducted	 and	 the	 elbow	 flexed
(see	Video	Link	30.1).	Pathologically,	there	is	symmetric	degeneration	of	the
lenticular	nuclei,	with	widespread	neuronal	loss	and	proliferation	of	Alzheimer-
type	II	astrocytes.

Kayser-Fleischer	 rings	 are	 crescents	 of	 green-brown	 discoloration	 of	 the
cornea	because	of	copper	deposits	in	Descemet’s	membrane	(Figure	30.4);	these
are	essentially	always	present	in	patients	with	neurologic	involvement	but	may
not	 be	 visible	 without	 a	 slit	 lamp.	 Rarely,	 the	 disease	 may	 present	 without	 the
rings.	 Slit	 lamp	 examination	 may	 also	 detect	 sunflower	 cataracts	 because	 of
copper	deposition	in	the	lens.

Risus	 sardonicus	 refers	 to	 an	 unusual	 forced	 “smile”	 because	 of	 facial
dystonia	and	may	be	seen	in	Wilson’s	disease	and	other	disorders	(Figure	30.5).
Other	 manifestations	 of	 the	 disease	 include	 cirrhosis,	 atypical	 hepatitis,
hemolytic	 anemia,	 and	 renal	 disease.	 Patients	 may	 present	 with	 liver	 disease
alone,	brain	disease	alone,	or	evidence	of	both.	In	a	series	of	282	patients	seen
over	 three	 decades,	 the	 mean	 age	 at	 diagnosis	 was	 16,	 and	 the	 predominant
features	 were	 neurologic	 (in	 69%);	 the	 predominant	 neurologic	 manifestations
were	parkinsonism	(62%)	and	dystonia	(35%).

FIGURE	 30.4	 Copper	 deposits	 in	 Descemet’s	 membrane	 producing	 the	 brownish
Kayser-Fleischer	 ring	 in	 Wilson’s	 disease.	 (Reprinted	 from	 Chern	 KC,	 Saidel	 MA.
Ophthalmology	 Review	 Manual.	 2nd	 ed.	 Philadelphia:	 Wolters	 Kluwer
Health/Lippincott	Williams	&	Wilkins,	2012,	with	permission.)

FIGURE	30.5	Risus	sardonicus	in	a	patient	with	Wilson’s	disease.

Pantothenate	Kinase–Associated
Neurodegeneration

Pantothenate	 kinase–associated	 neurodegeneration	 (PKAN,	 neurodegeneration
with	 brain	 iron	 accumulation	 type	 1,	 Hallervorden-Spatz	 syndrome)	 is	 a	 rare
autosomal	
rust-brown
recessive	 disorder	 associated	 with	 macroscopic	
discoloration	 of	 the	 globus	 pallidus	 and	 substantia	 nigra	 because	 of	 iron
deposition.	The	clinical	phenotype	is	variable.	The	disease	usually	begins	in	the

first	 to	 the	 fourth	 decade	 of	 life,	 with	 rigidity,	 involuntary	 movements,	 ataxia,
and	 dystonia,	 followed	 by	 pyramidal	 signs	 and	 progressive	 dementia.	 MRI
findings	 are	 characteristic.	 T2-weighted	 sequences	 show	 bilaterally	 symmetric
low	 signal	 intensity	 in	 the	 globus	 pallidus,	 because	 of	 iron	 deposition,
surrounding	a	focus	of	high	signal	intensity,	because	of	gliosis.	This	“eye	of	the
tiger”	image	pattern	is	virtually	diagnostic	for	PKAN.

Dentatorubropallidoluysian	Atrophy

Dentatorubropallidoluysian	atrophy	is	a	heredofamilial	degeneration,	because	of
CAG	 repeats,	 in	 which	 the	 pathologic	 changes	 involve	 primarily	 the	 dentate,
globus	 pallidus	 externa,	 red	 nucleus,	 and	 subthalamic	 nucleus.	 Clinical
manifestations	 include	 choreoathetosis,	 dystonia,	 dementia,	 myoclonus,	 and
ataxia;	 the	disease	is	 often	included	as	 one	 of	 the	 hereditary	 ataxia	syndromes.
Most	 reported	 cases	 have	 been	 from	 Japan.	 A	 cluster	 of	 cases	 occurred	 in	 the
United	States	around	the	Haw	River	in	North	Carolina	(Haw	River	syndrome).

HYPERKINETIC	MOVEMENT	DISORDERS

Hyperkinesia	 refers	 to	 increased	 movement.	 Hyperkinesias	 are	 abnormal
involuntary	 movements	 that	 occur	 in	 a	 host	 of	 neurologic	 conditions.
Hyperkinesias	 come	 in	 many	 forms,	 ranging	 from	 tremor	 to	 chorea	 to	 muscle
fasciculations	to	myoclonic	jerks.	Any	level	of	the	motor	system,	from	the	motor
cortex	 to	 the	 muscle	 itself,	 may	 be	 involved	 in	 their	 production.	 The	 only
common	characteristic	is	that	the	movements	are	spontaneous	and,	for	the	most
part,	not	under	volitional	control.	They	may	be	rhythmic	or	random,	fleeting	or
sustained,	 and	 predictable	 or	 unpredictable	 and	 may	 occur	 in	 isolation	 or
accompanied	 by	 other	 neurologic	 signs.	 Table	 30.2	 summarizes	 some	 of	 these
features.

In	 the	 examination	 of	 abnormal	 movements,	 the	 following	 should	 be	 noted:
(a)	the	part	of	the	body	involved	or	the	exact	location	of	the	movements;	(b)	the
extent	of	the	movement,	or	its	distribution	as	it	regards	to	part	of	a	muscle,	an
entire	 muscle,	 movement	 involving	 joints,	 or	 more	 complex	 or	 composite
patterns	 consisting	 of	 a	 sequence	 of	 different	 movements;	 (c)	 the	 pattern,
rhythmicity,	 uniformity,	 multiformity,	 and	 regularity	 of	 recurrence—there	 may
be	 a	 regular	 or	 rhythmic	 recurrence	 of	 activity	 involving	 the	 same	 muscle	 or

groups,	 or	 there	 may	 be	 an	 irregular	 pattern	 of	 constantly	 changing	 motion	 of
different	 parts;	 (d)	 the	 course,	 speed,	 and	 frequency	 of	 each	 particular
movement;	(e)	the	amplitude	and	force	of	the	movement;	(f)	the	relationship	to
posture,	rest,	voluntary	activity	or	exertion,	involuntary	activity,	various	stimuli,
fatigue,	and	time	of	day;	(g)	the	response	to	heat	and	cold;	(h)	the	relationship	to
that	 movements	 are
emotional	
suppressible	 by	 attention	 or	 the	 use	 of	 sensory	 tricks;	 and	 (j)	 the	 presence	 or
absence	of	the	movements	during	sleep.	In	general,	involuntary	movements	are
increased	 by	 stress	 and	 anxiety	 and	 decrease	 or	 disappear	 with	 sleep.	 Truly
involuntary	 movements	 must	 be	 separated	 from	 complex	 or	 bizarre	 voluntary
movements,	such	as	mannerisms	or	compulsions.

tension	 and	 excitement;	 (i)	

the	 degree	

TABLE
30.2

Abnormal	Involuntary	Movements	as	a	Spectrum	of
Movements

Regular/Predictable

Intermediate

Fleeting/Unpredictable

Tremor

Most	dystonias

Fasciculations

Hemiballism

Myokymia

Myoclonus

Palatal	myoclonus

Athetosis

Chorea

Tic

Dyskinesias

Stereotypy

Myorhythmia

It	may	be	possible	to	name	movements	that	fit	a	well-defined	clinical	pattern,
but	 it	 is	 often	 better	 to	 describe	 the	 abnormality.	 Palpation	 may	 sometimes	 be
useful,	 especially	 if	 the	 movements	 are	 very	 fine	 and	 limited	 to	 individual
muscles.	 Videos	 are	 often	 very	 useful	 in	 the	 diagnosis	 and	 management	 of
movement	disorders.

TREMOR

A	tremor	is	a	series	of	involuntary,	relatively	rhythmic,	purposeless,	oscillatory

	
	
	
	
	
movements.	The	excursion	may	be	small	or	large	and	may	involve	one	or	more
parts	 of	 the	 body.	 A	 simple	 tremor	 involves	 only	 a	 single	 muscle	 group;	 a
compound	 tremor	 involves	 several	 muscle	 groups	 and	 may	 have	 several
elements	 in	 combination,	 resulting	 in	 a	 series	 of	 complex	 movements	 (e.g.,
alternating	 flexion	 and	 extension	 together	 with	 alternate	 pronation	 and
supination).	 Not	 only	 the	 agonist	 and	 antagonist,	 but	 muscles	 of	 fixation	 and
synergists	may	play	a	part	in	the	movements.	A	tremor	may	be	present	at	rest	or
with	 activity.	 Some	 tremors	 are	 accentuated	 by	 having	 the	 patient	 hold	 the
fingers	 extended	 and	 separated	 with	 the	 arms	 outstretched.	 Slow	 movements,
writing,	and	drawing	circles	or	spirals	may	bring	tremor	out.

Tremors	 may	 be	 classified	 in	 various	 ways:	 by	 location,	 rate,	 amplitude,
rhythmicity,	 relationship	 to	 rest	 and	 movement,	 etiology,	 and	 underlying
pathology.	 Other	 important	 factors	 may	 include	 the	 relationship	 to	 fatigue,
emotion,	self-consciousness,	heat,	cold,	and	the	use	of	medications,	alcohol,	or
street	drugs.	Tremor	may	be	unilateral	or	bilateral	and	most	commonly	involves
distal	 parts	 of	 the	 extremities—the	 fingers	 or	 hands—but	 may	 also	 affect	 the
arms,	 feet,	 legs,	 tongue,	 eyelids,	 jaw,	 and	 head	 and	 may	 occasionally	 seem	 to
involve	the	entire	body.	The	rate	may	be	slow,	medium,	or	fast.	Oscillations	of	3
to	 5	 Hz	 are	 considered	 slow	 and	 10	 to	 20	 Hz	 rapid.	 Amplitude	 may	 be	 fine,
coarse,	 or	 medium.	 Tremor	 may	 be	 constant	 or	 intermittent,	 rhythmic	 or
relatively	 nonrhythmic,	 although	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 rhythmicity	 is	 implied	 in
the	term	tremor.	Irregular	“tremor”	may	be	due	to	myoclonus.

The	 relationship	 to	 rest	 or	 activity	 is	 the	 basis	 for	 classification	 into	 two
primary	tremor	types:	rest	and	action.	Resting	(static)	tremors	are	present	mainly
during	relaxation	(e.g.,	with	the	hands	in	the	lap)	and	attenuate	when	the	part	is
used.	Rest	tremor	is	seen	primarily	in	PD	and	other	parkinsonian	syndromes.

Action	 tremors	 appear	 when	 performing	 some	 activity.	 Action	 tremors	 are
divided	into	subtypes:	postural,	kinetic,	task-specific,	and	isometric.	Only	when
they	are	very	severe	are	action	tremors	present	at	rest.	Postural	tremors	become
evident	 when	 the	 limbs	 are	 maintained	 in	 an	 antigravity	 position	 (e.g.,	 arms
outstretched).	 Common	 types	 of	 postural	 tremor	 are	 enhanced	 physiologic
tremor	and	ET.	Kinetic	tremor	appears	when	making	a	voluntary	movement	and
may	 occur	 at	 the	 beginning,	 during,	 or	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 movement.	 The	 most
common	example	is	an	intention	(terminal)	tremor.	Intention	tremor	is	a	form	of
action	tremor	seen	primarily	in	cerebellar	disease	(see	Chapter	43).	 The	 tremor
appears	when	precision	is	required	to	touch	a	target,	as	in	the	finger-nose-finger
the	 movement.
or	

It	 progressively	 worsens	 during	

toe-to-finger	

test.	

Approaching	 the	 target	 causes	 the	 limb	 to	 shake,	 usually	 side-to-side
perpendicular	to	the	line	of	travel,	and	the	amplitude	of	the	oscillation	increases
toward	the	end	of	the	movement.	Some	tremors	fall	into	more	than	one	potential
classification.	Most	tremors	are	accentuated	by	emotional	excitement,	and	many
normal	 individuals	 develop	 tremor	 with	 anxiety,	 apprehension,	 and	 fatigue.	 A
shivering	 type	 of	 tremor	 (rigors)	 may	 be	 brought	 on	 by	 cold,	 but	 identical
movements	can	be	psychogenic.

Physiologic	 tremor	 is	 present	 in	 normal	 individuals.	 The	 frequency	 varies
from	8	to	12	Hz,	averaging	about	10	Hz	in	the	young	adult,	somewhat	slower	in
children	 and	 older	 persons.	 The	 frequency	 for	 an	 individual	 is	 the	 same	 at
different	sites	in	the	body.	The	visible	tremor	brought	out	in	normal	persons	by
anxiety,	 fright,	 fatigue	 (rock	 climber’s	 tremor,	 Elvis	 leg),	 and	 other	 conditions
with	 increased	 adrenergic	 activity	 is	 accentuated	 or	 enhanced	 physiologic
tremor.	 A	 typical	 example	 of	 enhanced	 physiologic	 tremor	 is	 that	 seen	 in
hyperthyroidism.	The	tremor	involves	principally	the	fingers	and	hands	and	may
be	fine	and	difficult	to	see.	It	may	be	brought	out	by	placing	a	limb	in	a	position
of	postural	tension,	by	performing	voluntary	movements	at	the	slowest	possible
rate,	 or	 holding	 the	 index	 fingertips	 as	 close	 together	 as	 possible	 without
touching.	The	tremor	may	be	better	appreciated	by	placing	a	sheet	of	paper	on
the	 outstretched	 fingers;	 shaking	 of	 the	 paper	 may	 be	 obvious	 even	 though
tremor	is	not	grossly	visible.	Physiologic	tremor	may	be	present	both	at	rest	and
on	activity,	but	it	is	accentuated	by	activity	as	well	as	by	anxiety	and	emotional
stress.	 Similar	 tremor	 occurs	 due	 to	 the	 effects	 of	 alcohol,	 nicotine,	 caffeine,
amphetamines,	ephedrine,	and	other	stimulants	(Table	30.3).	A	fine	tremor	of	the
closed	eyelids	is	seen	in	hyperthyroidism	(Rosenbach’s	sign).

TABLE	30.3

Some	Drugs	That	Cause	Tremor

Sympathomimetics	(epinephrine,	pseudoephedrine,	isoproterenol,

metaproterenol,	albuterol,	terbutaline,	ritodrine)

Aminoglycoside	antibiotics	(amikacin,	kanamycin,	tobramycin)
Methylxanthines	(aminophylline,	theophylline)
Amphetamines
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Bupropion

Carisoprodol,	orphenadrine	(centrally	acting	muscle	relaxants)
Antipsychotics
Cyclosporine
Benzodiazepines	(diazepam,	oxazepam)
Selective	serotonin	reuptake	inhibitors
Other	antidepressants	(mirtazapine,	amoxapine,	trazodone,

clomipramine)

Lithium
Thyroid	supplements
Antiarrhythmics	(mexiletine,	amiodarone,	quinidine)
Opioid	antagonists	(naloxone)
Phenytoin
Tramadol
Valproic	acid
Vasopressin
Yohimbine

Tremor	of	medium	amplitude	and	rate	is	often	evident	in	anxiety.	Such	tremor
may	occur	in	the	absence	of	neurologic	disease.	The	tremor	is	usually	postural,
most	 evident	 with	 the	 hands	 outstretched,	 made	 worse	 by	 movement,	 and	 may
interfere	with	motor	activity.	ET	is	often	of	medium	amplitude	and	rate	but	may
be	 coarse	 when	 severe.	 The	 intention	 tremor	 of	 multiple	 sclerosis	 (MS)	 and
cerebellar	disease	is	usually	of	medium	amplitude	and	may	vary	in	degree	from
mild	to	severe;	it	may	be	coarse	and	irregular,	especially	when	associated	with
ataxia.	Coarse	tremors	occur	in	a	variety	of	disease	states	and	are	usually	slow.
Parkinsonian	tremor	is	one	of	the	most	characteristic.	Coarse	tremor	also	occurs
in	Wilson’s	disease	and	other	extrapyramidal	syndromes.	The	tremor	of	general
paresis	 and	 alcoholism	 may	 also	 be	 coarse,	 especially	 if	 the	 movements	 are
diffuse,	 as	 in	 delirium	 tremens.	 Psychogenic	 tremor	 and	 the	 tremor	 associated
with	midbrain	and	cerebellar	disease	may	also	be	coarse	and	slow.

Parkinsonian	Tremor

Resting,	static,	or	nonintention	tremor	occurs	most	frequently	in	diseases	of	the

basal	 ganglia	 and	 extrapyramidal	 pathways	 (Video	 30.1).	 The	 most
characteristic	 tremor	 of	 this	 type	 is	 seen	 in	 PD	 and	 the	 various	 parkinsonian
syndromes	(see	PD	above).	The	tremor	is	slow,	coarse,	and	compound	in	type.
The	rate	may	vary	from	2	to	6	Hz,	averaging	4	to	5	Hz.	The	movement	in	the
hand	 characteristically	 consists	 of	 alternate	 contractions	 of	 agonist	 and
antagonist,	 involving	 the	 flexors,	 extensors,	 abductors,	 and	 adductors	 of	 the
fingers	and	thumb,	together	with	motion	of	the	wrist	and	arm,	including	flexion,
extension,	pronation,	and	supination.	As	a	result,	there	is	a	repetitive	movement
of	 the	 thumb	 on	 the	 first	 two	 fingers,	 together	 with	 the	 motion	 of	 the	 wrist,
producing	the	classical	pill-rolling.	The	tremor	is	relatively	rhythmic,	present	at
rest,	 and	 may	 be	 temporarily	 suppressed	 by	 movement.	 It	 may	 disappear
temporarily,	 whereas	 the	 limb	 is	 engaged	 in	 a	 voluntary	 effort.	 Because	 of	 the
uniformly	 alternating	 movements	 at	 regular	 intervals,	 it	 is	 sometimes	 called	 an
alternating	tremor.	The	tremor	may	be	unilateral	at	onset;	it	may	even	begin	in	a
single	digit	but,	in	most	cases,	eventually	becomes	bilateral.	It	disappears	during
sleep	 and	 is	 aggravated	 by	 emotional	 stimulation,	 fatigue,	 and	 anxiety.	 Tremor
resembling	 that	 of	 parkinsonism	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 other	 extrapyramidal
syndromes.

Essential	Tremor

ET	is	the	most	common	of	all	movement	disorders	(Video	30.1).	It	is	higher	in
frequency	 and	 lower	 in	 amplitude	 than	 the	 tremor	 of	 PD.	 The	 etiology	 and
pathophysiology	 remain	 obscure,	 but	 recent	 evidence	 suggests	 a	 cerebellar
abnormality.

ET	 is	 often	 familial.	 The	 prevalence	 of	 ET	 increases	 with	 age,	 may	 first
appear	anywhere	between	the	second	and	sixth	decades	of	life,	and	tends	to	be
slowly	 progressive.	 ET	 is	 a	 postural	 and	 action	 tremor	 that	 tends	 to	 affect	 the
hands,	head,	and	voice.	It	is	made	worse	by	anxiety.	The	movement	of	the	head
may	be	in	an	anteroposterior	(affirmative,	yes-yes)	or	a	lateral	(negative,	no-no)
direction.	 Senile	 tremor	 is	 ET	 occurring	 during	 senescence	 with	 a	 negative
family	history.

A	 common	 problem	 is	 differentiating	 the	 tremor	 of	 early	 PD	 from	 ET.	 The
tremor	 of	 PD	 is	 most	 prominent	 at	 rest,	 whereas	 that	 of	 ET	 occurs	 with	 a
sustained	 posture,	 such	 as	 with	 the	 hands	 outstretched,	 or	 on	 action.
Parkinsonian	 tremor	may	 persist	 with	 hands	outstretched	but	usually	 damps,	 at
least	 momentarily,	 when	 making	 a	 deliberate	 movement,	 whereas	 ET	 usually

worsens	 with	 any	 attempt	 at	 a	 precise	 action.	 The	 ET	 patient	 may	 have	 great
difficulty	 sipping	 water	 from	 a	 cup,	 but	 the	 PD	 patient	 may	 do	 so	 without
spilling	a	drop.	The	head	and	voice	are	often	involved	with	ET,	only	rarely	with
PD,	although	the	tremor	in	PD	may	involve	the	lips	and	jaw.	Alcohol	and	beta-
blockers	 often	 improve	 ET	 but	 have	 no	 effect	 on	 parkinsonian	 tremor.	 Some
patients	thought	to	have	ET	go	on	to	develop	PD.

Other	Forms	of	Tremor

Cerebellar	tremor	is	a	low-frequency	tremor	that	occurs	primarily	as	the	finger
approaches	 a	 target	 (intention	 tremor);	 it	 may	 have	 a	 postural	 component	 (see
Chapter	 43).	 Rubral	 (Holmes,	 cerebellar	 outflow,	 midbrain)	 tremor	 refers	 to	 a
severe,	 large-amplitude,	 relatively	 slow	 (2	 to	 5	 Hz)	 tremor,	 involving	 both
proximal	 and	 distal	 muscles,	 present	 at	 rest	 but	 made	 worse	 with	 action.	 The
clinical	picture	resembles	a	combination	of	parkinsonian	and	cerebellar	tremors.
It	may	be	unilateral	and	is	usually	due	to	stroke	or	trauma.	Formerly	thought	to
result	from	an	abnormality	of	the	red	nucleus,	it	is	now	believed	to	be	due	to	a
lesion	involving	cerebellar	efferent	and	nigrostriatal	fibers	coursing	through	the
midbrain.

Orthostatic	tremor	(shaky	legs	syndrome)	is	a	variant	of	ET	that	involves	the
legs.	It	is	an	isometric	tremor	most	apparent	when	standing,	and	it	abates	when
walking.	 Neuropathic	 tremor	 is	 a	 coarse	 postural	 and	 action	 tremor	 seen	 in
patients	 with	 peripheral	 neuropathy.	 Dystonic	 tremor	 is	 typically	 a	 localized,
irregular	 postural	 tremor	 that	 resembles	 ET	 but	 is	 more	 irregular	 and
asymmetric.	It	usually	but	not	invariably	occurs	with	evidence	of	dystonia.	Head
tremor	 in	 a	 patient	 with	 cervical	 dystonia	 and	 hand	 tremor	 in	 a	 patient	 with
writer’s	 cramp	 are	 examples.	 Task-specific	 tremors	 appear	 during	 performance
of	a	particular	activity	(e.g.,	primary	writing	tremor).	Nonorganic	or	psychogenic
tremor	is	typically	complex	and	does	not	fit	well	into	the	classification	scheme.
The	 patient	 may	 have	 action	 as	 well	 as	 resting	 tremor,	 with	 rapidly	 changing
clinical	 features	 and	 disability	out	of	proportion	to	 the	tremor.	 Typical	 features
include	abrupt	onset	with	maximal	disability	immediately,	onset	in	one	limb	with
rapid	generalization,	spontaneous	resolution	and	recurrence,	easy	distractibility,
entrainment,	and	refractoriness	to	conventional	antitremor	treatment.

CHOREA

Chorea	 (Gr.	 “dance”)	 is	 characterized	 by	 involuntary,	 irregular,	 purposeless,
random,	 and	 nonrhythmic	 hyperkinesias	 (Video	 30.4).	 The	 movements	 are
spontaneous,	abrupt,	brief,	rapid,	jerky,	and	unsustained.	Individual	movements
are	 discrete,	 but	 they	 are	 variable	 in	 type	 and	 location,	 causing	 an	 irregular
pattern	of	chaotic,	multiform,	constantly	changing	movements	that	seem	to	flow
from	one	body	part	to	another.	The	movements	may	at	times	appear	purposeful
to	a	casual	observer,	but	they	are	actually	random	and	aimless.	They	are	present
at	 rest	 but	 are	 increased	 by	 activity,	 tension,	 emotional	 stress,	 and	 self-
consciousness.	The	patient	may	be	able	to	temporarily	and	partially	suppress	the
movements,	and	they	disappear	in	sleep.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.4	Chorea	in	a	patient	with	Huntington’s	disease.

The	distribution	of	the	choreic	movements	is	variable.	They	may	involve	one
extremity,	 one-half	 of	 the	 body	 (hemichorea),	 or	 be	 generalized.	 They	 occur
most	characteristically	in	the	distal	 parts	of	the	upper	 extremities	 but	 may	 also
involve	 the	 proximal	 parts,	 lower	 extremities,	 trunk,	 face,	 tongue,	 lips,	 and
pharynx.	There	may	be	repeated	twitching	and	grimacing	movements	of	the	face
that	change	constantly	in	character	and	location.	Involvement	of	the	vocal	tract
may	 cause	 abnormal	 vocalizations,	 difficulty	 in	 maintaining	 phonation,	 or
aphonia.

The	 abnormal	 movements	 interrupt	 the	 harmonious	 coordination	 of	 prime
movers,	 synergists,	 and	 antagonists.	 They	 interfere	 with	 and	 distort	 voluntary
movements,	and	the	latter	may	be	short,	jerky,	and	unsustained.	Difficulty	with
rapid,	 repetitive	 movements	 and	 problems	 performing	 a	 sequence	 of	 hand
the	 disturbed	 motor	 function.	 Constant	 unwanted
movements	
movements	 of	 the	 hands	 may	 interfere	 with	 activities	 of	 daily	 living.	 When

indicate	

asked	to	hold	the	hands	outstretched,	there	may	be	constant	random	movements
of	 individual	 fingers	 (piano-playing	 movements).	 If	 the	 patient	 holds	 the
examiner’s	 finger	 in	 her	 fist,	 there	 are	 constant	 twitches	 of	 individual	 fingers
(milkmaid	 grip).	 Choreic	 movements	 may	 often	 be	 brought	 out	 by	 having	 the
patient	 carry	 out	 two	 simultaneous	 acts.	 She	 may	 touch	 finger	 to	 nose	 or
protrude	 the	 tongue	 in	 isolation,	 but	 when	 attempting	 to	 do	 both	 at	 the	 same
time,	 the	 jerky	 movements	 become	 noticeable.	 The	 patient	 may	 also	 have
difficulty	chewing	and	swallowing.

The	patient	may	try	to	incorporate	a	spontaneous,	involuntary	movement	into
a	 semipurposeful	 movement	 in	 order	 to	 mask	 the	 chorea	 (parakinesia).	 If	 a
choreic	movement	suddenly	makes	a	hand	fly	upward,	the	patient	may	continue
the	movement	and	reach	 up	and	scratch	 her	nose.	 When	 chorea	is	 generalized,
the	patient	is	in	a	constant	state	of	motion	with	continual	adventitial	movements
randomly	scattered.

In	 addition	 to	 the	 abnormal	 movements,	 there	 is	 hypotonia	 of	 the	 skeletal
muscles,	with	decreased	resistance	to	passive	movement.	The	outstretched	hands
are	held	with	hyperextension	of	the	fingers	with	flexion	and	dorsal	arching	of	the
wrist	 (spooning).	 The	 fingers	 are	 separated	 and	 the	 thumb	 is	 abducted	 and
droops	downward.	When	the	arms	are	raised	overhead,	the	hands	may	turn	into	a
position	 of	 hyperpronation.	 Motor	 impersistence—the	 inability	 to	 sustain	 a
contraction—frequently	accompanies	chorea.	The	patient	is	frequently	unable	to
hold	 the	 tongue	 out	 for	 any	 length	 of	 time;	 when	 asked	 to	 do	 so,	 the	 tongue
shoots	out	and	then	 jerks	 back	quickly	 (snake,	 darting,	 flycatcher,	or	 trombone
tongue).	The	blink	rate	is	increased.

There	is	no	paralysis,	but	the	hypotonia	and	constantly	repeated	hyperkinesias
may	interfere	with	voluntary	movement	enough	to	cause	significant	impairment
of	 motor	 function.	 The	 hypotonia	 may	 result	 in	 pendular	 deep	 tendon	 reflexes.
Many	disorders	may	cause	chorea,	among	them	Huntington’s	disease	(HD)	and
Sydenham’s	chorea.

Huntington’s	Disease

HD	 (Huntington’s	 chorea)	 is	 a	 progressive,	 fatal,	 AD,	 neurodegenerative
condition	 with	 variable	 penetrance,	 because	 of	 an	 unstable	 CAG	 trinucleotide
repeat	 expansion	 on	 chromosome	 4.	 The	 gene	 produces	 a	 protein	 called
huntingtin.	The	mutant	protein	results	in	an	expanded	polyglutamine	tract	and	a
buildup	 of	 deleterious	 β-amyloid–like	 aggregates,	 which	 primarily	 affect	 the

three	 cardinal	

caudate	 and	 putamen.	 The	 onset	 is	 usually	 between	 the	 ages	 of	 35	 and	 50,	 but
the	 disease	 may	 begin	 in	 childhood	 or	 senescence.	 Onset	 is	 often	 earlier	 when
the	disease	is	inherited	from	the	father.	Age	of	onset	correlates	inversely	with	the
length	 of	 trinucleotide	 repeats.	 Repeats	 tend	 to	 lengthen	 in	 succeeding
generations,	 causing	 earlier	 onset	 (anticipation),	 particularly	 with	 paternal
transmission.	 DNA	 diagnostic	 testing	 can	 confirm	 the	 diagnosis,	 even	 in
presymptomatic	individuals.
Huntington	 described	

features:	 dementia,	 emotional
disturbance,	and	the	familial	nature	of	the	disorder.	The	condition	is	inexorably
progressive	and	ultimately	fatal.	The	typical	course	is	from	15	to	20	years.	Some
symptomatic	 treatments	 are	 available,	 but	 nothing	 which	 will	 arrest	 the
progression.	 The	 choreic	 movements	 may	 cause	 the	 patient	 to	 complain	 of
clumsiness	or	tremor.	The	movements	are	similar	to	those	of	Sydenham’s	chorea
but	 are	 often	 somewhat	 slower,	 less	 jerky,	 and	 more	 bizarre,	 widespread,	 and
violent.	 They	 may	 be	 seemingly	 purposeful,	 and	 the	 same	 pattern	 may	 be
repeated	 over	 and	 over.	 Frequently,	 the	 larger	 muscle	 groups	 and	 the	 proximal
extremities	are	affected;	there	may	be	repeated	shrugging	of	the	shoulder	or	flail-
like	movements	of	the	arm	and	twisting	and	lashing	movements	that	lie	between
those	of	chorea	and	athetosis.	Facial	grimacing	may	be	marked.	Movements	of
the	 fingers	 and	 hands	 are	 often	 accentuated	 as	 the	 patient	 walks.	 Pronounced
chorea	of	the	arms	and	legs	when	walking	may	lead	to	a	bizarre,	prancing	gait
(see	 Video	 Link	 30.2).	 In	 the	 later	 stages	 of	 the	 disease,	 the	 chorea	 may
progress	to	athetosis	or	dystonia.	Rigidity	may	become	a	conspicuous	feature	in
the	 later	 stages	 of	 choreic	 disease.	 In	 juvenile	 HD,	 with	 onset	 prior	 to	 age	 20,
rigidity	
rigid,	 or
pseudoparkinsonian	variant).

is	 often	 more	 prominent	

than	 chorea	

(Westphal,	

HD	 is	 accompanied	 by	 progressive	 intellectual	 deterioration.	 Cognitive
impairment	 usually	 begins	 at	 about	 the	 same	 time	 as	 the	 abnormal	 movements
but	 may	 precede	 it	 and	 progresses	 in	 tandem.	 Most	 patients	 also	 develop
psychiatric	 abnormalities,	 particularly	 personality	 changes	 and	 mood	 disorders.
The	 degree	 of	 dementia	 is	 out	 of	 proportion	 to	 the	 cortical	 pathology	 and	 may
reflect	 impairment	 related	 to	 the	 role	 of	 the	 caudate	 in	 cognition.	 Patients	 are
typically	reduced	to	a	vegetative	state	about	10	to	15	years	after	onset.

Neuropathologically,	 there	 is	 atrophy	 most	 prominent	 in	 the	 caudate,
the
putamen,	 and	 cerebral	 cortex.	 The	 neuron	
enkephalinergic	 (ENKergic)	 spiny	 neurons	 of	 the	 striatum.	 Loss	 of	 ENKergic
striatal	 neurons	 lessens	 the	 inhibitory	 influence	 of	 the	 striatum	 on	 the	 external

initially	 affects	

loss	

segment	 of	 the	 globus	 pallidus,	 allowing	 it	 to	 increase	 its	 inhibition	 of	 the
subthalamic	nucleus.	This	results	in	a	decrease	in	the	facilitatory	influence	of	the
subthalamic	 nucleus	 on	 the	 internal	 segment	 of	 the	 globus	 pallidus,	 decreasing
increasing
the	 inhibition	 of	 the	 motor	 thalamus	 (releasing	 the	 brake),	
thalamocortical	activity,	and	resulting	in	hyperkinesis	(see	Chapter	26).	Imaging
studies	 may	 show	 atrophy	 of	 the	 caudate,	 producing	 a	 square-shaped	 lateral
ventricle	 (Figure	 30.6).	 The	 cortical	 atrophy	 primarily	 affects	 the	 frontal	 and
temporal	 regions.	 HD-like	 1	 and	 2	 are	 hereditary	 disorders	 clinically	 and
pathologically	very	similar	to	HD.

Other	Forms	of	Chorea

Sydenham’s	chorea	(chorea	minor,	rheumatic	chorea,	St.	Vitus’	dance)	occurs	in
childhood	 and	 adolescence	 in	 relationship	 to	 streptococcal	 infection.	 Like
rheumatic	fever,	it	has	become	a	rarity	in	developed	countries.	After	recovery,	a
patient	 may	 retain	 minimal	 choreic	 movements	 or	 have	 minor	 tic-like
movements	 that	 are	 difficult	 to	 differentiate	 from	 chorea.	 Some	 of	 the	 other
conditions	 associated	 with	 chorea	 include	 chorea	 gravidarum	 (occurs	 during
pregnancy),	
syndrome,
neurosyphilis	 (usually	 with	 concomitant	 HIV	 infection),	 hyperthyroidism,
polycythemia	vera,	nonketotic	hyperglycemia,	adult	polyglucosan	body	disease,
Behçet’s	 disease,	 and	 neuroacanthocytosis.	 In	 children,	 chorea	 may	 occur	 after
cardiac	 surgery	 (postpump	 chorea).	 Sydenham’s	 chorea	 may	 recur,	 at	 times,	 as
chorea	 gravidarum.	 There	 is	 also	 a	 form	 of	 nonprogressive	 chorea	 that	 is
inherited	as	a	recessive	trait	(benign	hereditary	chorea).

lupus	 erythematosus,	 antiphospholipid	

systemic	

FIGURE	 30.6	 T1-weighted	 MRI	 (A),	 T2-weighted	 MRI	 (B)	 and	 axial	 CT	 (C)	 images
show	atrophy	of	the	caudate	and	frontal	horn	enlargement.	(From	Sethi	KD.	Magnetic

resonance	 imaging	 in	 Huntington’s	 disease.	 Mov	 Disord	 1991;6[2]:186.	 Copyright	 ©
1991	 Movement	 Disorder	 Society.	 Reprinted	 by	 permission	 of	 John	 Wiley	 &	 Sons,
Inc.)

Structural	lesions	of	the	basal	ganglia,	such	as	infarct,	neoplasm,	or	trauma,
may	occasionally	cause	chorea.	It	may	occur	with	inborn	errors	of	metabolism,
such	 as	 Lesch-Nyhan	 syndrome,	 Niemann-Pick	 disease,	 and	 gangliosidosis.
Chorea	 is	 nearly	 universal	 in	 the	 neuroacanthocytosis	 syndromes,	 in	 which
various	 neurologic	 abnormalities	 are	 associated	 with	
the	 presence	 of
acanthocytes	 on	 peripheral	 smear.	 Some	 patients	 have	 a	 genetic	 abnormality
involving	 the	 protein	 chorein.	 Others	 may	 have	 decreased	 or	 absent	 (Bassen-
Kornzweig	disease)	beta-lipoproteins.	Neuroferritinopathy	is	an	AD	disorder	in
which	various	extrapyramidal	features,	including	chorea,	develop	in	the	third	to
fifth	decade.	It	is	often	mistaken	for	HD.	Low	serum	ferritin	is	common	but	not
invariable.

Chorea	 may	 be	 a	 transient	 side	 effect	 of	 many	 medications,	 such	 as
psychotropic	 agents,	 phenytoin,	 antihistamines,	 levodopa,	 methylphenidate,
lithium,	 oral	 contraceptives,	 estrogen,	 tricyclic	 antidepressants,	 isoniazid,	 and
others.	 Drugs	 of	 abuse	 may	 cause	 chorea,	 including	 cocaine	 (“crack	 dancing”)
and	 amphetamines.	 Cocaine	 abuse	 is	 also	 associated	 with	 other	 movement
disorders,	 including	 dystonia,	 exacerbation	 of	 Tourette’s	 syndrome,	 multifocal
tics,	 opsoclonus-myoclonus,	 and	 stereotyped	 behavior.	 Chorea	 may	 be	 a
persisting	feature	of	past	or	present	exposure	to	psychoactive	drugs	as	part	of	the
syndrome	 of	 tardive	 dyskinesia.	 It	 may	 be	 a	 remote	 effect	 of	 carcinoma	 or	 be
part	 of	 multisystem	 familial	 degenerative	 disorders.	 Hemichorea	 may	 follow
structural	lesions	of	the	contralateral	basal	ganglia	(see	Hemiballism).

ATHETOSIS

In	athetosis	(Hammond’s	disease),	the	hyperkinesias	are	slower,	more	sustained,
and	 larger	 in	 amplitude	 than	 those	 in	 chorea.	 They	 are	 involuntary,	 irregular,
coarse,	 somewhat	 rhythmic,	 and	 writhing	 or	 squirming	 in	 character.	 They	 may
involve	 the	 extremities,	 face,	 neck,	 and	 trunk.	 In	 the	 extremities,	 they	 affect
mainly	 the	 distal	 portions,	 the	 fingers,	 hands,	 and	 toes.	 The	 movements	 are
characterized	 by	 any	 combination	 of	 flexion,	 extension,	 abduction,	 pronation,
and	supination,	often	alternating	and	in	varying	degrees	(Figure	30.7).	They	flow
randomly	from	one	body	part	to	another,	and	the	direction	of	movement	changes

randomly.	The	affected	limbs	are	in	constant	motion	(athetosis	means	“without
fixed	 position”).	 Hyperextension	 of	 the	 fingers	 and	 wrist	 and	 pronation	 of	 the
forearm	may	alternate	with	full	flexion	of	the	fingers	and	wrist	and	supination	of
the	forearm.	Facial	grimacing,	slower	and	more	sustained	than	in	chorea,	often
accompanies	 the	 movements	 of	 the	 extremities,	 and	 there	 may	 be	 synkinesias
affecting	 other	 parts	 of	 the	 body.	 The	 hyperkinesias	 may	 not	 be	 constant	 or
continuous.	The	movements	can	often	be	brought	out	or	intensified	by	voluntary
activity	of	another	body	part	(overflow	phenomenon).	They	disappear	 in	sleep.
Voluntary	 movements	 are	 impaired	 and	 coordinated	 action	 may	 be	 difficult	 or
impossible.	Athetosis	is	usually	unilateral;	bilateral	involvement	is	called	double
athetosis.

FIGURE	30.7	A	and	B:	A	patient	with	congenital	unilateral	athetosis.

Athetosis	 is	 usually	 congenital,	 the	 result	 of	 perinatal	 injury	 to	 the	 basal
ganglia,	 and	 may	 be	 present	 in	 association	 with	 other	 neurologic	 deficits
(athetotic	 cerebral	 palsy).	 It	 may	 be	 either	 unilateral	 or	 bilateral.	 The
predominant	pathologic	changes	are	in	the	caudate	and	putamen,	although	there
may	 also	 be	 cortical	 involvement.	 Double	 athetosis	 may	 be	 associated	 with
status	 marmoratus	 of	 the	 basal	 ganglia,	 which	 is	 usually	 due	 to	 anoxic	 birth
injury.	Acquired	athetosis	may	follow	disease	or	trauma	in	later	life.	Many	of	its
causes	overlap	with	those	of	chorea,	and	in	fact,	many	patients	have	features	of

athetosis	 plus	 chorea.	 Choreoathetosis	 refers	 to	 movements	 that	 lie	 between
chorea	 and	 athetosis	 in	 rate	 and	 rhythmicity	 and	 may	 represent	 a	 transitional
form.	 Slow	 athetoid	 movements	 begin	 to	 blend	 with	 dystonia.	 Pseudoathetosis
(sensory	 athetosis)	 is	 a	 term	 used	 to	 describe	 similar	 undulating	 and	 writhing
movements	of	the	extremities	because	of	loss	of	position	sense	as	a	result	of	a
parietal	 lobe	 lesion	 or	 peripheral	 deafferentation	 because	 of	 such	 conditions	 as
tabes	 dorsalis,	 posterolateral	 sclerosis,	 and	 peripheral	 nerve	 disease	 (Figure
30.8).	 The	 movements	 are	 more	 marked	 when	 the	 eyes	 are	 closed	 and	 are
usually	unassociated	with	an	increase	in	muscle	tone.

FIGURE	30.8	Pseudoathetosis	of	the	hand	in	a	patient	with	a	parietal	lobe	lesion.

DYSTONIA

Dystonia	 refers	 to	 spontaneous,	 involuntary,	 sustained	 muscle	 contractions	 that
force	 the	 affected	 parts	 of	 the	 body	 into	 abnormal	 movements	 or	 postures,
sometimes	with	cocontraction	of	agonists	and	antagonists.	Dystonia	often	affects
the	 extremities,	 neck,	 trunk,	 eyelids,	 face,	 or	 vocal	 cords.	 It	 may	 be	 either
constant	 or	 intermittent	 and	 generalized,	 segmental,	 focal,	 multifocal,	 or	 in	 a
hemidistribution.	 Dystonic	 movements	 are	 patterned,	 tending	 to	 recur	 in	 the
same	location,	in	contrast	to	the	random	and	fleeting	nature	of	chorea.	The	speed
of	 dystonia	 varies	 widely,	 from	 slow,	 sustained,	 and	 cramp-like	 (athetotic

dystonia)	to	quick	and	flicking	(myoclonic	dystonia).	When	the	duration	is	very
brief	(less	than	1	second),	the	movement	may	be	referred	to	as	a	dystonic	spasm,
when	 more	 sustained	 (several	 seconds)	 as	 a	 dystonic	 movement,	 and	 when
prolonged	 (minutes	 to	 hours)	 as	 a	 dystonic	 posture.	 Occasionally,	 dystonia	 is
associated	with	rapid	rhythmic	tremulous	movements	(dystonic	tremor).	Action
dystonia	 occurs	 when	 carrying	 out	 a	 voluntary	 movement.	 As	 in	 athetosis,
overflow	may	occur,	with	the	dystonia	brought	out	by	use	of	another	part	of	the
body.

Generalized	dystonia	causes	involuntary	movements	similar	in	many	respects
to	athetosis	but	involving	larger	portions	of	the	body,	often	producing	distorted
postures	 of	 the	 limbs	 and	 trunk.	 The	 movements	 are	 slow,	 bizarre,	 and
sometimes	 grotesque,	 with	 an	 undulating,	 writhing,	 twisting,	 turning	 character,
and	a	tendency	for	the	contraction	to	be	sustained	at	the	peak	of	the	movement
(torsion	 dystonia,	 torsion	 spasm).	 Generalized	 dystonia	 may	 start	 distally,
usually	 in	 the	 foot,	 with	 plantarflexion	 and	 inversion,	 and	 then	 spread	 to	 the
opposite	side,	the	upper	extremities,	the	trunk,	face,	and	tongue.	In	severe	cases,
there	 are	 writhing	 movements	 of	 the	 shoulder	 muscles,	 hip	 girdles,	 and	 trunk.
There	is	peculiar,	axial	twisting	of	the	spine,	causing	marked	torsion	of	the	entire
vertebral	column	with	lordosis,	scoliosis,	and	tilting	of	the	shoulders	and	pelvis.
Dysarthria,	facial	grimacing,	and	torticollis	may	also	be	present.	The	muscles	are
often	 in	 a	 constant	 state	 of	 hypertonicity,	 and	 the	 muscular	 contractions	 may
cause	 severe	 pain.	 The	 movements	 are	 involuntary	 but	 are	 increased	 by
voluntary	 activity	 and	 emotion.	 Eventually,	 postures	 become	 fixed	 by
contractures,	 and	 deformities	 develop.	 The	 term	 dystonia	 is	 sometimes	 used	 to
describe	 the	 postures	 or	 positions	 assumed	 by	 the	 patient,	 as	 well	 as	 for	 the
hyperkinesia	itself.	Dystonia	may	be	intermittent	or	paroxysmal,	lasting	minutes.
Dystonia	musculorum	deformans	(DMD,	idiopathic	torsion	dystonia)	is	a	rare
progressive	disease	that	usually	begins	in	childhood.	DMD-1	(DYT1	dystonia)	is
AD,	and	DMD-2	(DYT2	dystonia)	is	recessive;	numerous	other	genetic	forms	of
dystonia	exist.	Dystonia	also	occurs	in	Wilson’s	disease,	acquired	hepatocerebral
degeneration,	 PKAN,	 kernicterus,	 in	 HD	 as	 it	 progresses,	 in	 PD,	 and
occasionally	 with	 structural	 lesions	 affecting	 the	 basal	 ganglia.	 Dystonia	 can
occur	 as	 a	 drug	 side	 effect,	 particularly	 as	 a	 dose-related	 manifestation	 of
treatment	with	levodopa	and	other	dopaminergic	drugs.	Other	offending	agents
include	 cimetidine,	 anticonvulsants,	 calcium	 channel	 blockers,	 and	 anxiolytics.
Tardive	 dystonia	 is	 related	 to	 treatment	 with	 phenothiazines	 and	 other
psychotropic	 drugs.	 Dopa-responsive	 dystonia	 (Segawa’s	 disease	 and	 many

other	 names)	 is	 a	 distinctive	 and	 common	 type	 of	 generalized	 dystonia	 that
presents	 in	 childhood	 or	 adolescence	 and	 is	 characterized	 by	 marked	 diurnal
variation	in	severity	and	exquisite	responsiveness	to	small	doses	of	levodopa.	It
is	a	consideration	in	the	differential	diagnosis	of	diplegic	cerebral	palsy,	sporadic
spastic	 paraplegia,	 hereditary	 spastic	 paraplegia,	 and	 JPD.	 Misdiagnosis	 is
frequent.	Hemidystonia	is	along	the	spectrum	of	hemichorea	and	hemiballismus
but	because	of	a	lesion	of	the	contralateral	striatum.

The	 focal	 dystonias	 are	 disorders	 causing	 involuntary	 contractions	 in	 a
limited	 distribution.	 A	 relatively	 common	 form	 of	 focal	 dystonia	 is	 cervical
dystonia	 (spasmodic	 torticollis;	 Chapter	 19),	 which	 affects	 the	 neck,	 and
sometimes	the	shoulder,	muscles,	producing	either	a	sustained	or	jerky	turning	of
the	 head	 to	 one	 side,	 often	 with	 some	 element	 of	 head	 tilt.	 “Torti”	 implies	 a
twisting	or	turning	movement;	less	common	variants	of	cervical	dystonia	include
retrocollis	 (extension	 movement)	 and	 anterocollis	 (flexion	 movement).	 In	 the
beginning,	 the	 twisting	 and	 turning	 may	 be	 intermittent	 or	 present	 only	 in
paroxysms	 (spasmodic),	 but	 later	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 syndrome,	 there	 is
persistent	 contraction	 of	 the	 involved	 muscles	 with	 resulting	 deviation	 of	 the
head.	Many	if	not	most	patients	with	cervical	dystonia	learn	they	can	straighten
their	 head	 by	 placing	 a	 hand	 or	 finger	 somewhere	 on	 the	 face	 or	 performing
some	 other	 maneuver	 to	 provide	 sensory	 stimulation	 or	 light	 counterpressure
(geste	antagoniste,	sensory	trick,	counterpressure	sign;	Figure	30.9).	Notoriously
refractory	 to	 medical	 therapy,	 cervical	 dystonia	 is	 now	 often	 treated	 by	 the
injection	 of	 infinitesimally	 small	 amounts	 of	 botulinum	 toxin	 to	 weaken	 the
abnormally	contracting	muscles.

FIGURE	30.9	 Sensory	 trick	 in	 cervical	 dystonia.	 The	 patient	 found	 that	 keeping	 her
right	 hand	 behind	 the	 neck	 helped	 keep	 her	 head	 straight.	 She	 kept	 the	 right	 elbow
flexed	so	constantly	she	developed	a	right	ulnar	neuropathy	at	the	elbow.

Writer’s	 cramp	 (graphospasm)	 is	 a	 focal	 dystonia	 of	 the	 hand	 or	 forearm
muscles	brought	on	by	use	of	the	part,	most	frequently	by	writing.	There	are	a
number	of	other	focal,	occupational,	or	task-specific	dystonias	related	to	specific
activities.	 Musicians	 may	 develop	 hand	 or	 embouchure	 dystonia.	 The	 yips	 in
golfers	 may	 be	 a	 task-specific	 dystonia.	 Blepharospasm	 (upper	 facial	 dystonia)
causes	involuntary	closure	of	both	eyes.	The	spasms	may	be	brief	or	sustained.
Patients	with	sustained	spasms	become	functionally	blind	during	the	paroxysms.

Involuntary	 closure	 of	 one	 eye	 is	 usually	 due	 to	 early	 hemifacial	 spasm.
Oromandibular	dystonia	involves	the	mouth,	lips,	and	jaw.	The	combination	of
blepharospasm	 and	 oromandibular	 dystonia	 constitutes	 Meige’s	 (Brueghel’s)
syndrome	 (Video	 30.5).	 Auctioneer’s	 jaw	 is	 a	 task-specific	 oromandibular
dystonia.	 Spasmodic	 dysphonia	 is	 dystonia	 of	 the	 vocal	 cords	 (see	 Chapter	 9).
Belly	dancer’s	dystonia	refers	to	involuntary	movements	affecting	the	abdominal
musculature.	Focal	dystonias	of	peripheral	origin	have	been	described	in	relation
to	nerve,	plexus,	or	nerve	root	lesions.	A	segmental	dystonia	is	more	extensive
than	 a	 focal	 dystonia	 and	 involves	 contiguous	 body	 regions	 (e.g.,	 cervical
dystonia	accompanied	by	oromandibular	dystonia).

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.5	Examples	of	blepharospasm	and	Meige’s	syndrome	(blepharospasm
with	oromandibular	dystonia).	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.	Reich.)

HEMIBALLISMUS

Hemiballismus	(hemiballism)	refers	to	a	dramatic	neurologic	syndrome	of	wild,
flinging,	incessant	movements	that	occur	on	one	side	of	the	body	(Video	30.6).
It	is	classically	due	to	infarction	or	hemorrhage	in	the	region	of	the	contralateral
subthalamic	nucleus;	the	lesion	results	in	disinhibition	of	the	motor	thalamus	and
the	 cortex,	 resulting	 in	 contralateral	 hyperkinetic	 movements.	 Case	 series	 with
modern	neuroimaging	have	shown	that	only	a	minority	of	cases	have	lesions	in
the	subthalamic	nucleus.	Nonketotic	hyperglycemia	is	also	a	common	etiology.
The	 ballistic	 movements	 of	 hemiballismus	 resemble	 those	 of	 chorea	 but	 are
more	 pronounced.	 The	 clinical	 distinction	 between	 severe	 hemichorea	 and
hemiballismus	 becomes	 arbitrary.	 Like	 chorea,	 hemiballistic	 movements	 are
involuntary	 and	 purposeless	 movements,	 but	 they	 are	 much	 more	 rapid	 and

forceful	 and	 involve	 the	 proximal	 portions	 of	 the	 extremities.	 When	 fully
developed,	 there	 are	 continuous,	 violent,	 swinging,	 flinging,	 rolling,	 throwing,
and	 flailing	 movements	 of	 the	 involved	 extremities.	 The	 movements	 are
ceaseless	during	the	waking	state	and	disappear	only	with	deep	sleep.	They	are
usually	 unilateral	 and	 involve	 one	 entire	 half	 of	 the	 body;	 their	 intensity	 may
cause	 movement	 of	 the	 entire	 body.	 Rarely,	 they	 are	 bilateral	 (biballismus	 or
paraballismus)	 or	 involve	 a	 single	 extremity	 (monoballismus).	 The	 movements
may	 spare	 the	 face	 and	 trunk.	 Hemiballismus	 is	 difficult	 to	 treat,	 incredibly
disabling,	and	sometimes	fatal	because	of	exhaustion	and	inanition.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.6	Hemiballismus.	The	movements	were	unremitting	and	medically
intractable	but	resolved	after	pallidotomy.	(From	Suarez	JI,	Metman	LV,	Reich
SG,	et	al.	Pallidotomy	for	hemiballismus:	efficacy	and	characteristics	of
neuronal	activity.	Ann	Neurol	1997;42:807–811.)	(Courtesy	Dr.	Stephen	G.
Reich.)

DYSKINESIAS

All	 hyperkinetic	 movements	 are	 technically	 dyskinesias,	 but	 the	 term	 is	 often
used	 to	 encompass	 complex	 involuntary	 movements	 that	 do	 not	 neatly	 fit	 into
another	category.	Dyskinesia	is	used	most	often	to	refer	to	abnormal	involuntary
to	 drugs.	 Dyskinesias	 are	 a	 common	 dose-related
movements	 related	
complication	 of	 the	 treatment	 of	 PD	 with	 levodopa	 and	 dopamine	 agonists.	 In
some	 disorders,	 the	 dyskinesias	 occur	 paroxysmally.	 Paroxysmal	 dyskinesias
strike	 suddenly	 and	 unexpectedly	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 engaged	 in	 otherwise
normal	 motor	 behavior.	 The	 dyskinesias	 may	 be	 precipitated	 by	 movement
(paroxysmal	kinesigenic	dyskinesia)	or	by	other	factors,	such	as	stress,	heat,	or

fatigue	 (paroxysmal	 nonkinesigenic	 dyskinesia).	 Paroxysmal	 hypnogenic
dyskinesias	occur	during	sleep.

OROFACIAL	DYSKINESIAS

Orofacial	 dyskinesias	 are	 involuntary	 movements	 of	 the	 mouth,	 face,	 jaw,	 or
tongue	 that	 may	 consist	 of	 grimacing,	 pursing	 of	 the	 mouth	 and	 lips,	 “fish-
gaping”	 movements,	 and	 writhing	 movements	 of	 the	 tongue.	 These	 often
develop	 as	 tardive	 dyskinesias	 (TD)	 after	 the	 use	 of	 phenothiazines	 and	 other
psychotropic	drugs.

TD	 are	 involuntary	 movements	 that	 usually	 develop	 in	 patients	 who	 have
received	 phenothiazines	 or	 related	 compounds,	 usually	 as	 treatment	 for	 major
psychosis,	 for	 prolonged	 periods.	 Dyskinesias	 may	 also	 occur	 shortly	 after
initiation	 of	 psychotropic	 therapy	 and	 may	 be	 associated	 with	 the	 use	 of	 other
drugs.	 The	 movements	 typically	 involve	 primarily	 the	 mouth,	 tongue,	 and	 jaw
with	incessant	chewing,	smacking,	licking,	and	tongue-thrusting	movements	that
are	difficult	to	eradicate.	Some	patients	are	unaware	they	have	these	movements.
It	seems	likely	that	long-term	dopamine	receptor	blockade	leads	to	denervation
hypersensitivity	 of	 the	 receptor.	 The	 movements	 not	 infrequently	 first	 appear
when	 the	 dose	 of	 dopamine-blocking	 agent	 is	 reduced	 and	 can	 often	 be
controlled,	 at	 least	 temporarily,	 by	 reinstituting	 or	 increasing	 the	 dose	 of	 the
drug.	 TD	 are	 more	 prone	 to	 develop	 in	 older	 patients,	 especially	 women.
Unfortunately,	 the	 term	 TD	 is	 often	 used	 for	 all	 involuntary	 orofacial
movements,	 which	 may	 develop	 with	 no	 drug	 exposure,	 especially	 in	 older	 or
edentulous	 patients.	 Other	 abnormal	 movements	 may	 arise	 as	 a	 tardive
phenomenon,	 including	 tremor,	 dystonia,	 akathisia,	 tics,	 and	 chorea.	 Rabbit
syndrome	refers	to	a	rhythmic	perioral	tremor,	generally	associated	with	the	use
of	psychotropics.	The	movements	are	more	rapid	and	regular	and	do	not	involve
the	tongue,	helping	distinguish	them	from	TD.

MYOCLONUS

The	 term	 myoclonus	 has	 been	 used	 for	 several	 differing	 motor	 phenomena.	 In
general,	 myoclonus	 may	 be	 defined	 as	 single	 or	 repetitive,	 abrupt,	 brief,	 rapid,
lightning-like,	 jerky,	 arrhythmic,	 asynergic,	 involuntary	 contractions,	 involving
portions	 of	 muscles,	 entire	 muscles,	 or	 groups	 of	 muscles.	 The	 movements	 are

quicker	 than	 chorea.	 Myoclonus	 is	 seen	 principally	 in	 the	 muscles	 of	 the
extremities	 and	 trunk,	 but	 the	 involvement	 is	 often	 multifocal,	 diffuse,	 or
widespread.	 It	 may	 involve	 the	 facial	 muscles,	 jaws,	 tongue,	 pharynx,	 and
larynx.	There	may	be	successive	or	simultaneous	involvement	of	many	muscles.
Myoclonus	may	appear	symmetrically	on	both	sides	of	the	body;	such	synchrony
may	 be	 an	 attribute	 unique	 to	 myoclonus.	 The	 sudden,	 shock-like	 contractions
usually	 appear	 in	 paroxysms	 at	 irregular	 intervals,	 during	 either	 the	 resting	 or
active	 state,	 and	 may	 be	 activated	 by	 emotional,	 mental,	 tactile,	 visual,	 and
auditory	 stimuli.	 Myoclonic	 movements,	 like	 fasciculations	 and	 myokymia,
occasionally	 are	 too	 weak	 to	 cause	 joint	 movement.	 More	 often,	 they	 affect
entire	muscles	or	muscle	groups,	producing	clonic	movements	of	the	extremities.
They	may	be	so	violent	as	to	cause	an	entire	limb	to	be	suddenly	flung	out	and
may	even	throw	the	patient	to	the	ground.	An	excessive	startle	response	causing
a	 massive	 whole-body	 myoclonic	 jerk	 occurs	 in	 some	 conditions,	 especially
Creutzfeldt-Jakob	disease	(see	“Hyperekplexia”).	Myoclonus	may	also	be	subtle,
a	quick	flick	of	a	finger	or	foot.

Myoclonus	 has	 been	 classified	 in	 numerous	 ways,	 including	 the	 following:
positive	versus	negative,	epileptic	versus	nonepileptic,	stimulus	sensitive	(reflex)
versus	 spontaneous,	 rhythmic	 versus	 arrhythmic,	 anatomically	 (peripheral,
spinal,	segmental,	brainstem,	or	cortical),	and	by	etiology	(physiologic,	essential,
epileptic,	 and	 symptomatic).	 Asterixis	 may	 be	 viewed	 as	 negative	 myoclonus,
the	 transient,	 unwanted,	 abnormal	 relaxation	 of	 a	 muscle	 group.	 As	 typically
used,	the	term	myoclonus	refers	to	positive	myoclonus:	abnormal	jerks.	Cortical
reflex	 myoclonus	 is	 focal	 myoclonus	 triggered	 by	 stimulation	 or	 movement	 of
the	affected	part.

Myoclonic	 movements	 may	 occur	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 conditions,	 and	 their
significance	 varies.	 Physiologic	 myoclonus	 occurs	 in	 normals.	 Sleep	 starts
(hypnic	 jerks)	 are	 myoclonic	 jerks	 that	 appear	 during	 the	 process	 of	 falling
asleep	 but	 disappear	 during	 sleep.	 Hiccups	 are	 another	 form	 of	 physiologic
myoclonus.	In	essential	myoclonus,	there	are	no	accompanying	abnormalities;	it
may	be	sporadic	or	familial.	Paramyoclonus	multiplex	is	a	disorder	of	adult	life
causing	paroxysmal	contractions	of	the	limb	and	trunk	muscles.	The	etiology	is
not	known,	and	the	existence	of	the	entity	has	been	questioned.

Myoclonus	 is	 frequently	 encountered	 in	 epilepsy.	 Many	 epileptic	 patients
have	 occasional	 random	 myoclonic	 jerks	 of	 the	 axial	 or	 proximal	 limb
musculature,	which	may	appear	or	increase	in	frequency	immediately	prior	to	a
seizure.	 Beginning	 around	 puberty,	 patients	 with	 juvenile	 myoclonic	 epilepsy

(Janz	syndrome)	have	generalized	tonic-clonic	seizures	that	are	associated	with
frequent	 myoclonic	 jerks	 predominantly	 affecting	 the	 arms,	 especially	 on
awakening.	Massive	myoclonic	spasms	of	infancy	are	characterized	by	frequent,
sudden,	violent	jerking	attacks	with	flexion	of	the	neck	and	trunk	and	adduction
or	 abduction	 and	 extension	 of	 the	 arms	 and	 legs	 (infantile	 spasms,	 West
syndrome).	The	body	may	bend	forward	(salaam	or	jackknife	attacks).

The	 progressive	 myoclonic	 epilepsies	 are	 a	 group	 of	 disorders	 that	 include
Unverricht-Lundborg	syndrome	and	Lafora	body	disease.	Progressive	myoclonic
epilepsy	can	also	occur	without	Lafora	bodies	and	in	type	3	Gaucher’s	disease,
sialidosis,	 gangliosidoses,	 ceroid	 lipofuscinoses,	 and	 myoclonic	 epilepsy	 with
ragged	 red	 fibers.	 In	 dyssynergia	 cerebellaris	 myoclonica,	 one	 of	 the	 several
Ramsay	 Hunt	 syndromes,	myoclonus	 is	 accompanied	 by	 progressive	 cerebellar
degeneration	and	seizures.

Myoclonus	 occurs	 without	 prominent	 seizures	 in	 a	 number	 of	 other
conditions,	 including	 metabolic	 disorders	 (especially	 uremic	 and	 anoxic
encephalopathy),	subacute	sclerosing	panencephalitis,	PKAN,	Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease,	 Alzheimer’s	 disease,	 Wilson’s	 disease,	 HD,	 CBD,	 viral	 encephalitis,
general	 paresis,	 Hashimoto’s	 encephalopathy,	 and	 the	 lipidoses.	 Opsoclonus
refers	 to	 random,	 chaotic,	 lightning-fast	 eye	 movements	 (see	 Chapter	 14).
Opsoclonus	 accompanied	 by	 myoclonus	 (opsoclonus-myoclonus	 syndrome,
feet,	 Kinsbourne’s	 syndrome)	 may	 occur	 as	 a
dancing	 eyes-dancing	
postinfectious	 encephalopathy	 or	 as	 a	 paraneoplastic	 syndrome,	 especially
because	 of	 occult	 neuroblastoma.	 Action	 myoclonus	 occurs	 with	 use	 of	 the
involved	limb.	A	syndrome	of	action	or	intention	myoclonus	may	develop	as	a
sequel	to	cerebral	anoxia	(Lance-Adams	syndrome).

Myoclonus	 may	 sometimes	 be	 benign	 and	 without	 serious	 significance	 and
even	 have	 a	 psychogenic	 basis.	 Movements	 difficult	 to	 differentiate	 from
myoclonus	 may	 be	 nonorganic.	 Benign	 nocturnal	 myoclonus	 may	 occur	 in
healthy	persons.	Paroxysmal	kinesigenic	myoclonus	has	also	been	described.

Myoclonus	 is	 typically	 arrhythmic	 and	 diffuse,	 but	 the	 term	 has	 also	 been
applied	 to	 rhythmic	 and	 localized	 motor	 phenomena.	 Palatal	 myoclonus	 is
characterized	 by	 involuntary,	 rhythmic	 movements	 of	 the	 soft	 palate	 and
pharynx,	sometimes	of	the	larynx,	eye	muscles,	and	diaphragm,	and	occasionally
of	other	muscles.	The	movements	are	generally	not	influenced	by	drugs	or	sleep.
The	palate	may	bounce	up	and	down	or	twitch	rhythmically	to	one	side	(Video
30.7).	The	posterior	pharyngeal	wall	moves	laterally,	and	the	larynx	moves	in	an
upward	and	downward	direction.	Movements	involving	the	diaphragm	or	larynx

may	 cause	 a	 grunting	 respiratory	 noise.	 Opening	 and	 closing	 of	 the	 eustachian
tube	sometimes	causes	a	clicking	sound	accompanying	the	movements,	audible
to	the	patient	and	sometimes	the	examiner.

Video	30.7	Palatal	myoclonus	(microtremor).	(Courtesy	Dr.	Jason	Hawley.)

00:00	/	00:00

Palatal	myoclonus	 occurs	in	essential	 and	symptomatic	 forms.	 Symptomatic
palatal	 myoclonus	 occurs	 with	 lesions	 involving	 the	 connections	 between	 the
inferior	 olivary,	 dentate,	 and	 red	 nuclei.	 The	 Guillain-Mollaret	 (myoclonic)
triangle	 is	 a	 loop:	 inferior	 olive	 →	 inferior	 cerebellar	 peduncle	 →	 dentate
nucleus	→	superior	cerebellar	peduncle	→	red	nucleus	→	central	tegmental	tract
→	 inferior	 olive.	 A	 lesion	 anywhere	 in	 this	 loop,	 most	 often	 brainstem
infarction,	may	cause	palatal	myoclonus	and	its	variants.	Lesions	of	the	central
tegmental	tract	may	cause	hypertrophy	(pseudohypertrophy)	of	the	olive.	There
is	gliosis	of	the	amiculum	of	the	olive,	increasing	the	size	of	the	olive	grossly,
which	may	be	visualized	by	MRI.

Palatal	myoclonus	is	also	referred	to	as	palatal	microtremor.	Tremors	are	due
to	 alternating	 agonist-antagonist	 contractions,	
to
contraction-relaxation	 cycles	 of	 an	 agonist.	 In	 addition,	 tremors	 usually
disappear	 in	 sleep	 and	 these	 palatal	 movements	 do	 not.	 Whether	 palatal
myoclonus	 is	 best	 characterized	 as	 rhythmic	 myoclonus	 or	 a	 tremor	 remains
unclear.

rhythmic	 myoclonus	

ASTERIXIS

primarily	

Seen	
hepatic
encephalopathy,	 asterixis	 is	 an	 inability	 to	 sustain	 normal	 muscle	 tone	 (Video

encephalopathy,	

in	 metabolic	

particularly	

30.8).	 With	 the	 arms	 outstretched	 and	 wrists	 extended,	 “like	 stopping	 traffic,”
the	lapse	in	postural	tone	may	cause	the	hands	to	suddenly	flop	downward,	then
quickly	recover,	causing	a	slow	and	irregular	flapping	motion	that	led	to	the	term
“liver	 flap.”	 When	 severe,	 the	 entire	 arm	 may	 drop.	 Other	 body	 parts	 may
exhibit	the	phenomenon	(e.g.,	inability	to	keep	the	foot	dorsiflexed	[foot	flap]).
Unilateral	asterixis	may	occur	with	focal	brain	lesions,	particularly	involving	the
contralateral	 thalamus.	 In	 metabolic	 encephalopathy,	 there	 may	 be	 a	 high-
frequency	postural	tremor	that	begins	after	a	latent	period	of	2	to	30	seconds	and
attenuates	 on	 movement	 (mini-asterixis,	 metabolic	 tremor).	 In	 unresponsive
patients,	 asterixis	 at	 the	 hip	 joints	 can	 sometimes	 be	 brought	 out	 by	 passively
flexing	and	abducting	to	hips	so	that	the	thighs	form	a	“V.”	In	this	position,	the
knees	may	flap	up	and	down.

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.8	Asterixis.	The	first	segment	shows	asterixis	of	the	hands,	the	second
segment	of	the	feet.	(Courtesy	Dr.	Robert	Laureno.)

MYORHYTHMIA

The	term	myorhythmia	refers	to	slow	(typically	2	to	3	Hz),	rhythmic	alternating
movements	that	resemble	tremor.	The	primary	distinguishing	characteristics	are
the	 slow	 rate	 and	 the	 often	 widespread	 involvement.	 It	 may	 be	 intermittent	 or
continuous,	 synchronous,	 or	 asynchronous	 when	 involving	 multiple	 body	 parts
and	 is	 absent	 during	 sleep.	 The	 movements	 may	 involve	 one	 or	 several	 limbs,
the	head,	the	eyes,	or	various	combinations.	Myorhythmia	has	been	described	in
receptor	 encephalitis,	 Hashimoto’s
cerebrovascular	 disease,	 anti-NMDA	
encephalopathy,	 and	 other	 disorders.	 Oculomasticatory	 myorhythmia	 refers	 to
pendular	vergence	movements	of	the	eyes	synchronous	with	contractions	of	the

masticatory	 muscles.	 It	 is	 a	 distinctive	 movement	 disorder	 that	 appears	 to	 be
specific	 for	 central	 nervous	 system	 (CNS)	 Whipple’s	 disease	 (see	 Video	Link
30.3).

TICS

The	hyperkinesias	discussed	to	this	point	have	been	involuntary	movements.	In
another	type	of	abnormal	movement,	the	patient	has	some	degree	of	awareness
of	 the	 movement	 but	 must	 make	 a	 movement	 in	 response	 to	 the	 urge	 of	 some
compelling	inner	force.	The	patient	experiences	tension	and	restlessness,	which
are	 temporarily	 relieved	 by	 making	 a	 particular	 movement.	 Such	 movements
have	 been	 called	 “unvoluntary.”	 Examples	 include	 tics,	 akathisia,	 stereotypies,
compulsions,	and	restless	legs.

Tics	 (habit	 spasms)	 are	 quick,	 irregular	 but	 repetitive	 movements	 that	 are
more	often	seen	in	children	than	adults.	A	tiqueur	is	a	person	who	is	subject	to
one	or	multiple	tics.	A	tic	may	be	defined	as	a	coordinated,	repetitive,	seemingly
purposeful	 act	 involving	 a	 group	 of	 muscles	 in	 their	 normal	 synergistic
relationships.	 Tics	 are	 stereotyped,	 recurrent	 movements	 that	 may	 seem
purposeful	 but	 are	 relatively	 involuntary,	 consisting	 of	 brief	 contractions	 of
whole	 muscles	 or	 groups	 of	 muscles,	 always	 accompanied	 by	 motion	 of	 the
affected	 part.	 Patients	 are	 able	 to	 suppress	 the	 movements	 temporarily	 with
concentration,	 but	they	 quickly	 return	when	 attention	 is	 diverted	to	 some	other
task.	Voluntary	 suppression	 causes	 a	 sense	of	 intolerable	 mounting	tension	 and
an	 urge	 to	 move	 that	 is	 temporarily	 relieved	 by	 indulgence	 in	 a	 tic.	 Tics	 are
exaggerated	by	emotional	strain	and	tension;	they	cease	during	sleep.

Tics	 may	 involve	 any	 portion	 of	 the	 body.	 Common	 examples	 of	 simple
motor	tics	include	repetitive	blinking,	facial	contortions,	or	shoulder	shrugging.
More	 complicated	 tics	 can	 occur,	 and	 tics	 can	 also	 involve	 the	 vocal	 tract
(phonic	or	vocal	tic),	producing	throat-clearing	as	well	as	bizarre	vocalizations,
such	as	barking	and	grunting	or	sounds	resembling	a	hiccup.

Patients	affected	with	Gilles	de	la	Tourette	syndrome	(maladie	des	tics)	have
multifocal	tics,	compulsive	behavior,	imitative	gestures,	stereotyped	movements,
grunts	 and	 groans,	 and	 evidence	 of	 regressive	 behavior.	 There	 are	 explosive
vocalizations,	 and	 the	 patient	 may	 utter	 profanity	 and	 obscenities	 over	 which
they	 have	 no	 control	 (coprolalia).	 The	condition	 has	 its	onset	 in	childhood	and
occurs	most	frequently	in	boys,	usually	in	the	preadolescent	period.	Tics	are	very

common	 and	 usually	 benign;	 patients	 with	 Tourette’s	 syndrome	 have
exaggerated,	complex	tics,	which	together	with	the	other	features	of	the	disease
can	 be	 very	 disabling	 (see	 Video	Link	30.4).	 The	 large	 repertoire	 of	 tics	 and
the	 combination	 of	 motor	 and	 vocal	 tics	 distinguish	 Tourette’s	 syndrome	 from
ordinary	tics.	The	disease	is	hereditary,	probably	AD	with	variable	expressivity,
and	related	to	some	dysfunction	of	dopamine	receptors.	It	is	likely	that	the	noted
historical	 literary	 figure,	 Dr.	 Samuel	 Johnson,	 the	 famously	 eccentric	 author	 of
the	first	English	language	dictionary,	suffered	from	Tourette’s	syndrome.

AKATHISIA

Patients	 suffering	 from	 akathisia	 experience	 an	 inner	 restlessness	 and	 urge	 to
move	that	causes	them	to	remain	in	almost	constant	motion.	It	occurs	most	often
as	 a	 result	 of	 treatment	 with	 dopamine-blocking	 agents.	 Patients	 with	 PD	 may
experience	akathisia	but	are	not	able	to	move	in	response	to	it.

STEREOTYPY

A	 stereotypy	 is	 a	 repetitive,	 purposeless	 but	 often	 seemingly	 purposeful,
involuntary,	 patterned	 motor	 activity.	 Common	 foot	 shaking	 and	 other
mannerisms	 are	 examples	 of	 simple	 stereotypies.	 More	 complex	 stereotypies
may	 involve	 ritualistic	 behavior,	 such	 as	 the	 compulsions	 of	 obsessive-
in	 psychiatric
compulsive	 disorder.	 Stereotypies	 most	 commonly	 occur	
disorders:	 anxiety,	 obsessive-compulsive	 disorder,	 schizophrenia,	 autism,	 and
mental	 retardation.	 They	 may	 also	 be	 a	 part	 of	 neurologic	 disorders,	 such	 as
tardive	 dyskinesia	 and	 Tourette’s	 syndrome.	 The	 hand-wringing	 in	 Rett’s
syndrome	is	a	stereotypy.	“Punding”	refers	to	complex,	purposeless,	stereotyped
behavior	seen	in	cocaine	and	amphetamine	abuse	and	in	patients	with	PD	disease
treated	with	dopaminergic	agents.	Stereotypies	may	resemble	motor	tics	but	do
not	 share	 the	 suppressibility,	 variability,	 or	 mounting-tension	 compulsion	 to
make	 the	 movement.	 Mannerisms	 are	 somewhat	 more	 complicated	 and
stereotyped	 and	 are	 usually	 carried	 out	 in	 a	 more	 leisurely	 manner.	 They	 may
appear	 only	 under	 emotional	 stress	 or	 when	 the	 patient	 is	 engaged	 in	 some
particular	activity.

HYPEREKPLEXIA

refers	

(startle	 disease,	 pathologic	 startle)	

Hyperekplexia	
to	 disorders
characterized	by	an	excessive	startle	response	in	the	absence	of	other	evidence	of
neurologic	disease,	sometimes	accompanied	by	echolalia,	automatic	behavior,	or
automatic	obedience	(see	Video	Link	30.5).	 It	 may	 be	 sporadic	 or	hereditary.
Colorful	 names	 have	 been	 used	 for	 variants	 of	 the	 condition	 described	 in
different	 geographic	 regions	 (jumping	 Frenchmen	 of	 Maine,	 latah,	 myriachit).
An	 exaggerated	 startle	 response	 may	 also	 occur	 in	 Creutzfeldt-Jakob	 disease,
Tay-Sachs	disease,	stiff-person	syndrome,	and	lipidoses.

SLEEP-RELATED	DYSKINESIAS

Except	 for	 palatal	 myoclonus,	 involuntary	 movements	 generally	 do	 not	 occur
during	 sleep.	 There	 are	 some	 disorders,	 however,	 that	 occur	 primarily	 during
sleep.	 Restless	 legs	 syndrome	 (RLS,	 Ekbom’s	 syndrome,	 fidgety	 feet,	 jimmy
legs)	 is	 a	 common	 disorder	 causing	 unpleasant	 and	 difficult-to-describe
sensations	in	the	legs	that	are	temporarily	relieved	by	movement.	The	symptoms
commonly	 occur	 at	 night	 as	 the	 patient	 is	 drifting	 off	 to	 sleep.	 Many	 affected
individuals	 get	 up	 and	 walk	 around	 to	 obtain	 respite.	 The	 patient	 support
newsletter	 is	 NightWalkers.	 In	 many	 patients,	 RLS	 is	 accompanied	 by
spontaneous	movements	of	the	legs	during	sleep	(periodic	movements	in	sleep,
nocturnal	 myoclonus),	 best	 documented	 by	 polysomnography.	 The	 disorder	 is
likely	due	to	a	central	disturbance	of	dopamine	metabolism.	The	restless	red	legs
syndrome	is	RLS	associated	with	telangiectasias	of	the	legs.	Patients	with	spinal
stenosis	 may	 have	 leg	 pain	 in	 recumbency	 with	 similarities	 to	 RLS	 (vespers
curse;	Chapter	47).	Restless	arms	and	restless	abdomen	may	also	occur.

FASCICULATIONS

Fasciculations	are	fine,	rapid,	flickering	or	vermicular	twitching	movements	due
to	contraction	of	a	bundle,	or	fasciculus,	of	muscle	fibers.	They	are	usually	not
extensive	 enough	 to	 cause	 movement	 of	 joints,	 except	 occasionally	 the	 digits.
They	vary	in	size	and	intensity,	from	so	faint	and	small	as	to	only	slightly	ripple
the	surface	of	the	overlying	skin	to	coarse	and	impossible	to	overlook.	They	are
random,	irregular,	fleeting,	and	inconstant.	At	times,	they	are	abundant;	at	other

times,	they	require	a	careful	search.	Fasciculations	often	seem	to	strike	where	the
examiner	is	not	looking	and	are	usually	seen	from	the	corner	of	the	eye.

Fasciculations	 are	 brought	 out	 by	 fatigue	 and	 cold.	 When	 assessing
fasciculations,	the	patient	should	be	warm,	comfortable,	and	completely	relaxed.
It	is	written	that	fasciculations	may	be	brought	out	by	mechanical	stimulation	of
the	muscle	(e.g.,	light	tapping),	and	neurologists	frequently	engage	in	a	ritual	of
tapping	 a	 muscle	 with	 a	 reflex	 hammer	 and	 peering	 intently	 for	 a	 resultant
fasciculation.	Whether	this	really	occurs	is	debatable.	Good	light	is	necessary	in
order	 to	 visualize	 fasciculations;	 oblique	 lighting	 is	 best.	 They	 may	 be	 more
difficult	 to	 see	 in	 women	 than	 men	 because	 of	 the	 overlying	 subcutaneous	 fat.
When	not	visible,	they	can	occasionally	be	palpated	or	heard	with	a	stethoscope.
Many	 patients	 are	 unaware	 of	 fasciculations;	 others	 may	 see	 or	 feel	 them,	 or
both.	Needle	electromyography	can	detect	their	presence	even	when	they	cannot
be	seen.	High-resolution	sonography	may	reveal	fasciculations	not	visible	from
the	 surface.	 Fasciculations	 continue	 in	 sleep.	 They	 are	 exaggerated	 by	 the
administration	of	cholinergic	drugs	(e.g.,	pyridostigmine).	Hypercaffeinism	is	a
common	 cause	 of	 fasciculations	 in	 normal	 individuals.	 At	 one	 time,	 the	 terms
fibrillation	and	fasciculation	were	used	synonymously.	But	fibrillation	potentials
are	 the	 contractions	 of	 single	 muscle	 fibers	 too	 small	 to	 be	 visible	 through	 the
skin;	they	can	only	be	detected	by	needle	electromyography.	Fasciculations	are
contractions	 of	 a	 large	 group	 of	 fibers,	 all	 or	 part	 of	 a	 single	 motor	 unit.
Fasciculations	 are	 much	 more	 gross	 than	 fibrillations	 and	 can	 be	 seen	 through
intact	skin.

Fasciculations	 are	 a	 characteristic	 feature	 of	 motor	 neuron	 disease	 (Video
30.9).	 They	 serve	 as	 a	 very	 useful	 marker	 for	 the	 disease,	 and	 the	 diagnosis
should	 remain	 circumspect	 when	 fasciculations	 are	 not	 present.	 Their	 exact
mechanism	remains	debatable.	Fasciculations	were	once	thought	to	represent	the
dying	 gasps	 of	 sick	 motor	 neurons,	 but	 current	 evidence	 indicates	 they	 more
likely	 arise	 much	 more	 distally	 in	 the	 neuron,	 perhaps	 in	 immature,	 unstable
(ALS),	 abundant
peripheral	 sprouts.	
fasciculations	 may	 be	 an	 indication	 that	 disease	 progression	 will	 be	 rapid.
Fasciculations	 of	 small	 hand	 muscles	 in	 chronic	 anterior	 horn	 cell	 disease,
particularly	 spinal	 muscular	 atrophy,	 may	 cause	 small	 amplitude,	 subtle	 finger
twitches	called	minipolymyoclonus,	which	are	of	course	not	real	myoclonus.

lateral	 sclerosis	

In	 amyotrophic	

00:00	/	00:00

Video	30.9	Fasciculations	in	a	patient	with	end-stage	amyotrophic	lateral
sclerosis.

Although	fasciculations	are	most	characteristic	of	motor	neuronopathies,	they
can	 occur	 in	 any	 chronic	 denervating	 process,	 including	 radiculopathy	 and
peripheral	neuropathy.	Fasciculations	can	also	occur	when	anterior	horn	cells	are
involved	in	intrinsic	spinal	cord	disease,	such	as	syringomyelia	or	tumor.	Except
for	thyrotoxicosis,	myopathies	generally	do	not	cause	fasciculations.	In	chronic
denervating	 disease	 resulting	 in	 an	 enlarged	 motor	 unit	 territory,	 slight	 muscle
contraction	may	activate	a	larger	than	normal	number	of	muscle	fibers	causing	a
visible	 twitch	 referred	 to	 as	 a	 contraction	 fasciculation.	 These	 do	 not	 have	 the
same	 significance	 as	 spontaneous	 fasciculations.	 In	 Kennedy’s	 disease
(bulbospinal	muscular	atrophy),	contraction	fasciculations	occur	in	the	chin	with
slight	pursing	of	the	lips.	Contraction	fasciculations	may	be	seen	occasionally	in
normal	individuals,	especially	in	the	small	hand	muscles.

Fasciculations	 unaccompanied	 by	 atrophy	 or	 weakness	 do	 not	 necessarily
indicate	the	presence	of	a	serious	disease	process.	About	70%	of	the	population,
especially	 health	 care	 workers,	 have	 occasional	 benign	 fasciculations.	 Some
patients,	 most	 often	 older	 men,	 have	 prominent	 fasciculations	 without	 other
abnormality.	 These	 most	 often	 occur	 in	 the	 calves,	 and	 the	 patients	 are	 quite
aware	 of	 the	 movements,	 whereas	 most	 patients	 with	 ALS	 seem	 surprisingly
oblivious	 to	 their	 fasciculations.	 The	 clinical	 examination	 is	 otherwise	 normal,
and	needle	electromyography	is	normal	except	for	the	fasciculations.	There	is	no
infallible	 way	 to	 distinguish	 benign	 from	 malignant	 fasciculations	 from	 the
fasciculations	 alone;	 judgment	 is	 made	 by	 the	 company	 they	 keep.	 A
nonprogressive	 course	 over	 time	 is	 more	 reassuring	 than	 a	 single	 normal
electrodiagnostic	evaluation.	Of	121	patients	with	benign	fasciculations	followed

up	 to	 32	 years,	 none	 developed	 ALS.	 In	 another	 report,	 6.7%	 of	 ALS	 patients
had	 fasciculations	 as	 an	 isolated,	 initial	 manifestation	 of	 the	 disease.	 Cramp-
fasciculation	 syndrome	 is	 a	 syndrome	 of	 cramps	 and	 fasciculations	 because	 of
hyperexcitability	of	the	peripheral	nerve.

MYOKYMIA

Myokymia	 (Gr.	 kyma,	 “wave”)	 refers	 to	 involuntary,	 spontaneous,	 localized,
transient	 or	 persistent	 quivering	 movements	 that	 affect	 a	 few	 muscle	 bundles
within	a	single	muscle	but	usually	are	not	extensive	enough	to	cause	movement
at	 a	 joint.	 The	 movements	 are	 somewhat	 coarser,	 slower,	 and	 undulating
(“wormlike”),	 usually	 more	 prolonged,	 and	 involve	 a	 wider	 local	 area	 than
fasciculations.	 They	 usually	 are	 not	 affected	 by	 motion	 or	 position,	 and	 they
persist	 during	 sleep.	 On	 needle	 electromyography,	 clinical	 myokymia	 is
accompanied	by	electrical	discharges,	either	myokymic	discharges	or,	less	often,
neuromyotonic	 discharges.	 Myokymic	 discharges,	 the	 electrical	 phenomenon,
may	or	may	not	be	accompanied	by	clinical	myokymia,	the	visible,	vermicular
undulations	on	the	skin	surface.

Myokymia	 often	 occurs	 in	 normal	 individuals,	 causing	 persistent,	 focal
twitching	of	a	muscle,	most	commonly	the	orbicularis	oculi.	Myokymia	usually
occurs	in	isolation,	without	evidence	of	an	accompanying	neurologic	disease;	it
is	exacerbated	by	fatigue,	anxiety,	and	caffeine.	Myokymia	in	normal	individuals
and	benign	fasciculations	may	represent	similar	alterations	in	muscle	physiology.
Myokymia	occurs	in	a	variety	of	disease	states;	it	is	thought	to	arise	because	of
biochemical	 perturbations	
the	 nerve	 microenvironment	 because	 of
demyelination,	 a	 toxin	 (such	 as	 rattlesnake	 venom	 or	 gold	 salts),	 edema,	 a
decrease	in	ionized	Ca++	concentration,	or	other	factors	(see	Video	Link	30.6).
The	generator	lies	somewhere	along	the	motor	axon.

in	

Myokymia	may	be	generalized	or	focal/segmental.	Focal	myokymia	is	much
more	 common	 than	 generalized	 myokymia.	 The	 superior	 oblique	 muscle	 may
develop	 episodic	 twitching	 producing	 a	 low-amplitude	 monocular	 intorsional
movement	 (microtremor)	 that	 may	 cause	 annoying	 monocular	 oscillopsia	 and
diplopia.	It	may	be	a	microvascular	compression	syndrome	with	contact	between
the	trochlear	nerve	and	a	vascular	structure	that	may	be	seen	by	high-resolution
thin	slice	magnetic	resonance	images.	Myokymia	sometimes	occurs	in	the	facial
muscles	in	patients	with	MS	or	other	lesions	of	the	brainstem	or	cranial	nerves,

such	as	pontine	glioma,	syrinx,	or	Guillain-Barré	syndrome.	Facial	myokymia	is
usually	transient	but	may	persist	for	long	periods	when	due	to	channelopathy	or
a	 structural	 lesion,	 such	 as	 pontine	 glioma	 or	 syringobulbia.	 Other	 abnormal
facial	 movements,	 including	 synkinesias	 because	 of	 aberrant	 facial	 nerve
regeneration	 and	 hemifacial	 spasm,	 are	 discussed	 in	 Chapter	 16.	 Focal	 limb
myokymia	is	particularly	characteristic	of	radiation	damage	to	a	nerve	or	plexus.
Myokymia	 is	 only	 rarely	 associated	 with	 nerve	 compression	 syndromes.
Myokymia	may	be	seen,	along	with	fasciculations,	in	motor	neuronopathies.	The
pacemaker	 site	 varies	 with	 the	 condition.	 The	 response	 pattern	 of	 myokymic
discharges	to	sleep,	anesthesia,	nerve	blocks,	and	curare	suggests	a	distal	origin
in	many	instances.

Generalized	 myokymia	 (Isaacs’	 syndrome,	 syndrome	 of	 continuous	 muscle
fiber	activity,	neuromyotonia)	causes	generalized	muscle	stiffness	and	persistent
contraction	 because	 of	 underlying	 continuous	 muscle	 fiber	 activity.	 Needle
electromyography	 discloses	 spontaneous	 repetitive	 firing	 of	 motor	 unit
potentials,	 creating	 myokymic	 and	 neuromyotonic	 discharges.	 Morvan’s
syndrome	 (Morvan’s	 fibrillary	 chorea)	 is	 a	 dubious	 entity	 also	 associated	 with
clinical	 myokymia.	 Generalized	 myokymia	 also	 occurs	 in	 episodic	 ataxia	 with
myokymia.

STIFF-PERSON	SYNDROME

Stiff-person	(stiff-man,	Moersch-Woltman)	syndrome	is	due	to	hyperexcitability
of	 anterior	 horn	 cells	 related	 to	 interference	 with	 gamma-aminobutyric	 acid–
mediated	spinal	cord	inhibitory	mechanisms.	There	is	progressive,	often	painful
rigidity,	 punctuated	 by	 intense	 muscle	 spasms,	 particularly	 affecting	 the	 axial
and	 paraspinal	 muscles.	 The	 axial	 rigidity	 causes	 hyperlordosis	 and	 prominent
paraspinal	 muscle	 contractions.	 Superimposed	 on	 the	 stiffness	 are	 spasms
provoked	 by	 movement	 or	 external	 stimuli.	 Most	 patients	 have	 antibodies	 to
glutamic	 acid	 decarboxylase.	 In	 stiff-limb	 syndrome,	 symptoms	 are	 limited	 to
one	 extremity.	 Jerking	 stiff-person	 syndrome	 is	 characterized	 by	 muscles
stiffness	 and	 spasms	 affecting	 the	 legs.	 Progressive	 encephalomyelitis	 with
rigidity	 and	 myoclonus	 causes	 a	 clinical	 picture	 similar	 to	 classic	 stiff-person
syndrome	but	is	more	rapidly	progressive.

SPASMS

Spasms	are	involuntary	contractions	of	a	muscle	or	group	of	muscles.	The	tonic
contraction	 may	 cause	 either	 alteration	 of	 position	 or	 limitation	 of	 movement.
They	 may	 occur	 in	 almost	 any	 muscle.	 A	 painful,	 tonic,	 spasmodic	 muscular
contraction	is	often	spoken	of	as	a	cramp.	Spasms	that	limit	movement	may	be
defensive	 or	 protective.	 Prolonged	 spasm	 may	 cause	 reflex	 rigidity	 or	 be
followed	 by	 muscle	 contracture.	 Spasms	 are	 often	 of	 reflex	 origin	 because	 of
peripheral	irritation	affecting	either	muscles	or	nerves.	Pain	is	a	common	cause
of	defensive	spasm	and	reflex	rigidity.	Muscle	spasm	may	also	be	voluntary	or
occur	 in	 response	 to	 fear	 or	 excitement.	 Carpopedal	 spasm	 is	 a	 common
manifestation	 of	 tetany	and	 hyperventilation	 (Chapter	52).	 Muscle	spasms	 may
also	result	from	central	processes.	Prolonged	and	severe	muscle	spasms	occur	in
tetany	 and	 tetanus.	 Characteristic	 painful	 tonic	 spasms	 occur	 in	 MS	 and	 stiff-
person	syndrome.

OTHER	HYPERKINESIAS

In	the	painful	legs	and	moving	toes	syndrome,	there	are	continuous,	involuntary
movements	of	the	toes	associated	with	pain	in	the	legs	(see	Video	Link	30.7).
The	 condition	 is	 sometimes	 a	 manifestation	 of	 peripheral	 neuropathy,	 but	 the
responsible	 lesion	 in	 many	 is	 not	 clear.	 Variants	 are	 painful	 arms	 and	 moving
fingers	 and	 painless	 legs	 and	 moving	 toes.	 Jumpy	 stump	 is	 involuntary
movements	of	an	amputated	limb.

FUNCTIONAL	MOVEMENT	DISORDERS

Functional	(psychogenic,	nonorganic)	movement	disorders	can	simulate	virtually
any	type	of	movement	disorder.	Functional	disorders	do	not	correspond	to	any	of
the	organic	types	of	abnormal	involuntary	movement;	they	are	bizarre,	change	in
type	 from	 time	 to	 time,	 and	 are	 influenced	 by	 emotional	 state	 and	 suggestion.
Onset	 is	 often	 sudden.	 If	 a	 movement	 disorder	 is	 bizarre	 and	 defies
classification,	 the	 possibility	 that	 it	 may	 be	 psychogenic	 should	 be	 borne	 in
mind.	 Peculiar	 motor	 behaviors	 occur	 frequently	 in	 major	 psychiatric	 illnesses
such	as	schizophrenia.	However,	being	bizarre	and	difficult	to	characterize	does
not	necessarily	mean	a	movement	disorder	is	psychogenic.

Psychogenic	tremor	is	typically	complex	and	does	not	fit	well	into	the	tremor
classification	 scheme.	 The	 patient	 may	 have	 rapidly	 changing	 clinical	 features

